CHAPTER I.
The
day that followed after the flight of
Abdoul-al-Sidi
,
beheld the army of Cortes crossing that ridge
which extends like a mighty curtain, between the
great volcano and the rugged Iztaccihuatl; and many
a hardy veteran shivered with cold and discontent,
as sharp gusts, whirling rain and snow from the
inhospitable
summits, prepared him for the contrast
of peace and beauty which is unfolded to the
traveller
,
when he looks down from the mountains to the
verdant valley of Mexico. Even at the present day,
when the axe has destroyed the forest; when the
gardens of flowersthe cultivation of which, with a
degree of passionate affection that distinguished the
Mexicans from other races, seemed to impart a tinge
of poetry to their character, and mellow their rougher
traits with the hues of romance,when these flower
gardens have vanished from the earth; when the
lakes have receded and diminished, and, with them,
the fair cities that once rose from their waters,
leaving
behind them stagnant pools and saline deserts;
even now, under all these disadvantages, the prospect
of this valley is of such peculiar and astonishing
beauty as, perhaps, can be nowhere else equalled
among the haunts of men. The providence of the
Spanish viceroys in constructing a road more direct
and more easy of passage, to the north of the great
mountains, has robbed travellers of the more
spirit-stirring
impressions which introduced them to the
spectacle, when pursuing the ancient highway of the
Mexicans. It ascends among gloomy defiles, at the
entrance of which stand, on either hand, like
stupendous
towers guarding the gate of some Titan
strong-hold, the two grandest pinnacles of the interior.
It conducts you among crags and ravines, among
clouds and tempests, now sheltering you under a
forest of oaks and pines, now exposing you to the
furious blasts that howl along the ridges. A few
dilapidated
hamlets of Indians, if they occasionally
break the solitude, destroy neither the grandeur nor
solemnity of the path. You remember, on this
deserted
highway, that you are treading in the steps of
Cortes.
As the army proceeded, Don Amador, alive to
every novelty, took notice that, regularly, at short
distances from each other, not excepting even in the
wildest and loneliest places, there were certain low
and rude but strong cabins of stone built by the
wayside
,
but without inhabitants. These, he was told, were
the houses that were always constructed by the
Mexican
kings on such friendless routes, to shelter the
exposed
traveller. He thought such benignant provision
betokened some of the humaner characteristics of
civilization
,
and longed eagerly to make acquaintance
with those nobler institutions which might be presented
below. This desire was not the less urgent, that the
frozen winds, penetrating his mailed armour, made
him shiver like a coward on the back of his war-horse.
He felt also much concern for his kinsman, who rode
at his side with a visage even wanner and more
wobegone
than ordinary. But in the deep and
death-like
abstraction that invested his spirits, Don Gabriel
was as insensible to the assaults of the blast, as to the
solicitude of his friend. The page Jacinto, moreover,
caused him no little thought; for the flight of his
father, though this had exposed him neither to the
anger nor inquiries of Don Hernan, (who affected to
treat the desertion of the Moors as an affair of little
consequence, save to themselves,) had left the boy so
dejected and spiritless, that, as he trudged along
between
the two cavaliers, he seemed to follow more
1*
with the instinct of a jaded house-dog, than with the
alacrity of a faithful servant. To the pity of his
young master he returned but a forced gratitude, and
to his benevolent counsel that he should ride behind
Lazaro, he rendered the oft-repeated excuse, `Seor
mio, I am afraid of horses; and 'tis better to walk
than ride over these cold hills.'
There is much wisdom in what thou sayest, as I
begin now to perceive, said Amador, dismounting
and giving his steed to Lazaro: 'tis better to be
over-warm with marching on foot, than turned into
an icicle on horseback. My father! he said, gently
and affectionately, to Calavar, wilt thou not descend,
and warm thyself a little with exercise? But the
knight only replied with a melancholy and
bewildered
stare, which convinced the novice that entreaty
and argument upon this subject, as, at present, upon
all others, would be alike unavailing. Sighing
therefore
,
and, with a gesture, directing Baltasar to assume
his station at the side of Don Gabriel, he took the
page by the hand, and removing to a little distance
from the group as well as from all other persons, he
walked on, entering into discourse with Jacinto.
I do not marvel at thee, Jacinto, he said, nor
can I altogether censure thee, for grieving thus at the
flight of thy father. Nor will I, as was, last night,
my resolve, reprimand thee for leaving me, contrary
to my bidding, at the chamber of my good knight;
for, besides finding thee in grief enough at present, I
perceive thou wert instigated to this disobedience by
anxiety for thy parent, which would have excused in
thee a greater fault. But let me ask thee, not so
much as a master as a friend, two or three questions.
First, Jacinto, he continued, art thou dissatisfied
with thy service? or with thy master, who loves thee
as well as myself?
Servicemaster!Senor! said the boy,
confused
.
I demand of thee, art thou discontented with thy
duties, or grieved by any unkindness which has been
manifested to thee by thy master, or by any of us,
who are his followers?
I cannot be discontented with my duties, said
the boy, a little cheerfully, for it was not possible long
to withstand the benevolence of his patron;I
cannot
be discontented with my duties; for, in truth, it
seems to me, there are none imposed upon me,
except
such as are prompted by my own fancies. I am
very skilless in the customs of service, never having
been in service before; yet, seor, I like it so well,
that with such masters, methinks, I could remain a
contented servant to the end of my days. That is,
that isBut here the page interrupted himself
abruptly. As for any unkindness, I own with
gratitude
,
I have never received from my lord, from my
master, nor from his people, any thing but great favour,
as well as forgiveness for all my faults.
Thou answerest well, said the novice gravely.
I did not apprehend anybody could treat thee
rudely, except Lazaro, who is a rough fellow in his
ways, and being in some sort a wit, is oft betrayed
into saying sharp things, in order that people may
laugh at them. Nevertheless, Lazaro has a good
heart; for which reason I pardon many of his
freedoms
;
but, I vow to thee, though he is a brave
soldier
,
and albeit it is opposed to all my feelings and
principles to degrade a serving-man by blows,
nevertheless
,
had I found him venting his wit upon thee,
I should have been tempted to strike him even with
the hardest end of my lance.
I never had a better friend than Lazaro, said
the page, with a faint smile; and I love him well,
for he affects my singing, and praises me more than
anybody else. Then, as for Marco and Baltasar,
though they delight more in cleaning armour than
listening to a lute;and as for the secretary, seor
Lorenzo, who cares for nothing but tilting with any
one who will take the trouble to unhorse him,they
are all good-natured to me, and they never scold me.
This, then, being the case, said Amador, and
allowing thy first and most natural obedience to be
to thy father, rather than to a master, how dost thou
excuse to thyself the intention of deserting the service
of thy friends, without demanding permission, or at
least acquainting us with thy desires.
Seor! exclaimed Jacinto, surprised and
embarrassed
.
It is known to me, that such was thy resolution,
said the cavalier, with gravity; for it was so
confessed
to me, last night, by thy father. But, indeed,
though I cannot avoid expressing my displeasure at
such intention, which seems to me both treacherous
and ungrateful, I led thee aside less to scold thee,
than to give thee intelligence of Abdalla, I myself
being, as I think, the last Christian that beheld him.
Oh, seor! and he escaped unharmed? cried the
boy.
Verily without either bruise or wound, save that
which was made on his soul, when I reproached him
for deserting thee.
I am deserted by all! exclaimed Jacinto,
clasping
his hands.
For the thousandth time, I tell thee, no! said his
patron: And thy father made it apparent to me he
abandoned thee unwillingly; nor would he leave me,
though the pursuers were approaching fast, until he
had exacted of me the very superfluous vow, that I
would give thee a double protection from all wrong
and injustice. Dry thy tears: I have already obtained
of Cortes a promise of full pardon for Abdalla, when
he returns to us, as doubtless he will, at Tenochtitlan.
I hope so! I pray he may! said Jacinto, hurriedly;
or what, oh! what shall become of us!
I will have him sought out, and by-and-by take
thee, and him along, to Cuenza. 'Tis hard by to
Granada.
The boy remained silent, and Amador continued:
Thy father also showed me, that it was thy
faithful
love, in remaining by my kinsman during a swoon,
which prevented thee from escaping with him. This,
though it does not remove the fault of thy design,
entirely forces me to pardon it; and indeed, Abdalla
did as much as acknowledge thou wert averse to the
plan.
Seor, I was: for though our degradation was
great, I knew not how much greater it might be
among the pagans.
Degradation! dost thou talk of degradation! In
good faith, thou surprisest me!
Seor, said the boy, proudly, though you will
deride such vanity in poor barbarians of the desert,
yet did we ever think ourselves, who had always
been free and unenslaved, debased by servitude. At
least, my father thought so; and I myself, though
speedily solaced by the kindness which was shown
me, could not but sometimes think it had been better
to have perished with my father in the sea, along with
our unhappy people, than to remain as I was,and as
I am,a
servant
in the house of my master!
A silly boy art thou, Jacinto, said Amador,
surveying him with surprise: for, first, thy office as
the page of a most noble and renowned knight, is such
a one as would be coveted by any grandee's son,
however noble, who aspired to the glory of arms and
knighthood; and I admonish thee, that, had not his
infirmity driven Don Gabriel from Spain entirely
without the knowledge of his servants, thou shouldst
have seen the son of a very proud and lofty nobleman
attending him in the very quality which thou thinkest
so degrading. I did myself, though very nearly
related to him, and though sprung of such blood as
acknowledges none superior, not even in the king that
sits on the throne, enter first into his service in the
same quality of page; and, trust me, I esteemed it
great honour. In the second place, I marvel at thee,
having already confessed that thy service is both
light and pleasant.
It is even so, seor, said the boy, meekly, and
I am not often so foolish as to repent me. It was not
because I thought so yesternight, but because my
father bade me, that I strove to escape from it; for
he was in danger, or feared he was, and it was my
duty to follow him without repining.
I come now to ask thee another question, said
the neophyte. By what good fortune was it, that
thou stumbledst upon my kinsman, among the ruins of
that profane pyramid?
It was there, seor, that the princes met us.
Hah! Oh, then, thou wert plotting with my bold
prince, hah! Faith, a very valiant pagan! and in no
wise resembling the varlets of Cuba. If thou knowest
aught of these men that may concern our leader to
know, it will be thy duty to report the same to him,
Jacinto, and that without delay.
Nothing, seor, said the page, hastily. I
discovered
that my father was to fly with the
ambassadors
;
that he was to seek them at the pyramid;
and it was there we found my master swooning.
Didst thou see aught there that was remarkable,
or in any way inexplicable?
I saw my lord fainting, my father and the princes
flying, and the soldiers pursuing and shooting both
with cross-bow and musket.
'Tis already, said the cavalier, turning his eye
askaunt to Don Gabriel, yet I know not by what
revealment, whispered through the army, that my
kinsman saw a spectre,some devilish fiend, that, in
the moment of his doubt, struck him to the earth!
Ay! said Jacinto, turning towards the knight,
and eyeing him with a look of horror; he thought
'twas Zayda, whom he slew so barbarously among
the Alpujarras!
The cavalier laid his hand upon Jacinto's shoulder,
sternly,
What art thou saying?what art thou thinking?
Hast thou caught some of the silly fabrications of
the soldiers? I warn thee to be guarded, when thou
speakest of thy master.
He confessed it to me! said the page, trembling,
but not at the anger of his patron. He killed her
with his own hands, when she screened from his
cruel rage her husband Alharef, his vowed and true
friend!
Peace!thou art mad!'Twas the raving of
his delirium.There is no such being as Zayda.
There is not, but there
was
, said Jacinto,
mournfully
.
And how knowest thou that? demanded
Amador
,
quickly. Thou speakest as if she had been thy
kinswoman. Art thou indeed a conjuror? There is
no dark and hidden story, with which thou dost not
seem acquainted!
She was of my tribe, said Jacinto, mildly, though
tremulously, returning the steadfast gaze of his
patron
:
I have heard my father speak of her, for she
was famous among the mountains. Often has he
repeated to me her sorrowful story,how she drew
upon herself the anger of her tribe, by preserving
their foe, and how their foe repaid her byoh
heaven
!
by murdering her! Often have I heard of
Zayda; but I knew not 'twas Calavar who killed
her!
Can this be true? said Amador, looking blankly
towards his unconscious kinsman. Is it possible my
father can have stained his soul with so foul, so deadly,
so fearful a crime! And he confessed it to thee? to
thee, a boy so foolish and indiscreet that thou hast
already babbled it to another?
I could not help speaking it
this
time, said
Jacinto
,
humbled at the reproach; but if my lord
will forgive me, I will never speak it more.
I do forgive thee, Jacinto, as I hope heaven will
my father. This then is the sin unabsolved, the
action
of wrath, the memory of sorrow, that has slain
the peace of my kinsman? May heaven have pity
on him, for it has punished him with a life of misery.
I forgive thee, Jacinto: speak of this no more; think
of it no more; let it be forgottennow and for ever,
Amen!I have but one more question to ask thee;
and this I am, in part, driven to by thy admission of
the most wondrous fact, that Don Gabriel confessed
to
thee
his secret. Many of thine actions have filled
me with wonder; thy knowledge is, for thy years,
inexplicable; and thou minglest with thy boyish
simplicity
the shrewdness of years. Dost thou truly
obtain thy knowledge by the practice of those arts,
which so many allow to be possessed by Botello?
Seor! exclaimed the boy, startled by the
abruptness
of the question.
Art thou, indeed, an enchanter, as Yacub charged
thee to be?Give me to understand, for it is fitting I
should know.
The exceeding and earnest gravity with which the
cavalier repeated the question, dispelled as well the
grief as the fears of the page. He cast his eyes to
the earth, but this action did not conceal the
humour
that sparkled in them, while he replied,
If I were older, and had as much acquaintance
with the people as Botello, I think I could prophesy
as well as he; especially if my lord Don Hernan
would now and then give me a hint or two
concerning
his designs and expectations, such as, it has been
whispered, he sometimes vouchsafes to Botello. I
have no crystal-imp like him indeed, but I possess
one consecrated gem that can call me up, at any
time, a thousand visions. It seems to me, too, that I
can recall the dead; for once or twice I have done it,
though very much to my own marvelling.
Thou art an enigma, said Don Amador. What
thou sayest of Botello, assures me the more of thy
subtle and penetrating observation; what thou sayest
of thyself, seems to me a jest; and yet it hath a
singular
accordance, as well with my own foolish
fancies
and the charges of that Moorish menial, as with
the events of the two last nights. Either there is,
indeed, something very supernatural in thy
knowledge
,
or the delirium of my kinsman is a disease
of the blood, which is beginning to assail my own
brain. God preserve me from madness! Hearken
in thine ear, (and fear not to answer me:)Hadst
thou any thing to do with the raising of the
phantom
thou callest Zayda?or is it the confusion of
my senses, that causes me to suspect thee of the
agency?
Senor! said the boy, in alarm, you cannot think
I was serious?
What didst thou mean, then, by acknowledging
the possession of that consecrated and vision-raising
jewel?
I meant, responded the youth, sadly, that, being
a gift associated with all the joys of my happiest
days, I never look at it, or pray over it, without being
beset by recollections, which may well be called
visions
;
for they are representations of things that have
passed away.
And the story of Leila?Pho'tis an absurdity!
I have heard that the cold which freezes men to
death, begins by setting them to sleep. Sleep brings
dreams; and dreams are often most vivid and
fantastical
,
before we have yet been wholly lost in
slumber
.
Perhaps 'tis this most biting and benumbing
blast, that brings me such phantoms. Art thou not
very cold?
Not very, seor: methinks we are descending;
and now the winds are not so frigid as before.
I would to heaven, for the sake of us all, that we
were descended yet lower; for night approaches, and
still we are stumbling among these clouds, that seem
to separate us from earth, without yet advancing us
nearer to heaven.
While the cavalier was yet speaking, there came
from the van of the army, very far in the distance,
a shout of joy, that was caught up by those who
toiled in his neighbourhood, and continued by the
squadrons that brought up the rear, until finally lost
among the echoes of remote cliffs. He pressed
forward
with the animation shared by his companions,
and, still leading Jacinto, arrived, at last, at a place
where the mountain dipped downwards with so
sudden
and so precipitous a declivity, as to interpose no
Vol. II. 2
obstacle to the vision. The mists were rolling away
from his feet in huge wreaths, which gradually, as
they became thinner, received and transmitted the
rays of an evening sun, and were lighted up with a
golden and crimson radiance, glorious to behold, and
increasing every moment in splendour. As this
superb
curtain was parted from before him, as if by
cords that went up to heaven, and surged
voluminously
aside, he looked over the heads of those that
thronged the side of the mountain beneath, and
saw, stretching away like a picture touched by the
hands of angels, the fair valley imbosomed among
those romantic hills, whose shadows were stealing
visibly over its western slopes, but leaving all the
eastern portion dyed with the tints of sunset. The
green plains studded with yet greener woodlands;
the little mountains raising their fairy-like crests; the
lovely lakes, now gleaming like floods of molten
silver
,
where they stretched into the sunshine, and now
vanishing away, in a shadowy expanse, under the
gloom of the growing twilight; the structures that
rose, vaguely and obscurely, here from their verdant
margins, and there from their very bosom, as if
floating
on their placid waters, seeming at one time to
present the image of a city crowned with towers
and pinnacles, and then again broken by some
agitation
of the element, or confused by some vapour
swimming through the atmosphere, into the mere
fragments and phantasms of edifices,these, seen in
that uncertain and fading light, and at that misty
and enchanting distance, unfolded such a spectacle of
beauty and peace as plunged the neophyte into a
revery of rapture. The trembling of the page's
hand, a deep sigh that breathed from his lips,
recalled
him to consciousness, without however
dispelling
his delight.
By the cross which I worship! he cried, it
fills me with amazement, to think that this cursed and
malefactious earth doth contain a spot that is so
much like to paradise! Now do I remember me of the
words of the seor Gomez, that `no man could
conceive
of heaven, till he had looked upon the valley of
Mexico,'an expression which, at that time, I
considered
very absurd, and somewhat profane; yet, if
I am not now mistaken, I shall henceforth, doubtless,
when figuring to my imagination the seats of bliss,
begin by thinking of this very prospect.
It is truly a fairer sight than any we saw in
Florida
,
most noble seor, said a voice hard by.
The cavalier turned, and with not less satisfaction
than surprise, (for the delight of the moment had
greatly warmed his heart,) beheld, in the person of the
speaker, the master of the caravel.
Oho! seor Capitan! cried Don Amador,
stretching out his hand to the bowing commander.
I vow, I am as much rejoiced to see thee, as if we
had been companions together in war. What brings
thee hither to look on these inimitable landscapes?
Art thou come, to disprove thy accounts of the
people
of Tenochtitlan? I promise thee, I have heard
certain stories, and seen certain sights, which greatly
shake my faith in thy representations.What news
dost thou bring me of my kinsman, the admiral?
Seor, said the master, the stars have a greater
influence over our destinies, than have our desires.
It seems to me, that that very astonishing victory of
the most noble and right valiant seor, Don Hernan,
at Zempoala, did utterly turn the brains of all the
sailors in the fleet: and his excellency the admiral
having declared himself a friend to the conqueror,
they were all straightway seized with such an
ambition
to exchange the handspike for the halbert, and
mine own thirteen vagabonds among them, that, in
an hour's time after the news, my good caravel was
as well freed of men as ever I have known her
cleared
of rats, after a smoking of brimstone. So,
perceiving
the folly of remaining in her alone, and
receiving
the assurance from my knaves that, if I went
with them, I should be their captain, and his
excellency
consenting to the same, I forthwith armed
myself
with these rusty plates, (wherein you may see
some of the dints battered by the red devils of
Florida
,)
and was converted into a soldier,the captain
of the smallest company in this goodly army, and
perhaps the most cowardly; for never did I before
hear men grumble with such profane discontent, as
did these same knaves, this very day, at the cold airs
of the mountain. If they will fight, well; if they
will not, and anybody else will, may I die the death
of a mule, if I will not make them; for one hath a
better and stronger command in an army than in a
ship. Last night I came to that great town they call
Cholula, and was confirmed in my command by the
general.His excellency, the admiral, bade me
commend
his love to your worship; and hearing that
you have enlisted his secretary into your service,
sends, by me, a better suit of armour for the youth,
and prays your favour will have him in such keeping,
that he shall be cured of his fit of valour, without the
absolute loss of life, or his right hand, which last
would entirely unfit him for returning to his ancient
duties,as, by my faith! so would the former. But,
by 'r lady, my thoughts run somewhat a
wool-gathering
at this prospect; for I see very clearly, 'tis a rich
land here, that hath such admirable cities; and, I am
told, we shall have blows enow, by and by, with the
varlets in the valley. Nevertheless, I am ready to
wager my soul against a cotton neck-piece, that, if
these infidels have half the spirit of the savages of
Florida, we shall be beaten, and sent to heaven,
Amen!that is, for the matter of heaven, and not
the beating!
I applaud thy resolution, mine ancient friend,
said the cavalier, and methinks thou art more
vigorous
,
both of body and mind, on land than thou wert
at sea. I will, by and by, send the secretary to
receive
the armour, and will not forget his
excellency's
bidding, as far as is possible. But let us not,
by conversation, distract our thoughts from this most
lovely spectacle; for I perceive it will be soon
enveloped
in darkness; and how know we, we shall
ever look upon it again?
Thus terminating the interview, the neophyte, as
he descended, watched the unchanging yet ever
beautiful
picture, till the sun buried himself among the
mountains, and the shadows of night curtained it in
obscurity.
CHAPTER II.
Passing
the night in a little hamlet on the mountain
side, the army was prepared, at the dawn of the
following
day, to resume its march. But the events of
this march being varied by nothing but the change
of prospect, and the wonder of those by whom the
valley was seen for the first time, we will not imitate
the prolixity of our authority, the worthy Don
Cristobal
,
but despatch, in a word, the increasing delight
and astonishment with which Don Amador de Leste,
after having satiated his appetite with views of lake
and garden, surveyed the countless villages and
towns of hewn stone that rose, almost at every
moment
,
among them. A neck of land now separates
the lakes of Chalco and Xochimilco; and the retreat
of the waters has left their banks deformed with fens
and morasses, wherein the wild-duck screams among
waving reeds and bulrushes. Originally, these basins
were united in one long and lovely sheet of water,
divided indeed, yet only by a causey built by the
hands of man, which is now lost in the
before-mentioned
neck, together with its sluices and bridges, as
well as a beautiful little city, that lay midway
between
the two shores, called by the Spaniards
Venezuela
,
(because rising, like its aristocratic
godmother
,
from among the waters,) until they discovered
that this was a peculiarity presented by dozens of
other cities in the valley. Here was enjoyed the
spectacle of innumerable canoes, paddled, with corn
2 *
and merchandise, from distant towns, or parting with
a freight of flowers from the
chinampas
, or floating
gardens. But this was a spectacle disclosed by other
cities of greater magnitude and beauty; and when,
from the streets of the royal city Iztapalapan, the
army issued at once upon the broad and straight dike
that stretched for more than two leagues in length,
a noble highway, through the salt floods of Tezcuco;
when the neophyte beheld islands rocking like
anchored
ships in the water, the face of the lake
thronged
with little piraguas, and the air alive with snowy
gulls; when he perceived the banks of this great
sheet, as far as they could be seen, lined with villages
and towns; and especially when he traced far away
in the distance, in the line of the causeway, such a
multitude of high towers and shadowy pyramids
looming over the waters, as denoted the presence
of a vast city,he was seized with a species of awe
at the thought of the marvellous ways of God, who
had raised up that mighty empire, all unknown to the
men of his own hemisphere, and now revealed it, for
the accomplishment of a destiny which he trembled
to imagine. He rode at the head of the army, in a
post of distinction, by the side of Cortes, and fell
moved to express some of the strange ideas which
haunted him; but looking on the general attentively,
he perceived about his whole countenance and figure
an expression of singular gloom, mingled with such
unusual haughtiness, as quickly indisposed him to
conversation.
The feelings that struggled in the bosom of the
Conqueror
were, at this instant, akin to those of the
destroyer
,
as he sat upon `the Assyrian mount,'
over-looking
the walls of Paradise, almost lamenting, and
yet excusing to himself, the ruin he was about to
bring upon that heavenly scene. Perhaps `horror
and doubt' for a moment distracted his thoughts; for
no one knew better than he the uncertain chances
and tremendous perils of the enterprise, or mused
with more fear upon the probable and most
sanguinary
resistance of his victims, as foreboded by the
tumults that followed after the late massacre. But
when he cast his eye backward on the causey, and
beheld the long train of foot and horse following at
his beck; the many cannons, which, as they were
dragged along, opened their brazen throats towards
the city; the rows of spears and arquebuses
bristling
,
and the banners flapping, over the heads of his
people, and behind them the feathered tufts of his
Tlascalans; and heard the music of his trumpets
swell from the dike to the lake, from the lake to the
shores, and die away, with pleasant echoes, among
the hills; when he surveyed and listened to these
things, and contrasted with them the imperfect
weapons
and naked bodies of his adversaries; the
weakness
of their institutions; the feebleness of their
princes; the general disorganization of the people;
and counted the guerdon of wealth and immortal
renown that should wait upon success; he stifled at
once his apprehensions and his remorse, ceased to
remember that those, whose destruction he
meditated
,
were, to him, `harmless innocence,' and
satisfied
himself, almost with the arguments of the fiend,
that
Public reason just,
Honour and empire, with revenge enlarged,
By conquering this new world, compels me now
To do what else, though damn'd, I should abhor.
Triumph and regret were at once dividing his bosom;
he knew he was a destroyer, but felt he should be a
conqueror.
There were many things in Don Hernan, which
notwithstanding the gratitude and the desires of the
neophyte, prevented the latter from bestowing upon
him so much affection as he gave to one or two of
his followers. The spirit of the leader was wholly,
and, for his station, necessarily, crafty; and this very
quality raised up a wall between him and one who
was of so honourable a nature that he knew no
concealment
.
The whole schemes and aims of the
general
were based upon such a foundation of fraud
and injustice, that, he well knew, he could not,
without
expecting constant and vexatious opposition, give
his full confidence to any truly noble spirit; and the
same wisdom that estranged him from the lofty,
taught him to keep aloof from the base. While
artful
enough to make use of the good qualities of the
one, and the bad principles of the other class, he was
satisfied with their respect; he cared not for their
friendship. It was enough to him, that he had
zealous
and obedient followers: his situation allowed
him no friends; and he had none. Of all the valiant
cavaliers who shared with him the perils and the
rewards of the invasion, there was not one who, after
peace had severed the bonds of companionship, did
not, at the first frown of fortune, or the first
invitation
of self-interest, array himself in arms against his
leader.
While the general gave himself up to his proud
and gloomy imaginings, the novice of Rhodes again
cast his eyes over the lake. It seemed to him, that,
notwithstanding the triumphant blasts of the trumpet,
the neighing of horses, and the multitudinous tread
of the foot-soldiers, as well as the presence of so
many canoes on the water, there was an air of
sadness
and solitude pervading the whole spectacle. The
new soldiers were perhaps impressed with an awe
like his own, at the strange prospect; the veterans
were, doubtless, revolving in their minds some of the
darker contingencies, over which their commander
was brooding. Their steps rung heavily on the stone
mole; and as the breeze curled up the surface of the
lake into light billows, and tossed them against the
causeway, Don Amador fancied, they approached
and dashed at his feet with a certain sullen and
hostile
voice of warning. He thought it remarkable,
also, that, among the throngs of canoes, there rose
no shouts of welcome: the little vessels, forming a
fleet on either side of the dike, were paddled along,
at the distance of two or three hundred yards, so as
to keep pace with the army; and the motion of the
rowers, and the gleaming of their white garments,
might have given animation, as well as
picturesqueness
,
to the scene, but for the death-like silence that
was preserved among them. The novelty of
everything
about the cavalier gave vigour to his
imagination
he
thought these paddling hordes resembled the
flight of ravens that track the steps of a wounded
beast in the desert,or a shoal of those ravenous
monsters that scent a pestilence on the deep, and
swim by the side of the floating hospital, waiting for
their prey.
What they mean, I know not, mused the
cavalier
.
After what De Morla has told me, I shall be
loath to slay any of them; but if they desire to make
a dinner of me, I swear to St. John! I will carve
their brown bodies into all sorts of dishes, before I
submit my limbs to the imprisonment of their most
damnable maws! And yet, poor infidels! methinks
they have some cause, after that affair of the festival,
to look upon us with fear, if not with wrath; for if a
garrison of an hundred men could be prompted to do
them such a foul and murderous wrong, there is
much reason to apprehend this well-appointed
thousand
might be, with as little provocation and
warning
,
incited to work them a still more deadly injury.
I would, however, that they might shout a little, were
it only to make me feel more like a man awake; for,
at present, it seems to me, that I am dreaming all these
things which I am looking at!
The wish of the cavalier was not obeyed; and
many a suspicious glance was cast, both by soldier
and officer, to the dumb myriads paddling on their
flanks; for it could not be denied, though no one
dared to give utterance to such a suggestion, that
were these countless barbarians provided with arms,
as was perhaps the case, and could they but conceive
the simple expedient of landing both in front and rear,
and thus cut off their invaders from the city and the
shore, and attack them at the same time, with good
heart, in this insulated and very disadvantageous
position
,
there was no knowing how obscure a
conjecture
the historian might hazard for the story of their
fate. But this suspicion was also proved to be
groundless
;
no sort of annoyance was practised, none
indeed
was meditated. The thousands that burthened
the canoes, had issued from their canals to indulge a
stupid curiosity, or, perhaps, under an impulse which
they did not understand, to display to their enemies
the long banquet of slaughter which fate was
preparing
for them.
The army reached, at last, a point where another
causeway of equal breadth, and seemingly of equal
length, coming from the south-west, from the city
Cojohuacan, ruled by a king, (the brother and
feudatory
of Montezuma,) terminated in the dike of
Iztapulapan
.
At the point of junction was a sort of
military work, consisting of a bastion, a strong wall
and two towers, guarding the approach to the
imperial
city. It was known by the name of Xoloc, (or, as
it should be written in our tongue, Holoc,) and was
in after times made famous by becoming the
headquarters
of Cortes, during the time of the siege. It
stood at the distance of only half a league from the
city; and from hence could be plainly seen, not only
the huge pyramids, with their remarkable towers
rising aloft, but the low stone fabrics whereon, among
the flowers (for every roof was a terrace, and every
terrace a garden,) stood the gloomy citizens,
watching
the approach of the Christian army.
At this point of Xoloc, at a signal of the general,
every drum was struck with a lusty hand, every
trumpet filled with a furious blast, and the Christians
and Tlascalans, shouting together, while two or three
falconets were at the same time discharged, there
rose such a sudden and mighty din as startled the
infidels
in their canoes, and conveyed to the remotest
quarters of Tenochtitlan, the intelligence of the
advance
of its masters.
Scarcely had the echoes of this uproar died away
on the lake, when there came, faintly indeed, but full
of joyous animation, the response of the Christian
garrison; and as the army resumed its march, they
repeated their shouts loudly and blithely, for they
now perceived, by the waving of banners and the
glittering of spears, that their friends, rescued, as
they all understood, by their presence, from the fear
of a miserable death, were coming forth to meet them.
Two or three mounted cavaliers were seen to separate
themselves from this little and distant band, and
gallop
forwards, while the causeway rung to the sound
of their hoofs. Don Amador, being in advance, was
able, as they rushed forwards with loud and merry
halloos, to observe their persons, as well as the
reception
they obtained from Don Hernan. His eye
was attracted to him who seemed to be their leader,
and who, he already knew, was Don Pedro de
Alvarado
,
a cavalier that had no rival (the gallant
Sandoval
excepted,) in fame and in the favour of his
general
.
He was in the prime of life, of a most noble
stature, and of a countenance so engaging and
animated
,
that this, in addition to the constant
splendour
of his apparel, whether the gilded mail of a
warrior, or the costly vestments of a courtier,had
won him from the Mexicans themselves the
flattering
title of
Tonatiuh
, or the Sun; a compliment which
his friends did not scruple to perpetuate, nor he to
encourage. He rode immediately up to Cortes, and
stretching out his hand, said gayly, and indeed,
affectionately
,
Long life to thee, Cortes! I welcome thee as my
saint. God be praised for thy comingAmen! Thou
hast snatched me from a most ignoble and hound-like
death; for Sir Copilli, the emperor, has been
starving
me!
Don Hernan took the hand of the cavalier, and
eyeing
him steadfastly and sternly, while his old
companions
gathered around, said with a most pointed
asperity
,
My friend Alvarado! thou hast done me, as well
as these noble cavaliers, thy friends, and also thy lord
the king, a most grievous wrong; for, by the
indulgence
of thy hot wrath and indiscretion, thou hast,
as I may say, dashed the possession of this empire
out of our hands: and much blood shall be shed, and
many Christian lives sacrificed in a war that might
have been spared us, before we can remedy the
consequences
of thy rashness!
A deep gloom that darkened to a scowl, instantly
gathered over the handsome visage of Don Pedro;
and snatching his had roughly away, he drew
himself
up, and prepared to reply to his general with
wrath, and perhaps with defiance. But it was no
part of the policy of Cortes to carry his anger
further
than might operate warningly on the officer and
on those around; for which reason, offering his hand
again, as if not noticing the discontent of his
lieutenant
,
he said, with an artful appearance of sincerity,
I have often thought how thou mightest have
been spared the necessity of slaying these perfidious
and plotting hounds; and it seems to me, even now,
if thou couldst, by shutting thyself in thy quarters
and avoiding a contest, have submitted to the foolish
imputations some might have cast on thee, of acting
from fear rather than from prudence, this killing of
the nobles might have been avoided. I say, some,
indeed, might have accused thee of being in fear,
hadst thou not killed the knaves that were scheming
thine own destruction; but this is an aspersion which
thou
couldst have borne with as little injury as any
other brave cavalier in this army, being second to
none in a high and well-deserved reputation; and so
well am I persuaded that none could have better than
thyself withstood the uncommon dangers of thy
command
in this treasonable city, that I should have
excused
any precaution of peace, that might have
seemed
cowardly to others. Nevertheless, I must own,
thou wert forced to do as thou hast done; for no
brave man can submit to be thought capable of fear;
and, I know, 'twas this thought alone, that drove thee
out to kill the nobles.
No cloud in those tropical skies could have vanished
more suddenly in the sunbeam, than did the frown of
Alvarado at these complimentary words of his
general
.
He caught the hand that was still proffered,
shook it heartily, kissed it, and said,his whole
countenance
beaming with delight and pride,
I thank your excellency for this just consideration
of my actions, and this expression of a true excuse for
what seems, and what perhaps may have been, a
great indiscretion. Your excellency, and these noble
seores, my friends, would have esteemed me a
coward
,
had I sat securely and quietly in the palace,
watching, without attempting to forestall, the
conspiracy
of the lords of Mexico; and I have great hopes,
when I have permission to explain all these things to
your excellency, though I do not much plume myself
on wisdom, but rather on fighting, (which is the only
thing I have ever studied with diligence,) that you
will say I acted as wisely as, in such case, was
possible
.
I have no doubt of it, said Cortes, smiling, as he
rode onwards.But, nevertheless, there is more
wisdom in thy knocks than in thy noddle, he
muttered
to himself.The shame of the reproof, though
dispelled by the flattery of the rebuker, did not wholly
disappear from the bosom of Alvarado. A word of
sarcasm will live longer than the memory of a benefit.
Alvarado was, in after days, a traitor to his general.
But without now giving himself leisure for
consideration
,
the cavalier addressed himself to his old
companions
;
and even, (for his joy at being so rescued
out of peril, warmed his heart to all,) made up with
much satisfaction to the knight Calavar. But since the
confession at Cholula, the distemper of Don Gabriel
had visibly increased; and his fits of abstraction were
becoming, every hour, so frequent and so profound, as
to cause the greatest alarm and anxiety to his
kinsman
.
He neither heard nor saw the salutations of
Vol. II. 3
Don Pedro; nor indeed did he seem at all sensible to
any part of the strange scene that surrounded him.
Foiled in this attempt, the courteous and vivacious
soldier turned himself to Don Amador, as presenting
the appearance of a noble and gallant hidalgo, and
would speedily have been on a footing of the most
perfect friendship with him, had it not been that the
neophyte still freshly remembered the story of the
massacre, and met his advances with a frigid
haughtiness
.
By'r lady! said the offended cavalier, it seems to
me that the devil, or the cold mountain, has got into
the bosoms of all; for here am I, with my heart at
this moment as warm as a pepper-pod, or a black
cloak in the sunshine, and ready to love everybody,
old and young, vile and virtuous, base and gentle;
and yet everybody, notwithstanding, meets me with
a most frosty unconcern. I swear to thee, valiant
cavalier, whosoever thou art, my breast is open to
thee, and I crave thy affection; for, besides perceiving
that thou art assuredly an hidalgo, I see thou hast a
Moorish page at thy side, with a lute at his back; and
if his pipe be half so good as his face, I cannot live
without being thy friend; for I love music!
Jacinto shrunk away from his admirer, alarmed as
much at the suddenness of his praise, as at the many
evolutions of the lance, which, by way of
gesticulation
,
he flourished about him in a very vigorous
manner. But Don Amador, greatly amused at the
freedom, and, in spite of himself, gained by the
frankness
,
of Don Pedro, replied with good-humour.
Seor, said he, I am Amador de Leste, of the
castle Del Alcornoque, near to Cuenza; and having
heard certain charges against you, in the matter of
the Mexican nobles, I replied to you, perhaps, with
prejudice. Nevertheless, what the general has said,
does, in some sort, seem to lessen the force of the
charge; and if you will, at your leisure, condescend
to satisfy my doubts, as I begin to be assured you can,
I will not hesitate to receive your friendship, and to
tender you my own in return. Only, previous to
which, I must beg of you to turn your lance-point
another way, so that the boy Jacinto, who is
somewhat
afraid of its antics, may be enabled to walk
again at my side.
Seor Don Amador de Leste, said the soldier,
taking this speech in good part, I avow myself
satisfied
with your explanation, and so determined to
pursue
your friendship, (inasmuch as I have not heard any
good singing since the little Orteguilla, the page of
the Indian emperor, or, what is the same thing, of
Cortes, lost his voice in a quinsy,) that I will give you
the whole history of the nobles, their atrocious
conspitacy
and their just punishment, as soon as we have
leisure in our quarters. And now, if you will have
the goodness to ride with me a little in advance, I
will have much satisfaction, as I perceive you are a
stranger, to introduce you to this great and
wonderful
city, Tenochtitlan, of which I have been, as I may
say, in some sort, the king, for two long and
tumultuous
months; and I swear to you, no king ever
clutched upon a crown with more good will and joy
than do I, this moment, abdicate my authority.
Thus invited by his courteous and jocund friend,
the neophyte rode onwards so as to reach the heels
of Cortes, just as the garrison, inspired by the sight
of their leader, broke their ranks, and rushed forwards
to salute him.
CHAPTER III.
The
soldiers of Alvarado differed in no wise from
those veterans whom Don Amador had found
standing
to their arms on the banks of the River of Canoes;
only that they presented, notwithstanding their loudly
vented delight, a care-worn and somewhat emaciated
appearance,the consequence of long watches,
perpetual
fears, and, in part, of famine. They broke
their ranks, as has been said, as soon as they beheld
their general, and surrounded him with every
expression
of affection; and, while stretching forth their
hands with cries of gratitude and joy, invoked many
execrations on their imperial prisoner, the helpless
Montezuma, as the cause of all their sufferings.
Among them, Don Amador took notice of one man,
who, though armed and habited as a Spaniard,
seemed
,
in most other respects, an Indian, and of a more
savage race than any he had yet seen; for his face,
hands, and neck were tattooed with the most fantastic
figures, and his motions were those of a barbarian.
This was Geronimo de Aguilar, a companion of
Balboa
,
who, being wrecked on the coast of Yucatan,
had been preserved as a slave, and finally, adopted
as a warrior, among the hordes of that distant land;
from which he was rescued by Don Hernan,
happily
to serve as the means of communication, through
the medium of another and more remarkable
interpreter
,
with the races of Mexico. This other
interpreter
,
who approached the general with the
dignified
gravity of an Indian princess, and was received
with suitable respect, was no less a person than that
maid of Painalla, sold by an unfeeling parent a slave to
one of the chieftains of Tobasco, presented by him to
Cortes, and baptized in the faith under the
distinguished
title of the seora Doa Marina; who, by
interpreting
to Aguilar, in the language of Yucatan, the
communications
that were made in her native tongue,
thus gave to Cortes the means of conferring with her
countrymen, until her speedy acquisition of the
Castilian
language removed the necessity of such
tedious
intervention. But at this period, many
Spaniards
had acquired a smattering of her tongue, and
could play the part of interpreters; and, for this
reason
,
Doa Marina will make no great figure in this
history. Other annalists have sufficiently
immortalized
her beauty, her wisdom, and her fidelity; and
it has been her good fortune, continued even to this
day, to be distinguished with such honours as have
fallen to the lot of none of her masters. Her
Christian
denomination, Marina, converted by her
countrymen
into
Malintzin
, (a title that was afterwards
scornfully applied by them to Cortes himself,) and
this again, in modern days, corrupted by the Creoles
into
Malinche
, has had the singular fate to give name
both to a mountain and a divinity: the sierra of
Tlascala
is now called the mountain of Malinche; and
the descendants of Montezuma pay their adorations
to the Virgin, under the title of Malintzin.
Don Amador de Leste, attended by De Morla,
as well as his new acquaintance, Alvarado, was able
to understand, as well as admire, many of the
wonders
of the city, as he now, for the first time, planted
his foot on its imperial streets.
The retreat of the salt waters of Tezcuco has left
the present republican city of Mexico a full league
west of the lake. In the days of Montezuma, it stood
upon an island two miles removed from the western
shore, with which it communicated by the dike or
calzada
of Tlacopan,now called Tacuba. The
causeway
of Iztapalapan, coming from the South, seven
miles in length, passed over the island and through
the city, and was continued in a line three miles
further to the northern shore, and to the city
Tepejacac
,
where now stand the church and the
miraculous
picture of Our Lady of Guadalupe. Besides these
three great causeways, constructed with
inconceivable
labour, there were two others,that of
Cojohuacan
,
which, as we have mentioned, terminated in the
greater one of Iztapalapan, at the military point Xoloc,
a half league from the city; and that, a little
southward
of the dike of Tacuba, which conveyed, in
aqueducts of earthenware, the pure waters of
Chapoltepec
to the temples and squares of the imperial
city. The island was circular, saving that a broad
angle or peninsula ran out from the north-west, and
a similar one from the opposite point of the compass:
it was a league in diameter; but the necessities of
the people, after covering this ample space with their
3 *
dwellings, extended them far into the lake; and
perhaps
as many edifices stood, on piles, in the water as
on the land. The causeways of Iztapalapan and
Tacuba, intersecting each other in the heart of the
island, divided the city into four convenient quarters,
to which a fifth was added, some few generations
before, when the little kingdom of Tlatelolco,
occupying
the north-western peninsula, was added to
Tenochtitlan
.
On this peninsula and in this quarter,
Tlateloeco, stood the palace of an ancient king, which
the munificence of Montezuma had presented to
Cortes
for a dwelling, and which the invader, six days
after the gift, by an act of as much treachery as
daring, converted into the prison of his benefactor.
The appearance of this vast and remarkable city
so occupied the mind of the neophyte, that, as he
rode staring along, he gave but few thoughts, and
fewer words, either to his kinsman or the page. It
was sunset, and in the increasing obscurity, he gazed,
as if on a scene of magic, on streets often having
canals in the midst, covered alike with bridges and
empty canoes; on stone houses, low indeed, but of a
strong and imposing structure, over the terraces of
which waved shrubs and flowers; and on high
turrets
,
which, at every vista, disclosed their distant
pinnacles
.
But he remarked also, and it was mentioned
by the cavaliers at his side as a bad omen, that
neither
the streets, the canals, nor the house-tops
presented
the appearance of citizens coming forth to
gaze upon them. A few Indians were now and then
seen skulking at a distance in the streets, raising their
heads from a half-concealed canoe, or peering from
a terrace among the shrubs. He would have thought
the city uninhabited, but that he knew it contained as
many living creatures, hidden among its retreats, as
some of the proudest capitals of Christendom. Even
the great square, the centre of life and of devotion,
was deserted; and the principal pyramid, a huge and
mountainous mass, consecrated to the most
sanguinary
of deities, though its sanctuaries were lighted
by the ever-blazing urns, and though the
town
of
temples
circumscribed by the great Coatepantli, or
Wall
of Serpents
, which surrounded this Mexican Olympus,
sent up the glare of many a devotional torch,yet
did it seem, nevertheless, to be inhabited by beings as
inanimate as those monstrous reptiles which writhed
in stone along the infernal wall. In this light, and in
that which still played in the west, Don Amador
marvelled
at the structure of the pyramid, and cursed it
as he marvelled. It consisted of five enormous
platforms
,
faced with hewn stone, and mounted by steps
so singularly planned, that, upon climbing the first
story, it was necessary to walk entirely round the
mass, before arriving at the stair-case which
conducted
to the second. The reader may conceive of the
vast size of this pagan temple by being apprised,
that, to ascend it, the votaries were compelled, in
their perambulations, to walk a distance of full ten
furlongs, as well as to climb a hundred and fourteen
different steps. He may also comprehend the
manner
in which the stairways were contrived, by
knowing
that the first, ascending
laterally
from the corner,
was just as broad as the first platform was wider
than the second; leaving thus a sheer and continuous
wall from the ground to the top of the second terrace,
from the bottom of the second to the top of the third,
and so on, in like manner, to the top.
But the pyramid, crowned with altars and censers,
the innumerable temples erected in honour of
nameless
deities at its foot, and the strange and most
hideous Coatepantli, were not the only objects which
excited the abhorrence of the cavalier. Without
the wall, and a few paces in advance of the great
gate which it covered as a curtain, rose a rampart
of earth or stone, oblong and pyramidal, but
truncated
,
twenty-five fathoms in length at the base, and
perhaps thirty feet in height. At either end of this
tumulus, was a tower of goodly altitude, built, as it
seemed at a distance and in the dim light, of some
singularly rude and uncouth material; and between
them, occupying the whole remaining space of the
terrace, was a sort of frame-work or cage of slender
poles, on all of which were strung thickly together,
certain little globes, the character of which Don
Amador could not penetrate, until fully abreast of
them. Then, indeed, he perceived, with horror, that
these globes were the skulls of human beings, the
trophies of ages of superstition; and beheld, in like
manner, that the towers which crowned the
Golgotha
,
(or
Huitzompan
, as it was called in the Mexican
tongue,) were constructed of the same dreadful
materials
,
cemented together with lime. The
malediction
which he invoked upon the builders of the ghastly
temple, was unheard; for the spectacle froze his blood
and paralyzed his tongue.
It was not yet dark, when, having left these haunts
of idolatry, Don Amador found himself entering into
the court-yard of a vast, and yet not a very lofty,
building,the palace of Axajacatl; wherein, with
drums beating, and trumpets answering joyously to
the salute of their friends, stood those individuals of
the garrison who had remained to watch over their
prisoners and treasures. The weary and the curious,
thronging together impatiently at the gate, mingling
with the garrison and some two thousand faithful
Tlascalans, who had been left by Cortes as their
allies, and who now rushed forward to salute the
viceroy of their gods, as some had denominated Don
Hernan, made such a scene of confusion, that, for a
moment, the neophyte was unable to ride into the
yard. In that moment, and while struggling both to
appease the unquiet of Fogoso, and to drive away
the feathered herd that obstructed him, his arm was
touched, and looking down, he beheld Jacinto at his
side, greatly agitated, and seemingly striving to
disengage
himself from the throng.
Give me thy hand, cried Don Amador, and
I will pull thee out of this rabble to the back of
Fogoso
.
But the page, though he seized upon the hand of
his patron, and covered it with kisses, held back,
greatly to the surprise of Don Amador, who was
made sensible that hot tears were falling with the
kisses.
I swear to thee, my boy! that I will discover thy
father for thee, if it be possible for man to find him,
said the cavalier, diving at once, as he thought, to
the cause of this emotion.
But before he had well done speaking, the press
thickening around him, drew the boy from his side;
and when he had, a moment after, disengaged
himself
,
Jacinto was no longer to be seen. Not
doubting
,
however, that he was entangled in the mass, and
would immediately appear, he called out to him to
follow; and riding slowly up to Cortes, he had his
whole attention immediately absorbed by the
spectacle
of the Indian emperor.
Issuing from the door of the palace, surrounded
as well by Spanish cavaliers as by the nobles, both
male and female, of his own household, who stood
by him,the latter, at least,with countenances of
the deepest veneration,he advanced a step to do
honour to the dismounting general.
In the light of many torches, held by the people
about him, Don Amador, as he flung himself from
his horse, could plainly perceive the person and
habiliments
of the pagan king. He was of good stature,
clad in white robes, over which was a huge mantle
of crimson, studded with emeralds and drops of gold,
knotted on his breast, or rather on his shoulder, so
as to fall, when he raised his arm, in careless but
very graceful folds; his legs were buskined with
gilded leather; his head covered with the
copilli
, or
crown, (a sort of mitre of plate-gold, graved and
chased with certain idolatrous devices,) from beneath
which fell to his shoulders long and thick locks of
the blackest hair. He did not yet seem to have
passed beyond the autumn of life. His countenance,
though of the darkest hue known among his people,
was good, somewhat long and hollow, but the
features
well sculptured; and a gentle melancholy, a
characteristic expression of his race, deepened,
perhaps
,
in gloom, by a sense of his degradation, gave
it a something that interested the beholder.
In the abruptness with which he was introduced
to the regal barbarian, Don Amador had no leisure
to take notice of his attendants, all princely in rank,
and, two or three of them, the kings of neighbouring
cities: he only observed that their decorations were
far from being costly and ostentatious;a
circumstance
,
which, he did not then know, marked the
greatness of their respect. In the absurd grandeur
which attached to the person of their monarch, no
distinction of inferior ranks was allowed to be traced,
during the time of an audience; and in his majestic
presence, a vassal king wore the coarse garments of
a slave. So important was esteemed the observance
of this courtly etiquette, that, at the first visit made
him, in his palace, by the Spaniards, the renowned
Cortes and his proud officers did not refuse to throw
off their shoes, and cover their armour with such
humble apparel as was offered them. But those days
were passed; the king of kings was himself the
vassal
of a king's vassal. Yet notwithstanding this, it
had been, up to this time, the policy of Don Hernan
to soften the captivity, and engage the affections, of
the monarch, by such marks of reverence as might
still allow him to dream he possessed the grandeur,
along with the state, of a king. Before this day,
Cortes had never been known to pass his prisoner,
without removing his cap or helmet; and indeed,
such had been so long the habit of his cavaliers, that
all, as they now dismounted, fell to doffing their
casques without delay, until the action of their leader
taught them a new and unexpected mode of salutation.
The weak spirit of Montezuma had yielded to the
arts of the Spaniard; and forgetting the insults
of past days, the loss of his empire, and the shame
of his imprisonment, he had already conceived a
species
of affection for his wronger. Cortes had no
sooner, therefore, leaped from his horse, than the
emperor, with outstretched arms, and with his
sadness
yielding to a smile, advanced to meet him.
Dog of a king! said the invader, with a
ferocious
frown, dost thou starve and murder my
people
,
and then offer me the hand of friendship? away
with thee! I defy thee, and thou shalt see that I can
punish! Thus saying, and thrusting the king rudely
aside, he stepped into the palace.
A wild cry of lamentation, at this insult (it needed
no interpretation) to their king, burst from the lips of
all the Mexicans; and the Spaniards themselves were
not less panic-struck. The gentle manners of
Montezuma
,
and his munificence, (for he was in the daily
habit of enriching them with costly presents,) had
endeared him to most of his enemies; and even the
soldiers of the garrison, who had so lately accused
him of endeavouring to famish them, had no belief
in the justice of their charges. Many of them
therefore
,
both soldiers and hidalgos, indignant and
grieved at the wanton insult, had their sympathies
strongly excited, when they beheld the monarch roll
his eyes upon them with a haggard smile, in which
pride was struggling vainly with a bitter sense of
humiliation
.
De Morla and several others rushed
forwards
to atone, by caresses, for the crime of their
general. But it was too late; the king threw his mantle
over his head, and without the utterance of any
complaint
,
passed, with his attendants, into his apartments.
His countenance was never more, from that day, seen
to wear a smile.
Don Amador de Leste was greatly amazed and
shocked by this rudeness; and it was one of many
other circumstances, which, by lessening his respect
for the general, contributed to weaken his friendship,
and undermine his gratitude. But he had no time to
indulge his indignation. He was startled by a loud
cry, or rather a shriek, from the lips of the knight
Calavar; and running to the gate, beheld, in the
midst of a confused mass of men, rushing to and fro,
and calling out as if to secure an assassin, his
kinsman
lying, to all appearance dead, in the arms of his
attendants.
CHAPTER IV.
The
first thought of the young cavalier was, that
Don Gabriel had been basely and murderously struck
by some felon hand; an apprehension of which he
was, in part, immediately relieved by the
protestations
of Baltasar, but which was not entirely
removed
until he had assisted to carry the knight into
a chamber of the palace, and beheld him open his
eyes and roll them wildly round him, like one
awaking
from a dream of night-mare.
I say, muttered Baltasar, as he raised the head
of the distracted man, and beckoned to clear the room
of many idle personages who had thrust themselves
in, he was hurt by no mortal man, for I stood close
at his side, and there is not a drop of blood on his
body. 'Twas one of the accursed ghosts, whom
may St. John sink down to hell; for they are ever
persecuting
us.
Mortal man, or immortal fiend, whispered
Lazaro
,
knitting his brows, but looking greatly frighted,
I saw him running away, the moment the knight
screeched; and, I will take my oath, he had such a
damnable appearance as belongs to nothing but the
devil, or one of these pagan gods, who are all devils.
Had he been a man, I should have slain him, for I
struck at him with my spear!
Miserere mei! groaned the knight, rising to his
feet, they are all unearthed,Zayda at the temple,
and
he
in the palace!
Don Amador trembled, when, he heard his kinsman
pronounce the name of Zayda, for he remembered
the words of Jacinto. Nevertheless he said, be not
disturbed, my father; for we are none here but thy
servants.
Ay! said the knight, looking gloomily but sanely
to his friend; I afflict thee with my folly; but I
know
now
that it will end.Let the boy Jacinto sing
to me the song of the Virgin; I will pray and sleep.
Don Amador looked round, and Jacinto not being
present, began to remember that the page had been
separated from him in the crowd, and that he had
not seen him since the moment of separation. None
of the attendants had noticed him enter the
court-yard
;
and a superstitious fear was mingled with his
anxiety, when Don Gabriel, casting his eyes to
heaven
,
said, with a deep groan,
The time beginneth, the flower is broken, and
now I see how each branch shall fall, and the trunk
that is blasted, shall be left, naked, to perish! Seek
no more for the boy, he went on to Amador, with a
grave placidity, which, coupled with the extravagance
of his words, gave the youth reason to fear that his
mind, wavering under a thousand shocks, had at last
settled down for ever in the calm of insanity,seek
for the good child no more, for he is now in heaven.
And lament not thou, my son Amador, that thou shalt
speedily follow him; for thy heart is yet pure, thy
soul unstained, and grace shall not be denied thee!
Jacinto is not dead, my father, said the neophyte
earnestly; and if thou wilt suffer Baltasar to
remove
thy corslet, and make thee a couch under
yonder
canopy, I will fetch him to thee presently, and he
shall sing thee to sleep.
Remove the armour indeed, muttered Don
Gabriel
,
submitting passively, for now there is no more
need of aught but the crucifix, prayers, and the
grave. Poor children! that shall die before the day
of canker, what matters it? I lament ye not,ye
shall sleep in peace!
Thus murmuring out his distractions, in which his
servants perceived nothing but the influence of some
supernatural warning that boded them calamity, the
Vol. II. 4
knight allowed himself to be disarmed and laid upon
a couch on a raised platform at the side of the
chamber, over which the voluminous arras that
covered
the walls, were festooned into a sort of not
inelegant tester.
Meanwhile, the neophyte, beckoning Lazaro with
him, and charging him to make good search
throughout
the palace for the page, began to address himself
to the same duty. And first, attracted by the lights
and by the sounds of many voices coming from a
neighbouring apartment, he advanced to the door,
where he was suddenly arrested by the appearance
of a Mexican of very majestic stature, though clad
in the same humble robes which had covered the
attendants
of Montezuma, issuing from the chamber,
followed by a throng of cavaliers, among whom was
the general himself. At the side of Cortes stood a
boy, in stature resembling Jacinto; and in whom, for
a moment, Don Amador thought he had discovered
the object of his desires. But this agreeable delusion
was instantly put to flight, when he heard Don
Hernan
address him by the name of Orteguilla, and saw
that he exercised the functions of an interpreter.
Tell me this knave, my merry
muchacho
, said
the general,tell me this knave, (that is to say, this
royal prince,) Cuitlahuatzin, that I discharge him
from captivity, under the assurance that he shall,
very faithfully, and without delay, command his
runagate
people to bring me corn to the market; of which
it is not fitting we should be kept in want longer than
to-morrow. And give him to understand, that I hold,
as the hostage of his good faith and compliance, the
dog Montezuma; (translate
that
, the king his brother:)
who shall be made to suffer the penalty of any neglect,
on his part, to furnish me with the afore-mentioned
necessary provision.
The little Orteguilla, in part acquainted with the
Mexican tongue, did as he was directed; and the
prince Cuitlahuatzin, (or, as it should be pronounced
in English speech, Quitlawtzin,) receiving and
understanding
the direction, bowed his head to Cortes with
stately humility, and immediately withdrew.
Not discovering or hearing aught of Jacinto in this
throng, Don Amador continued his search in other
parts of the palace, the court-yard, and even the
neighbouring street; but with such indifferent
success
,
that, when stumbling upon Lazaro, and made
acquainted that he had been equally unfortunate, he
began to entertain the most serious fears for the fate
of the boy.
Perhaps he was carried off by the spectre,
muttered
Lazaro, superstitiously, as his worship Don
Gabriel as much as hinted.
Or perhaps, said the neophyte, with a thrill of
horror, by some of those bloody cannibals, to be
devoured! And I remember now, that there were
many savages about me at the time; though I thought
them Tlascalans. I would to heaven, I had speared
the knaves that came between us; but I swear to St.
John of the Desert, if they have truly robbed me of
the boy, and for that diabolical purpose, I will pursue
their whole race with a most unrelenting vengeance.
At this moment, the cavalier was startled by a
sudden
Hark! from Lazaro, and heard, at a distance
in the street, though objects were lost in the darkness,
a great tumult as of men in affray, and plainly
distinguished
a voice crying aloud, Arma! arma! and
Christian men, for the love of God, to the rescue of
Christians beset by infidels!
Draw thy sword, Lazaro, and follow! cried the
cavalier, for these are other victims; and, with
God's favour, we
will
rescue them!
Thus exclaiming, and without a moment thinking
of the unknown perils among which he was rushing,
he ran rapidly in the direction of the cries, and
straightway
beheld, a little in advance of a great crowd of
people, a group consisting of four or five persons,
several of them women in strange attire, who stood
shrieking with terror, while at their feet rolled three
or four on the ground in close and murderous
combat
.
The cries of one of these prostrate figures bespoke
him a Spaniard, and while one sinewy pagan seemed
to hold him upon the earth, another stood with his
uplifted weapon, in the very act of despatching him.
At this moment, Don Amador rushed forwards, and
shouting his war-cry,
Dios, y buena esperanza!
(that
is, `God and good cheer!') struck the menacing
savage a blow that sent him yelling away, and seized
upon the other by the shoulder to stab him; when,
suddenly, the Spaniard rose to his feet, with a leap
that tumbled the infidel to the earth, and showed him
to be already dead, cried aloud, in the
well-remembered
voice of the magician,
Tetragrammaton! thou wert a good shield, though
a bloody one, sir carcass!Save the princesses, and
fly, or we are all dead men!Arma! arma! to the
rescue!
Thus shouting, and seizing upon one of the women,
while Don Amador snatched the arm of the other,
(for he perceived, they were like to be cut off by
the approaching crowd,) the sorcerer, with his
rescuers
,
ran towards the palace. His cries had reached
the quarters; and presently they were surrounded by
a hundred soldiers and cavaliers bearing lights, in the
glare of which Don Amador had scarce time to note
the countenance of his new ward, before she was
locked in the arms of De Morla.
Minnapotzin! Benita! cried the joyous cavalier.
Amigo mio! thou hast saved my princess!
Stop not to prate and be happy; for the storm
comes! exclaimed Botello. To the palace, all of
ye! and to the cannon! for were you five hundred men,
there are wolves enow at your heels to devour you!
Thus admonished, and perceiving, in fact, that a
vast, though silent multitude was approaching, all
were fain to fly, and in an instant they were crowding
into the gates of the court-yard.
This comes of insulting the king! cried a voice
from the mele, as Cortes, shouting out to clear the
gates, was seen himself assisting to draw a piece of
artillery to the opening.
I see naught,I hear nothing, cried the general,
affecting not to remark this reproach, (which was
indeed just; for it was this over-refinement of policy,
spread with wonderful celerity throughout the city,
which dashed the last scale from the eyes of the
Mexicans, convinced them that their monarch was
indeed a slave, and let loose the long-imprisoned
current
of fury.) I see nought, I hear nought; and my
brave Rolands have been flying from shadows!
Say not so; the town is alive, cried the magician.
The hounds set on me, as I was bringing, at your
excellency's command, these princesses from Tacuba;
and it was only through the mercy of God, my good
star, an Indian that I killed for a buckler, and the
help of this true cavalier, (whose fate, out of gratitude,
I will reveal to him to-morrow,) that we were not all
killed by the way:for small reverence did the false
traitors show to the maidens.
Clear the way, then. Discharge me the piece,
Catalan
,
true cannohier! said Cortes, and we will see
what our foes look like, so near to midnight.
The match was applied, the palace shook to the
roar,and the blaze, illumining the street to a great
distance, disclosed it, to the surprise of all, entirely
deserted.
I will aver upon mine oath, said Don Amador,
that the street was but now full of people; but
where they have hidden, or whither they have fled,
wholly passes my comprehension.
Hidden, surely, in their beds, cried the general,
loudly and cheerfully, for he perceived the crowds
about him were panic-struck. They set on Botello,
doubtless, because they thought he was haling away
the princesses with violence; and, convinced of their
error, they have now gone to their rest,a mark of
wisdom in which I would advise all here to follow
their example.
Thus cheered by their leader, the soldiers began
4 *
to disperse; and Amador, musing painfully on the
mysterious fate of the page, was accosted by Cortes,
who, drawing him aside, said,
It has been told me, seor, that your Moorish
boy has made his escape.
His escape! echoed the novice, in surprise. He
did indeed vanish away from me, and I know not
how, though much do I fear, in a manner that it
shocks me to think on. I was about to ask of your
excellency, as the boy is a true Christian, as well as
a most faithful servant, for such counsel and
assistance
as might enable me, this night, to rescue him
out of the hands of the cannibals; for it would be a
sin on the souls of us all, should we suffer him to come
to harm.
And are you so well persuaded of his faith, as to
believe him incapable of treachery? demanded Don
Hernan, earnestly: Thou forgettest, he has a father
concealed among these infidels.
Ay! by my faith! cried Amador, joyously; I
thought not of that before. And yet, and yet
Here his countenance fell. How should he be so
mad, as to leave us in this strange and huge city,
with any hope of discovering Abdalla?
I can resolve thee that, said Cortes; for it is
avouched to me by Yacub, that he saw this wretch
(whom may heaven return to me for punishment, for
he is a most subtle, daring, and dangerous traitor,)
this very knave Abdalla, at thy horse's heels; but he
could not believe 't was he, until made acquainted
with the flight of the page.
Ay! now I see it; said Amador; and I
remember
that he wept, as he held my hand, as if grieving
to desert me. But, methinks, 't will be well to seek
him out, and reclaim him. Will your excellency allow
me the services of any score or two of men, who,
for love or gold, may be induced to follow me in the
search?
I will answer thee in thine own words, said
Cortes: Where wouldst thou look in this strange
and huge city, with any hope of discovering him?
Be content, seor; the boy is with the fox, his father.
That
should convince thee, he is in present safety.
And seor, I will tell thee, what I conceal from my
people, (for thou art a soldier, and, therefore, as
discreet
as fearless,) that I would not, this night,
despatch
an hundred men a mile from the palace,
without
looking to have half of them slain outright by the
rebels that are around us!
And dost thou think, said Amador, that these
besotted, naked madmen, would dare to assail so
many?
You will see, by my conscience! cried the
general, with a grim and anxious smile. Sleep with
thine armour at thy side; and forget not thy buckler,
for I have known a Tlascalan arrow pierce through
a good Biscayan gorget; and they say, the Mexicans
can shoot as well. Let not any noise arouse thee,
unless it be that of a trumpet. I would have thee sleep
well, my friend; for I know not how soon I may need
thy strong arm, and encouraging countenance!
Thus darkly and imperfectly apprising the novice
of his fears, (for now, indeed, a demon had roused a
thousand apprehensions in his breast,) the general
departed; and Don Amador disconsolately pursued
his way to the chamber of the knight of Rhodes.
CHAPTER V.
When
Don Amador returned to the chamber, he
was rejoiced to find his kinsman asleep, and not
offended
that the faithful Marco and Baltasar were
both nodding, as they sat at his side. He threw
himself
softly on a cot of mats, covered with robes of
fine cotton, over which was a little canopy,such
being the beds of the better orders of Mexico. The
crowded state of the palace (for it is recorded, that
the number of Totonac and Tlascalan allies, who
remained
in the garrison with Alvarado, now swelled
the army of Cortes to nearly nine thousand men,)
left him no other choice; and he felt, that his
presence
was perhaps necessary, in the unhappy
condition
of his knight. He was mindful to obey the
counsels
of Don Hernan, and lie with his weapons ready
to be grasped at the first alarm; and he remembered
also the hint that had been given him, not to be
surprised
at such tumults, when he heard a sound,
continued
throughout the greater part of the night, as of
heavy instruments knocking against the court-yard
wall, convincing him as well of the military vigilance
and preparations, as of the fears of his general. In
addition to this disturbance, he was often startled by
moans and wild expressions, coming from the lips of
the sleeping knight, showing him that even slumber
brought no repose to his distempered spirit. But,
above all, (and this made manifest the hold that the
Moorish boy had got upon his affections,) he was
troubled with thoughts of Jacinto; and often, as the
angel of sleep began to flutter over his eyelids, she
was driven away, by some sudden and painfully
intense
conception of the great peril which must
surround
the friendless lad, now that the events of the
evening proved him to be in the midst, and doubtless
in the power, of an enraged multitude, to whom every
stranger was an enemy. Often, too, as he was
sinking
into slumber, the first voice of dreams would cry
to him in the tones of Jacinto, or the silent enchanter
would bring before his eyes the spectacle of the boy,
confined in the cage of victims, or dragged away, by
the hands of ferocious priests, to the place of
sacrifice
.
These distractions kept him tossing about in
great restlessness, for a long time; and it was not
until the sounds of the workmen in the yard were no
longer heard, and until a deep silence pervaded the
palace, that he was able to drown his torments in
sleep.
He was roused from slumber by a painful dream,
and fancying it must be now approaching the time
of dawn, he stole softly to the bed-side of Calavar,
without disturbing the attendants. A taper of
myrtle-wax
,
burning on a little pedestal hard by, disclosed to
him the countenance of the knight, contracted with
pain, and flushed as if with fever, but still chained in
repose. He stepped noiselessly away, and gathering
his sword and a few pieces of armour in his hands,
left the apartment.
From the door of the palace, he could see, dimly,
for it was not yet morning,that vast numbers of
Tlascalans were lying asleep in the court-yard among
the horses, while many sentinels were stalking about
in silent watchfulness. He was now able, likewise,
to understand the cause of the heavy knocking,
which had annoyed him. The gates were closed;
but in three rude embrasures, which had been broken
in the wall by the workmen, frowned as many pieces
of ordnance, commanding the street by which he had
approached the palace.
Entering this again, and attracted by the distant
murmur of voices, he discovered a staircase at the
end of a passage, ascending which, he immediately
found himself on the terraced roof of the building.
And now he could perceive the exposed condition
of the royal citadel, as well as the preparations made
to sustain it, in the event of a siege.
The palace, itself, extended over a great piece of
ground, in the form of a square, the walled sides of
which were continuous, but the centre divided by
rows of structures that crossed each other, into many
little courts. The buildings were all low, consisting,
indeed, of but one floor, except that, in the centre,
were several chambers on the roofs of others, that
might be called turrets or observatories. The
terraces
were so covered with flowers and shrubs, that
they seemed a garden. This mass of houses was
surrounded
on all sides by a spacious court, confined by
a wall six or eight feet high, running entirely round
the whole. The palace, with its outer court, did not
yet occupy all of the great square upon which it stood.
It was a short bow-shot from the battlements to the
houses, which lined the four sides of the square.
Opposite
to each side or front of the fabric, was a great
street, along which the eye, in full day-light, could
traverse, till arrested by the surrounding lake.
Directly
opposite, likewise, to each of these streets, as
Don Amador soon discovered, the careful general
had caused to be broken as many embrasures as he
had seen on the quarter of the principal entrance;
and, now, there were no less than twelve pieces of
artillery (with those who served them sleeping in
cloaks hard by,) looking with formidable preparation
down the yawning and silent approaches.
The neophyte had not yet given a moment to these
observations, when he perceived on the top of one
of the turrets, a group of cavaliers, who, being
relieved
against the only streak of dawn that tinged
the eastern skies, were plainly seen, gesticulating with
great earnestness, as if engaged in important debate.
He approached this turret, and mounting the ladder
that ascended it, was assisted to the roof by the hand
of Cortes.
I give you good cheer, and much praise for your
early rising, Don Amador, cried the general, with
an easy courtesy and pleasant voice, which did not,
however, conceal from the novice, that he was really
affected by anxiety and even alarm; for this,
besides
convincing me, that no one is more ready than
thyself for a valiant bout with an enemy, will give
thee an opportunity to note in what way these pagan
Mexicans advance to assault; a matter of which I
am myself ignorant, though assured by my friend
Alvarado, that nothing can be more warlike to look
upon.
I vow to God, and to Saint Peter, who cut off a
knave's ear, said Don Pedro, that there are no
such besotted, mad, dare-devils in all the world
beside
,
as you shall quickly see; and I swear to you,
in addition, my friends, I did sometimes think, of a
morning, the very devils that dwell in the pit, were
let loose upon me. But fear not: with my poor
five-score
,
and the seven thousand Indians, who should
not be counted against more than one hundred
Christians
,
I felt no prick of dismay, except when I thought
of starvation; and with the force that now aids us,
'twill be but a boy's pastime, to kill ten thousand of
the bold lunatics, each day, before breakfast.
To this valiant speech, which was characteristic
of Alvarado,as notorious for boasting as for
bravery
,Don
Amador replied, complacently,
To my mind, nothing could be stronger than this
citadel against such enemies as we may have,
especially
since the placing of those cannon opposite to
the great streets,a precaution which should be
commended. Nevertheless, noble cavaliers, it does
not appear to me, that we are in any immediate peril
of assault: the infidels are not yet arisen.
Cast thine eye down yonder street! said Cortes
with a low voice, keep it fixed intently, for two or
three moments, on the shadows, and tell me what
thou seest among them. And, while thou art so
doing, do not shame to hold thy buckler a little over
thy face; for, now and then, methinks, I have seen
on yonder house-tops something unlike to rose-buds,
glancing among the bushes.
By my faith, said Don Amador, hastily, it
does seem to me, that there are men stirring afar in
the street,nay, a great body of them, and doubtless
clad in white,ay, I perceive them now! But I
thought 'twas a dim mist, creeping up from the lake.
If thou wilt look to the other three streets, said
Cortes, knitting his brows, and scowling around him,
thou wilt see other such vapours gathering about
us. Thus do they surround stags, in the sierras of
Salamanca! but, sometimes, the hunters have found
more wolves than deer among their quarry; and, by
my conscience, so will the dogs of Mexico find their
prey, this day, when they come a-hunting against
Castilians!Hah! did I not warn thee well? cried
the general, as an arrow, shot from a distant terrace,
and by some unseen hand, struck against the
guarding
shield with such violence as to shiver its stone
head into a thousand fragments. 'Ware such
Cupids
;
for, when they miss the heart, they are content
to rankle among the ribs. What say ye now, my
masters? The knaves are coming nearer! Such big
rain-drops do not long fall one by one, but show how
soon the flood will follow. Cover yourselves! for by
my conscience, that was another, though it fell short.
I see the house it comes from; and I will reward the
messenger shortly with such a cannon-shot as shall
leave him houseless.How now,
mi trompetero!
art
thou nodding? Wake me thy bugle, and let the
sleepers
look on the white clouds!
A trumpeter, who stood ready at the base of the
turret, instantly wound a loud blast on his instrument.
It was answered immediately by others from every
part of the court and the building; and, as if by
magic, the dead silence of the palace was
straightway
exchanged for the loud din and confusion of
thousands rising and springing to their arms. During
this tumult, Cortes descended from the turret.
Don Amador, fascinated by the spectacle, (for
now, the light of dawn, increasing every moment,
fully convinced the most sceptical, that countless
barbarians were thronging in the streets, and
advancing
against the palace,) remained for a time on
the terrace in company with others, surveying their
approach, and kindling into ardour. The four streets
were blocked up with their dusky bodies, for they
seemed nearly naked; and answering the drums and
bugles of the Spaniards with the hollow sound of their
huge tabours, and the roaring yells of great conches,
and adding to these the uproar of their voices, and,
what greatly amazed the neophyte, the shrill and
piercing din of loud whistling, they pressed onwards,
not fast indeed, but fearlessly, until they began to
pour like a flood upon the open square. Nevertheless,
and notwithstanding their very menacing
appearance
,
not a bow was yet bent, nor a stone or dart
discharged against the Christians; and they were
arraying, or rather grouping themselves, (for they
seemed to preserve no peculiar order,) about the
square, as if rather to support some peaceable
demand
with a show of strength, than to make an
absolute
attack, when the neophyte beheld Don Hernan,
clad in complete armour, spring upon a cannon, and
thence to the top of the wall, and wave his hand
towards
them with an air of imposing dignity. The
vast herds stilled their cries, and immediately
Malintzin
,
guarded by two soldiers who held shields
before
her, was seen to ascend and stand by the side of
her master.
Ask me these hounds, cried the general, with a
voice that seemed meant by its loudness to strike the
infidels with awe, wherefore they leave their beds,
and come, like howling wolves, to disturb me in my
dwelling? What is their desire? and wherefore have
they not come with baskets of corn, rather than with
slings and arrows?
The clear voice of Doa Marina was instantly
heard addressing the multitude; and was followed by
a shout such as may come from thrice a thousand
score men, wherein, and among other inexplicable
sounds, Don Amador heard the word
Tlatoani!
Tlatoani
!
repeated with accents in which intreaty
seemed
mingled with fury. He could not discover the
meaning of these cries from the imperfect Castilian,
and the low voice, with which Malintzin interpreted
them. But he could conjecture their signification, by
the reply of Cortes.
Tell the traitorous dogs, he exclaimed, sternly,
that their princes have avowed themselves the
vassals
of my master, the great monarch of Spain; that
their lord and king, Montezuma, is my friend and
contented guest, and will therefore remain in my
dwelling. Tell them also, he charges them to
disperse
,
throw by their arms, and return laden with
corn and meat. And add, moreover, that, if they
do not immediately obey this command, the thunders
Vol. II. 5
which God has given me to punish them, shall be let
loose upon them, and scatter their corses and their
city into the air. Tell we them
this
, and plainly;
and, hark'ee, cannoniers! stand fast to your
linstocks
!
No sooner was this haughty and threatening
answer
made known to the barbarians, than they
uttered
a yell so loud and universal that the palace,
and the earth under it, seemed to shake with the din;
and immediately every quarter of the edifice was
covered with arrows, stones, and other missiles, shot
off with extraordinary violence and fury.
Don Amador prepared to descend, but paused an
instant to observe the effect of the artillery, for he
heard the strong tones of the general shouting,
Now cannoniers! to your duty, and show
yourselves
men!
The very island trembled, when twelve cannon,
discharged nearly at the same moment, opened their
fiery throats, and, aimed full among the multitude,
poured innumerable death into their ranks. The
island trembled, but not so the naked barbarians of
Tenochtitlan. If the screams of a thousand wretches,
mangled by that explosion, rose on the morning air,
they were speedily drowned by the war-cries of
survivors
;
and before the smoke had cleared away, the
bloody gaps were filled, and the infuriated multitudes
were rushing with savage intrepidity full upon the
mouths of the artillery.
Don Amador hesitated no longer. He ran down
the staircase, paused a moment at the side of
Calavar
,
whom he found raving in a low delirium, for he
was burned by fever,paused only long enough to
charge Marco not to leave him, no not even for a
moment,and snatching up and rapidly donning the
remaining pieces of his armour, immediately found
himself in the court-yard, among the combatants.
CHAPTER VI.
The
neophyte had been informed by his friend De
Morla, as a proof of the degree of civilization
reached
by the Mexicans, that their armies were formed
with method, and as regularly divided and
commanded
as those of Christendom,each tribe
displaying
under a peculiar banner, representing the
arms, or, as we should say of our Northern bands,
the
totem
, of the race, and each tribe separated into
squadrons and companies, led by subalterns of
precisely
ascertained rank and power. He perceived
none of these marks of discipline among the
assailants
;
and, while properly appreciating their devoted
courage, was obliged to consider them no better than
a furious and confused mob. He was right: the
warriors
of Mexico had not yet appeared, and these wild
creatures, who came ungeneralled and unadvised to
the attack, were no more than the common citizens,
fired by the distresses of their king, and rushing to
his aid, without any bond of connexion or
government
,
save the unanimity of their fury. The violence
with which they leaped to the attack, carried them
to the gates of the court, and to the mouths of the
artillery, where they fell under the spears of the
Spaniards
,
or were scattered like chaff at each murderous
discharge of the cannon. Added to this, the
Tlascalans
,
animated by their ancient hatred, and the
presence
of him whom they esteemed almost a god,
clambered upon the wall, and with their clubs and
lances did bloody execution on the multitudes below.
The Tlascalans were, indeed, almost the only persons
of the garrison who suffered much loss; for the
Spaniards, cased in iron and escaupil, and fenced
behind the wall, or the battlements of the terrace,
discharged their cross-bows and muskets, and
handled
their long spears, in comparative safety.
The din of yells and screams, mingled with the
crash of arquebuses and the sharp clang of steel
cross-bows, was, in itself, infernal; while the peals
of artillery, served with such skill and constancy,
that, every half-minute, there was one or other
discharged
from some quarter of the palace, leaving, at
each discharge, a long avenue of death among the
crowds, converted what might have seemed a scene
of elysium into a spectacle of hell. No man could
reckon, no man could imagine, the slaughter made
by the besieged army, among their foes, in the short
space of half an hour. But the sun rose, and still found
the infatuated barbarians rushing,now with shouts
of defiance, and now with mournful cries, as if
calling
upon their imprisoned king,to add yet another
and another layer to the bloody ridges growing in
the paths of the cannon-shot.
All this time, the captive monarch, unseen by his
people, though quickly detected by the sharp eye of
Cortes, sat in one of the turrets, witnessing the
devoted
love of his people, and feeling, with sharp
pangs, that he had not deserved it. And now too (for
the suddenness of the punishment had convinced him
of the impolicy of the fault,) did Don Hernan himself
feel a touch of compunction for the wanton injury he
had done his prisoner; and, fearing lest the work of
this day should be but the prelude of a storm it might
not be in his power to allay, he sent to him De
Morla
,
a cavalier whom more than others he seemed to
favour, to persuade him, if indeed he might be
persuaded
,
to exercise his authority, and by
commanding
his people to disperse, preserve them from that
destruction, which, the general avowed, he was loath
to bring upon them.
No smile lit the countenance of Montezuma, at
the appearance of his favourite; and to the demand
of Don Hernan, he replied, with dignity, yet with a
bitter sorrow,
The
Teuctli
, (so they called Don Hernan, not
because they esteemed him a divinity, but a great
prince, this being the title of one of the classes of
nobility,) has made me a slave: my subjects are
his. Let the king govern his people.
So saying, and immediately descending from the
roof, he shut himself in his apartments, and
resolutely
refused to admit another messenger to his
presence.
And the dog denies me, then! cried Cortes,
when this answer was repeated to him. He says
the truth: he
is
my slave; his people are mine; and
I will straightway convince them of their subjection.
To horse, to horse, brave cavaliers! he shouted
aloud. Let it not be said, we wasted powder on
miserable naked Indians, when we have swords to
strike them on the neck, and horses' hoofs to tread
them to the earth!
No one was more ready to obey this call, than
Don Amador de Leste. He had stood upon the
wall, occasionally striking down some furious
assailant
with his spear, but oftener cheering others with
his voice, and yet remaining more as a spectator than
a combatant, disdaining to strike, except when
personally
attacked, until his blood was heated by the
spectacle.
Mount, now, my knave Lazaro! and perhaps we
shall find my poor Jacinto, among these outrageous
infidels. Get thee to horse, Fabueno; for to-day
thou shalt see what it is to be a soldier!
Fogoso stood, in his mail, like the steed of a true
knight, champing the bit and whinnying, for he
longed
to be in the midst of the combat; and loud was
the sound of his neighing, when he felt the weight
of his master, and turned his fierce eyes towards
the gate.
Before the cavaliers, forming three abreast, (as
many as could at once pass through the gates,)
loosing
their sabres in the scabbards, and couching their
spears, had yet received the signal to dash upon the
opposing herds, there came from the great pyramid,
which was seen rearing its mountainous mass above
the houses of the square, the sound as of a horn, sad
5 *
and solemn, but of so mighty a tone, that it swelled
distinctly over all the din of the battle, and sent a
boding fear to the heart of the Christians. They
knew, or they thought it the sacred bugle of Mexitli,
sounded only during the festivals of that ferocious
deity, or on the occasion of a great battle, when, it
was supposed, that Mexitli himself spoke to his
children
,
and bade them die bravely. There was not a
Spaniard present, who had not heard that the effect
of this consecrated trumpet, so sparingly used, was
to nerve even the vanquished with new spirit, and
those fighting with additional rage; and that the
meanest Mexican, however overpowered, thought
not of retreat, when thus cheered by his god. The
surprise of all was therefore great, when, at the first
blast, the Mexicans ceased their cries, and stood as
if turned into statues; and they were still more
amazed, when, as the brazen instrument again poured
its lugubrious roar over the city, the barbarians,
responding
with a mournful shriek, turned their backs
upon the besieged, and instantly began to fly. A
third blast was sounded, and nothing was seen upon
the great square, or the four streets, save heaps of
carcasses, and piles of human beings, writhing in the
death-agony.
Here is diabolical magic! cried Cortes, joyfully.
There are more signals made by that accursed horn
than we have heard of; and it seems to me,
Huitzilopochtli
may be sometimes a coward! Nevertheless,
we will look a little into the mystery; for I perceive
shining cloaks, as well as priestly gowns, on the
temple
,
which we will make claim to; for doubtless the
traitor Cuitlahuatzin is under one of them.Take
thou thy party, Sandoval, and scour me the streets
that lie eastward. We meet at the temple!For
ourselves, my masters! we are fifty horse, and three
hundred foot, all good Christian men; for in this work
we shall need no Tlascalans. Let us go, in the name
of God, and God will be with us.Only, 'tis my
counsel and command, that we keep together, with
our eyes wide open, lest we should have company
not so much to our liking.
The cavaliers cheered, as they rode from the
gates,and, with a savage delight, urged their horses
over the piles of dead, or smote some dying struggler
with the spear,an amusement in which they were
occasionally imitated by the foot-soldiers, who
followed
at their heels.
CHAPTER VII.
The
same solitude, which had covered the city the
preceding evening, now seemed again to invest it.
Corses were here and there strown in the street, as
of fugitives dying in their flight; and once a wounded
man was seen staggering blindly along, as if wholly
insensible to the approach of his foes. The sight of
this solitary wretch did more to disarm the fury of
Don Amador, than did the spectacle of thousands lying
dead on the square; and certain grievous reflections,
such as sometimes assailed him, after a battle, were
beginning to intrude upon his mind, when a cavalier,
darting forward with a loud cry, and couching his
lance, as if at a worthier enemy, thrust the wounded
barbarian through the body, and killed him on the
spot. A few hidalgos, and most of the footmen,
rewarded this feat of dexterity with a loud cheer;
but there were many, who, like the neophyte, met the
triumphant looks of the champion, Alvarado, with
glances of infinite disgust and frowning disdain.
As the party approached the neighbourhood of the
great temple, they began to perceive in the streets
groups of men, who, being altogether unarmed,
commonly
fled at the first sight of the Christians; though,
sometimes, they stood aside, with submissive and
dejected countenances, as if awaiting any punishment
the Teuctli might choose to inflict upon them. But
Cortes, reading in this humility the proofs of penitence,
or willing to suppose that these men had not shared
in the hostilities of the day, commanded his followers
not to attack them; and thus restrained, they rode
slowly and cautiously onwards, their fury gradually
abating, and the fears which had been excited by the
late assault, giving place to the hope, that it indicated
no general spirit, and no deep-laid plan, of
insurrection
.
The groups of Mexicans increased, both in numbers
and frequency, as the Christians proceeded, but still
they betrayed no disposition to make use of the arms,
which were sometimes seen in their hands; and the
Spaniards, regulating their own conduct by that of
the barbarians, rode onwards with so pacific an air,
that a stranger, arriving that moment in the city,
might have deemed them associated together on the
most friendly terms, and proceeding in company, to
take part in some general festivity. Nevertheless,
the same stranger would have quickly observed, that
these friends, besides keeping as far separated as the
streets would allow, and even, where that was
possible
,
removing from each other's presence, entirely,
eyed each other, at times, with looks of jealousy,
which became more marked as the Mexicans grew
more numerous. In truth, the feelings which had so
quickly passed from rage to tranquillity, were now in
danger of another revulsion; and many an eye was
riveted on the countenance of the general, as if to
read a confirmation of the common anxiety, as, ever
and anon, it turned from the prospect of multitudes
in front, to the spectacle of crowds gathering, at a
distance, on the rear.
All that is needful, whispered, rather than spoke,
Don Hernan, though his words were caught by every
ear, is to trust in God, and our sharp spears. There
is, doubtless, some idolatrous rite about to be enacted
in the temple, which draws these varlets thitherward;
and the gratitude with which they remember our
exploits of this morning, will account for their present
hang-dog looks. If they mean any treachery, such
as a decoy and ambuscado, why, by my conscience!
we must e'en allow them their humour, and punish
them, when 'tis made manifest. I counsel my friends
to be of good heart; for, I think, the dogs have had
fighting enough to-day. Nevertheless, I will not
quarrel with any man, who keeps his hands in
readiness
,
and puts his eyes and ears to their proper uses.
As if to set them an example, Don Hernan now
began to look about him with redoubled vigilance;
and it was remarked that he passed no house, without
eyeing its terrace keenly and steadfastly, as if
dreading
more to discover an enemy in such places than
in the street. This was, in fact, a situation from
which an enemy might annoy the Spaniards with the
greatest advantage, and at the least risk.
The houses of this quarter were evidently inhabited
by the rich, perhaps by the nobles, of Mexico. They
were of solid stone, spacious, and frequently of two
floors, lofty, and their terraces crowned with
battlements
and turrets. Each stood separated from its
neighbour by a little garden or alley, and sometimes
by a narrow canal, which crossed the great street,
and was furnished with a strong wooden bridge of
such width that five horsemen could pass it at a time.
Often, too, the dwelling of some man of power stood
so far back, as to allow the canal to be carried quite
round it, without infringing upon the street; but more
frequently it was fronted only with a little bed of
flowers. The stones of which such structures were
composed, were often sculptured into rude reliefs,
representing huge serpents, which twined in a
fantastic
and frightful manner about the windows and doors,
as if to protect them from the invasion of robbers.
Indeed, these were almost the only defences; for the
green bulrush lying across the threshold, could deter
none but a Mexican from entering; and, perhaps,
none but a barbarian would have seen, in the string
of cacao berries, or of little vessels of earthenware,
hanging at the door, the bell to announce his
visitation
.
A curtain commonly hung flapping at the
entrance; but neither plank nor bar gave security to
the sanctity of the interior.
Notwithstanding the fears of the general, he beheld
no Mexicans lurking among the terraces, or peering
from the windows, but his anxiety was not the less
goading for that reason; for having now drawn nigh
to the great square, it seemed to him that he had, at
last, thrust himself into that part of the city, where
all the multitudes of Tenochtitlan were assembled to
meet him,and whether for purposes of pacification
or vengeance, he dared not inquire.
The appearance of things, as the party issued upon
the square, and faced the House of Skulls, was
indeed
menacing. That enormous pyramid, which Don
Amador had surveyed, with awe, in the gloom of
evening, was now concealed under a more
impressive
veil;it was invested and darkened by a cloud
of human beings, which surged over its vast summit,
and rolled along its huge sides like a living storm.
The great court that surrounded it, was also filled
with barbarians; for though the Coatepantli, or Wall
of Serpents, with its monstrous battlements and
gloomy towers, concealed them from the eye, there
came such a hum of voices from behind, as could
not have been produced alone, even by the myriads
that covered the temple. In addition to these, the
great square itself was alive with Mexicans, and the
sudden sight of them brought a thrill of alarm into
the heart of the bravest cavalier.
The people of Tenochtitlan, thus, as it were, hunted
by their invaders, even to their sanctuaries, turned
upon them with frowns, yet parted away from before
them in deep silence. Nevertheless, at this
spectacle
,
the Christians came to an immediate stand, in
doubt whether to entangle themselves further, or to
take counsel of their fears, and retreat, without delay,
to their quarters. While they stood yet hesitating,
and in some confusion, suddenly, and with a tone
that pierced to their inmost souls, there came a
horrid shriek from the top of the pyramid; and fifty
Castilian voices exclaimed, A sacrifice! a human
sacrifice!and under the cross of Christ, that we
raised on the temple!
The place of God is defiled by the rites of hell!
cried Cortes, furiously, his apprehensions vanishing,
at once, before his fanaticism. Set on, and avenge!
Couch your lances, draw your swords; and if any
resist, call on God, and slay! So saying, he drew
his sword, spurred his dun steed, and rushed towards
the temple.
The half-naked herds fled, yelling, away from the
infuriated Christian, opening him a free path to the
walls; and had that fearful cry been repeated, there
is no doubt he would have led his followers even
within the Coatepantli, though at the risk of
irretrievable
and universal destruction. Before,
however
,
he had yet reached the wall, he had time for
reflection; and, though greatly excited, he could no
longer conceal from himself the consequences of
provoking
the pagans at their very temple, and during
the worship of their god. He was, at this moment,
well befriended, and numerously, indeed; but at a
distance from the garrison, without cannon, and
almost
without musketry, surrounded by enemies whom
the eye could not number, and who had not feared to
assail him, even when fortified in a situation almost
impregnable, and assisted by three times his present
force, as well as several thousand bold Tlascalans;
and in addition to all these disadvantages, there came
neither such sound of trumpet, nor such distant
commotion
among the Indians, as might admonish him
of the approach of Sandoval.
He checked his horse, and waving to his followers
to halt, again cast his eyes around on the multitude,
as if to determine in what manner to begin his
retreat
,
for he felt that this measure could be no longer
delayed. The Mexicans gazed upon him with angry
visages, but still in silence. Not an arm was yet
raised; and they seemed prepared to give him
passage
,
whichever way he might choose to direct his
course.
While hesitating an instant, Don Hernan perceived
a stir among the crowds, close under the Wall of
Serpents, accompanied by a low but general
murmur
of voices; and immediately the eyes of the
pagans
were turned from him towards the Coatepantli,
as if to catch a view of some sight still more
attractive
and important. His first thought was, that these
movements indicated the sudden presence of
Sandoval
and his party; a conceit that was, however,
immediately
put to flight by the events which ensued.
The murmurs of the multitude were soon stilled,
and the pagans that covered the pyramid were seen
to cast their eyes earnestly down to the square, as
the sound of many flutes, and other soft
wind-instruments
,
rose on the air, and crept, not unmusically,
along the Wall of Serpents, and thence to the ears
of the Spaniards. Before these had yet time to
express
their wonder at the presence of such peaceful
music amidst a scene of war and sacrifice, the
crowds slowly parted asunder, and they plainly
beheld
(for the Mexicans had opened a wide vista to
the principal gate,) a procession, seemingly of little
children, clad in white garments, waving pots of
incense
,
conducted by priests, in gowns of black and
flame colour, and headed by musicians and men
bearing little flags, issue from the throng, and bend
their steps towards the savage portal. In the centre
of the train, on a sort of litter, very rich and
gorgeous
,
borne on men's shoulders, and sheltered by a
royal canopy of green and crimson feathers, stood a
figure, which might have been some maiden princess,
arrayed for the festival, or, as she seemed to one or
two of the more superstitious Castilians, some fiendish
goddess, conjured up by the diabolical arts of the
priests, to add the inspiration of her presence to the
wild fury of her adorers. She stood erect, her body
concealed in long flowing vestments of white, on
which were embroidered serpents, of some green
material; in her hand she held a rod; imitative of the
same reptile; and on her forehead was a coronet of
feathers, surrounding what seemed a knot of little
snakes, writhing round a star, or sun, of burnished
gold.
As this fair apparition was carried through their
ranks, between the great wall and the House of Skulls,
the Mexicans were seen to throw themselves
reverently
on the earth, as if to a divinity; and those that
stood most remote, no sooner beheld her, than they
bowed their heads with the deepest humility.
Meanwhile, the Spaniards gazed on with both
admiration
and wonder, until the train had reached the
open portal; at which place, and just as she was
about to be concealed from them for ever, the
divinity
,
priestess, or princess, whichever she was, turned
her body slowly round, and revealed to them a face
of a paler hue than any they had yet seen in the
new world, and, as they afterwards affirmed, of the
most incomparable and ravishing beauty. At this
sight, all uttered exclamations of surprise, which were
carried to the ears of the vision: but Don Amador
de Leste, fetching a cry that thrilled through the
hearts of all, broke from the ranks, as if beset by
some sudden demon, and dashed madly towards the
apparition.
Before the Spaniards could recover from their
astonishment
,
the members of the procession,deity,
priests, censer-bearers, and musicians,with loud
screams vanished under the portals; and the infidels,
starting up in a rage that could be suppressed no
longer, rushed upon the novice, to avenge, in his
blood, the insult he had offered to their deity.
Quick, a-God's name! and rescue! cried Cortes,
for the young man is mad!
There seemed grounds for this imputation; for,
besides
the inexplicable folly of his first act, Don
Amador
appeared now, for a moment, to be lost in such a
maze, that blows of the heavy maquahuitl were rained
upon his stout armour, and several furious hands had
Vol. II. 6
clutched not only upon his spear, but upon himself, to
drag him from the saddle, before he bethought him
to draw his sword and defend his life. But his sword
was, at last, drawn, his fit dispelled; and before his
countrymen had yet reached him, he was dealing
such blows around him, and so urging his
courageous
steed upon the assailants, as quickly to put
himself
out of the danger of immediate death.
The passions of the multitude, restrained, for a
moment, by their superstition or their rulers, were
now fully and unappeasably roused; and with yells,
that came at once from the pyramid, from the temple
yard, from the great square, and the neighbouring
streets, they rushed upon the Christians, surrounding
them, and displaying such ferocious determination,
as left them but small hopes of escape.
God and Spain! honour and fame! cried
Alvarado
,
spearing a barbarian at each word, what do
you think of my Mexicans now, true friends?
His cheer was lost in the roar of screams; and
nothing but the voice of Don Hernan, well known to
be as clear and powerful in battle as the trumpet
which he invoked, was heard pealing above the din;
Now show yourselves Spaniards and soldiers,
and strike for the blood of Christ!Ho, trumpeter!
thy flourish! and find me where lags my lazy
Gonzalo
?
As he spoke, he fought; for so violent had been
the attack of the infidels, that they were mingled
among, and fighting hand to hand with the Christians,
a confused and sanguinary chaos. Scarcely,
indeed
,
had the trumpeter time to wind his instrument,
before it was struck out of his hand by a brawny
savage; and the same blow which robbed him of it,
left the arm that held it a shattered and useless
member
.
The blast, however, had sounded; and, almost
instantaneously, it was answered by a bugle, afar
indeed
,
and blown hurriedly as if the musician were in
as much jeopardy as his fellow, but still full of joy
and good cheer to the Christian combatants.
Close and turn!Footmen, to your square!
cried Cortes; and, valiant cavaliers, charge me
now as though ye fought against devils, with angels
for your lookers-on!
To the temple! to the temple! cried Amador,
with a voice rivalling the general's in loudness, and
turning in a frenzy towards the pyramid, down
whose sides the infidels were seen rushing with
frantic
speed.
But the head of Fogoso was seized by two friendly
followers, and while Don Amador glared fiercely at
the pale but not affrighted secretary, he heard, on the
other side, the tranquil voice of Lazaro:
Master, said the faithful servant, if we
separate
from our friends, we are dead men; and Don
Gabriel is left without a kinsman in this land of
demoniacs
.
Close, and turn, I bid ye! cried Cortes, furiously.
Heed not the wolves that are fast to your sides.
Charge on the herds, charge on the herds! and
overthrow
with the weight of your hoofs! Charge, I bid
ye; and care not though ye should find your lances
striking against the breast of Sandoval. Charge on
the herds!charge on the herds!
So saying, Don Hernan set an example, followed
by the cavaliers; and as the fifty horsemen spurred
violently upon the mob, shouting and cheering, the
naked multitudes quailed from before them, though
only to gather again on their flanks with renewed
desperation.
Will ye desert us that are afoot? cried voices
from behind, with dolorous cries.
Ho, Sandoval! art thou sleeping?
Santiago! and God be thanked!'tis the voice
of the general! cried Sandoval, in the distance. His
voice came from the surge of battle, like the cheer of
a sailor who recks not for the tempest. It filled the
cavaliers with joy.
Good heart now, brave hearts! shouted Cortes;
for my son Sandoval answers me! Rein me round,
and charge me back to the infantry!
Backwards galloped the fifty cavaliers, strewing
the earth with trampled pagans; and the footmen
shouted with delight, as they again beheld their
leader. But the relief and the joy were only
momentary
.
Fight ye, my dogs! and slay your own sheep!
Be firm; wall yourselves with spears; and presently
ye shall be lookers-on.Sweep the square again,
brave cavaliers! Goad flanks! couch spears! and,
this time, let me see the red face of my lieutenant!
Turning, and shouting with a louder cheer, (for
the experience of the two first charges had warned
the Mexicans of their destructive efficacy, and they
now recoiled with a more visible alarm,) the cavaliers
again rushed through their foes like a whirlwind; and
brushing them aside, as the meteor brushes the fogs of
evening, they dashed onwards, until their shouts were
loudly re-echoed, and they found themselves
confronted
with Don Gonzalo and his party.
The greetings of the friends were brief and few,
for the same myriads, attacking with the same
frenzied
desperation, invested them with a danger that
did not seem to diminish.
Bring thy foot in front, cried Cortes, and,
while they follow me, charge thou behind them. Be
quick, and be brave. March fast, ye idle spearmen:
and stare not, for these are not devils, but men!
God and Spain!Santiago, and at them again,
peerless
cavaliers!We fight for Christ and immortal
honour!
The valiant band of cavaliers again turned at the
voice of their leader, and again they swept the
corse-encumbered
square, rushing to the relief of their own
infantry. Following the counsel he had given to
Sandoval
,
the wary general passed by his foot-soldiers,
and bidding them march boldly forwards, and join
themselves with the infantry of Don Gonzalo, he
charged the infidels from their rear with a fury they
could not resist; and then rushing backwards with
equal resolution, discovered the foot-soldiers in the
position in which it had been his aim to place them.
The united infantry, full seven hundred men in
number
,
were now protected, both in front and rear, by
a band of cavalry; their flanks looking, on one side,
to the temple, and, on the other, to a great street that
opened opposite. Arranging them, at a word, in two
lines, standing back to back, and seconding himself
the manuvre which he dictated to Sandoval, the
general swept instantly to that flank which bordered
on the Wall of Serpents, while Gonzalo rode to the
other. Thus arranged, the little army presented the
figure of a hollow square, or rather of a narrow
parallelogram, the chief sides of which, were made
by double rows of spearmen, and the smaller by
bands of horsemen. Thus arranged, too, the
Christians
fought with greater resolution and success; for,
parting at once from a common centre, the infantry
drove the assailants from before them on two sides,
while the cavalry carried death and horror to the
others; until, at a given signal, all again fell back to
their position, and presented a wall altogether
inexpugnable
to the weak though untiring savages.
It was the persuasion of Don Hernan, that, in this
advantageous position, he could, in a short time, so
punish his enemies, as to teach them the folly of
contending
with Christian men, and perhaps end the
war in a day. But, for a full hour, he repeated his
charges, now pinning his foes against the wall, or
the steps of the House of Skulls, now falling back to
breathe; and, at each charge, adding to the number
of the dead, until their corses literally obstructed his
path, and left it nearly impassable. At every charge,
too, his cavaliers waxed more weary, and struck
more faintly, while the horses obeyed the spur and
voice with diminishing vigour; and it seemed that
they must soon be left unable, from sheer fatigue, to
continue the work of slaughter. The pagans
perished
in crowds at each charge, and at each volley of
6 *
bow-shots; but neither their spirit, nor their numbers,
seemed to decrease. Their yells were as loud, their
countenances as bold, their assaults as violent as at
first; and the Spaniards beheld the sun rising high in
the heavens, without any termination to their labours,
or their sufferings. Twenty Christians already lay
dead on the square, or had been dragged, perhaps,
while yet breathing, to be sacrificed on the pyramid.
This was a suspicion that shocked the souls of many;
for, twice or thrice, they heard, among the crowds,
who still stood on the lofty terrace, shooting arrows
down on the square, such shouts of triumphant delight
as, they thought, could be caused by nothing but the
immolation of a victim.
Grief and rage lay heavily on the heart of Cortes;
but though the apprehension, that, if much longer
over-worn by combat, his followers might be left
unable even to fly, added its sting to the others, shame
deterred him, for a time, from giving the mortifying
order. Harassed, and even wounded, (for a defective
link in his mail had yielded to an arrow-head, and
the stone was buried in his shoulder,) he nevertheless
preserved a good countenance; cheered his people
with the assurance of victory; fought on,
exposing
himself like the meanest of his soldiers; and
several times, at the imminent risk of his life, rescued
certain foot-soldiers from the consequences of their
foolhardiness.
There was among the infantry, a man of great
courage and strength, by the name of Lezcano, whose
only weapon was a huge two-handed sword, the
valiant use of which had gained him among his
companions
,
the title of
Dos Manos
, or Two-Hands. No
spearman of his company advanced to the charge
with more readiness than did this fellow with his
gigantic
weapon, and none retreated with more
constant
reluctance. Indeed, he commonly fell back so
leisurely as to draw three or four foes upon him at
once; and it seemed to be his pleasure, to meet these
in such a way, as should call for the praises of his
companions. His daring, that day, would have left
him with the additional name of the bravest of the
brave, had it been tempered with a little discretion.
But inflamed by the encomiums of his comrades, and
not less by the complimentary rebukes of his captain,
his rashness knew no bounds; and twice or thrice he
thrust himself into situations of peril, from which he
was rescued with great difficulty. He had been
saved once by Don Hernan. It was his fate, a
second
time, to draw the notice of the general; who,
falling back on the infantry, beheld him beset by a
dozen foes, surrounded, and using his great scimitar
furiously, yet, as it seemed, in vain; for he was
unhelmed
.
What ho, Don Amador! cried Cortes to the
cavalier
,
who was at his side, let us rescue
Dos Manos
,
the mad!
In an instant of time, the two hidalgos had reached
the group, and raised their voices in encouragement,
while each struck down a savage. At that moment,
and while Lezcano elevated his scimitar, to ward off
the blow of a maquahuitl, the massive blade, shivered
as if by a thunder-bolt, fell to the earth; but, before
it reached it, the sharp glass of the Indian sword
had entered his brain. The cavaliers struck fast
and hard, on either hand; the barbarians fled; but,
Lezcano, the Two-handed, lay rolling his eyes to
heaven
,
his head cloven to the mouth.
If we slay a thousand foes for every Christian
man that dies, yet shall we be vanquished! said
Cortes
,
turning an eye of despair on his companion, and
speaking the feelings he had concealed from all others.
Indeed, he seemed to rejoice that destiny had given
him one follower, to whom he might unbosom himself
without the apprehension of creating alarmhe
hesitated
not to relieve himself of his grief to Don
Amador
;
for he knew him to be inaccessible to fear. Be
of good heart, my friend. I have drawn thee into a
den of devils. We must retreat, or die.
I will advance or retreat, as thou wilt, said
Amador
,
with a visage, in which Don Hernan now, for
the first time, beheld an expression so wild and
ghastly, that he was reminded of Calavar. It
matters
nothinghere or at the palace! But it is my duty
to assure thee of mine own persuasion: Retreat may
bring us reliefthere is no victory for us, to-day.
God help thee! art thou wounded? cried Cortes.
A little hurt by the skilless hand of Fabueno,
said the novice, tranquilly, who, not yet being
perfected
in the use of the spear, thrust his weapon into
my back, while aiming at the throat of a cacique.
But that is not it. I have, this day, seen a sight,
which convinces me we are among magicians and
devils; and persuades me, along with certain other
recent occurrences, that the time of some of us is
reckoned. Therefore I say to thee, I will advance
with thee or retreat, as thou thinkest best. To me it
matters not. But my counsel is, to fly. We may
save others.
It is needful, replied Don Hernan, mournfully.
He gave his orders to certain officers; and the retreat
was commenced in the order in which they had
fought,that is to say, the infantry, drawing their
lines closer together, and facing to the flank, began
to march down the street, preceded by Sandoval,
charging the opponents from the front, while Cortes
and his band, at intervals, rushing back upon the
pursuers
,
kept the triumphant barbarians from the rear.
CHAPTER VIII.
The
distance between the great temple and the
palace of Axajacatl was by no means great; though
Cortes, for the purpose of prying into many streets,
had led his followers against it by a long and
circuitous
course,a plan which had been followed by Don
Gonzalo, though in another direction. Indeed they
were not so far separated, but that a strong bowman
or a good slinger might, from the top of the pyramid,
drive his missile upon the roof of the garrison, to the
great injury of the besieged, as was, afterwards, fully
made manifest. The distance, therefore, to be won
by the retreating Spaniards, was small; but it took
them hours to accomplish it. It seemed as if the
infidels, fearing lest their foes might escape out of
the hands if they slackened their efforts for a
moment
,
were resolved to effect their destruction at any
cost, while they were still at a distance from succour,
They pressed ferociously and rapidly on the fugitives;
they gained their front; and thus encompassed them
with a compact mass of human beings, against which
the cavaliers charged, as against a stone wall;
slaying
and trampling, indeed, but without penetrating it
for more than a few yards. Each step gained by
the van, was literally carved by the cavalry, as out
of a rock; while the utmost exertions of Don Hernan
could do nothing more than preserve his rear band
in the attitude of a dike, slowly moving before the
shocks of a flood, which it could not repel.
In addition to these alarming circumstances, there
were others now developed, of a not less serious
aspect, The canals that, in two or three places,
intersected
the street, were swarming with canoes, from
which the savages discharged their arrows with fatal
aim, or sprang, at once, upon the footmen, striking
with spear and maquahuitl, and were driven back
only after the most strenuous efforts. They had
destroyed the bridges, and the canals could only be
passed by renewing them with such planks as the
infantry could tear from the adjoining houses, and
hastily throw over the water,a work of no less
suffering
than time and labour. Besides all this, the
annoyance which Don Hernan had first dreaded, was
now practised by the crafty barbarians. The
terraces
were covered with armed men, who, besides
discharging their darts and arrows down upon the
exposed soldiers, tore away, with levers, the stones
from the battlements, and hurled them full upon the
beads of their enemies.
The sound of drums and conches, the fierce yells,
the whistling, the dying screams, the loud and hurried
prayers, the neighing of horsesand now and then
the shriek of some beast mangled by a rough spear,
the rattling of arrow-heads, the clang of clubs upon
iron bucklers, the heavy fall of a huge stone crushing
a footman to the earth, the plunging of some wounded
wretch strangling in a ditch, and the roar of cannon
at the palace, showing that the battle was universal,
these together, now made up such a chorus of hellish
sounds as Don Amador confessed to himself he had
never heard before, not even among the horrors of
Rhodes, when sacked by other infidels, then esteemed
the most valiant in the world. But to these dismal
tumults others were speedily added, when Cortes,
Taging with a fury that increased with his despair,
commanded the footmen to fire every house, whose
top afforded footing to the ferocious foe,a command
that was obeyed with good will, and with dreadful
effect; for though, from the nature of its materials,
and the isolated condition of each structure, it was
not possible to produce a general conflagration, yet
the great quantity of cotton robes, of dry mats, and
of resinous woods about each house, left it so
combustible
,
that the application of a torch to the
door-curtains
,
or the casting of a firebrand into the interior,
instantly enveloped it in flames. Among these, when
they burst through the roofs of light rafters, and the
thatching of dried reeds, the pagan warriors perished
miserably; or, flinging themselves desperately down,
were either dashed to pieces, or transfixed by the
lances of the Spaniards.
But the same agent which so dreadfully paralyzed
the efforts of the Mexican, brought suffering scarcely
less disastrous to the Christian ranks. They were
stifled with the smoke, they were scorched by the
flames of the burning houses; and, ever and anon,
some frantic barbarian, perishing among the fires of
his dwelling, and seeking to inflict a horrid vengeance,
grasped, even in his death-gasp, a flaming rafter in
his arms, and sprang down with it upon his foes,
maiming and scorching where he did not kill.
Thus fighting, and thus resisted, weary and
despairing
,
their bodies covered with blood, their
garments
sometimes burning, the Spaniards at last gained
the square that surrounded the palace; and fighting
their way through the herds that invested it, (for,
almost
at the same moment that they had been attacked
at the temple, the quarters were again assailed,) and
shouting to the cannoniers, lest they should fire on
them, they placed their feet in the court-yard, and
thanked God for this respite to their sufferings.
It was a respite from death, for behind the stone
wall they were comparatively secure; but not a
respite
from labour. The Mexicans abated not a jot of
their ardour. The same herds that covered the square
at dawn, were again yelling at the gates, and with
the same unconquerable fury; and the soldiers,
already
fainting with fatigue, with famine, and thirst,
(for they had taken no refreshment since the
preceding
evening,) were fain to purchase, painfully, a
temporary
safety, by standing to the walls, and keeping
the savages at bay, as they could.
The artillery thundered, the cross-bows twanged,
the arquebuses added their destructive volleys to the
other warlike noises; but the Mexicans, disregarding
these sounds, as well as the havoc made among their
ranks, rushed, in repeated assaults, against the walls,
and, sometimes, with such violence, that they drove
the besieged from the gate, and entered pell-mell with
them into the court-yard. Then, indeed, ensued a
scene of murder; for the Christians, flying again to
the portal, cut off the retreat of such desperadoes, and
slew them within the walls, without loss, and almost
at their leisure.
On such occasions, no one showed more spirit in
attacking, or more fury in slaying, than the young
secretary. The suit of goodly armour sent him by
the admiral, and his rapid proficiency in the practice
of arms, had inflamed his vanity; and he burned to
approve himself worthy the companionship of
cavahers
.
The native conscientiousness which filled him
with horror at the sight of the first blood shed, the first
life destroyed, by his hand, had vanished as a dream;
for it is excellence of war, that, while developing
our true nature, and remaining, itself, as the link which
binds man to his original state of barbarism, it
preserves
him the delights of a savage, without entirely
depriving him of the pleasures of civilization. The
right of shedding blood, mankind enjoy in common
with brutes; and, doubtless, a conformable philosophy
will not frown on the privilege, so long as the loss of
it would contract our circle of enjoyments. There
is something poetical in the diabolism of a fiend, and
as much that is splendid in the ferocity of a tiger;
and though these two qualities be the chief elements
of heroism, they bring with them such
accompaniments
of splendour and sentiment, that he would rob
the world of half its glory, as well as much of its
poetry, who should destroy the race of the great,
and leave mankind to the dull innocence of peace.
There are more millions of human beings, the
victims
of war, rotting under the earth, than now move
on its surface.
The pain of wounds had also produced a new
effect
in the bosom of Lorenzo; for, instead of cooling
his courage, it now inflamed his rage, and helped to
make him valiant. The mild and feeling boy was
quite transformed into a heartless ruffian; and so
great had become his love of slaughter, and so
unscrupulous
his manner of gratifying it, that, once or
twice, Don Amador noticed him, and would have
censured him sharply, but that his attention was
immediately
absorbed by the necessity of self-defence. The
cavaliers had dismounted, and the neophyte fought at
the gates on foot. In the midst of an assault, in
which the defenders had been driven back, but which
disgrace they were now repairing, he beheld his ward
struggling with a wounded savage, who grasped his
knees and hand, but in intreaty, not hostility; and
greatly was Don Amador shocked, when he beheld
the secretary disengage his arm, and, with a shout
of triumph, plunge his steel into the throat of the
supplicating
barbarian.
Art thou a devil, Lorenzo? cried the cavalier,
indignantly. That was a knave's and a coward's
blow! Thou shalt follow me no longer.
While he spoke, and left himself unguarded, a
gigantic pagan, taking advantage of his indiscretion,
leaped suddenly upon him, and struck him such a
blow with a maquahuitl, as, but for the strength of
his casque, would have killed him outright. As it was,
the shock so stunned him, as to leave him for a
moment
,
incapable of defence. In that moment, the
savage, uttering a loud yell, sprang forward to repeat
the blow, or to drag him off a prisoner; when
Fabueno
,
perceiving the extremity of his patron, and fired
with the opportunity of proving his valour, rushed
between them, and with a lucky blow on the naked
neck of the Mexican, instantly despatched him.
A valiant stroke, Lorenzo! said the neophyte,
losing somewhat of his heat, as he recovered his
wits. But it does not entirely wipe out the shame
of the other. Moderate thy wrath, curb thy fury,
and remember that cruelty is the mark of a dastard.
Strike me no more foes that cry for mercy!
As his anger had been changed into approbation,
so now were his censures abruptly ended by
exclamations
of surprise. For at that instant, Fabueno,
grasping his arm with one hand, and with the other
pointing a little to one side, turned upon him a
countenance
full of alarm. He looked around, and beheld
with amazement, his kinsman, Don Gabriel, entirely
unarmed, except with sword and buckler, mingled
with the combatants, shouting a feeble war-cry,
striking faintly, and, indeed, preserved less by his
courage than his appearance, from the bludgeons of
the infidels. His grizzly locks (for he was entirely
Vol. II. 7.
bare-headed,) fell over his hollow and bloodless
cheeks, whereon glittered, black and hideous, a single
gout of gore. His face was like the face of the dead;
and the savages recoiled from before him, as if from
a spirit rousing from Mictlan, the world of gloom, to
call them down to his dark dwelling.
In a moment the neophyte, followed by Fabueno,
and Lazaro, who answered to his call, and Marco,
who seemed to have been separated by the mele
from his master, was at the side of Calavar. The
mind of the knight was wholly gone; and he seemed
as if, at the point of death, raised from his couch by
the clamours of the contest, and urged into it by the
instinct of long habit, or by the goadings of madness.
He submitted patiently, and without words, to the
gentle violence of his kinsman, and was straightway
carried to his apartment.
CHAPTER IX.
After
much search and persuasion, a surgeon was
found and induced to visit the knight. He
despatched
his questions almost in a word, for he was a
fighting
Bachelor, and burned with impatience to return
to the contest. He mingled hastily a draught, which
he affirmed to be of wondrous efficacy in composing
disordered minds to sleep, gave a few simple
directions
,
and excusing his haste in the urgency of his
other occupations, both military and chirurgical, he
immediately departed.
Marco! said the neophyte, when the draught
was administered, and Don Gabriel laid on the couch,
thou deservest the heaviest punishment for leaving
thy master an instant, though, as thou sayest, while
fast asleep. Remain by him now, and be more
faithful
.
As for thee, Lorenzo, he continued, to the
secretary, who stood panting at his side, there is
good reason thou shouldst share the task of Marco,
were it only to repose thee a little; but more need is
it, that thou suffer thy blood to cool, and reflect, with
shame, that thou hast, this day, cancelled all thy good
deeds, by killing a prostrate and beseeching foe.
Remain
,
therefore, to assist Marco; and by-and-by I will
come to thee, and declare whether or not thou shalt
draw thy sword again to-day.
And thus leaving his kinsman to the care of the
two followers, and beckoning Lazaro along, Don
Amador returned to the court-yard and the conflict.
The history of the remainder of the day (it was
now noon,) is a weary tale of blood. Wounds could
not check, nor slaughter subdue, the animosity of the
besiegers; and the Spaniards, tired even of killing,
hoped no longer for victory over men who seemed
to fight with no object but to die, and who rushed up
as readily to the mouth of a cannon, whose vent was
already blazing under the linstock, as to the spears
that bristled with fatal opposition at the gates.
But night came at last, and with it a hope to end
the sufferings that were already intolerable. The
hope was vain. The barbarians, apparently
incapable
of fatigue, or perhaps yielding their places to
fresh combatants, continued the assault even with
increasing vigour and boldness. They rushed against
the court-wall with heavy beams,rude
battering-rams
,with
which they thought to shake it to its
foundations, and thus deprive the Christians of their
greatest safeguard. In certain spots they succeeded;
and the soldiers cursed the day of their birth, as the
ruins fell crashing to the ground, and they saw
themselves
reduced to the alternative of filling the breaches
with their bodies, or remaining to perish where they
stood. It is true, that in this kind of defence, as well
as under other urgent difficulties, they received good
and manly aid from their numerous allies, the
Tlascalans
,
who fought, during the whole day, with a
spirit and cheerfulness that put many a repining
Castilian
to shame. But these, though battling equally
for their lives, were incapable of withstanding long the
unexampled violence of the assaults; and it was soon
found that the naked bodies of the Tlascalans offered
but slight impediment to the frenzied Mexicans.
The Spaniards, in the expedient used to drive the
citizens from their house-tops, had taught them a mode
of warfare which they were not slow to adopt. The
palace was of a solid structure, and seemed to bid
defiance to flames. But the same cedars that
finished
the interior of meaner houses, formed its floors
and ceilings; every chamber was covered with mats,
and most of them were hung with the most
inflammable
kind of tapestry. In addition to this, the five
thousand Tlascalans, who had been left with
Alvarado
,
and who slept in the court-yard, besides
strewing
the earth with rushestheir humble couches
had constructed along the walls of the palace itself,
many rude arbours, or rather kennels, of reeds from
the lake, to shelter them from the vicissitudes of the
rainy season, which had, already, in part, set in.
And, to crown all, the cavaliers, whose horses, as
they well knew, were each worth a thousand
Tlascalans
,
had caused stalls to be constructed for them,
wherein they were better protected from the
weather
,
than their fellow-animals, the allies. With
these arrangements, the Mexicans were well
acquainted
.
No sooner, therefore, had they succeeded in beating
down several breaches in the wall, and found that
they could sometimes drive the besieged from them,
than they made trial of the expedient. They rushed
together against the walls in a general assault,
waving firebrands and torches, which those who
forced their way through the breaches, applied to
the stalls and arbours, or scattered over the beds
of the Tlascalans. The dying incendiary, pierced
with a dozen spears, ended his life with a laugh of
joy, as he beheld the flames burst ruddily up to his
brand.
The misery of the Spaniards was now complete.
They were parched with thirst. The sweet fountains
of Chapoltepec gushed only over the square of the
temple. A well, dug by Alvarado, in his extremity,
furnished a meager supply of water, and that so
brackish, that even the brutes turned from it in
disgust
,
till forced to drink, by pangs that would allow
them to be fastidious no longer. The nearest canal,
conducting the briny waters of Tezcuco, was shut
out by ramparts of savages. The Spaniards, with
one universal voice, sent up a cry of despair, as they
beheld the flames run over the court, the stalls, the
kennels, and up the palace walls, and knew not how
to extinguish them. The cry was answered from
without, with such yells of exultation, as froze their
blood; and in the glare of the sudden conflagration,
they saw the barbarians rushing again to the attack,
darting through the breaches, and leaping over the
walls.
In this strait, beset at once by two foes, equally
irresistible, equally pitiless, they struck about them
blindly and despairingly, cursing their fate, their
folly, and the leader who had seduced them from
their island homes, to die a death so ignoble and so
dreadful.
For a moment, the spirit of the general sunk, and
turning to Don Amador, whose fate it was again to
be at his side, he said, with a ghastly countenance,
rendered hideous by the infernal glare,
We die the death of foxes in a hole, very noble
friend! Commend thy soul to God, and choose thy
death; for we have no water to quench this hell!
God help my kinsman and father, and all is one!
said Amador, with a desperate calmness. The
flames are hot, but the grave is cold.
The grave is cold!
shouted Cortes, with the voice
of a madman. Live in my heart for ever! Cold
grave, moist earth! and Santiago, who strikes for a
true Christian, speaks in thy words!What ho, mad
Spaniards! he continued, shouting aloud, and
running
7*
as he spoke round the palace; earth quenches
flames, like water! Swords and hands to the task;
and he works best, who delves as at the grave of his
foeman!
If there was obscurity in the words of the general,
it was dispelled by his actions; for, dashing the rushes
aside, he loosened the damp soil with his sabre, and
flung the clods lustily on the nearest flames. Loud
and joyous were the shouts of his people, as hope
dawned upon them with the happy idea; and, in a
moment, the hands of many thousand men were
tearing
up the earth of the court, and casting it on the
flames, while the savages, confidently expecting the
result of their stratagem, intermitted their efforts for
awhile, leaving the gates and breaches nearly
unguarded
.
It is probable, that even this poor resource, in the
hands of so great a multitude of men, toiling with
the zeal of desperation, might have sufficed to quell
the flames. But, as if heaven had at last taken pity
on their sufferings, and vouchsafed a miracle for
their relief, there came, almost at the same moment,
the pattering of rain-drops, which were quickly
followed
by a heavenly deluge; and as the flames
vanished
under it, the Christians fell upon their knees,
and, with devout ardour, offered up thanks to the
Providence
,
that had so marvellously preserved them.
They sprang from their knees, with bolder hearts,
as the Mexicans again advanced to the assault. But
this was the last attack. As if satisfied with the toils
of the day, or commanded by some unknown ruler,
the barbarians, uttering a mournful scream, suddenly
departed.They were heard during the night; and in
the morning, when the waning moon shone dimly
through the rack, were seen stirring about the square,
but in no great numbers; and as they did not attempt
any annoyance, but seemed engaged in dragging
away the dead, Don Hernan forbade his sentinels to
molest them.
The guards were set, and the over-worn soldiers
retired, at last, to throw their wounded bodies on their
pallets. But throughout the whole night, the noises
of men repairing the breaches, and constructing
certain
military engines, assured those who were too
sore or too fearful to sleep, that the leader they had
cursed was sacrificing a second night to the duties of
his station.
CHAPTER X.
Don Amador
sought out the apartment of his
kinsman
,
with a troubled heart. A deep dejection, in
part the effect of extreme fatigue, but caused more
by the strange and melancholy events of the last
twenty-four hours, weighed upon his spirits, and had
increased, ever since the spectacle of the divinity,
notwithstanding the bustle and excitement of the
conflicts
which ensued.
In the passage, before he had yet reached the
chamber, he stumbled upon Fabueno. The secretary
looked confused and abashed, as if caught in a
dereliction
of duty; but before the cavalier could upbraid
him, he commenced his excuses.
`The opiate was strong; the knight was in a deep
slumber,' he said; `and, as Marco was sitting at his
side, he thought he might leave him for a moment, to
discover wherefore the soldiers had ceased fighting.
He hoped his noble patron would pardon him: he
would presently return.'
Seek thy pleasure now, Lorenzo, said the novice,
with a heavy sigh. Return when thou wilt,or
not at all, if thou preferrest to rest with thy
companions
of last night. I will now, myself, watch by Don
Gabriel.
His head sunk upon his breast, as he went on, for
his heart was full of painful reflections. Near the
door of the chamber, he was roused by a step, and
looking up, he beheld the padre Olmedo approaching.
Holy father, it rejoices me to see thee, he said.
I had, indeed, thoughts to seek thee out, and claim
thy benevolent counsels and aidance, but that I
deemed
me there were many among the wounded, and
perchance the dying, who had stronger claims on
thy good offices.
Thou art not hurt, my son?
I have a scratch, made by the unlucky spear of a
friend, but no harm from the enemy, said the
cavalier
.
I had indeed a blow also on the head, that
made my brain ring; but both, I had quite forgotten.
I am well enough in body, reverend father; and
perhaps
may be relieved in mind, if thou wilt vouchsafe
me thy ghostly counsels.
The good Bartolom, making a gesture of assent,
followed the youth into the chamber.
The knight was, as Fabueno had declared, lost in
a deep and, his kinsman was pleased to see, a
placid, slumber; but Marco, instead of watching,
lay sleeping full as soundly, hard by. This
circumstance
seemed to embarrass the cavalier.
Father, said he, I thought no less than to find
the serving-man awake; and it was my intent to
discharge
him a moment from the chamber, not fearing
that what I might say to thee, would disturb my
afflicted
friend. But I have not the heart to break the
rest of this old man,a very faithful servant,who
closes not his eyes, except when to keep them open
would no longer be of service to Don Gabriel.
He sleeps as soundly as his master, murmured
the priest. A good conscience lies under his rough
breast, or it would not heave so gently.
My father breathes gently, too, said Amador,
mournfully.
May heaven restore him, said the padre. His
guilt lies deeper in his imagination than in his soul.
Dost thou think so indeed, father? said Amador
warmly, though in a low voice.
The father startedThe history of thy kinsman
is not unknown to thee?
What I know is but little, save that my friend
is the unhappiest of men, said the novice. But
heaven forbid I should seek to fathom the secrets of
the confessional. I was rejoiced to hear thee say,
my kinsman was not so miserable as he deems
himself
;
for indeed I have begun to think there is
something
in the blood that courses in both our veins, so
inclined to distemperature, that a small sin may bring
us the pains of deep guilt, and a light sorrow pave
the way to madness.
The knight and the man-at-arms lay in a slumber
not to be broken by the whispers of confession. The
father retired to the remotest corner of the
apartment
,
and Don Amador knelt humbly and
penitentially
at his feet. A little taper shed a flickering ray
over his blanched and troubled forehead, as he bent
forward to kiss the crucifix, extended by the
confessor
.
Buen padre, said he, the sins I have to confess,
I know thou wilt absolve, for they are sins of a hot
blood, and not a malicious heart. I have been awroth
with those who wronged me, and thirsted to shed
their blood. For this I repent me. But the sins of pride
and vanity are deep in my heart. I look about me
for those acts of darkness, which should have caused
the grief wherewith I am afflicted; but, in my
self-conceit
,
I cannot find them. And yet they must
exist; for I am beset with devils, or bewitched!
The father gazed uneasily from the penitent to the
sleeping knight; but the look of suspicion was
unnoticed
.
We are all, as I may say, my son, beset by devils
in this infidel land. They are worshipped on the
altars of the false gods, and they live in the hearts
of the idolaters. But if thou hast no heavy sin on
thy soul, these are such devils as thou canst better
exorcise with the sword, than I, perhaps, with prayers.
I think, indeed, thou hast no such guilt; and,
therefore
,
no cause for persecution.
Holy father, I thought so myself, till late. But
cast thine eyes on Don Gabriel. Thou seest him,
once the noblest of his species, yet, now, the shadow
and vapour of a man,a wreck of reason,a living
death,for his mind hath left him. This I say to
thee with much anguish. I could strike another who
said it; but it is trueHe is a lunatic!It is I that
have robbed him of reason. This is my sin; and I
feel that it is heavy.
Thou ravest, good youth. Thy love and
devotion
are well known; and he hath, out of his own
mouth, assured me, that thy affection surpasses the
love of man. Rest thee content. A deeper cause
than this, and one wherein thou hast no part, has
afflicted him. An accident of war, tortured, by a
moody imagination, into wilful guilt, hath turned him
into this ruin.
It
was
an accident, then, and no murder! said the
cavalier, joyously, though still in a whisper. I thank
God that my father is unstained with the blood of a
woman.
I may not repeat to thee secrets revealed only to
God, said the confessor; but this much may I say,
to allay thy fears,that the blow which destroyed
a friend, was meant for a foe; for rage veiled his
eyes, and the steel was in the hands of a madman.
This will assure thee, that thou hast had no agency
in his affliction, but hast ever proved his truest
comfort
.
This indeed is the truth, murmured the novice,
and this convinces me, that by robbing him of his
comfort, I gave him up to the persecution of those
thoughts and memories, which have destroyed him.
When I fought by his side at Rhodes, when I
followed
at his back through Spain, his malady was
gentle. It brought him often fits of gloom,
sometimes
moments of delirium; he was unhappy, father,
but not mad. I had acquired the art to keep the evil
spirit from him; and, while I remained by him, he
was well. I left him,at his command, indeed, but
he did not command me to forget him. The servant
slept, and the sick man perished. While I was gone,
his infirmity returned; and the madness that brought
him to this infidel world, though I follow him, I am
not able to remove. I found him changed; and, by
my neglect, he is left incurable.
I think, indeed, as thou sayest, replied the
confessor
,
mildly, there is something in thy blood, as
well as in Calavar's, which inclines to convert what
is a light fault, into a weighty sin. Thou wrongest
thyself: this present misery is but the natural course
of disease, and thou hast no reason to upbraid
thyself
with producing it.
Father, so thought I, myself, till lately, said
the cavalier, solemnly; for we have ever in our
hearts some lying spirit, that glosses over our faults
with excuses, and deludes us from remorse. But it
has been made manifest to me, by strange
revealments
and coincidences, by griefs of my own as well
as of others, that my neglect was a grievous sin, not
yet forgiven. And verily, now do I believe, that had
I remained true to my knight, much sorrow would
have been spared to both him and me.
I cannot believe that thy unfaithfulness was a
wrong of design, said the father. If it be, make
me acquainted with it, and despair not of pardon.
Thou wert parted from the knight at his own
command
?
To gather him followers for the crusade
meditated
against the infidels of Barbary, said the
novice,a brave and pious enterprise, from which
the emperor was quickly diverted by other projects.
This change being proclaimed, there remained
nothing
for me to do, but, like a faithful friend and
servant
,
to return to my kinsman. Had I done so, what
present affliction and disturbing memories might not
have been prevented! Know, father, for I tell thee
the truth, that it was my fortune, or rather my
unhappiness
,
to discover, at the sea-port in which I
sojourned, a Moorish maiden, of so obscure, and,
doubtless, so base, a birth, that even the noble lady
who gave her protection, knew not the condition of
her parents. Yet, notwithstanding this baseness of
origin, and the great pride of my own heart, (for
truly I am come of the noblest blood in the land!)
I was so gained upon by the beauty and excellent
worth of this maiden, (for I swear to thee, her
superior
lives not in the world!) that I forgot even that
she was the daughter of an idolater, and loved her.
A Moorish infidel! said the confessor. It is
not possible thou couldst pledge thy faith to an
unbeliever
?
Holy father, said Don Amador, this sin was at
least spared me. The maiden was a Christian,
tenderly
nurtured in all the doctrines of our faith, and
almost ignorant that the race from which she drew
her blood, knew any other; and, father, I thought,
until this day, that the soul of Leila dwelt among the
seraphs. Moreover, if the plighting of troth be sinful,
I am again innocent; for, before I had spoken of love,
she was snatched away from me.
She is dead, then? demanded the padre.
Surely, I think so, said the cavalier, mournfully;
yet I know not the living creature that wots of her
fate. Father! the sin of deserting my kinsman was
first visited to me through her; and because I was a
sinner, Leila perished.
How
, father, I cannot tell thee.
She vanished away by night,carried off, as some
averred, by certain Moorish exiles, who, that night,
set sail for Barbary; or, as others dreamed, murdered
by some villain, and cast into the sea; for the veil
she wore, was found the day after, dashed ashore by
the surf. But, whether she be dead, or yet living,
again I say, I know not; though I affirm on the cross
which I hold in my hand, I beheld her this day, or
some fiend in her likeness, under the similitude of a
priestess, or a divinity, I know not which, carried on
the shoulders of the infidels, and by them worshipped!
The confessor started back in alarm, surveying the
excited features of the penitent, and again cast his
eyes towards Don Gabriel. Then, laying his hand
on the head of the cavalier, he said, gently, but
warningly
,
Cast such thoughts from thee, lest thou become
like to thy kinsman!
Ay! cried the cavalier, clasping his hands, and
turning an eye of horror on the father,thou
speakest confirmation of mine own fears; for I have
said to myself, this is a frenzy, and therefore I have
come, at last, to be like my kinsman! The thing that
I have seen, is
not;
and the reason that made me a
man, has fled from me!
Nay, I meant not that, said the padre,
endeavouring
to soothe the agitation he had, in part, caused.
I desired only to have thee guard thyself against the
effects of thy fancy, which is, at present, greatly
over-excited. I believe that thou didst indeed see
some pagan maiden, strongly resembling the Moorish
Leila;a circumstance greatly aided by the similarity
of hue between the two races.
And dost thou think, said the cavalier, his
indignation
rising in spite of his grief, that the adored
and most angelic Leila could, in any wise, resemble
the coarse maids of this copper-tinted, barbarous
people? I swear to thee, she was fairer than the
Spanish girls of Almeria, and a thousand times more
beautiful!
In this I will not contend with thee, said the
father, benignantly, well satisfied that anger should
take the place of a more perilous passion. But I
may assure thee, that, among the princesses of the
royal household, whom, I think, thou hast not yet
seen, there are many wondrous lovely to look upon
and, to show thee that even a barbarian may resemble
a Christian, it is only needful to mention that when
at our first coming to these shores, the portrait of
Cortes, done by an Indian painter, was carried to
Montezuma, he sent to us, by the next messengers
with rich presents, a noble of his court so strongly
resembling Don Hernan, both in figure and visage
that we were all filled with amazement.
Vol. II. 8
Well, indeed, thou speakest to me words of
comfort
,
said Don Amador, more composedly, though
still very sadly; but I would to heaven I might look
again on this woman, or this fiend, for I know not if
she may not be a devil! In truth, I thought I beheld
a spectre, when she turned her eyes upon me; and,
oh father! you may judge my grief, when thus
thinking
,
and beholding her a spirit worshipped by
idolaters
,
I knew she must be of the accursed!
I have heard of this woman from others who
beheld her, said the father, and, I doubt not, she is
a mortal woman, esteemed holy, because a priestess,
and therefore received by the people with those marks
of respect, which thou didst mistake for adoration.
It was reported to me, that she was of marvellous
great beauty.
Marvellous, indeed! said the youth. But, father,
here is another circumstance that greatly troubled
me; and, in good sooth, it troubles me yet. It is
known to thee that my kinsman had, until
yesternight
,
a little page,a Moorish boy, greatly beloved
by us both. As for myself, I loved him because he
was of the race of Leila; and I protest to thee,
unnatural
as it may seem, I bore not for my young brother
a greater affection than for this most unlucky urchin.
A foolish fellow charged him to be an enchanter; and
sometimes I bethink me of the accusation, and suppose
he has given me magical love-potions. Last night he
was snatched away, I cannot say how; but what is
very wonderful, my kinsman and two of his people
saw, almost at the same moment, a terrific phantom.
Father, you smile! If it were not for my sorrow, I
could smile too, and at myself; for greatly am I
changed, since I set foot on this heathen land. A
month since, I held a belief in ghosts and witchcraft
to be absurd, and even irreligious. At this moment,
there is no menial in this palace more given over to
doubts and fears, and more superstitious. Is not this
the first breathing of that horrible malady?
It is the first perplexity of a scene of novelty and
excitement. Fatigue doth itself produce a temporary
distraction, as is very evident when we come to fling
our over-worn bodies on our couches, to sleep. This
is the land of devils, because of idolaters; and I may
not deny, that the fiends have here greater power to
haunt us with supernatural apparitions, than in the
lands of our true religion. Yet it is not well to yield
too ready a belief to such revelations; for heaven will
not permit them, without a purpose. Rather think
that the infirmity of thy kinsman, and the ignorance
of his people, were deluded by an accidental deception,
which a cooller observer might have penetrated, than
by any real vision. But what wert thou saying of
the Moorish page?
Father, said Amador, earnestly, at the moment,
when the train that surrounded that wonderful
priestess
,
alarmed to see me rush towards them, (for that
supernatural resemblance did greatly move me,) fled
into the temple, I heard the voice of Jacinto
screaming
aloud among the infidels, as if, that moment, offered
by them a victim to their accursed divinities.
God be with his soul, if it be so! said the
confessor
,
for barbarous and bloody in their fanaticism
are the reprobates of Tenochtitlan. Yet I would have
thee, even in this matter, to be of good heart; for it
is believed among us, that Abdalla, his father, has
been received into the service of the Mexican nobles,
to teach them how to resist our arts, and how to
compass our destruction; and it must be evident, that
for that traitor's sake, they will spare his boy, stolen
away from us, as it appears to me to be proven, by
the knave Abdalla himself. But think thou no more
of the boy. He was born to inherit the perfidy of his
race; deception and ingratitude have rendered him
unworthy thy care; and if, some day, the nobles
should yield him to the priests for a victim, it will be
but a just punishment for his baseness. Give thy mind
to other thoughts, and refresh thy body with sleep;
for much need have we of all the assistance thou
canst now render us. Sleep, and prepare for other
combats; for this day is but the prologue of a tragedy,
whose end may be more bloody and dreadful than
we have yet imagined. Thy soul is without stain,
and heaven absolves thee of sin. Brood over no more
gloomy thoughts; believe that Providence
overshadows
thee; sleep in tranquillity; and be prepared for
the morning.
The good father concluded the rite of absolution
with a blessing parental and holy, and stole away
from the chamber. Don Amador sighed heavily, but
with a relieved mind, as he rose from his knees. He
gazed upon the marble features of the sleeping knight,
smoothed the covering softly and tenderly about his
emaciated frame, and then crept to his own couch.
His thoughts were many and wild, but exhaustion
brought slumber to his eyelids; and starting, ever and
anon, at some elfin representation of the captive page,
or the lost maid of Almeria, bending over him with
eyes of wo, he fell, at last, into a sleep so profound,
that it was no longer disturbed by visions.
CHAPTER XI.
At
the earliest dawn, Don Amador arose from his
couch, refreshed, but not reanimated, by slumber.
An oppressive gloom lay at his heart, with the
feeling
of physical weight; and without yet yielding to
any definite apprehension, he was conscious of some
presentiment, or vague foreboding of sorrow. The
taper had expired on the pedestal, but an obscure
light, the first beam of morning, guided him to the
bed-side of his kinsman. The form of Baltasar was
added to that of Marco on the floor; and the
serving-men
slept as soundly as their master. He bent a
moment over Don Gabriel, and though unable to
perceive
his countenance in the gloom, he judged, by
the calmness of his breathing, that the fever had
abated. Heaven grant that the delirium may have
departed with it! he muttered to himself, and that
my poor friend may look upon me rationally once
more! If we are to perish under the knives of these
unwearying barbarians, as now seems to me
somewhat
more than possible, better will it be for my
kinsman's soul, that he die with the name of God on
his lips, instead of those of the spirits which torment
him.
While the cavalier gave way to such thoughts, he
heard very distinctly, though at a great distance,
such sounds as convinced him that `the unwearying
barbarians' were indeed rousing again for another
day of battle. He armed himself with the more haste
that he heard also in the passage, the sound of feet,
as if the garrison had been already summoned, and
were hurrying to the walls.
As he passed from the apartment, he found himself
suddenly in the midst of a group of cavaliers, one of
whom grasped his hand, and pressing it warmly,
whispered in his ear, I will not forget that I owe
thee the life of Benita!Come with me, my friend,
and thou shalt see how pride is punished with shame,
and injustice with humiliation.
I thought, said Don Amador, that we were
about to be attacked, and that my friends were
running
to the defence.
Such is the case, said De Morla. The millions
are again advancing against the palace, and we go
to oppose them, though not to the walls. We have
raised devils, and we run to him we have most
wronged, and most despised, to lay them. In an
instant, you will hear the shrieks of the combatants.
If we find no other way to conquer them than with
our arms, wo betide us all!for we are worn and
feeble, and we know our fate.
Several of the cavaliers had lights in their hands;
but the chamber, into which Don Amador followed
them, was lit with a multitude of torches, chiefly of
the knots of resinous wood, burning with a smoky
8 *
glare, and scattering around a rich odour. The
scene disclosed to the neophyte, was imposing and
singular. The apartment was very spacious, and,
indeed, lofty, and filled with human beings, most of
them Mexican nobles of the highest rank, and of both
sexes, who stood around their monarch, as in a
solemn audience, leaving a space in front, which was
occupied by the most distinguished of the Spaniards,
among whom was Don Hernan himself. A little
platform
,
entirely concealed under cushions of the richest
feathers, supported the chair, (it might have been
called, the throne,) on which sat the royal captive,
closely invested by those members of his family who
shared his imprisonment. A king of Cojohuacan, his
brother, stood at his back, and at either side were
two of his children, two sons and two daughters, all
young, and one of them,a princess,scarce
budding
into womanhood. Their attire, in obedience to
the laws of the court, was plain, and yet richer than
the garments of the nobles. But it was their position
near the king, the general resemblance of their
features
,
and the anxious eyes which they kept ever bent
on the royal countenance, which pointed them out as
the offspring of Montezuma.
As for Montezuma himself, though he sat on his
chair like an emperor, it was more like a monarch
of statuary than of flesh and blood. The Christian
general stood before him, dictating to the interpreter
Marina, the expressions which he desired to enter the
ear of his prisoner; but, though speaking with as
much respect as earnestness, the Indian ruler seemed
neither to hear nor to see him. His eye was indeed
fixed on Don Hernan, but yet fixed as on vacancy;
and the lip, fallen in a ghastly contortion, the rigid
features, the abstracted stare, the right hand pressed
upon his knee, while the left lay powerless and dead
over the cushions of his chair, as he bent a little
forward
,
as if wholly unconscious of the presence of his
people and his foes, made it manifest to all, that his
thoughts were absorbed in the contemplation of his
own abasement.
The neophyte heard the words of Don Hernan.
Tell his royal majesty, the king, said the
general
,
with an accent no longer resembling that which
had fixed the barb in the bosom of his prey, that it
mislikes me to destroy his people, like so many dumb
beasts; and yet to this end am I enforced by their
madness and his supineness. Bid him direct his
subjects
to lay down their arms, and assail me no further;
otherwise shall I be constrained to employ those
weapons which God has given me, until this
beauteous
island is converted into a charnel-house and
hell, and the broad lake of Tezcuco into the grave of
his whole race!
The mild and musical voice of Marina repeated
the wish in the language of Anahuac; and all eyes
were bent on the monarch, as she spoke. But not a
muscle moved in the frame or the visage of
Montezuma
.
Is the knave turned to stone, that he hears not?
muttered the chief. Speak thou, my little Orteguilla.
Repeat what thou hast heard, and see if thine antics
will not arouse the sleeper.
The youthful page stepped up to the king, seized
his hand, which he strove to raise to his lips, and
looking up in his face, with an innocent air,
endeavoured
to engage his attention. This boy had, from
the first days of imprisonment, been a favourite with
Montezunia; and being very arch and cunning, Don
Hernan did not scruple to place him as a spy about
the king, under colour of presenting him as a servant.
In common, Montezuma was greatly diverted with his
boyish tricks, and especially with his blundering
efforts
to catch the tongue of Mexico. But there was
no longer left in the bosom of the degraded prince,
a chord to vibrate to merriment. Habit, however,
had not yet lost its hold; and as the boyish voice
stammered out the accustomed tones, he gradually
turned his eyes from the person of the general, and
fixed them on the visage of Orteguilla. But as he
gazed, his brows contracted into a gloomier frown,
he laid his hand on the prattler's shoulder, and no
sooner had the urchin ceased speaking, than he thrust
him sternly, though not violently, away. Then
drawing
himself erect, he folded his arms on his bosom,
and without uttering a word, fixed his eyes on the
face of Cortes, and there calmly and sorrowfully
maintained them.
This is, doubtless, a lethargy, said the general;
but it suits not our present occasions to indulge it.
Where is my friend, De Morla? He was wont to
have much influence with this humorous man.
I am here, said De Morla, stepping forward;
and if you demand it, I will speak to the king;
though with no hopes of persuading him to show us
any kindness.
As De Morla spoke, Don Amador, who had
followed
him to the side of Cortes, observed one of the
princesses turn from her sire, and look eagerly
towards
his friend. In this maiden, he doubted not,
he perceived the fair Minnapotzin; and he ceased to
wonder at the passion of his countryman, when he
discovered with his own eyes how little her beauty
had been overrated. Though of but small stature,
her figure, as far as it could be perceived through
the folds of peculiar vestments, was exceedingly
graceful. The cymar was knotted round her bosom
with a modest girdle, and left bare two arms prettily
moulded, on which shone bracelets of gold,
fantastically
wrought. Her hair was long, and fell,
braided
with strings of the same metal, on her shoulders,
on which also was a necklace of little emeralds
alternating
with crystals, and suspending a silver
crucifix
of Spanish workmanship. These were her only
decorations. Her skin was rather dark than tawny,
and the tinge of beautifying blood was as visible on
her cheeks as on those of the maids of Andalusia.
Her features were very regular; and two large eyes,
in which a native timidity struggled with affection at
the sight of her Christian lover, rendered her
countenance
as engaging as it was lovely. She hung
upon De Morla's accents with an air of the deepest
interest, as he expressed, in imperfect language, the
desires of his general.
As he spoke, the infidel king surveyed him with a
frown,a notice that he now extended to all the
Christians present, but without deigning to reply. It
was evident that he understood the desires of his
jailor, and equally plain that he had resolved to
disregard
them. The angry spot darkened on the brow
of Cartes; and he was about to degrade the captive
with still more violent marks of his displeasure;
when, at this moment, the roar of his artillery,
mingled
with the shouts of the besiegers, suddenly shook
the palace to its foundations, and drowned his voice
in the shrieks of the women.
Montezuma started to his feet, and cast a look
upon Cortes, in which horror did not wholly conceal
a touch of ferocious satisfaction. His people were,
indeed, falling under those terrific explosions, like
leaves before the mountain gust; but well he read in
the dismayed visages of the Spaniards, that fate was,
at last, avenging his injuries on the oppressors.
Speak
thou
to thy father, my Benita! cried De
Morla, in her own language, to the terrified princess,
and let him stay the work of blood; for none but
he has the power. Tell him, we desire peace,
repent
the wrongs we have done him, and will redress
them. If he will regain his liberty and his empire,
if he will save his people, his children, and himself,
from one common and fearful destruction, let him
forget that we have done him wrong, and pronounce
the words of peace.
The Indian maiden threw herself at the feet of the
king, and bathing his hands with tears, repeated the
charge of the cavalier.
Montezuma gazed upon her with sorrow, and
upon his other children; then looking coldly to Don
Hernan, he said, with a tranquil voice, while Doa
Marina rapidly interpreted his expressions,
What will the Teuctli have? He commands a
captive to shield him from the darts of free warriors:
Montezuma is a prisoner. He calls upon me to quiet
a raging people: Montezuma has no people. He
commands me to regain my liberty: the Mexican
that hath been once a slave, can be a freeman no
more. He bids me save my children: I have none!
they are servants in the house of a stranger.He
that is in bonds, hath no offspring!
While he spoke, the din increased, as if the yelling
assailants were pressing up to the very walls of the
palace; and many cavaliers, incapable of remaining
longer inactive, and despairing of his assistance,
rushed from the apartment to join in the combat.
Why does he waste time in words? cried Cortes.
At every moment, there are slain a thousand of his
subjects!
If there were twenty thousand, said the captive,
assuming, at last, the dignity that became his name,
and speaking with a stately anger, and if but one
Christian lay dead among them, Montezuma should
not mourn the loss. Happier would he be, left with
the few and mangled remnants, with his throne on the
grave of the strangers, than, this moment, were he
restored to his millions, with the children of the East
abiding by him in friendship.Thou callest upon me
to appease
my
people. Thou knowest that they are
thine. Why should they not listen to
thee?
Ay, why should they not? said Don Hernan,
speaking rather to himself, than to Montezuma, and
flinging sarcasms on his own head. By my
conscience
,
I know not; for though I was somewhat
conceited, to grasp at the sceptre so early, I think I
may hold it with as much dignity as any infidel, were
he a Turkish sultan.Hearken, Montezuma; thou
art deceived: thy people are not mine, but thine, and
through thee, as his sworn vassal, the subjects of my
master, the king of Spain. Confirm thy vassallage,
to him, by tribute, be true to thy allegiance, and
remain
on thy throne for ever; and, if such be thy
desire
,
I will straightway withdraw my army from the
empire, so that thou mayest reign according to thine
own barbarous fancies.
I trust thee not, said the king, for already
hast thou deceived me! I revoke my vows of
vassalage
;
for he that has no kingdom, cannot be a
king's deputy.Do thy worst, continued the
monarch
,
with increasing boldness, no longer regarding
the furious looks of Don Hernan, and learning, at last,
to deserve the respect of his foes. Do thy worst:
Thou hast degraded me with chains, and with words
of insult; nothing more canst thou do, but kill! Kill
me, then, if thou wilt; and in Mictlan will I rejoice,
for I know that my betrayers shall follow me! Yes!
he added, with wild energy, I know that, at this
moment, your heart is frozen with fear, and your
blood turned to water, seeing that revenge has
reached
you, and that your doom is death! The wronger
of the lords of Tenochtitlan has learned to tremble
before its basest herds; and let him tremble,for the
basest of them shall trample upon his body!
Am I menaced by this traitor to his allegiance?
cried Cortes.
Seor, said De Morla, let us trifle the time
with no more deception. There is no one of our
people, who does not perceive that we can maintain
our post in this city no longer, and that we cannot
even escape from it, without the permission of our
foes. This knows Montezuma, as well as ourselves.
Why incense him, why strive to cajole him further?
Let us tell him the truth, and buy safety by
restoring
,
at once, what we cannot keep; and what,
otherwise
,
we must yield up with our lives.
Ay, faith,it cannot be denied: we are even
caught in a net of our own twisting. Tell the knave
what thou wilt. We will leave his accursed island.
But how soon we may return, to claim the
possessions
of our master, thou needst not acquaint him.
But, by my conscience, return we will, and that right
briefly!
A thousand different expressions agitated the visage
of Montezuma, while listening to the words of De
Morla. Now a flash of joy lit his dusky features;
now doubt covered them with double gloom; and
now he frowned with a dark resolution, as if
conceiving
the fate of the Christians, if left to themselves,
still caged in their bloody prison. The memory of
all he had suffered, mingled with the imagination of
all the vengeance he might enjoy, covered his
countenance
with a mingled rage and exultation. While
he hesitated, his eye fell upon his children, for all had
thrown themselves at his feet; and he beheld them,
in fancy, paying the penalty of his ferocity. The
stern eye of Cortes was upon him; and he thought
he read, in its meaning lustre, the punishment which
awaited his refusal.
Will the Teuctli depart from me, he cried,
eagerly
,
if I open a path for him through my incensed
people?
I will depart from him, replied Don Hernan,
if his people throw down their arms, and disperse.
They will listen to me no more! exclaimed
Montezuma, suddenly clasping his hands, with a look
and accent of despair, for I am no longer their
monarch. The gods of Anahuac have rejected the
king that has submitted to bonds; a great prophetess
has risen from Mictlan, bearing the will of the
deities
;
and, by the bloody pool Ezapan, that washes
the wounds of the penitent, the people have heard her
words, and sworn faith to a new ruler, beloved by
heaven, and reverenced by themselves. They have
seen the degradation of Montezuma, and
Cuitlahuatzin
is now the king of Mexico!
He speaks of the strange priestess we saw at the
temple, said De Morla. It is, indeed, said among
all the Mexicans, (but how they have heard of her, I
know not,) that she has been sent by the gods, to
dethrone
our prisoner, and destroy the Christians.
Thou art deceived, said Cortes, to the monarch,
without regarding this explanation; there is no
king, but thyself, acknowledged by thy people; and,
at this moment, they are fighting to rescue thee from
what they falsely consider bondage;falsely I say,
for thou knowest, thou art my guest, and not my
prisoner
,free
to depart whenever thou wilt,that is,
whenever thou wilt exert thy authority to appease the
insurrection. It is their mad love for thee, that
reduces
us to extremity.
And thou swearest, then, cried Montezuma,
catching eagerly at the suggestion and the hope,
thou swearest, that thou wilt depart from my
empire
,
if I appease this bloody tumult?
I swear, that I will depart from thy city, said
the crafty Spaniard; and I swear, that I hope to
depart from thy empireone day, at least, when I
am its master. He muttered the last words to
himself.
Give me my robesI will speak to my people!
No sooner was this speech interpreted, than the
Spaniards present uttered exclamations of pleasure;
and some of them running out with the news to their
companions, the court-yard soon rung with their
shouts. Despair; at once, gave place to joy; and even
to many of those who had been most sick of battle,
the relief came, with such revulsions of feeling, that
they seemed loath to lose the opportunity of slaying.
Quick to your pieces! charge, and have at the
yelling imps! cried divers voices, for presently we
shall have no more fighting!
CHAPTER XII.
The
cannoniers, moved by this new feeling,
discharged
their last volley with good will, and, at the
same moment, the crossbowmen and musketeers shot
off their pieces from the wall and the terraces. The
Vol. II. 9
four sides of the palace were thus, at the same
instant
,
sheeted with flame; and the effect of the
combined
discharge was incalculably great and fatal
among the dense bodies of besiegers. As they
staggered
,
and fell back a little, to recover from their
confusion, the mounted men, who had placed
themselves
in readiness for the final charge, rushed at
once, spear in hand, on the disordered multitude,
dealing death at every thrust, and almost at every
tramp of their chargers.
It was precisely at this moment, that the Indian
emperor, arrayed in the pompous and jewelled robes,
in which he was wont to preside at the greater
festivals
of the gods, with the
Copilli
on his head, and
the golden buskins on his feet, preceded by a noble
bearing the three rods of authority, and attended by
half a dozen valiant cavaliers, (of whom the
neophyte
was one,) holding their bucklers in readiness to
protect him from any ill-directed missile,stepped
upon the terrace and advanced towards the
battlements
.
The spectacle that presented itself in the
dawning light, was, to him at least, grievous and
horrid. The earth of the square, and the dwellings
that surrounded it, were torn by the cannon-shots,
and many of the houses had tumbled into ruins.
From this height, also, could be seen the blackened
wrecks, which marked the path of the army,
returning
,
the previous day, from the temple. But a more
sorrowful sight was presented to the unfortunate
monarch, in the prospect of his people, great
numbers
already lying dead on the furrowed square, while
the survivors were falling fast under the lances of the
horsemen.
Don Hernan enjoyed for a moment, with malicious
satisfaction, the exclamations of grief, with which
his prisoner beheld this sight; for it was his pleasure
to believe, that Montezuma was himself the planner
of the insurrection. Then, giving a sign to a
trumpeter
,
who was with the party, to wind a retreat, the
horsemen instantly reined round their steeds, and
galloped
back to the court-yard. With a loud yell of
triumph, the Mexicans, thinking their pursuers fled
from fear, prepared to follow them, and poised their
weapons as a prelude to the assault. At that critical
period, the cavaliers moved aside from their prisoner,
and he stood confronted with his people. The great
cry with which the barbarians beheld their monarch,
had something in it that was touching, for it
expressed
a childish joy; but there was something still more
affecting in the result, to those whose hearts were
not utterly steeled, when they beheld the universal
multitude, as with one accord, fling themselves upon
their knees, and, dropping their weapons and
pronouncing
the name of the king, extend their hands
towards him, as to a father.
Is it possible then, muttered, or rather thought,
Don Amador de Leste, smothering a sudden pang of
remorse, that these blood-thirsty barbarians are
only seeking our lives, to liberate their king? Surely,
we do a great sin, to slay them for their love.I
would that my knight, my people, and myself, were
fighting the Turks again.
The sudden change from the furious tumult of war
to such stillness as belongs to midnight, was
impressive
and even awful; and solemn looks, both from
his subjects and his foes, from those who fought in
the court-yard, and those who manned the roof and
the turrets, were bent on the royal captive, as he
stepped upon the battlement, and addressed himself
to his people.
My children! said Montezuma, for so his words
were rapidly interpreted by De Morla,if ye are
shedding your blood, to convince me of your
affection
,
know that I feel its constancy, without approving
its rashness. Though I be a prisoner He
paused, for the word stuck in his throat, and groans
and lamentations showed how unpalatable it was to
his subjects. Though I be a prisoner with the
Teuctli, yet have you to know, it is, in a great
measure
,
with mine own consent; and, at this moment,
I remain not by enforcement, but by choice.
The unhappy monarch, by so expressing his
address
as to steer clear of offence to the Spaniards,
(for well he knew they dreaded lest his confessions
should still more inflame the citizens,) committed
the more fatal error of displeasing his people. A
murmur of indignation ran through the mass, when
Montezuma, with his own lips, confirmed his
abasement
.
Several rose, frowning, to their feet, and a
young man, parting quickly from the crowd,
advanced
so near to the palace, that his features could
be plainly distinguished. He was of noble stature,
countenance, and mien, evidently of the highest
order of nobility, and enjoyed the distinction of a
principality in the House of Darts, as was shown by
the red fillet in his hair, suspending the tufts of
honour. His trunk and shoulders were invested in a
coat of armour, either of scales of copper or of
leather, richly gilt, bordered at the bottom with
lambrequins
of green and red feathers. His limbs were
naked, saving only the bright sandals on his feet, and
the glittering bracelets on his arms. His left arm
supported a light buckler, doubtless of wicker-work,
though painted with many bright and fantastic colours;
and, from the bottom of it, waved a broad penacho,
as well as a bulky maquahuitl, which he held in his
left hand, while balancing a copper javelin in his
right. A tall plume of the most splendid hues nodded
majestically on his head.
As this bold and noble-looking youth stepped up to
the very mouths of the cannon, and raised his fiery
eyes to the king, Don Amador de Leste thought that
he recognized in him the princely ambassador of
Cholula
,the
young fugitive, who had been so ready to
dispute the path with him, under the walls of the holy
city.
Dost
thou
say this, thou that wert once their lord,
to the people of Mexitli? said the young prince, (for,
as has been recorded by other historians, it was the
valiant Quauhtimotzin, the nephew of the king, who
now so sharply rebuked him.) Dost
thou
indeed
confess, son of Axajacatl! that thou art, by thine own
consent, the friend of a perfidious stranger? by thine
own choice, O conqueror of many nations! the serf
and slave of him who is the brother of Tlascala?
Then art thou, indeed, what we have called thee,the
slayer of thy people,for this blood has flown at thy
bidding; a traitor to thy throne,for thou hast
surrendered
it to a master; an apostate to thy gods,
for thou hast shut thine ears, when they called upon
thee for vengeance. Miserable king!and yet a
king no more! When thy people wept to see thee
degraded, thou gavest them up to slaughter; and
while they come to restore thee to thy rights, thou
confessest, that thou lovest these less than the shame
of captivity! Know then, that, for thy baseness, the
gods have pronounced thee unworthy to be their
viceroy, and thy people have confirmed the decree.
We break the rods of authority; we trample upon
the robes of state: and Montezuma is no longer a
king in Tenochtitlan!
The unhappy monarch trembled, while he listened
to this insulting denunciation, for he felt that he had
deserved it. But his people still lay prostrate on the
earth; and, hoping that they shared not the
indignation
of his kinsman, he elevated his voice again, and
spoke sternly:
Why doth Quauhtimotzin forget that he is the son
of my brother, and my slave? Is the young man
that smiles in jewels, wiser than he that hath gray
hairs? and the people that delve in canals and build
up the temples, have they more cunning than the
king who councils with the spirits at the altar? Know,
that what has been done, has been done wisely, for
it was according to the will of heaven; and heaven,
which has tried our fidelity, is about to reward it with
happiness and peace. The strangers have promised
to depart from us: throw down your arms, and let
them be gone.
9 *
And wilt thou, said the prince, elevating his
voice to a still angrier pitch, who hast been so
many times deluded, counsel us to listen to their lies?
O fallen Montezuma! thou leaguest with them against
us. Wilt thou suffer them to escape, when we have
them enclosed in nets, as the birds that sing in thy
gardens? O degraded chief! thou hast not the
courage
to desire the blood of them that have dethroned
thee! Thou art not he that was Montezuma; thy
words are the words of a Christian; thou speakest
with the lips of a slave, and the heart of a woman;
thou art a Spaniard, and thy fate shall be the fate of
a Spaniard! Cuitlahuatzin is our king; and we strike
thee as a foeman!
As the prince concluded his indignant oration, he
swung round his head the javelin, which, all this time,
he had balanced in his hand, and lanched it, with all
his force, full at the breast of Montezuma. The shield
of the novice, quickly interposed before the body of
the king, arrested the sharp weapon, and it fell,
innocuous
,
on the terrace. At the same moment, the
Mexicans all sprang to their feet, with loud cries, as
if giving way to repressed fury, and brandished their
arms. The bucklers of the cavaliers were instantly
extended before the monarch, to protect him from the
dreaded missiles. But, as if desperation had robbed
him of his fears, and restored to him, for his last hour,
some share of that native spirit which had elevated
him to the throne, he pushed them immediately aside,
aud raising himself to his full height, and spreading
forth his arms, gazed majestically, though with a
ghastly countenance, on his people. The words of
mingled intreaty and command were already on his
lips, but they were lost even to the Spaniards who
stood by, in the thunder of shouts coming from twenty
thousand voices; and the warning cry of Cortes was
equally unheard, bidding the Spaniards to Save the
king! The shields were interposed, however,
without
command, and caught many of the missiles,
stones, arrows, and darts,which fell like a shower
on the group,but not all. An arrow pierced the
right arm, a stone maimed the right leg, and another,
striking upon the left temple of the abandoned
monarch
,
crushed the bone in upon the brain; and he fell
into the arms of the cavaliers, like a dead man.
The cannoniers, at that moment, seeing the
returning
rage of the barbarians, shot off their pieces. But
the battle was done. No sooner had the Mexicans
beheld their monarch fall under the blows of their
own weapons, than they changed their cries of fury
to lamentations; and throwing down their arms, as
if seized with a panic, they fled from the square,
leaving
it to the Christians and the dead.
CHAPTER XIII.
In
great grief and consternation of mind, the
cavaliers
carried the king to his apartments, and added
their own sharp regrets to the tears of his children,
when the surgeon pronounced his wounds mortal.
Even the seor Cortes did not disdain to heave a
sigh over the mangled form of his prisoner; for, in
his death, he perceived his innocence, and
remembered
his benefactions; and, in addition, he felt, that,
in the loss of Montezuma, he was deprived of the
strongest bulwark against the animosity of his people.
I have done this poor infidel king a great wrong,
he said, with a remorse that might have been real,
and yet, perhaps, was assumed, to effect a purpose
on his followers; for now, indeed, it is plain, he
could not have been unfaithful to us, or he would not
thus have perished. I call God to witness, that I had
no hand in his death; and I aver to yourselves, noble
cavaliers, that, when I have seemed to treat him with
harshness and injustice, I have done so for the good
of my companions, and the advantage of our king;
for barbarians, being, in some sort, children, are to
be governed by that severity which is wholesome to
infancy. Nevertheless, I do not wholly despair of
his life; for there are some score or two lusty fellows
in the garrison, who have had their skulls cracked,
and are none the worse for the affliction. I trust
much in thy skill, seor
boticario
, he continued,
addressing the surgeon; and I promise thee, if thou
restore Montezuma to his life and wits, I will, on
mine own part, bestow upon thee this golden chain
and crucifix, valued at ninety pesos, besides
recommending
thee, likewise, to the gratitude of my brother
captains, and the favourable notice of his majesty,
our king,whom God preserve ever from the wrath
and impiety of such traitorous subjects as have laid
our Montezuma low! I leave him in thy charge. As
for ourselves, valiant and true friends, it being now
apparent to you, that we have none but ourselves to
look to for safety, and even food, (the want of which
latter would, doubtless, create many loud murmurs,
were it not for the jeopardy of the former,) I must
recommend you to betake you to your horses, and
accompany me in a sally which it is needful now to
make, both for the sake of reconnoitring the dikes,
and gathering food.What now, Botello! he cried,
observing the enchanter pressing through the throng;
what doest thou here?Thou never madest me a
prophecy of this great mishap!
I never cast the horoscope, nor called upon
Kalidon-Sadabath
,
to discover the fate of any but a
Christian
man, said Botello, gravely; for what matters
it
what
is the fate of a soul predoomed to flames,
whether it part with violence, or in peace? I have
sought out the destiny of his people, because I thought,
some day, they should be baptised in the faith; but I
never cast me a spell for the king.
Wilt thou adventure thine art in his behalf, and
tell me whether he shall now live or die?
It needs no conjuration to discover that, said
the magician, pointing significantly to the broken
temple. The king will die, and that before we are
released from our thraldom. But hearken, seor,
he continued, solemnly, I have sought out the fate
that concerns us more nearly. Last night, while
others buried their weariness in sleep, and their
sorrows
in the dreams of home, I watched in solitude,
with prayers and fasting, working many secret and
godly spells, and conversing with the spirits that
came to the circle.
The wounded monarch was forgotten, for an
instant
,
by the cavaliers, in their eagerness to gather
the revelations of the conjurer; for scepticism, like
pride, was yielding before the increasing difficulties
of their situation, and they grasped at hope and
encouragement
,
coming from what quarter soever.
And what have the spirits told thee, then?
demanded
the general, meaningly.Doubtless, that,
although there be a cloud about us now, there shall
sunshine soon burst from it; and that, if we depart
from this city, it will only be like the antique
battering
ram, pulled back from a wall, that it may
presently
return against it with tenfold violence.
I have not questioned so far, replied Botello,
earnestly. I know, that we must fly. What is to
come after, is in the hands of God, and has not been
revealed. Death lies in store for many, but safety
for some. The celestial aspects are unfavourable,
the conjunctions speak of suffering and blood;
dreams are dark, Kalidon is moody, and the fiends
prattle in riddles. Day after day, the gloom shall be
thicker, the frowns of fate more menacing, retreat
more hopeless. Never before found I so many black
days clustered over the earth! In all this period,
there is but one shining hour; and if we seize not
that, heaven receive us! for, beyond that, there is
nothing but death.On the fifth day from this, at
midnight, a path will be opened to us on the
causeway
;
for then, from the house Alpharg, doth the
moon break the walls of prisons, and light fugitives
to the desert. But after that, I say to thee again,
very noble seor, all is hopelessness, all is wo!
starvation in the palace, and shrieking sacrifices on
the temple!
On the fifth night, then, said Cortes, gravely,
if the fates so will it, we must take our departure,
provided we die not of famine, on the fourth. I
would the devils that thou hast in command, had
revealed
thee some earlier hour, or some good means
of coming at meat and drink. Get thee to thy
horoscopes
again, thy prayers and thy suffumigations;
and see if thou hast not, by any mischance,
over-looked
some favourable moment for to-morrow, or
the day after.
It cannot be, said Botello; my art has
disclosed
me no hope; but, without art, I can see that,
to-morrow, the news of Montezuma's death, (for
surely he is now dying,) will fill the causeways with
mountaineers, and cover the lake with navigators,
all coming to avenge it.
I like thy magic better than thy mother wit,
said Don Hernan, with a frown. Give me what
diabolical comfort thou canst to the soldiers; but
croak no common-sense alarms into their ears.
I have nothing to do with the magic that is
diabolic
,
said the offended enchanter. God is my
stay, and the fiends I curse! If I have fears, I speak
them not, save to those who may handle them for
wise purposes. This, which I have said, will surely
be the fate of to-morrow; and the besiegers will
come, in double numbers, to the walls. What I have
to speak of to-day, may be of as much moment,
though revealed to me neither by star nor spirit.
The Mexicans are struck with horror, having slain
their king; they hide them in their houses, or they
run, mourning, to the temples; the soldiers are fresh,
and the streets are empty. What hinders, that we
do not gird on our packs, and, aiming for the near
and short dike of Tacuba, which I so lately traversed,
with the king's daughters, make good our retreat this
moment?
By Santiago! cried Cortes, quickly, this is a
soldier's thought, and honoured shalt thou be for
conceiving
it. What ho, Sandoval, my friend! get the
troops in readiness. Prepare thy litters for the sick
and wounded;have all ready at a moment's
warning
.
In the meanwhile, I will scour the western
streets, and if all promise well, will return to conduct
the retreat in person.
We can carry with us, said Botello, the
wounded
king, and his sons and daughters; and if it chance
we should be followed, we will do as the tiger-hunter
does with the cubs, when the dam pursues him,
fling a prisoner, ever and anon, on the path, to check
the fury of our persecutors.The king will be better
than a purse of gold.
Ay! now thou art my sage soldier again! said
the general. Get thee to the men, and comfort
them. Apothecary, look to the emperor; see that
he have the best litter.Forget not thy drugs and
potions. And now, Christian cavaliers, and brothers,
be of good heart.Let us mount horse, and look at
the dike of Tacuba.
The officers, greatly encouraged at the prospect
of so speedy a release from their sufferings, followed
the general from the apartment. Their elation was
not shared by Don Amador de Leste. He rejoiced,
for his kinsman's sake, that he was about to bear him
from the din and privation of a besieged citadel; but
he remembered that the Moorish boy must be left
behind to perish; and it seemed to him, in addition,
that certain mystic ties, the result of a day's
adventure
,
which began to bind his thoughts to the pagan
city, were, by the retreat, to be severed at once, and
for ever.
But if his gloom was increased by such reflections,
it was, in part, dispelled, when he reached the
chamber
of his kinsman. The delirium had vanished, and
the knight sat on his couch, feeble, indeed, and greatly
dejected, but quite in his senses. He turned an eye
of affection on the youth, and with his trembling hand
grasped Don Amador's.
I have been as one that slept, dreaming my
dreams, he said, while thou hast been fighting the
infidel. Strange visions have beset me; but thanks
be to heaven! they have passed away; and,
by-and-by
,
I will be able to mount and go forth with thee;
and we will fight, side by side, as we have done
before, among the Mussulmans.
Think not of that, my father, said the novice,
for thou art very feeble. I would, indeed, thou
hadst but the strength this day, to sit on the saddle;
for we are about to retreat from Tenochtitlan.
Nevertheless
,
Baltasar shall have thy couch placed on a
litter, which we can secure between two horses.
Speakest thou of retreating? exclaimed Don
Gabriel.
It is even so, my friend. The numbers, the fury,
and the unabating exertions of the Mexicans, are
greater than we looked for. We have lost many
men, are reduced to great extremities for food,
altogether
dispirited, and now left so helpless, by the
disaster
of the king, that we have no hope but in flight.
Is the king hurt?and by a Spaniard?
Wounded by the stones and arrows of his own
people, and now dying. And, it is thought, we can
depart to best advantage, while the Mexicans are
repenting the impiety that slew him.
And we must retreat?
If we can;a matter which we, who are
mounted
,
are about to determine, by riding to the nearest
causeway. This, dear father, will give Marco and
Baltasar time to prepare thee. I will leave Lazaro
and the secretary to assist them. Presently, we will
return; and when we march, be it unopposed, or yet
through files of the enemy, I swear to thee I will ride
ever at thy side.
And my boy?my loving little page, Jacinto?
exclaimed the knight, anxiously: Hath he returned
to us? I have a recollection, that he was stolen away.
'T will be a new sin to me, if he come to harm through
my neglect.
Let us think no more of Jacinto, said the novice
with a sigh. If he be living, he is now in the hands
of Abdalla, his father, who has deserted from us, and
is supposed to be harboured by the Mexicans. God
is over allwe can do him no goodGod will
protect
him!
Don Gabriel eyed his kinsman sorrowfully, saying,
Evil follows in my path, and overtakes those who
follow after me. Every day open I mine eyes upon
a new grief. I loved this child very well; and, for
my punishment, he is taken from me. I love thee,
also, Amador, whom I may call my son; for faithful
and unwearying art thou; and, belike, the last blow
will fall, when
thou
art snatched away. Guard well
thy life, for it is the last pillar of my own!
A few moments of affection, a few words of
condolence
,
were bestowed upon Don Gabriel; and then
the novice left him, to accompany the cavaliers to the
causeway.
As he was stepping from the palace door into the
court-yard, his arm was caught by the magician,
who, looking into his face with exceeding great
solemnity
,
said,
Ride not thou with the cavaliers to-day, noble
gentleman. Thou art unlucky.
A faint smile lit the countenance of the youth. It
was soon followed by a sigh.
This is, indeed, a truth, which no magic could
make more manifest than has the history of much of
my life. I am unfortunate; yet not in affairs of war;
being now, as you see, almost the only man in this
garrison, who is not, in part, disabled by severe
wounds. Yet why should I not ride with my friends?
Because thou wilt bring them trouble, and
thyself
misery.I cannot say, seor, added Botello, with
grave earnestness, that thou didst absolutely save
my life, when thou broughtest me succour in the
street; seeing that this is under the influence of a
destiny, well known to me, which man cannot alter.
It was not possible those savages could slay me.
Vol. II. 10
Nevertheless, my gratitude is as strong, for thy good
will was as great. I promised to read thee thy
fortune
;
but in the troubles which beset me, I could
not perfect thy horoscope. All I have learned is,
that a heavy storm hangs over thee; and that, if thou
art not discreet, thy last hour is nigh, and will be
miserable. The very night of thy good and noble
service, I dreamed that we were surrounded by all
the assembled Mexicans, making with them a
contract
of peace; to which they were about swearing,
when they laid their eyes upon thee, and straightway
were incensed, at the sight, as at the call of a
trumpet
,
to attack us. Thou knowest, that it was thy rash
attack on the accursed prophetess, which brought
the knaves upon us! Thrice was this vision repeated
to me: twice has it been confirmedonce at the
temple
,
and, but a moment since, on the roof. Hadst
thou
not stood before the king with thy shield, the rage of
the Mexicans would not have destroyed him!
Therefore
,
go not out, now; for he that brings mischief,
twice, to his friends, will, the third time, be involved
in their ruin!
The neophyte stared at Botello, who pronounced
these fantastic adjurations with the most solemn
emphasis
.
His heart was heavy, or their folly would
have amused him.
Be not alarmed, Botello, he said,
good-humouredly
,I
will be very discreet. My conscience
absolves
me of all agency in the king's hurts; and if I
did, indeed, draw on the attack at the pyramid, as I
am by no means certain, I only put match to the
cannon, which, otherwise, might have been aimed at
us more fatally. I promise thee to be rash no more,
no, not even though I should again behold the
marvellous
prophetess, who, as Montezuma told us, has
risen from his pagan hell.
The enchanter would have remonstrated further;
but, at this moment, the trumpet gave signal that the
cavaliers were departing, and Don Amador stayed
neither to argue nor console. He commanded the
secretary, whom he found among the throng, to
return to Don Gabriel; and Lorenzo reluctantly
obeyed
.
Lazaro was already with the knight.
Thus, without personal attendants, Don Amador
mounted, this day, among the cavaliers, prepared to
disprove the enchanter's predictions, or to
consummate
his destiny.
CHAPTER XIV.
The
sufferings of the Spaniards in the streets,
when returning from the pyramid, had admonished
the general of the necessity of devising some plan
of protection against those citizens who fought from
the house-tops, whenever constrained to attempt a
second sortie. Accordingly, the artisans, in
obedience
to his commands, had spent the preceding
night in the construction of certain wooden turrets,
sufficiently lofty to overlook the commoner houses,
and strong enough to bid defiance to the darts of the
enemy. They were framed of timbers and planks,
torn from different parts of the palace. Each was
two stories in height, and, in addition, was furnished
with a guard, or battlement over the roof, breast-high,
behind which, some half a score musketeers might
ensconce themselves to advantage, while nearly as
many crossbowmen could be concealed in either
chamber, discharging their weapons from narrow
loop-holes. A little falconet was also placed in the
upper chamber. They were mounted on
gun-carriages
,
and meant to be drawn by the Indian allies.
They were called at first
mantas
, or blankets; but
afterwards were nicknamed
burros
,either because
they were such silly protections as might have been
devised by the most stupid of animals, which is one
signification of the word, or, because the
cannon-wheels
,
revolving under the mass, reminded the
soldiers
of the great wheel of a mill, which is another
meaning. One of these machines had been
completed
,
and was now ordered to be taken out,not
from any apprehension that it might be needed, but
because it appeared to the sagacious general, that,
if fate should imprison him longer in Tenochtitlan,
the present was the best opportunity to instruct his
soldiers in the management of it.
It was already lumbering slowly and clumsily over
the broken square, drawn by some two hundred
Tlascalans
,
and well manned with soldiers, when Don
Amador passed from the gates. As the cavaliers
rode by, its little garrison, vastly delighted with their
safe and lazy quarters, greeted them with a merry
cheer, the gayest and most sonorous strain of which
was sounded by those who defended the roof. As Don
Amador looked curiously up, he was hailed by a voice
not yet forgotten, and beheld, perched among others,
whom he seemed to command, on the very top of the
manta, the master of the caravel.
I give you a good day, noble Don Amador!
said this commander, with a grin. I am not now
aboard of such a bark as the little Sangre de Cristo;
but, for navigating through a beleagured city,
especially
among such cut-throats as we have here in
Tenochtitlan
,
perhaps a better ship could not be invented.
Thou art then resolved, said the cavalier, with
a smile, that this people is not far behind the race
of Florida?
Ay! I cannot but believe it; and I ask their
pardon
,
for having so greatly belied them, said the
captain; for more ferocious devils than these, never
saw I;they dwell not among the lagoons of the
north.
And dost thou remember thy wager? said Don
Amador, losing the little gayety that was on his visage,
at the recollection.
Concerning my soul, (which heaven have in
keeping
!)
and the cotton neck-piece? cried the sailor,
with a grim look.Ay, by my faith, I do. If we
fly this day, the first part of the venture is
accomplished
;
for true valour must acknowledge a defeat,
as well as boast a victory. And if we do not, I am
even ready to wager over again for the second,
touching
heaven. Three more such days as yesterday,
and God bless us all! But it is a good death to die,
fighting the heathen! At the worst, I have cheated
the devil;for the padre Olmedo absolved me this
morning.
Don Amador rode forward, relapsing into gloom.
The streets were, for a time, deserted and silent, as
if the inhabitants had fled from the island; and when,
now and then, the cavaliers halted, to deliberate on
their course, to list for the cries of human voices, or
to watch the progress of the tottering manta, already
far behind, the sound of shrubs rustling together on
the terraces, came to their ears with the melancholy
cadences of a desert. Sometimes, indeed, in these
pauses, they heard, from the recesses of a dwelling,
which otherwise seemed forsaken, faint groans, as
of a wounded foeman dying without succour; and,
occasionally, to these were added the low sobs of
women, lamenting a sire or brother. But they had
approached the limits of the island, and almost within
view of the causeway, without yet beholding an
enemy, when a warning gesture from the hands of
Don Hernan, at the front, brought them to a halt;
and, as they stood in silence, they heard, coming
faintly on the breeze, and, as it seemed, from a street
which crossed their path, a little in advance, such
sounds of flutes and tabours as had, the day before,
conducted the mysterious priestess to the pyramid.
Don Amador's heart beat with a strange agitation,
as he listened; and he burned again to look on the
countenance of this divine representative of a pagan
divinity. Whether it was the dejection of his spirits,
which gave its own character to the music, or
whether
indeed this was now breathed from the lips of
mourners, he thought not to inquire; but others were
struck with the wild sadness of the strain, and gazed
10*
inquisitively upon one another, as if to gather its
meaning. While they thus exchanged looks, and
awaited the issue of the event, the sounds
approached
,
growing louder, but losing none of their
melancholy
;
and a train of priests, in long black robes,
and with downcast eyes, followed by boys with
smoking censers, at last stole on their view, slowly
crossing the street on which they had halted. At
this moment, and just as the prophetess (for it was
she who stood, as before, under the feathered canopy,
carried by the devotees,) came into sight, the roar of
a cannon, bellowing afar from the palace, startled
the cavaliers from their tranquillity; and, in the
assurance
of new conflicts, destroyed, at once, their
hope of peaceful escape. This explosion, as was
afterwards
discovered, was rather the cause than the
consequence of hostilities; for the Mexicans, after
the sortie of Cortes, approaching the citadel in great
numbers, to beseech the body of their king, not
doubting
that he was slain, the Spaniards had mistaken
their grief for renewing rage, and immediately fired
upon them.
A furious scowl darkened the visage of Don
Hernan
,
as this distant discharge swept away his hopes;
and rising on his stirrups, he cried to his companions,
Let us seize the person of this accursed priestess,
demon, or woman,who profanes the holiness of
Our Lady, and incenses the hearts of the rabble! On,
and be quick; for 'tis an easy prize, and may replace
the emperor!
Until this moment, the train, casting their eyes
neither to the right nor left, and raising them not
even at the roar of the cannon, had been ignorant of
the presence of the Spaniards. But when the harsh
voice of the Christian drowned the breathings of the
flutes, they paused, looking towards him in affright;
and again, for an instant, the lustrous eyes of the
prophetess fell upon the visage of Don Amador. His
heart heaved with a sickening sensation; and the
impulse
which had before driven to flight his better
judgment, assailed him anew with violence. His
voice shouted with the rest, but it uttered the name
of Leila; and, as if, indeed, he beheld the lost maid
of Almeria, or her phantom, he spurred towards the
prophetess full as madly as when she vanished,
before
,
under the Wall of Serpents. But the train,
scattering
at once, fled in horror from the Spaniards,
escaping into the neighbouring houses. The object
of the outrage, nevertheless, seemed in the power of
the cavaliers; for though the bearers deserted her not,
they fled but slowly under their burden.
But there were protectors nigh, of whom the
Spaniards
had not dreamed; and even Cortes himself
reined back his horse with dismay, when, suddenly,
there sprang from the intersecting street a multitude
of armed nobles, interposing their bodies between
him and his victim; and his eye, running an instant
down the street, beheld them followed by a myriad
of pagans without end.
Back to the manta! cried the general, hastily;
for these dogs are armed, and the men of the turret
have no aid!Hark! hear ye not the howls? Rein
round, and back! They are slaying my Tlascalans!
Before the neophyte could recover from his
confusion
of mind, he found himself turned round and
borne along with the mass of galloping horsemen.
The Mexicans uttered a cry, as with one impulse, and
followed furiously after.
In the crowd of thought that distracted him, Don
Amador remembered the words of Botello, and
believed
that he was, indeed, labouring under some
enchantment
,
which made him a misfortune to his
friends. But not long had he leisure for such
meditations
.
The loud yells of combatants, and the sounds
of arquebuses, in front, increased at each step; and,
quickly turning an angle in the street, he found
himself
in the midst of conflict.
An immense herd of men had surrounded the
manta, and were engaged hand to hand with the
Tlascalans who drew it; while the Spaniards on its
top defended themselves, at a disadvantage, from
many Mexicans, stationed on the terrace of a lofty
house, the dwelling of some superb Tlatoani. So near
indeed was the turret to the walls of this edifice, and
so high above it was the latter, that the huge stones
tumbled from the battlements, fell with great certainty
on its roof, crushing the men of the caravel, and
beating down both the wooden parapet and the
platform
.
At the same time, certain savages, with long
poles, struck at the defenders, and thrusting the points
of their weapons into its breaches, endeavoured to
topple it to the ground. As it rocked thus to and fro,
the violent motion entirely prevented the little
garrison
from making use of their arms; and with wild
cries to their friends, to seize the ropes, dropped by
the Tlascalans, and drag the manta from the palace,
they were seen holding by its sides as well as they
could, receiving, without returning, the blows of their
adversaries. The necessity of obeying their prayer
was seen more plainly than the means; for the crowd
of mingled Tlascalans and Mexicans that surrounded
the crazy machine, was impenetrable; and had it been
so, the appearance of the manta, threatening each
moment
to fall, would have deterred the boldest from
approaching its dangerous vicinity.
As it was, the cavaliers gave what aid they could.
They thrust their spears into the mass of Indians,
shouting to the Tlascalans to disengage themselves
from the enemy. But these shouts, if the allies did
not indeed receive them rather as encouragement to
fight the more fiercely, dissolved not the bloody mele
into its components of friend and foe; and many a
Tlascalan died, that day, pierced through the heart
by spears, which their bearers thought were thrust
through the breasts of Mexicans.
In the meanwhile, the heavy burro was shaken
still more violently; and Don Amador, looking up,
beheld the master of the caravel alone on the top,
(for his sailors were already slain) grasping
despairingly
at a fragment of the parapet; while stones and
darts were showered upon him from the adjoining
terrace, and a heavy pole, aimed by a lusty barbarian,
struck him with merciless severity. His countenance
was pale, his eye haggard, and his honourable scars,
now livid, and almost black, were relieved, like fresh
wounds, on his ghastly brow. His helmet had fallen
to the ground; and the sight of his gray hairs shaking
over his scarred front, as he was tossed up and down,
like one bound hand and foot on the back of a wild
animal, inflamed the neophyte with both rage and
pity.
Loose thy hold! drop upon the Indians, and take
thy chance among them! he cried at the top of his
voice. What ho! friend Gomez! wilt thou lie there,
and perish?
It seemed as if the voice of the cavalier had not
passed unheard; for the wretched man was seen to
raise himself on his knees, and look down to the
fighting
men below, as if meditating a leap; when
suddenly
a great stone fell on the platform with a
crashing
noise, and, at the same moment, the manta,
lurching like an ill-ballasted ship before a hurricane,
staggered over its balance, and fell with a tremendous
shock to the ground. The neophyte thought not of
the miserable combatants, crushed in its fall. He
beheld the voyager, at the instant of its destruction,
hurled from the ruin, as if from some mighty balista
of ancient days, clear over the heads of the Indians,
and dashed, a mangled and hideous corse, almost at
his feet.
God pity thee! he cried, with a shudder; thy
words are made good, thy wager is won,and the
saints that died for the faith, take thee to paradise!
Do ye hear! Ho! to your lances, and back upon
the wolves that are behind us! cried the
trumpet-voice
of Don Hernan. The neophyte turned, and
clapping spurs to Fogoso, charged, with the
cavaliers
,
upon those squadrons which had pursued them;
but, like his companions, he checked his horse with
surprise, and no little consternation, when he beheld
in what manner the infidels were prepared to receive
them. The street was packed with their bodies, as
far as the eye could see; and darts and swords of
obsidian were seen flashing above the heads of the
most distant multitude; but he perceived that those
combatants who stood in front, stretching from wall
to wall, were armed with long spears, mostly, indeed,
with wooden points, sharpened, and fire-hardened,
though some few were seen with copper blades, full
a yard in length, which they handled with singular
and menacing address. Thus, no sooner did the
cavaliers
approach them, than those of the first rank,
dropping
,
like trained soldiers, to their knees, planted the
buts of their weapons on the ground, while those
held by others behind, were thrust over the shoulders
of the kneelers, and presented, together, such a wall
of bristling spines, as caused the bravest to hesitate.
Have we Ottomies of the hills here! cried Don
Hernan, aghast. Or are these weapons, and this
mode of using them, the teaching of the traitor Moor?
A loud shout, mingled with laughs of fierce derision,
testified the triumph of the barbarians; and Cortes,
stung with fury, though hesitating to attack, called
for his musketeers, to break the line of opponents.
Our musketeers are in heaven! carried up in the
fiend of a burro! cried Alvarado, waving his sword,
and eyeing the vaunting herd. Before the days of
saltpetre, true men were wont to shoot their foes
without it.All that is to be done, is to conceive we
are hunting foxes, and leaping over a farmer's wall.
Soho! Saladin, mouse! And all that are brave
gentlemen
,
follow me! Hah!
As he concluded, the madcap soldier spurred his
steed Saladin, and, uttering a war-cry, dashed
fearlessly
on the spearmen. Before he had yet parted
from his companions, Don Amador de Leste, fired,
in spite of his melancholy, by the boldness of the
exploit, and unwilling to be outdone by a cavalier of
the islands, brushed up to his side, and spurring
Fogoso
at the same moment, the two hidalgos
straightway
vaulted among the barbarians.
The show of resolution maintained by the exulting
spearmen, while the Christians stood yet at a distance,
vanished when they beheld those animals, which they
always regarded with a superstitious awe, rushing
upon them with eyes of fury, and feet of thunder. To
this faltering, perhaps, it was owing, that the two
Dons were not instantly slain; for, though the heavy
armour that guarded the chests and loins of the
steeds, could repel the thrust of a wooden spear as
well as the corslets of their riders, no such protection
sheathed their bellies; and had they been there pierced,
their masters must instantly have perished. As it was,
however, the front rank recoiled, and when it closed
again, the cavaliers were seen wielding their swords,
(for in such a mele their spears were useless,) and
striking valiantly about them, but entirely surrounded.
Shall we be thus shamed, my masters? cried
Don Hernan, sharply. Methinks there are two
more
such cavaliers in this company?Santiago, and
at them!
Thus saying, and, with a word, inflaming their
pride, he leaped against the foe, followed by all the
horsemen.
The two leaders in this desperate assault had
vanished,swallowed up, as it were, in the vortex
of contention; and it was not until his friends heard
the voice of Alvarado exclaiming, wildly, as if in
extremity, Help me, De Leste, true friend! for I am
unhorsed! Help me, or the hell-hounds will have me
to the temple!that they were convinced the young
men were living.
Be of good heart! cried Don Amador, (for he
was at his side,) drawing his sabre, with a dexterous
sleight, over the sinewy arms that clutched his
companion
,
and releasing, without doing him harm. If
thou art disarmed, draw my dagger from the sheath
and use it; and fear not that I will leave thee, till
rescued by others.
Who gets my sword, takes the arm along with
it! cried Alvarado, grasping again his chained
weapon
,
and dealing fierce blows, as he spoke. I will
remember the actHo! false friends! forsworn
soldiers
!
condemned Christians! why leave ye us
unsupported
?
Courage, and strike well! we are near, answered
Don Hernan. Press on, friends; trample the curs
to death! Join we our true cavaliers; and then sweep
back for victory!
Where goest thou, now, mad Amador? they
heard the voice of Alvarado exclaiming; Return:
thy horse is shoed with piraguas; but mine sticks fast
in this bog of flesh. Return; for, by heaven, I can
follow thee no further!
Come on, as thou art a true man; for I am sore
beset, and wounded! These words, from the lips
of the neophyte, came yet through the din of yells;
but it seemed to those who listened, that there was
feebleness in the voice that uttered them.
Onward! cried Cortes, with a voice of thunder,
and urging his dun steed furiously over the trampled
barbarians; the young man shall not perish!
A wolf-hound, weary and spent with the chase,
suddenly surrounded by a whole pack of the
destroyers
he has been tracking, and falling under the fangs
of his quarry, may figure the condition of Don
Amador
de Leste, surrounded and seized upon by the
enemy. Nothing but the vigour of powerful and
fiery-spirited steeds could have carried the two
cavaliers
so far into a crowd of warriors almost
compacted
.
While the neophyte gave assistance to his
friend, a dozen blows of the maquahuitl were rained
upon his body; and so closely was he invested
immediately
after, (when, as Alvarado reined in his steed
to await the rest, the two cavaliers were separated,)
that he thought no longer of warding off blows; but
giving himself up to smiting, he trusted to the strength
of his mail for protection. But the heavy bludgeons
bruised where they could not wound; and his
armour
being, at last, broken by the fury of the blows,
the sharp glass penetrated to his flesh, and he began
to bleed. He cast his eye over his shoulder, for his
strength was failing; but the plume of Don Pedro
waved at a distance behind, and the shouts of Cortes
seemed to come from afar. He turned his horse's
head, to retreat; but half a dozen savages,
emboldened
by this symptom of defeat, clutched upon the
bridle; and the hand he raised to smite at them, was
seized by as many others. It was at this moment
that he called out to his companion, in the words we
have recorded; but the answer, if answer were made,
was drowned in the savage yells of exultation, with
which his foes beheld him in their power. He
collected
all his energies, struggled violently, and
striking
the rowels deep, and animating Fogoso with his
voice, hoped, by one bound, to spring clear of his
capturers. The gallant steed vaulted on high, but
fell again to the earth, under the weight of the
many that clung to him: and a dozen new hands
were added to those that already throttled the rider.
Rescue me, if ye be men! he cried, with a voice
that prevailed over the uproar.The cry was echoed
by twenty Christian voices hard by, and a gleam of
hope entered into his heart. Another furious
struggle
,
another plunge of Fogoso, and he thought that the
hands of his enemies were at last unclenching. A
bright weapon flashed before his eyesIt was steel,
and therefore the falchion of a friend!It fell upon
his helmet with irresistible weight; his brain spun,
his eyes darkened, and he fell, or rather was dragged,
like a dead man, from his horse. But ere his eyes
had yet closed, their last glance was fixed on the
visage of the striker; and the sting of benefits
forgotten
was added to the bitterness of death, when,
in this, he perceived the features of Abdalla, the
Moor.
In an instant more, the barbarians parted in terror
before the great Teuctli.
Vol. II. 11
Where art thou, De Leste? he cried. We are
here, to rescue thee!
As he spoke, there sprang, with a fierce bound,
from among the Mexicans, the well-known bay,
Fogoso
,
his foamy sides streaked with gore, the stirrups
rattling against his armed flanks, the reins flying in
the air,but no rider on the saddle.
By heaven, false friends! craven gentlemen! you
have lost the bravest of your supporters! cried Don
Hernan. On! for he may yet live: on! for we will
avenge him!
The band, resolute now in their wrath, plunged
fiercely through the mob. They struck down many
enemies,they trampled upon many corses; but,
among them, they found not the body of De Leste.
CHAPTER XV.
Whether
it was that this attack was caused by
an ebullition of popular fury, which yielded to some
mysterious and religious revulsion of feeling, or
whether
,
indeed, the leaders of the barbarians, persuaded
of the madness of fighting the Christians hand to
hand, and resolved to conquer them rather by famine
than arms, had called off their forces,was a secret
the Spaniards could never penetrate. No sacred
horn was sounded on the pyramid; but, in the very
midst of what seemed their triumph, when the
cavaliers
were nearly exhausted and despairing, it became
manifest that the Mexicans were giving way, and
vanishing, not one by one, but in great clusters, from
the field.
The Christians had no longer the spirit to pursue.
They found the street open; and, dashing through
the few foemen that lingered on the field, they made
their way good to the palace. Before they reached
it, they were joined by a powerful detachment, sent
out to their assistance. They returned together. At
the gate of the court-yard, stood Baltasar, Lazaro,
and the secretary, looking eagerly for the appearance
of Don Amador. His horse was led by a cavalier,
whose countenance was more dejected than the rest.
It was De Morla; and as he flung the bridle to
Lazaro
,
he said,
Hadst
thou
been with thy master, this thing had
not happened; for, though a serving-man, thou
wouldst have remained behind him, when a cavalier
deserted.
Dost thou accuse
me
of deserting the noble
youth? said Alvarado, fiercely. God forbid, I
should shed Christian blood! but, with my sword's
point, I will prove upon thy body, that thou liest!
And upon thine, said De Morla, with calm
indignation
,
I will make good the charge I have uttered,
that thou didst abandon in extremity, when he called
upon thee for aid, the man who had just preserved
thine own life.
Are there not deaths enow among the infidels?
cried Cortes, angrily, that ye must lust after one
another's blood?Peace! and be ye friends,
lamenting
our valiant companion together; for, De Morla,
thou doest a wrong to Alvarado; and, Don Pedro,
thou art a fool, to quarrel with the peevishness of a
mourning friend.
The secretary listened to the cavaliers with a face
of horror; not a word said Lazaro, but as he wiped
the foam from the steed, and, with it, the blood of his
master, he eyed Don Pedro with a dark and
vindictive
scowl. As for Baltasar, his rugged features
quivered
,
and he did not hesitate to stand in the way of
the Tonatiuh, saying,
If any cavalier have, indeed, been false to my
young lord, I, who am but a serving-man, will make
bold to say, he has played false to a gentleman
who would have perilled his life for any Christian in
need; and the act, though it be answered to man,
God will not forgive.Who will tell this to my
master
,
Don Gabriel?
Alvarado, extremely enraged, had raised his spear
to strike the old soldier; but he dropped his arm, at
the last words, and said with great mildness,
Thou art a fool to say this.I lament thy lord;
I loved him, and I did not desert him.
For the remainder of that day, the garrison were
left in peace. No foes appeared on the square; but,
twice or thrice, when parties were sent out to
reconnoitre
,
they were met, at a distance from the palace,
by herds of Mexicans, and driven back to their
quarters.
The desperate situation of the army was now
evident
to the dullest comprehension. The barbarians
had removed from the reach of the artillery, and
drawn, with their bodies, a line of circumvallation
round their victims, patiently waiting for the moment,
when famine should bring them a secure vengeance.
All day, there were seen, on the top of the pyramid,
priests and nobles, now engaged in some rite of
devotion
,
and now looking down, on the besieged, like
vultures on their prey; but without attempting any
annoyance.
The murmurs of the garrison, exasperated by
despair
and want of food, were loud and stern; but Don
Hernan received them only with biting sarcasms.
He bade those who were most mutinous, to depart if
they would; and laughed scornfully at their
confessions
of inability. To those who cried for food, he
answered by pointing grimly to the stone walls, and
the carcasses that lay on the square; or he counselled
them to seek it among their foes. In truth, the
general
knew their helplessness, and in the bitterness of
his heart at being thus foiled and jeoparded, he did
not scruple to punish their discontent, by disclosing
the full misery of their situation. They were
dependent
upon him for life and hope, and he suffered this
dependence to be made apparent. He revealed to
them no scheme of relief or escape; for, in fact, he
had framed none. He was, himself, as desperate as
the rest, seeing nothing before him but destruction,
and not knowing how to avoid it; and what measures
he did take, during these sorrowful hours, were rather
expedients to divert his thoughts, than plans to
diminish
the general distress.
Notwithstanding the memorable fate of the burro,
and the disinclination of the soldiers to die the death
of its garrison, he obstinately commanded those which
were unfinished to be completed, with some additional
contrivances to increase their strength and mobility.
He sent out parties to ransack the deserted houses in
the vicinity, for provisions, though hopeless of
obtaining
any; and he set the idlers to mending their
armour of escaupil, and the smiths to making
arrow-heads
,
as if still determined rather to fight than fly.
He held no councils with his officers, for he knew
they had no projects to advise; and the desperate
resort over which he pondered, of sallying out with
his whole force, and cutting his way through the
opposing foe, was too full of horror to be yet spoken.
Moreover, while Montezuma yet lived, he could not
think his situation entirely hopeless. The surgeon, upon
a re-examination of the king's wounds, had formed
a more favourable prognostic; and this was
strengthened
,
when Montezuma at last awoke from stupor,
and recovered the possession of his intellects. It was
told him, indeed, that the royal Indian, as if resuming
his wits only to cast them away again, had no sooner
become sensible of his condition, and remembered
that his wounds had been inflicted by his people, than
he fell into a frenzy of grief and despair, tearing
away the bandages from his body, and calling upon
his gods to receive him into Tlacocan, the place of
caverns and rivers, where wandered those who died
the death of the miserable. Don Hernan imagined
that these transports would soon rave themselves
away, and persuaded himself that his captive,
yielding
at last to the natural love of life, would yet remain
11 *
in his hands, the hostage of safety, and perhaps the
instrument of authority.
Sorrow dwelt in the palace of Axajacatl; but her
presence was more deeply acknowledged in the
chamber
of Calavar. From the lips of Baltasar,and the
rude veteran wept, when he narrated the fall of the
young cavalier, whom he had himself first taught the
knowledge of arms,Don Gabriel learned the fate of
his kinsman. But he neither wept like Baltasar, nor
joined in the loud lamentations of Marco. His eyes
dilated with a wild expression, his lip fell, he drooped
his head on his breast, and clasping his hands over
his heart, muttered an unintelligible prayer,perhaps
the ejaculation which so often, and so piteously,
expressed his desolation. Then falling down upon his
couch, and turning his face to the wall, he remained
for the whole day and night without speaking a word.
CHAPTER XVI.
The
fate of Don Amador de Leste, though so
darkly written in the hearts of his companions, was
not yet brought to a close. Some of his late friends
deemed only that he had been overpowered and
slain; but others, better acquainted with the customs
of the foe, shuddered over the assurance of a death
yet more awful. They knew that the pride of the
Mexican warrior was, not to slay, but to capture; as
if, indeed, these demibarbarians made war less for
the glory of taking life, than for the honour of
offering
it in sacrifice to the gods. Such, in truth, was the
case; and to this circumstance was it owing that the
Christians were not utterly destroyed, in any one
encounter in the streets of Tenochtitlan. The fury
of their foes was such as may be imagined in a
people
goaded to desperation by atrocious tyranny and
insult, and fighting with foreign oppressors at their
very firesides; yet, notwithstanding the deadly
feeling
of vengeance at their hearts, they never forgot
their duties to their faith; and they forbore to kill,
in the effort to take prisoner. Twice or thrice, at
least, in the course of the war that followed after
these events, the life of Cortes, himself, was in their
hands; and the thrust of a javelin, or the stroke of a
bludgeon, would have freed them from the destroyer.
But they neither struck nor thrust; they strove to
bear him of alive, as the most acceptable offering
they could carry to the temple; thus always giving
his followers an opportunity to rescue him out of their
grasp. Every captive thus seized and retained, died
a death too terrible for description; and high or
low,the base boor, and the noble hidalgo, alike,
expiated, on the stone of sacrifice, the wrongs done
to the religion of Mexitli.
Knowing so much of the customs of Anahuac, and
not having discovered his body, the more experienced
cavaliers were convinced that Don Amador de Leste
had not yet enjoyed the happiness of death; they
persuaded themselves that he had been taken alive,
and was preserved for sacrifice. Many a Castilian
eye, that afternoon, was cast upon the pyramid,
watching the steps, and eagerly examining the
persons
of all who ascended.But no victim was seen
borne upon their shoulders.
When the cavalier of Cuenza opened his eyes, after
the stunning effects of the blow were over, it was in
a confusion of mind, which the objects about him,
or, perhaps, the accession of a hot fever,the result
of many severe wounds and contusions,soon
converted
into delirium. He lay,his armour removed,
on a couch in a spacious apartment, but so
darkened
,
that he could not distinguish the countenances
of two or three dusky figures which seemed to bend
over him. His thoughts were still in the battle; and,
in these persons, he perceived nothing less than
Mexican
warriors still clutching at his body. He started
up, and calling out, Ho, Fogoso! one leap more
for thy master, caught fiercely at the nearest of the
individuals. But he had overrated his strength; and,
almost before a hand was laid upon him, he fell back,
fainting, on the bed.
Dost
thou
strike me, too, false villain? he again
exclaimed, as his distempered eyes pictured, in one
silent visage, the features of Abdalla. Be thou
accursed
for thy ingratitude, and live in hell for ever!
A murmur of voices, followed by the sound of
retreating
steps, was heard; and in the silence which
ensued, his fancy became more disordered,
presenting
him phantasms still more peculiar.
Is this death? he muttered, and lie I now in
the world of shadows? God be merciful to me a
sinner
!
Pity and pardon me, O Christ, for I have fought
for thy faith. Take me from this place of blackness,
and let me look on the light of bliss!
A gentle hand was laid upon his forehead, a low
sigh breathed on his cheek; and suddenly a light,
flashing up as from some expiring cresset, revealed
to his wondering eyes the face and figure of the
mysterious
prophetess.
O God! art thou indeed a fiend? and dost thou
lead me, from the land of infidels, to the prison-house
of devils? he cried, again starting up, clasping his
hands, and gazing wildly on the vision. Speak to
me, thou that livest not; for I know, thou art Leila!
As he uttered these incoherent words, the figure,
bending a little away, and fastening upon his own,
eyes of strange meaning, in which pity struggled with
terror, seemed, gradually, to fade into the air; until,
as suddenly as it had flashed into brightness, the light
vanished, and all was left in darkness.
From this moment, the thoughts of the cavalier
wandered with tenfold wildness; and he fell into a
delirium, which presented, as long as it lasted, a
succession
of exciting images. Now he struggled, in
the hall of his own castle of Alcornoque, or the
Cork-tree
,
with the false Abdalla, the knee of the
Almogavar
on his breast, and the Arab poniard at his throat,
while all the time, the perfidious Jacinto stood by,
exhorting his father to strike; now he stood among
burning sands, fighting with enraged fiends, over the
dead body of his knight, Calavar, to protect the
beloved
corse from their fiery fingers; now the
vanished
Leila sat weeping by his side, dropping upon his
fevered lips the juice of pleasant fruits, or now she
came to him in the likeness of the pagan Sibyl,
beckoning
him away, with melancholy smiles, to a distant
bay; while, ever, when he strove to rise and follow,
the page Jacinto, converted into a giant, and
brandishing
a huge dagger, held him back with a lion's
strength and ferocity.
With such chimeras, and a thousand others, equally
extravagant, disturbing his brain, he passed through
many hours; and then, as a torpor like that of death
gradually stole over him, benumbing his deranged
faculties, the same gentle hand, the same low
suspiration
,
which had soothed him before, but without
the countenance which had maddened, returned to
him, and made pleasant the path to annihilation.
CHAPTER XVII.
From
a deep slumber, that seemed, indeed, death,
for it was dreamless, the cavalier, at last, awoke,
somewhat confused, but no longer delirious; and,
though greatly enfeebled, entirely free from fever.
A yellow sunbeam,the first or the last glimmering
of day, he knew not which,played through a
narrow
casement, faintly illuminating the apartment, and
falling especially upon a low table at his side,
whereon
,
among painted and gilded vessels of strange form,
he perceived his helmet, and other pieces of armour,
as well as a lute, of not less remembered
workmanship
.
He raised his eyes to the attendant, who sat
musing, hard by, and, with a thrill and exclamation
of joy, beheld the Moorish page, Jacinto.
Is it thou, indeed, my dear knave Jacinto! whom
I thought in the maws of infidels? he cried, starting
up. And how art thou; and how is thy lord, Don
Gabriel, to-day? Tell me, where hast thou been,
these two troubled days? and how didst thou return?
By my faith, this last bout was somewhat hard, and
I have slept long!
Leave not thy couch, and speak not too loud,
noble master, said the page, kneeling, and kissing
his hand,for thou art sick and wounded, and here
only art thou safe.
Ay, now indeed! said Don Amador, with a
sudden
and painful consciousness of his situation, I
remember me. I was struck down, and made a
prisoner. What good angel brought me into thy
company? Thanks be to heaven! for my hurts are
not much; and I will rescue thee from captivity.
I am not a captive, seor, said the boy, gently.
Are we, then, in the palace?Where are our
friends?Am I not a prisoner?
Seor, we are far from the palace of Axajacatl.
But grieve not; for here thou art with thy servants.
Thou speakest to me in riddles, said the novice,
with a disturbed and bewildered countenance. Have
I been dreaming? Am I enchanted? Am I living, and
in my senses?
The saints be praised, thou art indeed, said the
page, fervently; though, both nights, and all day,
till the blessed potion set thee asleep, I had no hopes
thou wouldst ever recover.
Both nights! echoed Don Amador, fixing his
eyes inquiringly on the boy; Has a nighthave
two nights passed over me, and wert thou, then, with
me, during it all?Ha! Was it thine acts of sorcery,
which brought me those strange and melancholy
visions? Didst
thou
conjure up to me the image of
Leila?That priestess, that very supernatural
prophetess
By
heaven! as I see thee, so saw I her
standing at my bed-side, in some magical light, which
straightway turned to darkness. Didst thou not see
her? Tell me boy, art thou indeed an enchanter?
Prepare me thy spells again, reveal me her fate, and
let me look on the face of Leila!
As the cavalier spoke, he strove in his eagerness
to rise from the couch.
Seor, said the page, a little pleasantly, if thou
wilt have me satisfy thy questions, thou must learn to
acknowledge me as thy physician and jailor; and
give me such obedience as thou wouldst, formerly,
have claimed of me. Rise not up, speak not aloud,
and give not way to the fancies of fever; for here
are no priestesses, and no Leilas. I will sing to thee,
if that will content thee with bondage. But now
thou must remain in quiet, and be healed of thy
wounds.
I tell thee, my boy Jacinto, went on the
cavalier
,
wounds or no wounds, jailed or not jailed, I am
in a perplexity of mind, which, if thou art able, I
must command, or, what is the same thing, beseech
thee to remove. First, therefore, what house is this?
and where is it? (whether on the isle Mexico, the lake
side, the new world, or the old, or, indeed, in any
part of the earth at all?) Secondly, how got'st thou
into it? Thirdly, how came I hither myself?and
especially, what good Christian did snatch my body
out of the paws of those roaring lions, the Mexicans,
when I was hit that foul and assassin-like blow by
by
Seor, said the page, not doubting but that his
patron had paused for want of breath, to answer
all these questions, is more than I am allowed. All
that I can say, is, that if prudent and obedient, (I say
obedient, noble and dear master, continued the boy
archly, for now you are my prisoner,) you are
safer in this dungeon than are your Spanish friends
in their fortress,reduced to captivity, indeed, but
preserved from destruction
By the false, traitorous, and most ungrateful
knave, Abdalla, thy father! exclaimed the
neophyte
,
with a loud and stern voice; for just as he had
hesitated to wound the ears of the boy, he beheld,
slowly stalking into the apartment, and eyeing him
over Jacinto's shoulder, the Almogavar himself; and
the epithets of indignation burst at once from his lips.
Jacinto started back, alarmed; but Abdalla
approached
,
and regarding the wounded cavalier with an
unmoved
countenance, motioned the boy to retire.In
an instant the Moor of Barbary and the Spaniard of
Castile were left alone together.
Shall I repeat my words, thou base and cut-throat
infidel? cried Don Amador, rising so far as to place
his feet on the floor, though still sitting on the
platform
which supported his mattress, and speaking
with the most cutting anger. Was it not enough,
that thou wert a renegade to the rest, but thou must
raise thy Judas-hand against thy benefactor?
My benefactor indeed! said Abdoul calmly, and
with the most musical utterance of his voice. Though
I wear the livery of the pagans; (He had on an
armed tunic, somewhat similar to that of
Quauhtimotzin
,
though without a plume to his head, and
looked not unlike to a Mexican warrior of high
degree
;)
and though I am, by birth, the natural
enemy
of thee and thine, yet have I not forgot that thou
art
my benefactor! I remember, that, when a brutal
soldier struck at me with his lance, thy hand was
raised to protect me from the shame; I remember,
when a thousand weapons were darting at my
prostrate
body on the pyramid of Zempoala, that thou
didst not disdain to preserve me; I remember, that,
when I fled from the anger of Don Hernan, thou
offeredst
me thine intercession. Seor, I have forgotten
none of this; nor have I forgotten, he went on,
with earnest gratitude, that, to these favours, thou
didst add the greater ones, of shielding my feeble
child from stripes, from ruin, and perhaps from death.
This have I not forgotten, this can I never forget!
The name of Spaniard is a curse on my ears; I hate
thy people, and, when God gives me help, I will slay,
even to the last man! but I remember, that thou art
my benefactor, and the benefactor of my child.
And dost thou think, said the neophyte, that
these oily words will blind me to thy baseness? or
that they can deceive me into belief, when thy actions
have so foully belied them? Cursed art thou,
misbelieving
Moor! an ingrate and apostate; and, had
I no cause, in mine own person, to know thy perfidy,
it should be enough to blazon thy villany, that thou
hast, on thine own confession, deserted the standard
of Christ, and the arms of Spain, to enlist in the
ranks of their pagan foes!
The standard of Christ, said the Moor, with
emphasis
,
waves not over the heads of the Spaniards,
but the banner of a fiend, bloody, unjust, and
accursed
,
whom they call by His holy name, and who
bids them to defile and destroy; while the Redeemer
proclaimeth only good-will and peace to all men.
Have thy good heart and thy strong mind been so
deluded? Canst thou, in truth, believe, that these
oppressors
of a harmless people, these slayers, who
raise the cross of heaven on the place of blood, and
call to God for approval, when their hands are
smoking
with the blood of his creatures, are the followers
of Christ the peaceful, Christ the just, Christ the
holy? These friends whom thou hast followed, are
not Christians; and God, whom they traduce and
belie in all their actions, has given them over to the
punishment of hypocrites and blasphemers, to
sufferings
miserable and unparalleled, to deaths dreadful
and memorable! May it be accomplished,Amen!
Dost thou speak this to
me
, vile Almogavar! of
my friends and countrymen? Dost thou curse them
thus in my presence, most unworthy apostate?
Sorrowful be their doom, and quickly may it
come upon them! cried Abdalla, with ferocious
fervour, for what are they, that it should not be
just? and what am I, that I should not pray that it
be accomplished? I remember the days of Granada!
I remember the sack of the Alhambra! I remember
Vol. II. 12
the slaughter of the Alpujarras! and I have not
forgotten
the mourning exiles, driven from those green
hills, to die among the sands of Africa, the clime of
their fathers, but to them a land of strangers! I
remember me how the lowly were given to the
scourge, and the princely to the fires of Inquisitors,
our children to spears, our wives to ravishers and
murderers!Cursed be they that did these things,
even to the last generation!
The cavalier was amazed and confounded at the
vehement and lofty indignation of the Morisco; and
as the form of Abdoul-al-Sidi swelled with wrath, and
his countenance darkened under the gloomy
recollection
,
he seemed to Don Amador rather like one of
those mountain princes, who had defied the
conquerors
,
to the last, among the Alpujarras, than a poor
herdsman of Fez, deriving his knowledge, and his
fury, only from the incitations of exiles. His
embarrassment
was also increased by a secret
consciousness
,
that the Moor had cause for his hate and his
denunciations. He answered him, however, with a
severe voice:
In these ills and sufferings,
thou
hadst no part,
unless thou hast lied to me; having been a child of
the desert, afar from the sufferers of Granada.
I
lied
to thee, then, said Abdalla, elevating his
figure, and regarding the cavalier with proud
tranquillity
.
From the beginning to the end, was I a
chief among the mourners and rebels,the first to
strike, as I am now the last to curse, the oppressor,
a child of the desert, only when I had no more to
suffer among the Alpujarras; and thou mayst know,
now, that my fury is as deep as it is just,for
the poor Abdalla is no Almogavar of Barbary, but a
Zegri of Granada!
A Zegri of Granada! cried Don Amador, with
surprise.
A Zegri of Granada, and a prince among Zegris!
said the Moor, with a more stately look, though with
a voice of the deepest sorrow; one whose fathers
have given kings to the Alhambra, but who hath
lived to see his child a menial in the house of his foe,
and both child and father leagued with, and lost
among, the infidels of a strange land, in a world
unknown!
I thought, by heaven! said the cavalier, eyeing
the apostate with a look almost of respect, that that
courage of thine in the pirate rover, did argue thee
to be somewhat above the stamp of a common boor;
and therefore, but more especially in regard of thy
boy, did I give thee consideration myself, and enforce
it, as well as I could, to be yielded by others. But,
by the faith which thou professest, sir Zegri! be thou
ignoble or regal in thy condition, I have not forgotten
that, by the blow which has made me (as it seems to
me, I am,) thy prisoner, thou hast shown thyself
unworthy of nobility; and I tell thee again, with
disgust
and indignation, that thou hast done the act of a
base and most villanous caitiff!
Dost thou still say so? replied the Zegri, mildly.
I have acknowledged, that no gratitude can repay
thy benefactions; this do I still confess; and yet have
I done all to requite thee. Thou lookest on me with
amazement. What is my crime, noble benefactor?
What is thy crime? Art
thou
bewitched, too?
Slave of an ingrate, didst thou not, when I was
already overpowered, smite me down with thine own
weapon?
I did,heaven be thanked! said the Moor,
devoutly
.
Dost thou acknowledge it, and thank heaven
too? said the incensed cavalier.
I acknowledge it, and I thank heaven! said
Abdalla, firmly. Thou saidst, thou wert already
overpowered. Wert thou not in the hands of the
Mexicans, beyond all hope of rescue?
Doubtless, I was, replied the neophyte; for
Cortes was afar, and Alvarado full three spears'
length behind. Nevertheless, I did not despair of
maintaining the fight, until my friends came up to my
relief.
Thou wert a captive! cried the Zegri,
impetuously
,a
living captive in the hands of Mexicans!
Dost thou know the fate of a prisoner in such hands?
By my faith, said Don Amador, I have heard,
they put their prisoners to the torture.
They sacrifice them to the gods! cried the
Moor. And the death, he continued, his swarthy
visage whitening with horror, the death is of such
torment and terror as thou canst not conceive; but
I
can, for I have seen it! Now hear me: I saw my
benefactor a captive, and I knew his life would end
on the stone of sacrifice, offered up, like that of a
beast, to false and fiendish gods! I say, I saw thee
thus; I knew this should be thy doom; and I did all
that my gratitude taught me, to save thee. I struck
thee down, knowing, that if I slew thee, the blow
would be that of a true friend, and that thou shouldst
die like a soldier, not like a fatted sheep. Heaven,
however, gave me all that I had dared to hope: I
harmed thee not; and yet the Mexicans believed that
death had robbed them of a victim. I harmed thee
not; and the heathens suffered me to drag away what
seemed a corse; but which lived, and was
my
benefactor
,the
saviour of myself, and the protector of
my child!
As Abdalla concluded these words, spoken with
much emphasis and feeling, a tear glistened in his
eye; and the neophyte, starting up and eagerly
grasping his hand, exclaimed,
Now, by heaven! I see all the wisdom and truth
of thy friendship; and I beg thy pardon for
whatever
insulting words my folly has caused me to speak.
And, now that I know the blow was struck for such
a purpose, I confess to thee, as thou saidst thyself, it
would have been true gratitude and love, though it
had killed me outright.
I have done thee even more service than this,
said the Zegri, calmly; but, before I speak it, I
must demand of thee, as a Christian and honourable
soldier, to confess thyself my just and true captive.
Thy captive! cried Don Amador. Dost thou
hold me then as a prisoner, and not as a guest and
friend? Dost thou check my thankfulness in the
bud, and cancel thy services, by making me thy
thrall?
I will not answer thy demands, said Abdalla.
I call upon thee, as a noble and knightly soldier,
fairly captured, in open war, by my hands, to
acknowledge
thyself my captive; and, as such, in all things,
justly at my disposition.
If thou dost exact it of me, said the cavalier,
regarding him with much surprise and sorrow, I
must, as a man of honour, so acknowledge myself.
But I began to think better of thee, Abdalla!
And, as a prisoner, to whose honour is confided
the charge of his own keeping, thou engagest to
remain in captivity, without abusing the confidence
which allows such license, by any efforts to escape?
Dost thou demand this much of me? said Don
Amador, with mortified and dejected looks. If thou
art thyself resolved to remain in the indulgence of
thy treason, thou surely wilt not think to keep me
from my friends, in their difficulties? and especially
from my poor kinsman; who is now greatly
disordered
,
and chiefly, I think, because thou hast robbed
him of Jacinto.
This am I not called upon to answer, said
Abdalla
,
gravely. I only demand of thee, what thou
knowest thou canst not honourably refuse,thy
knightly gage, to observe the rules of captivity,
until
such time as I may think proper to absolve and
free thee.
Sir Almogavar, or sir Zegri, or whatsoever thou
art, said the cavalier, folding his arms, and
surveying
his jailor sternly, use the powers which thou
hast, thy chains, and thy magical arts; for I believe
thou dealest with the devil;get me ready thy
fetters
,
and thy dungeon. Thou hast the right so to
12 *
use me, and I consent to the same; but I will gage
thee no word to keep in bonds, inglorious and at
ease, while my friends are in peril. However great
the service thou hast done to me, I perceive thou art
a traitor. I command thee, therefore, that thou have
me chained and immured forthwith; for, with God's
will and help, I will escape from thee as soon as
possible, and especially, whensoever my friends come
to assist me.
I grant thee this privilege, when thy friends
come near to us, said Abdalla, coolly, whether
thou art chained or not. It is not possible thou canst
escape, otherwise, at all. Thou art far from the
palace, ignorant of the way, and, besides, divided
from it by a wall of Mexicans, who cannot be
numbered
.
What I ask thee, is for thy good, and for the
good of myself, and Jacinto. If thou leave this house,
thou wilt be immediately seized, and carried to the
stone of sacrifice.
Don Amador shuddered, but said,
I trust in God! and the thought of this fate shall
not deter me.
Go then, if thou wilt, said the Zegri, haughtily.
The service I have done thee, has not yet released
me from thy debt; and thou canst yet command me.
Begone, if thou art resolute: the door is open; I
oppose
thee not. Preserve thy life, if thou canst; and
when thou art safe at the garrison, remember, that
Abdoul-al-Sidi, and the boy Jacinto, have taken thy
place on the altar of victims.
What dost thou mean? I understand thee not.
What meanest thou?
Even that thou canst not escape, without the same
being made known to the Mexicans; and that it cannot
be made known to this vindictive people, that I have
robbed them of their prey, without the penalty of my
own life, and that of Jacinto, being immediately
executed
.
When thou fliest, the father and the son
perish.
Dost thou speak me this in good faith? said the
cavalier, greatly troubled. God forbid I should
bring harm to thee, and especially to the boy. If I
give thee my gage,thou wilt not hold me bound to
refrain from joining my friends, should I be so
fortunate
as to see them pass by, and am persuaded,
the Mexicans will not discover thou hast
harboured
me?
If they pass by, I will myself open the doors,
said Abdalla; for I protest to thee, I keep thee here
only to ensure thy security.
Hark'ee, sir MoorDon Hernan is about to
retreat
.
Dost thou intend I shall remain in captivity
a single victim among the barbarianswhile my
countrymen are flying afar, perhaps returning to
Christendom?
I swear to thee, seor, said the Zegri, earnestly,
that, when the Spaniards fly from this city, thou
shalt be free to fly with them. I repeat, I make thee
a prisoner, to prevent thy becoming a victim.
And what hinders that we do not fly together
to the palace? Thy knowledge may conduct us
through the streets by night; and, with my head, I
will engage thee a free pardon, and friendly
reception
.
God hath commissioned me to the work, and it
shall go on! said the Moor, with solemn emphasis.
I know that thou couldst not save me from the fury
of Don Hernan: he would grant thee my life at
midnight
,
and, on the morrow, thou wouldst find me dead
in the court-yard. Fly, if thou wilt, and leave me to
perish by the hands of Mexicans: Spaniards shall
drink my blood no more!
I give thee my gage, said the cavalier, with
this understanding, then, that I am free to fly,
whenever
I may do so without perilling thy life, and the
life of Jacinto.
And thou wilt hold to this pledge, like a true
cavalier
?
demanded Abdalla, quickly.
Surely, I cannot break my plighted word!
God be thanked! cried the Zegri, grasping the
hand of the cavalier, for, by this promise, thou
hast saved thy life! Remain here; Jacinto shall be
thy jailor, thy companion, thy servant. Be content
with thy lot, and thank God; for thou art the only
brand plucked out of the burning, while all the rest
shall perish.God be praised!I save my
benefactor
!
With these exclamations of satisfaction, Abdalla
departed from the chamber.
CHAPTER XVIII.
The
cavalier pondered, in perplexity, over the
words of Abdalla; and, the longer he reflected, the
more he began to lament his captivity, and doubt the
wisdom of his gage.
It is apparent to me, he soliloquized, that my
countrymen are in greater jeopardy than I before
apprehended
,
and that it has been the plot of this subtle
Moor, (whom I confess, however, to have something
elevated and noble in his way of thinking, and much
gratitude of heart, though of a mistaken character,)
to keep me out of harm's way, while the Mexicans
are murdering my companions. Heaven forgive me
my rash parole, if this be true; for such safety
becomes
dishonour and ignominy. I will talk with
him further on the subject; and if I find he hath thus
schemed to preserve me, at such a price of
degradation
,
I will straightway revoke my engagement, as
being wrung from me by deceit, and quite impossible
to be fulfilled.I marvel where loiters the boy, Jacin
to? Methinks I could eat something now, for I know
not how long it is since I have tasted food:an
orange, or a bunch of grapes, were not amiss.But,
heaven save me! I have heard oranges do not grow
in this land; and, perhaps these poor Moriscos are
no better off than my friends at the palace. God help
them! for the Mexicans fight like Turks; and, once
or twice, that evening of the conflagration, I thought
I had got me again into the trenches of Rhodes; and
as for those knaves that wounded me, never did I see
more valiant devils. I am glad I left my knight so
possessed of his wits.That Botello doth seem very
clearly to have apprehended my fate, though the
mishap be not so miserable as death. Truly, there
did, a third time, war come out of peace; and yet, I
assure myself, that, this time, it was brought about
by Don Hernan rushing against that supernatural
creature, that looks on me in the street, and eyes me
even by my bed-side.
The cavalier was startled from his revery by a
light step, and as the curtain was drawn aside from
the door, he almost thought, for an instant, that he
beheld the visage of the priestess, peering through
its folds. A second glance, however, showed him
the features of the Moorish page, who came in,
bearing
a little basket of fruits and Indian confections, as
if anticipating his wants. These Jacinto placed
before
him, and then sat down at his feet.
For a few moments, Don Amador, in the
satisfaction
of the boy's presence forgot many of his
perplexities
;
but observing, at last, that Jacinto's smiles
were ever alternating with looks of distress and
alarm, and that, sometimes, he surveyed his
imprisoned
master with eyes of great wildness, the
cavalier
began again to recur to his condition, to the
mysteries which surrounded him, and especially to
the suspicions, which so often attributed to the page
the possession of magical arts.
Thou saidst, Jacinto, he abruptly exclaimed,
after thrusting aside the almost untasted food, and
regarding the boy with a penetrating look, that thou
wert for the two last nights at my bed-side?God
be good to me! for 'tis an evil thing to be benighted
so long!
Seor, I was.
And, during all that time, I was entirely
dispossessed
of my wits?
Seor mio, yes. But, now, heaven be thanked,
your honour will recover!
And, thou art sure, I did not labour more under
enchantment than fever?
The page smiled, but very faintly, and without
replying.
To me, it seems no longer possible to doubt, said
the cavalier, that I have been, divers times, of late,
entirely bewitched; and that thou hast had some
agency in my delusions.
Jacinto smiled more pleasantly, and seemed to
forget
the secret thoughts which had agitated him.
Dost thou, demanded the cavalier, know aught
of a certain supernatural priestess, that goes about
the streets of this town, in pagan processions, followed
by countless herds of nobles and warriors?
The page hesitated, while replying
I have indeed heard of such a creature, andI
may say,I have seen her.
Thou hast seen her!Is she mortal?
Surely, I think so, noble seor, replied Jacinto,
with increasing embarrassment.
For my part, said the novice, with a deep sigh
and a troubled aspect, I am almost quite convinced,
that she is a spectre, and an inhabitant of hell, sent
forth upon the earth to punish me with much affliction,
and, perhaps, with madness. For I think she is the
spirit of Leila; and her appearance in the guise of a
pagan goddess, or pagan priestess,the one or the
other,shows me, that she whom I loved, dwells not
with angels, but with devils. This is a thought,
continued
the cavalier, mournfully, that burns my heart
as with a coal; and if God spare my life, and return
me to mine own land, I will devote my estates to buy
masses for her soul; for surely she cannot have fallen
from sin into irreparable wo, but only into a
punishment
for some heresy, the fault of bad instruction,
which may be expiated.
Jacinto regarded the distressed visage of his patron
with concern, and with indecision, as if impelled, and
yet afraid, to speak what might remove his anguish.
Then, at last, moved by affection, and looking up with
arch confidence to Don Amador, he said,
Seor, I can relieve you of this unhappiness.
This is no spirit, but a woman, as I know full well,
for I am in the secret.I am not sure that it will not
offend my father, to divulge such a secret to any
Spaniard: yet can its revealment prejudice none.
Know, seor, and use not this confession to my
father's injury, that all this interlude of the prophetess,
devised by the Mexican nobles and priests, with my
father's counsel and aid, is a scheme to inflame the
people with fresh devotion and fury against the
Spaniards
,
your countrymen. For, being very
superstitious
and credulous, the common people are easily
persuaded that their gods have sent them a
messenger
,
to encourage and observe their valour; as, it is
fabled, they have done in former days. The
prophetess
is but a puppet in their hands.
The cavalier eyed the young speaker steadfastly,
until Jacinto cast his looks to the earth.
Set this woman before me; let me look upon her,
he said, gravely, and yet with earnestness.
The page returned his gaze with one of confusion,
and even affright.
Thou wilt not think to deceive me, continued
his patron, after confiding to me so much? Know
thou, that it will rejoice me, relieving my mind of
many pangs, to find that thy words are true, and to
look upon this most beauteous, and, to my eyes, this
most supernatural, barbarian. If she be a living
creature, thou hast it in thy power to produce her,
for she dwells in this house. I say this, Jacinto, on
strong persuasion of the fact, for last night I beheld
her, and did almost touch her!
Seor, said the boy, briskly, that was one of the
fancies of thy delirium. It was my poor self thou
wert looking on. Twenty times, or more, didst thou
call to me, as being the prophetess; and as often
didst thou see in me some other strange creature.
Now, I was my lord Don Gabriel, your worship's
kinsman; now, some lady that your honour loved;
now, an angel, bringing you succour in battle; now,
my lord's little brother; now, his enemy;and, twice
or thrice, I was my own poor self, only that I was
killing my lord with a dagger,as if I could do any
wrong to my master!
Is this the truth, indeed? said the cavalier,
dolorously
.
I could have sworn, that I saw that
woman
,
and that I was very sane, when I saw her. As
for the after-visions, I can well believe, that they
were the phantasms of fever, being very extravagant,
and but vaguely remembered.Thou deniest, then,
that thou hast the power of casting spells?
The page smiled merrily, for he perceived his
patron was relieved of one irrational distress, and,
banteringly, replied,
I will not say
that;
I can do many things my
lord would not think, and I know many he would
not dream.
The cavalier was too sad and too simple-minded
to jest.
I believe thee, he said, seriously; for, in every
thing, thou art a miracle and mystery. Why is it,
that thou hast obtained such a command over my
affections? Why is it, that I have come to regard
thee, not as a boy, young and foolish, but as one ripe
in years and wisdom? It must needs be, because
thou derivest thy power and thy knowledge from
those astral and magical arts, which I once esteemed
so vain; for I remember me, that, at thy years, I
was, myself, not half so much advanced in intelligence
and art, but was, on the contrary, quite a dull and
foolish boy.
It all comes of my music, said the page: for that
is a talent which matures faster than any other, and
drags others along with it; besides giving one great
skill in touching hearts. Your worship remembers,
how soon young David gained the love of the Jewish
king, and how he would have cured him of his
melancholy
,
but that Saul had a bad heart. Now, my lord
seems, to me, to have, like this king, an evil spirit
troubling him; and perhaps, if he will let me, I can
sing it away, with the ballad of the Knight and the
Page; for my lord's heart is good.
The Knight and the Page? I have never heard
thee sing that, said Don Amador, somewhat
indifferently
.
What is it about?
It is about a brave cavalier, that loved a noble
lady, who loved him; but being made to believe her
false to her vows, he went to the wars to die, followed
by a little page, whom he thought the only true friend
he had left in the world.
By my faith, said Don Amador, regarding the
boy kindly, in this respect, methinks, I am, at
present
,
somewhat like that knight; for thou, that art,
likewise, a little page, seemest to be the only friend
I have left in the worldthat is, in this city,that is
to say, in this part of it; for I have much confidence
in the love of several at the palace, notwithstanding
that I think some others were a little backward in
supporting me, when beset, that evil day, by the
barbarians
.Was
he a Spanish knight? and of what
parts?
Of the Sierra Morena, at some place where the
Jucar washes its foot.
In good truth! cried the cavalier, that is the
very river that rolls by Cuenza; and herein, again,
is there another parallel.But I should inform thee,
that, when the mountain reaches so far as the Jucar,
and runs up along its course, it is then called the
Sierra of Cuenza, and not Morena. But this is a
small matter. I shall be as glad to hear of the knight
of Jucar, as of one of my ancestors.
He resembled my lord still more, said the page,
for he had fallen, fighting the infidel, very grievously
wounded; and his little page remained at his side, to
share his fate.
Vol. II. 13
That
I
have, in a manner, fallen, and, as I may
say, fighting the infidel, is true; but by no means can
it be said, that I am grievously wounded. These
cuts, that I have on my body, are but such scratches
as one might make with a thorn; and, were it not
for my head, which doth ever and anon ring much
like to a bell, and ache somewhat immoderately, I
should think myself well able to go out fighting again;
not at all regarding my feebleness, which is not much,
and my stiff joints, which a little exercise would
greatly reduce into suppleness.
It was the resemblance of my lord's situation to
the knight of Jucar's, that reminded me of the
roundelay
,
said Jacinto, taking up his lute, and stringing
it into accord; and now your worship shall
represent
the wounded knight, and I the young page that
followed him.But your worship should suppose me,
instead of being a boy, to be a woman in disguise.
A woman in disguise! said the cavalier: Is
the page, then, the false mistress? There should be
very good cause to put a woman in disguise; for,
besides that it robs her, to appearance, if not
absolutely
,
of the natural delicacy of her sex, it forces her
to be a hypocrite. A deceitful woman is still more
odious than a double-faced man.
But this lady had great cause, said Jacinto,
seeing that love and sorrow, together, forced her
into the henchman's habit, as my lord will presently
see.
So saying, with a pleasant smile, the minstrel struck
the lute, and sang the following little
ROMANCE
OF
THE KNIGHT AND THE PAGE.
1.
A Christian knight, in the Paynim land,
Lay bleeding on the plain;
The fight was done, and the field was won,
But not by the Christian train:
The cross had vail'd to the crescent,
The Moorish shouts rose high,
`
Lelilee! Lelilee!
'but the Christian knight
Sent up a sadder cry.
My castle lies on Morena's top,
Jucar is far away:
My lady will rue for her vows untrue
But God be good for aye!
Young page! thou followest well;
These dog-howls heed not thou.
`
Lelilee! Lelilee!
'
Get thee hence to my lady now.
Tell her this blood, that pours a flood,
My heart's true faith doth prove
My corse to earth, my sighs to thee,
My heart to my lady love!
2.
The page, he knelt at the Christian's side,
And sorely sobb'd he then:
The faithless love can truer prove
Than hosts of faithful men.
The cross has vail'd to the crescent,
The Moorish shouts are high,
`
Lelilee! Lelilee!
'but the love untrue
Hath yet another cry.
Thy castle lies on Morena's top,
Jucar is far away;
But dies the bride at her true lord's side,
Now God be good for aye!
The page that followeth well,
Repeats the unbroken vow
`
Lelilee! Lelilee!
'
Oh, look on thy lady now!
For now this blood, that pours a flood,
Doth show her true love's plight.
My soul to God, my blood to thine
My life for my dying knight.
Is that
all?
said the cavalier, when Jacinto had
warbled out the last line. There should have been
another stanza, to explain what was the cause of
separation
,
as well as how it happened that the lady came
to follow the knight, as a servant; neither of which
circumstances is very manifest.
Seor, said Jacinto, if all the story had been
told, it would have made a book. It is clear, that an
evil destiny separated the pair, and that love sent the
lady after her lord.
Be thou a conjuror or not, said Don Amador,
musingly, thou hast the knack ever to hit upon
subjects, as well in thy songs as in thy stories, which
both provoke my curiosity, and revive my
melancholy
.
My
castle, as I may say, doth `lie on
Morena's
top,'that is to say, on the ridge of Cuenza;
and Jucar is, indeed, `far away;' but heaven hath
left me no lady-love, either to die with me among the
infidels, by whom I am made to bleed, or to lament
me at home. An evil destiny (
how
evil I know not,
and yet do I dread, more dark than that which
prevails
with a jealous heart,) hath separated me from
one whom I loved,and, doubtless, hath separated
me for ever. The cavalier sighed deeply, bent his
eyes for a moment on the ground, and then raising
them, with a solemn look, to the page, said abruptly,
I have come to be persuaded, altogether beyond
the contradiction of my reason, that thou hast,
somehow
,
and, perhaps, by magical arts, obtained a
knowledge
of the history of my past life. If thou knowest
aught of the fate of Leila, the lamented maid of
Almeria, I adjure thee to reveal thy knowledge, and
without delay! Thou shakest thy head.Wherefore
didst thou refuse to finish the story of her who bore
her name, and who dwelt in the same city?
My lord will be angry with me, said the page,
rising in some perturbation,I have deceived him!
I am sorry to know thou couldst be, in any way,
guilty of deceit, though I do readily forgive thee;
charging thee, however, at all times, to remember,
that any deceitfulness is but a form of mendacity, and
therefore as mean and degrading as it is sinful.In
what hast thou deceived me?
When I told my lord the story of Leila, and
perceived
how it disturbed him, said Jacinto, with a
faltering voice, I repented me, and told him a thing
that was not true, to appease him. The Leila of
whom I spoke, had dwelt in Almeria within a year
past; and, perhaps, she was the maid that my lord
remembered.
As the page made this confession, Don Amador
sprang eagerly to his feet, and, as he seized the
speaker's arm, cried, with much agitation,
Dost thou tell me the truth? and does she live?
God be praised for ever! doth the maiden live?
She lived, when my father brought me from
Barbary
Heaven be thanked! I will ransom her from the
infidels, though I give myself up to captivity as the
price!
Seor, said the page, sorrowfully, you forget
that you are now a prisoner in another world.
The cavalier smote his breast, crying, It is true!
and the revealment comes too late!Silly boy! he
continued, reproachfully, why didst thou delay
telling
me this, until this time, when it can only add to
my griefs? Why didst thou not speak it, at Tlascala,
that I might have departed forthwith from the land,
to her rescue?
My lord would not have deserted his kinsman,
Don Gabriel?
True again! exclaimed Don Amador, with a
pang. I could not have left my knight, even at the
call of Leila. But now will I go to Don Gabriel, and
confessing to him my sorrow, will prevail upon him
straightway to depart with me; for here, it must be
plain to him, as it is to me, that God is not with us.
Alas! seor, said the page, it is not possible
that you should go to Don Gabriel, nor that you should
ever more leave this heathen land.
Dost thou confess, then, demanded the novice,
that Abdalla has deceived me, and that I am held
to perpetual captivity?
Seor, said the boy, clasping his hands, and
13 *
weeping bitterly, we shall never more see Spain,
nor any land but this. The fate of Don Hernan, and
of all his men, is written; they are in a net from
which they cannot escape; and we, who are spared,
obtain our lives only at the price of expatriation. My
father remembered his protector,my lord is saved;
but he shares our exile!
At this confirmation of his worst suspicions, the
countenance of Don Amador darkened with despair
and horror.
And Abdalla, thy father, has plotted this foul,
traitorous, and most bloody catastrophe? And he
thinks, that, for my life's sake, I will divide with him
the dishonour and guilt of my preservation?
My lord knows not the wrongs of my father,
said Jacinto, mournfully, or he would not speak
of him so harshly.
Thy father is a most traitor-like and backsliding
villain, said Don Amador, and this baseness in him
should entirely cancel in thee the bonds of affection
and duty; for thou art not of his nature. Hark thee,
then, boy: it is my purpose straightway to depart
from this house, and this durance. I desire to save
thee from the fate of a pagan's slave. Better will it
be for thee, if thou shouldst die with me, in the attempt
to reach the palace, (and I swear to thee, I will
protect
thee to the last moment of my life,) than remain
in Tenochtitlan, after thy Christian friends have left
it, or after they are slain. It is my hope, and, indeed,
my belief, that, when the valiant general, Don
Hernan
,
comes to be persuaded of his true condition, he
will, immediately, and at any cost, cut his way out
of this most accursed city. In this manner will we
escape, and thou shalt find, in me, a father who will
love thee not less truly, and more in fashion of a
Christian, than the apostate Zegri.
If my lord could but protect my father from the
anger of Don Hernan, and prevail upon him to return
with my lord! said Jacinto, eagerly.
I have already proposed this to him, and, in his
fury, he denies me.
Heaven help us then! cried Jacinto, for there
is no other hope; and we must dwell with the
barbarians
!
Dost thou think, that I will rest here, when they
are murdering Don Gabriel?Hark thee! what knave
has stolen away my sword?Know, that I will
straightway make my escape, and carry thee along
with me; for God would not forgive me, did I leave
thee abandoned to barbarians, to the eternal loss and
perdition of thy soul. I say to thee again, thou shalt
accompany me.
I will remain with my father! said the boy,
stepping back, and assuming some of that dignity
and decision, which the neophyte had so lately
witnessed
in Abdalla; and so will my lord, likewise;
for my lord has given him a pledge, which he cannot
forfeit.
Miserable wretch that I am! said the cavalier;
in either case, I am overwhelmed with dishonour.
My gage was sinful, and the infraction of it will be
shame. Bring me hither Abdalla; I will revoke my
promise to him in person; and, after that, I can
depart
,
without disgrace.
Thou canst not escape, without shedding blood,
at least, said the boy, with a pale and yet
determined
countenance, for, first, thou must slay my
father, who saved thee from the death of sacrifice.
If thou goest, in his absence, then must my lord
strike down the son;for with what strength I have,
I will prevent him!
The amazement with which the warlike cavalier
heard these words, and beheld the stripling throw
himself manfully before the door of the apartment,
entirely disconcerted him for a moment. Before he
could find words to express his anger, or perhaps
derision, the page, with a sudden revulsion of
feeling
,
ran from the door, and flinging himself at his
patron's feet, embraced his knees, weeping and
exclaiming
,
with much passion,
O my dear master! be not incensed with me;
for I am but weak and silly, and I have no friends
but my father and thee! If thou takest me from my
father, then shall he be left childless, to live and to die
alone; if thou goest without us, we shall be deserted
to perish without a friend; for no one has smiled on
us but my lord; and if thou goest while my father is
absent, he will curse me, and I will curse myself,
for thou must needs die in the streets!
The novice was touched, not so much by the last
and undeniable assurance, as by the pathetic appeal
of the Morisco.
Be comforted, Jacinto, he cried; for now,
indeed
,
it appears to me, that, whether I had passed
my gage or not, I could not take advantage of the
weakness of such a jailor, and fly, without the
greatest
shame. And, in addition, it seems to me inhuman
and unjust, that I should think of escaping, without
doing my best to snatch thee and thy father also,
(whose sinfulness does, in this case, at least, spring
from affection,) out of thraldom. Be thou therefore
content: I will remain thy patient prisoner, until such
time as Abdalla returns; hoping that I can, then,
advance
such remonstrance and argument, as shall
convert him from his purpose, and cause him to
repent
what wrongs he has already done Don Hernan,
and to accept his mercy, which I do again avow
myself
ready to secure with my life, and even with my
honour. But I warn thee, that I can by no means
remain a captive, while my friends are given up to
destruction.
Seor, said Jacinto, rising, there is a hope
they will be spared, if the king should recover; for
greatly have the Mexicans mourned the rage which
wounded their monarch. If he live, and again
command
peace, there will be peace; and all of us may
yet be happy.
God grant that this may be so! said the
cavalier
,
catching at the hope. I will therefore remain
with thee a little; for if my friends be not starved
outright, I have no fear but that they can easily
maintain
themselves a week in the palace.
And besides, seor, said the page, returning to
his playful manner, if you were to leave me, how
should you hear more of the maid of Almeria?
Of Leila? cried the cavalier, forgetting at once
his honour and his friends; now do I remember me,
that you have not yet told me how you acquired your
most blessed and blissful knowledge. Heaven forgive
me! I did not think it possible,but, I believe, I had
entirely forgotten her! How comest thou to know
aught of her? Answer me quickly, and be still more
quick to tell me all you know.
Will not my lord be satisfied with my knowledge,
without seeking after the means of acquiring it?
demanded the page, hesitatingly.
If, indeed, said Don Amador, solemnly, thou
hast obtained it by the practice of that kind of magic
which is forbidden, though my curiosity will not
permit
me to eschew its revelations, yet must I caution
thee, from this time henceforth, to employ it no more;
for, herein, dost thou peril thy soul. But, if it be by
those arts, which are not in themselves sinful, thou
shouldst not be ashamed to confess them; for the
habit of concealment is the first step in the path of
deception; and I have already assured thee, that a
deceiver is, as one may say, a lie in the face of his
Maker. But of this I will instruct thee more fully
hereaftor: at present, I burn with an unconquerable
desire to hear thee speak of Leila.
But how know I, said the page, again hesitating,
that she of whom I speak, is the Leila after whom
it pleases my lord to inquire?And why indeed, now
that I think of it, should my lord inquire at all after
one of a persecuted and despised race?
Wilt thou still torment me? Have I not told thee
that I forgot her origin, and loved her?
And did she love my lord back again?
Thou askest me what I cannot with certainty
answer, replied the cavalier, for she was snatched
away from me, before I had yet overcome the natural
scruples of my pride to discourse of love to one who
seemed so much beneath the dignity of my birth and
fortunes.
And my lord gave her no cause to think she had
obtained favour in his eyes?
In this thou dost not err; for, saving some gifts,
which were, indeed, more the boons of a patron than
the tribute of a lover, I did nothing to address me to
her affections. In all things, as I may say, I did
rather assume the character of one who would
befriend
and protect her from wrong, than of a man
seeking after her love.
But, if she accepted my lord's gifts, she must have
loved him, said Jacinto.
They were very trifles, rejoined the cavalier,
saving only one, indeed, which, as she must have
perceived, could not have been more properly
bestowed
than upon one so innocent and friendless as
herself. This was a very antique and blessed jewel,
a cross of rubies,fetched by mine ancestor, Don
Rodrigo of Arragon, more than three hundred years
ago, from the Holy Land, after having been
consecrated
upon the Sepulchre itself. It was thought to
be a talisman of such heavenly efficacy, in the hands
of an unspotted virgin, that no harm could ever come
to her, who wore it upon her neck. For mine own
part, though I could tell thee divers stories of its
virtue
,
recorded in our house, yet was I ever inclined
to think, that a natural purity of heart was, in all
cases, a much better protection of innocence than
even a holy talisman. Nevertheless, when I beheld
this orphan Moor, I bethought me of the imputed
virtues of those rubies; and I put them upon her
neck, as thinking her friendless condition gave her
the strongest claim to all such blessed protection.
A cross of rubies! cried the page; it is she!
And thou canst tell me of her resting-place? and
of her present condition? cried the overjoyed
cavalier
.
I remember, that, at the temple of Tlascala,
thou didst aver, that, notwithstanding the apparent
baseness of her origin, it had been discovered that
she was descended of very noble parentage!
What I
can
tell thee, and what I
will
, said
Jacinto
,
gravely, will depend upon thine own actions.
If thou leavest this place, without my father's
consent
,
hope not that thou shalt know any thing more
than has been spoken. If thou art content to remain
a little time in captivity, and to yield me the
obedience
which I demand, thou shalt find, that a child
of a contemned race may possess wisdom unknown
to men of happier degrees. Thou hast acknowledged
thyself the captive of my father; wilt thou promise
obedience to me?
Don Amador surveyed the boy with a bewildered
stare:
It is possible, said he, that I am yet dreaming;
for it seemeth to me very absurd, that thou, who art
a boy, and wert but yesterday a servant, shouldst
make such a demand of subjection to a man and a
cavalier, and, as I may say, also, thy master.
My lord will not think I would have him become
a servant, said Jacinto. The subjection I require,
is for the purpose of securing him that gratification
of his curiosity, which he has sought,and thus only
can he obtain it. In all other respects, I remain
myself
the slave of my lord.
Provided thou wilt demand me nothing
dishonourable
nor irreligious, (and now, that I know, from
thy father's confession, that thou art of noble descent,
I can scarcely apprehend in thee any meanness,) I
will make thee such a promise, said Don Amador.
But I must beseech thee, not to torment me with
delay.
My lord shall not repent his goodness, said the
page, with a happy countenance; for when he
thinks not of it, his wishes shall be gratified. But,
at present, let him be at peace, and sleep; for the
time has not yet come. I claim, now, the first proof
of my lord's obedience. Let him eat of this
medicinal
confection, and, by a little rest, dispel the heats
of fever, which are again returning to him.
I declare to thee, said Don Amador, I am
very well; and this fever is caused by suspense, and
not disease.
Thou must obey, said the page. While thou
art sleeping, I will inquire for thee the fate of Leila;
for it is yet wrapped in darkness, and it cannot be
discovered but by great efforts.
The cavalier obeyed the injunctions of his young
jailer, ate of the confection, and, Jacinto leaving the
apartment, he yielded to exhaustion and
drowsiness
,
and notwithstanding his eager and tormenting
curiosity, soon fell fast asleep.
CHAPTER XIX.
Gloom
and fear still beset the garrison at the
palace
of Axajacatl; and the mutiny of soldiers, and
fierce feuds among the cavaliers, were added to
other circumstances of distress. Those ancient
veterans
,
who had followed Don Hernan, from the first
day of invasion, and who had shared with him so
many privations and perils, were, in general, still
true to their oaths of obedience, and preserved through
all trials, an apparent, if not a real composure of
spirit, as well as a firm reliance on the wisdom of
their leader. But the followers of Narvaez, uninured
to combat, and but lately acquainted with suffering,
their sanguine expectations of conquest without
danger, and of wealth without labour, changed to a
mere hope of disgraceful escape, and that hope, as
they all felt, founded, not in reason, but imagination,
turned their murmurs into the most bitter
execrations
,
and these again into menaces. The officers,
too, rendered peevish by discontent, and reckoning
each the discomfiture of his neighbour as the
evidence
of feebleness or fear, spoke to one another with
sarcasms, and even sometimes to Don Hernan
himself
with disrespect. The self-command of the
general
,
however, never deserted him; he rebuked insult
with tranquil indignation, and so far prevailed over
his fiery subordinates, as to compose most of their
quarrels, without suffering them to be submitted to
the ordeal of honour. One feud had arisen,
nevertheless
,
which his skill could not allay; and all that
he could effect by remonstrance, and even
supplication
,
was an agreement of the parties to postpone its
final arbitrement, until such time as the providence
of heaven should conduct them afar from
Tenochtitlan
.
The wrath engendered in the bosom of the
Tonatiuh, by the angry reproaches of De Morla, after
their return from the battle of the Manta, had been
inflamed by a new circumstance, which, though of
a trivial nature, the pride of Alvarado and the
resentment
of his opponent had converted into an affair
of importance.
There was among the many kinswomen of
Montezuma
,
who shared his captivity, (for the policy of the
general had reduced nearly all the royal blood to
bonds,) a certain young maiden, a daughter of the
lord of Colhuacan, and therefore a niece of the king:
who, in the general partition which the nobler of the
cavaliers had, in prospective, made of the Indian
princesses, had fallen to the lot of Alvarado. In those
days of legitimacy, there was some degree of divinity
allowed to hedge the person of even a barbaric
monarch
;
and happy was the hidalgo, who, by
obtaining
a royal maid for his wife, could rank himself, in
imaginary dignity, with the princes of Christendom.
At the present moment, the companions of Cortes had
rather made their selections, than endeavoured to
commend themselves to the favour of their
mistresses
;dropping,
thereby, so much of their
reverence
for royalty, as not to suppose the existence of
Vol. II. 14
any will, or opposition, in the objects of their desire.
The Doa Engracia, (her native title has entirely
escaped
the historians,) was, therefore, beloved by Don
Pedro; but, not having been made acquainted with
the hidalgo's flame, she stooped, at the first
promptings
of affection, to a destiny less brilliant and lofty.
Her heart melted at the handsome visage of the
young Fabueno; and the secretary, flattered by the
love of so noble a maiden, and emboldened by his
success in arms, did not scruple to become the rival
of the Tonatiuh. The rage of Don Pedro would have
chastised, in blood, the presumption of such a
competitor
;
but De Morla, remembering the novice, did
not hesitate, for his sake, to befriend his servant; and,
when he avowed himself the champion of Lorenzo,
he dreamed that he was about to avenge the fall of
his brother-in-arms.
The result of this opposition to the humours of
Alvarado, was a quarrel, so fierce and unappeasable,
that, as has been said, all which the general could
effect
,
was a postponement of conflict; and when Don
Pedro surrendered the princess to her plebeian lover,
it was with the assurance, that, as soon as the army
had left the city and lake, he should reckon her
ransom
out of the life-blood of his companion.
The discovery of the unfaithfulness of his betrothed,
(for, in this light did the cavaliers regard the captive
princesses,) had been made the preceding evening;
and the angry contest of the cavaliers, and the
arrangements
for combat, occurred at the moment
while Don Amador was lamenting the backwardness
of his friends to support him, when he became a
captive.
To allay the heart-burnings of his officers, who had
arrayed themselves, according to their friendships, on
either side, the general caused his trumpets to sound,
and bade all to prepare for an expedition of peril.
He had, all along, eyed the great pyramid, frowning
over his fortress, with peculiar anxiety. This was
caused, in part, by his consciousness of the advantage
it would give his enemies, as soon as they should dare
to profane its sanctity, by making it the theatre of
conflict. This very morning, it was made apparent,
by the presence of many barbarians thronging up its
sides, and by an occasional arrow or stone discharged
from its top, that the Mexicans were aware of its
usefulness. In addition to this cause for attempting
to gain possession of it, the leader was moved by a
vague hope, that, once master of the holiest of
temples
,
he might obtain the same advantages, through
the superstition of his foes, which he had lately
possessed
,
in the person of Montezuma, through their
reverence
for the king. He mediated an assault, and
resolved to attempt it, before the pyramid should be
covered with Mexicans.
The strength of the army, both horse and foot,
was straightway displayed upon the square; and the
war-worn Christians once more marched against the
triumphing infidel.
The knight of Calavar, sitting on his sable steed,
with an air of more life than was ordinary, appeared
in this band; and the three serving-men, with the
secretary
,
followed at his back.
CHAPTER XX.
In
his sleep, the wounded cavalier was no longer
a captive. Memory and imagination, acting together,
bore him to the shores of the Mediterranean; and as
he trode the smooth beach, his eye wandered, with
transport, to the blue Alpujarras, stretching dimly in
the interior. But not long did he gaze on those
mountains, which intercepted the view of his distant
castle. He stepped joyously along over the sands,
obeying the voices and gestures of his conductors;
for, it seemed to him, that his hands were grasped,
the one by the page Jacinto, the other by the
priestess
of Mexico, both of whom urged him on with
smiles, while pointing to a group of palm-trees, under
which reclined the long-lost maid of Almeria. The
cross of rubies shone upon her breast, and her
downcast
eyes regarded it with a gaze of sadness; but,
ever and anon, as the cavalier vainly strove to
approach
,
and called to her with his voice, they were
raised upon him in tears; and the hand of Leila was
uplifted, with a melancholy gesture, towards heaven.
With such a vision, repeated many times in his brain,
varied only by changes of place, (for now the scene
was transferred to the deserts of Barbary, now the
fair vales of Rhodes, and now the verdant borders
of Tezcuco,) he struggled through many hours of
torture
;
and, at last, awoke, as a peal of thunder,
bursting
on the scene, drove, terrified away, as well his
guides as the maid of his memory.
As he started from his couch, confused and
bewildered
,
the thunder seemed still to roll, with distant
murmurs, over the city. His practised ear detected,
in these peals, the explosions of artillery, mingled
with volleys of musketry; but for awhile, in his
disorder
,
he was unable to account for them; and in a
few moments they ceased.Night had succeeded to
day; no taper burned on the table, and scarcely
enough light shone through the narrow casement into
the apartment, to show him that he occupied it alone.
His lips were parched with thirst; he strode to the
table, and finding nothing thereon to allay the
burnings
of fever, he called faintly on Jacinto. No
answer
was made to the call; he seemed to be the only
tenant of the house; and yet he fancied that the deep
silence, which succeeded his exclamation, was broken
by distant and feeble lamentations. He listened
attentively
;
the sounds were repeated, but yet with so
low a tone, that they would have escaped him
entirely
,
had not his senses been sharpened by fever.
Obeying his instincts of benevolence, rather than
his reason, for this had not yet recovered from the
disorder of slumber, he stepped from the chamber;
and, following not so much the sounds, which had
become nearly inaudible, as a light that gleamed
at a little distance, he found himself soon at the door
of an apartment, through the curtain of which
streamed the radiance.
The image of Leila, surveying the cross of rubies,
had not yet departed from his imagination, when he
pushed aside the flimsy arras, and stood in the room;
and his feelings of amazement and rapture, of
mingled
joy and terror, may be imagined, when he
beheld
,
at the first glance, what seemed the incarnation
of his vision.Before a little stool, which supported
a taper of some vegetable substance, burning with
odours and smoke, there knelt, or seemed to kneel, a
maiden of exquisite beauty, whose Moorish character
might have been imagined in her face, but not
detected
in her garments, for these were of Spanish fashion.
The light of the taper streamed full upon her visage,
from which it was not two feet removed, and showed
it to be bathed in tears. Her eyes were fixed upon
some jewel held in her hands, close to the light, which
was attached, by a chain of gold, to her neck; and
the same look which revealed to Don Amador the
features of the maid of Almeria, showed him, in this
jewel, the well-known and never to be forgotten cross
of rubies. The cavalier stood petrified; a smothered
ejaculation burst from his lips, and his gaze was fixed
upon the vision as on a basilisk.
At his sudden exclamation, the maiden raised her
eyes, gazed at him an instant, as he stood trembling
with awe and delight; and the next moment,whether
it was that she struck the light out with her hand, or
whether the taper and the figure were alike spectral,
and snatched away by the same enchantment which
had brought them into existence,the chamber was
left in darkness, and the pageant of loveliness and
sorrow had vanished entirely away.
No sooner had this unlooked for termination been
presented, than Don Amador recovered his strength,
and, with a cry of grief, rushed towards the spot so
14 *
lately occupied by the vision. The stool still stood
on the floor, but no maiden knelt by it. A faint gleam
of dusky light shone suddenly on the opposite wall,
and then as suddenly disappeared. It had not been
lost to the cavalier; he approached it; his
outstretched
hands struck upon a curtain hung before another
door, which admitted him into a passage, where a
pleasant breeze, burdened with many perfumes, as
from a garden, puffed on his cheeks. The sound of
steps, echoing at the end of the gallery, and the
gleaming of a light, struck at once upon his ears and
eyes; he rushed onwards, with a loud cry, gained
the door, which, he doubted not, would again reveal
to him the blessed vision, and the next moment found
himself arrested by the Zegri.
Behind Abdalla stood the slave Ayub, bearing a
torch, whose light shone equally on the indignant
visage of the renegade Moor, and the troubled aspect
of his captive.
Hath the seor forgot that he made me a vow?
cried Abdalla, sternly: and that, in this effort to
escape
,
he covers himself with dishonour?
To this reproach, Don Amador replied only by
turning a bewildered and stupified stare on his host;
and the Zegri, reading in this the evidence of
returning
delirium, relaxed the severity of his countenance,
and spoke with a gentler voice.
My lord does not well, he said, to leave his
chamber, while the fever still burns him.
He took the cavalier by the arm, and Don Amador
suffered himself to be led to his apartment. There,
seating himself on the couch, he surveyed the Moor
with a steadfast and yet disturbed look, not at all
regarding
the words of sympathy pronounced by his
jailer. At last, rousing himself, and muttering a sort
of prayer, he said,
Are ye all enchanters? or am I mad? for either
this thing is the fabrication of lunacy, or the illusion
of unearthly art!
Of what does my lord speak? said the Moor,
mildly, and soothingly. He should not think of
dreams.
Dost thou say, dreams? cried the cavalier, with
a laugh. Surely mine eyes are open, and I see
thee. Dost thou not profess thyself flesh and blood?
The Moor regarded his captive with uneasiness,
thinking that his wits had fled.
My noble patron does not ask me of his
countrymen
and friends, he said, willing to divert his
prisoner's
thoughts. This day, did I behold his followers,
and, in addition, his kinsman, the knight of Calavar.
At this name, the neophyte became more
composed
.
He eyed the speaker more attentively, and
now remarked, that, besides the leathern mail which
he wore in the manner of the Mexicans, his chest
was defended by an iron corslet, which, as well as
the plumes of his tunic, was spotted with blood. As
the Moor spoke, Don Amador perceived him to lay
upon the table, along with the torch, which he had
taken from Ayub, a sword dyed with the same gory
ornament; and he started to his feet, with a feeling
of fierce wrath, which entirely dispelled his
stupefaction
,
when he recognized in this, his own vanished
weapon.
Knave of a Zegri! he cried, hast thou used
my glave on Spaniards, my friends and brothers?
When I struck thee the blow which saved thy
life, said Abdalla, calmly, I was left without a
weapon; for the steel shivered upon thy casque. I
borrowed the sword, which, to thee, was useless,
and I return it, not dishonoured, for it has drunk the
blood of those who are, in the eyes of heaven,
idolaters
and assassins. I give it back to thee, and will
not again use it, even in a just and righteous combat;
for, thanks be to God! it has been the means of
providing
me a store, which I hope to increase into an
armoury.
Thou avowest this to me? and with exultation?
said the cavalier, passing at once, in the excitement
of anger, from the effects, and even the remembrance,
of the vision.
If my lord will listen, replied Abdalla, not
unrejoiced
at the change, and willing to confirm the sanity
of the prisoner, he shall hear what good blows this
rich and very excellent weapon hath this day struck.
A better never smote infidel or Christian.
I will hear what thou hast to say, said the novice,
with a stern accent; and, wondering what direful
calamity shall befall thee, for having thus profaned
and befouled the sword of a Christian soldier, I hope
thou wilt tell me of such things as will prove to me
that God has punished the same, if not upon thy head,
yet, at least, upon the heads of divers of thy godless
companions.
There are many of the godless, both heathen and
Christian, who have slept the sleep of death this day,
said Abdalla, knitting his brows with the ardour of a
soldier; many shall die to-morrow, some the next
day, but few on the lastfor who shall remain to
perish? Every day do I look down from the
pyramid
,
and hearken to the groans of those who
destroyed
Granada; and every day, though the lamentings
be wilder and louder, yet are they fewer. Heaven
be thanked! a few days more, and not a bone shall
be left to whiten on the square, that does not speak
of vengeance for the Alpujarras!
Moor! said the frowning Spaniard, have a
care that thy ferocious and very unnatural triumph
do not cause me to forget that I am thy prisoner. It
was, perhaps, proper, that thou shouldst fly from Don
Hernan, seeing that the slanders of very base caitiffs
had prejudiced thee, and left thy life in jeopardy;
perhaps, also, the necessity to gain the favour of
Mexicans for thyself and Jacinto, by fighting with
them against their foes, may, in part, extenuate the
sin of such impiety; but I warn thee, thou leapest
wantonly into superfluous crime, when, instead of
mourning thy cruel fate, thou rejoicest over the blood
thou art shedding.
Whose fault is it? and who shall account for my
crime? said the Zegri, with energy. I came to
these shores against my will; when I landed upon
the sands of Ulua, my heart was in the peace of
sorrow. I besought those who held me in unjust
bondage, to discharge me with my boy: had they
done so, then had I left them, and no Spaniard should
have mourned for his oppression; the wrongs of
Granada had not been repaid in Mexico. My prayers
were met with mockery; the Zegri that hath sat in
the seat of kings, was doomed to be the bearer of a
match-stick; and the boy, whose blood runs redder
and purer than that in the veins of the proudest
cavalier
of all, was degraded into the service of a menial,
in the house of the bitterest enemy of his people!
What was left for me? To choose between slavery
and exile, contempt and revenge.The seor thinks
that the base Yacub belied me: Yacub spoke the
truth. From the moment when I perceived I could
not escape from the land, then did I know, that God
had commissioned me to the work of revenge; and
I resolved it should be mighty. I meditated the flight
I have accomplished, the treason I have committed,
the revenge I have obtained. I saw that I should
remain in wo, with benighted barbarians; but I saw,
also, that I should be afar from Spaniards. God be
thanked! It was bitter to be parted, for ever, from
the land of my birth, and the people of my love; but
it is goodly and pleasant, to see the Castilian perish
in misery, and remember Granada!
Throughout the whole of this harangue, Don
Amador
de Leste preserved a countenance of inflexible
gravity.
Sir Zegri, said he, with a sigh, when it was
concluded
,
I perceive, that heaven hath erected a wall
between us, to keep us for ever asunder. Whether
thy bitter hatred of Spaniards be just or not, whether
thy appetite for revenge be allowable or accurst, still
is it apparent, that, while thou indulgest the one, and
seekest to gratify the other, it is impossible I should
remain with thee on any terms, except those of
enmity
and defiance; for those whom thou hatest, and
dost so bloodily destroy, they are my countrymen.
I love thy boy, but thee I detest. And now, having
discovered that thou art of very noble blood, and
being impelled to punish on thee the very grievous
and unpardonable wrongs, which thou art doing to
my country, I beg thou wilt release me from my
parole
,
and fetch hither one of those swords which thou
hast rifled from Spanish corses, I arming myself with
my own weapon, here befouled with Spanish blood.
We will discharge upon each other, the obligations
we are under, thou to hate and slay Spaniards, and
I to punish the haters and slayers of the same; for it
is quite impossible I can live longer in peace,
suffering
thee to destroy my friends. Fetch hither,
therefore
,
a sword, and let us end this quarrel with the life
of one or the other; and, to ease thee of any anxiety
thou mayest have, in regard to Jacinto, I solemnly
assure thee, that, if thou fall, I will myself take thy
place, and remain a father to him to the end of my
days.
As the cavalier made this extraordinary proposal,
Abdalla surveyed him, first with surprise, then with
gloomy regret; and when he had finished, with a
glistening eye. Before Don Amador had yet done
speaking, the Zegri unbuckled his corslet, and,
flinging
it on the floor, at the last word, said, with mild
and reproachful dignity,
Behold! thy sword is within reach, and my breast
is naked. What hinders that thou shouldst not strike
me at once? Thou speakest of JacintoIt is enough
that thy hand saved him from the blow of thy
countryman
:
at that moment, I said, in my heart, though
I spoke it not, `Thou hast bought my life.' If thou
wilt have it, it is thine. If thou hadst killed my
father
,
I could not aim at thine!
Of a truth, said the cavalier, moodily, I should
not slay thee out of mere anger, but duty: yet I
would that thou mightest be prevailed upon to assault
me, so as to enforce me into rage; for, I say to thee
again, so long as thy hostile acts continue, I must
very violently abhor thee.
They will not continue long, said Abdalla.
After
a few days, there will remain in my bosom no
feeling but gratitude; and, then, my lord shall see,
that the fury which has slain all others, has been his
own security.
Of this, said Don Amador, I will have a
word to speak with thee anon. At present, I am
desirous
,
that thou shouldst relate to me the fate of
this day's battle, which I am the more anxious to
know, since thou hast spoken the name of Calavar.
I am loath to obey thee, said the Zegri,
struggling
with the fierce satisfaction that beset him at
the thought, for it may again excite thee to anger.
Nevertheless, I will listen to thy story, with such
composure as I can, as to a thing, it may be needful
for me to know; after which, I have myself a
matter
of which it is quite essential I should acquaint
thee.
Thus commanded, the Moor obeyed; and his eyes
sparkled, as he conned over in his mind the events of
a day so dreadful to the Spaniards.
CHAPTER XXI.
Yesterday
, when thou wert sleeping, said the
Zegri, or lay as one that slept
That day, then, muttered Amador, is a blank
in my existence! and very grievous it is, to think
that so great a space of so short a period as life,
should be lost in a stony lethargy.It seems to me,
that that blow thou gavest me, was somewhat rounder
than was needful.Nevertheless, I am not angry, but
grateful.
Yesterday was a day of comparative peace,
continued the Zegri. The Spaniards shut
themselves
in their citadel, preparing for the greater
exploit
of to-day. It was evident to the dullest of the
nobles, that Don Hernan had cast an evil eye on the
temple.
Did he so? cried the cavalier. It was the
thought of a good Christian: and, methinks, my
countrymen had not been judged with so many of
these present torments, if they had sooner torn down
that stronghold of the devil, which is detestable in the
eye of heaven.
To-day, they marched against it, said Abdalla,
with all their force, both of Spaniards and
Tlascalans
;
and, I will say for them, that they marched
well, fought boldly, and revenged their own heavy
losses, in the blood of many barbarians, as well on
the pyramid as in the temple-yard and the streets.
They came against us, with four such turrets, moving
on wheels,
Is it possible, cried Amador, that the general
was not sufficiently warned of the inefficacy of those
engines, by the doleful fate of the manta, that day,
when it was my mishap to be vanquished?I shall
remember the death of the ship-master, Gomez, to the
end of my life.Twice or thrice, did I long to be
with him among the fire-worshippers, who must be
a very strange people. But the Mexicans are very
valiant.
Of a truth, they are, said the Zegri. I will
not detain my lord with the account of the battle in
the streets, wherein the mantas were again, in great
part, destroyed; nor will I relate, with what suffering
the Castilians won their way to the Wall of Serpents,
and the temple-yard. It was here, that I beheld my
lord's kinsman, the knight of Calavar, unhorsed, and
in the hands of the infidel
Accursed assassin! cried the neophyte,
springing
to his feet, and hast thou kept me in bonds,
that my knight should perish thus, without succour?
The foe of Granada did not perish, and he was
not without succour, said the Zegri, loftily. When
his steed, slipping on the polished stones, with which
that yard is paved, fell to the earth, and many savage
hands were fastened on his body, there was a friend
hard by, who raised both the knight and charger, and
preserved them from destruction.
Give me the name of that most noble friend,
cried Don Amador, ardently,for, I swear, I will
reckon this act to him, in my gratitude, as the
salvation
of my own life. Tell me, what true Christian
was he?
One, said Abdalla, calmly, who hated him as
the slayer of his people, but remembered that he
repented his evil acts with misery and distraction,
one, who abhorred him for these deeds of sin, and
yet loved him, because he was, like his kinsman, the
protector of childhood and feebleness.
I doubt not, that
thou
wert the man, said the
cavalier, faltering, and, therefore, I return thee my
thanks. But I would have thee know, that,
whatever
blood was improperly shed by my kinsman, was
shed by accident and not design; for, no man is
more incapable of cruelty than the noble knight, Don
Gabriel. But, this shows me, that thou art really of
lofty blood; for none but a magnanimous soul can
render justice to a hated enemy.
Why should I dwell upon the conflict in the
yard? continued the Moor, hastily. Through the
flames of the many chapels, that filled it,with
shouts and the roar of muskets,the Christians, ever
victorious, and yet ever conquered even by victory,
rushed against the steps of the pyramid, disregarding
the stones tumbled on them from the terraces, the
darts flung down from the little barbicans or niches
in the wall, and the flaming logs shot down, endwise,
from the steps. Terrace after terrace, stair after
stair, were won; and the Christians stood; at last, on
the summit, fighting hand to hand with the four
thousand
nobles who defended it. My lord cannot think,
that even these numbers of naked men could long
Vol. II. 15
withstand a thousand Christians, robed in iron, and
infuriated by desperation. Score after score were
slain, and tumbled from the top; the flames burst
from the altar of Mexitli,the priest died in the
sanctuary, the Tlatoani at the downfallen urns; and,
in an hour's time, the Spaniards were masters of the
pyramid.
Thanks be to heaven, which fought with them!
cried Amador, devoutly. And thus may the infidel
fall!
Does not my lord pity the wretches, who die for
their country? said the Zegri, reproachfully. This
is not a war of heaven against hell, but of tyranny
against freedom.I did see some sights, this day,
upon the pyramid, which caused me to remember
those noble Roman generals, who, in ancient times,
were wont to devote themselves to death, for the good
of the state. At the very moment when the condition
of the Mexicans was most dreadful, when, despairing
of the usefulness of longer resistance, they rushed
frantically upon the Spanish spears, transfixing
themselves
by their own act, or flung themselves from the
pyramid, to be dashed to pieces below,at this
moment
,
I beheld, with mine own eyes, two very young
and noble Tlatoani, to whom I had myself just shown
a means of escape, rush upon Don Hernan, who
fought very valiantly throughout the day. They
cast away their arms, flung themselves at his feet,
as if to supplicate for mercy; and having thus thrown
the general off his guard, they seized him, on a
sudden
,
in their arms, and hurried him to the edge of
the terrace. From that dizzy brink they strove to
drag him, willing, themselves, to die dreadfully, so
that the great enemy of Tenochtitlan should fall with
them. But the strength of boys yielded to the iron
grasp of the Christian; and, flinging them from him
like drops of water, or gouts of blood from his
wounded hand, he beheld them fall miserably to the
earth,dead, but not yet avenged.
Thanks be to God again! cried the cavalier,
warming with excitement; for, though these youths
met their death very bravely, they were guilty of a
most vile treachery; for which, death was but a just
punishment. And so, my true and excellent friends
did win this battle? By heaven! it galls me to the
marrow, to think that I lie here idle, while such
things are doing around me!
They won the temple top, said Abdalla, with a
laugh of scorn, that they might look down from that
height, and behold themselves surrounded by an
hundred
thousand men, who were busy slaying their
Tlascalan slaves, and waiting for the masters. Very
plainly did I hear their cries of despair at that sight;
and these were goodly music. For myself, I escaped,
as did some few others, by dropping from terrace to
terrace, upon the dead bodies, which, being tumbled,
in great numbers, from the top, lay, in some places,
in such heaps along the galleries, as greatly to lessen
the dangers of a fall. Well were the Mexicans
revenged for this slaughter, continued the Moor,
his eyes glittering with ferocious transport, when
the Spaniards descended, to cut their way to the
quarters
,
encumbered with captive priests, and such
provisions
as they had gathered in the chapels. How
many fell in the squares and streets, how many were
suffocated in the canals,how few were able to
pierce through the myriads that invested the palace,
(for, all this time, had there been thousands assailing
the weak garrison, and tearing down the court-yard
wall)why should I speak of these? It is enough,
that the gain of the pyramid,lost as soon as
gained,cost them irreparable wo; and that the
wounded fugitives (for the Mexican glass drank of
the blood of all,) now lie in their desolate house, their
court-walls prostrate, the buttresses of their palace
cracked by fire, their steeds unfed and starving, their
ammunition expendedhopeless and helpless, calling
to the leaders who cannot relieve, the saints who will
not hear, and waiting only for death. Death then!
for it cometh; death! for it is inevitable; death! for
it is just; and death! for it repays the wrongs of
Granada!
As the triumphing Moor concluded his fiery oration,
the cavalier, whose excitement was raised to the last
pitch, and whose indignation and remorse were alike
kindled by a full knowledge of the condition of his
countrymen, cried aloud,
Hark thee, sir Moor! with these friends, thus
reduced to extremity and despairing, it is needful I
should straightway join myself, to endure what they
endure, to suffer as they suffer, to die as they die. I
refuse to save my life, when the forfeit of it to an
honourable purpose, may relieve them of their
distresses
.
I repent me of the gage which I gave thee,
I revoke my promise of captivity, and am, therefore,
free to make my escape; which I hereby attempt,
peacefully if I can,but warning thee, if thou oppose,
it shall be at the peril of thy life!
So saying, the cavalier snatched up the sword from
the table, and sprang towards the door. So quickly,
indeed, did he act, and so much did he take his jailer
by surprise, that he had nearly arrived at the curtain,
before Abdalla had time to intercept him. His brain
was in a ferment of passion, and the various
excitements
of the evening had inflamed him again into
fever; so, that, in the fury of the moment, when the
Zegri leaped before him, endeavouring to catch him
in his arms, he forgot every thing but his purpose,
and the necessity of escaping. He caught the Moor
by the throat, and struggling violently, raised the
crimson steel to strike. The life of Abdalla seemed
not to have a moment's purchase,the weapon was
already descending on his naked head, when,at
that very instant,the curtain was drawn from the
door, and dimly, but yet beyond all shadow of doubt,
in the light of the torch, the cavalier beheld the pale
visage of the maid of Almeria, shining over the
shoulders of the Moor.
The sword fell from his hand, and his whole frame
shook, as, with wild eyes, he returned the gaze of the
vision. The Zegri, amazed, yet not doubting that
this sudden change was the mere revolution of
delirium
,
took instant advantage of it, snatched the
leathern
strap from the lute of Jacinto; and when the
curtain, falling again, had concealed the spectral
countenance, the arms of the cavalier were bound
tightly behind him. This was a superfluous caution.
His strength had been supplied by fury, and the
instant that this had subsided, the exhaustion of two
days' illness returned; and had not his spirits been
otherwise unmanned, he would now have been as a
boy in the hands of Abdalla.
The Moor conducted him to the couch, on which
he suffered himself to be placed without opposition,
and without speaking a word. His whole faculties
seemed lost in a sudden and profound stupor; and
Abdalla began to fear that, in his prisoner, he had
found, in more respects than one, a true
representative
of his kinsman, Don Gabriel.
CHAPTER XXII.
A CERTAIN degree of monotony prevails among all
the vicissitudes of life, and even the most exciting
events fail, after a time, to interest. A paucity of
incidents will not much sooner disgust us with the
pages of history, than the most abundant stores of
plots and battles, triumphs and defeats, if too liberally
dispensed;for these are composed of the same
elements
,
and have, on the whole, the same wearisome
identity of character. For this reason, though the
many battles fought in the streets of Mexico, during
the seven days which intervened betwixt the second
coming and the second departure of Cortes, have
something
in them both of interest and novelty, we have
not dared to recount them in full, nor, indeed, to
mention
all of them; being satisfied to touch only such,
15 *
and, in truth, only such parts of such, as, in
themselves
,
have each some peculiar variety of
characteristic
.
We pass by, with a word, the increased
sufferings of the Christians,their murmurs and
lamentations
,their
despair and frenzy.
The day that followed after the fatal victory of the
pyramid, brought its battles like others. That day,
it became apparent that the last fibre which bound
hope to the palace wall, was about snappingit was
known to all, that the Indian monarch was expiring.
The prediction of Botello had made all acquainted
with the day on which a retreat might be
accomplished
.
That day was drawing nigh; but the
impatience
of the soldiers, and the anxiety of the officers
to prepare, or, at least, to reconnoitre, the path of
retreat, again drove them from their quarters. A
weak, but well chosen and trusty garrison was left
in charge of the palace; while Don Hernan, with all
the forces that could be spared of his reduced army,
sallied from the court-yard, and fought his way to
the dike of Iztapalapan.
In this exploit, new difficulties were to be
overcome
,
and new proofs were exhibited of the sagacity
and determination of the barbarians. Besides the
obstacles
offered by the ditches, robbed of their bridges,
the Mexicans had heaped together across the streets,
the fragments of their demolished houses, thus
forming
barriers, which were not passed without the
greatest labour and suffering. Nevertheless, the
Spaniards persevered, and not only gained the
causeway
,
but approached nigh to Iztapalapan, before a
Tlascalan messenger, creeping in disguise through
the crowds of enemies, recalled them to the palace,
which was furiously assailed, and in imminent
danger
of being carried by storm.
It is not to be supposed, that this attempt on the
great dike, and the return, were effected without the
most bloody opposition. The lake suddenly swarmed
with canoes full of fighting men, and when Don
Hernan
again turned his face towards Tenochtitlan, he
beheld the causeway covered with warriors, who,
besides disputing his passage with unappeasable rage,
broke, as well as they could, the bridges over the
sluices, seven in number, wherein were mingled the
floods of Chalco and Tezcuco. His valour, however,
or his good fortune, prevailed; and by night-fall he
reached the square of Axajacatl, and fell with
renewed
fury upon the savages who still struggled with the
garrison. When he had carved his way through
them, and had directed the exertions of his united
forces against the besiegers, who still raved, like
wolves, around him, he gave some thought to those
companions, whose fate it had been, to lay their
bodies on the causeway, or to take their rest, with
such exequies as could be rendered in the
lamentations
of men expecting each instant to share their
fate, under the salt bosom of Tezcuco.
It became known, that, among these unhappy
victims
,
was the knight of Calavar,but how slain, or
where entombed, no one could relate. From the day
of the loss of his kinsman, he had been reckoned by
all, entirely insane. He held communion with none,
not even his attendants; but casting aside his
abstraction
,
and resuming his armour, he was present in
every conflict which ensued, fighting with an ardour,
fury, and recklessness, as astonishing as they were
maniacal. All that was remembered of his fate, this
day, was, that, when at the farthest part of the
causeway
the trumpets were ordered to sound a retreat,
he was seen, without attendants, for they were
wedged
fast in the mele, dashing onwards amid the dusky
crowds that came rushing upon the front from the
suburbs of Iztapalapan. Cortes had, himself, called
to the knight to return, and not doubting that he
would extricate himself without aid, had then given
all his attention to the Mexicans attacking on the
rear. This was known; it was known also that Don
Gabriel had not returned: beyond this, all was
mystery
and gloom.
CHAPTER XXIII.
Two hours after night-fall, and while the Spaniards
were still engaged in close battle with the besiegers,
who, this night, seemed as if their rage was never to
be appeased, the cavalier Don Amador de Leste
rested in his chamber, (the Moorish boy sitting
dejected
at his feet,) now starting up with cries of grief
and impatience, as the continued explosions of
artillery
admonished him of the straits of his friends, and
now, as these seemed to die away and be followed
by silence, giving his mind to other not less exciting
thoughts, and questioning the page of the events of
the past day.
Not now, not now,ask me not
now!
replied
the page, with great emotion to one of his demands;
for now can I think of naught but my father. It is
not his custom to leave me so long by night, even
when the battle continues. Heaven protect him! for
at any moment, he may die; and what then am I, in
this land, and among this people? Would to heaven
we had perished in Spain,nay, in Barbary,in the
sea along with our friends; for, then, might we have
died together!
Give not way to this passion, said the cavalier,
with an attempt at consolation, which drove not the
gloom from his own countenance; for thou knowest,
that, whatever evil may happen to Abdalla, I will
myself befriend thee.
My father is slain! cried Jacinto, wringing his
hands, or long since would he have been with us.
If this be the case, said Amador, with grave
benevolence, and I will not deny that Abdalla doth
keep his life in constant jeopardy, it plainly shows,
that I am bound to make a father's effort to protect
thee, and thou to follow my counsels. Hark! he
exclaimed, as a furious cannonade, seemingly of all
the pieces shot off together, brought its roar and its
tremor to his prison-house,dost thou not hear how
ferocious is the combat, at this moment? Know,
Jacinto
,
that every explosion seems like a petard
fastened
to and bursting upon mine own bosom,so very
great are the shock and pang of mind with which, at
such time, I bethink me of the condition of my
countrymen
.
Much longer I cannot endure my captivity;
I have resolved that it shall end, even, if that be
needful, by the breach of my solemn vow; for, I am
persuaded, the dishonour and compunction which
must follow upon that, will be but light, compared
with the great ignominy of my present inactivity, and
the unspeakable remorse which rends my vitals, while
submitting to it. But I can by no means escape,
while thou art left alone to be my jailer; if I escape
by force of arms, it shall be when thy father is here
to oppose me. I counsel thee, however, as thinking,
with thee, that Abdalla may be dead
Here Jacinto burst into the most bitter
lamentations
.
Be not thus afflicted; for I speak to thee only of
a possibility which may be feared, and not of a
certainty
to be mourned. What I mean is, that this
possibility
should be enough to release thee, as well as
myself, from this house; for if Abdalla be really
deceased
,
it must be evident to thee, nothing could be
more foolish, and even dangerous, than to remain in
it alone; seeing that, if we be not found out and
murdered
by the Mexicans, we must surely expect to be
starved. Guided by the sounds of battle, we can
easily find our way to the palace; and perhaps, by
wrapping ourselves in some of these cotton curtains,
we may make our way through the herds of
Mexicans
,
without notice, as being mistaken for some of
their fellow-combatants. Once arrived within
ear-shot
of the palace, I have no fear but that we shall
be very safe; and I pledge my vow to thee, that I
will so faithfully guard thee on the way, that no
weapon
shall strike thee, that has not first pierced my
own bosom.
The page clasped his hands, and regarded his
master with looks in which affection struggled with
despair.
But if my father should liveoh, if my father
should live! and returning to this desolate house,
should find that his child has deserted him!
If he live, said the cavalier, then shall he
know, that thou hast taken the only step to preserve
him from destruction, both temporal and eternal. I
will not rest, till I have procured for him a free
pardon
;
I will hold thee as a hostage, which, in addition
to the assurance of forgiveness, will speedily bring
him into the garrison: for, knowing his love to thee,
I know he cannot live without thee. Besides, I will
obtain, for I will demand it, permission for him to
return with thee to Spain; and if my knight consent,
we will depart together; for now I am convinced
that heaven doth fight against us, even to upholding
the godless heathen. Let us therefore depart, making
our trust in God, who will cover us, this night, as
with shields, to protect our weakness.
Alas, alas! cried the boy, faltering with grief
and fear, my lord is sick and wounded, feeble and
helpless.
That I have not all the vigour, which, a few days
since, was mine, said the cavalier, snatching up his
sword, and brandishing it, once or twice, in the air,
as if to make trial of his strength, I cannot deny.
Nevertheless, I am stronger than yesterday; and
besides
,
while placing great reliance on the protection
of heaven, I shall trust less to my weapon than to
such disguises as it may be in our power to adopt.
With these figured curtains wrapped about us, and,
if there be any feathers about the house, a bunch or
two tied to our heads, I have no doubt, we can
delude
the Mexican fighting men, and, in the tumult of
battle, pass through their ranks, entirely unmolested.
While the page hesitated and wept, visibly
struggling
between his wishes and his fears, there occurred
a sudden interruption in the cannonade; and, in the
dead silence that followed, both heard the sound of
rapid footsteps approaching the door, accompanied
by smothered groans.
The page startedIn an instant, the steps were
heard in the passage, followed by a heavy sound, as
of a man falling upon the floor.
Oh God! my father! my poor father! cried
Jacinto
,
springing to the door.
He was arrested by the arm of the neophyte, who
plainly distinguished, along with the groans that came
from the passage, a noise as if the sufferer were
struggling to his feet; and in a moment after, as he
pushed aside the curtain, to go out himself, the slave
Ayub, covered with blood, rushed by him into the
apartment, and again fell prostrate.
My father, Ayub! my father? cried the page,
kneeling at his side.
Allah il Allah! praised be God, for now I am
safe! said the Morisco, raising on his arm, and,
though his whole frame shook as in the ague of death,
regarding the pair with the greatest exultation. I
thought they had shot me through the liver with a
bullet; but Allah be praised! 'twas naught but an
arrow. Help me up, noble seorEh? ay? Trim
the taper a little, and give me a morsel of drink.
Thou sayest naught of my father, Ayub? said
Jacinto, eagerly and yet with mortal fear,for he
knew by the gesture of Don Amador, as he ceased
his unavailing attempt to lift the wounded man, but
more by the countenance of Ayub himself, that he
was a dying man.
How can I speak without light? cried the Moor,
with a sort of chuckle. Trim the torch, trim the
torch, and let me see where these boltheads be
rankling
.Praise
be to Allah, for I thought myself a dead
man!
Wilt thou not speak to me of my father?
exclaimed
Jacinto, in agony.
A brave night! a brave night! muttered Ayub,
fumbling at his garmentsValiant unbelievers!
Praised be GodThe Wali
Ay, the Wali! the Wali, thy master! cried
Jacinto
,
his voice dwindling to a hoarse and terrified
whisper;my father, thy master, Ayub?
The WaliHah! exclaimed the unbeliever,
roused by the distant explosions;At it yet, brave
pagans? Roar, cannon! Shout, infidel! shout and
whistleshout, whistle, and kill!Save me the Wali,
save me the Wali!
Oh heaven, Ayub!thou sayest nothing of him,
of my father!
They took him a prisonerbut we'll have him
again!Lelilee! Lelilee!Strike fast, pagan!A
brave day for Granada!
At these words, Jacinto seemed not less like to die
than the fugitive. But as he neither fell to the floor,
nor screamed, Don Amador still held fast to Ayub,
who was now struggling in the most fearful
convulsions
,
and yet, strange to hear, still uttering broken
expressions of joy.
A prisoner, a prisoner!A little drink, for the
sake of Allah! he cried, incoherently. Ha, ha!
one runs not so far with a bullet in the liver!Now
they are at it! now they are killing the great seores!
now, they murder 'em!Great joy! a great sight
for a Moor! greatgreatgreat revenge!Many
days agoneGreatgreat revenge! says the Wali
They killed my motherGreat revengegreat
greatOho! great revenge for Granada!
With these accents on his lips, mingled with sounds
of laughter, and horrid contortions of countenance,
the infidel Moor, (for such was Ayub,) sprang
suddenly
to his knees; and flinging abroad his arms,
and uttering a yell of agony, fell back instantly upon
the floor, quivered a moment, and then lay a
disfigured
corse.
Dost thou see, Jacinto! said Don Amador,
taking
the shivering boy by the arm. Ayub is dead,
and thy father a prisoner. If thou wilt save the life
of Abdalla, the Wali, (I never before knew that
Abdalla
,
though noble, was of this dignitybut this shall
help me to plead for him;) get thyself instantly in
readiness, and let us begone.
The page turned a tearless countenance on his
patron, and replied, with a tranquillity that seemed to
come from desperation,
I will go with my lord, for I have no friend now
but him,I will go with my lord, to look upon my
father's dead body; for I know the Spaniards will
not spare his life a moment,I will go with my lord,
and would that I had gone sooner! for now, it is
too late.
As Jacinto pronounced these words, he began to
weep anew, though hearkening passively to the
instructions
of the cavalier.
If thou canst find me any plumes, said Amador,
fetch them to me straight; and if thou hast about
the house, any Mexican garment, which thou canst
wear, haste thou to don it. As for myself, I will first
arm, and then robe me in the tunic of this poor dead
misbeliever. Be of good heart, I charge theeGod
will protect us.
There are robes enough, both for my lord and
me, said the sobbing boy,and shrouds tooIt
is too late.But I can die with my lord!
Why, that is spoken with more valour than I
thought thou hadst, said the cavalier. But bring
me the robes, without thinking of thy shrouds; and
be very quick, for I must have thee to buckle some
of these straps of my jambeux.
The page took up a little taper that lay near the
flambeau, and, shuddering as he passed by the body,
instantly departed on his errand.
CHAPTER XXIV
WHEN the boy returned, bearing a bundle of
garments,
and two or three such crests as were worn
by the nobler Mexicans, in time of war, the cavalier
had more than half-armed himself. He sighed, as he
flung the habergeon over his shoulders, to find the many
rents made among the Flemish links by the
Mexican
glass; but he sighed more, when he discovered
how greatly his bodily powers were enfeebled, by
feeling, almost for the first time in his life, the
oppressive
weight of the mail. Nevertheless, the
cannon
still roared at the palace, every moment was
expediting
the doom of Abdalla, perhaps, also, that of his
friends and kinsman; and he seized upon cuish and
greave, gauntlet and helm, with activity and
eagerness
.
"What is that huge mantle thou placest upon the
table?" he demanded of the page, without relaxing
in his efforts.
"A
tilmatli
, or Indian cloak, large enough to hide
my lord's armour," replied Jacinto, hurriedly. "If the
Mexicans should see the gleaming of but a single link,
death on the spot, or, still more horrid, on the
pyramid,
will be the fate of my lord."
"Now that I know, that such would be the
consequence
of captivity," said the cavalier, fiercely, "I
swear to God and St. John, I will die fightingthat
is, if it please heaven, that I shall be struck no more
blows that overpower without killing."
"And this great penacho," said the boy, "I will tie
to my lord's crest, so that it shall entirely veil the
helmet. I have fastened some of the red tufts among
the feathers, whereby the pagans may think my lord
is a war-chief, and noble, if they should see them."
"Of all boys that I have ever yet seen, thou art by
far the shrewdest and wisest," said Don Amador,
with complacency, but without ceasing a moment to
do on his armour, What disguise hast thou
provided
for thyself?
A garment, said Jacinto, which, being flung
about my body and hooded over my head, will cause
the Mexicans to think me a woman devoted to the
service of one of their gods.
A most damnable delusion, said the novice;
and I would thou hadst fallen upon some other
device
.
But, perhaps, thou hadst no choice; and, now
that I think of it, thy small stature, and very smooth
and handsome visage, will, perhaps, suit this disguise
better than another. If there be any sin in assuming
it, heaven will allow the necessity, and forgive the
commission. Quick, and don it,for I would have
thee tighten these greave-straps, before I pull on my
boots.
It will but encumber me: I will fling it over me
in the passage, said Jacinto, kneeling, and
endeavouring
,
with an unsteady hand, to perform the office
required of him.
Be of good heart, I charge thee, and tremble
not. Thou art unused to this service; but think not,
though thou beest the son of a Moorish Wali, of the
noblest blood, that this duty can dishonour thee. I
have performed it myself, times without number, to
my good knight, Don Gabriel. I would thou wert
somewhat stronger, though. Fear not to pull with all
thy strength. I have shrunk somewhat with the
fever,greatly to the disparagement of my leg,
and the strap is of the stiffest.
It is stiffened with my lord's blood! said the
page, trembling more, but succeeding, at last, in
securing
it. Then rising, and knotting a broad and
shadowy plume over his patron's helmet, so as, in a
great measure, to conceal the gleaming iron, he
assisted
to fasten it. There remained nothing, then,
for the cavalier, but to arrange the tilmatli about
his person; a feat, in which, with the aid of the page,
he succeeded so well, as quite to hide his martial
equipments, without yet depriving him of the power,
in case of necessity, of using the sword, which he
held naked in his hand.
Thy woman's weeds! Why dost thou hesitate,
Jacinto? he cried, prepared, and now eager to make
his departure. Thou thinkest of thy lute? By my
faith, I shall be loath thou shouldst lose it, for much
good has it done, and yet may do, to Don Gabriel.
I will bear it under my arm.
Think not of the lute, said Jacinto, sorrowfully.
What need have we now of music? It will but
overburden my lord, whose hands should be free;
and in mine, it would only serve to expose the
deception
of my apparel.
Cast it aside, then; and now, in God's name, let
us depart!
Jacinto stepped, faltering, up to the body of Ayub,
lying stiff and cold, the countenance, illuminated by
the slanting torch-light, still mingling a grin of
exultation
with the contortion of the death-agony. A tear
dropped upon the swarthy cheek, and a deep sob
burst from the bosom of Jacinto, when he gazed his
last upon the dead Morisco.
Why dost thou tarry to weep? said Amador,
impatiently.Ayub was an infidel.
My lord does not know how those who have not
many friends, can value the few, said the page.
This man was faithful to my father; and therefore
do I lament him, as one whose loss is a sore
misfortune
;
and, infidel though he were, yet was he of the
faith of my ancestors.
Remember, however, that, while thou weepest
over a dead friend of Abdalla, thou deprivest him of
the services of a living one.
Thus rebuked, Jacinto moved rapidly into the
passage, and flinging, as he went, the garment he
held about his person, stepped with the cavalier into
the street.
A thick scud, threatening rain, careered over the
heaven, and the smoke of cannon, mingling with the
mists of the lake, covered the city with a gloom so
deep, that Don Amador could not easily distinguish
the peculiar habiliments of his companion.
Nevertheless
,
he could well believe that his appearance was
that of an Indian maiden. He bade Jacinto to take
him by the hand, adding an injunction, under all
circumstances
that might arise, to maintain his grasp.
To this, Jacinto answered,
Let it not be so,at least, not until we are so
environed, as to be in danger of separating. My lord
must now consent to be guided by me. (He spoke
with singular coolness, as if restored, by the urgency
of the occasion, to all that self-command and
discretion
,
which had so often excited the wonder of his
patron.) I will walk a little before; and if the
people should approach, let my lord take no notice,
but follow calmly in my steps, as though he were a
great noble, disdaining to look upon his inferiors. Be
not amazed at what may happen, and, especially, do
not speak a word until close by the Spaniards.
Dost thou mean, said the cavalier, suddenly
struck with the memory of the vision, not yet
accounted
for by the page,dost thou mean to
practise
any arts of magic? for if so
I beseech my lord not to speak, said the boy,
with a hurried voice; for, if a word be heard,
neither
valour nor magic can save us from destruction.
By-and-by, my lord shall see the wisdom of this
counsel; and all that is strange in its consequences,
shall be explained to him.
Thus speaking, Jacinto strode forwards, and Don
Amador, wondering, yet yielding to his instructions,
followed in silence.
The cannon still roared at the palace, and the
shouts of the infuriated combatants were plainly
heard, in the intervals of the discharges; so that, as
the cavalier had hinted, there could be no difficulty
in determining their path. Nevertheless, it appeared
to him, that Jacinto walked forwards with the
boldness
and certainty of one familiar with the streets he
was treading.
16*
For a time, their course lay through a street
entirely deserted; but, by-and-by, passing into one
of greater magnitude, they beheld shadowy masses,
now of single figures, now of groups, darting about,
many of them with lights, as if flying, some from
the scene of combat, and others, like themselves,
approaching it. It was apparent that this street
was one of the four great avenues leading to the
square of Axajacatl; for no sooner had the two
Christians stepped upon it, than the sounds of conflict
came to them with tenfold loudness; and they could
behold, ever and anon, as the deadly discharges burst
from the artillery, the flames flashing luridly up
through the mists, like the jets of a distant volcano.
With the consciousness that he now trod a
principal
street, Don Amador became aware that he was,
of a certainty, advancing full upon the mouth of, at
least, one piece of ordnance; and, as Jacinto paused
suddenly, as if dismayed at his peril, (for at that
moment
a ruddy flame shot out of the mist, and a
falconet
bellowed down the street,) he approached the boy,
and said,
For thy sake, Jacinto,(it does not become me
to say for my own; though I confess some
repugnance
to advance thus on the cannon of my friends,)
I should wish thou couldst find some other path, not
so much exposed to be raked as this.
Speak not,we have no choice, muttered the
boy. But God be thanked! the bullet that strikes
my lord, will first pass through my own body.
This little expression of devotion was pronounced
with an earnestness that touched the heart of the
cavalier; and he was about to utter his satisfaction,
when a gesture of Jacinto, who immediately began
to resume his pace, warned him into silence. The
usefulness of the caution was soon made manifest;
for two or three Mexicans suddenly brushed by,
though without seeming to notice them. An instant
after, there passed several groups, bearing
wounded
men in their arms; and, by-and-by, while every
moment seemed to surround them yet more with
isolated individuals, there came a party in some
numbers, uttering lamentations, as if over the body
of a great noble. Several of these bore torches in
their hands, wherewith they were enabled to descry
the pair; and Don Amador's heart beat quick, as he
saw three or four detach themselves from the group,
and run forwards, as if to make sure of a prey. He
grasped at his weapon, invoked his saint, and moved
quickly up to Jacinto, to give him what protection
he could. But, at the very moment when he feared
the worst, he was amazed to behold the barbarians
come to a dead halt, and, at the waving of Jacinto's
hand, part from before him with countenances of
reverence and fear. The same remarkable change was
observed in those who composed the party bearing
the corse, with the addition of new marks of homage;
for, leaving the body in the hands of a few, they
seemed about to follow the page in a tumultuous
procession, until he turned round, waving his hand
again; at which gesture, nearly all immediately fell
on their knees, and so remained until he passed. All
this time, the wondering cavalier was conscious that
he was himself unregarded.
Little by little, while the screams and cannon-shots
grew louder at each step, Don Amador perceived
that the groups began to grow into crowds, and then
into dense masses, every moment; while, every
moment
,
also, it became still more apparent, that his
guide exercised some powerful, though, to him,
inscrutable
,
influence, over the mob; for, no sooner
did their torches reveal his figure, than all were
straightway seized with admiration, falling upon their
knees, or returning on their path, and following him
towards the battle.
The gestures of Jacinto served no longer to repel
them; and in a few moments there were hundreds
of men, their numbers increasing at each step, who
pressed after him eagerly, though reverentially,
uttering, at first, low murmurs, and then, at last,
shouts of joy and triumph. These reaching the ears
and drawing the attention of others in front, they, in
turn, added their respect to the homage of the rest.
However surprising, and, indeed, confounding, this
notice, and these salutations, to Don Amador, they
were far from agreeable; for the train followed so
close upon his heels, that he dreaded, every moment,
lest some derangement of his mantle or plumes might
expose to their gaze the hidden ensigns of a Christian.
Greatly was he rejoiced, therefore, when the steady
and persevering advance of the page had carried him
so deeply into the crowd, that it was scarcely
practicable
for more than one or two individuals, at a time,
to look upon him, and quite impossible that the noisy
train should follow. He ceased, therefore, to lament
his proximity to the cannon-mouths, which still, at
intervals, flung death among the besiegers; for he
thought that in that alone there was safety. His
desire, in this particular, was soon gratified; for he
was, at last, wedged, with the page, among a mass
of men so dense and so disordered, that he no longer
feared a scrutiny. He was in sight of the palace, his
foot planted upon the square, and but a few paces
separated from his friends and his knight.
In the flash of the arquebuses, but more
particularly
in the fiendish glare of the cannon, when
disemboguing
their contents upon the barbarians, he
beheld the terraces covered with his countrymen,
resisting as they could, and with every shot from the
musket, every bolt from the arbalist, adding a life to
the reckoning of their revenge, and yet fainting with
fatigue over a slaughter which had no end. The
square was filled with men, as with a sea, and when
the fiery flashes of the ordnance lit it up as with a
momentary conflagration, the commotion following
upon each, made him think of those surges of fire
which roll in the crater of a volcano, and of the
billows
of blood that dash upon the shores of hell. A
more infernal spectacle could not, indeed, have been
imagined; and when the harsh yells of the pagan
myriads were added, the tophet was complete, and
man appeared,as he yet appears,the destroyer
and the demoniac.
This spectacle, however horrible it might have
been to one accustomed to look upon man as the
image of his maker, and the blow struck at the life
of man, as a stroke aimed at the face of God, had
the effect to stir the blood of Don Amador de Leste
to such a degree, that, had he not been checked by
the cold hand and the deadly pale visage of his
companion
,
he would have followed the impulse of his
valour, uncovered his weapon, and, shouting a
war-cry
,
dashed at once upon the throat of the nearest
infidel
.
The look of Jacinto recalled him to his senses;
he made him a signal to clutch upon his mantle and
follow, and then plunged again into the gory crowd.
The tempest, both physical and mental, which beset
all that rout of pagans, reduced the intelligence of
each to but two objects of thought,his enemy and
himself. Not one turned to wonder or observe, when
the strong shouldersstrong from excitementof
the cavalier thrust him aside, or the hard touch of an
iron-cased elbow crushed into his bosom; nor,
perhaps
,
was a look cast upon the effeminate figure, that
seemed a girl, at the back of this impetuous stranger.
Thus, then, unresisted and disregarded, the cavalier
made his way, step by step, taking advantage of every
moment when the barbarians gave way before an
explosion of artillery, or a charge of the garrison,
hoping, at each effort, to issue upon the open space
betwixt the besiegers and the besieged, and, at each,
arrested by a denser crowd,speaking words of
encouragement
to the horror-struck page, for well he
knew he might speak without fear in such a din,
and, feeling, at each moment, his strength melting
away, like burning wax, under the prolonged exertion.
He toiled for his life, for the life of the boy, perhaps
for the life of Don Gabriel; but human nature could
not sustain the struggle much longer. Despair came
to his heart, for he knew not how far he stood from
the palace wall, and felt that he could labour no
more. His eye darkened, as he looked back to
Jacinto
,the
boy was swooning where he stood.
God be merciful to us both! But, at least, thou
shalt die in my arms, poor boy! he muttered,
making
one more effort, and raising the page from the
earth. God be merciful to us,but especially to
this child, for he is sinless, and, I fear me, fatherless.
At this moment, a dreadful scream burst from the
lips of all around the novice, and immediately he felt
himself borne back by the barbarians as they
recoiled
,
seemingly, from a charge of cavalry. The
thought was hope, and hope again renewed his
strength. He planted his feet firmly on the earth, and
with his elbow and shoulder dashed aside the fleeing
pagans, pressed the senseless boy to his heart, raised
his voice in a shout, and the next moment stood free
from the herd, ten feet from the muzzle of a cannon,
from which the Mexicans had been recoiling. His
eye travelled along the tube;the magician Botello
stood on the broken wall at its side, and the linstock
he held in his hand was descending to the vent.
For the love of God, hold! shouted the cavalier,
or you will kill Christian men!
The match fell to the earth, and the cavalier sprang
forward. But if his voice had reached the ears of
friends, it had not escaped the organs of foes. A
dozen savages, forgetful of their fears, sprang
instantly
towards him, endeavouring to lay hold upon
him. A back-handed blow of his weapon loosed the
grasp of the most daring, and the hands of others
parted along with the flimsy disguise of Jacinto. He
left this in their grasp, tottered forward, and the next
moment, as the cannon belched forth its death upon the
pursuing herds, stood in the court-yard of the palace.
CHAPTER XXV.
As the cavalier sprang among his countrymen,
almost fainting with exhaustion, he loosened, with as
much discretion as dexterity, the knot of the tilmatli,
and dropped it to the earth, so that he might not be
mistaken for a foe. The sudden gleam of his armour,
and the sight of his wan visage, struck all those who
had rushed against him with horror. Among the
foremost of all, was the man-at-arms Lazaro, who
no sooner perceived that he had raised his trusty
espada
against what he doubted not was the spectre of
the novice, than he fell upon his knees, yelling aloud,
Jesu Maria! my master! my master's ghost!
with other such exclamations of terror.
At this moment, the page revived in the arms of
his patron, but only to add to the cry of Lazaro a
shriek so wild and heart-piercing, that it drove all
other sounds from the ears of Don Amador. The
cavalier observed the cause of this cry, and again his
eye lighted up with the fires of passion. A group of
soldiers, agitated by some tumult, which had no part
in the conflict around, stood against the palace wall,
under a casement, from which was projected a
bundle
of partisans. Round this extempore gibbet was
fixed a rope, one end of which being pulled at by
those below, the cavalier beheld, shooting up above
the heads of the mass, a human being, to all
appearance
,
bound hand and foot; and in the blackened and
horribly convulsed countenance of the sufferer, he
perceived the features of Abdalla, the Wali.
With a bound, that carried him at once into their
midst, and with a rapidity that prevented opposition,
he rushed up to the wall, and before the Morisco was
elevated above his reach, struck the halter with his
weapon. The Zegri fell to the earth;the
executioners
looked upon the visage of his bold preserver, and
being persuaded, like Lazaro, that the very ghastly
apparition before them was nothing less than the
ghost of an hidalgo, universally reckoned dead, they
recoiled in affright. Before they had recovered from
their confusion, the culprit rose to his feet, glared a
moment on the cavalier, and then springing away,
was instantly lost among the combatants. A wild
and exulting cry of Moro! Moro! Tlatoani Moro!
rose among the barbarians; and the Spaniards knew
that their prey was beyond pursuit.
Santos santisimos! Holy Mother of heaven!
grace upon all, and Amen! if thou beest a living
creature, speak,or I will smite thee for a devil!
These words came from the lips of Alvarado, who
had himself commanded the body of hangmen, and
who now, though his teeth chattered with terror,
advanced
his rapier towards the bosom of his late
companion
.
As he gazed and menaced, Don Amador,
yielding, at last, to the consequences of labours
altogether
above his enfeebled powers, sunk swooning to
the earth; and Jacinto, rushing from the crowd, flung
himself upon his body.
Viva! praise God, and let the cry go round; for
we have saved the noble De Leste! shouted Don
Pedro, with a voice of joy, raising the senseless
cavalier
.
Now shall ye hear from his own mouth, ye
caitiffs that have belied me, that I played not the foul
companion. Viva! I swear it rejoices me to behold
thee!Why, thou little rascal traitor, art thou here,
too! It was God's will thy vagabond father should
purchase me my brother; for which reason, I am not
incensed he has escaped me. One day is as good as
another for hanging.How now, my noble friend!
art thou hurt beyond speaking! God's lid! but I
would hug thee, if thou didst not look so dismal!
All this time, the neophyte surveyed the astounded
visages around him with a bewildered eye; and,
doubtless, his obtuse senses could not, at that moment
of clamour, detect the accents of Don Pedro.
Tetragrammaton! did I not tell thee the truth?
cried the harsh voice of Botello.
Master! dear master! exclaimed Lazaro, as he
embraced the knees of the novice.
Thanks be to God! the noble seor has escaped!
shouted the secretary.
God be praised! but would it had been yesterday!
for then might it have been better for Don Gabriel.
The name of his kinsman, spoken by the well-known
voice of Baltasar, dispelled at once the dreamy trance
of the cavalier.
How fares my noble kinsman? he cried.
The head of Baltasar fell on his breast, and a loud
groan came from his fellow-servitor. Don Amador
looked to the Tonatiuh, and witnessed the change
from blithe joy to gloomy hesitation, which instantly
marked his handsome aspect; the face of Fabueno
darkened; and the magician strode away.
Clear for me, if ye will not speak! said the
cavalier
,
with sudden sternness; for there is no sight of
wo I cannot now look upon.
He grasped the arm of Jacinto, and pushing into
the palace, made his way toward the chamber of the
knight.The hand of devastation had been upon the
walls of the passage; beams and planks had been
torn away to supply the materials for the mantas and
other martial engines; and Don Amador no longer
knew the apartment of his kinsman. A dim light,
and a low sound of wailing, came from a curtained
door. Before the secretary and the other attendants
who followed, could intercept him, he stepped into
the room.
The sight that awaited him instantly fastened his
attention. He was in the chamber of Montezuma,
and the captive monarch lay on the bed of death.
Around the low couch knelt his children, and behind
were the princes of the empire, gazing with looks of
awe on the king. In front were several Spanish
cavaliers, unhelmed and silent; and Cortes himself,
bare-headed and kneeling, gazed with a countenance
of remorse on his victim; while the priest Olmedo
stood hard by, vainly offering, through the medium
Vol. II. 17
of Doa Marina and the cavalier De Morla, the
consolations of religion.
The king struggled in a kind of low delirium, in
the arms of a man of singular and most barbarous
appearance. This was a Mexican of gigantic stature,
robed in a hooded mantle of black; but the cowl had
fallen from his head, and his hair, many feet in length,
plaited and twisted with thick cords, fell like cables
over his person and that of the dying king. This was
the high-priest of Mexico, taken prisoner at the battle
of the temple.
The countenance of Montezuma was changed by
suffering and the death-throe; and yet, from their
hollow depths, his eyes shot forth beams of
extraordinary
lustre. As he struggled, he muttered; and his
broken exclamations being interpreted, were found
to be the lamentations of a crushed spirit and a
broken
heart.
Bid the Teuctli depart, were some of the words
which Don Amador caught, as rendered by the lips
of Marina: before he came, I was a king in Mexico.
But the son of the gods, he went on, with a hoarse
and rattling laugh, shall find that there are gods in
Mexico, who shall devour the betrayer! They roar
in the heavens, they thunder among the mountains,
(the continued peals of artillery, shaking the fabric of
the palace, mingled with his dreams, and gave a
colour to them)they speak under the earth, and
it trembles at their shouting. Ometeuctli, that
dwelleth
in the city of heaven, Tlaloc, that swimmeth on
the great dark waters, Tonatricli and Meztli, the
kings of day and night, and Mictlanteuctli, the ruler
of hell,all of them speak to their people; they look
upon the strangers that destroy in their lands, and
they say to me, `Thou art the king, and they shall
perish!'Wo! wo! wo! he continued, with an
abrupt transition to abasement and grief; they look
upon me and laugh, for I have no people! In the
face of all, I was made a slave; and, when they had
spit upon me, they struck me as they strike the slave;
so struck my people. Come, then, thou that dwellest
among the rivers of night; for, among the rivers,
with those who die the death of shame, shall I
inhabit
.
Did not Mexico strike me, and shout for joy?
Wo, wo! for my people have deserted me! and, in
their eyes, the king is a slave!
Put thy lips to this emblem of salvation, said
the Spanish priest, extending his crucifix, eagerly;
curse thy false gods, which are devils; acknowledge
Christ to be thy master; and part,not to dwell
among the rivers of hell, which are of fire, but in the
seats of bliss, the heaven of the just and happy.
I spit upon thy accursed image! said the
monarch
,
rousing, with indignation, into temporary
sanity
,
and endeavouring to suit the action to the word;
I spit upon thy cross, for it is the god of liars and
deceivers! of robbers and murderers! of betrayers
and enslavers! I curse thy god, and I spit upon him!
All the Spaniards present recoiled with horror at
the impiety, which was too manifest in the act to
need interpretation; and some, in the moment, half
drew their swords, as if to punish it by despatching
the dying man at once. But they looked again on
the king, and knew that this sin was the sin of
madness.
As they started back, the person of De Leste,
whom, in their fixed attention to Montezuma, none
of them had yet perceived, was brought into the view
of the monarch. His glittering eye fell upon the
penacho, which the cavalier had not yet thought to
remove from his helmet, and which yet drooped,
with its badges of rank, over his forehead. A laugh,
that had in it much of the simple exultation of
childhood
,
burst from the king's lips; and, raising himself
on the couch, he pointed at the ruddy symbols of
distinction. The cavaliers, following the gesture with
their eyes, beheld, with great agitation, their liberated
companion; and even Cortes, himself, started to his
feet, with an invocation to his saint, when his eye
fell upon the apparition.
The words of Amador,Fear me not, for I live,
though not lost, were unanswered; for,
notwithstanding
that many of the cavaliers immediately
seized upon his hands, to express their joy, they
instantly cast their regards again upon Montezuma,
as not having the power to withdraw them for a
moment
from him.
Say what they will, muttered the king, still
eyeing
the penacho with delight, I, also, am of the
House of Darts; and in Tlascala and Michoacan,
and among the Otomies of the hills, have I won me
the tassels of renown. Before I was a king, I was
a soldier: so will I gather on me the armour of a
general, and drive the Teuctli from my kingdom.
Ho, then, what ho! Cuitlahuatzin! and thou, son of
my brother, Quauhtimotzin! that are greater in war
than the sons of my body, get ye forth your armies,
and sound the horns of battle! Call upon the gods,
and smite! on Mexitli the terrible, on Painalton the
swift! call them, that they may see ye strike, and
behold your valour! Call them, for Montezuma will
fight at your side, and they shall know that he is
valiant!
The struggles of the king, as he poured forth these
wild exclamations, were like convulsions. But
suddenly
,
and while the Spaniards thought he was about
to expire in his fury, the contortions passed from his
countenance, his lips fell, his eyes grew dim, and his
voice was turned to a whisper of lamentation.
I sold my people for the smile of the Teuctli; I
bartered my crown for the favour of the Christian; I
gave up my fame for the bonds of a stranger; and
now what am I? I betrayed my childrenand what
are they? Let it not be written in the books of
history
,blot
the name of Montezuma from the list of
kings; let it not be taught to them that are to follow.
Tlaloc, I come!Let it be forgotten.
Suddenly, as he concluded, and as if the fiend of
the world of waters he had invoked, had clutched
upon him, he was seized with a dreadful convulsion,
and as his limbs writhed about in the agony, his eyes,
dilating with each struggle, were fixed with a stony
and basilisk glare upon those of Cortes; and thus,
his gaze fixed to the last on his destroyer,he expired.
When the neophyte beheld the last quiver cease in
the body, and knew by the loud wail of the
Mexicans
,
that Montezuma was no more, he looked round
for Don Hernan; but the general had stolen from the
apartment.The visage of Cortes revealed not the
workings of his mind; but his heart spoke to his
conscience
,
and his soul recorded the confession;I
have wronged thee, pagan king;but thy vengeance
cometh!
Don Amador's arm was touched by his friend De
Morla.
In the chamber of death, said the cavalier,
sadly, thou mightest best hear of death: but I
cannot
discourse to thee, while Minnapotzin is mourning.
Let us depart, brother.
Don Amador motioned to the page, and followed
his friend out of the apartment.
CHAPTER XXVI.
On
the following morning, it was known to all the
garrison, that they were, at night, to depart from
Tenochtitlan. The joy, however, that might have
followed the announcement, was brief; for, at the
same moment that the exhausted Christians were
roused from slumber and bidden to prepare, the
warders
sent down word from the turrets, that their
enemies
were again approaching. The shrewdest of all
could perceive no other mode of retreat than by
cutting
their way through the besiegers; and it required
but little consideration in the dullest, to disclose the
manifold dangers of such an expedient. They
manned
the walls and the court-yard, therefore, with but
17*
little alacrity, and awaited the Mexicans in sullen
despair.
But Don Hernan, quick to perceive, and resolute
to employ the subtle devices of another, had not
forgotten
the words of Botello, when that worthy
counselled
him to make such use of Montezuma and his
children, as had been made of the golden apples, by
Hippomenes, when contending in the race with the
daughter of Schneus.
The Mexicans advanced, as usual, with whistling
and shouts, filling the square with uproar; and, as
usual, the cannoniers stood to their pieces, and the
Tlascalans to their spears; but before a dart had
been yet discharged, those who looked down from
the battlements, beheld a funeral procession issue
from the court-yard.
A bier, constructed rudely of the handles of
partisans
,
but its rudeness in a measure concealed by the
rich robes of state flung over it, was borne on the
shoulders of six native nobles, all of them of high
degree in Tenochtitlan. It supported the body of the
emperor, which was covered only by the tilmatli,
leaving the countenance exposed to view. The royal
sandals were on his feet, and the copilli, with the
three sceptres, lay upon his breast. The pagan priest
in his sable garment, his face covered by the cowl,
and his head bending so low, that his hideous locks
swept the earth, stepped upon the square, chanting
a low and mournful requiem; and the bearers,
stalking
slowly and sorrowfully under their burden,
followed
after.
The murmurs were hushed in the palace; and the
square, so lately filled with the savage shouts of the
enemy, became suddenly as silent as the grave. The
monotonous accents of the priest were alone heard,
conveying to the Mexicans, in the hymn that ushered
a spirit into the presence of the deities, the knowledge
of the death of their king.
For awhile, the barbarians stood in stupid awe;
but, at last, as the train approached them, and they
perceived with their own eyes the swarthy features
of their monarch fixed in death, they uttered a cry
of grief, low indeed, and rather a moan than a
lament
,
but which, being caught and continued by the
voices of many thousand men, was heard in the
remotest
parts of the city. They parted before the
corse of one, to whom, before the days of his
degradation
,
they had been accustomed to look as to an
incarnate divinity. They fell upon their knees, and
bowed their faces to the earth, as he was carried
through them; and again the Spaniards beheld the
impressive spectacle, of a great multitude prostrate
in the dust, as if in the act of adoration.
When the bearers and the body were alike
concealed
from their view, the Mexicans rose, and
turning
towards the palace, brandished their weapons
with fierce gestures, and many exclamations of
hatred
,
against the destroyers of their king. For a
moment, Cortes doubted if his expedient had not
served rather to increase, than to divert, the fury of
his opponents; and he beckoned from his stand on the
terrace, to the cannoniers, to prepare their matches.
But an instant after, he revoked the command: the
Mexicans were retiring; a great army was suddenly
converted into a funeral train, and thus they departed
from the square, after the body of their ruler, without
striking a blow at the invader.
This circumstance reassured the garrison; and
the prospect of speedy release from intolerable
suffering
and from destruction, wrought such a change
over all, that visages, emaciated by famine, and
haggard
from despair, were lit up with smiles; and songs
and laughter re-echoed through chambers, which,
but the night before, had resounded with prayers,
groans, and curses. Nothing was now thought of
but the bread and fruits of Tlascala, the mines
and fandangos of Cuba; and many a sedate and
sullen
veteran clapped his hands with a sudden joy, as
he bethought him of the urchins sporting in the
limpid
Estero, or climbing the palm that grew at his
cabin door. Escape from the miseries which had
environed them, and the privilege to discourse for
life of the marvels of Tenochtitlan,of the beauty
of its valleys, the magnificence of its cities, the wealth
of its rulers, the ferocious valour of its citizens,to
wondering listeners, were the only offsets thought of
to the many labours, sufferings, and risks of the
campaign
.
The little property amassed by eachthe
share of Montezuma's presents, and the spoils stripped
from the dead, were stored, along with such trifles
as might add the interest of locality to legends of
battle, in the sacks of the soldiers. All made their
preparations, and all made them in hope.
The only melancholy men in the palace, that day,
were Cortes and Don Amador de Leste. The latter
remembered his knight, falling ingloriously and alone
on the causeway; and the general pondered over the
griefs of defeated ambition.
But whatever were the pangs of Don Hernan, he
forgot not the duties of a general. Besides other
precautions, he caused his carpenters to construct a
portable bridge of sufficient strength to support the
weight of his heaviest artillery, and yet, not so
ponderous
but that it might be carried on the shoulders
of some half a hundred strong men. This he
provided
,
fearing lest the barbarians had destroyed the
bridges not only of the great dike of Iztapalapan,
but of that of Tacuba, on which it was his
determination
to attempt his flight, and which, running
westward
from the island, was, as has been intimated,
but two miles in length.
In accordance with the advice of the
necromancer
,
the hour of departing was put off until midnight,
a period of time which had the double advantage
of being recommended by Botello, and of ensuring
the least molestation. Each individual, therefore,
made his preparations, and looked forward to that
hour.
The melancholy that oppressed the spirits of the
neophyte, was so great, that he betrayed little
curiosity
either to acquaint himself with the events which
had occurred during his captivity, or even to inquire
further into the mysterious knowledge and acts of
the page. But, however indisposed to conversation,
he could not resist the attentions of De Morla. From
him he learned the imputation he had cast on the
valour and gratitude of Alvarado; a charge which the
novice removed, by magnanimously confessing, that
his own indiscretion had carried him beyond the
reach of Don Pedro, who should be in no wise held
accountable for his misfortune. He heard with more
interest, and even smiled with good-natured
approbation
,
at the story of Fabueno's fortune; but a frown
darkened on his visage, when De Morla pictured the
anger and domineering fury of the Tonatiuh; and
this was not diminished, when his friend confessed
himself the champion of the secretary, announced
that Cortes had sanctioned the quarrel, and claimed
of him the offices of a friend.
If blood must be shed in this quarrel, he said,
it must be apparent to you, my very noble and
generous friend, (for, surely, your kindness to
Lorenzo
merits this distinction,)it must be apparent,
I say, that I am he who is called upon to shed it.
The youth is my own follower; for which reason, I
am bound to give him protection, and support him in
all his just rights, whereof one, I think, is to love any
woman who may think fit to give him her affections,
whether she be a princess or peasant. I must,
therefore
,
after repeating to thee my thanks for thy very
distinguished generosity, require thee to yield up thy
right to do battle with Don Pedro, if battle must,
indeed
,
be done,though I have hopes that his good
sense will enforce him to surrender the maid, without
the necessity of bloodshed.
I cannot yield to thee, hermano mio, said De
Morla, quickly; for there is deadly feud betwixt
the Tonatiuh and myself; and were he to fight thee
a dozen times over, still should he, of a necessity,
measure weapons with me.
It doth not appear to me, how this difference can
call for more than one combat; and, as I have told
thee, I think it can be composed, provided thou
allowest
me to assume thy place, entirely without
conflict
.
Know thou, my friend, said De Morla, that I
have already, in the matter of thy fall and capture,
at the fight of the manta, charged Alvarado with
many terms of opprobrium and insult; for which
reason, a duello has become very inevitable.
Having already heard from myself, said Don
Amador, with gravity, that Don Pedro cannot justly
incur reproach for my mishap, thou canst do nothing
else, as a true cavalier, but instantly withdraw thy
charges, and make him the reparation of apology;
after which, there will remain no need of enmity.
Thou speakest the truth! said De Morla,
impetuously
;
and I am but a knave, to have said, or
even thought, except at the moment when I was
grieved and imbittered by thy supposed death, that
Don Pedro could demean himself, in any battle, like
a craven. I freely avow, and will justly bear
witness
,
that he is a most unexceptionable cavalier. So
far, I am impelled to pronounce by simple veracity.
But yet is there mortal, though concealed, feud
betwixt
us.
The neophyte looked on his friend with surprise;
seeing which, De Morla took him by the arm, and
said, with great heat,
I have come to hear, by an accident, that Don
Pedro did once, ('tis now many months ago,) in the
wantonness of his merriment, fling certain aspersions
upon the innocence of Benita; a crime that I could
not have forgiven even in thee, amigo querido, hadst
thou been capable of such baseness. I now confess
to thee, without having divulged the same to any one
else, that this circumstance did greatly inflame my
anger, and that, from that moment, I have sought
out some means to quarrel with Alvarado, and so
slay him, without involving the fame of Minnapotzin:
for it is clear to me, as it must be to any lover, who
doth truly reverence his mistress, that to associate
her name with a quarrel, would be at once to darken
it with the shadow of suspicion. If I should say to
Alvarado, `Thou hast maligned my mistress, thou
cur, and therefore I will fight thee,' then should he,
for the credit of his honour, aver that he spoke the
truth; and whether he lived or died, the maiden
should still be the sufferer. I have, therefore,
resolved
,
that my cause of vengeance shall be
concealed
;
and thou wilt see that the present pretext is
the honourable cloak I have been so long seeking.
This I confess to thee; but I adjure thee to keep my
counsel.
There was a degree of lofty delicacy and
disinterestedness
in this revealment, which chimed so
harmoniously
with the refined honour of Don Amador,
that he grasped De Morla's hand, and, instead of
opposing further remonstrance, assured him, both of
his approval and his determination to aid him, as a
true brother in arms, in the conflict.
But how comes it, my friend, he demanded,
with a faint smile, thou darest look so far into
futurity
,
for such employment? Hast thou forgot the
prophecy of Botello? Methinks, to be fulfilled at all,
the consummation should come shortly; for, with
this night, we finish the war in Mexico.
For a time, seor mio, said De Morla. Though
the griefs of Montezuma be over, (heaven rest his
soul, for he was the father of Minnapotzin!) the pangs
of his race are not yet all written. I will abide with
Don Hernan; and if Botello do not lie, thou shalt
yet see me sleep on the pyramid.
Heaven forbid! cried Amador. I would rather
thou wouldst follow mine own resolutions, and, for
once, show Botello that he hath cast a wrong figure.
Dost thou mean to desert us?
My kinsman sleeps in the lake, said the novice,
sadly; the tie that bound me to this fair new world
is therefore broken. In mine own heart, I have no
desires to fight longer with these infidels, who cannot
injure the faith of Christ, nor invade the churches of
Christendom. The Turks are a better enemy for a
true believer; and, if I put not up my sword
altogether
,
it shall be drawn, hereafter, on them. The
little page, whom I have, by a miracle, recovered, I
will convey with me to Cuenza, after having, in like
manner, recovered his father, (a very noble Morisco,)
or been otherwise assured of his death. I would
greatly persuade thee, having made the princess thy
wife, to follow with me to thy native land. `My
castle lies on Morena's top,' continued the
cavalier
,
insensibly falling upon the melody of the Knight
and the Page, and beginning to muse on the singer,
and to mutter, Surely Jacinto is the most
wonderful
of boys!
My patrimony is worn out, said De Morla,
without
regarding the sudden revery of his friend; and
I give it to my younger brothers. By peace or war,
somehow or other, this land of Mexico will be, one
day, conquered; and, then, a principality in Anahuac
will count full as nobly as a sheep-hill in Castile. I
abide by Don Hernan. But let us be gone to the
treasury: I hear the ingots chinking, and thou hast
not yet looked upon our spoils.
The exchequer thus alluded to, and to which De
Morla speedily conducted his friend, was the sleeping
apartment of the general. Of the wealth that was
there displayed,the stores of golden vessels and of
precious stones, as well as of ingots melted from the
tribute-dust long since wrung from the unhappy
Montezuma
,it
needs not to speak. The whole treasury
of an avaricious king, a predecessor of the late
captive
,
walled up in former days, and discovered by a
happy chance, was there displayed among the meaner
gleanings of conquest. An hundred men, as Don
Amador entered, were grasping at the glittering
heaps, while the voice of Don Hernan was heard
gravely saying,
The king's fifth, here partitioned and committed
to the trust of his true officers, we must defend with
our lives; but while granting to all Christian men in
this army, free permission to help themselves here as
they like, I solemnly warn them of the consequences,
should we, as mayhap my fear may prove true, be
attacked this night, while making our way through
the city. The richest man shall thereby purchase
the quickest death.The wise soldier will leave these
baubles, till we come back again to reclaim them.
This night, I will insure the life of none who carries
too rich a freight in his pockets.
He spoke with a serious emphasis, and some of the
older veterans, raising their heads, and eyeing his
countenance steadfastly for a moment, flung down
the riches they had grasped, and silently retired from
the apartment. But many others bore about their
persons a prince's ransom.
CHAPTER XXVII.
At
midnight, the Mexican spy, looking over the
broken wall, beheld in the court-yard which it
environed
,
a scene of singular devotion;or rather he
caught with his earsfor the grave was not blacker
than that midnightthe smothered accents of
supplication
.
The Christians were upon their knees,
listening
,
with a silence broken only by the fretful
champing
of steeds, and the suppressed moans of wounded
men, to a prayer, pronounced in a whispering voice,
wherein the father Olmedo implored of Heaven to
regard
them in pity, to stupify the senses of their
enemies
,
and surround his servants with the shields of
mercy, so that, this night, they might walk out of the
city which was their prison-house, and from the
island which had been their charnel, oppressed no
more by the weight of His anger.
The prostrate soldiers, to that moment, full of
confident
Vol. II. 18
hope, and not anticipating the danger of any
opposition, hearkened with solicitude to the humble
and earnest supplication; and when the padre
besought
the deity to endow their arms with strength,
and their hearts with courage, to sustain the toils,
and perhaps the perils, of retreat, they were struck
with a vague but racking fear. The petition which
was meant to embolden, deprived them of hope; and
they rose from their vain devotions, in unexpected
horror.
The gloom that invested the ruinous palace,
prevailed
equally over the pagan city. No torch shone
from the casements or house-tops, no taper flickered
in the streets; and the urns of fire on the
neighbouring
pyramid, the only light visible,save, now and
then, a ghastly gleam of lightning bursting up from the
south,burned with a dull and sickened glare, as if
neglected by their watchers. A silence, in character
with the obscurity, reigned over the slumbering city;
and when, at last, the steps of those who bore the
ponderous bridge, and the creaking of artillery wheels,
were heard ringing and rolling over the square, the
sounds smote on the hearts of all like the tolling of
distant funeral bells.
The plan of retreat, determined after anxious
deliberation
,
and carefully made known to all, was
adopted with readiness, as these footsteps and this
rolling sound of wheels,the only signals made,
were heard; each man knew his place, and, without
delay, assumed it. In little more than half an hour,
the whole train of invaders, Christian principals and
Tlascalan abettors, was in motion, creeping, with the
slow and stealthy pace of malefactors, over the street
that led to the dike of Tacuba. Few glances were sent
back to the palace, as those dim sheets of lightning,
flashing up over the path they were pursuing,
revealed
obscurely, ever and anon, its broken and deserted
turrets. Its gloomy pile associated nothing but the
memory of disaster and grief. Fearful looks,
however
,
were cast upon the dusky fabrics on either side
of the street, as if the fugitives apprehended that each
creak of a wheel, each clattering of horses' hoofs,
or the rattling of armour, might draw the infidel from
his slumbers; and many an ear was directed
anxiously
towards the van, in fear lest the trumpet should,
at last, be sounded, with the signal of enemies
already
drawn up, a thousand deep, on the path they
were treading. But no sounds were heard, save
those which denoted the continued progress of their
own bands; no wakeful barbarian was seen lurking
in the streets; and hope again slowly returned to the
bosoms of the tremblers.
Before they had yet reached the borders of the
island
,
the night became still more dark than at their
outset; for the lightning grew fainter at each flash,
and finally sank beneath the horizon, to continue its
lurid gambols among the depths of the South Sea.
This was witnessed with secret satisfaction; for, with
these treacherous scintillations, departed the dread
that many felt, lest they should betray the march of
the army.
It has been mentioned, that the people of
Tenochtitlan
had not only covered the surface of the island
with their dwellings, but had extended them, on
foundations
of piles, into the lake, wherever the
shallowness
of the water permitted. This was especially
the case in the neighbourhood of the great dikes; in
which places, not only single houses, but entire
blocks, deserving the name of suburbs, were
constructed
.
Such a suburb jutted out, for some distance,
along the causeway of Tacuba.
The van of the army had already passed beyond
the furthest of these black and silent structures, and
yet no just cause existed to suppose the retreat had
been discovered; though many men of sharper ears
or fainter hearts than their fellows, had averred that
they could, at times, distinguish, on the rear, a dull
sound, as of men moving behind them in heavy
masses. The wiser, however, were satisfied, that no
such sounds could prevail even over the subdued
noise of their own footsteps; but some of these bent
their ears anxiously towards the front, as if afraid of
danger in that quarter. The reason of this was not
concealed. All day, sounds of lamentation had been
heard coming from the dike, upon which they were
now marching, or from its neighbourhood. It was
rumoured, that the cemetery of the Mexican kings
lay on the hill of Chapoltepec, under the huge and
melancholy cypresses, which overshadow that green
promontory; and that there, this day, Montezuma
had been laid among his ancestors. A whole people
had gone forth to lament him; and how many of the
mourners might be now returning by the causeway,
was a question which disturbed the reflections of all.
But this apprehension was dispelled, when the front
of the army had reached the first of the three ditches
which intersected the dike to Tacuba. Its bridge
was removed and gone, and the deep water lay
tranquilly
in the chasm. The foe, relying on this simple
precaution, had left the dike to its solitude; and the
expedient for continuing the imprisonment of the
Spaniards, was the warrant of their security.
A little breeze, dashing occasionally drops of rain,
began to puff along the lake, as the bridge-bearers
deposited their burden over the abyss. This was not
the labour of a moment; the heavy artillery, which
still preceded the train of discomfited slayers, like a
troop of jackals in the path of other destroyers,
required that the ponderous frame should be adjusted
with the greatest care. While the carriers, assisted
by a body of Tlascalans, who slipped into the ditch
and swam to the opposite side, were busy with their
work, the long train of fugitives behind, halted, and
remained silent with expectation. The rumbling of
the wood over the flags of the causeway, the
suppressed
murmurs of the labourers, and, now and then,
the dropping of some stone loosened by their feet,
into the ditch,added to the sighs of the breeze,
whispering
faintly over casque and spear,were the only
sounds that broke the dismal quiet of the scene; and
there was something in these, as well as in the
occurrence
itself, which caused many to think of the
characteristics of a funeral;the mute and solemn
expectation of the lookers-on,the smothered
expressions
of the few,and the occasional rattle of clods,
dropping, by accident, upon the coffin.
The bridge was, at last, fixed, and the loud clang
of hoofs was heard, as Cortes, himself, made trial of
its strength. The breath of those behind, came more
freely, when these sounds reached their ears; and
they waited impatiently till the advance of those who
preceded them, should give motion to their own
ranks.
The post of Don Amador de Leste had been
assigned
,
at his own demand, in the vanguard,which
was a force consisting of twenty horsemen, two
hundred
foot, and ten times that number of Tlascalan
warriors, commanded by Sandoval, the valiant; and,
up to this moment, he had ridden at that leader's side,
without much thought of unhealed wounds and
feebleness
,
willing, and fully prepared, to divide the
danger and the honour of any difficulty, which might
be presented. But being now convinced, by the sign
we have mentioned,that is to say, the removal of
the original bridge,that no enemies lay in wait on
the causeway, he descended from the back of
Fogoso
,
giving the rein to Lazaro, and commanding him
to proceed onward with the party. In this, he was,
perhaps, not so much governed by a desire to escape
the tedium of riding in company with the ever
taciturn
Sandoval, as to be nearer to the forlorn boy,
Jacinto, who had, until this moment, trudged along
at his side. Some little curiosity to witness the
passage
of the rout of fugitives, had also its influence;
for, taking the page by the hand, he led him to the
edge of the bridge, where he could observe every
thing without inconvenience, and without obstructing
the course of others.
The dike of Tacuba was, like that of Iztapalapan,
of stone, and so broad, that ten horsemen could easily
18 *
ride on it abreast. Its base was broad, shelving, and
rugged, and the summit was, perhaps, six feet above
the surface of the water.
The thunder of the twenty horsemen, as they rode
over the bridge, interrupted the consolation which
the neophyte was about to give to Jacinto; who,
hanging closely to his patron's arm, yet looked back
towards the city, with many sobs for his exiled father.
In the gloomy obscurity of the hour, the cavaliers of
the van, as they passed, seemed rather like spectres
than men;in an instant of time, they were hidden
from sight among the thick shadows in front. Not
less phantom-like appeared the two hundred foot,
stealing over the chasm, and vanishing like those
who had preceded them. Then came the two
thousand
Tlascalans, their broken and drooping plumes
rustling over their dusky backs, as they strode
onwards
,
with steps quickened, but almost noiseless.
After these, came the cannon,eighteen pieces of
different sizes, dragged by rows of pagans,
commanded
by the gunners. The bridge groaned under
their weight; and a murmur of joy crept over the
compacted multitude behind, when they had counted
them, one by one, rumbling over the sonorous wood,
and knew that the last had crossed in safety.
Much time was necessarily occupied in the passage
of these cumbrous instruments; and an interval of
several minutes was allowed to intervene betwixt the
passage of each, while the cannoniers were looking
to the condition of the bridge and the ropes.
It was on these occasions, that the greatest quiet
prevailed; for, then, even breath was hushed in
suspense
;
and it was on these occasions also, that the ears
of the neophyte were struck by a sound, which had
not, perhaps, at that time, attracted the attention of
any other person. The breeze, which occasionally
whispered on his cheek, was so light, as scarcely to
disturb the serenity of the lake; and yet, it appeared
to him, notwithstanding all this, that, in these
moments
of calm, he could plainly distinguish, upon
either hand, and at a little distance, the rippling of
water, as if agitated by a moderate wind. He
strained
his eyes, endeavouring to pierce the gloom, and
unravel the cause of this singular commotion,but
wholly in vain. The circle of vision was
circumscribed
into the narrowest bounds; and wo betide
the infidel, who, fishing in the lake, that night, should
fall from his canoe in slumber, and be parted from
it but twenty feet, in his confusion.The cavalier
looked up to the heavens; but the few drops
discharged
from their stony vault, pattered with a sound
almost inaudible upon the water. While he was yet
wondering, he heard the voice of one passing him,
say to a comrade,
Art thou not wroth, Iago, man, to give up
yonder
rich town to the kites, and this fair water to the
ducks of Mexico?
This trivial question gave, at once, a new colour
to his thoughts, for he remembered what millions of
wild fowl brooded every night on the lakes; and,
almost
ashamed that he should have yielded a moment
to the suggestions of fear, he turned, once more, to
watch the progress of the army.
The centre division consisted of but an hundred
Christian footmen, and half a score cavaliers; but
two thousand Tlascalans were added to it, and it was
commanded by Cortes in person; who, having
ridden
across the bridge, as has been said, to prove its
strength, now waited for the coming of his party,
beyond the breach. Along with this division, were
conducted the prisoners, and the king's spoil,the
latter being carried on the backs of wounded steeds,
unfit for other service, as well as on the shoulders of
Tlamm. The prisoners, comprising all the family
of Montezuma, whom evil fortune had thrown into
the hands of Don Hernan, were environed by the
hereditary foes of their race, but protected from any
secret stroke of malice, by three or four cavaliers
who rode with them.
Among these few horsemen, the neophyte
perceived
one, across whose saddle-bow there sat what
seemed a female, enveloped in thick mantles. In this
cavalier, he thought, by the murmur of the voice with
which he addressed his muffled companion, that he
detected his friend, the seor De Morla.
Is it thou, Francisco, my brother? he whispered,
inclining towards the cavalier; and hast thou
Benita
thus under thy protection?
I thank heaven, yes! replied De Morla. But
what doest thou on foot, and so far removed from
the van? Has Fogoso cast thee again? I prythee,
walk thou by me a little.Dost thou remember thy
promise?
Surely, I do: but speak not of it now; for, this
moment, my heart is very heavy, and I cannot think
with pleasure of a contest with Christian man. I will
presently follow thee.
Speak me not what I have told thee to mortal
man, for the sake of her whom I hold in my arms,
and who already owes thee a life. To-morrow,
he continued, exultingly, as he passed,to-morrow
we shall tread upon the lake side; and, then, God be
with him who strikes for the honour and innocence
of woman!
Art
thou
there too, Lorenzo? said the novice,
perceiving the secretary riding at the heels of the
young cavalier of Cuenza, and burthened in like
manner
with the freight of affection. Guard thy
princess
well, and have great care of the bridge, and the
rough edge of the dike; for thy horsemanship is not
yet so perfect as De Morla's, nor can thy charger at
all compare with the chestnut gelding. Ride on with
care, and God be thy speed!
The centre of the army was, at last, over the
bridge. The neophyte cast his eye to the black
mass of the rear-guard, which contained the greater
part of the troops, both Christian and allied,
commanded
by Velasquez de Leon and the Tonatiuh; the
latter of whom, to show his affection for the island
of which he had been, as he said, a king, and to prove
his contempt for his late subjects, chose to ride the
very last man in the army; while De Leon conducted
the front of the division. The latter, stern, decided,
and self-willed in all cases, deferred, for a moment,
to give the signal to march, in order that the centre
might be well cleared of the bridge; but more,
perhaps
,
from a natural love of tyranny, to torture with
delay the spirits of his impatient followers.
In this moment of quiet, the sounds, which Don
Amador had forgotten, were repeated with more
distinctness
than at first; but still they were of so vague
a character, that he could not be certain they were
produced by any cause more important than the
diving and flapping of water-fowl. Nevertheless,
feeling a little uneasiness, he clasped the hand of
Jacinto
tighter in his own, and strode with him over the
bridge. He paused again, when he had crossed, and
was about to give his whole attention to the
mysterious
sounds; when, suddenly, he was amazed and
startled by the spectre of a man, rising up as from
the lake, and springing on the causeway close by his
side.
He drew his sword, demanding quickly, but with
perturbation,
Who and what art thou, that comest thus from
the depths of the waters?
Tetragrammaton! peace!Dost thou not hear?
Hear what, sir conjurer? Hast thou been
listening
likewise to the wild fowl. By my troth, I thought
thou wert a spirit!
Wild fowl! muttered Botello, with a horse-laugh.
Such wild fowl as eat carrion, and flap the water
like crocodiles.Hah! dost thou not hear? Lay
thine ear upon the causeway at the water's edge
But thou hast not time. Get thee to thy horse, and
delay not; and if thou seest Cortes, or any other
discreet cavalier, bid him draw and be ready. I
said, that some should escape, but not
all!
God be
with thee! follow quickly, and sheath not thy sword.
Surely, this time, thou art mad, Botello! Here
are no foes.
But the remonstrance of the cavalier was cut short
by the instant flight of the magician; and ere the
words were out of his mouth, a horseman, crossing
the bridge, and riding up to him, said sternly,
Who art thou, Sir Knave and Sir Witless! that
babblest thus aloud, in time of peril, contrary to
I am thy very good friend, seor De Leon, said
the novice, abruptly; and, waiving any difficulty
which might spring from the heat of thy words, if duly
considered, I think fit to assure thee, that I have but
just parted from the necromancer, Botello; by whom
I am advised to bid thee, as well as all other discreet
officers whom I may see, to draw sword, and remain
in readiness for a foe; there being certain sounds on
the water, which, in his opinion, are ominous of evil.
For myself, I bid God guard thee, meaning, in
person
,
to join the van, as soon as possible.
The cavaliers parted,De Leon riding back to
his party, without uttering a word; and Don
Amador
,
with the page, stepping forwards so fleetly, as
soon to find himself among the Tlascalans of the
centre. Through these he made his way, ever and
anon casting his eye to the lake, and looking for the
tokens of a foe, but without perceiving anything at
all unusual. He gained the midst of this band of
allies, reached the side of his friend, and laid his hand
on De Morla's arm. A low wailing voice came from
the folds of the garments, which veiled the
countenance
of Minnapotzin; and some strong agitation
shook the frame of his friend.
Think not of love
now
, my brother! cried the
neophyte, hurriedly; but be warned that thou art
in danger, and Minnapotzin with thee. It is thought,
that enemies are at hand.
Having thus spoken, and without waiting for an
answer, Don Amador, still urging Jacinto along,
endeavoured to make his way through the dense
bodies of Tlascalans, which separated him from Don
Hernan. He reached their front, he stepped upon
the little space left between them and the general,
and placed his eyes upon Cortes. But before he had
yet spoken, it seemed as if the whole moving mass
of the army had been converted into marble, on the
causeway; for instantly, as if with one consent, the
train came to a dead halt, and a cry, low, but breathed
from the hearts of men struck with mortal dread, rose
from the van to the rear, in one universal groan.
The cavalier turned where all eyes were turned,
and beheld a sudden pyramid of fire, like one of the
many gushes of flame he had already seen in this
volcanic land, save that the blaze was steadier, shoot
up, from a vast height in the air, over the distant city,
and plunge its sanguine point against the heavens;
while, at the same moment, its lurid mass, reflected
and reversed on the lake, darted over the water to
his feet, in a path of blood,as if Mexitli, the Terrible
God, had, at last, roused from slumber, and couched
his gigantic spear against the slayers of his children.
The blaze illumined the lake far round, and, shining
on the casques of cavaliers and the plumes of
Tlascalans
,
disclosed the whole line of the army, stretched
along the calzada. In an instant more, the neophyte,
petrified with awe, perceived that this mighty
balefire
was kindled on the top of the great temple; and,
in the strong and glaring line, which it struck out
upon the water, there was revealed a mass of living
objects, floating, like birds, upon the element, yet
speckled with the human colours of Mexico. At the
same moment, and while his eye yet wavered
between
the flaming pillar and the moving objects on
the water, there came from the pyramid a sound,
heard once before, and never more to be forgotten.
The horn of the gods was winded;the doleful and
dismal note came booming with hideous uproar over
the waters; and before the hills had caught up its
echoes, the whole lake, right and left, in front and
on the rear, rung, roared, and trembled, under the
yells of an hundred thousand infidels.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
The
situation of the Spaniards, at that moment,
though sufficiently frightful to every one, was yet
known, in all its horrors, only to the leaders of the
van. As hope is ever independent of judgment, ever
unreasonable and unreflective, the absence of the
bridge, at the first sluice, was not enough to persuade
the fugitives, that the passage of the second might
be equally interrupted. But, at the moment when
the signal-fire was kindled on the temple, Sandoval
had already reached this ditch, and perceived that
its bridge was also demolished, and, as it seemed,
very recently too; for there yet remained a huge
timber lying across the chasm,left, as he feared,
rather as some decoy and trap, than, as was more
probable, deserted suddenly by workmen, scared
from their labours by the approach of the Spaniards.
The three ditches divided the dike into four
portions
,
of as many furlongs in extent. On the second
of these portions was concentrated the whole
retreating
army, its front resting upon a sluice of great
depth, passable by footmen, (for the great beam was
soon discovered to be sound,) but not by the horse
and artillery, without the portable bridge, which yet
rested over the first breach. This second obstacle
being overcome, it was apparent, that a third would
still remain to be surmounted; and the passage of
both was to be effected in the presence, and in the
midst, of a great enemy.
As we have said, the beacon-light, shooting up from
the pyramid, and continuing to burn with intensity,
brought light, where all, before, was darkness; and
revealed such innumerable fleets of canoes, hovering
on both flanks, as the novice had not seen, even on
that day when he first trode upon a dike of Mexico.
But the spirit that then slumbered, was now awake;
and as the rowers responded, with their wild cries,
to the roar of the sacred trumpet, they struck the
water furiously with their paddles, until the whole
lake seemed to boil up with a spray of fire; and thus
they rushed madly against the causeway.
The novice cast his eye upon the general. The
ruddy glare of the beacon could not change the
deadly pallor that covered his cheeks; but,
nevertheless
,
with this ghastly countenance turned to the foe,
he cried out, cheerily, or, at least, firmly, to those
immediately in advance,
Who ho, cannoniers! your quoins and handspikes!
your horns and matches! and show me your throats
to the lake-rats! Then, raising his voice to its
trumpet-tones, he continued, as if giving counsel and
command to all: Be bold and fearless, and strike
for the honour of God, brave Christians! Soho! De
Leon, valiant brother! and thou, Alvarado,
matchless
cavalier! raise me the bridge, and be quick; for
here we need it.
The voices of other officers were heard, faintly
mingled with the din, but not long; every moment
the shouts of the Mexicans, continued without
intermission
,
became louder, and their canoes were
plunging
nearer to the causeway.
A pang rent the bosom of Don Amador:
I must get me to my companions, he cried, to
Jacinto
,
and what can I do for thee this night, young
page that I love?
I will follow thee, said the page, tremulously;
I will die with my lord.
Would that I had thee but upon the back of
Fogoso! for methinks that even De Morla should not
strike more truly for Minnapotzin than would I, this
night, for thee.
Where goest thou, De Leste? cried Cortes, as
the novice pushed by. Pausethou art best among
the cannoniers.
A dreadful yell, at that moment, drowned the
general's
voice: but one still more dreadful was heard,
when, as the pagans drew breath to repeat the cry,
Vol. II. 19
the Christians in front heard the rear-guard
exclaiming
,
with loud and bitter shrieks, The bridge!the
bridge!it is fast and immoveable!The weight
of the horses and artillery had sunk it deep into the
chasm, and no human strength could stir it from its
foundation.
These words and sights were all the occurrences
of a moment. There was neither time for
observation
nor lamentation. The infidels on the water
rushed to the attack with the same fury which had
so often driven them upon the spears of the garrison;
and, not less by their cries than their apparent
numbers
,
it was made obvious that the whole strength of
the great city was gathered together for this
undertaking
;
for those who had caught a little of their
language, could distinguish the different quarters of
the island encouraging each other with cries of Ho,
Tlatelolco! shall Majotla strike first at the foe?
Alzacualco
!
on; for Tecpan is swift and mirthful.On,
ho! for Mexitli is speaking; on, for our gods are on
the temple, and they hunger for the Teuctli! The
line of the army was full half a mile in length; but,
as far as it stretched, and further than the eye could
penetrate beyond either extremity, a triple row of
canoes, on each side of the causeway, was seen
closing upon it with the speed and fury of breakers,
dashing against a stranded ship.
Now
, cannoniers! cried Don Hernan, elevating
his voice above the tumult, when the rushing masses
were within but a few paces of the causey;
now
to
your linstocks, and touch in the name of God!
The damp gunpowder sparkled and hissed on the
vents, but did not fail the Christians in their need.
The roar of the volley was like the peal of an
earthquake
;
and, right and left, as eighteen horizontal
columns of fire darted from the engines, the lake
boiled up with a new fury, fragments of canoes and
the bodies of men were seen flung up into the air,
and yells of agony which chilled the blood, bore
witness to the dreadfulness of the slaughter.
Quick, and again! cried Don Hernan, eagerly.
Shoot fast, and shoot well; and know that I will
shortly be back with ye.Ho, Sandoval! why dost
thou loiter? plunge into the ditch, and swim. Rest
where thou art, De Leste; for thou art too weak for
battle. Give thine aid to the cannoniers.
The confused and huddled Tlascalans, who formed
the rear of Sandoval's party, shouted at the cry of
the Teuctli, and made way for him. A cavalier,
bearing a burthen in his arms, spurred after, with a
mad impetuosity, which rendered him regardless of
the many naked wretches he trampled to the earth:
it was De Morla. The example thus set by the
apparent
flight of the two hidalgos, was followed by
others; and the allies were broken by the hoofs of
Christians, while still enduring the arrows, that came
like a driving rain from the lake.
Meanwhile, it was evident, though the cannon,
recharged and shot off again with extraordinary
quickness, served to keep the part of the causeway
where they stood free from assailants, that they had
effected a landing, perhaps, both in front and rear,
certainly on the latter,where they were already
engaged, hand to hand, with the Spaniards. The
thunder of the explosions did not conceal from the
novice the shrieks of his countrymen. His blood
boiled with fury:
Come with me, Jacinto, he cried. We will
reach Fogoso; and then I can do my duty to my
friends, and smite these accursed murderers, without
deserting thee.
He dragged the trembling page after him; he
darted among the cannoniers, and passed the
artillery
.
He reached the Tlascalans, who followed the
van,but havoc was already among their ranks. As
he gained them, he perceived the shelving sides of the
causeway lined with canoes, from which were
springing
up, like locusts, a cloud of Mexicans, brandishing
their glassy maces, and rushing with the yells of
wolves upon their ancient foes. Barbarians were
mingled with barbarians in one hideous mass of
slaughter, impassable and impenetrable.
His heart sunk within him. I have prejudiced
thy life, as well as my own, this night, he said.
Would that I had never left the back of Fogoso!
Before he had yet time to resolve whether to
return
to the cannoniers, or to make one more effort to
pierce the bloody mass, he was descried by the crew
of a piragua, which, that moment, was urged upon
the dike with such violence, that it was split in twain
by the shock. The eager warriors rushed up the
ascent with a shriek of exultation, and brandished
their spears. The neophyte retreated; but neither
the rapidity of his steps, nor the keenness of his
blows, would, perhaps, have availed against their
numbers, enfeebled as he was, and trammelled by the
grasp of the affrighted Jacinto, had not a party of
Spanish footmen, flying from the rear, come that
moment
to his aid. These, though they forced the
barbarians
to give way, were, in their turn, driven back
upon the cannon; and Don Amador was fain to
follow
them.
The audacity of the foe seemed still to increase
rather than diminish; and, twice or thrice, efforts
were made by certain valiant madmen among them,
to spring to land immediately in the mouths of the
cannon. These were instantly speared by the many
desperate Spaniards, who, flying from their posts in
the rear, which were now known to be in extremity,
took refuge among the artillery, as the only place of
safety, and there fought with better resolution.
In the meanwhile, the efforts of the enemy still
remaining
unabated, the prisoners and many of the
rear-guard pressing wildly forward, and Don Hernan
and most of the officers having fled to the front, from
which they had not returned, the gunners were
themselves
seized with a panic; and, without regarding
the death on which they were thus rushing, began to
leave their pieces, and fly. The representations of
Don Amador served to arrest some of them, and
other soldiers taking their places at the guns, they
yielded passively to his instructions; and he found
himself, at once, in the post of a commander.
The many bitter reflections that harrowed his own
bosom, he spoke not, and sharply he reprimanded
others, who were yielding to despair. Whatever
might be the difficulty of advancing, he felt that such
a measure was become indispensable, as promising
the only hope of salvation: for every instant the
clamours increased on the rear, as if, there, the
barbarians
had attacked in the greatest numbers, and
were approaching nearer to the cannon, flushed with
slaughter and victory. He instructed the gunners in
what manner they should rush forwards with their
charged pieces, pointed obliquely, so as to sweep the
sides of the dike, shoot them off, when arrested by
too determined a front of resistance, and, loading
quickly, take advantage of the confusion following
each discharge, so as to gain as much ground as
possible
,
while still manfully fighting. He hoped, thus,
besides succouring the Tlascalans in front, and
giving
room for the rear-guard to follow, to reach the
second ditch, where, as he had heard, the beam still
gave passage to the footmen, but where his most
sanguine wishes could point him out no other hope
than to stand by the cannon till relieved, or abandon
them and fly, as, it seemed to him, all had done, who
had already crossed the breach.
He animated the gunners with his voice, and with
his actions; and so great was the effect of the
discharges
on the Indians landing, that the artillerymen
were able to rush forwards perhaps a score yards,
after each volley; thus convincing all of the wisdom
of the measure, and the probability of escape.
Two circumstances, however, greatly diminished
the exultation, which the cavalier would have
otherwise
felt at the success of his stratagem. Though
the Tlascalans in front ever responded to the shouts
of his gunners, and though each discharge seemed to
bring him nearer to them, yet ever, when a volley
19*
was preceded by the loud
Viva!
meant to
encourage
the allies, the answer seemed to come from the
same distance, and the mass of feathered warriors,
lit up by the discharge, disclosed the bodies of none
but frowning Mexicans. The other circumstance
was still more appalling; the space behind, left
vacant
by his advance, was occupied no longer by foot
or horse, by treasure-bearer or prisoner, by Spanish
musketeer or Tlascalan spearman. A few dusky
groups could be seen running to and fro, behind; but
yet they seemed rather to rush backwards than to
follow after.
God save the rear-guard! he muttered, for it
is surely surrounded.On, brave cannoniers! Cortes
shall not be ignorant of your deeds this night, and
Don Carlos, the emperor, shall know of your fame.
The shout, with which the cannoniers again poured
forth the deadly volley, was repeated with victorious
energy, when the Mexicans, scattered by the
discharge
,
or leaping to avoid it, into the water, parted
away from before them; and they found themselves,
suddenly, upon the brink of the second ditch. The
great beam lay in its place; but the dark water in
the chasm was filled and agitated by the bodies of
men, wounded and suffocating. The white tunic of
the Mexican was confounded with the plume of a
Christian cavalier; the red arm of an infidel,
Tlascalan
or foeman,shook by the side of a Castilian
spear; the white visages of dead men rolled on the
necks of drowning horses; bales of rich cotton stuffs,
lances dancing up and down like the leaded
bulrushes
of children,armour of escaupil,garments, and
bodies of dying and dead,were floating together in
such horrible confusion, that the water seemed to heave
and bubble as with a living corruption.
The sight of the ditch and the beam clear of
enemies
,
fired the cannoniers with new hopes; and in
the frenzy of their joy, they would instantly have
dropped their fuses and handspikes, and taken to
flight, had it not been that Don Amador flung himself
upon the beam, and striking the first man dead,
commanded
them still to stand to their pieces.
Base caitiffs are ye all, he cried, who, thus
having the victory, and the lives of half the army, in
your hands, should so desert your posts, in the midst
of triumph! Wheel round half your pieces, and sweep
the causey sides behind;for I hear the coming of
friends. Would ye give up your pieces to infidels?
They are your safety!
The reproof of the cavalier, the sight of their dead
comrade, and the sword which had punished him,
still commanding the narrow pathway, the voices of
Christians behind, but, more than all, the manifest
truth of the declaration, that their safety depended
on their remaining by the artillery, turned the
gunners
,
at once, from their purpose; and their
resolution
received a new confirmation, when a Christian
voice was heard shouting in the front, as if of some
cavalier, heading a band of returning friends, and,
when, the next moment, a Spanish soldier was seen
to run towards them, leap on the beam, and then
spring from it to the causeway.
Santiago, and shoot on! cried the overjoyed
gunners; for Cortes is coming!
What, ho, knave Lazaro! cried the novice, as
the blaze of the discharge showed him in the new
comer, the countenance of his henchman. Where
goest thou? Wherefore hast thou left the horses?
And where is Don Hernan?
Master! dear master, is it thou? cried Lazaro,
with such a shout of joy as drowned even the yells
of death about him. Quick, for the love of God!
over the beam, with all these varlets,for life! for
life! for Don Hernan is fled, and all the cavaliers!
Peace, thou villain!Heed not this trembling
fool, exclaimed Amador, quickly. You hear!
the last ditch is bridged and free, and ye can, at any
moment, reach the firm land, as the cavaliers have
done.Give me another volley or two, for God, for
the honour of Spain, and for your friends, who are
fast approaching. We will march together with the
whole rear, to ensure safety. Quick!See ye not
how yonder fiends are rushing into your muzzles?
Viva! A bold shot for St. James, and our people!
The cavalier turned to Lazaro: he was bleeding,
and he cast a look of despair on his master.
Why art thou idle? thou wert bred to the linstock,
sirrah. Show thyself a Christian man and true.
Hark! hearest thou not? 'T is the shout of De Leon!
Bravely, bold hearts! the rear-guard is nigh.Hah!
halon, halon! Don Pedro!
'T is the voice of the secretary! cried Lazaro;
and God help me, but he cries for succour!
Ho, seor! seor Don Amador! for the love of
Christ!the wild shout of Fabueno, for the
neophyte
could no longer doubt it was he, was suddenly
interrupted: the shrill shriek of a woman succeeded;
and, then, every thing was lost in a hurricane of yells,
so intermingled that no one could say whether they
came from Christians or pagans.
Staydrop thy match,hold me this boy, as
thou holdest thy life, and suffer none to pass the
beam
For the sake of the cross thou adorest, the maiden
thou lovest! cried the terrified boy, clinging to the
cavalier, leave me not, oh leave me not, in this
horror
,
to die alone! The Mexicans will kill me, for I
have now no gown of a priestess to protect me
Notwithstanding the boiling excitement of the
novice
,
these last words filled his brain with strange
thoughts, but still so confused that they were more
like the momentary phantasms of delirium, than the
proper suggestions of reason. But whatever they
were, they were instantly driven out of his mind, by
another cry from Fabueno, seemingly hard by, but
so feeble and wailing, that a less acute ear might
have supposed it came from a considerable distance.
He shook the boy off, flung him into the arms of
Lazaro, crying, Answer his safety with thy life!
with thy life! and immediately darted through the
cannoniers, and retraced his steps on the causeway.
By this time, the fire on the pyramid had attained
its greatest brilliancy, and the wind having died
entirely
away, it projected its lofty spire to heaven, and
burned with a tranquillity which seemed to leave it
motionless; while its reflection on that part of the
lake which shared not in the agitations of conflict,
produced a spectacle of peace in singular contrast
with the horrible scene of carnage, that moment
represented
on the causeway. The light it shed, though
it made objects visible even as far as the second
ditch, did not illuminate the furthest part of the dike;
and there, whatever deed of death might be presented,
was hidden from the eyes of all but the actors
themselves
.
Raising his voice aloud, and running towards the
nearest group, Don Amador sought out the secretary. But this group, before he had yet reached it, started
away, and fled, with loud cries, towards the city, or
to where the tumult was greatest; and he knew by
their shouts of `Tlatelolco! ho, Tlatelolco!' that they
were Mexicans. On the spot they had thus deserted,
the novice stumbled over the body of a man, his throat
cut from ear to ear, his cotton armour torn to pieces;
and from the shreds, as the carcass rolled under his
foot, there fell out, rattling and jingling on the stones,
divers vessels of gold and jewels, such as had been
grasped in the treasury.
Without pausing to survey this victim of
covetousness
,
the cavalier ran on; and, hearing many
Christian
voices, ringing now with curses, now with
prayers
,
and now with shouts of triumph, he called out
at the top of his voice,
On, brothers! on to the artillery! advance!
Strike well, and forward!Ho, Lorenzo! comrade!
where art thou? and why answerest thou not?
A gurgling sound, as of one suffocating in the
flood, drew his eye to the lake almost under his feet.
The water rippled, as if lately disturbed by the
falling
of some heavy body; and just where the circling
waves washed sluggishly up the shelving dike, there
lay a white mass like a human figure, the head and
shoulders buried in the tide. The wash of the ripple
stirred the garments, and, in part, the corse, so that
it still seemed to be living; but when the novice had
caught it up, he beheld the visage of a very youthful
girl, her forehead cloven by a sword of obsidian, and
the broken weapon wedged fast in the brain. At the
same instant, the water parted hard by, and there
rose up a dark object, that seemed the back of a
horse, across which lay the body of a man in bright
armour, the legs upwards, but the head and breast
ingulfed. For an instant, this dreary sight was
presented
;
but, slowly, the steed, whose nostrils were
still under water, as if held down by the grasp of the
dead rider, rolled over on his side, and the body,
slipping off the other way, sunk headlong and silently
into the flood, followed presently by the horse; and
the next moment the waters were at rest.
God rest thee, Lorenzo! cried the novice,
laying
down the corse of Eugracia. Thy life and thy
hopes, thy ambition and thy love, are ended together
but now can I not lament thee!
He started up, as the causeway suddenly shook
with the tramp of hoofs, and a cavalier, without
spear or helm, dashed madly by. Almost at the
moment
of passing, whether it was that the strength of
the fugitive had suddenly given out, or whether, as
seemed more probable, a flight of arrows had been
sent in pursuit, and struck both horse and rider, the
steed made a fierce bound into the air; and then
pursued
his course, masterless.
Follow onwards, ye men of the rear! cried the
novice, struck with a sudden horror; for now he
became conscious that the artillery had been, for
several moments, silent; and when he looked after
the flying steed, though he could not, at that
distance
,
perceive any thing, he could hear fierce voices
mingling together in strife; and presently the
riderless
horse, as if driven back by a wall of foes,
returned
,
passing him again with the speed of the wind.
The limbs of the cavalier were nerved with the
strength of fury; for he thought he heard the screams
of Jacinto, ascending with the harsher cries of the
gunners; and scarcely did that frightened charger
fly more swiftly from the battle, than he himself now
back to it.
Thy duty, knave Lazaro! he cried. The boy!
save the boy!
Don Amador! oh Amador! Don Amador! came
to his ears, in a voice that rent his heart.
I come! I come! shouted the cavalier,
redoubling
his exertions, but not his speed, for that was at
the highest.
Oh heaven, Amador! Amador!
In his distraction, the neophyte confounded two
voices into one; and while he replied to one, his
thoughts flew to another.
I come! Answer mewhere art thou? I am
here:where art thou!
As he uttered these words, he sprang through the
artillery, which was without servers,among bodies
which were lifeless,and stood alone,for there
was no living creature there but himself,on the
borders of the sluice, the beam over which was
broken off in the middle, and the further portion,
only, left standing in its place.
He cast his amazed and affrighted eye from the
water, heaving as before with the struggles of dying
men, to the corpse on whose bosom he was
standing
.In
the grinning countenance, covered with
blood, and horribly mutilated by a blow which had
pierced through the mouth, jaws, and throat, to the
severed spine, he beheld the features of Lazaro, fixed
in death; and looked wildly at his side, to discover
the body of the page. No corse of Jacinto was
there; but, on the ground, where he had stood, on
the spot where he had charged him to stand, the
novice
perceived a jewel, catching a ray from the
distant
fire, glittering red, as with blood, and held by
a golden chain to which it was attached, in the
death-grasp of the henchman. He snatched it from
the earth and from the hand of the dead, and looking
on it with a stare of horror, beheld the holy and never
to be forgotten cross of rubies.
With that sight, the scales fell from his eyes, and
a million of wild thoughts beset his brain. The
magical
knowledge of the page, coupled with his
childish
and effeminate youth,his garments, so fitted to
disguise,his scrupulous modesty,his tears, his
terrors
,
his affection, and his power over the mind of
the cavalier,the garb of the priestess, so lately
acknowledged
,the
vision in the house of the Wali,
Abdalla,the cross of jewels, doubtless snatched
from the neck of Jacinto, when barbarians were
tearing him from the faithful Lazaro,all these
came to the brain of the cavalier with the blaze and
the shock of a cannon, suddenly discharged at his
ears. He looked again to the corses about him
they were those of the gunners; to the ditchit
writhed no more; and then, uttering the name of
Leila, he sunk, in a stupor, to the earth.
CHAPTER XXIX.
While
these scenes of blood were passing in the
centre of the army, and a hideous mystery concealed
the fate of the rear, the condition of the advanced
guard, though not altogether hopeless, was scarce less
terrific. When the forces of Sandoval, comprising
many of the followers, both common soldiers and
captains
,
of Narvaez, were made acquainted with the fate
of the bridge, and beheld the vast number of foes that
impelled their canoes towards the further bank of
the second ditch, as if to secure the passage, they
waited not for directions to cross over, by swimming.
They imitated the example of their commander,
Sandoval, who, leaping from his horse, and leading
him into the water, passed over by the beam, while
still holding and guiding the swimming animal. This
mode of proceeding being necessarily very slow, and
the barbarians rushing, in the meanwhile, against
them with unspeakable fury, the impatience of the
cavaliers became so great, that many of them spurred
their steeds down the sides of the dike, and thus,
swimming them along by the beam, passed to the
other side. Divers of the footmen, seduced by the
example, leaped, in like manner, into the lake; and
the Tlascalans, at all times less formidable opponents
than their armed allies, being, at the same moment
violently assaulted, sprang also into the water, so
that it became alive with the bodies of man and
horse,as if a herd of caymans, such as haunt the
lower rivers of that climate, were disporting and
battling in the tide. While thus embarrassed and
entangled together in the water, the swimmers were
set upon by the Mexicans, who, pushing their canoe
among them, and handling their heavy paddles, as
well as war-clubs, despatched them, almost without
labour, and with roars of exultation.
It was at this instant of confusion, and while those
Tlascalans who still remained on the dike, contended
but feebly with the augmenting assailants, that Don
Hernan, followed closely by De Morla, and others,
dashed over friend and foe, and reached the ditch.
The scene of horror there disclosed, the miserable
shrieks of Christian comrades, perishing in the gap
and the neighbouring parts of the lake, the
increasing
yells of infidels behind, touched the stout heart
of Cortes with fear. He descended from his steed,
sprang upon the beam, and crossed, crying out,
the same time, to those who followed,
Hold, cavaliers! Wait ye here for the artillery:
leave not this gap to the murderers. Fight ye he
well, and ye shall have help from the van.
So saying, he sprang again upon his horse. I
Vol. II. 20
Morla was at his heels, bearing Minnapotzin in his
arms, but on foot: the chestnut gelding was left
drowning in the sluice, entangled and sinking under
the weight of a dozen men, who had seized upon
him, in their terror.
God forgive thee, cavalier! cried Cortes, as he
caught the eye of Francisco; for, for this barbarian
puppet, thou playest the coward, and leavest thy
friend to perish, without the aid of a blow!
De Morla answered not, but, with a ghastly smile,
uncovered and pointed at the features of the
unconscious
princess.
If she be dead, cried the general, give her body
to the waters of her native lake; if she live, commit
her to the care of the Tlascalans; then call on thy
saints, and show that thou art not a craven!
Then, without waiting for an answer, Don Hernan
spurred onwards, striking down, almost at every
step,for the whole causeway was beset,some
luckless savage; and, now and then, in his
desperation
,
smiting at the hands of certain of his own
countrymen
,
who strove to arrest the galloping steed,
and spring behind him.
He reached the third and last ditch; it was
bridgeless
,
like the others, and, like the others, a theatre of
disorder and massacre. The pillar of fire, here,
revealed its figure but luridly and faintly, through
the thick mists and the cannon-smoke, sluggishly
driving over the lake; but he thought he could trace,
in the distant gloom, in front, the outline of those
rugged hills, which lie along the western borders of
the lake. He turned his face backwards to the city;
a tempest of yellsthe pagan shouts of victory, and
the last cries of Spaniards to God,came mingling
on a gust, that waved the distant flame to and fro,
like a sword of fire in the hands of some colossal
fiend. A bolt of ice smote through his bosom; and
when he plunged into the sluice, and, rising on the
opposite bank, drove the sharp spurs into the flanks
of his charger, no man, of all the army, fled with
more craven horror than himself.
An hour afterwards, the moon, diminished to the
thinnest crescent, crept with a sickly and cadaverous
visage, to the summit of the eastern hills, and peeped
down into the valley, preceding the dawn that was
soon to look upon its scenes of death.
At this moment of moonrise, those few Christians
who had escaped from the battle, were grouped at
the end of the dike, deliberating, in unspeakable
agitation
,
upon the course they were to pursue. Many
advised that they should instantly resume their flight,
and trust to their speed to put them, before
morning
,
beyond the reach of their merciless enemies;
some insisted upon remaining, to give help to such
wretches as, ever and anon, made their way from
the causeway, and, with tears of joy and loud
thanks-givings
,
threw themselves among their friends; a
few, more honourable, or more insane, among whom
were Sandoval and Don Christobal de Olid, (a very
valiant cavalier, to whom other histories have been
juster than this,) demanded, with stern reproaches,
that their leader should conduct them again to the
combat, which was still raging on the lake, and rescue
their countrymen out of that fiery furnace, or, at
once, honourably and justly, perish with them.
Is there one here, who, if I refuse this most mad
counsel, will say I do it from fear? demanded the
general, with a voice broken by agony and despair.
What I do, I do for the good of heaven, the king,
and yourselves. If I suffer you to return, then
will ye perish, Spain lose an appanage worthy the
first-born of an emperor, and, in that accursed city,
God be daily grieved by the sight of idolatry and
sacrifice. By remaining where we are, we shall
save many lives; and this land of milk and honey, of
corn and of gold, though now torn from us for our
sins, will be yet the guerdon of our resolution. I
aver and protest, that if we return to the hell that is
on the lake, we shall be lost, to a man. Is there one,
then, who says I remain here from fear?
Notwithstanding the deep grief and agitation which
gave their tone to the words of the general, there was
mingled withal a touch of such sternness, as forbade
even the boldest to reply. Great, therefore, was the
surprise of all, when a hollow and broken voice
murmured, in answer, from the causeway,
There is ONE,there are an hundred,there
have been
(but now they are not,) a thousand men,
who say that, this night, Cortes hath proved a craven,
a deserter of his friends, a traitor to his king, a
betrayer of his God,and, therefore, a villain!
As these words were uttered, there staggered up
the bank, on which the party rested, a figure,
seemingly
of a cavalier, but his armour so rent and
demolished
,
as, in many places, to leave his body naked.
His helmet was gone, and his locks, dripping with
water and blood, fell over his breast, leaving their
crimson stains on the white mantle muffling the body
of some slighter figure, which he bore in his arms.
I forgive thee, De Morla! cried the general,
rushing forwards, and then recoiling, as Don
Francisco
deposited the burden at his feet, and, removing
the cloth reeking with water as with gore, disclosed
to the view of all, gently touched by the ray of that
wasted and melancholy moon, the countenance of
the dead princess. Who hath struck the daughter
of Montezuma?who hath done this deed?
He who hath smitten the hearts of a thousand
Christians, by leading them into peril, and deserting
them in their need! said the cavalier, with a
tranquillity
that struck all with terror, for it was
unnatural
;
he, who commanded me to fling, while living,
this child of a murdered king into the lake, or upon the
spears of Tlascalans, and then get me back to the foe,
that be might himself fly in safety!
Thou art mad, Francisco! and thou doest me foul
injustice! said Don Hernan, hurriedly. I fled not;
nor did I bid thee do aught but entrust this hapless
maiden to some strong band of allies, thou being
thyself on foot, and, therefore, incompetent to protect
her.
You called me craven, too! said the cavalier,
with a hoarse laugh, raising his voice aloud. Thou
liest!I am braver than thou; for my body is covered
with woundsfrom the crown to the sole, there is no
part but is mangled;and yet thou hast not a
limb but is untouched! You call me craven! God
smite you with punishment, for you are
all
cravens,
knaves, and murderers together! You wait on the
banks, while we are dying, and you call us cravens!
God will do us right! God will avenge us! God will
hear our prayers! and so God curse you all, and
keep your bones for the maws of infidels!
Thus speaking, and concluding with the voice of a
madman, the young cavalier cast a look on the dead
princess, and, uttering a horrid scream, ran back,
distracted, to the causeway.
In the name of God, on! exclaimed an hundred
voices; we are
not
cravens and murderers, and
Spaniards shall not fall unaided!
Don Hernan himself, stung by the sarcasms of the
unhappy and well-beloved cavalier, was the first to
clap spurs to his horse; and again the thunder of
cavalry, and the quick tread of footmen moving in
order, were heard on the dike of Tacuba.
CHAPTER XXX.
Thousands
of infuriated and exulting savages had,
in the meanwhile, landed from their canoes at the
second ditch, raised their cries of triumph over the
abandoned artillery, and struck, with a rage not to be
appeased by death, the Christian corses which lay
so thick among them. But, while living invaders
20 *
remained, either in the front or rear, they tarried not
long, to waste their malice on the dead.
The cavalier Don Amador, when he made the
marvellous
discovery, detailed in a preceding chapter,
and perceived that the fair and lamented being of his
dreams, heaven had permitted so long to walk by his
side, in this new and strange world,revealing her
to his eyes only at the moment when destined to be
snatched from them for ever,felt, at that instant of
discovery as if all the ties which bound him to
existence
,
were at once dissevered. Rage at his blindness,
furious compunctions of remorse for his negligence,
and an agony of grief at the supposed dreadful fate of
the maiden, were mingled with a sort of wild
indignation
against the providence which, by veiling his eyes,
and shutting his ears to the suggestions of his heart,
(for, surely, from the moment he looked upon the page,
his affections were given him,) had robbed him of his
mistress. It was not, therefore, wonderful, that such
a conflict of mind, acting upon a body weakened by
previous wounds and sickness, and exhausted by
present exertions, should have thrown him across the
body of Lazaro, himself, to all appearance, full as
lifeless. And thus he lay, for half an hour, insensible
to the battle, which was now drawing nigh to the
ditch, and now leaving it to its charnel solitude.
He was recalled to life, by feeling some one tug
forcibly
at the sacred jewel, which he retained
throughout
his lethargy, with the same instinct which had
preserved it in the death-grasp of the henchman.
More lucky than Lazaro, yet scarce more happy,
this violence woke up the sleeping energies of life;
and he raised his head, though only to stare about
him with a bewildered look of unconsciousness.
God be thanked! exclaimed a Christian voice
in his ear, as a friendly hand seized him by the
shoulder; lead or gold, glass or precious stone,
never was cross of Christ picked up on the wayside,
but good fortune followed after it! What ho, seor!
up and away! The things that I spoke of, have come
to pass. Kalidon-Sadabath dances in the Crystal;
he loves the smell of blood!Up! arise and away,
for thine hour is not come.
The cavalier arose, and stared at the friendly
magician
;
which Botello seeing, and supposing he was
now fully restored to his wits, this lunatic of another
sort seized him by the arm, and, dragging him
towards
the water, said,
Fear not; if thou hast not the skill of a crocodile,
know that I can bear thee across the channel; and
that the more easily that it is already choked with
corses, and no Mexicans nigh to oppose us.
The neophyte broke from his companion, and with
wild cries of
Leila! Leila!
ran towards the cannon.
God save thee! art thou mad? Dost thou call
upon woman or devil? This is no place for girls;
and never heard I of imp called Leila.
Thou knowest not my wretchedness, Botello,
said Don Amador. Let me look again, if her body
be not here.Hah! he cried, struck with a sudden
thought, and turning quickly to the conjurer. Thou
art a magician, and knowest of the dead as well as
the living. I have decried thine art, but now I
acknowledge
thy wisdom. Behold this rubied cross
oh heaven! that I should hold it in my hand, and
know, that, but a moment since, it was on the neck
of Leila! Look, enchanter; this jewel came from
the neck of a woman, whom but now I left standing
on this brink. Call her from the dead, if she have
perished; or show me what path she hath trodden, if
she be living; and I will reward thee, though I give
thee the half of my patrimony.A woman, I tell
thee! Wilt thou not believe me? Half my estate, but
to look upon her!
It was manifest, even to the unhappy novice
himself
,
that Botello regarded him as a madman. But
nevertheless he replied earnestly, Here is no place
for conjurations: there be devils enough about us
already. Tarry not here; for this will neither benefit
thee, nor her of whom thou speakest. Spring into
the ditch,rush with me to the main; and, then,
what thou seekest, thou shalt know. Courage,
courage
!
Dost thou not see yonder star, that creeps up
by the dim moon, under the rack, dimmer even than
the dim moon? Under that star, came I into earth;
and while it shineth in that conjunction, the dart of a
savage cannot wound me,no, not though it strike
me upon the naked brow!Hark! dost thou not
hear? The fragments of the rear-guard are
approaching
.
Let us swim this abyss before they reach
us, lest we be entangled among them. Hesitate not:
we will go together, for I see thou art worn and
feeble; and I remember that thou gavest me succour
in the streets of Mexico.
The neophyte had yielded, with a sort of
captive-like
and despairing submission, to the will of Botello;
and was descending with him moodily to the water,
when suddenly the latter paused, listening to a
Christian
shout in the distance, as of one approaching them
from the shore.
Hark! it is repeated!Viva! They come from
the main; they have beaten the cubs of darkness
Viva! viva! Santiago, and quick, valiant friends!
The joyous shouts of Botello were re-echoed,
though only by a single voice. Yet this was
evidently
approaching, and with great rapidity.
During the whole time of the resuscitation of Don
Amador, and of his dialogue with the enchanter, the
causeway in the neighbourhood of the ditch had been
free from foes, but only because it was free from
Christians; and the lake in the vicinity was equally
solitary. But now as they stood listening to the
shouts, the two companions could perceive the lake,
some distance in front, on both sides of the dike,
boiling
up in foam under canoes impelled towards them
with extraordinary violence, seemingly upon the
flank of the party from which proceeded the cry.
But whatever was the speed of the canoes, it seemed
to be unequal to that of the Christian; whose shouts,
wild and loud, and now almost incessantly repeated,
grew shriller and nearer every moment.
On, valiant friends! on!heed not the pagans;
on! shouted Botello, as the canoes cut the water
within an hundred paces of the ditch. Thanks be
to God! I see them! Hah! good! and hereHark to
his voice! how cheery!here comes the valorous
De Morla!
As he spoke, the figure of De Morla, outstripping
the wind, was seen running towards the ditch, while
some of the arrows shot after him by the pursuers,
and passing him, fell even at the feet of the expectant
pair.
The sight of his friend kindled the ardour of Don
Amador. He shouted aloud,
On, valiant brother!It is I! thy sworn friend of
Cuenza!
To this speech, De Morla answered with a yell,
that chilled the heart of his townsman; and running
without a moment's hesitation, and without slackening
his speed, to the end of the broken beam, where it
overhung the middle of the sluice, he sprang from it,
as if assisted by its elasticity, to so great a height
into the air, that, it was plain, he would clear the
chasm in the bound. As he leaped, he waved his
sword, and uttered a scream; a cloud of arrows at
the same time whistled through the atmosphere; and
when he reached the ground, twenty of these deadly
missiles were sticking in his body.
The neophyte raised up his head; one arrow was
in his brain:it snapped off, as the head rolled on
Amador's arm. A thrill and a gasp were the last
and only manifestations of suffering. The next
instant
,
the body of De Morla rolled down the
shelving
plane of the ditch, and sunk, with a few
bubbles
,
among a hundred of his countrymen, already
sepulchred therein.
CHAPTER XXXI.
Meantime
the reappearance of the barbarians
seemed to cut off the last hope of escape from Amador
and his companion; but the magician, answering the
cavalier's sullen look of despair with a laugh, and
pointing to the little star, which still made its way
up the cloudy arch along with the moon, said,
dragging
him at the same time towards the artillery,
What the spirits say, is true! All this said they,
of De Morla.May he rest with GodAmen! Fear
not; be of good heart:while the star shines, there
is hope,and hope for both; for though I have not
yet read thy fate in full, still, while thou art at my side,
thou canst be in no great peril. At the worst, and
when the worst comes, it is written, that eagles shall
come down from heaven, and bear me away on their
backs.Hast thou never a flint and dry tinder, to
light me a linstock? Here hath some knavish gunner
left his piece charged, and the grains of sulphur still
heaped up from rimbase to cascable. A good roar
now might do marvels.Quick! they are upon us.
Fling thee under the wheels, and look but as dead
as thou didst erewhile, till the cut-throats be passed.
Hah! 'fore God, dost thou hear? he exclaimed,
suddenly
leaping up.Kalidon, soho, brave imp! and
thou shalt be a-galloping yet!Hearest thou that
shout, like the clang of a bugle on a hill-top?'Tis
Cortes! and he cometh!
It was even as the magician had said. From the
moment that De Morla took the fatal leap, the
rowers
ceased paddling in their canoes, as if certain of
his fate, or unwilling to follow so feeble a prey, and
remained huddled together, as though they awaited
the approach of a more tempting quarry. They had
not perceived the two companions. Just as Botello
was about to creep under a falconet, around whose
wheels the corses lay very thick, the strong voice of
Cortes was heard rising over the din, which, at some
quarter or other of the causeway, was kept up
incessantly
during the whole conflict. It echoed again,
sustained and strengthened by the voices of a
considerable
party.
They approach! said Botello. They are a-horse
too; I hear the trampling. God quicken the rear!
Methought there were many who followed me.
Hark! cried the cavalier. The foul knaves
desert us! their voices are weaker; they fly again
to the land!
Here's that which shall fetch them back, if they
be men! exclaimed Botello, catching up a port-fuse
not yet extinguished, striking it on his arm to shake
off the ashes, and whirling it in the air till it glowed
and almost blazed. It will show them, there be
some living yet; and, with God's blessing, will
scatter
yon ambushed heathen like plashing water-drops.
Ojala!
and all ye fiends of air and water, of earth
and of hell, that are waiting for pagan souls, carry
my hail-shot true, and have at your prey!
So saying, the conjurer applied the match. The
roar of the explosion was succeeded not only by the
yells of Mexicans, dying in their broken canoes, or
paddling away from so dangerous a vicinity, but by
Spanish shouts, both on the rear and in front.
On, brave hearts! cried Cortes; there be bold
knaves yet at the ordnance!
The next moment the little band of horse that
headed the relief, sprang into the lake, and
swimming
aside, so as to avoid the sunken bodies, and the
bales still floating in the ditch, crossed over to the
cannon; while a large body of men, arranged with
such order, that they blocked up the whole causeway
from side to side, came marching up from the rear,
fighting as they fled, and still valiantly resisting the
multitudes
that pursued both on the dike and in the water.
Thanks be to God! cried Don Hernan, rejoiced
that so many lived, and yet appalled at the numbers
and ferocious determination of the foes, who still,
like venomous insects following the persecuted herd,
pursued whithersoever the Christians fled. Art
thou alive, De Leon?Praised be St. James, who
listened to my prayer! Turn ye now, and let us
succour
the rest.
They are in heaven, said De Leon, with a faint
voice, for he was severely wounded, as indeed were
all his crew. Push on, in the name of God, all who
can swim.The others must perish.
Hold! stay! exclaimed Cortes. Fling the
cannon
into the sluice.Think not of the enemy. Heave
over my good falconets: they will make a bridge
for ye all.
The wounded footmen seized upon the guns, with
the energy of despair; and flinging over the ropes to
that company of their fellow-infantry who had
followed
Don Hernan, and now stood on the opposite
side, the pieces were pushed and dragged into the
water, and, together with the mass of corses already
deposited in that fatal chasm, made such a footing
for the infantry as enabled many to pass in safety.
Among these was Don Amador de Leste, his hand
grasped by the faithful magician, who perceived that
he was sunk into such sluggishness of despair, that
he must have perished, if left to himself.
It is not to be supposed that this passage was
effected
without opposition and loss. On the contrary,
the barbarians redoubled their exertions; and while
many rested at a distance, shooting whole clouds
of arrows, others pushed their canoes boldly up to
the gap, and there slew many taken at such
disadvantage
.
Nevertheless, the passage was at last effected, and
the footmen, joining themselves to their fellows, and
forming, as before, twenty deep, followed the
horsemen
towards the shore.
Hold! shouted Botello, when the party was
about to start. Save your captain, ye knaves of the
rear!Save De Leon! the valiant Velasquez!
A few, roused by this cry, and heedless of the
shafts shot at them, rushed back to the brink, and
beheld the wounded and forgotten captain, in the
water, struggling in the arms of two brawny
barbarians
,
who strove to drag him into a canoe. While
his followers stood hesitating, not knowing how to
give him aid, the little vessel, agitated by his
struggles
,
which were tremendous, suddenly overset, and
captive and capturers fell together into the water.
The two warriors were presently seen swimming
towards a neighbouring canoe; and De Leon,
strangling
under the flood, heaved not his last groan on the
gory block of sacrifice.
The fugitives paused not to lament; they resumed
their march, and gained the last ditch.
The events of that march, and of the passage of that
ditch, are, like the others, a series of horrors. Enough
has been narrated to picture out the dreadful
punishment
of men who acknowledged no rights but those of
power, and preferred to rob a weak and childish race
with insult and murder, rather than to subdue them, as
could have been done, by the arts of peace. In the
sole incident which remains to be mentioned, we
record
the fate of an individual whose influence had
been felt through most of the events of the invasion,
in many cases beneficially, but, in this, disastrously
enough. This was the enchanter, Botello,a man
just shrewd enough to deceive himself; which is, in
other words, to say, that he mingled in his own
person
so much cunning with so much credulity, that
the former was ever the victim of the latter. The
devoutness of his own belief in the efficacy of his
arts, was enough to secure them the respect and
reverence of the common herd, as well as of better
men, in an age of superstition. How much
confidence
was given to them by Cortes, does not clearly
appear in the older historians; but it is plain, he
turned them to great advantage, and had the art
sometimes to make the stars, as well as Kalidon of
the Crystal, furnish revelations of his own hinting;
and, it is suspected, not without grounds, that this
Vol. II. 21
very nocturnal flight, projected originally under the
impression that the barbarians would not go into
battle after night-fall, and, when the later events of
the siege had disproved this hope, still persisted in
from the persuasion that no Mexican would handle a
weapon on the day of an emperor's burial, was
conceived
in the brain of the general before it was
counselled
by the lips of Botello.
At all events, the enchanter did not, this night,
manifest any doubt in his own powers. With a
strange and yet natural inconsistency, he seemed to
rejoice over the slaughter of his countrymen, as over
the confirmation of his predictions. Twice or thrice,
at least, he muttered, and once even in the thick of
combat, to Don Amador, by whose side he ever
walked
,
at the head of the retreating party,
I said, this night we should retreatwe have
retreated
:
I said, there should be death for many, and
safety for somethe many are at rest, (God receive
their souls, and angels carry them to the seats of
bliss!)and some of us are saved.
Be not over-quick in thy consummations, said
Amador. We are here now at the third ditch,
which is both wide and deep, and no bodies to bridge
it; and seest thou not how the yelling curs are
paddling
in to oppose us?
Bodies enow! cried the enchanter.
To-morrow
,
at mid-day, when the sun is hottest, ye shall see
corses lying along on both sides of the causey, like
the corks of a fisherman's net; and at the ditches,
they will come up like ants out of the earth, when a
dead caterpillar falls at their door. Yet say I, we
shall be saved, and thou shalt see it; for I remember
how thou didst carve the back of that knave that lay
on me in the streets of Mexico; and I will carve a
dozen for thee in like manner, ere dawn, on this
causeway.
Boast no more: such confidence offends heaven;
for thy life hangs here as loosely as another's.
The star! the star! cried Botello, the dim little
star! is it not shining? The morning comes after it,
and the eagles are waking on the hills. They will
snuff the battle, they will shriek to the vultures, to the
crows, and the gallinazas, and down will they come
together to the lake-side and the lake. At eventide,
ye will see dead men floating about in the wind, and
on the breast of each a feeding raven; but devils shall
be perched on the corses of the heathen!
Heaven quit me of thy wild words, for they sound
to me unnatural and damnable, as though spoken by
one of those same demons thou thinkest of.Speak no
more.Look to thy life, for it is in jeopardy.
Hast thou not seen me in the battle? and, lo you
now, I have not a scratch! said the enthusiast. I
have fought on the dike, when there were twelve men
of us, good men, bold and true: eleven were slain,
but here am I untouched by flint, unbruised by stone,
unhurt by arrow. I fought three screeching infidels
in the water, hard by to where two valiant cavaliers
were pulled off their horses, and so smothered; and
yet strangled I my heathens, without horse to help,
or friend to say God speed me. The life that is
charmed is invulnerable; the star shines, the eagle
leaves her nest, and Kalidon-Sadabath laughs in the
crystal.Viva! Lo now, how Sandoval, the valiant,
will scatter me yon imps in the boats! He spurs into
the water; Catalan the Left-handed, Juan of
Salamanca
,
Torpo the Growler, Ferdinand of Bilboa, and
De Olid the Devil's Ketch, they spring after him!
There they go! Dance, Kalidon! thy brothers shall
have souls, to be fetched up from the mud as one
rakes up clams of a fish-day. Crowd hell with damned
heathens:there be more to follow!
Never before had such life possessed the spirits of
Botello. He stood on the edge of the causey,
shouting
loud vivas, as the bold cavaliers rushed among
the canoes that blocked up the sluice. The novice,
though shocked at such untimely exultation, was not
able to avoid it; for he was enfeebled, and Botello
held him with a fast and determined gripe.
Unhand me, conjurer, he cried, and I will swim
the ditch.
Tarry a little, till the path be made clear: thou
wilt be murdered else.
I shall be murdered, if I remain here; and so
wilt thou.Hah! did that shaft hurt thee?
Never a jot; how could it? There flies not the
arrow this night, there waves not the bludgeon, that
can shed my blood.
Art thou besotted?God forgive thee!this is
impiety.
The magician held his peace; for about this time,
the Mexicans, knowing that this band, diminished,
disordered, and divided by the ditch into two feeble
parties, was the sole remaining fragment of
oppression
,
and determined that no invader should escape
alive, rushed upon the causeway on all sides with such
savage violence as seemed irresistible. Those who
had not yet crossed, broke in affright, and flung
themselves
into the sluice with such speed, that, in a few
moments, Don Amador began to think that he and
Botello were the only Christians left.
Why dost thou hold me, madman? he cried.
Let me free.
Hark! dost thou not hear?there are Christian
men behind us, said Botello.Courage! What if
these devils be thicker than the thoughts of sin in
man's heart, fiercer than conscience, deadlier than
remorse; yet shall we pass them unharmed.
Patience
!
'Tis the voice of a Spaniard, I tell thee, and
behind!
It is in front:hark! 'tis Don Hernan!
It is behind, and it is the cry of Alvarado! Let
us return, and give him aid. Ho, ye that fly! return!
the Tonatiuh is shouting behind us: will ye desert
him?Return, return!
Before Amador could remonstrate, the lunatic, for
at this moment, more than any other, Botello seemed
to deserve the name, had dragged him to the top of
the dike, where he stood exposed to the view and the
shots of the foe. A thousand arrows were aimed at
the pair.
Thou art a dead man! said Amador.
Dost thou not see the star? cried the magician,
impatiently. Not a bird hath yet flapped her wing,
not an eagle hath fled from her cliff; and my star,
my star
As he spoke, he let go his hold of the cavalier, to
point exultingly at the diminutive luminary. At that
very instant, an arrow, aimed close at hand, struck
the neophyte on the breast, entering the mail at a
place rent by blows of a previous day, and, without
wounding him, forced its way out through links
hitherto
uninjured.
Hah! said the cavalier, as the arm of Botello
fell heavily on his shoulder.Art thou taught
wisdom
and humility, at last? Let us descend, and
swim.
As he moved, he became sensible that the shaft
was still sticking in his hauberk. He grasped the
feathered notchthe head was in the astrologer's
heart. The stout wood snapped, as Botello fell. It
struck him in the moment of his greatest hope. He
dropped down a dead man.
While Amador stood confounded and struck with
horror, he was seized, he knew not by whom, and
suddenly found himself dragged through the water.
Before he could well commend his soul to heaven,
for he thought himself in the hands of the enemy, he
beheld himself on firm land, while the voice of Cortes
shouted in his ear,
Rouse thee, and die not like a sleeper! Hold me
by the hand, and my good horse shall drag thee
through the meleI would sooner that my arm
were hacked off than that thou shouldst sleep in the
accursed lake: enough of thy blood rests in it, with
Don Gabriel.
Ay, thought the unhappy cavalier, enough of
my blood, and all of my heart. Don Gabriel, De
21 *
Morla, Lazaro, Lorenzo, anday, and Leila! Better
that I were with them!
A sudden cry from beyond the ditch interrupted
his griefs.
Pause, pause! cried the voice. Leave me not!
I am nigh!I am Alvarado!
The cavaliers looked back at these words, and
beheld
a man come flying, as it were, through the air
over the ditch, perched on the top of a long
Chinantlan
spear, the bottom of which was hidden in the
water. He fell quite clear of the sluice, after making
a leap which even his comrades, who had not
individually
seen it, held impossible for mortal man, and
which, even to this day, has preserved to the spot the
name of the Salto, or leap, of Alvarado.
The appearance of the Tonatiuh was hailed with
shouts of joy; and the Spaniards, receiving it as a
good omen, closed their ranks, and slowly, for every
inch was contested, fought their way to the shore.
When they trode upon the firm ground, the little star
had vanished in the gray beams of morning; and a
thick mist rising up from the water like a curtain,
concealed from the eyes of the fugitives, along with
the accursed signal-fire, the fatal towers and temples
of Mexico.
Thus closed a night of horror and wo, memorable
as the
Noche Triste
, or Melancholy Night, of
Mexican
history, and paralleled perhaps, in modern days,
if we consider the loss of the retreating army as
compared with its numbers, only by the famous and
most lamentable passage of the Berezina. More
than four thousand Tlascalans, and five hundred
Spaniards, were left dead on the causeway, or in the
lake. Of the prisoners, but two or three escaped;
two sons and as many daughters of Montezuma,
with five tributary kings, as well as many princes
and nobles, perished. All the cannon were utterly
lost, left to rust and rot in the salt flood that had so
often resounded to their roar; and of more than an
hundred proud war-steeds that champed the bit so
fiercely at midnight, scarce twenty jaded hacks
snuffed
the breath of morning.
With this broken and lamenting force, with foes
still hanging on his rear, and ever flying from his
front, Cortes set out to seek a path, by new and
unknown
mountains, to the distant Tlascala. He turned
his eyes but once towards the lake,the pagan city
was hidden among the mists, and the shouts of
victorious
Mexicans came but faintly to the ear. He
beat his breast, and shedding such tears as belong to
defeated hopes and the memory of the dead, resumed
his post at the head of the fugitives.
CHAPTER XXXII.
We
draw a curtain over the events of the first five
days of flight, wherein the miserable fugitives,
contending
,
at once, with fatigue, famine, and
unrelenting
foes, stole by night, and through darkling
by-ways
,
along the northern borders of the fair valley,
from which they were thus ignominiously, and, as it
seemed, for ever, expelled. Of the twenty mounted
men, each, like a Red-Cross Knight, in the ancient
days of the order, bore a wounded companion on his
crupper; and Don Amador, himself, on a jaded beast
that had belonged to Marco,for Fogoso had been
lost or killed in the mele,thus carried the only
remaining servant of himself and his knight,the
ancient Baltasar. Other mangled wretches were
borne on the backs of Tlascalans, in rudely
constructed
litters.
In this manner, the ruined and melancholy band
pursued its way, by lake-side and hill, over morass
and river, ever pursued and insulted by bodies of
barbarians, and frequently attacked; till, on the
evening
of the fifth day, they flung their weary forms to
sleep in the City (as it may be called) of Pyramids,
among those mouldering and cactus-covered mounds,
which the idolatry of a forgotten age reared to the
divinity of the greater and lesser luminaries of
heaven
,
on the field Micoatl, that is to say, the Plain of
Death. The visiter of San Juan de Teotihuacan still
perceives these gigantic barriers, rising among the
hundreds of smaller moundsthe Houses of the
Starswhich strew the consecrated haunts, and,
perhaps, conceal the sepulchres, of a holozoic people.
At sunrise, the Spaniards arose, ascended the
mountain of Aztaquemacan, at the north-eastern
border
of the valley, and prepared, with a joyous
expectation
,
which had not been diminished even by
the significant and constantly-repeated threats of the
pursuers, to descend into the friendly land of the
Tlascalans, by way of the vale of Otumba. For the
last two days, the name of this valley had been
continually
on the lips of the Mexicans, following on the
rear; and their cries, as interpreted by Marina, who
survived the horrors of the Melancholy Night,
intimated
,
plainly enough, that the work of revenge, so
dreadfully commenced upon the lake, was to be
consummated
in the gorges of the mountains.
Nevertheless
,
the Spaniards, in the alacrity of spirit, which
the prospect of soon ending their sufferings in the
Land of Bread, produced, forgot these menaces, or
regarded them as the idle bravados of impotent fury;
and clambered upwards, with increasing hope, until
they reached the crest of a ridge, and looked down
the slope to the wished-for valley. The sight which
they beheld, will be described in another place. It
remains, now, to return to an individual, whose fate
has long been wrapped in mystery.
At the moment when the Spaniards approached
the highest part of the ravine, by which, alone, they
could pass, in that quarter, from the vale of
Tenochtitlan
,
there lay, in a wild and savage nook of the
mountain, which went shelving upwards on the right
hand, and at so short a distance, that had a bugle
been winded in the army, it must have reached his
ears,one who had been a companion in many of
their battles and sufferings. A number of huge rocks,
fallen ages ago, and rolled from some distant
pinnacle
,
were heaped together on a broad and inclined
shelf, and enclosed a space of ground so regular in
form, and yet so rudely bounded by those sprawling
barriers, that it looked to the imagination not unlike
the interior of some stupendous temple, built by a
barbaric people, and overwhelmed, many ages before,
by some great convulsion. One side was formed by
a cliff, in whose shivered side yawned the entrance
of a black and dismal cavern, while the broken
masses of rock themselves formed the others. Among,
and over these, where they lay in contact with the
cliff, there rushed a torrent, which, in the times of
drought, might have been a meager and chattering
rivulet, making its way, merrily, through gap and
hollow, but which, now, swollen by the summer rains,
came raving and roaring over the rocks, broken by
them into a series of foaming cascades; and, then,
shooting over a corner of the enclosure, and, darting
through the opposite wall, it went, thundering, down
the mountain. A few stunted trees stretched their
withered limbs among these savage masses; and the
noontide sun, peeping down into the nook, and
lighting
up a part of the cliff, fell pleasantly on the mosses
and Alpine flowers, which ornamented its shelving
floor, tinting, with momentary rainbows, the mists
that hung over the fall. A sable steed, without bridle
or halter, and much the worse for such primitive
stabling, but yet, to all appearance, the relic of a
once noble war-horse, wandered, at liberty, through
the enclosure, cropping the few plants which
bedecked
it, or drinking from the little pools, at the side of
the torrent; while, at the mouth of the cave, at the
foot of a wooden crucifix of the rudest description,
lay sleeping the figure of his master. A stained and
tattered garment of leather, investing his limbs, was
not altogether hidden under a black mantle, which
partly covered his body. The head of the sleeper
lay on his right arm, and this embraced the foot of
the cross, so that the grizzly locks, which fell from
his forehead, rested against, and almost twined
around, the holy wood.
The sunbeam played, unregarded, on his withered
cheeks, and flickered over a heap of rusted armour,
both of man and horse, which lay hard by, shining,
also, with a fierce lustre, upon what appeared a
scarlet surcoat, hung, like a banner, on the point of
a knightly lance, which rested against the side of the
cliff.
Disease, as well as age, had furrowed the cheeks,
and wasted the form of the slumberer; famine seemed
to have been at work, as well as all other privations
incident to a habitation in the desert; and there was,
in his whole appearance, such an air of extreme and
utter misery, as would have moved the pity of any
beholder, Nevertheless, he slept on, regardless of
the roaring fall, and heedless of the fierce sunbeam,
in such tranquillity as augured, at least, a momentary
suspension of suffering.
As the sun stole up to the meridian, another human
creature was suddenly added to the scene. The
browsing war-horse pricked his ears, and snorted, as
if to do the duty of a faithful sentinel, and convey to
his master a note of alarm, as certain dried branches
crackled among the rocks of the wall, and a stone,
loosened as by a footstep, fell, rattling, down their
sides, and buried itself in the pool, at the base of the
fall. But the anchorite, for such the solitude of his
dwelling, the poverty of his raiment, and, more than
all, the little rugged cross which he embraced, caused
him to appear, heard not these sounds; he slept on,
lulled by the accustomed roar of the water-fall; and
the steed was left alone, to watch the approach of
the stranger.
Presently, he was seen dragging himself up the
rocks, by the aid of a drooping bough; and when
he had reached their top, he rested for a moment,
still clinging to the branch, as if worn out with toil,
as was, indeed, made apparent by the youth and
feebleness
of his appearance. He cast a haggard and
uninterested eye on the romantic torrent leaping and
foaming at his feet, and seemed to hesitate whether
he should descend into the prison-like enclosure, or
retrace his steps, and retreat as he had come. But,
suddenly, his gaze fell upon the steed, and he started
with surprise at a sight so unexpected. The
sagacious
animal whinnied loudly, as if with recognition;
and the youth, devoutly crossing himself, looked, with
an agitation that denoted terror, on the red garment,
the cross, and the human figure that still lay
sleeping
,
or, perhaps, as he thought, dead, under its holy
shadow. Then, as if resolved, he hastened to
descend
from the rugged fragments, and seeking where
he might safely cross the brook, over the stones that
obstructed its bed, he at last stood at the side of the
good steed, which snuffed at him a moment with
joy, and, then, gambolling about a little, fell to
cropping
the plants again, satisfied that the comer was a
friend.
The youth stole up tremblingly to the side of the
sleeper, and seemed shocked at his emaciated and
neglected appearance. He stooped as if to awake
him, and then started back, wringing his hands, in
fear and grief. He bent over him again;a smile
passed like a beam over the countenance of the
recluse
,
and a murmur escaped his lips, of which the
youth caught only a few broken syllables:
Though I shed thy blood, were the words he
distinguished, yet did I not aim at thee; and,
therefore
,
hast thou forgiven me, for the sin was the sin
of frenzy. Thou pardonest me, too, Alharef, for thou
art, also, of the angels. It is good to walk with thee
through the seats of bliss.
A tear fell upon the cheek of the knight Calavar,
for it was, indeed, he; but it fell like the
spray-drop
,
or the gentle dew; and it was not until the hand
of the youth touched his shoulder, that he awoke,
and rose feebly to his feet.
Whoever thou art, said the unfortunate devotee,
thou breakest the only dream of happiness that
hath visited my slumbers, for long and many years,
and callest me from the paradise that filled me with
bliss, to the earth which is the wheel whereon I am
brokenMiserere mei, Deus!
Alas, my lord!
Art thou sent back to bid me prepare? cried
Don Gabriel, starting wildly, at the voice of the
intruder
.
Lo! I have flung me off the harness of
war, and devoted me to penance in the wilderness,
giving my body to sleep on the earth and in caves,
drinking of the wild floods, and eating of the tough
roots, with the earth-worm; while I sleep, my heart
is scourged within me; whilst I wake, I pray,and
I pray that I may sleep for ever. Know, therefore,
Jacinto! thou that dwellest in paradise! that I am
ready, and that I thank heaven, I am called, at last;
for weary has been my life, and long my
repentance
.
Alas, my lord, I live like thyself; and I call upon
thee, that thou mayest continue to live. I thought,
indeed, that thou wert dead, and so thought, and yet
think, thy friends,who are now in great peril.
God snatched me from the hands of the
heathen
,
said the knight, and brought me to this
place, that I might seek for peace. For, oh! my
heart was but filled with scorpions, that stung me
day and night, and my head strewn with coals, ever
burning and tormenting, whilst I sat in the infidel
city, and remembered how he that hath been my son,
was slain by murderers in the streets, because he
loved me! All that loved me have perished, and
(wo betide the hand that struck, and is not yet
withered
!)
two under mine own steel. Yea, Alharef, thou
art remembered! and, Zayda, thou art not forgotten!
Then came the blow to thee, dear seraph! and thou
wert carried off by the angry spirit of Alharef, who
defied me at the palace-gate, and, in the temple-yard,
raised me to my feet, and bade me think of Zayda.
Verily, I remember her, and my heart is black with
recollection! Then fell the bolt upon my boy,he
that was matchless in honour and love, peerless in war,
incomparable in truth!Would that the barbarous
knives had struck my bosom, instead of thine,
Amador
!
would that thou wert now upon thy gallant bay,
shaking thy lance, and shouting the cry of the
Hospital
,
and I in thy place, mouldering in the streets of
Mexico! I lay on my couch, whilst thou wert calling
to me for aid; I slept while thou wert dying.Cursed
be thy foundations, pagan city! ruin fall upon thy
towers, havoc ride howling through thy palaces, and
lamentations come up from thy lakes and gardens!
for he that was the last and first, the loving and
beloved
,
rots like a dog upon thy pavement!
Noble and dear master, said Jacinto, in this,
at least, thou art mistaken. My dear lord, thy
kinsman
,
perished not that day in the streets; for I myself
did watch by his sick couch, and see him, after thou
hadst departed, return in safety to the palace.
Dost thou say so?He died not in the streets?
Praised be God, for this his goodness! cried Don
Gabriel, falling on his knees. My sin, then, hath
not been visited on the guileless and true! My son
Amador yet liveth!
He looked to the page, and now, for the first time,
observed, as far as this could be seen through his
thickly padded garments, that the form of Jacinto
was greatly attenuated; his cheeks were hollow and
colourless, and his countenance altered, as by some
such grief as had been at work in his own bosom.
He seemed, too, to be very feeble. But, if such were
the appearances of sorrow on his visage, they assumed
a yet more striking character of agony and despair,
when the knight's words of joy fell on his ear. His
face grew paler than death, he trembled like a linden
leaf, and his lips scarcely obeyed their function, when
he replied, with a faint and fruitless effort at
calmness
,
I will not deceive my lord; no, heaven be my stay!
Vol. II. 22
I will not deceive my lord. Though my friend,my
patron,my protector,the noble Amador,fell not
in the streets, but returned to his people, yet is his
fate wrapped in mystery,in darkness and in fear.
That night, that dreadful night!O heaven! the
causey
covered with men, shrieking and cursing, stabbing
and rending! the lake choked with corses, and with
dying men still contending, and suffocating, each in
the grasp of a drowning foe!But I think not of
that, I think not of that!Who lived? who died?
We searched for the body of my lord, but found it
not: he was not with those they led to the pyramid;
his corse floated not among the hundreds, which
befouled the lake: yet did they discover his goodly
war-horse on the water-side,his surcoat was
dragged
from a ditch, among cannon, under whose heavy
bulk lay many bodies, which the Indians strove to
push up with polesbut my lord's body rose not
among them. And yet, he sleeps in the lake,yes,
he sleeps in the lake! for how could he escape that
night, and I no more by his side?
As Jacinto spoke, he wept and sobbed bitterly,
giving himself up to despair. But not so the knight:
he listened, somewhat bewildered, to the confused
narration of an event, in which he had shared no
part; but catching the idea, at last, and mingling it
with another, the fruit of his very distempered mind,
he said, quickly, and almost joyously,
Dry thy tears; for now I perceive that my son is
not dead, but liveth; and straightway we will go
forth, and seek him! Jacinto regarded the knight
with a melancholy look. He noticed the incredulity,
and resumed, with much devout emphasis,But a
moment since, before thou camest into this den, mine
eyes were opened upon paradise; it was vouchsafed
to me, who must never hope to enjoy such spectacle
again,no,
desdichado de mi!
never again, never
again,to look upon the golden city of God; wherein
I walked, with all those whom, in my life, I had loved,
and who were dead. There saw I, among the saints
and seraphim, my father, who fell in arms at the sack
of Alhama; my mother, who died giving me birth;
together with all the friends of my childhood, who
perished early: there, also, I beheld Alharef and
Zayda, the murdered and the blest,with all others
that were truly dead. Now thou wilt see, how God
opened mine eyes in this trance; for, though I wept
thee, dear child, as truly believing thou wert deceased,
yet thee I saw not among the blissful, where thou
must have been, hadst thou been discarded from
earth, as I thought thee. And I remember me, too,
and great joy it is to remember, that my son
Amador
was not among those saints; for which reason,
heaven makes it manifest to us, that he lives. Now,
therefore, let us go forth from this desert, and seek
him. Though mine eyes are sealed among these
hills, and my feet stumble upon the rocks, yet will
heaven point us out a path to Mexico!
Alas! my lord need not seek so far, said the
page. The pagans are now alone in the city,
having driven out their enemies, with terrible
slaughter
.Never
more will the Spaniards return to it!
Ay, now, I remember me! said the knight,
catching up some of his battered armour, as he
spoke. This defence, that I had thought for ever
rejected, must I again buckle on. I remember me,
thou spokest of a night of retreat by the causeway,
very dreadful and bloody. Ay! and thou saidst
thou wert at Amador's side!How was it, that
thou wert taken from him, and didst yet live?
My father Abdalla, said Jacinto, sorrowfully,
my father, by chance, heard me cry at the ditch,
when my lord, Don Amador, was gone; and he saved
me in his canoe.
Thy father? thy father, Abdalla?I remember
me of Abdalla, said the knight, touching his brow.
There is a strange mystery in Abdalla. I am
toldthat is, I heard from my poor Marcothat
Abdalla, the Moor, did greatly abhor me, even to the
seeking of my life,
He wronged him! said the page: whatever
was my father's hatred of my lord, he never sought
to do him a wrong!
Strange! muttered Don Gabriel; thou
acknowledgest
he hated me, then? Wherefore should he,
whom I have not injured, hate me? And wherefore,
after confiding thyself to my good keeping?
Let me not deceive my lord, said Jacinto, sadly,
but firmly: My father entrusted his child to him he
hated, because he knew him just and honourable;
and my father did receive great wrong, as well as
other unhappy Moors, of my lord, in the
Alpujarras
The knight dropped the dinted cuishes which he
had snatched up, and, clasping his hands wildly,
exclaimed,
Miserere mei, Deus! my sin is inexpiable, and
my torment endless; for, in the Alpujarras, did I slay
him whom I had sworn to love, and deface, with a
murderous sword, the loveliest of thine images!
Dear my lord, said Jacinto, shocked and grieved
at his agitation; forget this, for thy sin is not what
thou thinkest, and it has been already forgiven thee.
Zayda hath seen, from heaven, the greatness of thy
grief, and she intercedes for thee with our Holy
Mother.
She follows me on earth, she comes to me in
visions! cried Don Gabriel, vehemently.
Rememberest
thou not the night of Cholula? Then stood
she before me, as thou dost; and, with face of snow
and finger of wrath, she reminded me of my
malefaction
.
My lord is deceivedthis was no spectre, but a
living woman, said Jacinto, hurriedly.
The knight stared, aghast.
If I make it appear to my lord, continued the
page, that this was, indeed, no phantom sent to
reproach, but a living creature, haply resembling her
of whom he speaks, and, therefore, easily mistaken,
in the gloom, for one of whom my lord thought, in
his delirious moment,will it not satisfy my lord,
that he is not persecuted, but forgiven?
If thou canst speak aught to remove one atom and
grain from this mountain of misery, which weighs upon
my heart, said Calavar, earnestly, I adjure thee
that thou speak it. Many times have I thought that
she whom I slew, stood at my side; but yet had I
hopes, and a partial belief, that these were the visions
of my disease; for my mind is sometimes very sorely
distracted. What I saw at Cholula, was beyond such
explication,very clearly and vividly represented,
and seen by me when my thoughts were not
disordered
.
Let my lord be content, and know that this was
a living creature, as I have said, and no apparition:
let him do on his armour; and, by-and-by, all shall
be revealed to him.
Speak to me now, said the knight.
Not now! not now! interrupted Jacinto; for,
at this moment, the myriads of vengeful fiends who
seek for the blood of my lord, Don Amador, if he be
yet living, are rushing upon the poor fugitives. Doth
not my lord hear?Hark!
'Tis a trumpet! it blasteth for a charge of horse!
cried Calavar, as the distant sound came echoing up
the mountain, even over the roar of the fall.The
ancient war-horse heard the remembered note, and
pricking his ears, neighed loudly and fiercely, running
to a gap in the wall, as if to seek the contest, till
recalled by the voice of his master.
The infidels are then at hand, and they do battle
with Christians? exclaimed Don Gabriel, the fire of
chivalry again flashing from his eye, and almost
driving away the thought of Zayda. Buckle me
these straps, and see that thou art speedy; for this
brooks not delay. God hath called me to this
mountain
,
that I should be ready to do battle with the
heathen, in defence of the holy cross, which is my
22 *
sworn vow; and in the fulfilment of the same, I pray
God that I may die.Sound again, brave heart!
smite me the godless fast and well; for presently I
shall be with ye, striking for the faith!Why, how
thou loiterest, young knave! Be speedy, for my
son Amador is with the Christian host; and, this
day, heaven wills that I shall bring him succour.
Alas! my lord, cried the page, I would that I
could give my life to aid him; but my fingers are
skilless and feeble.
Thou art a godly boy, and well do I love thee.
Buckle me as thou canst, and care not to buckle
well; for, in this fight, God will be my armour.
Buckle me, therefore, as thou canst; and, while thou
art thus engaged, give me to know, what good angel
brought thee to be my messenger.
I followed my sire, said the trembling Jacinto,
with the forces of Mexico, that were sent to join
the mountain bands, and cut off the fugitives; and,
being commanded to rest me on the hill till the battle
was over, I lost myself; which, with my great grief
of heart, caused me to seek some nook wherein I
might die. For truly, now, unless my lord Amador
be living, I care not myself for life.
The forces of Mexico! be they many? and these
dogs of the hills, are they in numbers?
Countless as the drops of spray which the breeze
flings over us, said Jacinto, with much perturbation,
so that nothing, but the goodness of God, can
rescue
the Spaniards out of their hands, and conduct
them forth on the path so blocked up by their bodies.
The Mexicans are many thousands in number, and
triumphing still in the thought of their horrid victory
on the lake. They swear that no Spaniard shall
escape them, this day.
I swear, myself, said Calavar, fiercely, and
heaven will listen to the vow of a Christian, though one
sinful and miserable, that, this day, even they
themselves
,
the godless pagans, shall be scattered as dust
under our footsteps!Quickmy war-coat! and now,
my good lance, that hath drunk the blood of the
heathen
!
Santa Madre de Dios! Seora beatificada!
the
infidel shall fall under the cross, and the true believer
rejoice in his slaughter!
With such exclamations of fervour, the spirit of
youthful days returning, at each blast of the trumpet,
which was still winded at intervals, the knight ceased
doing on his armour, and then, with Jacinto's feeble
assistance, caparisoned his impatient steed. When
this was done, he bade the page to follow him; and,
riding through one of the many gaps in the colossal
wall, began to descend the mountain.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
The
midday sun was illuminating the peaks, and
darting its beams into the narrowest and darkest
ravines of these mountains, when Don Hernan, at the
head of his little army, rode to the crest of a hill, and
looked down upon the narrow, but beautiful valley of
Tonan, opening on the fields of Otompan,or, as the
name has been more euphonically rendered by
Spaniards
,
Otumba. The level vale itself, as well as the
hills on both sides, as far up, at least, as the
gentleness
of their slope allowed such cultivation, was
sprinkled with maize fields, which, being now at
their utmost point of luxuriance, covered such places
with intense verdure; while the green forests, that
here and there overshadowed the upper ridges, with
flowery cliffs protruding from their waving tops,
added the charm of solitude to the pleasant
prospect
of human habitation. But there was one
accidental
beauty at present revealed, which, however
disagreeable and even terrible to the leader, he could
not but acknowledge, in his heart, to surpass all the
others.
At the cry with which the general beheld this
phenomenon
,
his followers rushed up to his side, and
perceived
the whole valley, as it seemed,beginning at
the bottom of the ridge they now stood upon, and
extending not only from hill to hill, but as far as the
eye could see,filled, and indeed blocked up, with
enemies. The white and scarlet hues of their
garments
,
the plumes of divers colours waving on their
heads like a sea of feathers, over whose surging
surface
there passed here a bright sunbeam and there
the shadow of a cloud,the glittering of copper
spears, of volcanic falchions, and of jewels, (for this
day, the pagans decorated themselves, as for a
triumph
,
in their richest array,) produced a scene which
was indeed both glorious and terrific. Through this
human flood, Don Hernan knew he must conduct his
weary and despairing people; but without daring to
hope that the hand which had parted the Sea of the
Desert from before the steps of the Israelites, would
open, for him, a path through this equally fearful
obstruction
.
The Christians gathered round their leader in
silence. The loud roar of shouts, sounding from
below
,
as if a whole world shrieked at once, shook the
mountain under their feet; but they replied not.
Every man was, at that moment, commending his
soul to his Maker; for each knew there was no path
of escape, except though that valley, and felt in
addition
,
that, perhaps, not even the whole army, fresh,
well-appointed, full of spirits and resolution, as when,
on St. John's day, it entered the city of the lake,
could have made any impression on such a multitude,
displayed in such a position. The very extremity of
the case was the best counsel to meet it with
fortitude
;
every man considered his life already doomed
beyond respite, and, with such consciousness, looked
forward to his fate, with tranquillity. Their sufferings
by famine and fatigue on the road, though the
mutinous
and lamenting fugitives did not then know it, had
better prepared them to encounter such a battle-field,
than a series of victories, with spoils of gold and
bread; for these torments having already rendered
their lives burdensome, they were not greatly
frighted
at the prospect of ending them. These causes,
then, added to the fury of fanaticism, never entirely
at rest in the bosom of the invaders, will account for
their resolution, and even impatience, to attack an
army, rated by many of the conquerors, at two
hundred
thousand men. Had they been happier men,
they would not have rushed upon such manifest
destruction
.
The priest Olmedo stretched forth his arm,
holding
a crucifix: Christian and Tlascalan knelt down
upon the flinty ridge, and mingled together sullen
prayers.
As they rose, the ever-composed Sandoval cried
out, emphatically,
Now, my merry men all, gentlemen hidalgos
and gentlemen commoners, God hath, this day, given
us a great opportunity to signalize our valour;
which was all the oration it occurred to his
imagination
to make. The soldiers looked upon him with a
gloomy indifference. Then out spoke the hot-headed
Alvarado:
There be, to my reckoning, in yonder plain, he
said, with a grin of desperation, some five
hundred
thousand men; we have, of our own body, some
four hundred and fifty Christian soldiers, and we may
count the two thousand Tlascalans, here at our heels,
for fifty more; which just leaves us a thousand dogs
apiece to fight in yonder vale. If we gain the
victory
over such odds, never believe me, if we be not
clapped down in books by that German enchanter
Faust, who hath invented a way of making them in
such numbers, as being more heroical men than
either Don Alejandro, the great emperor of Egypt, or
some other country,or Don Rodrigo himself, who
was much greater than any such dog of a heathen
king. This much I will say, that never before had
starving men such a chance of dying like knights of
renown; and as, doubtless, God will send us some
fifty or an hundred thousand angels, to fight on our
side, we may chance stumble on a victory: in hope
of which, or in the certainty, on the other hand, of
going to heaven, I say, Santiago, and at them! for
their bodies are covered with gold and jewels!
God will help us! cried Cortes; and my friend
Alvarado hath very justly said, that there is a rich
spoil, in that valley, for victors. Though there be
here, perhaps, fifty thousand men, or more, yet are
they infidels, and, therefore, but as sparrows and
gnats before the face of God's soldiers. There are,
also, acres of very sweet corn in the valley; and,
beyond yon yelling herds, are the gates of Tlascala.
But let it not be thought, I will, this day, compel the
sword of any Christian. Yonder are the hill-tops;
there are dens enow, wherein one may give his bones
to wild-cats, and there be tall cliffs from which they
who prefer such end, may throw themselves, and
straightway be beyond the reach of battle. For
myself, though but one man follow me, yet will I
descend to that plain, walk through that multitude,
and marshalling an hundred thousand Tlascalans,
after I have rested me a little, return, by the same
path we are now treading, to the gates of Mexico,
to revenge upon such as yonder scum, the death of
my brothers, who are in heaven, as well as to lay
claim to those rich lands and mines of gold, which
are our right, and which it is yet our destiny to
over-master
.
If ye be minded to disperse and starve
among the hills, let me be acquainted with your
resolution
;
if ye will fight like soldiers and Christians,
speak out your good thoughts, and, in God's name,
let us begin!
We will fight! muttered the desperate men.
At this moment, some strong clear voice from the
company began to pronounce the words of the chant,
Kyrie Eleison
, and the rest joining in, Cortes gave
the signal to descend; and thus they went slowly
down towards the host, invoking mercy and singing
the praises of God, and waxing in boldness and
fanaticism
as they sang, until the neighbouring rocks
rang with the loud and solemn echoes of devotion.
Whatever was the piety of Don Hernan, it did
not, however, prevent his taking all the steps which
could be expected of a general in such a situation;
and one while joining, loudly, with others in the chant,
and at another, pausing to give deliberate
instructions
to his officers, he arranged the order and
expedients
of battle, before the wild anthem was
concluded
.
His instructions were simple, and related
but to one point. He counselled no one to be valiant,
for he knew the veriest coward in the ranks would
be compelled to deeds of heroism that day. He only
commanded, that the little troop of horse should form
five deep, and follow him whithersoever he might
lead, and that the footmen should keep their ranks
close, and follow after the horse. He knew, as,
indeed
,
did most of his followers, that the orders
conveyed
to a Mexican army by a Mexican general,
instead of being transmitted, from division to
division
,
by messengers, were directly communicated to
all by the general himself, through the medium of the
great banner, which he bore in his own hands, and,
from the lofty litter on which he was carried, kept
ever displayed to the eyes of his warriors. A few
simple motions of this royal telegraph, sufficed to
convey all the directions which a barbarous
commander
was required to bestow upon a barbarous
army. Among these, the vailing or dropping the
standard, was the well-known signal of retreat; and
whether it might be lowered by the general himself,
or struck from his hands by some fortunate foe, still it
was equally certain, that, in either case, his followers
would immediately, upon seeing it fall, betake
themselves
to flight.When Cortes eyed this immense
multitude, he calculated the chances of victory, not
by the probabilities of routing it, but by those of
making his way to the great banner.
The imperial standard, which, in the tongue of
Mexico, bore the horribly uncouth title of
Tlahuiz
matlaxopilli
, was conspicuously visible, even from the
mountain Aztaquemacan, which the Spaniards were
now descending. In the centre of the pagan army
was a group of warriors, made remarkable by the
height and splendour of their penachos, the glittering
of their jewelled decorations, and the sheen of their
copper lances, the blades of which, like some that
had been seen in Mexico, were full a yard in length,
and polished so that they shone like gold. These
were the guards,a body of young nobles,which
surrounded the person of the general, to protect the
banner from violence. In the centre of this group,
upon a litter of almost imperial gorgeousness, stood
the stately barbarian, bearing on a long pike-staff the
standard, which was a sort of net-work, made of
chains of gold,and, therefore, a more significant
emblem of the object of conquest, and the fate of
subjugation, than any banner of a Christian nation,
even at this day. A few white feathers, waving
amongst the links, kept it ever conspicuous.
As Don Hernan descended, he explained to the
horsemen his design to merge every other object in
that of seizing the Mexican standard; a project which
met the concurrence of each.
All that I have now to say to you, he added,
when approaching the base of the hill, is, to charge
with me at half-speed, and take no thought of
slaying
.
Those of you, who have ever endured the
bastinado
of a pedagogue, will remember, that Julius
Csar, or some such knave of a paynim, it matters
not who, being opposed in some civil war, to certain
cohorts of young gallants and hidalgos of Rome,
directed
his archers to spare the lives, but to let fly at
the faces, of these lady-puppets;a counsel of
infinite
wisdom; for, I remember, that in my youth,
until I got this gash o' the chin from a gentleman of
Saragossa, which somewhat spoils the beauty of my
beard, I had a mortal aversion to fight with any man
much given to striking at the face. What I have to
advise, therefore, is, that you will imitate the
wisdom
of that same Roman hound, and lance your
spears full at the eyes of all who may oppose you.
I have given charge to the footmen to finish our
work: while they are slaughtering such curs as are
not satisfied with scratched faces, we will make free
with yon same knave of the gold net. Let it be
reckonedand 'tis worth a king's ransomthe prize
of him who overthrows the general.Hark! hear
ye how the infidels shout!Are ye ready? In the
name of God, the Virgin, and Santiago, have at
them now like men! Amen!
Santiago! Santiago!
Thus shouting his war-cry, for now the horsemen
had reached the bottom of the hill, Don Hernan
couched his spear, with four cavaliers at his side, of
whom Don Amador de Leste was one, and, followed
by all the others, dashed furiously at the first ranks of
the Mexicans, who were already rushing against him.
The savages sprang aside, flinging their javelins
and swords at the hot Christians, and raining arrows
on their armed bodies; but ever, though thus expressing
their hostility, yielding rank after rank before the
irresistible
charge; until it became apparent to the
most doubting, that they might succeed, at last, in
reaching the banner. They, therefore, redoubled
their exertions, shouted the names of their saints, and
aiming continually at the eyes of the foe, made such
progress, that they were already almost, as it seemed,
within reach of the prize, when a yell of the
Indians
of more than ordinary loudness, echoed by
the infantry with exclamations of alarm, brought
them to a sudden stand.
They had penetrated deeply into the mass; but it
was as a noble ship ploughs her way through billows,
which yield and divide, only to unite again in her
wake, and roar after in pursuit. From their lofty
seats, they could overlook the multitude, and behold
how quickly the path they had carved, was filled up
by screaming barbarians, rushing turbulently after
them; while others dashed in like numbers, and with
equal ferocity, upon the footmen, now left far behind.
Vol. II. 23
As they looked thus over their shoulders, they
paused with surprise, and even perturbation; for they
perceived, furiously descending the slope of the hill on
the left hand, against the infantry which was already
sorely beset, what seemed a Christian cavalier in black
armour, mounted on a noble bay horse, and couching
a lance like a trained soldier, only that, behind him,
there followed, with savage yells, a band of several
thousand Indians, bearing the well-known colours of
Tenochtitlan itself.
God be our stay! cried the general, looking
aghast at this astonishing apparition; have we here
an infidel god, in very deed, risen up against us, and
riding a-horse like a Christian man? Avoid thee,
Satan! and all good saints spurn thee again to the
pit, from which thou comest!
'Tis Mexitli himself! cried one.
'Tis the devil! said another.
Look! exclaimed Don Pedro, he rushes down
upon the footmen, like a rock, tumbled from the
hill-top
;
and hark! heard ever man such horrible voice?
'Tis Mahound! 'tis Satan!Now all good angels
befriend us!
For my part, said Don Amador de Leste
But before his words had yet been heard by any
of his companions, they were cut short by such loud
and thrilling cries of joy from the infantry as equally
confounded the cavaliers.
Elo! Santiago! elo! nuestro buen amigo, el valoroso
Santiago!
that is to say, Lo, St. James! behold,
our good friend, the valiant St. James!burst from
the lips of the footmen, in a frenzy of triumph.
The cavaliers looked again, but to the opposite
mountain, and beheld upon that, as upon the other,
an armed and mounted cavalier descending with
lance in rest, and with the speed of thunder, as if
rushing to a tournay with him of the black armour,
but without being followed by any one, excepting a
single youth, who staggered far behind.
At this sight, the cavaliers uttered loud cries of joy,
not doubting that St. James had indeed come to
rescue them from the claws of the accursed Mexitli,
as they began to consider the black phantom.
Our saint fights for us! cried Cortes; On!
leave the black fiend to him!On, and let him behold
our valour. The standard, ho!Santiago is nigh!
The standard, the standard!
The sight of the second apparition seemed to have
smitten the pagans with as much terror as the view
of their own champion had infused into the Spaniards.
The young nobles who surrounded the banner, looked
to the vision with awe; and ere they had yet
recovered
from their confusion, the Christian cavaliers,
elated and invigorated, fell upon them with such
violence
as left the long copper lances useless in their
hands.
On, and quick! shouted Don Hernan, or the
knavish colour-man will spring from his perch, and
so rob ye of the gold. On, ho! on!Hah, infidel!
art thou not mine own?
As he uttered these last words, he rose on his
stirrups
,
stretched over his horse's neck, and handling
his heavy spear as one would an ordinary javelin,
lanched it with all his force at the chief. There
was never a better mark; for the barbarian, instead
of showing, as Cortes had hinted, any desire to
desert his litter, advanced to its very verge; and
while he balanced the staff and its weighty crest
with his left hand, whirled manfully a short dart
round his head, looking all the while at the great
Teuctli. There never was a better mark,for his
breast, covered with a flimsy hauberk of skins, on
which were sewed thin plates of gilded copper, was
fully exposed;there never was a better aim. Before
the dart had left his grasp, the spear of Don Hernan
smote him on the chest, and piercing copper and
bone alike, hurled him backwards, with the standard,
out of the litter.
The cavaliers shouted victory, and trampling
down the litter-bearers, and the young nobles, as
these began to fly, looked eagerly for the prize.
Have the knaves robbed us?Hah! mad John of
Salamanca,
thou
pickest my pocket of these crowns,
dost thou?
These words of Don Hernan were addressed to a
young hidalgo, who, the moment he had perceived
the spear of Cortes take effect, had flung himself
from his pied steed, rushed upon the downfallen
infidel
,
and striking his sword into his throat, tore from
him the badges of authority.
He who strikes the quarry, said the elated youth,
flinging both plume and golden net over the neck of
his general's horse, has the true claim to the trophy.
Keep them thyself, for thou hast won them; and
if Don Carlos be of mind, brave Juan, thou shalt
mount them for thy coat of arms. Soho, De Leste!
where art thou?I thought this prize should have
been thine!
De Leste has gone mad, said Alvarado.Shall
we chase the runagates? See how they scamper!
The words of Alvarado were true. No sooner
had the golden banner fallen from its height, and
been lost among the combatants, than there rose a
dismal yell over the whole valley, and the vast
multitudes
,
those near at hand, and those afar, alike,
began
to fly, and in the utmost confusion.
Victory! praise be to God! to God and our noble
St. James! cried Cortes, with a shout, that thrilled
to the hearts of the flying pagans. Follow not the
knaves: leave them to the footto the allies and our
mighty champion, the Saint!Soho, De Leste!
return
.
Follow not after the knaves.
'Tis De Olid, cried Don Pedro, that halloos
the hunt's-up. I tell thee, De Leste is mad!
Back to our Champion! said Cortes.Hah!
what saidst thou of De Leste?
That he is gone mad,raving, besottishly, and
very blasphemously mad; and that he deserted us,
the moment he saw thee fling thy spear.
God forbid the youth should prove to be as was
his kinsman, before his death-day, said Cortes; for
a more gallant and sufficient soldier, though
somewhat
self-willed, have I never beheld.Mad, sayst
thou?
He swore to me, first, said Alvarado, with a
devout shrug, that that paynim god, Mexitli,
descending
the hill yonder, was mounted on his own
good horse, Fogoso; which seems to me not
unreasonable
;
for Fogoso was, in some sense, the best
charger lost that night, (which God punish to the
heathen for ever!) and, doubtless, Huitzlipochtli, if
determined
to go out a pricking, like a Christian
knight-errant
,
would be wise enough to pick up the best ghost
of Christian horse. And, secondly, continued Don
Pedro, crossing himself, he swore that his most
holy valour, Santiago, who came down from the
hill-top
to help us, was no more than the ghost of his
kinsman, the knight Calavar, who was drowned,
horse and all, in the salt lake, near to Iztapalapan!
But ho! halon! let us follow the hunt!
Ha, my masters! cried Don Hernan; let us
return, and fathom this marvel, for it may bode us
much to know. But stayI will not rob ye of
pastime
.
As many of ye as will, spur after the hounds,
and aid the Tlascalans.
So saying, and the foes now being scattered in
flight over the neighbouring hills, the general returned
towards the infantry; while the cavaliers, shouting,
as if in a boar-chase, urged their steeds up the hills,
in pursuit of the fugitives.
Thus was fought, and thus won, a battle, in which
four hundred and fifty Spaniards, aided by a handfull
of Tlascalans, contended with a host of such
incredible
numbers, that, to this day, men remember it with
wonder, and would reject it as a fable, were it not
that the testimony of a thousand facts has placed it
beyond the reach of question.
23 *
CHAPTER XXXIV.
What
Alvarado had reported of Don Amador,
was true. The neophyte averred, that, dead or alive,
a spectre or a creature of flesh and blood,the
steed, bestridden by the sable phantom, and urged
with such fury against the footmen, was neither less
nor more than his own good beast, Fogoso; and he
declared, with even more impetuosity, as Don Pedro
had related, that the figure, descending the opposite
hill, was the knight of Calavar, on his ancient
war-horse
,an
apparition, perhaps, but no St. James,
unless
this heavenly patron had condescended to appear
in the likeness of a knight so valiant and so pious.
Strange fancies beset him, and so great was his
impatience
to resolve the marvel, that he scarce waited to
behold the general balance his good spear, before he
turned his horse, and spurred furiously backward.
Meanwhile, the black horseman descended with
such violence upon the footmen, as threatened their
instant destruction, his fierce eyes, as the Christians
thought, gleaming with the fires of hell; so that,
notwithstanding
the sudden relief coming in the person
of the supposed saint, they were seized with horror,
and gave way before him. At the moment when he
rushed among them, uttering what seemed the
Lelilee
of another land, he was encountered by his celestial
opponent, whose strong voice shouted outGod
and St. John! and down with thee, paynim demon!
The shock of two such steeds, both of great weight,
each bearing a man cased in thick armour, each
urged on by the impetus of descent from the hills,
and meeting, midway, in a narrow valley, was
tremendous
.
At the moment of encounter, the sable
rider perceived, for the first time, his opponent;he
checked his steed suddenly, and flung up his lance,
as if to avoid a contest. But the precaution came
too late;his rising lance struck the casque of his
adversary, tearing it off, and revealing the grim
visage and grizzly locks of the knight of Calavar;
while, at the same moment, the spear of Don Gabriel,
aimed with as much skill as determination, smote
the enemy on the lower part of the corslet, and
piercing
it as a buckler of ice, penetrated, at once, to the
bowels and spine. The shock that unseated the
riders, was shared by the steeds, and horse and man
rolled together on the earth.
The loud cry of Calavar! the Penitent Knight!
the valiant Don Gabriel! set up by the bewildered and
awe-struck infantry, reached the ears of the novice.
He spurred on with new ardour, and reaching the
footmen just as they divided in pursuit of the flying
barbarians, he sprung from his horse, and beheld his
kinsman lying senseless, and as it appeared to him,
lifeless, in the arms of the wounded Baltasar.
In the name of heaven, and Amen! what is this?
and what do I see? he cried. Oh heaven, is this
my knight?and doth he live?
He lives, said Baltasar, and he feels as of flesh
and blood; and yet did he die on the lake-side. God
forgive us our sins! for neither heaven nor hell will
hold the dead!
Just at that moment, the knight opened his eyes,
and rolled them on his kinsman,but his kinsman
regarded him not. A low moaning voice of one
never to be forgotten, fell on the ear of the novice,
as he gazed on his friend; and starting up, he beheld,
hard by, the page Jacinto, lying on the body of
Abdalla
,
from whose head he had torn the helm, and
now strove, with feeble fingers, to remove the broken
and blood-stained corslet.
Jacinto!Leila! cried Amador, with a voice
of rapture, flinging himself at her side, (for now,
though the garments of escaupil still concealed the
figure of the Moorish maid, the disguise could be
continued no longer.) The joy of the cavalier
vanished
,
for the maiden replied only with lamentations;
while the Zegri fixed upon him an eye, in which the
stony hardness of death was mingled with the fires
of human passion.
Place my head upon thine arm, cavalier! said
Abdalla, faintly, and let me look upon him who has
slain me.
Oh, my father! my father! cried the Moorish
girl.
God forbid that thou shouldst die, even for the
sake of the maiden I love, exclaimed Amador,
eagerly, supporting his head. Thou art a Wali, a
Christian, and the father of her that dwells in my
heart. Live, therefore; for though thou have neither
land nor people, neither home nor friends, neither
brother nor champion, yet am I all to thee; for I
crave the love of thy daughter.
The maiden sobbed, and heard not the words of
the cavalier; but the dying Moor eyed her with a
look of joy, and then turning his gaze upon Amador,
said,
God be thy judge, as thou dealest truly with her,
who, although the offspring of kings, is yet an orphan,
landless, homeless, and friendless on the earth.
I swear to thee, said the novice,and I
protest
Protest me nothing: hearken to my words, for
they are few; the angel of death calls to me to come,
and my moments fly from me like the blood-drops,
said the Zegri. Until the day, when I dreamed thou
wert slumbering in the lake, I knew not of this that
hath passed between ye. Had it been known to me,
perhaps this death that comes to me, might not have
come; for, what I did, I did for the honour and weal
of my child, knowing that, in the hand of Spaniards,
she was in the power of oppressors and villains.
That I have struck for revenge, is true; I have shed
the blood of Castilians and rejoiced, for therein I
reckoned me the vengeance of Granada. Yet, had
it been apparent to me, that the feeble maid, who,
besides myself, knew no other protector of innocence
in the world, could have claimed the love of an
honourable
cavalier, and enjoyed it without the shame
of disguise and menial occupation, then had I
submitted
to my fate, and locked up in the darkness of
my heart, the memory of the Alpujarras.
Who speaks of the Alpujarras? cried the knight
of Rhodes, staring wildly around; who speaks of
the Alpujarras?
I!
said the Moor, with a firm voice, bending his
eye on Don Gabriel, and striving, though in vain, for
his nether limbs were paralyzed, to turn his body
likewise;
I
Gabriel of Calavar,
I
speak of the
Alpujarras
;
and good reason have I to speak, and thou to
listen; for I was of the mourning, and thou of the
destroyers.
Pity me, heaven! cried the knight, staring on
the Moor, in the greatest disorder. I have seen
thee, and yet I know thee not.
Rememberest thou not the field of Zugar, and the
oath sworn on the cross of a blood-stained sword, by
the river-side?
Hah! cried Don Gabriel; dost thou speak of
mine oath?mine oath to Alharef?
And the town of Bucares, among the hills?
continued
the Zegri, loudly, and with a frown made still
more ghastly by approaching death; dost thou
remember the false and felon blow that smote the
friend of Zugar,and that, still falser and fouler,
which shed the blood of Zayda, the beloved of the
Alpujarras?
As the Wali spoke, the knight, as if uplifted by
some supernatural power, rose to his feet, and
approached
the speaker, staring at him with eyes of
horror. At the name of Zayda, he dropt on his knees,
crying,
Miserere mei, Deus! I slew her! and thou that
art Alharef, though struck down by the same sword,
yet livest thou again to upbraid me!
Struck down by thy steel, yet not then, but
now! exclaimed the Moor. I live again, but not
to upbraid theeI am Alharef-ben-Ismail, and I
forgive
thee.
At this name, already made of such painful interest
to the novice, his astonishment was so great, that, as
he started, he had nearly suffered the dying prince
(for such were the Walis of Moorish Spain,) to fall
to the earth. He caught him again in his arms, and
turned his amazed eye from him to Don Gabriel, who,
trembling in every limb, still stared with a distracted
countenance on that of his ancient preserver.
I am Alharef, and, though dying, yet do I live,
went on the Zegri, interrupted as much by the wails
of his daughter, as by his own increasing agonies.
The sword wounded, but it slew notit slew not
all
Zayda fell, yet live I, to tell thee, thou art forgiven.
Rash man! rash and most unhappy! thine anger was
unjust; and therefore didst thou shed the blood of the
good, the pure, the loving and the beautiful, and
thereby cover thyself, and him that was thy true
friend, with misery. When thou soughtest the love
of Zayda, she was the betrothed of Alharef.
Miserable
art thou, Gabriel of Calavar! and therefore
have I forgiven thee; miserable art thou, for I have
watched thee by night, and looked upon thee by
day, and seen that the asp was at work in thy bosom,
and that the fire did not slumber. Great was thy sin,
but greater is thy grief; and therefore doth Zayda,
who is in heaven, forgive thee.
She pardons me not, murmured Don Gabriel,
not a moment relaxing the steadfast eagerness of his
stare. At the pyramid of Cholula, on the
anniversary
of her death, she appeared to me in person, and,
O God! with the beauty of her youth and innocence,
yet robed in the blackness of anger!
And have thine eyes been as dark as the looks of
the lover? cried Alharef. Stand up, Zayda, the
child of Zayda! or turn thy face upon Calavar, that
his delusion may leave him.
As he spoke, he lifted feebly the arm which
embraced
his child, removed the cap, and parted the
thick clustering locks from her forehead. Still,
however
,
did she look rather the effeminate boy, upon
whom Calavar had been accustomed to gaze, than a
woman;for there is no effort of imagination stronger
than that required to transform, in the mind, the object
which preserves an unchanging appearance to the
eye. Nevertheless, though such a transformation
could not be imagined by Don Gabriel, there came,
as he wistfully surveyed the pallid features of the
maiden, strange visions and memories, which, every
moment, associated a stronger resemblance between
the living and the dead. He trembled still more
violently, heavy dew-drops started from his brow,
and he gazed upon the weeping girl as upon a basilisk.
Wherefore, continued the Zegri, speaking
rapidly
,
but with broken accents,when I had resolved
to fly to the pagans, as being men whom, I thought,
God had commissioned me to defend from rapine and
slavery, I resolved to take such advantage of their
credulity, as might best enable me to befriend them,
I say, wherefore I resolved this, I need not speak. I
protected my child, by recommending her to their
superstition; and, had I fallen dead in the streets,
still did I know, that reverence and fear would wait
upon the steps of one whom I delivered to them as a
messenger from heaven. In this light, I revealed her
to the princes at the temple, when
It is enough! muttered Don Gabriel, with the
deep and agitated tones of sorrow; I wake from a
dream.God forgive me! and thou art of the blood
of Zayda? the child of her whom I slew?Alharef
forgives me; he says, that Zayda forgives me; but
thou that art her child, dost
thou
forgive me?
Father! dear father, she doth! cried Amador,
gazing with awe on the altered countenance of
Alharef
,
and listening with grief to the moans of Zayda.
O holy padre! he exclaimed, perceiving the priest
Olmedo rising, at a little distance, from the side of a
man, to whom he had been offering the last
consolations
of religion,Hither, father, for the love of
heaven, and absolve the soul of a dying Christian!
Is there a priest at my side? said the Zegri,
reviving from what seemed the lethargy of
approaching
dissolution, and looking eagerly into the face of
the good Olmedo. Then, turning to Amador, he
said solemnly, though with broken words, Thou
lovest the orphan Zayda?
Heaven be my help, as I do, replied the cavalier.
And thou, Gabriel, that wert my friend, and
standest in the light of this young man's parent,
dost thou consent that he shall espouse the daughter
of Zayda, saved, while a piteous infant, by Christian
men, from out the house of death?
The knight bowed his head on his breast, and
strove to answer, but, in his agitation, could not
speak a word.
Quick, father! for heaven's sake, quick! cried
Alharef, eagerly; let me, ere I die, know that my
child rests on the bosom of a husband. Quick! for
the sand runs fast; and there is that in my bosom,
which tells me of death. Love and honour thy
bride; for thou hast the last and noblest relic of
Granada. Take herthou wert her protector from
harsh words and the violence of blows. Quick, father,
quick! quick, for mine eyes are glazing!
The strangely timed and hurried ceremony was
hastened by the exclamations of Alharef; and the
words of nuptial benediction were, at last, hurriedly
pronounced.
I see thee not, my child! muttered the Moor,
immediately after. My blessing to thee, Amador,
Gabriel, thou art forgiven.Thine arm round my
neck, Zayda; thy lips to mine. Would that I could
see thee!Get thee to Granada, with thy lordto
the tomb of thy motherI will follow theeTarry
not in this land of bloodI will be with thee; we
have a power yet in the hills
Let the cross rest on thy lips, if thou diest a
Christian, said the father.
The novice drew the maiden aside; the Zegri
pressed the sacred symbol to his lips, but still they
muttered strangely of Granada.
I am of the faith of Christ, and Mahomet I
defy. My people shall be followers of the cross, but
they shall sweep away the false Spaniard, as the wind
brushes away the leaves.The Emir of Oran is
prepared
the
king of Morocco will follow.A power
in the hillsAh!We will creep, by night, to
Granada
a
brave blow!Africa shall followHa, ha!
Seize the gates! storm the Alhambra!but spare
lifekill no women!Remember Zayda!
With such wild words, accompanied by the faint
cries of his daughter, the spirit of the Moor passed
away, and Alharef-ben-Ismail lay dead in the land
of strangers.
Don Gabriel uttered a deep groan, and fell across
the feet of his ancient friend.
At this moment, Cortes descended from his horse,
and, followed by other cavaliers, stepped up to the
lamenting group.
And Calavar, the valiant, has been murdered by
this traitor Moor! he cried.
Seor Don Hernan, said the novice, sternly,
and as he spoke, rising from the earth, and folding
the Moorish maiden to his heart, you speak of
him who was Alharef-ben-Ismail, a Wali of Granada,
driven by the injustice of our companions, and in
part, by your own harshness, to take arms against
you. As one that am now his representative, and,
as I may say, his son, I claim for him the
honourable
burial of a Christian soldier; and, after that, will
hold myself prepared, with sword and spear, to
defend
his memory from insult.
Vol. II. 24
CHAPTER XXXV.
A FEW words will finish the first part of the
cronicle
of Don Cristoval.
The victory so marvellously gained, removed the
last obstruction from the path of the Spaniards. The
ensuing day beheld them entering the territories of
their allies; and, in four days more, the chiefs of
Tlascala ushered them, with songs of joy, into the
republican city.
Six days after this happy event, the novice of
Rhodes sat by the death-bed of his kinsman.From
the moment when Calavar roused out of the fit of
unconsciousness
,
into which he had fallen on the field
of Otumba, his brain wandered with delirium; but it
gave his young kinsman, as well as the faithful
Baltasar
,
much relief to perceive, that his visions were
oftener of a pleasant than a disagreeable character.
Thus, the reappearance of Alharef, after such long
seeming death, dwelt in his memory, without the
recollection
of his subsequent decease; and with this
came the conceit that Zayda yet lived among the
Alpujarras, restored, like the Wali, to life, and all
forgetful of the wrongs he had done her. He
prattled
of returning now to Spain, and now to Rhodes,
and now of making a pilgrimage to the Holy Land.
It is true, that, sometimes, dark thoughts crept to his
brain, and agitated him with his former griefs; but
these were ever chased away by the sight of Leila,
whose countenance seemed to him as that of a holy
seraph, sent from heaven, to bid him be of good
cheer.
On the fifth day, he recovered his senses, and
being
sensible of his approaching dissolution, assembled
at his bed-side, after having received absolution, the
padre Olmedo, and the few friends and followers whom
heaven had spared him in this pagan land, being the
young cavalier of Cuenza, the melancholy Zayda, or
Leila, as Amador yet loved to call her, and Baltasar.
The spear of Alharef had not harmed him; he was
dying, the victim of a long remorse; or, rather, as
it may be said, he expired, when the excitement of
this passion no longer supported him. For, perhaps,
the same thing may be said of many mental diseases,
which is true of certain physical ones, to which a
human constitution has been long accustomed; that
is, they may obtain so vital a command over all its
functions, as to become in themselves the elements,
or at least the bulwarks, of life; so that, when they
are arrested by some unskilful leech, death shall
almost
immediately follow the cure.
I have now called you, my children, he said,
bending an eye of affection upon the pair, and
speaking
very feebly, to give you such counsel as may
be drawn from the history of my life. Its secrets
are revealed to you, its pages all lie open; and as
you read, your spirits will find their own instruction;
for they will discover, that the indulgence of passion,
especially the passion of anger, doth lodge a barb in
the bosom, never to be plucked out, save by the hand
of death. What I have to say, is rather of
command
than advice; and thou wilt listen to me,
Amador
,
my son, for God hath given thee, in the person
of this gentle Zayda, an argument of obedience,
which will touch thy heart more eloquently than
words.Break thy sword, hack off thy spurs, cast
thine armour into the sea, and think no more of war,
unless to defend thy fire-side, and the altars of thy
country, from the fury of invaders.
The novice started with alarm.
Think not that I rave, said the knight. I speak
to thee with the wisdom that comes from the grave.
Think no more of war; for war it is that rouses our
passions; and passions have made me what I have
been, and what I am. I cannot think
now
, (for, at
this moment, methinks I stand in the presence of Him
who abhorreth contention,) that He will pardon the
shedding of any blood, except that which the
necessity
of self-preservation, and the defence of our
country, enforce us to lavish. I repent me of that
which I have poured, though even from the hearts of
pagans; for pagans are still the sons of God, though
walking in darkness, for which we should pity them,
not slay. Thou hast drawn thy sword for glory; but
the lives that are taken for fame, shall weigh upon
the souls of men as murders;for such they are.
Thou drawest for religion:give thy purse to the
priest, and bid him convert with the cross; for the
wrath of God will rest for ever upon him who maketh
proselytes with the sword. Wo is me, that the
delusions
of glory and Christian zeal have stained me
so deeply! Live for happiness, and thou shalt wrong
none, neither man nor God, and, thus, happiness shall
be awarded thee; live for honour, and thou shalt know,
that heaven acknowledges none but that which is
justice; live for peace, which is virtue; and for
religion
,
which is goodness. Get thee to thy castle, to
the lands which thou shalt inherit; plant thy vines
and olives, relieve the unhappy, succour the
distressed
;
and if thy young brother should pant for the
barb and lance, teach him the history of thy
kinsman
.
Be virtuous, be peaceful, be charitable, and
be happy. When thou hearest of glory, bethink thee
of the poor deluded creatures we have slain in this
land; when thou art told of pious crusades,
remember
the days of the Alpujarras.Would that my days
were to pass again!
He paused, with exhaustion.
The noble knight, said the padre, hath spoken
much good and wholesome truth; nevertheless, in the
matter of infidels, what he has counselled, is not well.
For how is it written
Holy father, murmured Don Gabriel, there
be men enow who will obey thee in this matter, and
without exhortation or argument. Defeat not my
work; for I rob thee of but one. Let me think, that
the son of my affection will dwell in peace, and
thereby be clean in the eyes of God, and thus happy
at his death-hour. Would that I might appear before
my Maker, without the stain of blood!
With a few more such precepts of virtue, for
grief and the hand of death had made his heart wise,
Don Gabriel continued to address the novice. He
spoke many words of kindness, also, to the old and
faithful Baltasar, and was about to give his
benediction
to the child of Zayda, when a film came
suddenly
over his eyes:
Give me thy hand, he muttered, faintly and
almost
inarticulately; I see thee not, but mine eyes
are opened to Zayda. Where art thou, Amador, my
son? Heaven is blissfulAlharefZaydaall
Miserere mei, Domine!Thus he murmured for
a moment, his voice dwindling to a whisper; then his
lips moved, but without yielding any sound, until, at
last, it was apparent that he had expired, and yet
so gently, that not even a spasm of muscle, or change
of countenance, indicated the passage of his spirit.
Three days after this, at sunrise, the seor Cortes
stood alone with Don Amador de Leste, on the
terrace
of the great dwelling in which he had quartered
the remains of his army.
Thou leavest me then, De Leste? he said, in a
low voice, looking westward to the hills, beyond
which lay the valley of the lakes.
Such is my purpose, very noble seor, said the
cavalier, mildly, but firmly. My horses are
caparisoned
in the court-yard, my little company is in
waiting, my friends have been saluted, and nothing
remains for me but to thank your excellency for your
many manifestations of goodness to me and mine,
the living and the dead together,and to pray your
excellency wish me God speed.
And can you look upon yonder blue cliffs, and
those snow-capt pinnacles, said Don Hernan, with
24 *
a smothered voice, and think of leaving the paradise
they encompass, in the hands of the heathen?
I know not, said Don Amador, that it becomes
me to intrude any advice upon your excellency.
But you have already done deeds, as I am myself
a witness, which will give you immortal fame, though
you should proceed no farther in the impossible
attempt
to subjugate this very potent and wonderful
empire.
It shall be mine! said Cortes, smiting his hands
together, and speaking with clenched teeth. Though
there were but an hundred men left with me,nay,
were there but ten,I would sooner that they should
see me rent under the tusks of the wild mountain
hogs, than turning my back for ever against the city
of Montezuma. Thou thinkest the case is desperate;
yet, with those ten Christians, and the hundreds of
thousands of disaffected barbarians, whom I will
gather together, thou shalt hear, perhaps, ere thou
art housed in thy mountain castle of Cuenza, that he
whom thou leavest, is the lord of Mexico; and the
valiant men who remain by him, the barons and
counts of the great empire!
With mine own hills of olive and cork, have I
enough to content me, said the novice, coldly.
And thou carest not to revenge thy friends,
massacred
so barbarously, that fatal nightFlames be
on the soul of the enchanter for ever! exclaimed the
general, bursting into fury at the recollection.
I say, God pardon him! replied Amador, and
God receive to his rest those friends, of whom you
speak. I have naught to revenge; I lament their
fate, which was dreadful; but I acknowledge that
they were slain in honourable combat.
And thou carest not then to strike for the cause
of Christ, and aid in the conversion of countless souls
from perdition?
The cavalier regarded his general with a meaning
eye. Cortes felt the reproof, and catching his hand,
said, hastily,
It is enough! thou hast a young and tender wife
Who would have dreamed that such a creature
walked with us throughout that night? It is right,
thou shouldst desire to bear her from these scenes of
tumult, and not unnatural thou shouldst wish to share
the peace and happiness to which thou art conducting
her. For myself, I sometimes think of my own fair
Doa in the island, and the pleasant sound of the surf,
rolling, by night, on the beach under her lattice; but
nevertheless, there are, in this same heathen clime,
certain charms, which cause me to forget the fair
Catalina, and my merry brats into the bargain.
For me, said the novice, sadly, there is nothing
in this land but melancholy. Alharef, sire of Zayda,
sleeps under a rock at Otumba; and Calavar, whom
I may call my father, since such he was to me, now
rests in you grove, on the hill-side. I have buried a
faithful servant in the lake, and a good youth, whom
I loved, an old follower of my knight, and a very
dear friend. I shall think of the land with regret,
yet must I leave it without a sigh. I have hopes to
find me some conveyance to the islands, and there,
thank heaven, it is not so difficult to light upon a trader
of Seville bound on the homeward voyage.
If thou art, indeed, resolute to depart, said
Cortes
,
I have it in my power not only to wish thee
God speed, but to give thee a good ship of my fleet
at Ulua, commanded by thy very noble kinsman,
which he will, doubtless, man to thy liking with
choice sailors; and wherein, thou canst proceed
instantly
to Spain, without the tedious necessity of
touching at Cuba.
The eyes of the neophyte sparkled. Don Hernan
smiled:
Assuredly, said he, I am rejoiced to pleasure
thee so much; and yet thou wilt thyself confer upon
me a very ineffable obligation, by sailing in that same
good ship, and taking charge of a certain letter I
have here written to his majesty, our lord, Don
Carlos
,
being the second despatch wherein I have
presumed
to acquaint him with the success of our arms,
fighting in his cause, and in that of the holy church.
If it may suit your convenience to bear the same, in
person, to his imperial majesty, I hope you will
have no cause to repent doing me so great a favour.
I will bear it to his majesty, in person, said the
novice, taking the sealed packet, laying it upon his
forehead in token of fealty, and then warmly
grasping
the general's hand: I will do this with much
satisfaction; and, in memory that thou hast, upon
three several occasions, done me such personal
service, as touches me to answer with a life's
thankfulness
,
if there be any other act wherein I can
pleasure
thee, I pray thee command me to the same,
without
any reserve; for I will consider that thou dost
thereby acquaint me with a way to testify my
gratitude
.
I think you, said Don Hernan: I have no
commission with which I will dare further to trouble
you. And yet, and yet,and yetHe hesitated a
moment, and his lip slightly quivered; but instantly
resuming an air of indifference, he continued, If it
should suit your good convenience,that is, if you
should prefer,to travel rather by the hot mountains
of Estremadura, than the barren ridges of La
Mancha
,
while passing to the court at Madrid, I would
crave of your goodness to inquire me out a certain
village called Medellin, that lieth on the Guadiana,
some few leagues above the city of Merida.
Were it an hundred leagues, and they of the
rudest, said Amador, I should be no less ready to
do your bidding. But give me to know, when I am
arrived at this same village of Medellin, in what I
can pleasure you.
Inquire me out, said Cortes, a certain old man,
a poor hidalgo, called Martin Cortes, as also his wife,
Catalina.By my conscience, seor, they are my
father and mother; and they will have some joy to
hear you speak of me!
Now, I vow to heaven! cried Amador, struck
by the sudden and impetuous tone of feeling, which
Don Hernan strove to hide under a burst of gayety,
I am sorry they live not as far away as Pampeluna,
at once; that I might show you the readiness with
which I will be your messenger: for, herein, do I
perceive, I shall be looked on by them as a good
angel, sent to them from heaven.
Be not over-sanguine, said Cortes, affecting a
laugh: for, by my conscience, if you tell her not
every thing to her liking, my mother hath somewhat
of a shrewish way of admonishing you.
Nevertheless
,
it is enough: it hath been some long years since
they have heard of my whereabout and my
what-about
;
since, sooth to say, I one day played them a
dog's trick, and, a month after, was chasing the
Indians
in Cuba. It will greatly amaze them to hear
I have not been absolutely hanged, as my mother
oft-times promised me, for my sins; and, surely, they
will stare at you, when you tell them I have been
killing a great emperor, as some idle fellows have
charged on me; whereas, you know yourself,
having
been so forward to shield him, that Montezuma
was slain by his own people,a murrain on them!
I will bear witness to the truth, and I will say
nothing that can give them pain.
I shall be much beholden to you, said Don
Hernan
,
eagerly; for my mother is somewhat more
righteous than other women, and might be convinced,
out of the mouths of some of my friends, that I am
given to godless acts on occasions, which is very
false and slanderous. I will beseech you to bear them
certain curious jewels, and trifles of golden ware,
the fabric of my good savages here, more as
mementos
of my gracelessness, than as presents of
affection
;seeing
that they are of no great value.
They are such curiosities as will make mine old
playmates
stare. Ah, the rascals! they were all better
than I at their books, and somewhat less acquainted
with the pedagogue's palm.But pho! he continued,
suddenly dropping the tone of bagatelle, with which
he had spoken, I do but fool the time: your steed
neighs in the court-yard, your lady looks up to the
terraceI will detain you no longer. The king's
letter which you bear, will authorize you to demand
of the admiral the best ship in our small navy, as
also to have it sailored and provisioned to your mind;
and therein you can voyage, at your good pleasure,
to the Guadalquivir. I have presumed to order in
waiting, subject to your command, a company of
guides, consisting of four Castilian soldiers, ten
Tlascalans
,
and thrice as many Totonacs of the coast,
with whom you will take your own will as to speed,
though I recommend you to submit to theirs, in the
matter of the road. Commend me to your kinsman,
the admiral, as also very truly to my parents; and
if the emperor should see fit to express doubts of the
success of this enterprise, in which I am engaged,
tell him that I, Hernan Cortes, do say, and I gage
my head for the fulfilment of the same, that the land
shall
be his,all that lies between the two seas, and
betwixt the narrow neck of Panama to the south,
and the huge isle of Florida to the north: this I
promise
,
and this I will fulfil.And now, seor, giving
you my thanks for the good deeds you have already
done me, as well as those which you meditate, and
wishing to your fair and noble wife a green path by
land and a smooth way by sea, I do, very truly and
devoutly, and from the bottom of my heart, pray you
God speed!Remember me; for you shall hear of
me yet!
So saying, the two cavaliers descended and parted,
Don Amador de Leste to cross the seas, and,
discharging
the commands of his friend, both to the
ancient
hidalgo of Medellin and the great Charles of
Austria, to seek for happiness in his castle of
Alcornoque
,
in the society of his Moorish bride; and
Hernan Cortes to ponder alone upon the fall of
Tenochtitlan
.
CONCLUSION.
Of
the secondary characters of this history, enough
has been already narrated. Our respect, however,
for the memory of the magician, Botello, requires
that we should mention two circumstances in
relation
to his fate, and his chief and most mystical
familiar
.
His unexpected death, instead of destroying
his credit among those who survived the Noche Triste,
gave him additional claims to respect, even in the
grave; for when it was remembered, that the arrows
which slew so many Spaniards, were adorned with
the feathers of eagles, as well as other birds of prey,
they perceived, in his fate, only a confirmation of the
juggling subtlety of the fiends that `palter with us in
a double sense.' Truly, said they, Botello was
borne out of danger on the wings of eagles, as he
prophesied, albeit he was borne to heaven. In after
days, when Mexico had become the prey of the
invader
,
the lake was dragged for the bones of the
Christians
who had fallen with him in the nocturnal retreat,
which were then deposited, with many religious
ceremonies
,
in ground consecrated for the purpose. In
the last ditch, at the very spot where Botello had
fallen, a fortunate fisherman hooked up the magic
Crystal, the prison of Kalidon-Sadabath; who, greatly
to the horror of the finder, began instantly, as of old,
to dance, and curvet, and perform other diabolical
antics, in his hands. No other conjurer in the army
having the skill to interpret the motions of this
mysterious
imp, his crystal habitation was transmitted,
along with divers Mexican rarities, to the shelves of
the Escurial, where it was long viewed with wonder
and respect, as an instrument contrived by the hands,
and devoted to its unearthly uses by the skill, of the
celebrated Cornelius Agrippa. A philosopher, who
was thought, as was Feyjo in later days, by his
countrymen, to have too little consideration for
vulgar
prejudices, asserted, after attentive examination,
that the marvellous crystal was nothing more than a
piece of glass, hollowed by the maker into many
singular
cavities, wherein was deposited a coloured drop
of some volatile liquor, which being, at any time,
expanded
by the heat of the breath, or of the hand, would
instantly dart about, and assume the most fantastic
shapes, according to the sinuous vacuities through
which it happened to be impelled. This explanation
was received with incredulity; but, nevertheless,
Kalidon of the Crystal was treated with neglect, and,
in course of time, entirely forgotten. We surmise,
however, and the conjecture is not without argument,
that the Enchanted Crystal, presented, half a century
afterwards, by the angel Uriel to the famous English
conjurer, Doctor Dee, was no other than this
identical
stone, filched by the angelic thief from its dusty
repository, and given to him who best knew how to
put it to its proper uses.
Late in the autumn of the following year, the seor
Don Amador de Leste sat watching the sunset of a
peaceful day, from a little bower, on a lawn in front
of his castle Del Alcornoque. A clump of aged oaks
flung their branches over a low, square, and
mouldering
tower,the work of the Moorish masters of
Spain many a long year back, and a fragment, as it
seemed, of some ancient bath or fountain; for a body
of pure water still made its way through the
disjointed
stones, and fell bubbling into a little basin
beneath
.
The scene, as beheld from this spot, was one of
enchanting beauty and repose. The fountain was,
perhaps, midway on the slope of a long hill, a few
rods in advance of the castle, (with which it was,
indeed, connected by a somewhat neglected walk of
orange trees,) whose irregular turrets and frowning
battlements rose among groups of cork-trees, while
a broken forest of these, extended behind, up to and
over the crest of the hill. In front, the little valley,
wherein was embosomed the silvery Jucar, was
bounded now by sharp cliffs and jutting
promontories
,
and now by green lawns, which ran sweeping
upwards to the hill-tops on the opposite side. A hazy,
smoky atmosphere, warmed into lustre by the
sinking
luminary, while it mellowed all objects into
beauty
,
did not conceal from the eye the flocks of sheep
which dotted the distant slopes, the cattle standing at
the river-side, and the groups of peasantry, who
adding
their songs to the lowing of the heards and the
cawing of a flight of crows, urged forward the
burthened
ass from the vine-tree. A monastery rose in
the forest, a little village glimmered pleasantly on the
river bank, under the shadow of a cliff; and over the
ridges, which shut in the valley to the south, was
seen the dim outline of those sierras of Morena, from
which might be traced the peaks of the Alpujarras.
Over this fair prospect, the young cavalier looked
with pride, for it was the inheritance handed down
to him by a long line of ancestors,not snatched
away by violence from vanquished Moors, but
reclaimed
from them by a bold knight, whose
genealogical
tree had been rooted in those hills, before Tarik,
the Arab, had yet looked upon the Pillars of
Hercules
.
He gazed on it also with joy, for he had
learned to love peace; and this seemed the chosen
abode of tranquillity.
It doth indeed appear to me,
now
, he muttered,
as if my past life were a foolish dream. There is
a rapture in this quiet nook, a happiness in this
prospect
of loveliness and content, entirely beyond any
pleasure which I ever experienced in my days of
tumult and fame. What can there be, to add a
further
charm to this paradise?
Perhaps he muttered this interrogatory in the
spirit
of an improver and adorner of nature.It was
answered by the fall of a gentle footstep. He looked
behind him, and beheld, standing at his back, pausing
a moment with patient and yet dignified affection,
Vol. II. 25
the fair figure of a woman, who had no sooner caught
his eye, than she smiled, and pointed to a female
attendant
,
who bore in her arms, hard by, a sleeping
infant. A cross of rubies glittered on the lady's
breast.
If thou didst apprehend, Leila! said the
cavalier
,
with eyes of joy, that I reckoned this hill-side
a paradise, without thinking of thyself and my young
Gabriel, thou didst most grievously wrong me; for
I protest to thee, I never cease thinking of ye.
Never? murmured the mild voice of the
Moorish
lady: Heaven be praised!But, sometimes,
when thou lookest upon the sports of our little
brother
Rosario, it seems to me, thou dost forget us.
I vow to thee, my honoured and beloved lady,
said the hidalgo, earnestly, and, if thou wilt believe
me the rather for that, I swear by the bright eyes
of my young boy, that, since I discovered thou wert
alive, and, especially, since thou hast been mine own
Zayda, I have come to look with new eyes upon
those things, which were the joys of my youth. Let
us sit down upon this mossy stone; and, while we
gaze a little upon Rosario, who, thou seest, is
hacking
the wooden Turk's-head on the knollThou
knowest, he did so gash my young plantations of
olive-trees, that I was enforced to allow him this
block, for his recreationWhile we thus regard
him, (for, of a truth, he is a most gallant boy, and of
soldierly bearing,) I will discourse to thee in such
manner, as to convince thee that I have utterly
weeded from my bosom the foul plants of ambition,
and that I am equally solicitous to cleanse the breast
of my brother.Hah! by my faith, what now?
Seest thou yonder ill-looking, lurking knave? I doubt
me, he has been robbing my vineyard.May I die,
but the young varlet doth advance his sword against
him! Well done, sir Hector!And he knows not
I am near, to give him aidance!What ho, sirrah
Rosario! put up thy swordThis is no robber.
It is a pilgrimsome poor pilgrim, exclaimed
the lady:Rosario gives him his hand, and leads
him towards us.
It was even as the fair Doa had said. The youth
Rosario, who had, at first, advanced valiantly
towards
the stranger, as if to question his right to walk
so near the castle, was now seen to sink his weapon,
speak a word or two to the comer, and then give
him his hand, as if to conduct him to the cavalier.
As they approached, Don Amador could perceive
that the stranger had robed his figure in a cloak of
the humblest texture; he was barefooted; he held a
staff in his hand; and his great slouched hat was
adorned with scallop-shells. He seemed a palmer,
who had performed a long and painful pilgrimage;
for, though obviously a young man, his frame was
wasted, his beard long and haggard, and his cheeks
were very thin and pale.
By my faith, said Don Amador, this palmer
hath speedily won the heart of my brother; for, thou
seest, Rosario doth look into his face, as though he
had got him the hand of some great knight from
Judea.I welcome you with peace and good-will,
seor pilgrim; and my gates are open to you.Art
thou from Compostella or Loretto? Or, perhaps, thou
comest even from the Holy Land?
While the cavalier spoke, the Moorish lady
surveyed
the features of the pilgrim with a surprise
and agitation which drew the attention of Don
Amador
;
but before he could speak, the pilgrim replied:
Not from the Holy Land, but from a land
accurst
,from
death and the grave, from the depths
of the heathen lake and the maws of Mexicans
At these words, the lady screamed, and Don
Amador
himself started aghast, as he listened to the voice
of the speaker.
In the name of God, amen! he cried, recoiling
a step; I know thy voice, and I saw thee perish!
Pardon me, noble patron! said the pilgrim,
hastily
;
I spoke but in figures; and therein I spoke not
amiss, since I perceived that my noble lord looked
upon me as one that was dead. Alas, seor, I liveI
am your honour's poor ward and secretary, Fabueno.
Fabueno! cried the cavalier, recovering
himself
a little: If thou livest, thou liest; for Lorenzo
is dead!
Hast thou been lying, then, thou knave? cried
Rosario, with much indignation. I will knock the
cockles from thy cap; for thou saidst, thou hadst
fought with the great Cortes, among the Indians!
Alas, seor! cried Lorenzo, will you still think
me dead? Have sorrow and misery so changed
me, that your noble goodness cannot see, in this
broken frame and this withered visage, your poor
follower, Fabueno?
By my troth, I am amazed! This hand is flesh
and blood; this darkened brow and weeping eye
Pho! Look upon him, Zayda!Thou livest, then?
God be praised! And thou sheddest tears, too?
Never believe me, but I am rejoiced to see thee;
and thou shalt dwell with me, till thy dying day
Heaven be thanked!By what miracle wert thou
revived, after being both killed and drowned? I'faith,
thou didst greatly shock my lady.'Tis wondrous,
how soon she knew thee!
Knew me? exclaimed the secretary, gazing with
a bewildered eye upon the lady.
Why, dost thou forget, cried the cavalier,
catching
the hand of Leila, over whose brow a faint colour
rose at the remembrance,dost thou forget my
dear and beloved page, Jacinto?
Alas, madam, said Lorenzo, bending to the
earth, nothing but my confusion could have made
me so blind; and this is more wondrous, too, since
his excellency, Don Hernan, had made me acquainted
with the happiness of my lord.
Speakest thou of Don Hernan? cried the
cavalier
.
By my troth, I have an hundred thousand
questions to ask thee; and I know not which to
demand first. But thine own reappearance is so
marvellous, that I must first question thee of that;
and, afterward, thou shalt speak to me of Don
Hernan
.
How wert thou fished up?
Fished up, seor! said Lorenzo, sadly; I know
not well what your favour means. At that moment
of distraction and horror, he went on, with a
shudder
,
when I called to you for succour
I heard you, said Amador, and I ran to your
assistance,but, heaven forgive me! I cursed the act
afterwards, when I discovered that it had lost me my
poor Jacinto. Ah, seora mia! was there ever so
dreadful a night?
When I called, continued Fabueno, I was then
beset by the infidels. The princessthe poor
princess
,
was slain in my arms, and my horse speared
under me, so that we fell to the earth. Seor, I know
not well what happened to me, then, for my mind
fled from me: I only remember, that, as they flung
me into a canoe, there came a cavalier, the valiant
Don Francisco de Saucedo, as I found by his voice,
to my assistance, shouting aloud. I think, he was
slain on the spot; for I heard a plunging in the water,
as if his horse had fallen into the lake.
It was he, then, said Don Amador, whom I
saw sink so miserably into the flood! Heaven give
him rest!I thought it was thyself.
Seor, continued the secretary, I will not
weary you, now, with all the particulars of my
sorrow. When heaven restored me my reason, I
found myself lying in a wicker den,a cage of
victims
,in
the temple yard, under the pyramid; and I
knew that I was saved, only to be made a sacrifice.
Heaven forefend! cried Amador, while Zayda
grew white with horror.
I tell you the truth, seor, said Fabueno,
trembling
in every limb. There were more than thirty
such cages around me, and in every one a wounded
Spaniard, as I could both hear and see; and every
day, there was one dragged out by the priests, and
immolated.I could hear their yells from the temple
top.Seor, these things drove me into a delirium,
which must have lasted long; for when I came again
to my wits, I looked out, and saw that the cages
were emptyall but
one
. Then, I beheld the priests
come to mine own dungeon, and debate over me. I
tried to praybut, in my fear, I swooned. When I
looked forth again, they were dragging away my
fellow-prisoner.I knew that I should die upon the
morrow.That night, I fell into a frenzy, and with
my teeth (for my arms were bound behind me,) I
gnawed away the wooden bars of my cage. Heaven
helped me! God gave me strength! and St. James, to
whom I cried, sharpened my teeth as though they
were edged with iron! So, by this miracle, I escaped;
and, bound as I was, and beaten to the earth by a
tempest which raved over the lake, I made my way,
I know not how, by a causeway that lies to the
north, until I had reached the shore of the lake. I
hid me, by day, in groves and in marshes, and when
the night came, I journeyed onward, though I knew
not whither. What sufferings I endured from hunger
and thirst, I will not weary you by recounting. Mine
arms were still bound behind me; and when it was
my good fortune to find a field of green maize, I
could only seize upon the ears, like a beast, with my
teeth. I strove, by rolling upon the earth, and
rubbing
against trees, to get rid of the thongs, but all in
vain. This maddened me; and I thought that heaven
had deserted me. But the good St. James showed
me, one day, a place where the Indians had made a
fire. I rekindled it with my breath, and when it
began to blaze, I prayed and held my arms in the
flames, until the green withes, wherewith I was
bound, were burned asunder.
Good heaven! cried Amador, starting from the
stone on which he had seated himself, while Zayda
bent forward, as if to snatch the poor youth from the
flames, which still burned in her imagination;didst
thou suffer all this horrible combustion? Or, perhaps,
heaven vouchsafed thee a miracle, and scorched
away the cords, without suffering the fire to do thee
harm?
Had I been there, said Rosario, doughtily, I
would have cut the thongs with my sword; and,
then, I would have killed the bitter pagans that
wronged thee!
The miracle whereby I escaped from the cage,
was more than my sins deserved, said the secretary,
bending his head upon his bosom, and speaking with
an agitated voice. Heaven took not the pangs
from the fire, but it gave me strength to bear them.
I am here again, restored to my native land, and
among Christian menbut mine arms are withered.
Were they hacked off at the shoulders, cried
Amador, ardently, ay, and thy legs into the bargain,
yet will I so entertain thee here in my castle, that
thou shalt cease to lament them.
Nay, said the youth, looking with gratitude on
the cavalier, 'tis not so bad as that, as my lord may
see; for, though I may never more bear sword, yet
I can carry the pilgrim's staffay, and I can raise
them to my cheek, to brush away my thanks.I
have yet strength enough left to wield a pen; and, if
my noble patron
Speak no more of this, good Lorenzo, said the
Moorish lady, quickly and kindly. My lord hath
told thee thou art welcome; and I say to thee also,
thou art very welcome.
By my troth,
I
say so too, cried Rosario. But
after all, thou wilt be but pitiful, if thou hast not
strength left to handle a sword. I hoped you should
teach me a little; for old Baltasar is grum and crusty.
Peace, Hector! what art thou talking about?
said Don Amador.Think no more of thy
misfortune
,
Lorenzo; but give me to know the rest of thy
adventures.
They are spoken in a word, said the secretary.
When mine arms were freed, though so dreadfully
scorched, I could travel with more peace of mind.
I doubted not, that all the Christians had been slain
on the lake; yet, I thought, if I could but reach the
sea-coast, I might be, sometime, snatched out of the
hands of the barbarians. Nevertheless, this hope
deserted
me, when I perceived that the land was
covered
with people; and, one day, finding a cave among
the mountains, hard by to a water-fall, with a wooden
cross stuck up at the mouth
Surely, said Zayda, this was the cavern,
wherein
I found my lord, Don Gabriel.
I doubt it not, noble lady, said Fabueno, but
this I knew not then. I thought it was a retreat
provided
for me by the good St. James, who willed that
there I should pass my life, under the shadow of that
little crucifix. So there did I hide me, and, feeding
upon roots and such living creatures as I could
entrap
,
I remained in my hermitage a full year; until,
one day, I heard a trumpet sounding at the bottom
of the mountain; and running out in wonder, I
beheld
thanks
be to heaven! I beheld a company of
Spanish soldiers marching up the hill. By these men,
I was carried to Mexico, which was now fallen
Fallen, say'st thou? cried Amador. Is the
infidel city fallen?
Not the city only, but the empire, replied
Fabueno
;
and Cortes is now the lord of the great
valley.
Thou shalt tell me of its fate; but first thou must
rest and eat.I remember me now of the words of
Cortes.
His excellency, said Lorenzo, commanded me
to bear to your favour this little jewel, in token that
he has made good a certain vaunt which he made
you in Tlascalathe same being an emerald from
the crown of Quauhtimotzin, the king.
Hah! my valiant ambassador at Tlascala? Hath
he been the emperor?
And to your noble lady, he craves permission to
present this chain of gold, the manufacture of
Mexican
artists, since Mexico has become a Spanish city.
It is enough, said the cavalier; I perceive that
his genius is triumphant. I would that I might bear
this news to his father, Don Martin, as I did the
relation
of his disasters. But come; let us retire. Why
hast thou on these palmer weeds?
I vowed to St.James, on the mountains of Mexico,
in my great misery, that, if his good favour and
protection
should ever bless mine eyes with the sight of
Christian man, I would make a pilgrimage, barefoot,
to his holy shrine at Compostella. This it has been
my good fortune already to accomplish, our ship
having been driven, by a storm, into a port of
Gallicia
.
Not thinking this penance enough for my sins,
I resolved to continue my pains, and neither doff my
pilgrim's cap, nor do on my shoes, until I had reached
your favour's castle of the Cork-tree.
I welcome thee to it, again, and for thy life; and
I congratulate thee, that thou art relieved of the love
of war; wherein, thou wilt find, I have somewhat
preceded thee. Enter, and be at peace.When thou
art rested a little, I shall desire of thee to speak,for
very impatient am I to know,what circumstances
of marvel and renown, of romance and chivalry,
have distinguished the last days of Tenochtitlan.
THE END.