Vol. II. 1
NIX'S MATE.
VOLUME II.
CHAPTER XI.
Nature never did betray
The heart that loved her.
Wordsworth
.
And she was there, my hope, my joy,
My own, dear Genevieve!
Coleridge
.
Ye who encounter'd Scylla's maddening rage,
Her barking rocks and the Cyclopean roar,
Take courageall your sufferings assuage,
For memory yet shall gild your sorrows o'er.
nead. New Translation
.
We
now return to the metropolis of New-England.
Horace Seymour had at last entirely regained his
strength, and was once more entering upon the hopes,
wishes, and daily occupations of the busy world.
Nor had the interim of his indisposition disqualified
him from pursuing those studies in which he most
delighted
.
Having just graduated at Harvard University,
he had entered as a law student in his uncle's office,
where, under the guidance of Mr. Wilmer, he was
making as rapid progress as was possible in those
days when Blackstone was not by to smooth the
rugged road to the Bar. What was wanted,
however
,
in facilities, was amply made up by
perseverance
and industry; and students who were in
the least degree ambitious of eminence, were
contented
to abide by the
lucubrationes viginti annorum
of Coke, amidst the musty tomes of black-letter
Norman
French, and the not most elegant Latin of the
text-books. A seven years' clerkship was then
indispensable
to a knowledge of the mere outlines of
the Common Law of England; and when a young
man was so fortunate as to meet with such a guide as
Mr. Wilmer, it may be truly said that his education
commenced on the day of his entering the Law
office.
It is difficult to conceive of a worse contrivance
for bringing out the mind of man than a college:
but as temptations, trials, and every unimaginable
obstacle
are necessary for the development of the
christian
,
so it may be important for the moral and
intellectual
being to be crushed and trampled on, that the
more vitality may be imparted to it by the struggle.
If Colleges and Universities are useful in this way,
it is the only one in which they are; for we
contend
that the most accomplished graduates of those
institutions become eminent and useful citizens only
in proportion to the success they have in eradicating
the errors which have been implanted in them during
their four years of scholastic discipline.
These institutions are always behind the age, and
they are always so confirmed in their ignorance, that
it is a positive disadvantage to any young man to be
moulded according to their worn-out dogmas. If
any one doubts this, let him remember that the
sensual
philosophy is even now taught in our principal
colleges, though no man of intelligence refers to its
pages but from curiosity. If the
Speculum
Astronomi
of Albertus Magnus were the text book for
lectures on the stars, there would be more reason for
keeping the Essay of Locke on the list of collegiate
studies. But enough of this. It is liking reasoning
concerning Animal Magnetism to the besotted
ignorance
of the times, that will not be informed, though
one of the greatest of God's blessings is offered to
man on his knees. Perhaps one of these days we
will show up a College or University as it was in the
third decade of the nineteenth century.
Horace Seymour had been a year in his uncle's
office, when the early attachment which the young
man had cherished for his fair cousin ripened into
the most ardent affection. How, indeed, could two
such creatures help loving each other, especially
when they lived under the same roof, ate habitually
at the same table, and heard the same prayers of a
Sunday? The metaphysics of love would make a
most excellent and amusing book, but no one can
write it without laying his heart too much open to
the world. Rousseau did not understand it;
besides
,
he was too much of a brute, or rather not quite
enough of a brute; for brutes are seldom unnatural.
It may strike some of our readers as being a little
remarkable, but we assure them nevertheless it is
true, that our lovers, Grace Wilmer and Horace
Seymour, though they had been acquainted with
each other many years, and loved each other
exceedingly
,
never did so to distraction. What is
still more remarkable, and will be found recorded in
few faithful histories like this, they never once had
such a love scene as passed between a certain
Capulet
and Montague, and which, notwithstanding, we
always regarded as one of the most delicious things
in the world.
Yet they were often alone together when the
woodbine
and the humming-bird were suggesting a
dramatic
spectacle, but they did not seem so to comprehend
them. The fact is, they read love so legibly written
in each other's eyes, that there was no need of voice
to give it utterance. The beautiful flowers were
occasionally
go-betweens, and whispered sweet and
unutterable
fancies to the lovers; and when they met,
they felt that they understood each other, though they
said not a syllable about it. When the science of
spheres shall be understood, as it may be, there will
1*
be a new era in love. In the mean time let the
uninitiated
bewail their ignorance. There are more
things, as Hamlet sagely remarked, in heaven and
earth, than is dreamed of in your philosophy.
The storm which we have described in the last
chapter, exhausted its violence on the night which
followed the disaster at the Sunken Ledge; and on the
succeeding morning the sky was blue, with here and
there only a light feathery cloud flying over the
firmament
.
The trees were not as yet stripped of their
foliage, but they had assumed the most gorgeous and
beautiful colors; and the rays of the noon-day sun
fell warmly and cheeringly over the face of nature.
The tempest had raged with such violence, that many
large trees had been torn up by the roots, and the limbs
of many more were scattered abroad in the streets;
some damage, too, had been done by the swollen
tides; but, on the whole, the prospect abroad was
cheerful and invigorating.
So delightful was the weather, that Horace
Seymour
prevailed on his fair cousin to ride with him in
a chaise to Salem, a long day's journey through the
woods, but the more attractive for that reason to the
lovers, who enjoyed the wild beauties of nature with
all the freshness of life's morning. Their intention
was to visit their kinsman, a venerable gospel
minister
,
whose amiable children were the delight of all
who knew them, and to return after the expiration
of a few days' social enjoyment.
And let it not be objected that it was not in
accordance
with the custom of the day for two young
people of the different sexes to be permitted to ride
out together through the wilderness, unaccompanied
by their parents and guardians; for, be it
remembered
,
that besides the interregnum of strict discipline
during the time we speak of, our lovers were as much
Catholics in their education, as puritans, a
singularity
easily got rid of by those who desire it. But,
what is of more importance, such was the fact,
and therefore we must make the best of it. The
same objection might be made to the chaise and some
other minor matters; but as there is no end to
faultfinding
,
we shall not make any further suggestion of
its material.
The chaise driving up to the door, Horace
Seymour
handed the charming Grace to a seat; and
taking the reins, moved off, followed by an attendant
on horseback. As there was no bridge in those
days to Charlestown, another chaise had been
provided
in the latter place, to which the lovers crossed
over in a ferry-boat, sending back their own carriage
by the servant.
They were now riding over a most romantic
region
,
where a carriage-path led through a deep and
shady forest, opening only at distant intervals,
unveiling
the fine water prospect of Boston Harbor,
and some of the green islands that are scattered
among the glittering waters.
How beautiful is every thing in Nature,
exclaimed
the enamored girl, her fine face beaming
with intelligence as she gazed on the lovely objects
around her; and yet how neglectful we are of all
their delightful influences!
As she spoke, her deep blue eyes turned full upon
her lover, and as they met his, their long silken lashes
fell upon her cheek, unconsciously.
Oh yes, how
very
beautiful! responded Horace;
it is because we are so selfish that all the bountiful
things of creation attract no more attention, and
therefore it is good for us to be occasionally brought
down by sickness, that we may at the same time
appreciate
ourselves justly, and learn all the better to
set a proper value on the commonest things of life.
But surely
you
did not require to be so
disciplined
,
cousin Horace; for you were already
sufficiently
alive to the glorious things around you, while no
one could accuse you of setting too high a value on
yourself, surely.
Perhaps I was too much inclined to think as
you do, charming Grace, replied the young man,
but still I was deceived. Indeed, it is impossible
for one who is not such an angel as you are, not to
be carried away by selfishness and vanity.
Grace blushed deeply, but said nothing. What
could
she say? Her lover continued,
Do you know, Grace, that while I lay in my
chamber, and thought of the splendid forms abroad,
something like a new philosophy flashed upon my
mind?
No! replied the sweet girl, with a smile of
interested
surprise, pray tell me what it was!
It occurred to me, resumed her companion,
that the round of natural appearances is the
balance
wheel of the mind of man, and for this reason
we go mad when we are too long excluded from the
face of nature.
That was a singular fancy, replied Grace, with
something like laughter; how could such an idea
have originated in your mind?
I cannot say, said Horace Seymour, his pale
cheek tinging a little as he spoke, that the idea
originated entirely with me. I think some of the
opinions of Mr. Temple must have suggested it. He
believes, perhaps you know, in one harmonious chain
of dependencies, from the Creator, in all created
things.
Every body that believes any thing, believes as
much as that, replied Grace. I cannot discover any
reach of philosophy there!
Do not judge too hastily, returned her lover,
hear him a little further. All created things are
from primaries to ultimates. The
only
life is the
creative energy; but all created things are recipients
of this life. Earths and minerals are the ultimate
forms of creation, and there is in them a constant
effort to rise to that degree which is next above
them, namely, vegetable forms. Hence we discover
foliation in mines. The vegetable kingdom, in its
turn, struggles for animal being, so successfully at
times, that its species seem gifted with feeling and
perception. The brute creation, which is as distinct
from man as the vegetable is distinct from the
animal
,
struggles for rationality with such a cunning
effort, that the short-sighted naturalist classifies it
into
ranks of lower animals descending from man
only
in degrees. Man, as a rational creature, endeavors
after spirituality; and he does so, not as other
created
beings struggle for that which is unattainable, but
as an order of being which has within itself a germ
which may become the receptacle of heavenly light
and heat, till it expands to celestial existence.
According to that, he would make us noble
creatures!
And so we are intended to be, my dear cousin, if
we will but fulfil the conditions of our advancement.
What conditions? inquired the animated beauty.
The conditions of spiritual growth are
renunciation
of self, disinterestedness, and the faithful
performance
of our duties
. But I was speaking to you
of the influence of nature on the mind. Mr.
Temple
believes that all things in nature are merely
effects of spiritual causes, and that the reason why
we delight in them, is because they are to us a medium
through which we receive communion with angelic
beings.
The idea is certainly a very beautiful one,
said Grace, with an expression of serene
thoughtfulness
,
and it accounts for the tranquilizing pleasure
we receive in gazing on the firmament of stars, or
wandering
among fragrant flowers or in green meadows.
You may remember, continued her lover, that
beautiful passage in one of the psalms, `He maketh
me to lie down in green pastures, and leadeth me
beside
the still waters;' these are delightful, because
they correspond to good affections and tranquilizing
truths; and thus all beautiful things contribute to our
happiness, for their beauty is only the perception of
spiritual
realities.
Your reasoning is quite suggestive, said
Grace, for if what you say is true, and I confess it
strikes me very agreeably, there
is
a standard of taste,
and it will one of these days be known.
Unquestionably, replied Seymour; and to
illustrate
your ideawho doubts that, as respects Grecian
architecture, architectural taste is established?
No one, certainly; admitted Grace.
The reason of that is, and you will find it
admitted
by the ablest and best writers on the subject,
the proportions of Grecian architecture were
borrowed
from the Temple of Solomon.
And the plan of that was revealed from heaven!
said the beautiful girl.
Yet the scepticism of the age would laugh at one
who really believes it, though it is recorded in the
Word of God.
And how does Mr. Temple's philosophy guard
us against the dangers of disbelief? exclaimed the
beautiful girl, her face flushing with the interest that
the conversation was awaking.
Perhaps I am wrong, replied her lover, in
calling
it altogether philosophy; it is religion as well as
philosophy. But then it is so unlike what passes
for religion in our day, that the world would
denominate
it philosophy.
It seems to me, said Grace, deferentially, that
true religion and genuine philosophy must be so
nearly allied that they cannot be regarded apart.
You are undoubtedly right, dearest Grace,
returned
her admirer, charmed as much by her profound
sense as by her unequalled beauty; and I wish that
there were many more in the world who think as
you do. They cannot and ought not to be separated;
and yet you will find that they are regarded as light
and darkness, irreconcileable with each other.
And hence, replied Grace, both religion and
philosophy, instead of being the handmaidens of
happiness
,
are so unamiable and repulsive. It is difficult
for us, when we are so trammelled, to know what is
meant by the beauty of holiness.
But, according to Mr. Temple, every thing is
plain and intelligible. He believes in constant,
uninterrupted
progress; and therefore while he does
not despond at the abuses of society, and grow gloomy
amidst the darkness of fanaticism, he looks abroad
into the far future, and with the eye of a seer
discovers
an era when the veil that hangs between the
spiritual and natural worlds will be withdrawn, and
when man shall read the true relations of things, and
cease to doubt; when natural revelations in a constant
succession of illustrations appealing to the reason
and universal intelligence, will make man known to
himselfan era, in short, when the true democratic
principle will be understood, and just conceptions of
equality entertained.
But you seem to have forgotten your
balance-wheel
,
Horace; what has become of
that,
all the
while?
That was going on, dearest Grace, you may
depend
on it, or else we would not have arrived at such
sage conclusions.
I wish I understood better, said the beautiful
girl, what you mean by your new gleam of
philosophy
?
I mean, replied Horace Seymour, that there is
nothing that gives so healthy a tone to the heart and
mind of man, as a knowledge and love of nature, or
the works of God manifested to us.
I believe that most fervently, said Grace.
And therefore it is, that when we are young,
continued her lover, we are more susceptible of their
charms; for the world then has not left our hearts
Vol. II. 2
callous, and the language by which spiritual
realities
address themselves to man is almost audible and
wholly convincing, would we only attend to the
revelations
around us.
You are an enthusiast, exclaimed Grace,
laughing
.
If you call enthusiam, my beloved girl, a
passionate
devotion to truth for truth's sake; loving it
deeply, fondly, supremely, as I do my pretty cousin,
and only from the love of loving,why, then, I grant
you I
am
an enthusiast; not otherwise. There is a
great deal of talk, Grace, about loving the beauties of
nature; but I believe that there is but little
comprehended
of that love.
All love is incomprehensible, murmured the
lovely listener.
It is only so, replied Horace Seymour, in
name.
What is more so? inquired Grace.
Every thing which is more mysterious; but love
is the life of manreally and truly the life of man;
and if you will reflect on this great truth, not only
will love be no longer incomprehensible, but it will
be a key to a thousand mysteries.
In conversation similar to the foregoing the time
glided by, though we have reason to believe that
there was an occasional interlude of romantic
castle-building
to break in upon their more serious
discourse
:
for when they emerged once more from the
woods, and were passing by the charming village of
Sangus or Lynn, the following playful colloquy ensued.
Grace, do you hear the roaring of the beach?
inquired Horace Seymour.
Oh yes! Is it not grand? she replied.
How would it do for us to take a trot over to
Nahant
;
the sun will not set these two hours?
I should like it, of all things in the world, said
Grace, do, dear cousin, let us go over there. The
waves must look gloriously indeed after last night's
storm; I was down there once, and was enchanted
with the scenery.
You shall go then, again, replied her lover,
there never will be a better opportunity of seeing
Egg Rock and the Spouting Horn to advantage.
And perhaps we may meet the Swallow,
venred
the beautiful girl.
True, replied the young man, and if we
do
meet her, dearest Grace, she shall tell us our
fortunes
.
Would you dare to have your fortune told by an
enchantress? inquired Grace.
I would dare any thing with
you,
dearest; for I
know that the stars cannot fail to be propitious to
their more beautiful sister.
Well, now, I like that, said Grace archly, as
if the stars wouldn't be as jealous as any other pretty
creatures to be outshone by another! Come now,
you must try again!
But seriously, you are not afraid of your
horoscope
?
But seriously, I
am,
though, replied the fair
girl; for they say that the Swallow casts them with
fearful precision.
And if the Swallow should predict that we
would be married in a year or so, would that be any
thing so awful?
I can't imagine any thing more
Certain!
interrupted Horace Seymour; and
without any further negotiation, the bargain was
sealed
with a kiss.
Now, whether the young man's assurance had
gained strength from their emerging into clearer
day-light
,
might afford a good subject for a boarding-school
debating society. For our part, we assert the
affirmative
;
and if it were not for unmystifying so pleasant an
obscurity, we could give satisfactory reasons therefor.
As they turned round the corner of the carriage
way that comes to the long beach, which we
have heretofore spoken of, the cool breeze fell
refreshingly on the warm cheek of Grace Wilmer,
and her tresses floated freely over her shoulders.
She took off her hood, the better to enjoy the
prospect, and the top of the chaise was thrown
back, that no obstacle might intervene between the
ocean and the travellers.
One must visit Nahant after a north-east storm, or
at least during one, to realize the matchless
sublimity
of the scene which now burst upon our romantic
travellers. We will venture to say that there is
nothing
to be found superior to it for grandeur and
beauty
in America. The tide was nearly two-thirds
toward
its height, and the waves came rolling in in
long-extended platoons, stretching more than a mile
before you, and glistening in the light of the declining
sun like a mighty army of cuirassers, flashing and
driving on to battle. How beautiful were they in the
moment of dissolutionhow like the picture of good
men dying, and glorying most at the very instant
when they are about to roll back to eternity!
Was there ever any thing so magnificent and
splendid
!
exclaimed the enraptured girl. Do, Horace, look
at those waves; are they not grand, transcendent! Did
you see that gull? There he is again,there are
several of them. Only see how they hover over that
blazing wreath of water, plunging and rising, and
shaking the spray from their wings,what do you
think they are about?
They are only amusing themselves, answered
Horace Seymour; man is not the only creature
that sometimes diverts himself; almost all the
animals
do the same thing. Really this is worth
coming
to see!
The attention of the lovers had been so much
absorbed
by the sight of the waves, and the tremendous
roar with which they banged up against the beach, and
ran rushing back in torrents to the sea, and again came
2*
up, reddening and glistening, and breaking, and again
rushing back to the sea, that they had till now passed
unobserved one of the most striking features of the
scene.
Look! exclaimed Grace, pointing towards the
left as she spoke, only look, Horace, at Egg-Rock;
did you ever see any thing equal to it in your life?
As her lover turned to gaze where she directed,
his amazement was irrepressible. The waves rolling
in upon that solitary mass of rock rising so high
above the sea, made, nevertheless, a complete breach
over it, and poured down its south western side like
the cataract of Niagara; the sloping rays of the sun
fell on the ocean spray and spanned the whole with
a most brilliant arch, through which the deep blue
of the sky stood back in bold contrast with the white
feathery surf, again relieved by the dark waves that
swelled apparently at the base of the rock, which was
in reality girl like a water-spout with foam. To the
right of Egg-Rock, between that place and Nahant,
the ocean-prospect was uninterrupted; and as far as
the sight could reach, not even the smallest sail
interposed
between the eye and the horizon, where, in the
extreme distance over a wide expanse of some fifteen
miles, the waves rose and fell with their white caps
dancing against the sky. A few light clouds were
lazily hanging about the firmament, and the
atmosphere
was of dazzling clearness; so that every
object
discovered its exact outline, and could be
discerned
afar off with the greatest precision.
Nor was that portion of the scene of which the
black borders of Nahant formed a part, as the vision
reached to the south-east, without its due share of
sublimity. All along the shore, where visible, the
waves seemed to riot like slaves at the Saturnalia.
Two milesor more away, they could be seen leaping on
the iron-bound coast, throwing the foam up to an
incredible
distance, and sending back the rays of the
sun as from showers of the most brilliant diamonds.
In the meanwhile the sea was setting in faster and
faster, and as the gallant steed trotted over the hard
and shining sands, every ninth or tenth wave seemed
threatening to submerge them. But as the waves
came swelling on like an immense wall of glass,
green as emerald, and broke and tumbled on the
beach, the horse sheered to the right, and seemed to
take a pleasure in coquetting with the billows that
came rippling over his fetlocks.
It was a glad and exhilarating scene, and our
young adventurers rode onward careless of every
thing, and only occupied by the entrancing
bewilderment
around them. Their hearts were so full of the
influences of nature, that they could not choose but
give voice to their excitement; and they sang aloud,
and shouted as if they too would be a sharer in the
far and fierce delights of their all-bountiful mother
in the joy of her holiday.
Can any thing be more glorious than this?
exclaimed
Horace Seymour, his countenance glowing
with the exhilarating influences that made his very
arteries bound with enjoyment.
Nothing, surely nothing can equal it! replied
Grace Wilmer. Oh, how glad I am that we came
here:only I would that my dear mother could
enjoy
it with us!
I think, dearest Grace, said her lover, tenderly,
that I am quite happy enough with only you to
partake and sympathize with me.
Grace blushed, and pointed to some new beauty in
the scene, and just then a wave with more than
ordinary violence broke upon them, and sprinkled
them with its surf.
We must not trust these beautiful forms, my
love, exclaimed her adorer, turning the horse more
toward the narrow strip of land that bordered the
summit of the beach, but which was quite
impassable
on account of its rugged surface, and in places,
its unrolled gravel; I find we have not improved
the time as we might have done in the midst of the
glories that surround us, but as the sun will soon be
down, we will go as far as the other beach, and then
return without stopping at Nahant this time. We
would better do so on our return.
Then we shall not see the Swallow this
evening
?
No, dearest Grace, by the looks of the tide I
don't think it would be prudent to go to Nahant.
There is no
danger,
I hope! exclaimed the
fair girl, turning a little pale.
Not the least, answered her lover, who indeed
really apprehended none, but it has taken more time
make this little excursion than I anticipated, so I
fear we must have our horoscope postponed. But
never mind, Grace; it won't postpone our wedding on
any account.
You need not concern yourself about that, said
Grace Wilmer, rallying from her momentary
confusion
,
for I can prophecy as well as the Swallow
about such a weighty matter as that; and so you may
rest contented with the idea of dying a bachelor.
Unless, perchance, I should live to be married
hey? my sweet enchantress! returned her lover with
another salutation, which gave no offence, as it was
benevolently intended; and this brought them to the
smaller beach, which was in the more immediate
neighborhood of Nahant.
The sea now ran in frightfully high, and with
increasing
power, and Seymour began to fear that he
had unwittingly brought his fair charge into a
position
from which it would be difficult to extricate her.
The beach on which they were now riding is not
much more than a quarter of a mile in extent, but the
sea had already broken over it, and it was impossible
to reach Nahant, except by crossing that also. He
had already determined to return, but he could not
well disguise his apprehensions, as, approaching the
larger beach, his eye discovered to him that far away
it was completely submerged, so that it would be
impossible
for them to retrace their steps.
His resolution was now instantly fixed to force the
passage of the small beach, and with this
determination
he lashed his horse, and urged him to move on
as fast as possible. The sun had already sunk below
the main land, and the scene which, but a few minutes
before, had been arrayed so gorgeously, and which
had so completely absorbed their attention, was now
any thing but agreeable. Egg-Rock frowned
protentously
,
and the waves, as they came careering onward
amidst the chill atmosphere of sunset, seemed to dash
even against the hearts of the adventurers.
Bitterly now did Horace Seymour lament his want
of prudence and foresight, and though the necessity
he was under to guard against the dangers that
surrounded
them, prevented him from indulging in
disagreeable
reflections, he had it not in his power to
disguise
from Grace Wilmer the imminent peril to
which they were exposed.
Oh God! exclaimed the terrified girl, as a large
wave came thundering on and lifted the carriage from
the sandswhat will become of us! Oh mother,
mother, why did I leave you!Oh God, have mercy!
Keep calm, Grace, for the love of heaven! cried
the young man, as he threw himself on the dasher,
when the chaise once more struck the sands, and the
affrighted horse regained his foothold, keep calm for
the love of heaven; we are safe enough, depend upon
it.
He had scarcely spoken when another wave, more
tremendous than the former, came rolling horrioly
towards them, and Horace Seymour had hardly time
to turn the reins twice around his left wrist, and to
clasp the scared girl round the waist with his right
arm, when it burst upon them like a mountain-slide,
and overwhelmed them with the carriage and horse
in the boiling waters.
The recoiling waves instantly swept them back
into
the Atlantic, and the horse plunging with
maddening
desperation, immediately disengaged himself
from the harness. Seymour never for an instant lost his
presence of mind, but clinging resolutely to the reins,
and holding his precious burthen on his right arm, as
soon as he could contrive to see, made an almost
superhuman
effort, and caught the horse by the mane.
In another moment he was on the animal's back,
sustaining
the drooping body of Grace Wilmer in his
arms.
Thank God, we are safe! he exclaimed, his
utterance
half checked with the violence of his
exertions
.
Grace, my love, we are safe!
Where am I? moaned the bewildered sufferer.
Oh Horace! Horace! would I had died for you.
And as she spoke, she sunk again in his arms,
exhausted
.
The horse in the meantime appeared to be conscious
of his trust as well as of his own danger; for whenever a
wave threatened to ingulf them, he would turn
suddenly
round, and seemed to wish to indicate to his
rider the safest way of bearing himself. He would
then, when that danger had passed, toss his head in
the air, and shorting aloud, urge onward with all his
might, swimming to reach the nearest shore.
The figure of a man dressed in a sailor's habit was
now seen hurrying about the rocks, holding in his
hand a spy-glass. He evidently had been watching
the perilous situation of our unfortunate adventurers,
and was crying aloud for help in almost despair, for
it seemed as if all help must be in vain. The surf
broke so high, that no boat would have dared to
venture
toward the rocks on that part of the peninsula
had there been one present; and the mariner, though
he had a barge waiting for him on the south-east part
(where it was comparatively calm), which he would
readily have ventured had it been possible to get it
there in time, saw no hope of relief, and was
expecting
every instant to behold the objects of his interest
overwhelmed in the waves.
The faithful steed still held his way bravely, though
he was unable at all times to avoid the ruffian
billows
that several times completely dashed over
Horace Seymour and his beautiful but helpless
burthen
,yet
on he toiled, struggling heroically to gain
the nearest ledge of rocks; sometimes plunging
head-foremost
under the waves like a ship under crowd
of canvass in a hurricane, and then shaking the
brine from his main, and tossing his head in the air,
tugging for life in the desperation of a strong
swimmer
in his agony.
Fitzvassal, for it was no other than he, who beheld
the appalling spectacle from his secure position on the
rocks, and who had recognized the beautiful figure
of Grace Wilmer in her perilous situation, stood
almost
horror-stricken at the danger of his friends.
The horse was now within a hundred feet of where
he stood, and he knew well enough that in a few
moments the courageous animal would come within
the power of the receding waves, and that nearer
approach was impossible.
The only chance of safety was to strive, if
possible
,
to keep away from the rocks, and make the
complete
circuit of the peninsula, passing the terrific
Sponting-Horn, (that roared and raged like a
maddened
kraken, and sent the foam a hundred feet into the
air,) and doubling East-Point, Pulpit-Rock, and then
going outside of the Sunken Ledge, to bring up in the
quiet harbor of the cave. But how could this be
done? The distance was a mile and a half, and the
horse was already nearly exhausted with his own
unparalleled
exertions, and by the extraordinary weight
he carried. One other way of safety seemed
possible
,
Vol. II. 3
and that was the desperate suggestion of his
fancy
,
that if the man would throw himself from the
horse, he himself, by plunging in the boiling waters,
might assist him in getting his charge to the shore.
But he rejected the latter branch of the alternative,
and now had only time to shout aloud
Bear away from the rocks! For your life, bear
away from the rocks!
When a wave came rolling back, burying as it
passed, both horse and riders in the abyss.
As soon as Fitzvassal saw the reality of this
disaster
,
he waited no longer, but leaping as far off
from the rocks as he could, plunged headlong into
the waves. Nor was he alone in the rescue; for as
he rose from the eddying brine that whirled and
roared around him, he caught a rapid glance of his
own barge rounding East Point with unaccustomed
rapidity, and a canoe, propelled by a female, skimming
over the waters like a bird, the paddle flashing from
side to side like lightning, and sending a stream of
foam astern, white as the driving snow.
Horace Seymour with his precious charge had
been completely swept from the horse that, now
relieved
from his burthen, swam eagerly through the
creaming surge toward the shore. But the noble
animal was only doomed to struggle the harder for
his life, alas! in vain; for the gigantic waves having
him now entirely in their power, heaved him up
against the sharp rocks, and dyed the white foam in
his blood. His scream of agony mingled with the
uproar of the ocean, and after making a few
ineffectual
attempts to gain a footing on the rocks, and
being
borne back, and again hurried on like an iron ram
battering against an adamantine fortress, the fine
spirited
animal bowed his head to the destroyer, and his
long black mane streamed lifelessly on the surge. He
was dead.
In the meanwhile Horace Seymour rose to the air,
bearing gallantly the fainting form of Grace Wilmer,
and in a moment Fitzvassal was at his side.
And with hearts of controversy the gallant young
men trod the destructive wave, mutually sustaining
the beautiful burthen between them.
Leave her to
me,
cried Fitzvassal, I am fresh,
but you are weary; let me support Miss Wilmer,
while you take care of yourself.
I am not yet exhausted, answered Seymour,
unable
to breathe freely from fatigue, and as long as I
have my strength I will not desert her.
While they were yet speaking, Nameoke was by
their side with her bark canoe, and Fitzvassal (
Seymour
in vain endeavoring to accomplish it,) taking
the object of his heart's adoration in his arms, lifted
her lightly into the canoe.
It is well! exclaimed the enchantressbut the
canoe of Nameoke will not hold another; Nameoke
will take care of the maiden.
And as she spoke, her paddle flashed from side to
side, and the canoe leapt lighty over the billows. In
a minute she had doubled East Point, and was out of
sight just as Fitzvassal's barge, propelled by eight
oars, came up with him and his exhausted companion,
and took them both safely aboard.
The fatigue that Seymour had undergone was too
much for one who had so lately left a sick chamber,
and as soon as he found himself safe in the barge,
his energies for a time sank within him, and he
fainted
in the arms of his companion.
To the Swallow's Cave! said Fitzvassal, giving
orders to the coxswain as they made a circuit of
East-Point, and were now passing Pulpit-Rock and
nearing the Sunken Ledge.
Ay, ay, Sir! replied the officer; and the barge,
obeying the rudder, turned round to the desired
haven
.
Selecting a little cove close by, where the rude
sea grew civil, the barge ran in close to the rocks,
and Fitzvassal giving orders to wait for him, and
to take the best care of Seymour, leapt ashore, and
made the best way he could to the cavern of the
enchantress
.
Leaping from crag to crag, in a few moments he
was there. Already had the singular being, who
with the sea-gulls alone tenanted this wild
peninsula
,
replenished the fire that smoked upon the hearth,
and was now supporting the reviving girl with one
arm, parting her dark dripping tresses with her right
hand, endeavoring all the while to sooth her by the
mysterious agency of her own vital principle, which
she knew how to direct for her advantage.
You are doing the work of an angel, said our
adventurer, addressing the Indian girl with a tone
of thanksgiving; you have my eternal gratitude for
what you have done.
The son of the Vassal knows not what he is
saying
,
and yet Nameoke would save him from
destruction
,
replied the enchantress.
Fitzvassal gazed on her with astonishment. How
could this solitary tenant of the rock-bound Nahant
have known his unhappy parentage?
Nameoke! said he, catching at the appellation
which she had herself discovered, and for the time
quite forgetting the beloved object whose eyes
already
beamed with rekindling intelligence,
Nameoke
!
you seem to know me!
Nameoke reads the stars! replied the
enchantress
,
and she has been watching for you ever since
the young moon went down in the west, where she
will go again to-morrow.
Hark! she continued, did you hear that scream
from Felton? and as she spoke she snatched her
mace from the ground, and raised herself to her full
height, while her eyes gleamed with strange
unnatural
lustre.
Felton!
exclaimed Fitzvassal in the greatest
surprise; what of him, Nameoke? Did you speak of
his scream? Have you seen him?
3*
You will find what the thunder has left of him
in the ravine above! replied the enchantress,
recovering
from her momentary agitation and
resuming
her care of Grace Wilmer.
Fitzvassal sprang from the cavern, and presently
stood over the stiffened body of his lieutenant.
There was a black mark on his forehead, which he
unhesitatingly attributed to the lightning; and his
firm belief now was, that he had been struck the
night before in the storm.
Poor Felton! sighed his commander; so then
you are at rest before me!Well! you are spared
many a severe buffet that those you have left must
endure.Rest in peace!
He then took off his watch-coat, and having thrown
it over the body of his officer, returned to the
Swallow's
Cave.
Pray God, he exclaimed on re-entering the place,
death make no further havoc! Nameoke! that
lady must go with me on board. I will protect her.
Take her! replied the enchantress, for I
know thou hast no evil intention; take her and
save her from destructionwould that Nameoke
could save
thee!
What mean you? inquired the man with an
interest which he did not attempt to disguise.
You must perish, hopelessly perish replied
Nameoke, before the buds are green againunless
you read the stars of another hemisphere!
Fitzvassal only smiled at this, and then turning
to the beautiful girl, who was just recovered from
her stupor, said,
Will Miss Wilmer, said he, trust herself to
her new friendher cousin waits for her below?
He is safe then! Oh tell me Horace Seymour is
safe, cried the excited girl, and I will bless you for
ever!
You may rely upon it, charming maiden; I left
him perfectly so but a few moments since, although
he is much exhausted. My vessel is close by, and
if you will accept with him such poor
accommodations
as a sailor can give to those he values most, go
with me on board. The night is fast closing in,
and it will be impossible for you to return till
tomorrow
;
then I will see you safely restored to your
friends.
Grace thanked him with her large blue eyes
glistening with tears of gratitude. She had already
received so many favors at his hands, that she could
not doubt the honesty of his purposeand now
particularly, when such conclusive reasons had been
urged for her accompanying Fitzvassal on board,
and the Swallow had also yielded to the proposal,
she unhesitatingly accepted the invitation, and,
leaning
on his arm, accompanied him to the barge,
which immediately shoving off, in a short time
brought them securely to the Dolphin.
CHAPTER XII.
We buried him darkly.
Monody on Sir J. Moore
.
And coming events cast their shadows before.
Campbell
.
Where hast thou been, Sister?
Macbeth
.
In
the meantime night closed rapidly on the scene,
and left the peninsula wrapped in its deepest
shadows
.
The roar of the waters had gradually
subsided
,
and was now fast changing to the heavy,
monotonous
sound of the beating surge, that, rolling
back from the rocks, rattled on its pebbly wheels to the
ocean. The stars were glittering in the firmament
like those celestial words that contain interior truths
too transcendent for unaided reason; but though
there were few to read them, they were not wholly
unread. There was one who was gazing upward
till her heart died away within her.
Alone at her wild observatory stood Nameoke, her
hands clasped on her bosom, her knees resting on
the flinty rock. Her eyes were fixed on the heavens,
and the stars shone down on her tears. Words are
the out-breathing of the full spirit that will and must
have listeners, though they be only the forest leaves
and the stars. In the excess of her agony, the
feelings
of the wondrous girl found vent in her apparent
solitude.
The Great Spirit reposes! exclaimed Nameoke,
but the heart of his child feels no rest. The clouds
have passed from the stars, but the thoughts of
Nameoke's
bosom are like mist-wreaths on the water.
The waves rage and grow still again, but Nameoke's
heart rages for ever!
Hark! she interiorly ejaculated, turning
slowly
round and wrapping her mantle closer to her
bosom
;
hark!tramptramptramp,there is an
army, many as the sands
spiritmen
coming to
battle. See! they make ready their fire-thunder
against the red-men of the forest. The red men are
strong, and the Great Spirit fights their battles. Oh,
blood!blood!blood!rivers of red blood
running
,
running, running, rushing down, downa
mountain-torrent of blood!Stay, Massasoit!
Philip
,
Nameoke's father! Nameoke callsthey are
smothering her in blood! The war-whoop! the
war-whoop, raise the war-whoop, sons of the forest!
The long-knives bring fire-water more terrible than
fire-thunder for your ruin! The log-houses are all
on fire! the corn-fields are smoking in destruction!
The red-men are all drunkchangedchanged
changeddreadful to look at! They are reeling
away to the west!whipt, whipt like buffaloes by
the sharp, quick lashes of storm-lightning!
And the Sibyl shrieking in the delirium of her
fore-vision, fell prostrate on the rocks. For a few
minutes exhausted nature slept; but when Nameoke
revived, it was only to vary her tortures. A
creeping
chill passed over her as consciousness was
restored
,
and she shuddered as she spake.
The foul-eyed women are again abroadthe
witch-hags of the far-off mountains. They come to
teach and work woe. They plant their hell-seed in
the hatred of men's bosoms, and the harvest is
slander
and revenge. Nameoke would work good, but
in vain!Nameoke has much to do before the
moon shines on her corpseSon of the Vassal,
Nameoke's
heart bleeds for thee!
She pressed her hands to her forehead,again she
gazed long and silently on the stars, and then, heaving a
deep, shivering sigh, Nameoke descended from
Pulpit-Rock
,
and slowly retraced her footsteps to her cave.
As soon as his guests had been comfortably
provided
for, Seymour being confined to his berth, and
proper attendance having been arranged for him as
well as for his beautiful cousin, the barge was again in
readiness to take Fitzvassal to Nahant, who was
going there to bury the body of Felton.
Two other barges filled with sailors accompanied
their commander; and a number of lanterns gleamed
over the water from them, as it was now quite dark
already.
The sailors landed from their barges, leaving only
the oars-men and a petly officer in charge of each,
and followed their commander up the rocky ascent
to the place where lay the remains of the first
lieutenant
.
And now, while some were engaged in digging a
grave, others were occupied in preparing a sheet
which was dipped in melted tar, the mariner's proper
shroud. In this they wrapped the body of their
officer
,
which by the light of the lanterus they lowered
down into its long resting place; and having placed
a board above it, ranged themselves round the grave
to listen to the funeral service.
Strange as it may appear, those iron-hearted men
could not have rested unless this ceremony had been
performed, whether it be attributed to superstition or
to habit; for it is indisputab'e that most men will
cling to something like religion, even when they are
steeped in crime, and will kiss the cross with a
delirious
sort of devotion while they are meditating to
plunge a dagger or rob a sanctuary. Yet man, for
all this, is noble, and posterity will cause to be
forgotten
the insanities of his first generations; for he
has hardly yet thought of emerging from the savage
life, much less is he prepared for a millionth part of
the glories that await him. The enormities which
now track his path are like the crises of a diseased
body; they show the better nature struggling for
mastery with the worse, and the very conflict proves
the soundness of that spiritual principle which will
one day both heal and regenerate.
An officer held in his hand the liturgy, from which
he proceeded to read the imposing funeral service of
the Church of England; but scarcely had the solemn
words with which itcommences passed his lips,
when a sudden peal of that same unnatural laughter
which had so terrified Felton, burst upon their
appalled
hearing, and excited within their bosoms the
most fearful emotions.
The commander ordered the officer to proceed,
but as the same sound again smote on their ears, the
book dropped from his hand, and he could not go on
from apprehension.
Fitzvassal immediately commanded the liturgy to
be given to him, and though he was not himself
entirely
divested of the cold horror that crept over the
hearts of all present, he managed so as not to betray
his emotions, and succeeded in finishing the funeral
service over the body, not without the same
interruptions
,
which grew louder and louder as he advanced,
till they finally broke out in diabolical yells, as if on
purpose to mock and frustrate the ceremony.
The sailors were now ordered to fill the grave, and
then immediately to take to their boats, and in fifteen
minutes after, they were on their way to the Dolphin,
half petrified with what they had witnessed, which
was a hundred-fold exaggerated in the minds of all.
Our adventurer remained behind, his barge
waiting
for him according to orders, at the place where
he landed. His curiosity was now raised to the
highest pitch. Nameoke, of whom he had only
recently
heard, evidently knew him, and prophecied
darkly concerning him. In what way could she be
interested in his destiny? She judged that his
intentions
were honorable relative to Grace Wilmer.
It was true, but how could Nameoke have known it?
The death, too, of his lieutenant, and the allusion
which had been made to it in the cave.It now
occurred
to him that Felton might have been murdered;
but then, who could have done it? Might he not
have been destroyed by those superhuman powers
which had terrified his crew that evening?
Were
they superhuman? Much was talked abroad about
witchcraft, and many of the wisest believed in its
existence. Could it indeed be possible? These
thoughts, and similar ones, chased each other through
the brain of Fitzvassal, and he resolved that night,
if possible, to inquire into the wonders that
surrounded
him.
He returned to the Swallow's Cave, and as he
entered, its lonely occupant rose to receive him.
You have buried the man of dark thoughts,
said she, addressing him immediately, and it is well;
Vol. II. 4
the ravens would have visited him before the
morning
.
He met with an untimely death, said her visiter,
do you know any thing of its circumstances?
Suppose, said Nameoke, looking earnestly upon
him, suppose yonder maiden had been your sister,
and that she dwelt alone where the sea hymned her
nightly to her rest, and where the stars alone saw her
bathing in the waters.
Well, replied Fitzvassal, and what then?
Suppose that some ruffian had heard of her
being
there, and his imagination had been fired by the
flames of hell to break in upon the sanctuary of her
solitude, and had meditated violence to herwhat
would you have had your sister do to save herself from
the man of dark thoughts?
I would, replied her visiter, have her treat him
as a venomous reptile that crossed her path, and kill
him.
You are right! exclaimed the enchantress,
such was Felton to Nameoke, and she slew him!
You?
replied Fitzvassal, is it possible? Did
the man offer violence to your modesty?
Nameoke would have saved him, as she would save
Fitzvassal,
resumed the enchantress, she read his
doom in the stars and warned him to fly from the wrath
of the fates,but he turned a deaf ear and perished.
If he was doomed to perish, how could he
escape
?
inquired her visiter.
When the blood spouts from an artery, is not the
man dying? And may not an active will save him
from destruction?
Well!
Even so the will of man may control the stars,
and the powers of darkness be defeated by his
resolute
purpose.
Impossible!
I tell you, cried the enchantress, and her eyes
flashed with supernatural beauty as she spoke, I
tell you that the will of man in relation to all things
under the all-highest, is omnipotent for evil or for
good. It may be trained to strike a fellow-creature
dead by a thought, as he falls before a stroke of the
sun, or a chain-bolt of the thunder-cloud; it may
bring down angels out of heaven, or raise hell-fiends
from the fathomless abyss; it is the will of man and
only the will of man that makes paradise and death.
You talk
wildly!
said her listener in a half
whisper, yet so fascinated by her manner that he
could not withdraw his eyes from gazing on her
face.
Nameoke tells nothing that she does not know,
resumed the Indian girl, but Nameoke sees realities
in what you call the future.Man! man! why do you
not learn
yourself,
why do you dive into all and every
thing but the great thing of all; why do you leave
yourself unknown?
She raised herself as she spoke, upright, and seemed
to pierce the very rocks with her vision; her eyes grew
brighter and brighter, her cheeks swelled as if she
were struggling with some internal emotion too big
for utterance, and her lips parted and trembled as if
all speech were denied them. Suddenly her form
and features grew rigid, but still retaining their
peculiar
,
indescribable beauty of expression, while the
words poured from her lips in a torrent of
impassioned
cadences.
She spoke of man, the greatest of all themes, of man
as he was, as he is, and as he is to be. She looked
into
the great past, and told of his glorious innocence
before he could be truly happy in his blessedness, for
he knew no evil even by name, and therefore was
ignorant of the good which he possessed;she told
of his communion with the heavens, and of his
intercourse
with the angels; but even the angels were
like unto himself, and in the midst of his paradise,
man was not satisfiedfor he was man only in
infancy
.
She spoke of his in-burning desire of something,
of every thing which involved relations and
opposites
,
and this she described as the dawning of his
youth and reason, and she said that all was right,
and that man might have come to the knowledge of
good and of evil and have still been true to his
nature
;
but as his reason dawned and he saw what
was good and what was evil, he fell from his state of
primal peacefulness, because having known evil he
had not achieved the only good he is capable of
knowing and enjoying, by attributing every thing to
the giver and nothing to himself.
She spoke of the present, and told how man was
almost
unconsciously struggling with the weight of
ages, and was on the point of developing faculties
which he did not dream of possessing; that unheard
of sciences would come with a knowledge of self,
and add inconceivably to the happiness of the race;
that man would continue to progress and grow
better
,
notwithstanding the dark and discouraging
appearance
of evils which encompassed him, and that
though punishment unavoidably followed what was
evil, the time would come when man would be
restored
by the operation of his own will to that primal
state of peace from which he had fallen, and be
truly
happy because he would be taught to be
useful
.
When the sibyl had finished, she sunk for a few
moments down upon a heap of dry sea-weed, and
after
heaving a profound sigh, came to herself again.
Fitzvassal brought her some fresh water in a gourd,
which she tasted, and then fixing her eyes upon him
said,
Nameoke thanks you for your kindnessand
would repay itwill you listen to her counsel?
Most certainly will I listen, answered
Fitzvassal
,
who began to regard this extraordinary
character
with the deepest interest; and if I do not profit
4*
by your wisdom, may I suffer the penalty of my
fault.
Fly then, fly quickly, from these shores, and let
the stars of the other hemisphere shine on you
there is death in your horoscopeand Nameoke
sickens while she thinks of your fate: leave these
shores to-morrow,you
will
leave them to-morrow,
but oh, return not to the three hills again; the crime
you have already committed may be removed far
away by deeds of charity.
Fitzvassal started as she spoke, and looked with
amazement on her. How could
she
know of his
crime?
If, she resumed, laying her hand on his shoulder,
you harbor those thoughts that now occupy your
mind, you will have a still greater crime to atone
for.
What mean you? asked the man, shuddering
inwardly
as she spoke.
Know you not that your father is abroad on the
ocean? said the sibyl.
My father!
He is even now returning with the gold that
another
man found, and he is sharing the rights of
another
with the blood of his body.
Nameoke! exclaimed the conscious-smitten man,
what mean you?
Nameoke means, replied the enchantress, that
Edmund Vassal is this moment on the ocean in a
vessel laden heavily with the gold of
Port de la
Plata!
You amaze me! exclaimed Fitzvassal, is it
possible that avarice has driven him to the wreck!
His blood be upon his own head with vengeance!
Beware of
parricide,
unhappy man,replied
Nameoke, fly, hastily from these shores, and avoid
every sail you encounter.
Have you aught else to command me?
inquired
Fitzvassal, for it seems that one who knows me
so well, might tell me more.
Banish the memory of the only maiden you ever
loved, now and forever from your mind.
You demand impossibilities, exclaimed
Fitzvassal
;
but since you read my heart so welltell me
whom it is that I love.
She is a beautiful being, sighed Nameoke, the
morning-glory of innocence. She was born to make
thee mad and another happy.
Fitzvassal disguised, as well as he could, the
incredulity
he felt at this declaration. Had not Grace
Wilmer smiled on him; had she not blushed when
he spoke to her, and blushed as often as she spoke?
Surely it must be love, or at least a sentiment of deep
tenderness that she entertained toward him!
But he had yet to learn that smiles are not the
coinage of affection only, and that the philosophy
of blushing is more than skin-deep. A person may
blush by accident, or from a rude suspicion, or from a
transient motion, and ever after from the strong power
of association. This is the true cause of that
painful
manifestation of sensitiveness, which the
iron-nerved
and coarse-fibred never feel, and which is
sometimes attributed to vanity! Vanity never
blushes. Women, and men too, blush because they
remember
that they blushedand often from no
other
cause.
Nameoke! said Fitzvassal after a pause,
wishing
to call her attention to a subject which had
principally
occupied his thoughts at the time he entered
the Swallow's Cave,Nameoke! tell me, if you
can, what laughter and disturbance did I hear while
the body of Felton was burying?
It was the laughter of those, replied the maiden,
who love evil and work wo. Would you see the
monstrous-visaged women who come to you in
spirit
,
and prompt you to abominable thinkings, the
bad-eyed
revellers that whisper in the human ear, deeds
it were a sin even to name?
Surely you do not believe in witchcraft! said
Fitzvassal, in a tone of half inquiry.
There are those, exclaimed Nameoke, who
think that witchcraft is a chimera; but evil is mighty,
and malicious thoughts will blast even the flowers of
the field: much more can they trouble the spirit of
man. He who wills evil mightily, never wills in vain,
though the blight comes back on his own heart, and
kills him with reverberated curses.
Do you pretend to say that one can assume the
form of another, and thus torture the object of his
hatred?
The spirit of one may assume the shape of
another's
spirit and manifest itself for evil; but it is the
work of the father of lies.
You are dreaming, Nameoke, surely you do not
believe in this.
When you learn to
know yourself,
replied the
sibyl, stranger things than this will be familiar to
you; and it will not be long before such scenes will
be exhibited by those who are now sowing for the
harvest, that the ears of future generations will
tingle
as they listen.
Shall I behold them, Nameoke?
You will, and yet you will not. Come with
Nameoke
,
and she will show you a page of the future. But
the son of the Vassal must be secret as the grave. In
future times when men read the testimony of their
fathers, it will seem that credulity was the mother of
witchcraft begotten by diseased imagination, when
it will have been rather the
will of man
that has
subdued
it. But Nameoke speaks to after ages. Let
us away!
As she spoke she took from her bosom a talisman
of black-veined agate set in gold, which she hung
upon his neck.
Keep this, said she, for Nameoke's sake; though
it will not guard you from danger, it will keep your
heart from fear. It contains the deadliest poison,
distilled from the hollow fang of the rattle-snake, the
copper-head, and the mad-dogs' blood. Come with
Nameoke.
Immediately she seized her mace, and leaving the
cave, followed by Fitzvassal, ascended to the plain
above. In the direction of the Spouting-Horn was
seen a livid light that alternately rose and fell,
brightened
and faded, as they gazed upon it. The sibyl
was the first to break silence.
Nameoke will now show you a fearful sight which
she would have shown to Felton. But his heart
was harder than the flint, and the fire within him
burnt toward the regions of woe. The son of the
Vassal has already done evil; may the visions of
this night turn his heart from the way of
destruction
!
Whither are you going, Nameoke! and what
do you mean to show me?
Nameoke will show you the witches of the far
Hartz, that sometimes leave the Brocken as the
missionaries
of the hells. They hold to-night their
revels, and in diabolical mockery of the great
mystery
,
administer the communion of the damned to
those who are willing to be initiated. What you
will behold would be invisible to common men, as
we shall be invisible to the actors. See! we
approach
.
Stand near to Nameoke, and hold her
hand, thus!
As they neared the Spouting-Horn, its briny
belchings grew louder and louder, and by the
reflected
light of the witch-fire its mounting waves
gleamed hideously terrific. This was on their right
as they approached. As they came nearer, they
found that the light flashed up from below nearly
down at the bottom of the broad and steep ravine to
which at present a rude and craggy footpath leads
in the direction of the Horn; far above this
wonderful
fissure the rocks rise almost perpendicularly a
hundred feet, against which the huge jet of the
Spouting-Horn, dashes violently and is whirled aloft
by the opposing crags, in proportion to the violence
of the waves.
Nameoke will lead you to a place of safety,
said the sibyl, drawing Fitzvassal after her, and
taking another path to the Spouting-Horn on the
south-east side of the place. Behind yonder crag
where the shadow deepens like a cavern, we shall
be near to them and in no danger of discovery. Be
careful lest you speak. Should you be so
unguarded
as to utter even a monosyllable, that moment
the vision will be ended.
Slowly and cautiously they wound their way
among the rough crags, careful lest their unguarded
steps should loosen any fragment of rock, which,
tumbling down the precipice, might alarm the weird
sisterhood below. Fitzvassal still held the hand of
Nameoke, following her step by step till at last they
reached the place of their destination. Not a word
was spoken by either of them. They could only
see each other's faces, and feel the pressure of the
hand on any suddenly-awakened emotion. The
night was clear and beautiful; not a cloud was
under the firmament, but the stars shone calmly and
tranquilly, as if none but the pure in heart were
abroad to gaze upon their splendour, and none but
the worshippers of heaven were breathing beneath
its arch of glory.
But the attention of Fitzvassal and his guide was
absorbed by other objects, and their pulses throbbed
hard and heavily while they gazed.
Upon a flat rock at the left of the Spouting-Horn,
an enormous skull of a rhinoceros was discovered,
supported by four human thigh-bones fixed
transversely
to sustain the weight; these were lashed
together
by a number of huge snakes, that writhed and
twisted about, darting their fangs in every direction,
hissing and rattling with fearful fury as the flames
beneath
them scorched their exposed bodies. The fire
did not burn from any common fuel, but the hags
which went by turns to the task, poured out at times
certain substances like oils, which gave variously
colored fires, and threw the most ghastly shades on
all surrounding objects. Close to this
skull-chauldron
was a heap of dead bodies, that seemed to have
been lately dragged from the water, two of which
were interlocked in each other's arms.
As Nameoke gazed upon them, an involuntary
shudder ran through her frame, for she knew they
were the lovers who had been sacrificed to the
fiendish
malice of the Hartz hags, and she held her breath
to subdue, if possible, her expression of abhorrence.
Fitzvassal was petrified with horror.
At a little distance from this infernal hearth, a
stageing was erected to resemble a church altar. It
was formed of decayed coffins, and they were so
arranged
as to form steps by which it could be
approached
.
On the top of this altar was placed a
large goat, around the neck of which was suspended
a cross, contrived of the two forefingers of a dead
infant. A black velvet pall was stretched over the
altar, underneath the goat, tricked out with rusty
coffin-plates, and at the foot of the stairs were a large
number of dead bodies in every state of decay.
The smoke from the oil-fire of the witches curled
round the neighboring rocks in thick pitchy wreaths,
and the lurid light shone full on their dreadful faces.
There were twenty of them, the principal of whom
Nameoke recognized as the two deformed monsters
she had seen at the Pulpit-Rock. They had been
feeding the fire for some time in the manner already
described, and mumbling over inaudible charms as
the oils burnt blue and green; but they now joined
hand in hand and moved round the strange
chauldron
,
which boiling over, foamed up with blood, and
ran down the walls of the skull, scalding the snakes
Vol. II. 5
with the hot torrent till they tied themselves into
knots, writhing and screaming with harsh hisses.
While this was doing, they uttered unintelligible
incantations, at certain intervals terminating a
cadence
with peals of unnatural laughter, that
reverberating
from the neighboring cliffs, found another
echo at Egg Rock, that sounded like a response from a
company as infernal as their own. They would then
stop, and after robbing the corpses of hair and
finger-nails
,
they dropped them into the seething receptacle,
while the snakes, disengaging themselves from their
bondage, twined round their skinny arms, till
suffocated
by the stench of the decoction, they fell and
mingled with the ingredients.
There was now on a sudden an appearance like
many shooting stars, accompanied by a sound like
fast rushing in the air. As soon as this was
perceived
,
the hags put their withered fingers to their
lips, and for a moment were silent. The pale
woman
of Pulpit-Rock then beckoned to the others,
and bounding over the intervening gulf, followed
by all the rest, immediately landed at the foot of the
altar, where, after kissing the goat, they prostrated
themselves before it, and continued kneeling in
silence
,
each with her finger on her lips.
In a few moments after there were six new-comers
in the company, when they who were kneeling rose
together and welcomed them by clasping their hands.
The newly-arrived guests were younger and less
revolting
in appearance than those whom they found
at their orgies, but their faces were either bloated or
haggard, and the impress of confirmed iniquity was
deeply imprinted on their forms.
They now sat themselves down in a circle, while
several of the older ones, retiring behind the altar,
brought each a human scull which had been made
into a drinking cup; then going to the chaldron they
filled it with the hellish fluid, and returning passed
the same to the laughter-shaking hags.
Fitzvassal and his companion when they beheld
this horrible spectacle, could with difficulty restrain
their feelings of disgust; particularly when they
saw them drink hot blood, in which such revolting
ingredients had been mingled. As the hags drank
largely, their eyes gleamed in their hollow sockets,
when all at once a strange fury possessed them.
They suddenly sprang on their feet and clapped their
hands in mad and tumultuous mirth, and whirled
round with a velocity that made even the gazers giddy.
At length their frenzy subsiding, they again shook
hands and bowed themselves down to the beast;
then, at a signal from one of them, they rose to their
feet, and turning round, seated themselves in rows on
the coffins. The pale hag then took a small black
book from under the velvet pall, and passed it round
among the hideous company, each one of whom in
turn kissed it with seeming devoutness, when the
ceremony of drinking was repeated.
This ended, they began to boast of their exploits.
One of them gloried in murders, several of them in
daring robberies, most of them in seductions, but the
two of the Pulpit-Rock bore away the loudest
acclamations
,
by producing the bodies of the drowned
lovers, and vaunting of the horrors of the wreck.
They now joined hand in hand, and danced
frantically
round the chaldron, seeming not to touch the
rocks as they moved, and all the while uttering
dismal
sounds of mingled mirth and madness.
This was but the prelude to another scene: for
they now, at a signal given, arranged themselves as
before, while two of them fed the fire again with
oils, from which evolved thick smoke, that for a
time enveloped surrounding objects in darkness.
As the dense vapor curled away, one of them was
discovered, less haggard and offensive than the rest,
standing upon a tripod, and waving above her head
a long white wand.
The future! the future! exclaimed one of the
terrific sisterhood, let us see the future!
Hush!
hissed one half the company, and
holding
their lank fingers to their skinny lips, they all
leaned forward in eager expectation of the result.
The smoke-wreaths attenuating as they rose,
presently
assumed the forms of human beings. There
were two beautiful girls who appeared to be sisters,
and they were interchanging tokens of affection.
Near them stood an evil-eyed woman, who for a
while seemed to gloat upon them as the boa does on
its mediated victims. She then seemed to clothe
herself
in the form of one of the fair creatures, when
the two kissed each other and separated. No sooner
had one gone, than the witch, in the shape of the
departed, began to assail the other.
A scream of delight arose as one voice from the
witch company when they saw this, and they
clattered
their husky hands together, as if some new
invention
of evil had been achieved.
The girl seemed now to be tormented by her own
sister, and was writhing in agony beneath the
cruelties
she inflicted. Among other forms of torment,
she was strangling her, with her two hands clenched
round her throat, till her face became black as soot.
The scene changed. The girl who had been
tormented
had accused her own sister, who stood
before
the judgment-seat of the land. Near by was a
stake with bundles of faggots, and the unhappy
creature was bound to the same and burned. A
crowd of spectators were looking on, who seemed to
take pleasure in witnessing a just retribution.
They believe it! they believe it! screamed the
assembled beldames as they gazed, that will do!
that will do! they
believe it!
And as they spoke, they screamed triumphantly,
and clapped their hands as before.
The same witch that ministered at the fire, now
threw fresh oil on the flames, and as the smoke grew
thin in ascending, other forms appeared. As yet
they were not so developed in their outlines, as to
5*
make them distinctly seen; but one of them that
went before was more clearly seen than the others.
In a moment after, Fitzvassal was thunderstruck to
recognise in the first, the exact image of his own
father
!
He shuddered, but said nothing; for Nameoke
held him hard by the arm, and by her
expression
,
urged him to be silent. The form that followed
was now seen to brandish a dagger, which it was
about to plunge into the back of the pursued.
Fitzvassal could contain himself no longer, but
with a voice that broke harshly among the rocks, he
shouted
Revenge!
The surrounding crags took
up the cry, and reverberated
Revenge!
And the
diabolical crew, as they vanished in the air, screamed
close in Fitzvassal's ears,
Revenge!
He gazed, bewildered, on the fading
phantasmagoria
around him, and as it passed, Nameoke, pointing
to the figure of the murderer, cried emphatically,
See! Fitzvassal, see!
He turned, and recognised
himself
in the figure
of his father's assassin.
A slight faintness oppressed him, but soon
recovering
,
he wound his way back among the rough crags,
under the guidance of Nameoke; but he spoke not
a word to her. Nameoke preserved the same
unbroken
silence, and they parted at the
Swallow's-Cave
,
without uttering a syllable on the subject of
their adventure, or even in exchanging the farewells
of the night.
CHAPTER XIII.
Order for sea is given;
They have put forth the haven: further on,
Where their appointment we may best discover,
And look on their endeavor.
Antony and Cleopatra
.
It is a manacle of love; I'll place it
Upon this fairest prisoner.
Cymbeline
.
The
morning gun boomed over the waters of the
inner harbor from Castle Island to the town of
Boston
,
as a signal that the day was fast advancing, and
the eastern sky began to put off its dull gray robes
for the more splendid saffron; the large sea-birds
were rowing through the chill atmosphere, and here
and there dipping into the waves for fish, and then
mounting again on their wide-expanded wings, and
wheeling far away in the blue depths of ether, or
losing themselves against the snow-banks of the
skies.
From the deck of the Dolphin, as she rocked
gracefully
on the billows, could be seen in the distance and
yet be scarcely seen, the Cape now called after Ann,
and nearly the whole line of shore stretching up
through Marblehead and Salem, growing darker and
wider as it neared the eye, till it terminated in a mass
of forest land, opening in little vistas, through which
the abodes of man were discovered. Upon the face
of the waters all around, might be seen a dozen or
more little specks, which on a nearer view were
discovered
to be fishing-boats, that went out at the early
dawn for cod and haddock, and were sometimes
rewarded
for their industry by a huge halibut, which
might serve a whole ward of inhabitants.
The clouds now changed their aspect, and wore
the rich livery of purple and gold, with which they
welcomed the sun now slowly wheeling upward
from the ocean, and the waves that had subsided into
comparative calmness, sparkled in the bright
day-beams
and danced as if conscious of the
all-pervading
life and freshness of nature.
To those who looked down the harbor outside of
the islands, the tall spars of the Dolphin, as she lay
a little off the shore, were lightly traced against the
bright back-ground of the picture that shone through
her masts and rigging, while her black hull looked
like a part of the neighboring rocks against which
the rising and receding waters lapsed peacefully, and
seemed in the distance like a snow-wreath on the
shady side of a mountain.
The wind was blowing gently from the west, and
Fitzvassal, already on the deck of the Dolphin, was
examining, with the critical eye of a sailor, the
condition
of his spars and rigging, and devising the best
means of safely disposing of Grace Wilmer and
Seymour, when he observed a vessel coming through
Shirley-gut, that immediately arrested his attention.
At that moment a man aloft cried out, sail ho!
the Revenue Cutter! and if our adventurer had
before
doubted what it was, those doubts were now
removed
,
as merging from the narrow channel she came
down the outer harbor, wing and wing, bearing
directly
for Nahant.
Pipe all hands to heave anchors and make sail!
said the commander to the young man who had
succeeded
Felton in his office of lieutenant.
The officer conveyed the order to the boatswain,
whose shrill whistle rang through every part of the
vessel, and was reverberated from the neighboring
rocks: and in half a minute, all hands were on deck
heaving away at the windlass, and loosing the
canvass
from the yards and boombs.
In a few minutes the ponderous anchors were on
board, and every thing cleared for making sail. The
mainsail was now raised, and as the wind took it,
swinging the heavy boomb over the gunwale, the
Dolphin
came round to her course and began to move
through the water. The jib now went flying full of
wind, and the other necessary sails being set, she
put out to sea under the immediate command of the
pilot.
This is what I have been long expecting, said
Fitzvassal to Jake Morgan, as the latter placed
himself
at the helm, on resuming again his office. Sir
Edmund has somehow got wind of us, and has sent
the Cutter to look into our affairs.
She will have to outfly yonder gull, then,
replied
Morgan, for we have the wind fresher than it
is above, and good three miles the start;
howsom-ever
,
seeing 's knowing, and the devil can only
tell what may happen in the fish-pond of his
country-seat
.
Fitzvassal cast his eyes over the side of the
schooner
,
to see if there were any obstacle in their way,
when he perceived the boat of Morgan dragging at
the stern. This he ordered to be hoisted aboard
without
delay, and now there was not even a rope's end
to stay the course by a ripple.
The Dolphin was standing right out to sea a few
points from the east, and the Cutter now bore dead east
to head her in, carrying every stitch of canvas she
could crowd.
I should like to run out at least twenty miles,
Morgan, said Fitzvassal, before we fall in with that
vessel. We could easily have blown her out of
water
without leaving the harbor, but I have other
designs
upon her.
We can easily do that, sir, replied the pilot;
for since we hoisted the flying-jib, she has not
gained on us an inch, or my eye deceives me
mightily
;we
could run her hull-down in three hours, with
studdin'-sails all set, I know.
I don't care about running away from her so far
as that comes to, said the commander, and yet when
I consider that I have a lady on board, it would
perhaps
be as well to avoid an encounter. How many
fathoms have we now?
From six to eight, replied the pilot; not short
of six, howsomever.
Keep right a-head, Morgan, and show her as
much of your stern as you can, enjoined
Fitzvassal
,and
by all means don't let her gain on you
an atom: call me, if she does, or if she varies her
course any: we must keep a sharp look out, for we
have a deeper game than the mere act of running
away.
So saying he descended into the cabin, where a
little mulatto girl, about twelve years of age, was
assisting
the steward in preparing the table for
breakfast
.
Have you seen the lady this morning, Celia?
inquired
the commander, who had been extremely
solicitous
for the comfort of his guest, and had directed
the girl, who was a slave, to take particular care that
her every want should be provided.
Yes sir, replied the girl; Miss is right well,
she
is, to-day.
Will she come to breakfast, Celia?
Miss says, answered the girl, she'll have her
breakfast sent to her, if you please,
she
will.
Let her be obeyed in every thingdo you hear,
Celia?
Yes, sir, replied Celia; and continued busying
herself at the breakfast-table.
Massa Seymour, said the steward, who was a
negro and a slave, for in days of yore, slaves were
as common in New England as they are in
Maryland
,
and would be now, if self-interest had not
changed a system which that section of the country
had outgrownMassa Seymour very ill to-day
he take bad cold yesterday in de water.
I am sorry to hear that, Cato, replied his
master
;
we shall not see him then to-day, hey?
I'se feared not to-day, sir: he'll hab de gruel for
his breakfast, he tinks.
Fitzvassal went to the state-room door, and was
about to knock, when he hesitated, and turned to the
steward.
Cato, said he, ask Mr. Seymour if he is well
enough to see me for a moment: I should like to
speak a word or two with him.
The steward bowed and disappeared; but he
presently
returned with a message that,
Massa Seymour say he be happy to see Captain
Nix. I guess he no see de old Captain in a hurry;
but Cato no say nossinghe know a trick worth two
o'dat,
he
does.
And his white teeth shone between his black lips
like ermine on the sea-otter, and he chuckled with a
suppressed familiarity which plainly indicated on
what good terms he stood with his master.
It now for the first time occurred to Fitzvassal, that
it was all-important, for the success of his schemes, and
even for the furtherance of the colonial liberties, that
he should pass on board his own vessel for Captain
Nix, so long, at least, as his present guests remained
on board. Orders were accordingly given
throughout
the vessel, for this requirement to be enforced
under severe penalties, an order very easily
accomplished
,
as the word Captain was that which was
generally used to address the commander, and to
speak of him: but nevertheless, the precaution above
mentioned was deemed by him expedient, in case of
any accident which might render it necessary to use
his surname. And now it is proper that we should
revert to that part of the narrative which is
necessary
to fill the hiatus we have left, and to explain the
reason why Fitzvassal had been compelled to assume
a name which did not belong to him.
We have already informed the reader of the
mutinous
disposition of the crew, when lying off
Port
de la Plata;
how they refused to load the vessel with
the bags of gold, and the wedges of silver which the
persevering energy of Captain Phips had rescued
from the sea; and how they had been brought to
terms by the address of young Fitzvassal, who was
Vol. II. 6
then second officer under that enterprising leader.
We shall now proceed to relate the sequel of that
expedition
,
and the succeeding one for the recovery of
the buried treasure.
Cheered by the encouragement of Fitzvassal, the
crew of the Dolphin, then belonging to the Duke of
Albemarle, and commanded by William Phips,
returned
to their duties with alacrity, and as we have
mentioned, brought the treasure safely to England;
but when the vessel had discharged the precious cargo,
and Captain Phips having been knighted, had
relinquished
the command of the schooner, the noble
Duke turned a deaf ear to the demands of the sailors,
who modestly urged the promises of their officers,
though the chief of them, Mr. Nix, as first-mate, had
from the beginning refused to co-operate in assisting
them towards any extra remuneration. For he
declared
,
and with reason, that they had all shipped
as for any other voyage, without any reference to
shares, and that the very act of disobedience of which
they had been guilty, was of itself sufficient to
exclude
them from any gratuity.
Fitzvassal, as second-officer, was more among the
men, and it was by using all the influence he could
exert, that he kept them in order while in the
London
docks, begging them to abide by what he
promised as certain to be fulfilled, and giving them
such reasons for submission, as were to them
perfectly
satisfactory.
Notwithstanding the value of the freight brought
to the Duke of Albemarle, that nobleman was far
from being satisfied. Sir William Phips, on giving
up the command of the vessel, and retiring contented
with the share that had been allotted to him, assured
the Duke that not more than one half of the buried
treasure had been recovered; it is not wonderful,
therefore, that he determined to dispatch the same
vessel again in the confident expectation of
recovering
what remained.
Accordingly the Dolphin was fitted for sailing with
all expedition; for the Duke could not control his
apprehensions that some one would step in between
him and his prize, and deprive him of what he now
claimed as his own, by the right of prior discovery.
As the captain's place was vacant, Mr. Nix was
promoted to that office, and Fitzvassal elevated to the
post of first-officer. Felton, who had had great
experience
,
was taken from the forecastle and supplied
the place of the second.
Before leaving London, Captain Nix, who was an
independant in his principles, and opposed with
uncompromising
hostility the reigning monarch, and
with equal zeal favored the intentions of the
Stadtholder
,
was made the special agent to bear dispatches
from some distinguished persons, among others, Sir
William Temple, who, though they made a show of
loyalty to James, were in secret correspondence all
the time with the Prince of Orange. We have
already
alluded to some of these papers in a former part
of the narrative.
It was probably owing to the perfect
understanding
which subsisted between the first-officer, and the
crew of the Dolphin, that the latter did not manifest
the slightest symptoms of insubordination, either on
their way to
Porte de la Plata,
or while they were
there occupied in loading with the precious metals.
Nor were they able to exhaust the heaps of gold and
silver which they found; but after loading the
schooner
as deeply as they dared, they were still under the
necessity of leaving enough for another expedition,
or to serve as the rich gleanings for some other
fortunate
adventurer.
They were now on their homeward voyage, only
twelve hours sail from the shores of Hispaniola,
when, as the morning watch was called, Fitzvassal
gave the signal of rising, by discharging a
horse-pistol
.
Immediately all hands were on deck, and
the captain, with six men who had been recently
shipped at London, and could not be expected to
enter into the feelings of the rest of the crew, were
seized and put in irons. It was useless for so few to
make any resistance to fifty men, whose plan had
been so well digested and matured.
As soon as this was done, and the prisoners were
made safe under hatches, the men assembled on the
quarter-deck, and unanimously elected Fitzvassal to
be their captain, and Felton to be their lieutenant;
and they each and all took a good round oath, which
is not to be found in any statute-book, that they would
yield implicit obedience to their officers, and obey
them to the very sacrificing of their lives, in the
performance
of duty.
Our adventurer, of course, accepted with many
thanks, a station which he had taken so much pains
to secure for himself, and the first movement which
he made to retain the favor in which he was held,
was to measure out to each man his equal share of
the whole cargo, having first set apart a tenth for
himself, and a twentieth for Felton: his own share
being worth more than a hundred and fifty thousand
dollars of our present currency.
Early the next morning, the yawl was got in
readiness
,
and being well provided with every thing
necessary
for their support, the deposed Captain Nix was
placed on board with the six sailors, their shackles
having
been first knocked off, and the boat cast off and
abandoned to the mercy of the wide sea and the
winds.
After committing this act of piracy, our adventurer
held the same course till the yawl was out of sight,
and then he tacked for a direction nearly opposite.
His intention now was, to run into Massachusetts
Bay, and offer to every man the privilege of taking
his money and departing. After a pleasant voyage,
he hauled up at Barnstable, where seven of his crew
availed themselves of the privilege of quitting the
6*
Dolphin, and after having buried the principal part of
their gold in the sands, bent their way into the
interior
and distributed themselves in different parts of
the country.
The Dolphin now ran up the Bay, entered Boston
harbor, and running round to Mount Wallaston
anchored
there off-shore, as we have already had
occasion
to mention.
It must therefore be admitted, as the reader will
have already believed, that the schooner which now
extended its hospitality to the beautiful but
unfortunate
Grace Wilmer, and her still more unfortunate
lover, was a pirate and a buccaneer. It is true they
were ignorant of these facts, and it must be also
remembered
,
that no blood had as yet polluted her
scuppers; but crime is under the guardianship of
fiends, and when once an act of dishonesty and
shame has been deliberately committed, the will
having
been turned to evil, is difficult to be reclaimed,
and the first step is but too soon remembered as only
a degree in the progression of iniquity. A false step
can never be blotted out forever. It is not in the
power of heaven to obliterate an evil action.
Such had been the career of Fitzvassal, previous
to the time we are now chronicling, and the
remembrance
of the one crime which he could not wash
away, stung him sometimes almost to madness.
Particularly
was the recollection of it annoying to him
now, when he no longer felt the pangs of
remorseless
poverty, but was on the eve of bringing himself
before the eye of the world as a patriot, and a leader
among the martyrs to liberty. How gladly would he
have retraced the steps that had led him to the
temple
of mammon, how cheerfully would he have
renounced
all his wealth, for the privilege of earning
his daily bread by incessant toil;
toil,
that greatest of
all human blessings, that heaven-descended provision
of a bountiful God! How triumphantly would he
have labored early and late, for the privilege of
feeling
himself a man, untarnished by crime, and
standing
with conscious rectitude, in the presence of
assembled
angels!
But such is the retribution of evil, that then only
on its commission, is the beauty of goodness most
perceived. When it is too late to go back to the
green pastures and the still waters, and the sands of
the desert envelop him, the pilgrim in vain regrets
that he wandered from the way, while the
recollection
of that which is lost, only serves to add
bitterness
to his sorrows, and array his forms of agony in
darker, more impenetrable gloom.
To return from this digression. As soon as
Seymour's
willingness to have an interview with
Fitzvassal
had been signified to him, he entered the
stateroom
,
where the young man lay in his berth. The
first question the latter asked, after the usual
salutations
,
was relative to the well-being of his cousin;
and after he had received assurances of her being
comfortably
provided for, and attended by a young girl
who could administer to all her wants, Seymour
expressed
his satisfaction in terms of the warmest
gratitude
.
Fitzvassal assured him, that nothing would be
left undone to contribute to the mutual comfort of
himself and cousin, while they remained on board
his vessel, and promised him that they should be
safely landed in Boston or Salem, as soon as
circumstances
would warrant.
I perceive, Captain Nix, said Seymour, that we
are under weigh; are you steering for Boston, now?
No, replied the commander, the wind is dead
ahead, and I am running down the Bay. To tell
you the truth at once, Mr. Seymour, he continued,
looking at his guest archly, with a smile and a shake
of the headmy vessel is in the employment of the
friends of liberty in Boston, and being suspected by
Sir Edmund Andros, I have cause for believing that he
has sent the Revenue-cutter after me, the Frigate being
wanted at home. So I am running a race with his
majesty's revenue boat, though I have no contraband
goods to be taken care of.
You surprise me! exclaimed SeymourI am
one of the friends of liberty myself; give me your
hand for a bold heart and a true.
And they shook hands with all the cordiality of
enthusiastic partisans, who had sworn to live and die
in the defence of the rights of man.
It is a little singular, resumed Seymour, that I
should have thus been thrown in your way. Do
you expect to have a fight with the Cutter?
Not if I can well avoid it, Mr. Seymour, till we
have run outside some twenty or thirty miles, for I
do not wish to excite the suspicion of the forts; it
might thwart my measures materially, to do so.
Since my sickness, said Seymour; I have lost
the run of events in Boston, pray give me all the
information
you can about the patriot movements.
The interviews which Fitzvassal had enjoyed with
Mr. Temple, and subsequently with others of the
committee, enabled him to communicate to the
invalid
much valuable intelligence; but that which came
from England interested him the most.
There are strong indications, Captain Nix, of a
political revolution at home and abroadI am a
disciple
of Mr. Temple's school, perhaps you are not
acquainted
with his principles.
I think I understand them tolerably well, replied
the commander, but as I have never had but one
conversation with him expressly on the subject of
politics, of course I cannot be a proficient in his
doctrines
.
He is what I call a great man.
Undoubtedly he is so, Captain Nix, for he is a
good man. But the time has not yet come when
men will understand that heretofore there has been a
wrong classification of intellectual and moral things.
At present, nearly all the great men of the country
are bad men. The time will come, and Mr. Temple
discerns it afar off, with the vision of a seer, when
men will acknowledge that the moral takes
precedence
of the intellectual, and that virtue is the
highest
characteristic of man.
Fitzvassal bowed assent to this doctrine, but he
felt the more keenly how miserable was his own
condition. Yet in the midst of his sufferings, he
was happier in his unconscious humility, thanbut
who can measure the comparative happiness, or
misery
of man? It is indeed better for man to be
humble
than arrogant; though humility is not known to
him any more than is the pre-eminence of goodness;
still less does the world comprehend the beauty of
servingthe privilege of ministering to the
well-being
of others.
Fitzvassal now left his guest and went on deck.
The beautiful islands were all a-stern, and the broad
bay opened uninterruptedly to the ocean. The
Revenue-Cutter
was still behind, carrying every rag of
canvas she could rake and scrape from below.
Proudly did she bear down upon them, bending to
the pressure of her wide sheets, as if she were
careening
in the dock, and throwing the white foam to her
figure-head, and streaming it off from her rudder in
a bright, effervescing wake.
But the Dolphin kept away from her with only her
ordinary sails set, and while the government-vessel
seemed to be straining all her rigging, and making
the most prodigious efforts to overtake the schooner,
the latter flew away before her like an antelope
before
a hunter; and as she dashed the spray a-stern,
seemed to exult in superior youth and vigor.
We will have some sport, Morgan, when we get
outside, said the Captain, laughing.
I'm your boy for that sort of work, any day,
replied
the pilot, turning every minute, to observe
whether his vessel held the true course with
reference
to the chase.
I am not so certain that its best to have a brush
with her, Morgan, but I should like to sail round
her by daylight.
Clap on your studding-sails, and you can do it,
if you likebut you had better give her a shot or
two for amusement. Did I ever tell you the story of
my smuggling some liquor over shore here?
Very likely, replied the commander, who did
not feel just then in the temper to listen to one of
Jake Morgan's long yarns. Very likely I have,
Morganbut see there, there is something coming
along harder to swallow than one of your tough
stories
.
As he spoke, a volume of light blue smoke poured
rapidly from the bow of the Revenue Cutter, and
forming itself into an exact ring, came floating on the
current of air that flowed from the west, and
presented
one of the most beautiful objects that the eye
ever beheld, while at the same time, a shot came
skipping
over the water, and after dashing it up in half
a dozen places, fell about a quarter of a mile a-stern.
If I were to return that compliment, from the
long twenty-four, said Fitzvassal, it would'nt fall
short after that manner.
At that instant, the first-officer stepped up to the
Captain, and touched his hat as if he expected some
order suited to the occasion.
Answer her with the big gun, Mr. Wilson!
The officer touched his hat again, and retired to
execute the command.
In less than a minute, the match was applied to
the gun, which went off like a peal of thunder, jarring
the schooner to her kelson, and enveloping her in
one thick cloud of smoke.
The devil take the smoke! exclaimed Morgan,
a fellow can't see how the thing travels.
But in a short time, the wind cleared away the
obstacle
,
and a large rent was discovered in the
foresail
of the Revenue-Cutter.
As soon as this was perceived, the crew of the
Dolphin sent up a loud shout of exulation, which
ended in three hearty cheers; and it being in the
neighborhood of grog-time, the commander, in order
to encourage the men, gave orders to pipe all hands
to splice the main brace.
Three more cheers, louder and more hearty than
the others, acknowledged the favor which the
Captain
intended for the rough sons of Neptune, who
presently were seen surrounding the tub of
half-and-half
,
and quaffing, each man his half-pint, with true
sailor jollity.
If a revelation had been made in those days, that
in times not far distant, ships would be made to go
to sea
with
steam, and sailors
without
it, the
declaration
would have been equally incredible; for grog
was then considered as essential to a ship as her
rudder
,
and sailors regarded it as their very life's blood.
It is so for the most part now, but an improvement
has been made in this respect, which demonstrates
most decisively, that water, and
only
water, is the
sailor's element.
Fitzvassal, satisfied with the return favor that had
been given to the Revenue-Cutter, went again below,
for fear that his beautiful guest might have been
alarmed at the exchange of salutes; and as he
descended
,
he found her sitting on a sofa in the cabin,
amusing herself with a book.
It gives me pleasure, said the Captain, bowing
and taking off his hat to the lovely object of his
adoration
,
to see Miss Wilmer look so well after the
fatigues
of yesterday.
Grace curtesied by bowing her head gently, and
dropping her fair, blue eyes with unaffected respect,
replied:
I owe all that I enjoy to the generosity of
Captain
Nix. I hope that he will accept my gratitude.
Vol. II. 7
You owe nothing to me, Miss Wilmer; but it is
I who owe you every thing!
Grace lifted her eyes upon him, not with surprise,
for since she attributed what he said to nothing but
politeness, she had heard too many fine speeches to
regard them as extraordinary; but she had too deep
a sense of the obligations she was under to the
supposed
Captain Nix, to regard him as a common
bandier
of compliments, and as she reflected on his
possible
meaning, her fair face was gently suffused with
emotion.
Yes, continued the mariner, warming as he
proceeded
,
and not displeased that the charming girl
seemed sensible of his influence: indeed, I owe to
you every thing that gives me pleasure in life; for
why should I hesitate to declare, that it was Miss
Wilmer that first taught me that I had a better
nature
within me, and that self was not a worthy idol
of worship.
Though it was impossible for Grace Wilmer to
misunderstand this declaration, yet it was couched
in such delicate expressions, and was withal so
respectful
,
and unpretending in the manner of its
utterance
,
that she could not be offended; for when is
a gentle being ever annoyed at the implication of a
sentiment which, though it shrink like the violet from
the day-beams, is revealed by its subtler qualities?
But her fine sense of propriety did not allow her to
recognise the avowal of affection; and her exquisite
tact came promptly, and immediately to her aid.
It is certainly a great privilege, said Grace, in
being any way instrumental in making other people
happy, and one of the most enduring sources of
enjoyment
,
is the conferring of benefits. Our family
have afforded you repeated opportunities of making
yourself happier in that way, and we shall never
cease to be mindful of the obligation.
And then desirous of giving a different turn to the
conversation, she added:
But will Captain Nix be so obliging as to inform
me what destination his vessel has at present?
He then repeated to her in substance, what he had
previously communicated to Seymour, and quieted
every apprehension, by assuring her of a safe and
speedy return home.
I hope, however, that Miss Wilmer can be
contented
on ship-board for a little while, said
Fitzvassal
,
desirous of recurring to the original subject of
their discourse, though there is nothing in the
accommodation
of a vessel of war to be particularly
agreeable to a lady.
I trust that you will not find us troublesome guests,
replied Grace: for my part, I could put up with any
accommodations, after the terrible dangers I have so
recently encounteredbut my poor cousin
Have no anxiety on his account, Miss Wilmer,
he will be well enough to attend you, said the
mariner
.
Heaven grant it so; sighed Grace.
There was a pause of a few seconds, which the
young lady felt to be awkward, and which this very
thought tended to protract. She was about to rise
with a view of retiring to her state-room, but
Fitzvassal
detained her.
Stay a moment, Miss Wilmer! I have that to
communicate which another opportunity may never
allow.
Grace started involuntarily, but presently
recovering
herself, she resumed her seat on the sofa.
It is a source of consolation to me, said Grace,
without raising her eyes toward the person she
addressed
,
that I am under the protection of a
gentleman
who is too chivalrous to offend by a thought.
Say on, Captain Nix; I am all attention.
There was something like a mixture of real dignity,
and forced constraint, in this speech, that would
have confounded Fitzvassal, if he had not had a real
apology for detaining her; as it was, he did not seem
disturbed, but taking something from his pocket, he
extended it towards her, exclaiming:
Does Miss Wilmer remember ever to have seen
this?
Grace looked at it inquiringly for an instant;
Can it be possible? she cried, My
ring
?
It was indeed the rich jewel that the infatuated
young man had abstracted from her finger, when she
had fainted at the cruel sufferings of her cousin.
True, she had at first suspected who took it from her,
but as the generous and self-devoted man had
subsequently
become identified with the heroic mariner
who was instrumental in saving Seymour, she had
driven the idea from her mind as a rude and
uncharitable
imagining, as unworthy of herself as it
was undeserved by that officer.
May I ask, inquired Grace Wilmer, how
Captain
Nix became possessed of thisI hope he will
excuse me for asking so rude a question, but it is
well intended; I would save him from the
suspicion
Of
theft,
said Fitzassal, supplying the word
which he knew was uppermost in her mind.
Oh no, by no means, exclaimed Grace; such
a thought could not dwell with me, I assure you;
but at first, the circumstancethe
Miss Wilmer, said the mariner, interrupting her,
if I have been so fortunate as to win any kind
feelings
from your family by my actions, may they be
permitted to atone for a deed which was prompted by
the delirium of a passion, which
For pity's sake, Captain Nix, forbear! cried
Grace Wilmer, with extreme agitation, you know
not what you say; surely, you cannot mean
That I
love
you! exclaimed Fitzvassal,
passionately
,
and may the heavens witness my devotion.
Captain Nix! replied Grace, turning deadly
pale, I am faint; give me air! Oh my mother!
my mother!
And as the tones died away on her lips, she
swooned
in his presence.
The buccaneer called hurriedly for her attendant,
and the faithful Celia stood at her side. By using
the ordinary appliances in such cases, Grace revived,
and shortly after withdrew with her maid to her
state-room, and as she laid herself exhausted in her
berth, she found that the ruby ring whose loss had
given her so much uneasiness, was once more
glittering
on her finger.
CHAPTER XIV.
Cassio's kisses on her lips.
Othello
.
The next broadside we poured,
Brought the mainmast by the board.
Yankee Song
.
Tug him away; being whipp'd,
Bring him again.
Antony and Cleopatra
.
It
were a large chapter, in the history of human
affection, which should contain a recital of all the
woes that spring from self-delusion. How common
a thing it is for men to fancy themselves preferred
by the women they adore, when there is no other
ground for such assurance than the flattery of their
own hearts! It is a small reason that women should
love
us,
merely because we happen to love
them,
the belief of many wise ones to the contrary
notwithstanding
;
for it is so far from being true that love
begets love, that the very contrary might fall into a
proverb. That which passes current in the world
as love, is, generally speaking, nothing more than a
temporary delirium, arising from gratified vanity,
which, as soon as the incense heaped by the
imagination
on its altar is consumed, grows cold again, and
languid, and if it pines with any melancholy of
passion
,
it is only that of Narcissus, when the image of
his own attractions is no longer reflected from the
fountain.
Love, so far as it is merely natural, is as changeful
as a dream,so far only as it is spiritual, is it
enduring
.
It is not only beauty of form and feature,
that engages our higher affections, nor is it because
the lover is of imagination all compact, that he
sees Helen's beauty in the brow of Egypt.
Genuine
love is that of the spirit, which, if it be true,
must make the object beautiful though the outward
form and corporeal vestment are as rugged as the
gnarled oak. It is therefore honorable to women,
that the more exalted of the sex prefer a Socrates to
a mere Antinous, and leave a contrary choice to those
whose highest ambition it is to be admired, even
though the admiration is no purer than the emotion
of an animal.
Had Fitzvassal been more deeply read in the
annals
of affection, he would not so readily have
presumed
on a reciprocation of feeling from one whose
heart he must have known was already occupied.
It was his misfortune to love, not wisely, but too
well; and in the infatuation of his fancy, to mistake
the ordinary expressions of female courtesy, for
manifestations
of a deeper sentiment. There is many a
man who rails at the inconstancy of the sex, who
never could have excited in their hearts the most
transitory interest, and many a one who would have
the world suppose he is going to die a bachelor from
choice,
who sighs among his undarned hose, at his
dire and sad
necessity
.
Fitzvassal had the madness to believe, that Grace
Wilmer loved him. He had never before seen such
beauty and gentleness in woman, and as he loved
her with enthusiastic devotion, he vainly imagined
that her heart beat responsive to his own. He now
brooded over his declaration of love, and dwelt with
fondness on her every look, and word, and action,
which he as surely misinterpreted, as he ascribed it
to an interest for himself.
Grace Wilmer regarded him as her family
benefactor
,
and so far, as a man deserving her gratitude
and regard; but her heart was already pre-occupied
by one who was in all respects worthy of her love;
and she could no more divide her affections, and
keep a part from Seymour, than portion out her
animal
being to her worshippers. The declaration of
Fitzvassal was therefore equally unpleasant, and
startling. The first intimation she had received of
his love, was its frank avowal. In vain did she
examine
her heart, and explore the recesses of her
bosom
,
to discover if haply she had given occasion for,
or encouragement to, his feelings; and though the
conduct of her new lover had been as deferential and
delicate as the most susceptible mind could have
wished, she could not control her apprehensions
when she reflected on being in his power, and the
possible dangers that might await her from one
whom she supposed to be chagrined and
disappointed
.
Had she rather known that fuel had been
unconsciously
heaped on the fire she had kindled, her
heart would have been still less at ease, than it was
when she moistened her pillow with tears, weeping
in solitary anguish.
In the meantime, the commander of the Dolphin
paced his quarter-deck with feelings of mingled
pleasure
and anxiety. On the one hand, golden visions
of requited love and worldly honor, flitted in lovely
forms before his imagination; on the other, the fear
of the detection of his
one crime,
rose up like a
hideous
spectre to scare away his reason. He was in
the possession of wealth almost unbounded, and he
was little disturbed in conscience by the lawless
means through which it had been gained. It was
the dread of being found out, that alone disturbed
him; for he had learned to look upon the world with
delight, and to long for a share in its allurements.
In the banquet of life there seemed to him but one
obstacle to his perfect happinessand that was the
skeleton at the table.
The development of Fitzvassal's character, was a
strong illustration of the truth, that a perfect
harmony
of the will and of the understanding, is necessary
to a healthy state of mind, and to the practice of
virtue
.
The rational principle of man, which belongs
to the understanding, may, by the influx of heavenly
light, be elevated to the perception of causes, and
even to that of ends, which is the broadest reach of
created intelligence; but unless the affections which
belong to the will, become at the same time the
recipients
of heavenly love, and are thus elevated in a
like degree, the intellectual principle is drawn down
to the plain of the voluntary, and partakes of its
quality
,
however sensual and debased it may be. There
must be heat as well as light, before the earth will
yield nourishment for her children.
We may here find an answer to the question, why
men of transcendent intellect so often prostitute their
powers, and throw a charm over the very rottenness
of sensuality. So long as they voluntarily cling to
vices which are contrary to the divine law, and
therefore
inconsistent with the advancement of their
being
,
they do not love to elevate their affections above
the fascinations of the world; and since the
understanding
cannot operate without the will, it brings
down the light it has borrowed from above, to be
changed to the phosphorescence of corruption.
While Fitzvassal was engaged as we have
represented
him, in chewing the cud of sweet and bitter
fancy, it suddenly occurred to him, that he had
solemnly
promised to send Grace and her cousin to
Boston that very morning, and as he had no motive
for detaining them on board, and as it was
indispensable
to her comfort to return, the expedient
immediately
suggested itself of transferring them to the
Revenue-Cutter.
Seymour having been first consulted as to the
propriety
of the measure, the plan proposed was to place
them in Morgan's boat, and leave them there to be
taken up by the government vessel; but Seymour,
when he found that there was a sail-boat at his
disposal
,
eagerly embraced the opportunity of using it
as an immediate conveyance to the metropolis.
Every thing being made ready, by the vessel
hauling
away from the wind, and the lowering of the
boat, and its preparation for sailing, after cordial
adieus on the part of Seymour and Fitzvassal, and the
most marked declarations of interest on that of the
latter to Grace Wilmer, whose down-cast eyes and
pervading expression of melancholy were of course
misconstrued by her inamorato, they descended into
the skiff, and in a minute after were rapidly on their
way to Boston.
The Dolphin now immediately wore round to the
wind, when her ropes strained like the sinews of a
racer, as she bounded forward in the course. Her
commander stood on the quarter-deck, his glass
following
the boat with its precious merchandise. It
was now half way between the flying vessels. Why
is Fitzvassal disturbed as he gazes? Why does he
suddenly dash the glass on the deck, and descend in
agitation to his cabin? Leave the brandy untouched,
poor fool! It cannot obliterate the remembrance of
that reciprocal kiss. Its image shall haunt thee to thy
grave!
The boat having first been boarded by the Cutter,
was now seen shooting ahead toward Shirley-Point,
and was lost to the eye among the islands. Another
shot from the government-vessel indicated that the
ardor of pursuit had been stimulated, rather than
allayed, by the short interval that had happened.
The booming of the Cutter's gun immediately
roused Fitzvassal, who was now once more standing
with another spy-glass on his quarter-deck.
His first-officer was by his side in an instant.
When we return that fire, Sir, said the
commander
,
bitting his lip, that quivered with
hardly-suppressed
emotion, while his eyes flamed with anger,
it shall be to some purpose. When we have run
down out of hearing-distance from Boston, I mean to
show that fellow the hardest fight he ever dreamed
of. It is now eleven o'clock. By two hours after
noon, be ready to beat to quarters!
The officer bowed and retired, and soon after, the
men were seen taking down their boarding-pikes from
the masts and booms, with which they were circled,
and their basket-handled swords, which were stuck
round the capstan and long-boat, and their short,
Vol. II. 8
broad daggers, resembling the bowie-knife; and
these they proceeded to grind and polish,
preparations
dismal enough for their end, but engaged in with
the more alacrity by the men, for the grog they had
just drunk.
Fitzvassal, while this was going on, passed
frequently
before the sailors, with a view to observe their
faces, and discover the state of their dispositions.
The cheerfulness with which they went to work
assured
him that he had nothing to fear from any
dis-affection
among them. Shot of every description,
from chain to canister, was now brought on deck,
and piled up in pyramids by the guns which were
unlashed, carefully sponged and cleared, for
immediate
use. New match was also got ready, and all the
various implements of naval warfare adjusted as
they should be, preparatory to an engagement.
In the mean time, the Revenue-Cutter, crowding
all her canvas, bore down hard upon the Dolphin,
with the determination of coming up with her, if
practicable. Sir Edmund Andros was sufficiently
aware of the posture of public affairs, to keep himself
ever vigilant for the interest of the Crown, and he
had received implicit orders, in dispatches by the
Rose frigate, to carefully examine every vessel that
came into Boston or New-York harbors, about which
the slightest suspicion could be surmised.
Fitzvassal
was therefore wrong in his conjecture, that
Classon
had betrayed him; for, however bound that
minion
of power might have been to spy out the
movements
of the people and report to his master, he was
too fond of money, and was too much dazzled by the
bright anticipations his step-son had awakened, to
throw away an opportunity of amassing wealth, that
only required his silence to secure it.
The truth was, the Dolphin first fell under the
suspicion of Sir Edmund after she had removed to
Nahant. While there, she had been reported by a
fisherman well affected to the Crown; and the mere
circumstance of her lying idly in a place that could
furnish no commercial advantage, might have been
regarded as sufficient warrant for an unfavorable
judgment respecting her. Besides, the Buccaneers
were then ravaging the seas in all directions, and as
some of the most reputable moneyed men of the day
were suspected of co-operating in a source of profit,
which at that time was, to say the least, considered
as respectable as a monopoly of the necessaries of life
is now, Sir Edmund Andros was apprehensive that
some of these adventurers might be enlisted in a
cause, which however improbable in its result, it
could not be disguised was likely to disturb his quiet.
Impelled by these views, the Revenue-Cutter was
dispatched in pursuit of the Dolphin, though the
Governor was wholly unconscious of the real enemy
he had to deal with. She was directed to board the
suspected schooner, and if, on an examination of her
papers, or from other appearances, sufficient ground
should be afforded for the act, to bring her into
Boston
to be dealt with according to law.
Under these circumstances, when the schooner
was seen to weigh anchor and run away, no doubt
was left in the mind of the Cutter's officers, that there
had been just and probable cause to distrust her
friendship; and in accordance with this opinion, she
had been fired upon, as soon as she was supposed to
be within reach of the shot. On boarding the boat
which contained Horace Seymour and Grace, no
satisfaction whatever confirmatory of this belief could
be obtained, for as neither of them imagined that the
Dolphin was any other than a vessel employed by
the patriots, so the obligations they were under to
its commander, prevented them from giving any
satisfactory
information to the government Cutter.
Both vessels had now run down about twenty
miles below Boston Light-House, and still kept the
same relative distance from each other; for whenever
Fitzvassal, who had relieved the pilot, found that he
was gaining too much on his adversary, he brought his
vessel nearer to the wind, and backed his topsails, to
give the Cutter an opportunity of coming up.
The superiority of the Buccaneer over the
Revenue-Cutter
,
determined the former to avail himself of
the advantage, and instead of coming immediately to
close quarters, to keep up a running fire on her at
long shot, and thus disable her, without affording an
opportunity for retaliation. With this end in view,
all hands were piped to quarters. Orders were given
to fire only the long gun, which, as the
government-vessel
came within hitting distance, kept up an
incessant
fire upon her.
The position of the Cutter was such, that only
her bow-chasers could be used without wearing
round, and to do this, materially diminished her
headway; in fact, she had already lost ground by
firing her bow-guns, but as these invariably fell short
of the schooner, she soon relinquished their use
altogether
.
Still, however, the chase continued with the
greatest
assiduity on the part of the Cutter, which not
only crowded her studding-sails, and thrust out her
sweeps, but as long as she continued in moderate
soundings, sent her kedge ahead in the boats,
whenever
the breeze died away enough to require it, and
was thus run on by the crew to some advantage.
But with every auxiliary which maritime ingenuity
could suggest, the Dolphin continued to keep out of
hitting distance from the Cutter, while her own
long-gun
was constantly annoying her pursuer's rigging.
This sort of warfare was exceedingly amusing to
the crew of the Buccaneer, which sent up three
cheers whenever one of their shot told on the other;
yet they frequently begged for permission to come to
yard-arm and yard-arm, a mode of fighting better
suited to their temper.
Their commander, nevertheless, kept their ferocious
8*
disposition under, by assuring them that he had
carved out work enough for them to do at close
quarters
in the future, but that his intention for the
present
was only to riddle the Revenue-Cutter, and do
her business for her, without himself losing a spar or
a man.
Several shots had already passed through the
fore-topsail
of the Cutter, that vainly exerted itself to get
within reach of the Dolphin, and one, as she had
turned to bring her other guns to bear, had struck
her on her weather-beam, doing considerable
mischief
.
They had now run full thirty-five miles from
Boston
,
when the Revenue-Cutter, having had her sails
materially damaged, without conveying a single shot
to her opponent, became satisfied that it was vain to
think of overtaking her and bringing her into action;
and accordingly she tacked about with the intention
of relinquishing the chase entirely.
As soon as Fitzvassal understood the intention of
his enemy, he put the schooner about, and amidst
the vociferous shouts of the crew, in his turn
commenced
the chase. He was careful, however, not to
follow long in her wake; but bearing several points
away from her course, he continued to keep
constantly
in such a relative position as to bring several
guns to bear on her at once, though his long gun
was the only one that did essential service.
Under the galling fire of her adversary, whose
superiority
in every respect was too lately discovered,
the Revenue-Cutter found herself in the most painful
situation. On determining to abandon the chase,
she had not entertained the idea that the pursued
would become the pursuer; for she regarded the
schooner as little better than a pirate that stood in
apprehension of justice, and would be glad of a
chance of getting away from her; but when she
perceived
the Dolphin put about, the officers could not
help feeling anxious for the result. Most willingly
would they have come within carronading distance,
or to close quarters, but they soon found that their
annoyer was resolved to do neither. All they could
do was to run away as fast as possible, or to bear
down on their adversary, for the chance of a close
fight.
The last part of the alternative was finally
adopted
,
and the sails were trimmed accordingly; but the
moment Fitzvassal discovered the design, he shaped
his course so as to thwart its accomplishment, and
the Dolphin flew away from her like a bird.
At this moment, a shot from the long twenty-four
told on the foremast of the Revenue-Cutter, and it
came with a crash to the deck. The crew of the
Buccaneer immediately gave nine cheers, and the
schooner wore round again on her adversary. The
government-vessel being half dismantled, was of
course perfectly unmanageable, and remained at the
mercy of her enemy. The Buccaneer pursued his
advantage, and running up under her stern, poured
a heavy broadside, raking her fore-and-aft with
canister
,
grape, and round-shot, that at the first discharge
brought down the mainmast, and deluged her deck
with blood.
This destructive task was the work of a minute, and
the Dolphin then filled away, and stood off to observe
the desolation she had accomplished. The screams
and groans of the dying were audible on the deck of
the Buccaneer, and though there remained no flag
for the vanquished to strike, it was evident enough
that there was a disposition on board to surrender.
Accordingly, a quarter-boat was lowered, and
Wilson
was ordered, with twelve men, to go aboard and
take possession of the prize.
On coming along-side and ascending the
gangway
ladder, it was found that not an officer or man,
of the small number on board the Revenue-Cutter,
had been left unharmed. Out of eighteen persons,
ten had been killed, two others mortally wounded,
and the remaining six hurt, either by splinters, by
the falling spars, or by shot: on making which
discovery
,
Wilson sent four men, with a petty-officer,
to report the result to his commander.
As soon as Fitzvassal understood the disastrous
condition
of the Revenue-Cutter, he gave immediate
orders
to bring the wounded men aboard his own vessel,
though it was with great difficulty he could provide
them with accommodations. The Cutter was then
stripped of every thing valuable and useful, her guns
brought aboard the Dolphin, with all the ammunition
she had in her magazine. She was then scuttled, and
left to go down at her leisure.
The humanity that the Buccaneer had shown to
the wounded men, met with little sympathy from his
crew. They almost to a man cursed what they
called his folly, in lumbering the vessel with the
half-dead
carcases of an enemy, and would gladly have
heaved every one of them overboard, if they had had
their own way. They felt that they were pirates,
and though they were differently regarded in those
days than pirates are now, they were conscious of
having lost caste; and they were already prepared to
increase their crimes to any extent which any
emergency
might demand. Some of them, indeed, had
been old offenders, whose hands were dyed in blood,
and the contamination of their reckless minds and
communications had spread widely among the crew
of the Dolphin. But the austere discipline of
Fitzvassal
kept them constantly in check, and there was
only one of them who had the audacity to show his
resentment on this occasion.
This fellow was a large mulatto, a practical
instance
of that unnatural amalgamation which has so
many advocates among the deluded of our day. Of
all bad men, this race is the worst, and the annals of
crime would show that they are the most heartless,
stubborn, and depraved characters that are to be met
with on the purlieus of human society. The man
referred to passed among the sailors under the name
of Bloody Dick, for the atrocities of which he used
to boast, and for his known cruelty whenever he had
an opportunity of exercising it.
As this scoundrel passed by the wounded men who
were lying on the deck, he gave one of them, who
was even then almost dead, a violent kick on the
head, accompanied by the most
disgusting
blasphemies
,
swearing that he had better go to hell at once,
and be damned.
The miserable sufferer gave one groan, and
expired
.
This fiendish conduct, however, did not escape the
eye of the commander.
Lash that fellow to the foremast! exclaimed he;
and the order was immediately executed.
Now give him thirty-nine lashes on his bare back
with the cat, and report to me when it is over!
The fellow's screams and curses might have been
heard for miles, as the knotted, nine-thonged whip
scourged his tawny shoulders, without producing
any other effect upon him but pain, malice, and the
thirst of revenge.
This part of his punishment being executed, and
a report thereof made to the commander, he gave
orders that he should be keel-hauled.
All hands a-hoy! exclaimed the boatswain,
taking
up the order that had been passed to him, all
hands a-hoy, to keel-haul Bloody Dick!
Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah! vociferated the
sailors in reply, who were rejoiced at the opportunity
of paying back to the man they detested, a part of
the debt of gratitude they owed him for his repeated
annoyance.
Bloody Dick was then brought a midships,
stripped
to his skin, and his hands and feet bound closely
together. A long rope was next fastened under his
arms, and one end of it passed from larboard to
starboard
,
under the bottom of the schooner. A dozen
men were then ordered to take hold of each end of
the rope, while others were commanded to heave the
fellow overboard.
The relentless monster in vain struggled against
the further punishment that was about to be inflicted
on him;in vain he begged, cursed, implored,
blasphemed
,
and entreated by turns;he was instantly
hurled into the deep on the larboard side of the
vessel
,
when immediately those on the starboard
commenced
the operation of keel-hauling.
Hand-over-hand
,
they drew the rope over the gunwale, till they
brought Bloody Dick to the surface of the water. As
soon as they perceived that he had taken a mouthful
of air, they all at once let go, when those on the
larboard
side, in their turn, began to haul in. But the
moment the fellow had a breath of air, down he went
again, and was hauled up on the opposite side; this
operation was repeated, till he was ordered to be
taken aboard by the boatswain.
Exhausted, spiritless, and for the time subdued,
Bloody Dick lay for a short space panting on the
deck, disgorging the large draughts of salt water
which he had reluctantly swallowed in his
journeyings
under the keel, till at length gaining strength,
he sprang upon his feet, and seizing a knife from the
belt of a sailor near him, rushed upon Fitzvassal like
a tiger leaping from a jungle. The suddenness of
the attack might have been fatal to the commander,
had it not been for the faithful Cato, who, as he saw
the movement, interposed by tripping up the sturdy
mulatto, who thundered down, Ajax like in his fall,
prostrate on the deck.
To the yard-arm with that murderous scoundrel!
to the yard-arm with him, instantly! exclaimed the
commander. He has sent one innocent man to
eternity within an hour, and he would murder every
man aboard if he could;away with him! hang
him up instantly to the yard-arm!
The order was no sooner given than measures
were taken to put it in immediate execution. The
fellow was again seized, and securely pinioned. A
rope from the end of the fore-yard was then passed
down, and a noose made with a hangman's knot
thrown over the fellow's neck, and drawn so as not
to slip off. He was then ordered to stand on a
loaded
cannon, while the funeral service was read to
him.
While this ceremony was going on, all his evil
passions seemed to be working simultaneously, and
instead of listening to the lecture that was intended
for his comfort, he burst out with repeated
maledictions
on all that bore the human form, bitterly
lamenting
that he could not live to wreak his
vengeance
on Fitzvassal.
Never mind! he cried, casting a terrific look at
his commander; Never mind!
your
turn comes
next, and I will torture you to my heart's content,
when we meet on common ground among the
damned
!
As he spoke, the match was applied to the cannon,
which bellowing out its thunder, enveloped that part
of the schooner in smoke, which, as the wind drove
it away, discovered to the spectators of the scene the
last agonizing contortions of the dying malefactor.
Vol. II. 9
CHAPTER XV.
A little, round, fat, oily man of God.
Castle of Indolence
.
And who do you think they were?
The butcher, the baker,
The candle-stick-maker,
And all are gone to the Fair.
Mother Goose's Melodies
.
Then 't were well,
It were done quickly.
Macbeth
.
Let
us turn for a while to consider the progress
of events in the metropolis of New-England. Unawed
by the demonstrations of popular feeling which had
been so violently awakened, Sir Edmund Andros
continued to exercise the same despotic sway over
the people of Massachusetts, who had heretofore
submitted so meekly to the arbitrary exactions of
government, that the latter began to imagine it had
a right to stretch its prerogative without limits. Such
has ever been the history of the growth of power.
That which is yielded to from necessity, or
submitted
to with patience, is afterwards claimed as a right,
and enforced by authority; so that, in the course of
moral transference, the oppressor and the oppressed
change their relative position of obligor and
obligee
,
and are driven, on the one hand, to despotic
assumption
,
and on the other, to that last resort for the
recovery of natural and civil rights, which
terminates
in a violent and sudden revolution.
The well-established principle, that whenever the
balance of power is lost between the executive and
the legislative branches of government, there is a
tendency
to a complete absorption of power in the
scale where it already preponderates, is as true, when
predicated of the people, under representative forms,
as when affirmed of the legislature: so that the
experience
of the past, (other things being equal,) is a
sure guide for the future. But in our day, the
difficulties
that present themselves to the political
philosopher
,
arise from the failure of the
ceteris paribus,
a condition which is too often overlooked in their
predictions. So true is this, that the most superficial
observer might remark the almost utter want of
parallel
tendencies, between apparently similar acts of
executive or popular outrage in our times and in
those of antiquity; and it fully accounts for the
failure
of the Burkes and Pitts, to say nothing as to
other eminent men of still later times, in those reaches
of political understanding, which, based on the
maxims of the past, proposed as their object the
happiness
of the human family. The great evil of our
day is well-intending ignorance, and till there be a
scheme of public instruction, studied out, developed,
and matured, by which a true and comprehensive
cyclopedia of morals and politics may be taught, let
not the most sanguine expectant of human progress
anticipate any thing better, or more solid, than the
adoption of crude theories and monstrous principles.
When it is thought to be Machiavelian to deny
that a mere moral principle, apart from all other
circumstances
or considerations, should be and is a
sound political one;when we see the most puerile
dogmas asserted and maintained, by authoritative
persons whose productions spread far and wide, and
are taken up by millions as indisputable truth; it is
time for others, who stand on the watch-towers of
Liberty, to be awake and to sound the alarm through
the nation. It is ignorance, and nothing but
ignorance
,
that ruins nations; and the worst of it is, that
this same ignorance, which is so pestilential and
subversive
of human happiness, is found among those
very men who are regarded as the lights and
examples
of the land. It is not so much the ignorance of
the people, as that of their leaders, which is to be
deprecated
.
The people are generally well-informed,
but they cannot be expected, all of them, to be
philosophers
.
They have other work to do than to
analyze
knotty questions, and untangle abstruse
speculations
;but
it is a crying shame that they should
have no better teachers, than those who are but the
mere exudations of bloated universities, and who
believe
that a mass of unavailable Greek, Latin, and
Hebrew learning, is enough to qualify a man to
judge of the greatest questions of government.
There is a better knowledge, a wider and more
grasping attainment than these, and that is a
thorough
and well-digested understanding of Human
Relations.
The leading men of Boston had for a long time
comprehended the exact relation which the people
bore to the Sovereign and his deputy in
Massachusetts
;
they were fully conscious of having yielded
too readily in the outset, and of having continued to
yield too tamely to the unjust demands of power,
and to the insolence of office, and their brows burnt
with shame and indignation when they contrasted
their present condition with that it had been a few
years before, when they enjoyed untarnished, from
their fathers, the highest liberty of which a people
could boast. But they were men of moderation and
prudence, and though they knew well enough that
a revolution was inevitable, should the Sovereign see
fit to withhold that protection which his colonial
subjects
demanded, they cherished the fond anticipation
that he would yet be brought to terms, and thus end
all difficulties which existed between them.
The last act of tyranny on the part of the
government
,
in attempting to impress the free citizens of
9*
Boston, put a final stop to all forbearance among the
people. When the spirit of licentiousness is once
let loose, there is no prescribing limits to its progress.
The mob that wreaked its vengeance on Classon, it
is true, seemed satisfied for the time, but its
indignation
on that memorable occasion, was but the smoke
of the volcano, preparatory to a dreadful eruption.
Frequent meetings were held, and public
demonstrations
made, that indicated a determination, on the
part of the people, to put down, once and forever, the
high-handed usurpations of the government.
Resolutions were passed denouncing Sir Edmund
Andros and his coadjutors, as enemies to the country,
and as conspirators against the public peace; and the
effigy of the Governor was burnt on the Common
amidst the hisses and execrations of the multitude.
The effigy of the Pope was also fixed on a staging,
in company with a figure of the devil, horned and
tailed according to book, and after being dragged
round the town, was with his companion consigned
to the devouring element. Placards were pasted
up against the walls, threatening all persons with
popular
resentment who gave any assistance to the
Governor in the execution of his illegal acts, and
warning certain individuals who were obnoxious to
the charge of being informers, to look out for their
personal safety.
Notwithstanding these portentous appearances, Sir
Edmund Andros, secure in the possession of a
well-armed
troop, issued his edicts the same as ever, and
within a week after the affair of the Press-gang,
ordered
a freeman to be publicly whipt for not
paying
,
as he declared, sufficient respect to his authority.
But the man was rescued from the ignominious
punishment
,
and that night the Governor had his
windows
broken by the mob.
Nor were matters in a more tranquil condition in
the neighboring country-towns. The same spirit was
abroad in Braintree, Dedham, Roxbury, Dorchester,
Watertown, and generally throughout the colony;
but more particularly in those villages more
immediately
bordering on Boston. Watertown was one of
the foremost places of patriotic opposition, and was
noted in those days for the semi-annual Fair which
was held in its precincts. On such occasions, the
country people from the surrounding towns, and
large numbers from Boston, and even Salem,
assembled
,
as well as many friendly Indians, where
produce
of all sorts was exposed for sale or barter, cattle
offered for market, and such manufactured articles
as brooms, buckets, and farming utensils, were
exhibited
for purchase. Nor was the better part of
creation
behind-hand in contributing their quota of
hose, quilts, and baby-linen, to make up a complete
assortment of goods for the Fair.
Though the Committee of Safety, of which Mr.
Temple was the chairman, were contented to await
the natural course of events which they observed in
the way of development; trusting, in some degree, to
the awakened justice of the Sovereign, but by all means
confiding in the overruling hand of Providence,
which they knew would not leave them utterly, but in
its own good time bring them out of their Egyptian
bondage,there were some more turbulent and
restless
spirits, among whom were Randal and Bagnal,
who being cramped by the jealous watchfulness of
the Governor and his minions, and restricted in the
full swing of their resentment at the nefarious
measures
of his administration, looked forward to the Fair
at Watertown, as a fitting opportunity for raising the
standard of rebellion, or at least for concerting
measures
toward its accomplishment: for revels of all sorts
were indulged in at the Fair, which, within the last
eight years, had even become somewhat licentious;
and amidst the diversions and entertainments of one
kind and another, they expected to find a convenient
subterfuge for their schemes, and to rally around the
pine-tree banner a sufficient number of good men
and true, to wrest the sceptre from the hands of
tyranny
,
and trample its ensign in the dust.
The people in the country towns were quite as
restless under the galling sway of Sir Edmund
Andros
,
as those of Boston, though they did not feel all
its effects so immediately; but their sufferings were
positive and intolerable, and the exaggerated accounts
of what the metropolitans endured, excited their
warmest sympathy, and prepared them to co-operate
in any measure which they could set on foot, to bring
about a more desirable state of affairs. Hardly any
thing else was talked of but the latest news from
Boston
,
and public expectation was on tiptoe, whenever
a new-comer appeared from the metropolis, to learn
whether any fresh intelligence had been brought from
the mother country, or what new views were
entertained
by the people of Boston.
The ferry to Lechmere Point was crowded with
passengers, who from the early dawn, were
thronging
to go to Watertown, and join in the hilarities of
the Fair. A motley crowd had collected in one of
the boats which had just pushed off from the wharf,
at the west end of Boston, and were now crossing
Charles River on their way to Cambridge. Among
the passengers were Randal the anchor-smith, and
Bagnal the caulk-and-graver, besides four Catholic
priests, who never failed to be present where there
was a prospect of a gathering together, as their
especial
commission was to spy out the disposition of the
people, and insinuate the principles of the monarch,
with all the zeal of Papal missionaries.
One of this same brotherhood, a little, round, fat,
oily man, as Thompson has it, who had a roguish
twinkle in his eye, particularly engaged the
attention
of the anchor-smith, who, with his companion,
generally preserved a profound silence during the
passage, except to make some common-place remark
about the agreeable weather which they were so
fortunate
to have for the Fair, or touching the pleasant
scenery which opened on all sides, as the boat
receding
from the shores of the metropolis, made her
rapid course toward the opposite ones of Cambridge.
Father John, for this appeared to be the name of
the personage alluded to, was a man evidently about
forty years of age. He was rather short in stature,
but did not seem to be suffering at all under
mortifications
of the flesh. His countenance was fresh and
ruddy, indications of health which would have been
unaccountable on any known principles of total
abstinence
.
The other priests were good-looking,
intelligent
men, like himself; having every stamp
about them of well-informed citizens of the world.
They were all dressed alike, having on a close, black
scull-cap, a long, black frock of broad-cloth, and a
rosary, terminating with a cross suspended over the
neck.
That's a goodly looking college enough, Father
John, remarked one of the priests to the more
conspicuous
man he addressed, but its a pity that holy
mother church has n't the managing of it.
A thousand pities, truly; replied Father John,
but thanks to the blessed Virgin, he continued,
crossing himself, there is a fair prospect of its
being purged from its iniquities, before long.
As they spoke, their eyes were turned in the
direction
of Old Harvard, which even then made a
most respectable appearance at a distance.
I pity the poor boys, resumed Father John,
who are obliged to submit to the fooleries of that
puritanical toy-shop. When the teachers are asses,
what can you expect of the taught?
And the reverend gentleman chuckled till his
dewlap
quivered with the convulsion.
Did you ever attend one of their exhibitions?
he further inquired, addressing himself to each of his
pious brethren, by turns.
But they all declared that they never had enjoyed
that extraordinary pleasure; whereupon their
interrogater
proceeded.
It would be worth your while to attend one of
them, then; for you never heard such a whining set
of puppies in your life. Why, their cant oratory is
proverbial throughout the land. You can point out
a graduate of that College as far as you can hear his
voice, to say the least of it. Jesu! what eloquence!
And then the Professor that presides over that
department
you
ought to him read!ha! ha! ha!
And the jolly confessor commenced discoursing in
imitation of the man he ridiculed, till his companions
burst out into immoderate laughter at the
exhibition
.
Randal, though he had never had the disadvantage
of a college education, with the vain imagination
too often resulting therefrom, that he was all the
better for it, felt nevertheless extremely nettled, as
most Bostonians do, when any sarcasm is hurled
against the venerable University of their neighbor
Cambridge; and he accordingly buckled on his
armor
in her defence.
It may be very amusing to you, said he,
addressing
himself to the reverend brotherhood, to be
running
a tilt against Harvard College; but I fancy that
a little of her learning, after all, would n't do either
of you any harm.
At this rebuke, Father John drew down the
corners
of his mouth, suppressing the relaxation of his
muscles as well as he could, and replied:
No doubt, friend, your Alma Mater, (for I suppose
you are a fair specimen of her nurslings,) has
learning
enough cased up in the brick and mortar
yonder
;
but I must be permitted to say, that she has a
very strange way of showing it.
As an endorsement of this sally, the brethren were
contented to laugh only with their eyes, while Randal's
wrath began to wax hot in the encounter. Bagnal,
however, who saw the storm brewing, took his friend
aside, and entreated him to have a care how he
precipitated
a quarrel with those men on the very day
when it was most expedient to lull their suspicions
to sleep, and he succeeded at last in accomplishing
his object; Randal declaring, that by all that was
true and holy, he would punish the rascal yet for his
impertinence.
The boat at length arrived at the landing place in
Cambridge, and the passengers disembarking,
proceeded
on their way to Watertown. Hundreds of
others on foot and in carts, were on the road
travelling
to the same place of destination. After passing
Harvard College, the road to Watertown was found
to be thickly speckled with itinerants of both sexes,
and of all ages; among whom were a number of
students
in their square caps, who having a holiday on
the occasion, were according to custom, preparing to
make the most of it in the promised revels of
Watertown
.
A fine day this, for the Fair! exclaimed
Randal
,
addressing himself to a student who was
walking
alone, with an air of deep abstraction, apparently
unconscious of the bustling scene around him.
Very! was the laconic reply of the young man,
who paid no further attention to the salutation than
to lift his eyes for a moment on the speaker.
You are going to the Fair, I suppose!
persevered
Randal, who was not wholly destitute of the
characteristic
curiosity of his countrymen, and who was
particularly desirous of making some interest among
the students of Cambridge, for reasons best known to
himself.
Yes! returned the youth, with a sigh, as if he
were reluctantly forced into a colloquy, which he
would willingly have avoided; Yes! I am going
to the Fair, as you rightly conjecture;one might
as well follow the multitudethough not to do evil.
There is more danger of evil, replied Randal,
Vol. II. 10
whose political feelings were ever uppermost, from
the
few,
than the
many,
in these troublesome times.
The student looked at him earnestly for a few
seconds
,
and then casting his eyes on the earth,
continued
to walk on in silence.
The anchor-smith, unwilling to obtrude himself too
much on the young man, made a few passing remarks
to his friend Bagnal, who was walking beside him,
and at the same time narrowly observed the stranger
who had engaged his attention.
He was a young man about twenty years old,
judging from appearance, remarkably tall and
handsome
,
like the finest specimen of the South
Carolina
gentlemen. His eyes and hair were very black,
his nose was straight and beautifully moulded, his
mouth finely cut and filled with strong, regular, and
brilliantly white teeth. There was an expression of
deep thoughtfulness in his countenance, and there
were, young as he seemed to be, lines of marked
character clearly imprinted there.
After walking a minute or two in silence, only
interrupted
by an occasional observation on the
individuals
of the living panorama, Randal ventured to
resume the conversation.
You will pardon me, I hope, said he, but like
every son of New England, I feel a deep interest in
the welfare of old Harvard College; have you heard
any tidings lately of the President?
You mean of the
Rector,
replied the student.
True; I had forgotten, the apellation
President
did not sound agreeably in the ears of the Jesuits;
so they substituted
Rector
. Have you received any
intelligence from your Rector lately?
The student gave a glance, at once penetrating
and inquiring, towards the anchor-smith, and then
replied
:
From a remark you made, Sir, a few moments
since, I should take you for a patriot; and to do you
justice, your face and tone of voice confirm my
judgment
;
but there are so many false men abroad, that
it becomes us to be careful how we place too much
confidence in strangers. Will you do me the favor
to tell me your name?and you
yours,
Sir, if you
please! said he, turning his eyes on Bagnal;
my
name is Harding, and I am a tutor in the college.
My name is Randal, the anchor-smith of
Boston
.
And mine is Bagnal, the caulk-and-graver, of the
same place.
I know you both, resumed Harding, you are
alike dear to the people and odious to the government.
Your servant, gentlemen, I am glad to meet you!
and so saying, he gave them both a cordial shake of
the hand.
And now, said he, turning to Randal; I can
answer your question freely and fully, without fear
of being entrapped by spies. We had a letter from
the Rector yesterday, by the way of New-York.
What news did it communicate from
England
?
The most melancholy, and yet the most
cheering
.
I can't conjecture, said Bagnal, how that can
be.
But
I
can, joined Randal, who had a deeper
insight
into the state of public affairs than his patriotic
friend. The upshot of it is,I'll lay my life on its
correctness,the King has refused to restore the
charter
to Massachusetts, and the people of England are
in rebellion.
You are right, replied Harding, you are almost
perfectly right in what you imagine to be the condition
of things. Dr. Mather writes, that the King has
peremptorily
and finally refused to restore the charter,
which was so wrongfully taken from the people.
He says that there is not the shadow of a hope that
the petition, with which he was commissioned, will
ever be listened to while James the second is sitting
on the throne of England; but
There
is
a hope, interrupted Randal, whose
eagerness to hear the report of the Massachusetts
agent, made him anticipate its recital; there
is
a
hope that William of Orange will dispossess the
bigotted
Jesuit of his throne.
Ay; resumed Harding, not only a hope, but a
moral certainty of it. Dr. Mather tells us that
nearly
all the nobility are for William of Orange, and
that the prince will, before long, most inevitably
make a descent on England, and liberate the people
from the degrading bondage that now enslaves
them.
God grant it may be consummated, and that
quickly! replied Randal.
Amen! ejaculated the caulk-and-graver, amen,
with all my heart!
In the meantime, Mr. Harding, said Randal,
there is work to be done in old Massachusetts.
The people have all suffered extremely, added
Harding, and you in Boston, more than others. Do
you apprehend any violent measures from them?
All I
fear,
replied Randal, is that we shall be
too late. There
must
be a revolution, and that
immediately
.
I know, said Harding, that the present state of
things cannot possibly last long; but when William
of Orange comes to the throne, if such a merciful
event ever happens, your charter will be surely
restored
,
and all your rights re-established on a more
permanent basis then they were before their
invasion
.
I have, returned Randal, as much confidence
in the Stadtholder, as most menbut I know as
well as others that he is only a man after all, and that
the temptations of power are not to be trusted. The
people of Massachusetts must anticipate his
coronation
,
and take the adjusting of their affairs into their
10*
own hands. You may rely on it, this is the only
course that can be adopted, which can afford any
substantial hope of regaining our liberties. Let us
revolutionize the government ourselves, and then,
when William of Orange comes to the throne, he
will have nothing to do but to confirm what we
have done. He will not dare, while he has so many
conflicting interests to reconcile, as he must have for
a long time, I say he will not
dare
to undo what
the people of Massachusetts shall have achieved.
At all events, this is my view of the case, and, God
willing, I will do all in my power to see the thing
accomplished.
I agree with you fully, added Bagnal, we have
temporized long enough,it is now time to be up
and doing.
But how can you bring it about? inquired
Harding, who, though he in reality favored the
design
of his new friends, exercised extraordinary
circumspection
more from habit than premeditation.
That was the very object of our visit to
Watertown
this day, replied Bagnal, and it would seem
as if Providence had thrown you in our way, on
purpose
to assist us by your counsel; for I cannot be
mistaken in believing that you are not only an
uncompromising
friend of liberty, but that you would
readily and heartily lend your assistance in
accomplishing
one of the noblest achievements that ever
presented themselves to the enthusiatic martyrs of
freedom.
I should be too happy, rejoined Harding, to
see a peaceful change in the aspect of public
affairs
.
And you would lend a helping hand, would you
not, in a quiet sort of revolution?
Undoubtedly.
Enough! said Randal, there is a cavern in the
neigborhood of the lake.
I know it very well.
Meet us there at one o'clock, and if you can bring
with you two or three others on whom you can
depend
so
much the better. We are now
approaching
the encampment, and as we cannot converse with
freedom any longer, perhaps we would better
separate
.
Very well, replied the tutor, and making a
passing
salutation, he turned to leave his travelling
companion
,
to jog on by themselves.
Remember, at
one
precisely; said Randal.
Never doubt me, returned the tutor
farewell
!
So saying, the man of letters left his new
acquaintances
,
and was soon lost to their sight in the crowd.
That's a noble-hearted fellow, said Randal to
his friend, as Harding vanished from their
observation
;
or else I am no judge of character.
He certainly seems to be all that, replied
Bagnal
,
and I for one don't like him any the less for
his cautiousness. I think we shall find in the
college tutor a firm friend and a true patriot.
I incline to believe that all the professors, as well
as students, are favorable to the great cause. Men
of letters are generally on the popular side, when
things go wrong among governments.
Ay; added the other, universities and colleges
are the nurseries of republicans; or rather the
students
of those institutions are naturally freemen. I rather
think that college-governments have a tendency to
despotism.
And that is the very reason, replied Bagnal,
that those under their care manifest the republican
character. Hence, we so often see rebellion among
the students. Tyranny is odious in any formand
extremes have a perpetual tendency to meet.
Wherever you find a thorough despotism, you may
be sure to discover the finest spirit of democracy;
even though it may be buried under the guise of
submission
.
There is no doubt of the truth of all that, said
Randal; I should like to see, he continued, a
university conducted on a plan honorable both to
the teachers and the taught; one where there might
be full confidence between the government and the
students; for when there is so little of it as at the
present day, it is impossible to breed men in these
institutions
.
What can be more degrading, for
instance
,
than for a college-government to have a
trained company of
spies,
who take advantage of
the frankness of the students to betray them to
their masters? I was assured by a gentleman,
who had been a tutor in Harvard College, that
if I only knew the number of spies employed, and
the ways they set about entrapping the scholars, I
should be absolutely astonished. Even the poor
beneficiary
students are forced into this mean service,
and earn their pitiful education at the expense of
their honor and manhood. Now this is all wrong,
very wrong, and as much as I venerate the old walls
of Harvard, I cannot think of it without loathing. I
would not have a child of mine so contaminated for
all the Greek and Latin in the world. It is bad
enough for a young man to encounter the
temptations
of profligacy and licentiousness;yet there is
some
hope for the most abandoned sensualist. But
once break down a young man's honor and
self-respect
,
and it's all over with him. The elastic
principle
is then crushed out of him, and there is no
rebound
to virtue.
There is another lamentable abuse in
college-governments
,
added Bagnal, and I have seen
the bad effects of it in several instances. Boys of
sixteen or seventeen are too apt to be regarded by the
college as men whose moral and intellectual
characters
are already formed, and who are therefore
answerable
,
to the full extent of the term, for every
delinquency
and mal-practice of which they are guilty.
Now few men have any fixed principles before they
are five-and-twenty, and those characters which are
intended to expand the most largely, and endure the
longest, are the very ones which are the most
backward
in their development. Professors in colleges
never think of discriminating among the varieties of
character beneath their charge. A good memory
and a due share of the spirit of dissimulation, will
carry off the honors any day against all the genius
and sincerity that can be arrayed in opposition to
them. I pity the young man, who for some early
indiscretion has been subjected to the tender mercies
of these tyrants. There is little hope for him.
Perhaps
he has been grossly and maliciously slandered
by some evil-minded person, who has a grudge
against him, and then he is ground to the very dust,
perhaps turned out of college, or recommended `to
take up his connexion with it,' which amounts to an
expulsion;and then by an agreement among all
the colleges, he is shut out forever from the
privilege
of learning at any of these institutions. Is not
this tyranny of the worst kind?
It is, indeed, replied Randal, and I am very
sorry to add that it is, or was a very few years ago,
the truth told of old Harvard. I know an instance of
persecution within those walls, which is precisely
analogous to the one you suppose to be true. A
young man became hateful to one of the Professors,
for telling him the truth with too much boldness,
when positively required to do so. Without
intending
any disrespect, the student had an air of
impudence
,
and he gained the deadly hatred of the
Professor
,
who told him,
that if his class repeated the
indignities
they had offered to him as Professor, (for the
man was odious to the class, and
had
met with
repeated
indignity from them when assembled,)
he,
the student, should suffer for it. The class repeated
their insults, but though that student was known to
be innocent, he was made the scape-goat of the whole,
and sent away.
That Professor, exclaimed Bagnal, must have
had the heart of a rattle-snake. He committed
a
crime against the human soul,
and cannot be
forgiven
.
Let the galled jade wince! His retribution
has not come yet; but
it will come
.
The two friends had become so absorbed in the
topic that occupied their attention, that before they
were aware of it, they found themselves in the midst
of the preparations for the Fair. The spot selected
for the occasion was the rising ground on the
border
of the beautiful lake, which is the brightest
ornament
of Watertown, where, in more modern times,
Cambridge students were seduced away from their
books to enjoy the glories of nature, and the
abominations
of milk-punch, amidst the water-lilies and the
fruit trees, and the thousand beautiful et-ceteras of
that romantic region.
The majestic trees that shaded the grounds on that
part of the borders of the lake, had been thinned away
to allow a prospect of the tranquil water through a
dozen little vistas, beyond which were seen, on the
other side of the broad, silvery sheet, rich heaps of
foliage, liveried in all the gorgeous robes of autumn,
that threw their deep, broad shadows over the
intervening
waves.
A few rods from the lake, a large, commodious inn
had been many years erected, very nearly on the site
where the one now stands. It had several gables,
and on the side fronting the water, the roof, from a
high pitch, swept down in an angle of thirty degrees,
and was sustained by rough timbers of cedar, around
which the honey-suckle twined, and wooed the
humming-bird
to hover in its golden plumage, and suck
delicious nectar from its flowers.
Beneath the rude piazza of the inn, and under the
shade of several large oaks and elms which sheltered
it, were settles and benches, on which a number of
persons of various character were sitting, and
enjoying
the fine air of the season. The Indian-summer
had set in with all its gentle influences,that sweet
brief season, when autumn borrows the worn out
garniture of his predecessor, with its tempered sun,
dim atmosphere, and gentle breezes, that he may
enjoy
a few short hours of repose, before he yields the
sceptre to his hoary expectant.
Several of the tavern visiters were indulging
themselves with Dutch pipes and flip, talking politics,
scandal, and the infinite deal of nothingness that
affords
the ordinary motive power to the tongue. For
half a mile around were erected tents and booths, in
some of which different articles of traffic were
exposed
for sale, and in many others, liquor of all sorts and
colors tempted the thirsty customers to warm their
stomachs and scorch their brains.
These places were crowded with people who were
talking loudly, laughing, or singing as their fancy
moved them; and though it was not yet noon by two
hours, many gave unequivocal tokens of having taken
more frequent potations than became sober men even
at a festival.
On the open plain between the tavern and the lake,
which in the abominable nomenclature of modern
times is desecrated by the name of Fresh Pond,a
name that, instead of suggesting and being
appropriate
to the glorious beauty of the little inland sea, can
be associated with nothing but mud-turtles and
bull-frogs
,were
erected fandangos, as they termed them,
and swings, of different kinds, for both sexes to amuse
themselves with, by tossing through the air at the
imminent peril of their necks. Besides these, there
were two nine-pin alleys, and several smooth planks
for dancing.
This latter diversion was effected in the following
manner. An ordinary broad plank was placed on
the green, around which were collected a motley
Vol. II. 11
crowd of all who took pleasure in dancing, or in
seeing
others join in the amusement. The fiddler
struck up a jig, when some one of the inexpressible
gender invited a favorite piece of muslin to dance
with him. If she accepted the offer, he led her to
one end of the plank, and immediately took his own
station at the opposite one. They now began to
shuffle at each other, and stamp their feet with all
their might, nearing and retreating alternately; and
by the shouts of applause on one side or the other, it
was decided which excelled in the poetry of motion.
The one who stamped the louder was generally
admitted
to be the conqueror.
Randal, with his companion, was wandering
through the crowd, taking note of every thing he
saw, and conversing on the subject which so
completely
had the ascendency in his thoughts, when
his attention was directed to a tent, where all the
appointments
of intoxication were regularly prepared,
and several sorts of coarse viands arranged on
temporary
shelves to tempt the passer-by to patronise
mine host within.
The persons inside seemed to be much excited by
drinking, and were, as indicated by the tones of their
voices, on the brink of a quarrel. As the
newcomers
entered, Randal was surprised to recognise
Classon, who was engaged in a drunken debate with
Grummet, the man-o'-war's-man. They were both
highly excited, and it would have been difficult to
determine which was the more drunk of the two:
yet there was this difference between them. The
excitement
of Grummet seemed to have more
rationality
in it than the other's, for there were about Classon
evident signs of insanity. His eyes were glazed, and
they constantly looking askance as if he suspected
every body about him. His limbs twitched, as did
the muscles of his face, and he constantly rubbed
his hands, and sometimes gazed on them in a sort of
momentary abstraction. His legs seemed feeble, and
from a partial paralysis he appeared to be unable to
direct the movements of his body. These symptoms
are not the concomitants of common drunkenness.
There was a crisis approaching that had been
accelerated
by the terrible sufferings to which he had
been subjected by the populace.
Shiver my timbers! exclaimed Grummet, if I
had'nt rather be a hog in a long-boat than the
cabin-boy
of such a dd lubberly rascal as Sir Edmund
what's-you-call him? I know all about both o' you
you no need to be clapping your dirty rags on
my
cables to keep 'em from chafing;it's no go. I
should'nt like to have such a swim in the tar-kettle
as you had the other daynor toss about either to
the tune you danced to in the feather-bed.
Classon's face glowed with rage, and from
appearances
he would have struck the sailor had not
Randal
and the caulk-and-graver entered as they did.
How now, Classon, said the anchor-smith,
addressing
him, what's all the fuss about nowhey,
man?
Classon turned his fierce eyes upon him, and
muttering
something unintelligible to those standing by,
stamped on the ground, and then threw himself on a
seat with his back turned to the one who had
addressed
him.
The remains of the tar-and-feathering were still
visible about the man, who since that event had
wholly abandoned himself to drinking. Formerly,
he knew some sober moments, and was seldom drunk
before eleven o'clock. Now he made a business of
drinking. He kept the liquor at his bed-side, and
drank every half hour in the night. We said
that the remains of the tar-and-feathering were still
visible about him. His hair was in many places
knotted by the viscous substance, though it had been,
much of it, cut off; for wherever the tar touched the
hair, there it remained, in spite of all the detergents
that experience could suggest for its removal.
Brandy!bring me some brandy! exclaimed
he, turning to the boy that dealt out the hot,
manufactured
drink that passed under the name, brandy,
I say; do you hear?
The lad carried him a stiff glass of his favorite
drink, and handed it to him. Classon took it, with a
hand trembling like a withered bough in winter, and
turned away his head in silence and with loathing.
That which he believed to be necessary to his very
existence, was hateful to him as a scorpion. He no
longer drank for the pleasure it gave him: there was
no more intoxication for him than that of numbness
or insensibility, and this he
would
have, though it
was like swallowing the most disgusting medicine
every time the stimulant even approached his lips.
A lemon! exclaimed the half-paralytic, give
me a lemon, for God's sake!
A lemon was brought to him as he desired.
Classon took the fruit and biting a piece from the
same, looked at his brandy for a moment,and then
swallowed
it, as if it required a desperate purpose to do so.
He then partially sunk himself down, resting his hands
on his knees, gazing on the ground, and as it were
waiting
for the feeling of nausea to pass away from him.
This same process he was obliged to go through
every
day, till his stomach by repeated stimulants, about
noon became able to bear its poison without
revolting
.
There!
that's
over! exclaimed he, exultingly,
as if he had achieved a triumph; and as the alcohol
began again to stimulate, for a few brief minutes, his
prostrated system, he brightened up as a lamp will
do when the wick is nearly burnt out, and you shake
a little oil upon it.
You'r are a putty fellow, aint you? said
Grummet
,
looking upon him with unabated contempt,
there's another nail in your coffin, I guess, no how.
If you had given the money to your wife
11*
Damn
my wife! vociferated Classon, ye are
always talking about
her;
can't ye let the old
woman rest in her grave, but ye must be
everlastingly
gabbling about
her,
pray? and then walking up
to the liquor-stand, he helped himself to another
draught of brandy, which he tossed off with more
ease to himself than attended his previous potation.
Well! if you aint the greatest sand-bank
I
ever
saw, there are no whales at sea or sharks ashore
why, you suck the monkey like all the West-Indies!
exclaimed the big-whiskered sailor.
And it's none of your business if I do, replied
Classon, can't a fellow drink a dram now and then,
without having a quaker preacher at his elbow, hey?
you are the first sailor parson I ever heard preach up
temperance.
Blast temperance! exclaimed the
man-o'-war's-man
,
who preaches temperance here? I don't care
how much a man drinks, if he don't follow it as we
do the seas, for a living. I don't like to see a hand
always heaving at the windlass, nor always blowing
like a grampus or a puffing-pig. Who in the devil
said any thing about
temperance,
I want to know?
What did ye call me a sand-bank for, then?
inquired
Classon.
Because you are onethat's the reason. No you
aint, neither; you are a rum-hogshead, a tap-room
sponge that sucks up all the liquor that falls in its
way; sand-banks hold water, and that's more than
you could do, if you tried.
No more o' your slack! replied Classon, I'm
tired of it. And the flare-up of something like
pleasurable feeling, generated by the alcohol, had
already passed away, and left him moody and
irritable
.
Blazes! exclaimed Grummet, winking to
Randal
,
whom he recognized as one who had been
conspicuous
at the serving-up of Classon at the
rope-walk
;
blazes! you are getting mighty nice for a
mud-scow. P'rhaps you are tireder o'
tar-and-feathers
,
than o' my slackhey?
I'd slap your chops for a sixpence! growled the
broken-down wretch with a hiccough.
You'd try any thing for money, every body
knows; but if you were to bang your flipper against
my lumber-hole, you'd get served worse than
corned-fish-and-dip
,
I tell'e! P'rhaps you don't remember
the way I run into the wharf-rat of a truckman at
your old rum-hop below Tin-Pot. 'Cause, if you
don't, maybe I can put you in mind of it.
And with this, the sailor threw himself into the
ungainly attitude of a natural fighter, swinging
his body about, and leaving his guard open for a
skilful antagonist to hit him where he liked.
Classon, who had some skill in pugilism, saw his
advantage immediately, and without seeming to
prepare
himself for combat, helped himself to an
enormous
slug of brandy; and then, in a swaggering
way, as if he were careless of what the other said,
took hold of the lapels of his own coat, on each side,
between his thumb and fore-finger, and thus without
appearing to do so, put himself in an excellent
posture
of defence.
Unmindful of what the other intended, the sailor
continued to taunt Classon with the tar-and-feather
adventure, and finally concluded by saying:
A putty fellow
you!
damn you, you ought
to have gone down head first, instead of letting
your tender founder for want of caulking. Your
wife
The last word was hardly out of the
man-o'-war's-man's
mouth, before Classon hit him right above the
nose, a most powerful blow which he had rallied all
his force to inflict. The sailor went down like a
log, but he was on his legs again in an instant: yet
before he could reach his enemy, Classon hit away
left and right, and knocked him into the same
predicament
as before.
Had the publican been a man unexhausted by the
excesses to which he was addicted, he could, with the
skill he possessed, have easily vanquished
opponent
;
but he had completely debilitated himself by
the effort already made, and he began to puff and
blow like a high-pressure steam-engine.
It was Grummet's turn now. The sailor was no
more short-sighted than the publican to discover any
advantadge that might be offered by the chances of
war, and while his antagonist hit short and with
difficulty
,
he levelled a tremendous blow at him with
his left hand, which Classon, instead of stopping with
his right arm, purposely stopped with his left, a
man
uvre
that turned the sailor's body round so as to
expose
his left side wholly unprotected to a deadly right
handed hit, which, had it come from a muscular man,
would have carried away the sailor's ribs like
pipe-stems
.
As it was, it did but little harm to the man,
who promptly closed with his adversary, and after a
slight struggle, threw him to the ground.
The two master mechanics had looked on during
the brief time the contest was going on, and felt rather
disposed than otherwise, to see the odious tool of the
Governor get a hammering from the enraged tar; but
now that the fellow was down and out of wind, they
promptly interposed to save him from the drubbing
that he would inevitably have received but for their
aid.
Let the poor devil off, this time, pleaded Randal,
there's no use of beating him; he is n't worth the
time nor the trouble.
Just as you like, replied Grummet, but if there
was a stick o' sound timber about him, damn me if I
would'nt have bored a hole in it, that's all. Come,
let's splice the main-bracewill you suck the monkey
and tread up? it's grog time o' day, and I have n't
taken a horn since breakfast.
I don't generally do those kind of things,
answered
Randal, laughing, but
when
I do it is just
about this time. Come, Bagnal, what say you to a
rummer? I don't think that Jack here has
suggested
a bad thing, after all.
Well; said Bagnal, appearing to take the
matter
under consideration, while he clapped his hands,
and smacked his lips, well,if you will take a pipe
all round afterwardsand a walk in the woods, I
don't care if I
do
join you in a jorum of something
or other. Let's see, what shall it be?
I can't go your long walks, exclaimed
Grummet
,
but I will take a short trip with you for the
sake of the mess.
What shall it be, interrupted Bagnal, who
seemed to be getting out of patience, now the idea of
wetting his whistle had been forced upon him, what
shall it be?
Any thing for me, replied Grummet, I don't
care a splinter what it is, so long as it makes the
drunk come.
The two mechanics could n't help laughing at the
accommodating humor of the sailor, and they all
agreed at last that a mug of punch would be the most
legitimate thing they could take, and so they gave
directions to have it got ready, and in the interim sat
down in the tent.
Classon had already skulked away, after silently
helping himself at his old fountain, and growling out
a few curses at the sailor.
The punch was made ready, and the trio began to
pay their respects to it, without any ceremony.
Before
many minutes had passed, they finished a couple
of quarts, and lighting each a pipe, they sallied forth
from the tent to take a walk, as Bagnal had, for certain
reasons, a while before proposed.
It's not a bad idea, friend Bagnal, suggested the
anchor smith, as passing from the crowd they left,
they skirted the neighboring lake through the woods;
I say, it's not a bad iden, to get out of old Boston
now and then, to unbend a little, not a bad idea; is
it?
It's a confounded
good
one,
I
think, replied the
caulk-and-graver; for I must say, that we Boston
folks tie ourselves down rather too hard for our own
comfort. But the merchants who go to New-York to
unbend, as you call it; they unbend to some purpose.
They can do as they like in New-York. Every
man there attends to his own business, and is too
much occupied with what concerns himself, to
meddle
with other people's concerns; but in old Boston,
I don't know how it is, we are always thrusting our
thumbs between other men's grinders. I should like to
be with you in New-York for a while; I think we
could rub the dust off a littlehey?
I am just that way of thinking, rejoined the
anchor-smith
;
you were speaking o the merchant's
going
to New York. I see you understand a thing or
two on that subject. Is'nt it amusing to see the long,
pale faces on 'Chauge, who would no more think of
discounting a note for a fellow who takes a horn now
and then, than they would of taking a torch into a
powder-magazine
;to
see those persons who sit by the
hour in Insurance Offices, tearing young men's
characters
to pieceswho shave the very notes they have
refused to discount,to see those grave personages
transferred for a while to New-Yorkhammers and
and tongs! it would amuse you to see how they
blow it out!
Ha! ha! ha! exclaimed Bagnal, laughing, if
their wives and ministers could only see them! Oh
the saintswhat a precious set they are, to be sure!
Chatting in this manner, they walked along
together
,
Grummet all the while taking long whiffs of
smoke from his pipe and capering to the music of the
fiddles that sent their tones from the distance. They
had arrived at a shady arbor on the borders of the
lake, and here it was proposed by Randal, to rest
themselves. So they threw their bodies on the short
grass in the abandonment of luxurious indolence,
while the latter personage, addressing the sailor,
recommenced
the colloquy, as follows:
You jack-tars are the most independent set of
fellows in the world. You roam about from one
place to another, and fix your affections nowhere.
You have a sweet-heart in every port, and a home
wherever you happen to lie at anchor. The devil a
bit do you care who's governor, and if one country's
turned upside down, why, you have nothing to do but
to clap on your tarpaulin and bear away for another.
You're about right there, replied Grummet,
we don't care a cat-head what port we come to;
for that ere matter, it's all one to us, so long's the
grog's good and plenty on it, and the gals are kind
and handsome.
And wherefrom did you square away last?
inquired
the caulk-and-graver.
We cleared out of Portsmouth, last, answered
the sailor, blowing a cloud between himself and
his companions like the smoke of a swivel on
ship-board
.
If that's the case, said Randal, you have
jumped out of the frying-pan into the fire, so far as
escaping from any difficulties ashore, goes.
Who cares for difficulties ashore! exclaimed
Grummet, all I care about is what goes on aboard
ship; and yet, shiver my timbers, if I would'nt like to
see a little more tar-and-feathering going on in
Boston
,
that's all.
The two patriots had discovered enough in the
sturdy sailor to encourage their hopes that he might
be made instrumental in their projected enterprise,
and it was with a view of sounding the very depths
of his disposition, that they had proposed the walk,
which had led to the present conversation. He had
Vol. II. 12
now uttered a wish which gave them still greater
encouragement, for as he was inimical to Classon
the presumption seemed to be that he was inclined
towards the popular side of the two opposing
political
parties, if parties they could be called which
rallied
on one side the great mass of the community,
and was circumscribed on the other to the narrow
limits of executive patronage. The two friends were
therefore prompt to follow up the chain of
association
,
the first link of which had been suggested by
referring
to the tar-and-feathering of Classon.
Do tell us, exclaimed Bagnal, if you were
present at the Rope-walk, when the feathers flew
about so merrily, and when your friend Classon got
his winter clothes, without the help of the tailor?
Ay, ay; to be sure I was, replied the sailor,
laughing, and the fit wan't no purser's shirt on a
hand-spike neither. But I tell you what it is; though
old nosey got his clothes without the tailor, the
goose
had a hand in it, if she didn't, damme!
This witticism of the sailor's brought down all the
applause that could be expected from so small an
assembly
,
making a proper allowance for punch and
tobacco. Perhaps a worse joke would have been
well received from men who were predisposed for
the time to be entertained at all events.
Do you think the fellow deserved all he got on
that occasion? inquired Randal.
Deserved all he got? echoed the sailor. blast
my eyes! yes, and as much more as was left out.
Thirty-nine lashes of the cat-o'-nine-tails would
have been an improvement, though.
But you said, just now, you wished there had
been more of that same dressing done. Now, whom
would you like to see fixed out from the tar-kettle,
hey?
Why, if you must know, that blackguard
land-lubber
of a Governor. I don't know how it is, but
damme, if I don't hate him as I do the small-pox.
And yet some how I never saw him even hull-down
in my life.
What makes you hate him then? asked
Randal
.
Why, d'y see, every where I go, I hear some
dirty
thing about him, and that's enough, is n't it?
You are one of the hands of the Rose frigate!
said Randal, appearing hardly to heed the sailor's
inquiry
,
and as if a thought had suddenly flashed on
his mind which he wished to be satisfied.
Ay, ay, Sir, replied the sailor, I'm jest that are,
and I'm sorry to say as much. I'd like to get a
chance to slip the running bow-line they hove over
my figure-head one day at Wapping: but I'm
almost
affeared to desert.
Are you willing, pursued Randal, to bear
a hand in something that requires stout hands and
brave hearts, and which may and will better your
fortune
?
That
I am! exclaimed the sailor. I should
like to see the man that could say Bill
Grummet
ever lurched when it was his duty to go straight
ahead, or was ever affeared to go aloft in a gale. Show
us your chart, and blow me if I don't work your ship
for you like a nautilus.
We'll list you, then, my hearty, said Randal,
and your bounty shall come out of the Rose frigate,
if you like.
And I
do
like, replied Grummet; ever since I
got the last flogging aboard her, I swore by the salt
water goddesses, that I would have my revenge if I
could: and I came within the turn of a marline-spike
of shipping with as fine a fellow as ever you set eyes
on for a sailor, and then the Rose might have drifted
to the devil for all I would have cared about it.
Who was the sailor you speak of? inquired
Bagnal.
Oh, I can't tell you who he was, but I met him
one day down at Classon's boarding-house, when a
parcel of us got into a row, and the way he
copper-fastened
one chap of a truckman, would have done
your sight more good than eye-water. I met him
some time after, but he was busy about some other
matter and did n't say much to me, though I know
he wanted me to ship.
Did he say any thing about the government?
eagerly demanded Randal.
Why, I can't say exactly, replied the sailor, but
I recollect his saying over and over again that he
hated all tyranny both on sea and on land. I guess
he's no love for Sir Edmund Andros, from what he
said.
I'll bet a hundred pieces of eight, then,
exclaimed
Randal that I know the very man you have been
talking about. He's a fine-looking, handsome fellow,
hardly thirty years old, with light, curling hair, and
blue eyes.
Ay, ay, that's the man, replied Grummet.
Very officer-like in his manner?
Exactly; but there's no cold tar about him
there's nothing stiff in his manner. Why, bless ye, I
almost loved him, as soon as I set my eyes on him. I'd
give more to sail under such a man for nothing, than
to go to sea again in the Rose frigate at full
wages
.
Well! said Randal, rising, come along with
me; it's most time to be at the place of our
appointment
.
Come along with us, and we will let you
into a scheme, that will make your fortune and at the
same time gratify your revenge.
So saying they moved onward to the place of
rendezvous
which had been appointed, and arrived there
just at the minute named to Harding for their
meeting
.
It was situated near the borders of the lake, and
was accessible only by a narrow path through the
woods, which winding about, opened into several small
12*
avenues, and thus formed a sort of natural labyrinth.
There are no traces of the cave, we believe, at the
present day, but it was then known to many; yet from
its difficulty of access, and uninviting gloom, it was
seldom visited. It was not more than twenty feet long
and ten broad, and was lighted by a fissure that
extended
to the top, opening by a small orifice through
the earth.
As the three entered the cave, they discovered one
who had already arrived, but whom they could not at
first readily distinguish, on account of the comparative
darkness of the place. As soon, however, as they
became
accustomed to the gloom that reigned there,
Randal and his companion recognised the features of
Harding, with whom they exchanged the heartiest
salutations.
I was in hope, said the former, addressing the
man of letters, to have found some other
trust-worthy
persons in your company, for we have need of
strong hands and willing hearts, to accomplish the
work that remains for us to do.
I am sorry, replied Harding, that I was
unsuccessful
in my search for such charactersare there
to be no more of us at the meeting?
We are enough, exclaimed Randal, if we are
resolute in what we determine. We have brought
with us this man who is attached to the Rose frigate,
and I believe we may depend on him for signal
services
.
Ay; replied Grummet, hitching up his clothes,
I'm your boy for lending a lift if you have any thing
for me to do in the way of unloading a ship of
tyranny
.
The very thing we are after, said Bagnal.
Now let us proceed to business.
Done! exclaimed all at once.
I move then, exclaimed Randal, laughing, and
pointing to a large stone near the mouth of the cave,
I move that Mr. Harding take the chair, since the
object
of this meeting is well understood.
It being forthwith agreed upon that the nominee
should preside over the meeting, Harding seated
himself upon the designated place of honor, and
immediately
proceeded to recapitulate the substance of
their previous conversation. He then enlarged on
the present state of affairs, the public distress, and the
necessity of a change in the administration of the
government, and called on his friends to state with
perfect freedom their views in the emergency.
I am of opinion, said the anchor-smith, with
much warmth and animation, that a revolution
ought to be effected at once. It should be done
without
any delay.
And I agree with you entirely, added Bagnal,
the people are ripe for revolt, and it only requires
three or four of us to set them a-going, and the great
achievement is accomplished.
That's your sort, my hearties; I like the cut of
your jib, every one of you, if I don't blow me!
exclaimed
the sailor; only name what you would
have me do, and I'm your boy to the death.
We'll assign you an honorable post by and by,
said Harding, at present let us decide what course
to take in setting the wheel a-going.
I would advise, ventured Randal, that the
office
assigned to Grummet be on ship-board. Let
him speak to those of the crew on whom he can
depend
,
in order to gain them over to our object. We
shall want such aid, beyond doubt. For unless we
are disappointed in Captain Nix, there will not be
wanting an antagonist to the frigate, in case of an
outbreak among the people.
And who, pray, is Captain Nix? inquired
Harding
.
All that I can tell you of him, answered Randal,
is, that the Committee have secured the services of
such a man, who brought dispatches to them in his
armed schooner, from England. I have not seen
him, but he is regarded as a great acquisition to the
patriot ranks.
I'll bet a double-joe, exclaimed Grummet, that
the Captain you speak of is the same fine fellow we
saw at the tar-and-featheringand the one I drank
flip with at the Sea-Gull.
Like enoughlike enough,replied Randal,
musing,I should n't be at all surprised if it should
turn out to be the same. I hope it is he, for he is
just the kind of man we want.
Ay, that he is, added the sailor, and if he
brings his craft along side the Rose in the revolution,
I'll haul down the flag myself if I can. I'll train the
reefers for the fight. Leave me alone for that.
Mind now, resumed Randal, don't forget to
get things in readinessif you could contrive to
spike a few guns in a quiet way, there would be no
harm done,do you take?
Take!
Yes, I take with a vengeancelet Bill
Grummet alone for any job of the kind,he's no
marine in the business, I tell 'e.
But what's to be done in the metropolis?
inquired
Harding.
I am of opinion, answered Randal, that it
would be well for Bagnal to superintend the south
end of the town, while I take care of the north. Do
you, Mr. Harding, have charge of Beacon Hill, and
get ready a tar-barrel, which being fired on an
appointed
time, the north and south ends of the town
will rise at once and take possession of the fort,
Governor
and all. What think you of this?
All hands agreed that the plan was an excellent
one, and they were about to put a resolution to that
effect, when a shade passed over the orifice above the
cave, and a rustling was heard among the trees and
bushes that intertwined their leaves and branches
around it.
Hark! what noise was that? whispered
Bagnal
,
looking cautiously at his companions.
It was overhead, replied Harding, turning in
the direction whence the sound proceeded.
A rat in the locker! exclaimed the
man-o'-war's-man
,
let's have a lick at himwhat say
you?
Trap him if you can, by all means, replied
Randal, it's a spy on us, depend on it!
All hands on deck! heave a-hoy! yodled the
sailor, jumping an octave on concluding his
exclamation
.
As he half cried and half sang the words,
he sprang from the cave as if he had been suddenly
called from the forecastle in a squall, and, followed
by the others, he was soon at the orifice where the
disturbance had been made.
There he goes, the piratical scoundrelthere he
goes! cried the mariner at the top of his voice, at
the same time pointing at an object he had
discovered
gliding away through the trees,I see the
rascal's
sky-scrapers, though he's hull-down;heave to,
you lubberly rascal, heave to, or I'll give you a
broadside of cold iron, and the devil's blessing to
boot!heave to, you black-flag'd, bloody-bones of a
pirate!
And Grummet, suiting the action to the word,
made a speaking trumpet of his two hands, and
bellowing
lustily after the trespasser, ran towards him
with all his might, varying the above exclamations,
and seasoning them plentifully with oaths.
As the sailor had been the first to discover the
object
of the search, so he had got so far ahead of his
companions in the pursuit, dodging as he did among
the trees, that, for a time, they completely lost sight
of him, and could judge only of his whereabout by
the continued cry which he kept up during the
chase. Presently, from the following hurried
dialogue
,
they had reason to congratulate themselves on
the success of the pursuit, for Grummet, changing
his tone, cried out loudly enough to be distinctly
heard by them:
Douse your flag, you rascal! out boat, and bring
your papers abord;ah, you 're a putty fellow, aint
you?ho! ho! its one of
your
craft, is it?
Do for the love of all that is holy and righteous,
answered another voice from out the thick-entangled
wood in a tone of humble supplication, do for the love
of all that is holy and righteous, let me go!if you
are a christian and have a soul to be saved, let me
go!
And who in the devil's name are you?tell me
that, screamed Grummet in his ears, show us your
papers, or we'll hang you up at the yard-arm for a
good-for-nothing pirate as you arewhat sort of a
lugger are you, hey? can't you speak? take that,
then.
Mercy! mercy! shouted the affrighted man,
let me alone, and I will pay you well, and give you
the Holy Virgin's blessing into the bargain. For
mercy's sake, let me go!
You must be towed into port first, any how, and
stand trial for a prize, before we can let you slip your
cable and run out to sea in that manner.
Here are twenty pieces of eight, said the man,
imploringly, and a valuable gold watch,take them
and save me from those ruffians.
Ruffians,
pirate? exclaimed Grummet,
indignant
at the imputation cast upon his friends.
Gentlemen,
I mean, replied the other,
endeavoring
to amend what he found to be an unfortunate
expression
save
me from those gentlemen.
What gentlemen do you mean, you rascal?
demanded
the sailor.
Those who were with you in the cave;
returned
the man, so completely thrown off his guard by
the danger of his position as to be entrapped by his
own confessions.
Ha! ha! that's it, is it?so you
was
peeping
down the sky-light
was
you?
Guilty,
by the blazes!
and before the clerk asked you whether you was or no.
Come along, master pirate, with your black hull and
canvass! give us a grip at your hawserthis way!
helm hard a-portship a-hoya-hoy; there, hip!
And with this, Grummet emerged from the wood,
dragging after him a man who was soon presumed
to be a catholic priest by his habit. He was
accompanying
the sailor very reluctantly, and was
screening
his half-averted face with his left hand as they
drew nigh to the three individuals, who in the
meanwhile
stood still for them to come up.
They looked at each other, exchanging a smile of
half-surprise, mingled with satisfaction, that
Grummet
had succeeded in capturing a man, who, if he
really were guilty of eaves-dropping, would be a
formidable
witness against them. It was enough that
he was a catholic, had he overheard one half their
discourse in the cave, and it appeared to them
probable
that he had been dogging them since the
morning
,
and had become informed of all their intentions
and schemes.
Let us take a peep, if your reverence pleases,
said Randal, with an air of mock deference, under
your five-fingered domino;we would like to see to
which of the holy brotherhood we are indebted for
playing the blood-hound so dexterouslytake away
your holy fingers, if you please!
And accompanying this request, Randal
endeavored
to remove the priest's hand from his face, which
he nevertheless pertinaciously continued to hold
there from evident shame at being detected.
Douse your flipper, I saydo ye hear?
vociferated
Grummet; and while he spoke, he seized the
arm of the holy man at the elbow, and turned it
down, with a heave-ho! as if he were working at
the windlass. By mother-Carey and all her
chickens
!
Vol. II. 13
continued he, you're no weakling, any how;
I'd like to have you aboard ship to help weigh anchor.
You're a tough one for a chaplain; almost a match,
I guess, for our'n in the Rose!
Oh! ho! my saintly father John! drawled
Randal
as, taking a step backward, he gazed on the
bewildered
priest, it's
you,
is it? I did'nt expect to
have the honor of your reverence's company so soon
after parting with you this morning,I'm glad I've
found you, though. What news have you to
communicate
since we separated at the ferry, hey?
As Randal said this, he smiled sarcastically on the
priest, who with downcast eyes was telling his
beads mechanically, utterly at a loss what excuse to
make for the predicament in which he had thrust
himself.
Come, exclaimed Harding in a tone of stern
authority
,
can't you find your tongue?What were
you prowling about yonder wood for?speak, as
you value a whole skin; speak, Sir!
If you don't open that clam-shell of your'n and
warp,dn me, cried Grummet, if I won't
bring out your log-book any how.
And he was about to inflict some terrible
chastisement
on the priest, when the latter, breaking the
silence
produced by his confusion, at length spoke as
follows.
I am as innocent of what you think me guilty,
gentlemen, as a babe unborn is of the worst heresy in
the church. I could n't hear a word you said in the
cave, and had n't the slightest suspicion that you
could even imagine any treasonand may the holy
church refuse to shrieve me in my dying hour, if this
is not true.
Who said a word to you about the cave?
inquired
Harding, looking at the guilty priest full in the eyes,
that quailed before his scrutinizing gaze and the
confounding
question that had been put to him.
This mariner, replied the priest, looking timidly
towards the man, as if he hoped that he would not
deny his assertion, false as he knew it to be.
You lying rascal! exclaimed Grummet,
shaking
his double-jointed fist in the ecclesiastic's face,
how dare you have the impudence to spin such a
villainous yarn as that, in the presence of honest
men?I'll fix your rattling, for you, one of these
days, for this.
And then turning to his coadjutors, he
continued
:
I'll tell you the plain truth and uncoil the whole
cable in this ere matter. That rascal lies!it was
he who first spoke of the cave to meI never said a
word about it, till he did: and then I told him he
had pled guilty before the clerk of the admiralty
asked
him. That's the whole truth, as sure as my
name's Bill Grummet.
We know that, Grummet, exclaimed his
companions
,
we heard all that passed between you,
from the first.
Bring the rogue down to the cave; let us see
how an Inquisition dungeon will agree with his
saintship, cried Bagnal.
Ay, ay, added the sailor, let's have him under
hatches in no time.Come along, Mister Chaplain!
do you understand squeezing lemons, and making
punch and flip for a dry mess, hey?Come along,
my hearty, this way, there!
With this they forced the reverend spy into the
cavern, where they obliged him to confess that he
had been employed by the government, to keep a
watch on the movements of the people, and
especially
on those of Randal, and that he had, as the latter
suspected, been dogging them ever since the
morning
,
and overhearing all their intended manuvres;
but he promised them, by the truth which they
must recognise in this confession, that he would
hold their designs as secret as the grave, and not
even allow himself to think of them, provided they
would suffer him to go unpunished for his
imprudence
.
Surely, you cannot blame me, pleaded the
cunning
Jesuit, self-possession being restored to him by
the leniency of his judges, surely, you cannot blame
me so much, when you consider that I am a member
of holy mother church, and am bound, in virtue
of my priestly office, to serve her cause in all ways to
the best of my ability. We probably differ from each
other in our religious tenets, but as far as we act our
several parts with honesty and fidelity, we stand
acquitted
before heaven and earth of hypocrisy. I
thought myself called on by my king, and by his
holiness
,
the head of the Church, to exert myself to
prevent
the further spread of heresy, and to promulgate
the Catholic faith in the colonies: with this view, I
confess that I have heretofore opposed any rebellious
spirit among the people, but, from an accident which
I deeply deplore, I now find myself forced into a new
position, and on the good faith of a man and
gentleman
,
I swear to you that I will not betray your
secrets
in the smallest iota. Will you trust me?
No! I'll be dd if I do, for one; exclaimed
Grummet, for the longer I look at you, the more I
believe you are a piratical rascal sailing under
false colours. I say, messmates! continued
the sailor, taking a formidable quid of pig-tail,
so as to give himself time to let out the whole of
his suspicions deliberately, and to dwell on his
imagined discovery with satisfaction, I say
messmates
!
let's have a peep at this cruiser's papers;
p'rhaps we may find out by his clearance, a little
more about him than he cares to blow to the winds;
shall we make a search?
A good idea, Grummet! said Harding, and
worthy of the King's attorney-general;let us look
13*
at your pocket-book, friend, if you have no objection
come!
Out with it! added the two mechanics.
At this requisition, the man turned pale as death,
and from his extreme agitation, made it evident to
the little band of patriots that they had taken
possession
of a more formidable enemy than they had at
first imagined.
As this suspicion became confirmed, Bagnal and
Randal each seized an arm of the culprit, while
Grummet proceeded, without more ado, to search
the pockets of the seeming ecclesiastic. In doing
this, a leather wallet was drawn out, which on being
opened, exposed to the astonished gaze of his
examiners
,
among other papers, a number of letters,
all of which were directed to the arch enemy of
Massachusetts, a man who was, if possible, even
more hateful to the colonists than Sir Edmund
Andros
himself.
Is it possible? exclaimed Randal, pointing to the
superscription of the letters, and looking the man full
in the face with an expression of intense surprise;
is it possible that
you
are that man?
The pretended priest bit his lip with vexation, but
soon rallying from his perturbation, looked around on
the company calmly and collectedly, and then
drawing
himself up, replied:
Yes! you see before you the best friend of
the King; and the worst enemy, if you will have
it so, of the colonists. I
am
Edward
Randolph
!
CHAPTER XVI.
Death of my soul! those linen cheeks of thine
Are counsellers to fear.
Macbeth
.
Take thy face hence.
Id.
Full many mischiefs follow cruel wrath.
Spenser
.
Since
the year 1676, Massachusetts had not
known a more bitter and uncompromising enemy to
her interest and happiness than Edward Randolph;
but to enumerate all his acts of tyranny and
aggression
would be endless. From an avaricious and
needy adventurer, he finally became, through gross
misrepresentations of the resources of the colony, an
agent in the hands of the crown, to strip
Massachusetts
of all her privileges, that thereby the luxurious
wants of a corrupt government might be the more
amply supplied. It was through the immediate
instrumentality
of that bad man, that the charter was
taken from Massachusetts, and all the lands of her
yeomanry confiscated to the use of the crown;
regranted
only on payment of half its value in money,
and burthened with the most arbitrary and ruinous
exactions.
That such a character should have been
detestable
in the sight of the people, may be readily
imagined
.
He received their just execrations, and was
hooted at wherever he went as an insidious foe to
the rights of man, who was ready to commit any act
of infamy for gain. There was hardly an instance of
robbery or oppression disconnected with the name of
Edward Randolph: he was a party to all actions for
ejecting the rightful tenant from his soil, and was
constantly associated with the very name of
tyranny
.
During the struggles of the people to bring about
a better state of things, Randolph was mean enough
to add the characters of hypocrite and spy to his
other odious offices, and on the occasion of the Fair,
he had disguised himself as a Catholic priest, the
better to watch the movements of the people,
especially
of those individuals, who, from a more daring
spirit, had placed themselves in the front rank of
the assertors of the natural and chartered rights of
man.
He now stood confounded and abashed, however
hard he struggled to disguise his confusion, in the
presence of those whom he had been vile enough to
dog to their privacy, and take advantage of in their
seclusion. Had he fallen in with less conscientious
enemies, he would have been at once sacrificed to
their resentment, an expedient that might have been
justified by the necessity of the cause. As it was,
his foes had no desire to take his life, believing that
he might be made an example to others without the
shedding of his blood.
The little band of patriots looked at each other
with amazement when they became assured that the
pseudo priest was no other than the hateful agent of
British tyranny, the loathed and detestable Randolph.
The man himself seemed to be fully conscious of his
odious position, and was the first to break the silence
that reigned for a time after the announcement of
his name on his discovery.
Well! said he, looking round on his captors,
and what do you intend to do now? You have
detected
me in doing what I thought to be my duty, and I
suppose I must remain at your disposal.
Your
duty!
exclaimed Randal, with bitter and
indignant sarcasm; your
duty!
Yes, you have
done your duty as the vampyre does his; you have
lived on the life-blood of others, and are now bloated
with the butchery of human happiness. And to
finish all, you would see us hanged as traitors,
and exult in our destruction!
On my life, I would not! replied Randolph,
unable
to disguise his apprehension of what might be
the termination of his adventure, which looked so
inauspicious in the frowns of his captors; on my
life and honor, I would not betray you!
Hear him! cried Grummet, with a sort of angry
laughter, he promises by his
honor!
I wonder
how much his bond would bring on such a rotten
bottomry as that!
Randolph cast an angry look at the sailor, which
he could not restrain, but he deigned no reply. His
only hope seemed in the forebearance of the others, for
the man-o'-war's-man looked any thing but mercy.
And what treatment do you expect from us?
inquired
Harding; you have, on your own confession,
followed us like a puppy all this day, and, by your
contemptible hyprocrisy, become possessed of our
most important secrets. Do you imagine that we
can trust you?
Never! simultaneously exclaimed the two
mechanics
.
You cannot believe that we can confide in you
for a moment, added Harding.
I'd trust a cable of sea-weed sooner, said the
sailor, scornfully. I tell you what it is, my
hearties
;
you jest hang on to his figure-head, while I go
down to the booths yonder. Hold on a bit, will
you?
So saying, Grummet bolted from the cave, and
was out of hearing before his companions had time to
inquire as to his purpose in going, though they suspect
ed that he was meditating some plan of punishment
for the would-be Catholic priest.
As the sailor left the cave, Randolph looked
imploringly
on those who remained behind; for he
entertained
too well-founded fears that the man had gone away
so suddenly, with none of the kindest intentions
toward
himself.
For pity's sake, said he, addressing them in a
subdued and humble tone of voice, for pity sake,
have mercy on me, and save me from the violent
hands of that rough sailor and the mob. Let me go,
I beseech you, for if he returns with the posse, I shall
stand a small chance to save my life. It is terrible
to think of the indignation of an incensed crowd.
Especially when one feels as you must,
rejoined
Randal, that he deserves the severest retribution
at their hands.
Whatever I may deserve for mistaken opinions
or past misconduct, replied the self-abasing
hypocrite
,
you may depend on me for the future. We
are only poor, weak mortals, the best of us, and are
exceedingly liable to error. If I have heretofore
done wrong to the colony, I have it in my power to
make ample reparation, and I will do so. Forgive
me this once, and you shall never have cause to
regret
your clemency.
The three friends looked at each other
hesitatingly
,
and then withdrew a little to confer with each
other on the expediency of suffering him to depart.
Harding and Bagnal seemed, on the whole, willing
to trust the prisoner; but Randal declared that the
fellow
would certainly deceive them. They finally
determined
to allow him to escape, judging rightly
enough, that if he were detained in close custody his
absence might create suspicion and alarm on the part
of the government; and that if he were made a public
spectacle, it would be impossible to prescribe bounds
to the popular fury, which might result
disadvantageously
to their cause.
You are at liberty to depart, Mr. Randolph, said
Harding, addressing the prisoner, and as you were
lately in our power, so now we remain in yours.
You have promised on your honor not to betray us,
and the majority of us are willing to take your word.
Go, Sir, leave us!
Randolph bowed to them, and without uttering
one word of acknowledgment, departed: but as he
left the cave he muttered to himself, Fools! I will
not betray
you,
but your intentions shall be made
known to the government, immediately. With this
jesuitical determination, he took a circuitous route
that he might avoid the encampment and the
enemies
he most dreaded; then stepping on board the
ferry-boat, he was conveyed to Boston, where,
without
any delay, he repaired to the house of Sir Edmund
Andros, and made known to him the intentions of the
insurgents.
Randolph had not been gone many minutes,
before
Vol. II. 14
the three patriots, who had suffered him to
depart
,
recognised the voice of their coadjutor, returning
with a crowd of others from the Fair. Randal and
his companions had left the cave, and were about
half way between that place and the encampment.
The sound of the approaching voices through the
crowded oaks, indicated that the people were in a
high state of excitement. And so indeed they were;
for Grummet had run to the tavern, and through
the booths, shouting out for the enemies of tyranny
to follow him, for that Randolph, the British agent,
had been taken by some patriots on the borders of the
lake, who were about to hang him at the yard-arm
of a tree.
At such a summons, and on such an occasion, it
may be supposed that a large crowd would eagerly
rush onward, when the greater part of people had
nothing to do but smoke their pipes and get
intoxicated
,
especially when there was any mischief
a-foot, and one so hateful as Randolph was
promised
for their bloody entertainment. They did not
stop to inquire what was meant by the capture of
Randolph; it was enough, and they were grateful
for it, that an excuse had been afforded them for
raising a disturbance. Any thing is acceptable to
man by which he can forget himself for a season.
Man will and must be diverted from brooding over
his own individuality. Hence drunkenness, rioting,
and all sorts of disorder, where stimulants of a milder
kind are denied for popular divertisement: hence a
proportionate absence of the grosser pleasures, where
a love of the fine arts has been cherished and
cultivated
.
When will they be cherished and cultivated
in glorious America? A voice from afar replies
When the love of money shall not be her
all-engrossing
evil!
And here, while the vox populi is bellowing at the
heels of the sailor, and all hands are in the eager
pursuit
of a coarse and transitory self-forgetfulness, let us
pause for a moment to reflect on what was hiuted, at
the close of the last paragraph, relative to the progress
of taste among Americans; for it is to the
development
of taste that we must ultimately look, as the
only means of ridding ourselves of our most
odious characteristic, the exclusive love of
money-getting
.
In too many cases, amidst our overgrown
commercial
cities, may be seen an exemplification of the truth
that good taste is not the growth of a single
generation
.
Go to the palaces of some among the
merchant-princes
,
and bewail that it is not so; and bewail too,
the blessed ignorance that shuts out from the eyes
of the vulgar-elegant, the consciousness that amidst
all their luxury and wealth, they show not a particle
of refinement. Sit down on the costly ottomans amidst
the Madams Malaprop, and go away thankful for a
decent
education, though you dine at a shilling
ordinary
.
Gaze at the costly furniture, but don't laugh at
the daubs on the walls'till you depart; and then
thank heaven that you have at least escaped
that
form of the ridiculous, among the follies of the
times.
If instead of lavishing tens of thousands on the
works of the cabinet-maker and upholsterer, men
would send to our Greenough, Powers, Cole,
Doughty
,
and their like, for a better kind of furniture; the
higher class of society, the virtuous and refined,
when they condescend to visit the merely rich and
voluptuous, would find something else to admire
besides
the viands and the wines, or the gaudy, tinsel
trappings of luxurious mammon. It is a little
remarkable
,
that English travellers have generally
overlooked
the very faults in which our society most
abounds; while they have principally enlarged on
manners which do not so properly belong to society,
as to individuals thrown together from all parts of the
world by accident, each scrambling for himself.
How absurd it would be to decide on American
manners
at our public tables, which are every day
crowded
with foreigners and strangers, and where hardly
two individuals have been formed by the same rules!
and yet to such places we are indebted for the
severest
strictures on our habits and manners, when
perhaps
the most glaring instances of impropriety might
have been traced to the satirist's own countrymen.
No; gentlemen travellers from abroad! or lady
travellers
!
should haply any such one of these days be
found, if you tell the whole truth about us, you will
leave all your predecessors in the back-ground; while
the probability is, that it would have been told long
ago if there had not been too great a congeniality of
coarseness between the observers and the observed.
Travellers of any respectability should find their way
among those who do not
pretend
to elegance, because
it is natural to them, and they ought to know that it
is as unreasonable to expect to find the same
manners
and customs in America, which they had been
accustomed to see in England, as it would be to look
for the same climate or institutions. It ought to be
the glory of Americans that they are themselve alone,
and that they have not been moulded according to
bad influences abroad. The class of purse-proud
individuals
which are the peculiar bane of society, are
those who, having nothing more than wealth to give
them consideration, look down from their bad
elevation
on all whom they fancy to be beneath them,
while they overlook the truth that nothing but
modesty
and gentle cultivation can confer true
respectability
,
and save them from the hydra-headed
monster
,
selfishness
.
But to return to Watertown. The shouts of the
people
grew louder and more loud, till, as they
approached
the three patriots, the latter bagan to doubt
whether it would be prudent for them to encounter
the crowd, which, on finding themselves baulked in
their expectation, might, for aught they could judge
14*
to the contrary, wreak on them the vengeance that
they were determined to bestow on Randolph. They
had hardly time, however, to resolve the matter in
their minds, before Grummet broke from the wood,
followed
by more than a hundred people, some of whom
were armed with clubs, and others bearing a rope,
the application of which, as intended, could be no
matter
of question.
This way, my hearties, bear a hand here to the
starboard! the old pirate is stowed away in the hole
yonder. Hurrah! for the yard-arm and a running
bow-line.
Hurrah! burst forth from a hundred discordant
throats, with an accompaniment of oaths, curses, and
imprecations, all levelled at Randolph, whom they
even now imagined to be within their power, a
sacrifice
to their just indignation.
The moment Grummet encountered his friends,
he cried out:
Hullo, my hearties! are you here? where have
you lodged the chaplain?He's in the hole, aint
he?
And he was on the point of rushing by them in
his eagerness to reach his victim, when the voice of
Randal stopped him.
Randolph has escaped! cried the anchor-smith,
in a tone of voice that was intended to deceive the
crowd by its significance of regret.
Escaped! exclaimed Grummet in
astonishment
.
Escaped! echoed a score of others in similar
surprise and disappointment.
Which way did the rascal go? demanded
several
,
impetuously.
That's more than we can tell you, replied
Randal
,
for as soon as we followed him from the cave
he had disappeared among the trees, and that was the
last we have heard of him.Pray didn't you meet
him on the way?
Do you think he would be fool enough to throw
himself in our course? inquired the sailor, whose
chagrin
at the loss he had encountered was already
evinced
in his manner; never mind, my hearties! let's
give chase to the old pirate, and damme, we'll
overhaul
him yet. Clap on your studding-sails, my boys,
and scatter to all points: we'll have him yet. Three
cheers for the chase, hurrah!
To this appeal, the infuriated multitude replied
with enthusiasm, and away they went in every
direction
,
in hope of overtaking their object; but he was
already safely seated in the ferry-boat, having in
the interim made the best use of his loco-motive
with ten springs, that a frightened man could
command
.
After vainly pursuing Randolph, the scattered
multitude
returned to his encampment under the
guidance
of the sailor, and vented their unexhausted
anger
on every object that came within their reach.
By this time Classon had joined them, and amidst the
fellowship of intoxication, they forgot all their
animosity
towards him in the admiration they had for
his excesses. The man was stark mad with brandy,
and was foremost among the mob in demolishing
tents, breaking furniture, and spreading devastation at
random. The whole ground occupied for the Fair,
presented one aspect of ruin.
The mechanics, with their new friend witnessed the
scene of violence with mortification and sadness.
Alas! exclaimed Harding, how little mankind
are to be trusted. Who could have calculated on
such a termination of things as this?
It is human nature, replied Randal, men will
have an outlet for their feelings, and so we see the
innocent suffering for the guilty.
Such an exhibition of lawless violence, said
Harding
,
mournfully, is enough to make us pause
awhile before we set the wheel of Revolution a-going.
Who can tell how things will end, and who can say
how far they may go, or what excesses may follow a
serious popular movement?
Never fear the consequences; said Randal, and
his friends joined him in the sentiment, the madness
you have seen to-day could not well occur in Boston;
on her we principally depend for the tone which
will be given to the revolution.
As they bent their steps in the direction of the
metropolis
,
they recapitulated the substance of the
conversation
which had engaged them during the day,
so far as it related to the great object of their hopes
and wishes, and they interchanged many conjectures
as to the sincerity of Randolph's promises, and the
probability of his treachery.
I have not a particle of confidence in him,
insisted
Randal, the man is so thoroughly unprincipled,
that with all his assurances of being faithful to us,
you may rely on it he will lay the whole plan before
the governor. We ought to have kept him confined,
and not suffered him to escape.
But only think, urged Harding, only think
what the consequences would have been, had we
given the wretch over to the fury of the multitude!
It would have saved the property of many an
unoffending
man, which has now been sacrificed to
their disappointment.
And have ruined our cause completely, added
Bagnal, who siding with the tutor, did all he could to
reconcile his friend to the course they had adopted.
But Randal was immoveable in his opinion, and he
parted with Harding in the vicinity of the College,
with sad forebodings that their enterprise would be
defeated.
The two friends proceeding on their way to
Boston
,
took the ferry-boat at the Point, and reached the
metropolis as the last rays of the sun were receding
from the summits of the three hills.
CHAPTER XVII.
Once more upon the Ocean!
Childe Harold
.
One fatal remembrance, one sorrow that throws
Its bleak shade alike o'er our joys and our woes.
To which life nothing darker nor brighter can bring,
For which joy hath no balm, and affliction no sting.
Moore
.
I've done the deed.
Macbeth
.
After
the destruction of the Revenue-Cutter,
Fitzvassal
,
whose mind began to turn upon itself, and brood
over its self-inflicted misery, gave orders to put to sea.
He now, for the first time, had ample leisure for
reflection
;
for since his return to the scenes of his youth
his thoughts had been in such a whirl of excitement;
such new and untried emotions had possessed him; such
hopes, aspirations, doubts, fears, and misgivings, had
swayed him by turns, in the many new relations which
he held to society, that till now he had been unable
to realise his true position. He was pacing his
quarter-deck
wrapped in the gloomiest melancholy.
Fool! ejaculated the buccaneer, in the
wretchedness
of self-examination, fool, pitiable, despicable
fool!in what am I better or happier now, than
when in the miserable abode of my mother?alas,
poor mother!I fed upon my own heart and
bemoaned
our mutual misfortunes! Better, far better
would it have been for me to have lived contented
with my lot, and earned the daily crust that might
have kept thee from famishing!
The picture of his mother's sufferings then rose up
before the mind of Fitzvassal in all its horrors, and
the memory of her awful death and her dying words
checked the heartfelt curses as they trembled on his
lips for utterance.
His thoughts were next occupied with the object
of his adoration, and he felt his cheek grow pale, as
he saw her in his mind's eye reciprocate a kiss of
affection
,
and smile upon Seymour in the
abandonment
of love.
Up to the fatal moment when the too faithful
glass let the secret into his heart that Grace was the
lover as well as the beloved of another, Fitzvassal
had indulged the belief that his own passion was
returned
,and
on this one pervading, all-absorbing
thought, he had lived and been sustained amidst
every trial he encountered. Had that love been
indeed
successful, who shall say how different would
have been the whole course of his after-existence!
But as soon as the hideous reality burst upon him,
that he had deceived himself, and that instead
of the golden dreams he was indulging, nothing but
despair awaited him, deepened and darkened a
thousand
fold by the revolting imagination that another
but we cannot pursue a thought so brain-touching
let it pass!
From that moment Fitzvassal resolved to fulfil
his destiny. They prophecy concerning me, said
he to himself, gloomily and wretchedly enough;
and yet they tell me that my
will
can control my
fate. What fate! what destiny! what
will
have
I!
God knows I will to will otherwiseand yet I
do
wish to be revenged! I would not injure Grace
Wilmerand yet if I knew that she were unhappy
on my account, even unto death, I might be glad!
As for her lover,God! God! had I known
that,
would I not have throttled him amidst the waves!
Twice have I saved the life of a viper that even now
coils coldly and venomously about my heart, and
will by and bye sting me to madness! Where am I?
whither am I going? That strange being at Nahant
told me but yesterday, that I would go to sea this day!
And here I
am
at sea! She told me to avoid every
sail. Had I avoided the Cutter, there would have
been less blood spilt:was there any necessity for
blood-letting? was it a part of my destiny to
murder
?
Bah! nonsense! superstition! away with it,
Fitzvassal! it is worse than woman's weakness; away
with it!
And the infatuated man, with the aid of the bottle
flattered himself that he had overcome a weakness,
when, in fact, he had done nothing but paralyze the
organs of thinking by over-stimulating them. His
mind was oppressed the same as ever, and was
waiting
to manifest itself with renewed keenness when
the paralysis should pass away.
A temporary cheerfulness or rather recklessness
spread suddenly over his mind. The gloom that
weighed upon him was departed. The blue skies,
and the white, feathery clouds assumed a new aspect,
and awoke pleasant associations; the waves danced
and sparkled around him, and every thing grew
bright and glorious. The demons of intoxication
had entrapped him, and it was necessary to make
the victim glad till his power of breaking the toils
were destroyed; like the deluded neophyte that has
been led among gardens and roses, and made
delirious
with all that enchains the young imagination,
till the black veil descends forever on her
innocence
!
While in this state of sensual excitementthe cry
of Sail ho! sounded from aloft.
Where a-way! was the prompt inquiry from
below
.
Dead East! returned the look-out.
Bear down upon her and let's see who she is!
said Fitzvassal to his officer; God grant, we have
more work to do!
Vol. II. 15
I hope, said Morgan, you will either take no
more prizes, or no more wounded passengers;
how-somever
,
you know your own business; but the deck
of a buccaneer is no place for a hospital, I'm
thinking
.
It's not likely, Morgan, replied the commander,
that we shall have any fighting to do,there's no
such luck for us, I'm afraid.
I did n't know you had a notion of going out to
sea in earnest, said Morgan.
Nor I neither; as to thatbut we'll return before
long. I almost with I had let the Cutter aloneit
never could have done the Dolphin any harm.
Not's you know on! replied the pilot, shaking
his head wisely, and screwing up his eyes with an
expression of deep sagacitynot's you know on!
That Cutter, if she'd got along-side, or near enough,
might have put a red-hot-shot into your
powder-magazine
in no timehowsomever, it's no matter o'
mine.
True; added the buccaneer, or, in the
chances of war, she might have captured us.
Ay, resumed Morgan, encouraged, because his
notions were adopted by his superior; I've away of
thinking, that if an eighteen-pounder or two had told
against the Dolphin's masts, in the way our
twenty-four
spoke to the Cutter's, we might have had a
raking
in our turn.
And been carried into Boston chained as
pirates
.
Certainly! said Morgan, and been hanged up
on
the Neck and
by
the neck, too. Good again! not so
bad, that!
Very agreeable, truly, ejaculated Fitzvassal,
musing.
Very, echoed Morgan; mighty agreeable to be
dangling within sight of one's own house, after old
Mather had talked you as dry as a corn-cob on the
way to the gallows.
It was right, said Fitzvassal, to do as we did
with the Dolphin, but I am a little doubtful about
these prisoners.
Dead men tell no tales! whispered Morgan,
looking at the buccaneer with an expression that
seemed to indicate some uncertainty as to Fitzvassal's
disposition.
Shame! shame! Morgan, returned the latter,
indignantly
,
how can you be so barbarous?
And the commander of the Dolphin walked away
from the man, as if he dreaded contamination,
flattering
himself that he was opposed to an act, which all
the while he wished most heartily were accomplished.
If the best man that walks the earth could see
himself
as he really is, he would be scared to distraction.
The heart is stuffed with fragments of the ten
commandments
;
but while self-delusion has the custody of
that heart, she turns it about to please the
imagination
;
like a kaleidescope, that by ever moving makes
seeming order and variety out of shapeless and
unpleasing
forms, and even perverts the light of
heaven
to the irradiation and adornment of lies.
In the meantime, the Dolphin had gained so much
upon the other vessel that her flag could easily be
seen from below, with the assistance of the glass, and
she was reported from the look-out as evidently
an English merchantman of about three hundred
tons.
Crowd all sail! was the order immediately
given, on ascertaining the character of the vessel;
at least we'll get the latest news from England,
possibly a rich booty. The colonists will want
money, and they shall have it.
At this last idea, as it gained utterance, Fitzvassal
felt relieved, for it seemed to him a palliation of the
crime which he was meditating; so easy is it for
conscience to find a subterfuge in its distress.
The strange sail gradually ascended to the
horizon
,
and the two vessels were not more than three
miles distant, when the stranger was seen suddenly
to change her course, and press all her canvas for
flight. This only showed that she began to
suspect
the Dolphin; while it gave assurance to the
crew of the latter, that the ship was indeed a
merchantman
,
and it encouraged them to hope for a
prize.
Notwithstanding the efforts which the
merchantman
made to escape, the buccaneer gained so
rapidly
upon them that in two hours they were nearly
along-side.
Ship a-hoy! cried the first officer of the
Dolphin
,
through a speaking-trumpet, as they came
within
hailing distance.
Ship a-hoy! reiterated the officer, where are
you bound?
But the merchantman returned no answer.
The hailing was again repeated, yet with no other
effect; and but for an occasional movement in the
trimming of her sails, no one could have believed
that there was a person on her deck.
This conduct on the part of the vessel began to
excite the circumspection of Fitzvassal, who gave
orders to beat to quarters; but in the meanwhile the
schooner had run full abreast of the ship, and within
pistol-shot. The call to quarters was the signal to
the stranger to show some signs of animation, for
hardly had the drum sounded, before the plain sides
of the merchantman opened in half a dozen places,
and as many guns running out from her port-holes,
poured forth a broadside on the Dolphin, which
made the splinters fly about her fearfully. At the
same moment at least twenty heads were popp'd
above her bulwarks.
As soon as this was done, the vessel which,
merchantman
or not, seemed almost a match for the
Dolphin, endeavored to wear round, and run under
15*
her stern with a view to rake her, while the crew of
the latter came to quarters, and returned the
broadside
with interest.
Run close along-side of her, at all hazards,
shouted Fitzvassal, give her another broadside, and
run into her under cover of the smoke; then throw
your grappling-irons and board! Call the boarders
to be readyI will lead them myselffire away
now!Cato, you rascal, here!
The steward was at his side.
Mix powder in some rum and hand it round to
the men!instantlyaway!
The black was off in a moment, seizing a cannon
charge as he passed, from one of the powder
monkeys
;
and he soon returned with a bucket
containing
the infuriating mixture. The men had just
time to take a half-pint all around, the cannon in
the meantime roaring like thunder from both sides,
when the bowsprit of the Dolphin ran over the
taffrail
of the other, indicating, amidst the dense smoke
enveloping both vessels, that the desired contact had
taken place.
Fitzvassal had already stationed himself at the
head of twelve men by the bow of his own vessel,
awaiting the moment when the contact should take
place. He was armed, as were the other boarders,
in iron caps, made for this especial object, and each
had a pair of pistols, a broad-sword, and a cutlass,
the latter to serve as a guard for the left arm, as well
as for such mischief as it could find opportunity to
do. A short, broad dagger was sticking in the
leather
belt that contained the pistols.
Thus prepared, as soon as the buccaneer found
his bowsprit aboard the other, he cried out:
Now then! boarders follow me!
At the same time he ran up the bowsprit of his
own vessel, followed by his intrepid band, and before
his victim had time to perceive his intention, he was
with them on the quarter-deck, giving rapid orders,
and calling on his opponents to surrender.
But the boarded vessel was not so peacefully
disposed
.
She found herself engaged with one she did
not doubt to be a pirate, and though she had been
taken by surprise, she was resolved not to surrender
without disputing every inch of her deck.
The battle now raged, loud and terrible. The
vessels had run in so close to each other, that the
grappling-irons were thrown from amidships of the
Dolphin, and the two drawn close along-side. In
this position, the large guns could not be used at all;
the only available one would have been the long
twenty-four of the buccaneer, but as her commander
and so many of her best men were aboard of the
stranger, it would have been madness to have made
the use of it, which otherwise would have been so
decisive.
The useless state of the cannon soon left the scene
of action unobscured by the heavier clouds of smoke
that had before encompassed it, so that the
movements
on board the merchantman could be
distinguished
with some precision. The combat was for
the quarter-deck of the vessel. In this contest,
Fitzvassal
alternately drove his opponents, and was by
them beaten back again; at one moment the assailants
seemed to have victory on their side, when
immediately
fresh vigor appeared to actuate the desperate
efforts
of the half-vanquished, and the fortune of the
day, for the time, changed sides. Blood poured from
the scuppers in torrents, and it seemed as if the
vessels
were floating on a crimson tide, so ensanguined
were the waters around them. The only use made
of the cannon was to enable the men on both sides to
meet each other the more conveniently arm to arm,
as sitting bestride them, they cut and thrust at each
other furiously. The gunwales of the two vessels
were also lined with men in desperate conflict, each
side endeavoring to make a passage into its
antagonist's
vessel, but in vain.
While this was going on, Morgan, who had been
actively engaged repelling those who endeavored to
board the Dolphin, discovered that Fitzvassal was
with his little band in imminent danger. He had met
with a severe repulse, and was on the point of being
surrounded, when, communicating his design to
the first-officer, the word was given, and all those
men who were standing on the Dolphin's gunwale
amidships, suddenly fell back, and at that moment
the long twenty-four was discharged.
The shock was so great that it made a clear
passage
on the gunwale of the stranger, when Morgan,
who had formed the plan, instantly calling on all to
follow him who liked, sprang, under cover of the
smoke, on board the enemy, and backed by a dozen
men was along side his commander at the moment
of his utmost need.
Gallantly done, my friend! exclaimed
Fitzvassal
,
nobly, gallantly done! now then for victory in
earnest!
On this encouragement, the crew of the Dolphin,
which had been excited almost to madness by the
fiery potion they had taken, resumed the battle with
the more fierce and unrelenting fury. The assailed
began to give way, their number being sensibly
diminished
.
Hardly men enough remained on board
the buccaneer to load and fire a single cannon, for the
deck of the larger vessel had become the exclusive
scene of action. The decks were strewed with
bodies
,
some dying and screaming amidst the din and
uproar of battle; others shockingly mangled by the
large shot which had been thrown at the beginning
of the engagement.
Wounded in several places, Fitzvassal conducted
himself worthy of a better cause. On several
occasions
he was in imminent peril of his life. Once
while engaged with an athletic man, broad-sword and
broad-sword, he was pressed so hard from behind,
that turning to divide his guard, his foot slipped in
the thick gore, and he fell prostrate on the deck.
The sword of his adversary was already
descending
upon his neck, which must have severed his head
from his body, when Morgan, rushing in between,
struck by the deadly aim, and buried his short-sword
in the heart of the gigantic sailor. The man fell
down with a groan right over the prostrate body of
Fitzvassal, whom he almost strangled with the
torrent
of his blood.
While in this dreadful situation, Morgan, who
fought by his side manfully, parrying many deadly
thrusts which were aimed at his commander, at last fell
disabled by a pistol-shot, which broke his leg just below
the knee. The man who shot him was in the act of
discharging another pistol at the fallen pilot, when
Fitzvassal, disengaging himself with a powerful effort,
from the bodies which had fallen upon him, sprang
to the assistance of Morgan, and plunged his short,
broad steel to the hilt in his opponent's back. As he
drew out the sword again, the wounded man turned
round, and gazing fora moment on the buccaneer
shrieked out as the blood spouted from his mouth
and nostrils:
Edward Fitzvassal!you have murdered your
own father!
Then raising his hands toward heaven, he fell
backward dead among the slain.
Fitzvassal stood motionless with horror at this
announcement
,
and had it not been for his friends he
must have been sacrificed in the crowd. He stood
for a while like one suddenly smitten with catalepsy.
Fortunately for him the fight was nearly over. The
officers and the owner of the vessel being slain,
despair
seized on the hearts of the sailors and they
nearly
to a man ran below, crying and begging for
quarter
.
The flag of the merchantman was hauled
down, and possession at once taken of the vessel.
As Morgan lay helpless among a pile of the dying
and the dead, and had not heard the exclamation of
his foe at the moment he fell before the blade of his
commander, he gazed on the latter with surprise on
seeing him so distempered at the very time he had
reason to rejoice, and reaching forward as well as
he was able, he took hold of Fitzvassal's hand,
saying
:
How now, Captain, are you wounded?
The address of the disabled pilot seemed to restore
animation to the buccaneer, and he inquired:
Is it
you,
Morgan?
Ay, ay; replied Morgan, groaning with pain;
it's me sure enough; but I've got my winter's
wood, howsomever.
Morgan! inquired the commander, pointing to
the lifeless body of Edmund Vassal, tell me for
heaven's sake! did
I
kill that man?
As sure as I'm Jake Morgan with a broken leg,
you killed him. Why, you ought to know; for you
stuck that skewer of your's between his shoulders,
just as he was about to give me a night-cap for
eternity
?
Fitzvassal said nothing morebut he staggered to
the side of the vessel, and leaned on the slippery
gunwale. What thoughts were those that crowded
on him then! As if at the touch of a magician's
wand, the terrible past and the still more terrible
present
rose up simultaneously to his mind. He
remembered
the curses he had heaped on his parent
at his mother's death-bedhe remembered his oath
of vengeance, he remembered the spectre-scene at
the Spouting-Horn, and last of all he remembered
the warning of Nameoke, and his own stubborn
wilfulness
of purpose that would not be guarded nor
instructed
;
and as he thought of all these, his heart
grew harder than the flint, for he accused heaven of
mocking him, and making him the plaything of
destiny
.
Thank God! he at length exclaimed, starting
from the retrospection in which he had been
wrapped
,
thank God, I have done the deed! I swore
to be revenged, and I
am
revenged. I had the
will
to do it, and though I did not know my victim at
the time, he was given to me that I might not tell a
lie!
Heave that body overboard, instantly! said
Fitzvassal, pointing to his slaughtered fatherand
the order was immediately obeyed. As it fell into
the water heavily and with a loud plash, the
buccaneer
cast his eyes over the gunwale. It had risen
from the short depth to which it had been plunged,
and now lay nearly buried in the waters, the head
turned back, and the unclosed eyes glaring upward
as in the last agony of death.
Fitzvassal shivered with disgust, and sprang
aboard the Dolphin.
There is one more victim to be sacrificed to thy
shade, unhappy mother! groaned Fitzvassal,
one
did I say?
The buccaneer had been thinking of Classonbut
it occurred to him that there might be another
sacrifice
required. He called his officer to him, and
committing
all things to his charge, under the pretence
of his requiring immediate repose, he consigned
himself
to the oblivion he desired.
Alas! there remained no more repose nor
oblivion
for the mind of Fitzvassal. Tired nature's
sweet restorer, had flown from him forever. It is
true he could force himself to a state when the
consciousness
of his relation to the external world was
withdrawn, but so far from its being a state of repose
it was one of exaggerated suffering. His sense of
the sublimely terrible was inconceivably heightened
and his conscientiousness strangely awakened. He
constantly dreamed of hideous black fiends in
distorted
human forms, that laughed and hissed at him by
Vol. II. 16
turnsmen who could not hurt him, but only scare
him with their threats. He dreamed of his mother,
and she was sitting solitary and in tears, her head
bowed down between her hands, crying, Edward,
my son! my son! And when he spoke to her, she
raised her face to look at him, and it was a fleshy
skeleton's, that screamed in his ear Revenge! and
then vanished.
The scene would then suddenly change, and he
found himself leaning over the side of his vessel,
looking down into the clear, unfathomable abyss
below
him. There were ingots of gold and silver, and
precious stones without number, shining in
wonderful
profusion, and as he gazed and longed for it all,
a red mist overspread the dazzling vision, and the
body of his slaughtered father, emerging from the
cloud, rose to the surface of the water, his stony
eyes fixed on his guilty son; and as they gazed upon
him, a voice, unearthly and appalling, shrieked in
his ears
Revenge!
at which he would scream
beneath
the oppression of the night-hag, and wake
overwhelmed with dismay.
From such visions, the miserable man was
sometimes
a wakened by those who listened to his groans
and heart-rending sighsand he would come to
himself
bathed in the night-dews of agony, and for a long
time refuse again to trust himself to the penalties of
half-oblivion.
Most generally he was haunted in his sleep by the
forms of Seymour and Grace Wilmerand the vision
of their endearments was more than the bitterness of
death to him. Such was already the abundant fruit
of
one crime
.
On examining the vessel, it was discovered, to the
great joy of the buccaneers, that she was deeply laden
with gold and silver, which, it was ascertained, had
been taken from the same wreck that supplied the
Dolphin
.
The vessel was named the Duke of York, and
it was first proposed to take her freight from her and
scuttle her; but when Fitzvassal came to himself, he
decided otherwise, and gave orders to divide the
survivors
of the Duke of York and his own crew, which
had been considerably thinned by the contest, between
the two vessels; the command of the prize being
unhesitatingly
bestowed on Morgan, for his daring
achievements during the action.
The time I shirked the stone-jug in a coffin,
said Morgan on the occasion, I never dreampt of
commanding a snug buccaneer with three masts and
a cargo of gold. Howsomever, seeing's knowing;
and there's no telling but I may be rear-admiral yet,
since the wind of my luck has shifted.
But though Morgan was raised to this responsible
office, he was not able to attend to the duties of his
situation for some time, except to transmit orders
from below, where he was confined by his wound;
but it was a source of great comfort to him that it
was now in his power to command the presence of
any one on board his ship, to whom he could spin
his yarns without the danger of their declining the
narrative, or going to sleep during the recital.
After every thing on board the two vessels had
been put in order, the decks washed and holy-stoned,
every trace of the late action carefully removed, and
all necessary repairs completed, Fitzvassal, after
carefully examining every part of both vessels,
looked
at Morgan narrowly, as he lay in his berth, and
said:
I find no wounded men on boardwhere are
they?
Dead men tell no tales! replied the newly-made
Captain.
Morgan! said Fitzvassal, you are a worse
man than I thought you.
And you, replied the other, are no better.
Captain, confess to me that you are
glad
the job is
done! howsomever, we'll say nothing more about it.
The two vessels were once more on their way to
Boston.
CHAPTER XVIII.
And thus in days of yore they lived,
Whiling the merry Christmas hours.
Old Ballad
.
,
.
Not to love is fortune's sting
To love is full of sorrowing;
But sharper is his racking pain,
Who loves, and is not loved again!
Trans
.
The
suspicion that Randal entertained relative to
the conduct of Randolph was fully warranted by the
event. He made known to Sir Edmund Andros the
danger that threatened his government, and advised
him to make such a disposition of his forces, as
would effectually prevent an insurrection.
To this end, on the morning after the Fair, the
inhabitants of Boston were amazed to find that
preparation
16*
had been made for a movement which they
had not dreamed of immediately attempting, while
the patriotic leaders of the intended revolution were
downcast and mortified, that their labors should have
been frustrated for a time by their own misplaced
confidence. But they did not despair. They now
waited only for a moment when their odious tyrant
should be lulled again into false security, and they
improved the interim by unremitted exertions among
the people, to prepare them for the auspicious morn,
when the sun of liberty should return again to
illumine
their darkened hemisphere.
In the meanwhile, winter set in with all the
rigour
of those early days, when the snows banked up
to the chamber windows, and subnivian avenues
were made from house to house as the only way of
communication. The Dolphin, with her prize painted
so as effectually to disguise her, lay near mount
Wallaston
,
completely imbedded in the ice, their decks
roofed
over with planks, and these covered with a thick
surtout of snow. The Rose frigate lay in the stream
as usual; but though she floated free of ice, it was
impossible
for her to leave the harbour or the narrow
channel where she rested at anchor. She too was
roofed over in winter quarters, and presented the
same appearance as the others. Her topmasts and
top-gallant-masts were taken on deck, and she was
otherwise half dismantled, the better to contend with
the severity of the season.
There is never so much dissipation as when wars
and rumors of wars abound, if we except times of
greater danger, when plagues are decimating a
community
or earthquakes shaking cities to the dust.
Men have so little real belief in the religious
obligations
they profess, and so much real love of sensual
enjoyment, that the greater the opportunity, the
more uncontrolled and excessive will be their
self-indulgence
.
A standing-army quartered in or
about a city, will, it is known, corrupt the most
virtuous
people; nor is its effect the more destructive
by the vices which are introduced and disseminated
by it, than by the very sphere, or as it were,
atmosphere
of its body.
The mere moral philosopher knows but little of evil
influences, when from a circumscribed view of
the great relations of psychology, he overlooks
those phenomena that link the natural with the
spiritual
:
of these, this is no time to speak; but that
there are really and truly such phenomena
cognizable
by a cultivated perception, is known by a few as
rationally and certainly as are the ordinary facts in
every branch of natural science. Some of these
phenomena
have been shown to the world, but they have
been universally hooted at, through prejudices
falsely
imbibed from the Baconian philosophy.
It is difficult to make men discriminate between
what is only
different,
and what is absolutely
contradictory
.
If new phenomena are presented to them,
they straightway refer them to classes which are
old, and when they find that they cannot predicate
of the one, what they have been accustomed to
predicate
of the other, they indignantly reject the new
appearances as
contradictory
of their experience, and
therefore,
as necessarily absurd and visionary: when
a little reflection might inform them, that all
unknown
or new phenomena are removed from the
grasp of ordinary reasoning, because none of its terms
or instruments contain individuals but of known
classes.
When Dugald Stewart attacked the Aristotilean
logic for those scholastic pretensions which never
entered
into the thoughts of its illustrious author, and
gravely attempted to prove that the syllogism could
not be an instrument for extending the boundaries of
science, he must have had a vague and shadowy
notion
of the common tendency of the human mind
to narrow down its observation to the small
compass
of what is already established. If the idea had
been developed in his mind, he might have found
a key to that higher logic which he seems to have
had an indistinct dream of, and which as an
auxiliary
of truth, far transcends the dialectics of the
Stagirite
.
It is the only logic that can tear up the
fundamental
principles of atheism and show the absurdity
of an
priori
religion; that
monster,
which Paley,
Newton, Lord Brougham, the Bridgewater-Treatise
gentlemen, and the whole body of the clergy have
laboured
with such care to establish; little dreaming
that they are labouring on a foundation of sand,
which the searching flood of truth will sweep away
from their superstructure.
Here it is, that the atheist has always had the
vantage-ground
in polemic divinity. The christian has
based his argument on a
fallacy
which the atheist
has
felt
to be such, without having the means of
showing
it; but he has fairly enough contended that if the
foundation of an argument is untenable, the argument
itself is good for nothing: while the christian has, on
the other hand, obstinately insisted on the
importance
,
the
all-
importance of natural theology as the
basis of revelation. The very reverse of this is the
truth; for natural theology iscognizable only through
revelation.
After
a revelation, we recognize God in
his works;
before
a revelation, it were impossible;
because an argument that contains heterogeneous
ideas used as homogeneous ones, must allow of no
inference; and every idea we have
is
a logical
inference
.
All of which may be demonstrated with
mathematical
precision.
We have been led somewhat wide of our
intention
,
which was only to state that the quartering of
Sir Edmund Andros's army in Boston during the
events of 1688-9, served to relax more than ever the
severity of the popular manners. The outrage of
the Rose frigate was not forgotten, but there was so
many enormities constantly committed by the
government
,
that it was impossible for the public
indignation
to dwell for a long time exclusively on
one act of aggression.
During the interregnum of severe discipline, which
since the accession of James II. to the throne, had
been indulged to more or less extent in New
England
,
the extravagance and luxuries of the court
had found many imitators in Boston. The large
number of Episcopalians and Catholics who resided
in that town at the time, formed a strong contrast
to the Puritans, who still exercised much
self-denial
,
in spite of the many allurements with which
they were surrounded. But they were no longer the
same people who were contemporary with the
heavenly-minded
Winthrops. A very few of the
original
stock remained, and as they passed to the world
of spirits, their example was gradually forgotten:
just as the disinterested patriotism of seventy-six is
becoming only a theme for the historian, as the
heroes of that epoch are fading from our memory.
It was on Christmas night, that the long-expected
festival was to be celebrated at the mansion-house of
the Wilmer'sthe anniversary of the charming
Grace's nativity. Great preparations had been made
to give to the occasion all the elegance and luxury
which the fashion of the day afforded. A hundred
invitations had been given and accepted, while many
a young heart beat restlessly for the hour when her
beauty should blaze in the eyes of some fond admirer,
and be the object of general delight in the gay
assembly
at the Wilmers.
Though the night was dark, the street on the side
of the house, near the Mall, was in a blaze of light,
for a large number of cressets, the street-lamps of the
time, were hung out at shortintervals near the house,
and imparted a pleasing cheerfulness and
excitement
to the company as they arrived. These were a
sort of iron cage hung from a pole on pivots, in a
contrivance resembling a fork, and looked like
inverted
caps of iron. In these were placed the lights,
made of twisted wicks saturated with pitch, tallow,
linseed oil, hard rosin, and turpentine, melted
together; the lamp-lighter ascended the pole by
means of transverse pieces of wood projecting from
each side. The cressets were sometimes carried
from place to place on the pole, and were attended
by a man with a bag to feed it, and a torch to light
it with.
The snow at the time lay thin on the ground,
and carriages, (for several had been imported from
England by opulent people of Boston,) were enabled
to approach near to the door of the house. These
carriages were of different degrees of elegance,
according
to the wealth and taste of the owners. They
were shaped somewhat like the sedan-chairs seen in
the pictures of Hogarth, placed on four wheels.
The perch nearly touched the ground, and the upper
panels were filled with large glass. The side next
to the driver was vertical to the floor, and that
behind
sloped in an angle of about sixty-five degrees.
The driver's box and the dasher were not
materially
different from those of our day. These carriages
could not accommodate more than four persons, and
they were drawn by two or four horses, as the
circumstances
of the owner allowed.
The hall of the mansion-house was illumined by
a number of globular vessels of glass, in which wax
candles were burning, and throwing a profusion of
light on a line of uniform, engraved portraits in black
frames, that made a broad border along the whole
length of the wall. These were of distinguished
persons of the times of Elizabeth and her successors,
decked out in the various costume of the day. In
the centre of this row of portraits, hung a painting
five feet square, by one of the forgotten artists of the
day, representing Mr. Wilmer while a child eleven
years old, with his feathered hat under one arm, and
holding a large orange in his delicate fingers, around
which the lace ruffles bristled like the ruff on Queen
Elizabeth's neck. On each side of this stiff piece of
drawing were portraits of his mother and aunt, the
simplicity of whose costume strongly contrasted
with the splendid dresses that were now floating by
in crowds.
The parlors were on each side of the hall as in all
old-fashioned houses: the one looking towards the
Common was the more elegant of the two, and was
not generally opened, but was reserved for
extraordinary
occasions. The windows toward the Mall
were within deep alcoves, from the arches of which
fell rich, heavy drapery of crimson damask silk,
looped
up at the sides, and secured by large gilded
hooks. This room was hung round with gorgeous
tapestry, where in elaborate workmanship, was
represented
the story of Acton and his hounds, which
seemed to be preaching a practical homily on the
danger of domestic extravagance. The fire-place in
this room was ornamented with light green tiles,
each one of which was a beautiful picture of some
interesting sort. One series of them told the story
of a charming country maiden, from her first falling
in love to her disappointment; another, of a happy
marriage; and still another, of a maiden lady's lonely
state, when the astrologer cast her horoscope of
Never to be married. Over the mantle-piece in
this room were, on each side, gilded figures of
angels
,
each holding branches worked like olive-boughs,
wherefrom seven wax candles shone with a blaze of
light; and between these was a large panel of one
piece of wood, elegantly worked around like a
picture-frame
with elaborate carving, the centre
containing
a well-wrought group of figures representing
the Ascension of the Lord, which stood out in
altorelievo
,
and would have been creditable to the
modern
artists of Italy.
In this room was a rich Turkey carpet of a
magnificent
Vol. II. 17
pattern. The chairs were of solid
mahogany
,
with straight backs, curling over at the tops
like the capitals of Ionic columns, with stuffed
leather
seats varnished to the highest polish, and
studded
round with large-headed, bright brass tacks.
The windows facing the garden were not in alcoves
like those on the street, but they were sunken in
the wall enough to admit spacious seats, cushioned
to correspond with the curtain that fell in heavy
masses over them. Between these windows was a
spacious looking-glass of an oblong form, the gilded
frame of which was a foot deep, representing a
grapevine
,
from which hung bunches of golden fruit.
Beneath this was a heavy mahogany table, on which
were placed six tall silver candle-sticks, representing
Corinthian columns, each one containing a lighted
wax candle. In different parts of the room were
fire-screens, which were tall rods of iron-wood,
fixed
on a sort of pedestal with three claw-feet, on which
a shield of damask silk moved up and down, as also
did a little shelf for the accommodation of a book, if
one were disposed to read by the fire. This last was
blazing away from large logs of oak resting on
ponderous
andirons which shone like silver, and were
surmounted with balls of shining brass six inches in
diameter. By the side of the jambs were the shovel
and tongs, the latter large enough to lift a log with,
and were as bright as molten metal.
The other parlor was not so elegantly furnished.
The windows were constructed in the same way,
but the curtains were of a more sombre hue, and less
expensive fabric, and the walls, instead of being
tapestried
,
were only panelled; but these were
beautifully
wrought, and conveyed an air of great comfort to
the apartment. A very few pictures hung about the
room, but they were from the pencils of
distinguished
artists, and never failed to excite admiration from
visitors of good taste. This room was carpeted like
the other; the arrangements of the fire-place were
much the same; a similar looking-glass in a
corresponding
place appeared, beneath which was a table
conformable to the other, with another like set of
candlesticks and their accompaniments. At one
corner of this apartment was a spacious beaufet
built in a circular form, with crescent shelves, on the
highest one of which appeared a large china bowl,
which would have held three gallons at least. On the
other shelves a part of the family plate was
arrayed
,
with burners, porringers, tankards, vases, bowls,
and wine-cups, few specimens of which remain in
our times, when a vandal love of foolery prompts
the silly heiress to melt them down to more
fashionable
forms.
In both apartments among other furniture, was
a chair called a round-about, with a bottom of a
triangular
shape, a fashion that in some respects has been
revived in our times for study chairs. In the back
room, stood an old clock, which indicated the day of
the month, and the phases of the moon; and by the
side of this was a spinnet, the first form of the modern
piano-forte, the jacks of which would sometimes
jump of their own accord, and scare little children
who were playing together in the room.
The guests were now rapidly pouring in, and as
they entered, were courteously received by Mr. Wilmer,
who conducted them first to his lady and daughter,
who stood according to the custom of our times, to
exchange with them the salutations of the
evening
.
Only half a century previous to that day, the
costume
of ladies who were not restricted by the
exclusive
rules of the puritans, was more elegant than
splendid, and citizens' wives dressed with exemplary
plainness; but now, among the fashiouables, two
thousand pounds for a daughter's marriage-portion
were considered as hardly equivalent to a quarter part
of that amount half a century before. This march
of extravagance was owing to a re-action that took
place after the Restoration, and which had increased
prodigiously up to the year 1688, when there were,
among other luxuries, fifty carriages to one previous
to the interregnum.
Mrs. Wilmer, whose appearance we have not yet
described, was, making due allowance for the
difference
of twenty years in their ages, an exact
counterpart
of her daughter. Of course her figure was
more fully developed, and the expression of her face
more saddened and subdued by time, whose hand,
however, had not been laid too rudely on her beauty,
which by many might have been preferred even to
her child's.
She was dressed rather more in the fashion of
ladies in the time of Charles I. than in the strict
costume
of her day. She had on a rich scarlet silk
gown, close-bodied, with tight sleeves; a falling ruff
of very rich lace hanging over the shoulders, her hair
gracefully curled and adorned with a bunch of
white artificial flowers, and a string of pearls
tastefully
bound about her head. She wore also
earrings
with a single brilliant in each, and a pair of
pearl bracelets on her arms. The cuffs of her gown
were ornamented with rich point lace. Beneath her
gown appeared black silk clocks, and her beautifully
formed foot was encased in scarlet shoes with white
roses. Around her waist, tied behind, she wore a
broad, plaid sash, in memorial of her ancestors.
Grace appeared that evening in all her glory,
and her dress was calculated to show off her
surprising
beauty to the best advantage. Her hair, parting
in front, fell in luxuriant curls over her shoulders, and
her forehead was encircled with a band of pearls,
with a large diamond in the centre. The skirt of
her gown was of pale blue silk, over which she wore
a white satin jacket, with short, castellated lappels,
edged with blue, and bound round the waist by a
blue ribbon, tied in front in a small bow. She had
17*
on also white silk stockings, and satin shoes with
moderately
high heels. Her bosom was modestly
veiled
by a falling ruff of very rich lace, and her hand
had no other ornament than the ruby that sparkled
on her finger.
Mr. Wilmer was dressed in a plain suit of black
velvet, the doublet having a single row of jet buttons,
over which a cloak hung to the knees; this was
adorned by three capes. He wore breeches tied
below
the knee, black silk stockings, and shoes
ornamented
with ties of ribbon. Over the wrists were
broad cuffs of point lace. His head was dressed in a
black peruke, that fell in curls behind, and his neck
was adorned by a falling ruff of rich lace, fastened by
a cord and tassel.
Among the ladies was seen a great variety of
dresses, varying from the costume of Grace, more
particularly in the mode of wearing the hair, which
was arranged as their individual taste dictated, in a
profusion of curls stiffened with wires, in very
fantastic
as well as elegant forms. Some wore lace on
their bosoms, and others only neeklaces of pearls.
But the most remarkable dresses were to be found
among the young gallants who figured on that
occasion
,
some of whose hearts were ill at ease on the score
of Grace's engagement to Seymour; who, to tell the
truth, was not far behind the others in the foppery
of his attire. Their heads were decked out in
perukes
of every fashion and variety, with longcurls like
the coxcombs of our day, who excite the sympathies
of the sex for fear lest they may have unfortunately
been deprived of their ears. The colour of these
perukes was varied to suit the complexion, by
powders
of every teint, and while some were seen
combing
them at their ease, others were twisting the curls
about their fingers, as they ducked and bowed to the
ladies, and simpered out the compliments of the season.
Some of them wore double laces for ruffs, tagged with
silver; vests and cloaks of damask silk and velvet;
short trousered breeches terminating in stuffed rolls
and fringes; elegant boots with large projecting lace
tops under the calf of the leg, the points dangling
below the knee. Each had a broad brimmed castor
with feathers, which he carried in his hand; this was
gloved with scented leather; the other hand bore an
ivory or tortoise shell comb highly ornamented, which
was used as constantly as they now use the eye-glass.
Two or three of the beaux wore the new-fashioned
shoe-buckle resembling the horse-bean; and with the
addition of flimsy Spanish-leather boots, worn loose
and jauntily, and the superaddition of spurs, did
more execution that evening among unguarded
hearts, than the best-contrived mustach or epaulette
could do now. The small rapier was universally
worn.
Seymour, who officiated as a sort of master of
ceremonies
,
was here and there and everywhere
distributing
a portion of small-talk to every one of the
company
.
Well Grace, said he to her in an under-tone,
having
just left a group of beautiful girls, you have a
brilliant party this evening. But where is your
friend, Miss PhipsI don't find her as yet among the
amiables.
At that moment there was a bustle about the door,
which diverted the attention of Grace Wilmer, and all
eyes were turned in that direction, as the name of
Miss Phips was announced.
Caroline Phips was a lovely girl of seventeen, and
a particular friend of Grace's, and this evening had
been chosen for her coming out. Expectation had
been on tiptoe about her for some time, for it was
understood that she was to appear in the latest
fashion
,
dresses having been sent out to her from
England
as a present from the Duchess of Albemarle.
As she entered the room, a great sensation was
produced of course, and well it might have been, for
the heels of her silver-tissue shoes were so high, that
she could not walk without the assistance of another
person; this was a gentleman who was
distinguished
by the peculiarity of his boots, and the beauty of
his spurs. Her gown was of lilac-colored damask
silk, with a train six feet long; this was supported
by two little girls, dressed with wreaths of flowers on
their heads. Her hair was strained over a toupee of
silk and cotton wool, and was carried up higher than
the length of her face, the whole ornamented with
furbelows, and long lappets of point lace hanging
from it. The waist of her gown was very long, and
she wore a stomacher of purple velvet covered with
jewels.
No sooner had she gone through the preliminaries
of the evening, than she was surrounded by a dozen
beaux, all of whom were informed that her father had
been knighted (no great honor, by the way, at that
time when knighthood was so cheap) and was worth
a million of pounds sterling; Sir William Phip's
fortune
having been increased by Madame Rumor to the
said enormous amount.
Are you sure the old man is worth so much?
said a weakling of one-and-twenty in a pink peruke,
addressing a sapling of seventeen in a short bob of
yellow; the meanwhile curling his ringlets round
his fingers, and staring at the heiress with all his
eyes.
No doubt about it whatever, replied the short
bob; and they say too that the Duke of Albemarle
has presented her with a costly set of diamonds.
Is it possible! exclaimed the pink peruke,
well, she
is
a splendid girl to be sure. Did you
ever
see such a dress as that, though?
Magnificent! is'nt it? responded the short bob.
At that moment a young lady called the attention
of the latter by tapping him gently on the arm, and
inquiring how he liked Miss Phips's dress; but the
short bob read her own opinion in her arching
eye-brows
and pouting under lip, and replied:
It is in execrably bad taste, on my honor!there
is nothing like low-heeled shoes for a pretty foot, and
just such a dress as you have on to show a splendid
figure to advantage.
The young lady swallowed the intended flattery
whole, without biting it, and giving him a farewell
tap, by way of thank'e sir! moved off to fish for
another compliment: while the short bob took the
arm of his friend and strutted over the room to flirt
with the lady whose dress he had satirized, and to
make all the pretty speeches to her he could.
Another movement was now perceptible in the
hall, and presently Mr. Temple was ushered in,
leaning
on the arm of Fitzvassal. The old patriarch was
dressed with great simplicity, a plain coat of black
velvet fitting his body closely, with a single row of
small black silk buttons from the upper part of the
neck downward. His lower dress was cut with like
plainness, and he wore black silk stockings, and ties
on his shoes. A plain collar of white linen was
turned over his coat, extending but a few inches
downward, and his white locks fell on his shoulders
in easy, natural curls. There were four or five
gentlemen
present who were dressed with the same
simplicity
,
but they were all a good deal advanced in years,
who could not be influenced by the changes of
fashion
.
Fitzvassal was dressed in a superb suit of crimson
velvet, his doublet richly in wrought with gold, while
his breeches were of corresponding workmanship; he
wore the loose boot of Spanish leather without spurs,
and over his shoulders swung a sword-belt of
crimson
velvet worked with silver. His ruff was a
standing
one of Brussels lace. He carried an elegant
Spanish castor in his hand, from which waved two
black ostrich feathers. A single diamond, of great
size and purity, blazed from the band of the hat where
the feathers united. He wore his own hair, which
required
no artificial arrangement.
As they moved along under the guidance of Mr.
Wilmer, the crowd opened to the right and left, and
all eyes were fixed upon them.
Who is that young man? was the eager inquiry
of several blooming beauties, at once.
Why, don't
you know?
was a common reply,
that is Captain Nix, one of the first gentlemen of
the age.
And indeed, as Fitzvassal paced the room with the
venerable patriot on his arm, there was much about
him to interest every one who saw him.
Amidst the foppery of the times, he was arrayed
superbly
,
yet in accordance with consummate taste, while
there was an expression of thoughtful melancholy in
his fine countenance, that could not fail to excite the
curiosity of the sex.
As the unknown buccaneer, in his turn, bowed to
Grace Wilmer, without lifting his eyes to her own,
such a death-like paleness spread upon her lips and
cheeks, that it could not fail to be observed by many.
No one, however, suspected the cause, and it was
attributed
to the closeness of the room.
Ever since that morning when Fitzvassal
declared
his love to Grace Wilmer, her heart had been
sorely oppressed with the remembrance of it. She
had often met him in company, and his
conduct
had been so unaccountable that she could not
understand it. He was all smiles and sunshine at
the time when she left his vessel with Seymour, and
nothing had transpired, that she knew of, to
occasion
so marked a change in his manner. She could
not doubt that he loved her, and though she had
done nothing to encourage his affection, and most
heartily deplored its existence, she could not help
acknowledging
to her own thoughts, that she
entertained
no ordinary regard for him, and she was willing
to ascribe it to gratitude. However that might be,
she was grieved at his coldness, for she was afraid
that he had some cause, unknown to her, for being
offended with her.
After the party were assembled, supper was
announced
,
and the gentlemen led off the ladies to a
large room, contiguous to the one which we
described
at first, where tables were laid for all the guests.
A complete service of silver shone upon the board and
side-boards, but the viands, for the most part, would
not have been so tempting to ladies of our day, as
coquilles garnies de blanc de volaille aux truffes,
or
Charlotte russe, au citron
.
The principal dishes were two chines of beef
roasted; to these were added, two legs of mutton; a
dish of fowls, four pullets, two dozen larks, all side by
side or in piles; two large tarts, six neats' tongues,
several
dishes of prawns, anchovies, marrow-bones, with
a cheese. Besides, they had the king's favorite sauce,
which consisted of parsley and dry toast pounded in
a mortar, with vinegar, salt, and pepper. Ale and
wine, with sack-posset, were the principle articles of
drink. The malt-liquor was drank from large silver
tankards, which were hooped at intervals within;
and it was the bounded duty of every one to drink
exactly to a hoop; if he drank either above or
below
one, he was compelled to go another.
The windows and walls of the banqueting-room
were adorned with branches of spruce, and the
mistletoe
had its place over the door.
In the course of the evening, the health of the
governor
was proposed by Mr. Wilmer, as a matter of
ceremonious necessity. In offering it, he regretted
that Sir Edmund was unavoidably absent, and the
applause that followed may have been ascribed to the
latter circumstance, rather than to any sympathy
which the proposal of his health had awakened.
Amidst the hilarity of the evening, Fitzvassal alone
was sad; for even Mr. Temple and the stricter
puritans
Vol. II. 18
who had honored the company with their
presence
,
threw off a portion of their reserve and
entered
into the innocent gayety of the occasion. Among
the ladies, Grace might have been selected as the
most unexcited beauty, but her sadness was tempered
by an ever watchful courtesy, which made her
forget
herself in the interest she felt for those around
her.
Once only Fitzvassal's eyes met hers, when a blush
mounted to her cheeks, which drove his memory
back to the scene which haunted him like a demon,
while the table for a moment swam before his
vision.
The all-important task of eating and drinking
being
ended, a game of blind-man's-buff was proposed.
To this end the tables were cleared away, while old
and young commenced the Christmas diversion.
As the guests were most of them occupied in this
amusement, Fitzvassal again caught the eye of
Grace, who was standing close beside him, as if she
did not wish to avoid a friendly encounter with her
benefactor. As their eyes met, Grace, to guard
herself
from further embarrassment, addressed him,
Don't you intend to join in the game, Captain
Nix?
No, madam! replied the buccaneer, with a
forced
,
melancholy smile, which he believed expressed
his indifference.
Nor I; resumed the fair girl, looking down at
her feet, as if she would have no objection to his
continuing the conversation.
Let us walk below, then; said Fitzvassal,
offering
her his arm, which she willingly accepted, I
think it would be quite as pleasant there, and less
distracting.
So saying they descended the broad staircase
together
,
and turned into the principal room beneath.
It was blazing with light, but there was not a
solitary
guest present. Their minds were all absorbed
with blind-man's-buff above.
The curtain had fallen down on one side of an
alcove, and softened the light within.
Let us shun this glare, Miss Wilmer, said the
buccaneer, as he led her to that inviting retreat.
Grace was willing, yet reluctant,but she had
heard the worst that she dreaded from the handsome
officer, and she was desirous of regaining his good
opinion, which she feared had been temporarily
disturbed
.
Have I done any thing to offend you, Captain
Nix? said Grace, blushing in spite of herself.
Why do you ask that question? replied the
buccaneer
,
whose heart beat tumultuously as he gazed
on her, and whose love revived at the sight of her
extreme
beauty and innocent expression.
Because, replied Grace, venturing to look upon
his countenance, I would have the good opinion
of Captain Nix, though
You cannot
love
him!added Fitzvassal with
a sigh.
My affections were engaged before I saw you,
replied Grace, with simplicity.
Fitzvassal grasped her wrist convulsively as she
spoke, and rivetted his eyes upon her.
Miss Wilmer! said he, his deep voice faltering
with emotion, you surprise mewere you
betrothed
to Mr. Seymour before you visited my vessel?
Yes! certainlywhy? oh, yes, long, long
before
!
exclaimed Grace, as if she had an inward
perception
that on that depended the mysterious conduct
of the supposed Captain Nix, and she now rejoiced,
in clearing it up; yes, indeed, long before!
Then I thank God! replied Fitzvassal, for
you are
innocent,
though I am irretrievably
ruined
!
How ruined! exclaimed Grace, with the same
simplicity as before, and little suspecting the true
meaning of his words; how am I
innocent,
Captain
Nix?
A lover cannot be blamed, replied Fitzvassal,
for touching his lips to his betrothed'sand she is
innocent of any blame who reciprocates that token
of affection.
Grace looked at him for a moment surprised,
when the truth flashed suddenly upon her; she then
knew that she had been seen by the mariner under
circumstances which have been mentioned, and her
eyes fell upon her bosom.
But oh, Miss Wilmer! he added passionately,
you cannot think what a hell of agony he
encounters
,
who loving to excess, madly, violently
loving, is compelled to be the unwilling witness of
that seal of love, which should have been his own.
Seymour never loved you as I love
Captain Nix! said Grace, rising,her sweet
voice trembling as she spoke.
Stay! exclaimed Fitzvassaldo not leave
me in anger! man never loved woman as I love
younay! you must, you shall listen to me, Miss
Wilmer! From the moment I first beheld you, I
loved you, adored you, worshipped you; I had no
thoughts in which your image was not blended, no
hopes, no wishes, separate and unmingled with
your happiness.True, I never told you that I loved
you, but you knew it too well, alas!
Indeed, I
never
knew it! replied Grace, deeply
moved at what he had uttered, oh! if I
had
but
known it sooner!
And if you
had
! said Fitzvassal eagerly, as if
a ray of hope gleamed from her angel utterance to
illumine the midnight of his despairif you
had
have known itwhat then, Miss Wilmer; tell me, I
beseech you tell me!
I would sighed Grace, and sighing paused,
without completing the sentence.
18*
The downcast, perturbed look of the
transcendent
beauty faltering in the presence of the man who
religiously adored her, flattered his fondest hopes,
and prompted him to say:
Had you sooner known that I loved yousay,
Miss Wilmer, could you not, would you not have
listened
to my supplications?
Never! ejaculated Grace, choking as she
uttered
the words,Never, Sir, I could notI
ought
not to have loved you!
You
must
have loved me, charming creature!
exclaimed Fitzvassal, carried away by the height of
his feelings, you could not have helped loving one
who idolized you so much, so entirely!
And as he spoke, he fell upon his knee and
smothered
her hand with kisses.
For an instant, Grace seemed to waverbut it was
only for
pity
of her lover,a dangerous and fearful
herald of an approaching guest, which had it come
would have betrayed the hospitality of her bosom;
for an instant she seemed to waver, but immediately
rallying with heroic energy, she turned from him
with these words:
Captain Nix, I
never
loved you, and never
can;
what I
might
have done, heaven only knows! you
are aware that I am the betrothed of another. In
future
,
then, never speak to me of love. I would fain
respect
you, and be grateful to you, but I cannot think
of a warmer sentiment.
As she spoke, in tones of mingled sweetness and
dignity, Fitzvassal dropped her imprisoned hand
forever. As she left the room, his eyes followed her,
and when he observed a large tear coursing down her
cheek, a gush of tenderness leaped from the fountain
of his sympathy, and the lover and the loved wept
together, though there was a barrier like the
Alleghany
between them.
Fitzvassal left the house, buried in the gloomiest
reflections.
CHAPTER XIX.
Leon
.
you are tedious.
Dogb
.
It pleases your worship to say sobut truly, for my own
part, if I were as tedious as a king, I could find in my heart to
bestow
it all of your worship.
Much ado about nothing
.
The breast may mourn o'er a close link torn,
And the scalding drops may roll;
But 'tis better to mourn o'er a pulseless form,
Than the wreck of a living soul.
The Tree of Death
.
Nym
.
They say he cried out for sack.
Quick
.
Ay, that 'a did.
Henry
V
.
It
was on the morning after the festivities of
Christmas, as Fitzvassal was conversing with Mr.
Temple, at whose house he resided when in town,
that a servant announced a woman in the hall who
desired to speak with him; at the same time the
person
entered, being prompted by her characteristic
impatience
,
in whose dumpy figure and peculiar face,
he recognised no less an individual than Mistress
Debora
Saultz. As she came forward, Mr. Temple
retired to another apartment.
Lord 'a massy on us! exclaimed the woman, as
she discovered in Fitzvassal the gentleman she had
been in search of; do tell us if I have found
you at last!
Fitzvassal received her courteously, and requested
her to be seated.
Thank your kind heart! replied the woman;
well, I don't care if I
do
set down a bit, for it's pesky
cold this morning; the water friz in the pitcher
last night, and I e'en-a-most turned to an isuckle
myself
.
The rheumatiz troubles me a good deal too:
did you ever have the rheumatiz?
It must be a very bitter morning! said
Fitzvassal
,
turning his face toward the window, as if the
latter part of her speech had not been noticed, and
he were apprehensive that the garrulous old creature
would bore him to death.
Pesky cold, as you ever saw; replied Dame
Saultz, rubbing her leathery hands and holding
them to the blazing fire; it's as much as Christian
folks can do to keep from freezing. And there I've
been tending a sick man, more's the pity! instead of
making mince-pies and squash-puddings; though I
don't care a farthing about Christmas;
Thanksgiving's
the day for me. Now, last Thanksgiving, we
had the Rev. Mr. Morphine to dine with us;
Goodman
Saultz, and me, and ever so many of us set
down to roast turkey and plumb-pudding.Massy
on us! you can't think what a time we had
a-making
pies and thingsand the quantity of suet, and
plums, and citron, and butterand
Never mind, said the buccaneer, who was
already
tired out with her loquacity, never mind,
Mistress Saultz;you were just now speaking of
what you came about.
Lord'a massy! if I had'nt e'en-a-most forgotten
all about it. This comes of eating and drinking, and
a-taking of it so much. Well, if it is n't strange that
I should e'en-a-most have forgotten the very thing
I came about on purpose. So it is, strange enough!
strange enough, but we folks grow old before we
think of it, and then
Your business, if you please, madam!
interrupted
the impatient mariner.
Oh my business! replied the dame, Lauks!
you know it as well as I do. My goodman's Simon
Saultz, the apothecary who lives in Cornhill at the
corner of
I remember very well, groaned Fitzvassal.
And I turn an honest penny by going out to
nurse, and laying out folks for the cooling-board.
Then I take in washing and ironing, and do a
plaguy many old chores about the house.
I'm afraid I take up too much of your time,
Mistress Saultz, said the buccaneer, hoping that the
garrulous dame would take the hint and be off; I
pray that you don't let me detain you a moment.
Lord'a massy on us! how these men-folks talk!
exclaimed the womanthey are full of implements
and flatteries;bless your kind heart; I've got all the
live-long day before me, and you are welcome to the
whole of it
God forbid! ejaculated Fitzvassal, with earnest
solemnity.
And that puts me in mind of what I came about
for if you will only believe me, I've walked
e'en-a-most three long miles, and only on purpose to
see you.
The mariner poked the fire in despair.
Well you see, resumed Mistress Saultz, that
four days ago;let's see,yesterday was
Christmas
;
that's one; the thirty-mile man came the day
before with his eggs and poultryand the day before
that
For heaven's sake, Mistress Saultz! exclaimed
Fitzvassal, starting up and walking the room, do
tell me right out what you want me to do for you
this morning. I am not well, and have no leisure to
be idling any longer.
Lord'a massy on us! what's got
into
the man!
well if I must, I must, and there's an eend of it I
suppose: well, as I was going on to say, when you
interrupted me, it's now four days ago, since a man
called at the shop for medicine and nursery for a sick
man down at the Sea-Gull
Ah! replied Fitzvassal, becoming interested in
her business.
As true as a sarmon, continued Mistress Saultz,
down at the Sea-Gullyou know the Sea-Gull?
Perfectly!
The man that keeps it is going to his reckoning,
or there's no truth in a death-watch
Classon? exclaimed the buccaneer, in a tone of
eager inquiry.
Besides the death-watch, there was a
winding-sheet
last night on the candle: Lord'a massy how
scared I was, to be sure!
Is Classon dying, did you say?
If you'd seen all the sights that I saw, you'd have
thought soand a dog howled at midnightand
the cows,bless me what's that! suddenly
exclaimed
the nervous old nurse, starting at her own
shadow
.
Did Classon send for me? inquired Fitzvassal.
No; I can't say that he did, exactlybut he
raved a good deal about his wife who died in a
cellar
and
it seemed to me that it might have been
I understand you, my good womanmany
thanksmany thanks!you thought I might be
interested
in the sick manI understand you; no
more at present; no more now, I beseech you; go
back to him, I will be there in half an hour;I
pray you leave me now.
And he bowed her out of the room, which she left
rather unwillingly, saying:
Mind now, you don't fail to comefor he is
awful sick, and if you
Never fear, replied Fitzvassal, closing the door
upon her gently; the tedious old fool!
Can it be, mused the buccaneer, that Classon
is really dying? Well, I will go and see the poor
wretch;perhaps I may be able to help him; for I
begin to sympathize with the sufferings of others, even
the most abandoned.
For a few moments he paced the room absorbed in
such reflections.
It is remarkable, thought he, that we should
not begin to feel for others, till we are ourselves
heart-steeped in misery! It seems to me now as if I
had within me a fountain that wells up for all
mankind
,it
seems as if I could devote my life to the
alleviation
of human distress! What was it Nameoke
said? `
The crime you have already committed may
be removed far away by deeds of Charity
.' But I
have added crime to crime, since thenand it is now
too late to go back!
He then threw himself in a chair by the fire, while
his thoughts dwelt on the enchantress.
Nameoke! exclaimed he, thinking aloud, who
are
you? what link has bound our fortunes together?
Vol. II. 19
why should
you
have cared for Fitzvassal? why
should
you
have interested yourself in his
misfortunes
?Have
you
also, like him, been heart-broken,
and crushed in your affections; and have you only
pitied him for
that?
Just then, Mr. Temple entered, and Fitzvassal,
excusing
himself for not remaining, informed his
venerable
friend that he had been called away to see a
sick mariner at the lower end of the town. He then
bowed and departed.
In about half an hour, the heart-sick step-son of
Classon arrived at the Sea-Gull. He passed the
bar-room
,
where sailors were as usual carousing, being
served by a carrot-headed boy with liquor. Mrs.
Saultz had already arrived.
Lord'a massy on us, said she, on discovering
him as she was descending the stairs, how glad I
am that you are come; the man is as mad as a March
hare, e'en-a-most. I'm jest going to fetch a drop of
water, and will be with you in a minute.
Mrs. Saultz presently returned with a can of
water
,
and commenced ascending the stairs.
This way if you please, Captain Mixthis
way!
Nix!
said Fitzvassal, correcting her, my name
is Nix, and not Mix.
Well now, if I did'nt think it was Mix all the
time. There was several Mixes of my acquaintance
that used to live down town
The narrative of Mrs. Saultz respecting the Mixes
was now cut short by their entering the chamber of
the sick man.
That's him! said the nurse, pointing to a person
who was standing up half-dressed, with his back
towards
them, and in fancy pitching coppers into a
hat.
Fitzvassal stood still to observe the movements of
the publican. He had expected to find him in bed,
and was surprised to see him standing up in the
chamber.
The apartment was hardly high enough for a tall
man to stand erect in. It was none of the broadest,
besides having but one low window that looked out
upon the street. A small fire was blazing in the
room, and the sun was shining in upon the floor,
which was coarsely carpeted. Several bottles were
on the mantle-piece, and one was rolling under the
bed. A small bedstead was near where the patient
was standing, that seemed to have been tossed and
tumbled by one in a fever. As we have already
stated
,
Classon was fancying that he was pitching
coppers
in a hat.
Devil take the things, said he, talking to
himself
,
they won't go in! Let's try againthere!
missed again!Now for it! They won't go in!
they won't go in!
Fitzvassal drew near to him and arrested his
attention
but
Classon did not know him.
His step-son gazed on him with wonder, pity, and
disgust. His long hair was matted over his low
forehead, and his eyes were glazed and sunken. His
cheeks had fallen in, so that his jaw-bones projected
fearfully, and his legs were emaciated almost to a
skeleton's. His whole frame shook as with a palsy,
and his voice sounded hollow and husky.
How do you feel, Classon? inquired the
unknown
step-son.
Ah! you are the doctor, aint you?Come here
to me, and don't let that old beldame see us,she has
been trying all day to cut my throat,don't let her
come any nearer!
Fitzvassal drew nearer towards him, when he
seized him by the collar, and drawing down his ear to
his ownlips, he whispered in a death like, sepulchral
tone:
Did the old woman
cut up well?
And on this, he screamed out into an hysterical
peal of laughter, that made the blood fly to his head
perceptibly.
Would'nt it be better for you to turn in awhile?
said Fitzvassal, fixing his eyes upon him.
Yes! yes! I will turn inbut I won't sleepI
won't sleepunless you sit down therefor they are
trying to murder me. Look there, doctor! and he
lowered his voice again to a husky whisper, there's
one of'em creeping under the carpet, close by that
monstrous spider!
And Classon, lying down, wrapped himself
hastily
in the clothes, which in a few seconds after he
threw violently from him, and sat up in the bed.
Oh these spiders! moaned the delirious man,
making motions with his fingers, as if he were
picking
the revolting insects from his body, and throwing
them over the side of the bed, Oh these spiders,
how they plague me!They are winding their webs
about me all the time;I must get out of the bed
while I can, for they tie me up, and I shan't be able
to move, presently.
His step-son endeavored to soothe him, by
assuring
him that there were not any spiders near him.
Don't tell me that! don't tell me that! said
Classon, looking angrily about himdon't I see
them, and feel them too? Is'nt
that
one?ha! ha!
I've caught one of you, have I? No, no, no, he's gone
again!but there are a thousand of them; only see
how they crawl about me!
The wretched man then sunk back for a moment
exhausted, but not to sleep.
He'll rest a pesky little while, Captain Mix, said
the nurse, and then he'll be up again with his
tantrums
.
Don't he sleep any?
Lord 'a massy! he has'nt slept none these three
days.
The man must die if he does'nt get some sleep
soon. Has he seen a physician?
19*
Doctor Sikes has been to see him twice; but
lauks! would you believe it, he kicked him down
stairs yesterday for saying that he should'nt have
any more brandy!
At the sound of that word, Classon sat up again
in his bed, and held out his hand imploringly.
Give me some brandy! said he in tones that
went to the heart of his step-son, who, much as he
detested the man, now felt for him some small degree
of commiseration.
The doctor has said that you must not have any!
remonstrated Fitzvassal,it would only make you
worse.
Death and damnation! shouted the inebriate,
frantic and strong with rage; and who in the devil
is the doctor that says that Abner Classon shan't
drink in his own house?
Then softening his tone as well as he could,
with all the artfulness of insanity, he said in a
persuasive
voice.
Be so good as to give me only
one
drop!
Not a particle! answered Fitzvassal.
And who are
you,
pray, that dares to say so?
exclaimed
the madman, rising towards his step-son,
with fearful threatening.
The buccaneer never moved or quailed, but fixed
his eyes steadfastly upon him, till Classon shrunk
from their gaze, and once more fell exhausted on his
pillow.
The cold sweat stood in big drops on
Classon's
forehead, while his frame shook like an aspen;
his eyes rolled back in his head, and his dry tongue,
white and feverish, hung from his gasping mouth.
Fitzvassal ordered the nurse to bring a little
brandy
;
it was the only hope that remainedand it was
an act of mercy, even if there had been no hope, to
smooth his passage to the grave.
A spoonful of brandy diluted with water, was
poured into his mouth, and he revived like a collapsed
cholera-patient whose veins have been filled with the
injected stimulantor like a coal over which the
ashes of death have already gathered, when the
breath of heaven fans it for a moment.
But he was too far gone, to exhibit any signs of
reason; on the contrary, his thoughts were haunted
with horrible imaginingsand he would sometimes
scream aloud, in his fright at the phantoms around
him.
Oh! exclaimed Classon, with a groan that
seemed
to come from the very abyss of despair; Oh save
me! save me from them! They are trying to force
me into this coffin and it is too smallaway there!
I will not have it! I will not have it! That
winding-sheet
has been used
before!
it smells of the
grave!take it awayGod! God! I will not go
I will not go with you! They are now digging
the ground, the hard frozen ground. The
pick-axe
strikes fire from the ice! You shan't put me
down there!Help! help! oh, God! they are
cramming me down into a grave!Air! breath!
breath! mercy!
As this fit of delirium passed off, Classon,
suddenly
reviving, attempted to spring from the bed;
but Fitzvassal held him down with the strength of
three common men.
The miserable wreck of drunkenness struggled in
the grasp of the buccaneer like a ship that trembles
on a coral-reef the moment before it breaks to pieces
in the surge. His eyes stared wildly, and his hands
were stretched before him, as if he were scared to death
by some appalling spectre. In his agony of dread,
he bit his tongue, that fell clotted and dangling from
his lips;on this, he gave one scream, that rattled
blood smothered in his clogged throat, then drooped
his head and expired!
Fitzvassal laid the body of Classon on the bed, and
covered it over with a sheet; he then turned Mrs.
Saultz from the room, and burst into a flood of tears.
Alas! poor wretch! those were the only tears
that were ever shed over thee;and yet thou wast
once a man in all the exteriors of his being, and
with all the means of angelic excellence! Who shall
condemn thee utterly!who are they who pray that
the like of thee may be swept from the face of the
earth, that only sober men may remain? Alas!
they know not what they pray for, while their own
pharisaical hearts are whirling with as bad an
intoxication
as the drunkenness of wine. Is it better to
cast away, or to redeem?
Would you reform the drunkard? Treat him
kindly; for his is a human soul wandering on the
brink of a precipice, and the frowns of his
fellowmen
are more horrible to him than the death that
gapes below. He is a half-insane sufferer, saturated
with conscious evil;and if you scan him no
deeper
than his rags, you overlook a man-angel in misery.
Take him by the hand, and the heart that seemed
dead to all ennobling impulses, leaps at the God-sent
sympathy. There! that one emotion of gratitude
is an immortal bud shooting from the half-withered
trunk of humanity. Nurture itcherish itdo not
quench the spirit at your peril! Would to God,
that men could love their neighbor as themselves!
CHAPTER XX.
Strikefor your altars and your fires;
Strikefor the green graves of your sires;
Godand your native land!
Halleck
.
By oppression's woes and pains,
By our sons in servile chains,
We will drain our dearest veins
But they shall be free!
Burns
.
We
now pass over a little more than three months,
till the fourth of April, 1689. In the meantime, the
grasp of tyranny had not been relaxed, but
measures
still more odious to the people had been
relentlessly
pursued. Nor were the patriots inactive. Their
meetings had been more frequent than ever, and
even the ministers of religion were zealous for a
revolution
.
In a word, the people were ripe for a revolt,
when it was rumored abroad in Boston that a
messenger
had arrived from England, bringing intelligence
of the Stadtholder's descent on that country, his
rapturous
reception by all partiesthe flight of the king;
in short, news of the glorious Revolution which, as
was believed, had expelled tyranny forever from the
throne. It was rumored, too, that the messenger had
brought a copy of the Prince's Declaration,at which
intelligence, every heart throbbed and danced with
expectation.
The Declaration of the Prince of Orange, which
had been first published in Holland, contributed in
no small degree to his success in England. This
document set forth the chief grievances of the
British
people, and concluded by promising a complete
redress of them. As soon therefore as Sir Edmund
Andros heard that a copy of it had been brought over
to America, he ordered the messenger to be arrested
and thrown into prison. The people, however, soon
got wind of it, and rejoiced in the prospect which it
held out of their speedy emancipation.
But Sir Edmund Andros was determined to crush
them utterly if he could, and be in all respects the
faithful minion of his master James. He immediately
issued a proclamation calling on all persons to use
their endeavors to oppose the landing of any
emissary
of the Prince's, and he ordered out extraordinary
troops to prevent an insurrection among the
populace
.
At the same time the Rose frigate came near to
the town, and reports spread abroad that she was ready
to fire on the metropolis in case of any outbreak which
was threatened.
In the meanwhile, the people had determined to
submit no longer. On the morning of the 18th of
April, the signal for the insurrection was given, and
George, the commander of the Rose frigate, was
seized by several individuals. At the same time the
beacon from Beacon-Hill flamed proudly up to
heaven. The people of the surrounding towns were
waiting for the signal, and as the red blaze ascended
from Boston, a thousand other beacons threw forth
their eager light, and in less than an hour old
Massachusetts
rang from her extremest bordersLiberty!
liberty! `God and our native land!'
Boston was in the meanwhile one scene of uproar
and excitement. Organized bands from the North
and South ends of the town arose simultaneously,
and under Randal and Bagnal hurried to King's
Street, the centre of action. The throng increased,
and the crown sheriff attempted to disperse the
people
.
The people made him their prisoner. The
militia rapidly organized under their old officers, who
had been displaced by Sir Edmund, and demanded
of the royalist major his colors and drums. Being
refused
,
they were taken. The Governor, full of fear,
withdrew to the Fort, where, with his friends and
advisers, he endeavored to concert measures to meet
the emergency.
While these things were enacting, Charles river
and the inner harbor of Boston were alive with boats
crowded with brave hearts and stout hands. A
thousand armed heroes came from Charlestown
alone, and every village within twenty miles, sent
its companies of brave yeomen, who were eager for
the onset. The Dolphin and the Duke of York,
which had been waiting for this event, were nearing
the Rose frigate, their guns ready loaded, and their
boarders pike in hand.
Ten thousand freemen of Massachusetts had
invested
the Governor's Fortress, with their pine-tree
banners waving gallantly to the breeze, and the
anthem
of liberty sounding from their exalted bosoms.
Presently a herald announced from the Fort that the
Governor desired a conference.
No conference! no conference! resounded from
the patriotic crowd,Liberty forever! Liberty
forever! Down with the tyrants!Down with
them forever!
The roar of artillery now sounded from the north,
and the people knew that the Dolphin and her
consort
were contending with the royalist frigate.
Liberty and independence! old Massachusetts
forever! shouted the multitude; yield, tyrants,
yield!down with Sir Edmund Andros! down
with Randolph and all tyranny!
And at this signal, one brave fellow, who was soon
discovered to be Randal, leaped into the trench,
followed
by a host of others, who began to scale the
ramparts.
Instantly a peal of thunder burst from the Fort,
Vol. II. 20
which was intended to intimidate the assailants: but
they rushed on, careless, and not inquiring whether
the guns had been shotted or no, (as they had not
been,) and threw themselves by hundreds into the
Fort.
The garrison, as soon as they found that the
people
had taken possession of the Fort, threw down
their arms and surrendered. They were glad, too,
of the opportunity of so doing. The red-cross of
England came down from the flag-staff, and was
rehoisted
,
surmounted by the triumphant Pine-Tree.
Sir Edmund Andros and his friends were made
prisoners
,
and were confined in the Fortress.
A cry now went forth for the people to meet at the
Town-House, and the living torrent began forthwith
to set in that direction. The roar of artillery
continued
from the harbor. While the people are
thronging
to the Town-House, let us visit the scene of
naval
action.
Gallantly came on the two patriot vessels to meet
the frigate, which, on their near approach, they
hailed
from the Dolphin's quarter-deck, and ordered to
surrender. The only response made to this modest
demand, was from an eighteen pounder, whose shot
passed between the fore and main-masts of the
Dolphin, without effecting any damage. The gage
being thus unceremoniously thrown, the Dolphin
ran alongside her starboard quarter and poured a
heavy broadside into her, which, as soon as it was
answered from the frigate, was followed up by another
from the Duke of York, commanded by Morgan,
which afterwards ran into her, and threw the
grappling-irons
.
The fire continued for about ten minutes,
without doing so much damage, except to spars and
rigging, as might have been expected. The men in
the frigate had heard of the Revolution in England,
and did as little mischief as they could to the
patriots
,
who, in their turn, avoided blood-shed as much
as possible, from assurances that had been given
them, that, in case of an outbreak, the frigate should
be an easy conquest.
While, therefore, they were keeping up what
rather
amounted to a sham-fight than anything more
serious, Grummet was seen running up toward the
mast-head of the frigate. As he ascended, a shout went
up from the decks of the patriot vessels, and in an
instant
after, the flag of the proud vessel was seen
sailing
away on the breeze. Fitzvassal was master of
the frigate, and the independence of the colony was
sealed.
A crowd of people had now gathered about the
Town-House, such as never before had been
assembled
in old Massachusetts. They had dethroned
their tyrant and his minions, and were once again
free. The artillery now thundered from every part
of the town for joy, and the firing on board the
armed
vessels was continued on the same account. All
the bells were pealing from the churches,all was
excitement and gladness.
But in the midst of this general burst of joy, the
people began to ask each other what was next to be
done;when all at once a shout went up from the
vast assembly, louder, heartier, and more protracted
than ever. A great movement was observed in the
crowd, when presently the Nestor of the time, one of
the last survivors of the fathers of Boston, the late
governor, who had been turned from his office by
the tyranny of the monarch,the venerable
Simon
Bradstreet,
appeared leaning on the arm of the
patriotic Temple. That excellent old man was now
in his eighty-eighth year, and as he came forward in
the midst of the people whom he loved, he appeared
to them like the embodied form of all they honored
and reveredthe herald of their happiness, their
long-lost happiness, the assertor and proclaimer of
their liberty!
As he moved along, bowed with the weight of
years, his silvery hair flowing over his plain, black
dress of velvet, and his countenance beaming with
gratitude, love, and benevolence, the acclamations of
the people were without bounds. He was followed
by the members of the Secret Committee, and other
distinguished inhabitants of the metropolis, and with
them he ascended to the balcony of the Town-house.
There arrived, he was once more greeted with
the heart-felt, rapturous enthusiasm of the crowd.
He came there the apostle of liberty; like an
evangelist
he stretched forth his hands over the people,
and while his eyes filled with tears of thankfulness,
he called down a blessing upon them. He then
reminded
them of their fathers, and of the confidence
in the Divine Providence which had brought them
over the wide waters that they might worship
God according to the dictates of their consciences;
he spoke of the dangers they had passed, and of the
trials they had endured; and he reminded their
posterity
,
who were now in his presence, of that sublime
spirit of
Renunciation
which had been the ruling
characteristic of those great, good men, who had
never been
selfish
or
self-willed,
but who
constantly
referred all they achieved, and all they enjoyed,
to the great giver of all good things. He told them
that on account of their forgetfulness of these
obligations
,
they had lately been subjected to grievous
trials and calamities,but that God had now seen
fit to stay his hand, and restore to them those
temporal
blessings of which they had been for a time
deprived
,
that they might learn through the sufferings
of adversity to refer all their happiness to the giver.
He finally besought them to be grateful for the
achievements of the day, and by all means to use
their triumph with moderation. After once more
imploring a blessing upon them, he retired.
The death-like silence that held the multitude
during this address, continued for a time after it was
20*
ended. Tears stood in the eyes of manyand the
hearts of all were too much subdued for a while, to
give breath to their overwhelming joyousness. But
soon after, as Mr. Temple stepped forth, holding out
a scroll to the people, they once more burst forth into
loud and spirit-stirring acclamations.
As soon as silence had been restored, Mr. Temple
again held out the paper, and with a loud voice
exclaimed
:
THE DECLARATION OF LIBERTY!
The words flashed upon the people like lightning,
and their emotions found vent in one long-continued
peal of exultation, that was echoed from hill to hill,
and from mountain to mountain, till from the centre
to the circumference, time-honored, glorious old
Massachusetts sent up to the applauding heavens the
triumphant shouts of freedom.
Mr. Temple then read the
Declaration of
Liberty
,
that
paper which was the father of the
great
Declaration of Independence,
as the
Revolution
of 1689, begun and finished in Massachusetts,
was the parent of the memorable one that nearly a
century after succeeded, and made way for the
emancipation
of the world.
It contained an enumeration of grievances, and
of the unavailing petitions for their redress which
had been made, set forth in twelve articles, and
concluded
thus:We, the people of Massachusetts do
therefore seize upon the persons of those few ill men
which have been (next to our sins) the grand authors
of our miseries, resolving to secure them for what
justice, orders from his Highness with the English
Parliament, shall direct; lest, ere we are aware, we
find (what we may fear, being on all sides in danger)
ourselves to be by them given away to a foreign
power, before such orders can reach unto us; for
which orders we now humbly wait: in the
meantime
,
firmly believing that we have endeavored
nothing
but what mere duty to God and our country
calls for at our hands. We commit our enterprise
unto the blessing of Him, who hears the cry of the
oppressed, and advise all our neighbors, for whom
we have thus ventured ourselves, to join with us in
prayer and all just actions for the defence of the
land.
The Declaration of Liberty dissolved the odious
government of Andros, and the last clank of its chain
was heard amidst the enthusiastic uproar when the
people of Massachusetts trampled them to the dust.
It was now agreed, in a purely democratic assembly,
to constitute the Committee which, under Mr.
Temple
,
had been the guardian of those measures that
had resulted so gloriously to the cause of natural and
chartered rights,
a Committee of Safety,
for the time
being. Simon Bradstreet was recognised as Governor
of Massachusetts, and all the subordinate offices were
filled by their old incumbents. Representatives
were again chosen, and once more Massachusetts
assembled in general court.
CHAPTER XXI.
We celebrate not the sanguinary exploits of the tyrant to
subjugate
and enslave millions of his fellow creatures,we celebrate
neither the birth nor the coronation of that phantom styled a king;
but the resurrection of liberty, the emancipation of mankind.
J.
Maxcy
.
Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
Which would be worn now in their newest gloss,
Not cast aside so soon.
Macbeth
.
Thy famed pirate laurel seems to fade.
Lucan
.
The
first of June, 1689, was set apart by the people
of Massachusetts for a grand jubilee of Freedom;
for the example of her revolution, conceived and
perfected by her hardy children, without the concert
or co-operation of the other colonies, spread with
wondrous
rapidity, and extended to the Chesapeake and
to the wilderness.
It is difficult to overrate the importance of this first
great democratic movement in America; for it is not
saying too much, to ascribe to
that,
the paralysis
with which kingly assumption was first smitten in
the new world. True, it partially recovered from
the shock, and the third George of England
beleived
that its vigour was fully restored, and he
overtasked
its strength accordingly; but the sublime
will of a virtuous people smote down the palsied
monster a second time, and it has been lingering on
the shadowy borders of eternal death ever since.
Nor is it wrong to give the people of Massachusetts
the highest praise for the glorious stand they took
in this bold stroke for Liberty. Honored forever
be her children, and may the memory of their fathers
save them from narrow-minded prejudice and
illiberal policy. Wo unto them, when Bunker-Hill
shall be levelled into house-lots; when the
muck-rake
disinters their bones who fell at her Marathon!
The golden calf will then have been erected within
view of the lightnings of her own Sinai. Should
that day ever come, which God forbid, what
thenceforth
could be expected from Massachusetts?They
who never look back to their ancestors, says Burke,
will rarely look forward to posterity.
The first of June was ushered in by the roar of
artillery
,
the ringing of bells, and all those
demonstrations
of popular joy, which the elder Adams foretold
would be the heralds in after years of the anniversary
of the memorable fourth of July, '76. The town of
Boston was not polluted on that day by the presence
of one of her enemies; Andros and his coadjutors
having been all sent home to England.
Preparation had been made for a grand procession
of citizens, who with music and banners were to
march through the town and dine together under a
spacious tent in the Common. We well remember
sitting down with four thousand people under one
tent on Bunker-Hill, when the surviving heroes of
that great battle dined with Lafayette. Such a tent
as that was spread on Boston Common for the first
jubilee of Freedom.
The procession was formed at 12 o'clock, by the
marshals of the day, and first of all went the Boston
regiment, with martial music, under the command
of its reinstated officers. Next followed the
venerable
governor, Simon Bradstreet, with other
subordinate
civil officers; the reverend clergy succeeded,
followed by the magistrates. Next came a thousand
children dressed in white and blue, their heads girt
with chaplets of roses, and round their necks a
miniature copy of the Declaration of Liberty,
bound in red morocco, hanging by a blue ribbon:
next to these followed a long line of ladies, four
abreast, dressed in white, their heads also adorned
with white roses. Succeeding these came all the
different mechanics, who were marshalled according
to their trades, and in the midst of each company
came a large staging drawn by eight horses, on which
the peculiar business of the trade was exhibited.
Similar processions have taken place on extraordinary
occasions since. There were seen carpenters and
masons, and blacksmiths, wheel-wrights, et cetera,
busily employed, and their carriages all bore the
mottos, Life without liberty is intolerable,
Liberty
now and forever! The companies of the
mechanics
was followed by a long procession on foot,
and this was terminated by a cavalcade as
extensive
.
Among the young ladies whose charms were
exhibited
on the occasion, Grace Wilmer shone with
transcendent beauty. She was one of the few who
rodein carriages which were adorned with flowers and
flags, intertwined and gracefully arranged.
Seymour
sat opposite to her, entranced no less by her
fascinations, than by the patriotic excitement of
the day. Her father had been forgiven for being
one of Sir Edmund Andros's council, for it was soon
made manifest, that it had been through his influence
alone that still harsher measures were not pursued
by the tyrant. He was not only forgiven, but
rewarded
and elected to a magistracy.
The procession marched round the Common and
enterng at one of its upper gates formed an extended
circle within the wide inclosure. In the centre of
this a chair was placed, to which the venerable
Bradstreet was conducted by Mr. Temple. As the
excellent patriarch took his seat, the acclamations of
the people were unbounded. The ladies waved their
handkerchiefs, and scattered garlands before him.
The music poured forth its most animating sounds,
and the roar of the artillery was echoed far and wide,
from the walls of the vast natural amphitheatre of
which Boston Common is the arena. The majestic
trees, that with double rows of dark green foliage
then girdled that delicious spot, served as a
background
from every point of view, to the most
enlivening
and spirit-stirring picture that was ever
exhibited
in America.
In the centre of the Common was erected a
triumphal
arch, adorned with flags and oak-leaves, from
which swung banners bearing patriotic inscriptions,
while on one side of the arch the words
Renunciation
not Assumption
! and on the other
Massachusetts
and Liberty
! were emblazoned in
golden characters.
On both sides of the venerable governor were seated
a number of the most distinguished persons,
principally
Boston mechanics, through whose instrumentality
the revolution had been chiefly effected. On a
signal
given by six trumpeters who came forward from
behind the governor's chair on horseback, and woke
the echoes through their brazen instruments, a
number
of ladies, corresponding to the number of the chief
patriots, came forward, each one accompanied by a
little girl fancifully adorned, who held in her hand a
garland made of the leaves of the American Elm, the
emblem of patriotism.
The trumpets now sounded again, when the little
band of patriots knelt before the ladies, who, taking
the garlands from the hands of their young attendants,
placed them on the heads of the heroes, among
whom Randal and his friend Bagnal were
conspicuous
.
But this part of the ceremony was not yet
completed
.
The band of patriots, having been honored by
so great a distinction, bowed to the ladies and
resumed
their seats, still wearing their garlands of living
green, the acclamations of their fellow-citizens
resounding
far and wide: when the Governor rising,
remarked that there was still another person, who,
though a stranger and an Englishman, had been of
indispensable importance in the glorious achievement
of the Revolution, and he requested to know what
distinguished honor should be shown to him.
A murmur of interest ran through the vast
assemblage
as the subject of the patriarch's address became
known, and it was suggested by some of the most
influential
persons present, that it should be proposed
as the most suitable honor that could be conferred
upon him, to select the most beautiful and
accomplished
maiden present, to crown him as the others
had been crowned, with the elm garland, and that he
should lead the procession through the triumphal
arch.
Vol. II. 21
As soon as this proposal was made known to the
people, their approbation was manifested by the loudest
cheering, and every eye was at once directed towards
the imperial beauty, whose excellence was known
and admitted by all. Grace blushed deeply, for she
could not misunderstand the compliment, and she
was presently led forth by Mr. Temple, amidst the
deafening plaudits of the multitude, accompanied by
a young girl, who like the other attendants, held the
crown of patriotism in her hand.
In the meantime, the dignified and venerable
chief-magistrate gave his hand to Fitzvassal, who,
amidst the reiterated shouts of the people, came
forward
modestly to receive his garland. Without
raising
his eyes from the ground, he knelt, while the
majestic
beauty advanced.
Receive, said she, her voice trembling with
emotion
,
receive the reward of virtuous endeavor!
The people of Massachusetts, in awarding to you the
garland of patriotismadopt you as their son and
brother!
The garland was then placed upon Fitzvassal's
brow, and as it fell there, he raised his eyes to the
donor
.
A tear was trembling on their lids, and as the
gentle being who stood before him observed it, a
thousand
mingled emotions crowded to her bosom, in spite
of the distracting causes around her.
This, thought Fitzvassal, is worse than the
bitterness of death! it seemed to him as if the
skeleton
of Hope were mocking him with grave-garlands.
As her hand passed down again without the wreath
she had held, a solitary tear fell upon her hand, and
rivalled for a moment the jewel that adorned it.
Grace courtsied and withdrew, and as the supposed
Captain Nix was conducted back to his chair, once
more arose the rapturous acclamations of the
multitude
,
who little imagined what lacerated feelings were
torturing the objects of their applause.
The procession was now once more formed, and
Fitzvassal taking the lead, his head encircled with the
elm-garland, marched to the sound of heart-thrilling
music through the triumphal arch, while the ladies,
counter-marching on both sides, strewed the way
with roses.
The banquet was in the meantime made ready,
and the company who had been provided with cards
of admission were seated. On a platform in the
centre, elevated several feet above the other tables,
that they might be seen by all the guests, sat the
little
company of garlanded patriots, among whom
Fitzvassal was conspicuous on account of his youth
and manly elegance. He was, indeed, the
observed
of all observers, and as the toasts went round,
the health of the brave Captain Nix was received
with marked distinction.
As the hours rolled by, amidst the excitement of
the music and the wine, and the flow of feeling and
patriotic enthusiasm which made the very
atmosphere
exhilarating to those who inhabited it,
Fitzvassal
forgot his cares, and gave full swing to his
present emotions. Never had he appeared to such
advantage. His face beamed with pleasure as he
drank deeply of those allurements for which he had
in his more aspiring moments panted.
The reputed Captain Nix had just been called on
by the toast-master, and was in the act of offering a
sentiment, when two sturdy officers of justice entered
the tent, and going immediately up to him, asked
unceremoniously if his name were
Edward
Fitzvassal
!
Thunderstruck with the question, the buccaneer
turned pale as death. The company, waiting for his
toast, were so silent that a whisper might have been
heard from any part of the table. They all heard
the question of the officers, and were filled with
amazement. It was repeated.
Is your name Edward Fitzvassal?
Fitzvassal gazed upon them an instantand their
object at once flashed upon his mind. But he read
in their looks determination, and after a moments'
hesitation, replied:
Yes! it
is
Edward Fitzvassal!and what
then?
You are arrested on the charge of piracy!
exclaimed
one of the officers, exhibiting a magistrate's
warrantand you must go with us to answer to
the accusation!
A cry of astonishment and dismay ran through the
crowded company, and exclamations of
impossible
!
shame! shame! turn the scroundels out!
were reiterated from every part of the table; but
when they saw the accused with his head bowed
down to his bosom, and his hands clasped together
with the resignation of despair, following the officers
with apparent willingness,a change came over
their feelings, and they looked at each other, as if
they were waiting, after the shock of an earthquake,
for something more appalling to follow.
Such was the effect of this extraordinary incident,
that the festivities of the day were suddenly broken
up, and the guests retired from the tables wondering
and conjecturing among themselves, what could be
the meaning of so singular an affair. If their
patriarchal
governor had himself been accused of felony,
they could hardly have been more incredulous and
astounded. Here was a man who had been
recommended
to the favor of Massachusetts by one of the
first baronets of England, and who had taken a
conspicuous
and important part in her glorious
revolution
,
now under arrest, and in the hands of justice,
on a charge of piracy!
The news of the arrest spread on the wings of the
wind, and before night, it was the absorbing topic of
conversation.
I thought, said Saultz, rolling his goggle eyes,
and cramming his nose with snuff; I thought it
21*
would turn out so; for you remember, Debby, what
I told you when such heaps of gold came into the
shop all at once!
Lord'a massy on us! replied Mistress Debora, I
do
remember now you mention it, that he smelt very
strong of tar! Dear me, what are we all a-coming
to!
CHAPTER XXII.
Foul deeds will rise,
Though all the earth o'erwhelm them, to men's eyes.
Hamlet
So shall you hear
Of carnal, bloody and unnatural acts;
Of accidental judgments, casual slaughters;
Of deaths put on by cunning, and forc'd cause;
And, in this upshot, purposes mistook
Fall'n on the inventor's heads.
Id
.
On
the morning of the first of June, 1689, while
the guns were booming over the waters of Boston
harbor, and welcoming the dawn of the jubilee, an
open boat was slowly working its way up to the
metropolis
,
containing four men, who were nearly worn
to skeletons by fatigue and starvation. They were
the survivors of the small number of sailors, who,
with the unfortunate Captain Nix, were abandoned
by Fitzvassal and the other mutineers of the
Dolphin
so many months before, to the mercy of the
winds and the waves. Since that time, they had
gone through incredible hardships by land and by
sea, having been taken and tormented by savages
while ashore in an unknown region, from which
they providentially escaped on the appearance of the
summer. Their coming into Boston harbor
appeared
to be merely accidental, but the event showed that it
happened in accordance with that wondrous fitness
of things, that so often appeals to the rationality of
man to lead him from a belief in accident and blind
chance.
Three of those miserable beings perished before
the winter set in, and the survivors were sustained
by the exercise of great fortitude and perseverance.
On their coming up to the metropolis, having
neither compass or chart, which had been taken
from them by the Indians for baubles, they landed
on Green Island, then a beautiful spot about midway
between the town and the light-house. Here they
found fresh water, and clams, by which they were
revived, so that they could enjoy the marvellous
beauty of the place, which was covered with fruit
trees all in blossom; where the red-breast was
hopping
from spray to spray, and singing blithsomely
in the mild air of June.
That morning was to those weary men a sabbath
of sweet rest, and they poured out heart-felt thanks
givings for all the dangers they had escaped; yet they
knew not where they were. They wandered a long
while along the borders of the small island, which
they could compass in an hour's loitering walk,
charmed with the deliciousness of all around them;
for the waters were clear and unruffled, and the
shadows of the fruit-trees were painted in the broad
mirror of the Atlantic. Other islands were around
them, green and beautiful to behold, and several miles
toward the north-west, with intervening fortresses,
appeared a large city, as if built on a single hill,
sloping
from an elevation of a hundred feet to the
champaign on both sides, and sending up its many
glittering spires to heaven. On the left were hills
blue as the vault above them, and on all sides
landscape
features which are perhaps unequalled by any
similar spot on earth.
While they were sauntering in this way, hoping
for some boat to pass which might convey them to
the habitation of man, a small canoe, containing a
beautiful Indian woman, glided near to the Island,
and seemed to be drifting toward the city. They
hailed her again and again, but no answer was
returned
.
She was weeping and sobbing piteously,
and seemed to be too much absorbed in her own
grief to lend an ear to their address.
Towards noon, a fishing-boat passed near them,
and on being hailed, it landed for their relief. Then,
for the first time, they learned that they were in the
harbor of Boston, the birth-place, as Captain Nix
well knew, of his faithless mate. But it was the last
place he would have imagined Fitzvassal to be in,
after
the cruelties he had inflicted on himself and
fellow-sufferers
;
but when, after a long conversation
with the fisherman, he learned that a vessel
described
as his own, called the Dolphin, was in the
harbor
,
and that its commander, whose description
answered
so perfectly to the peculiarities of Fitzvassal,
was known as Captain Nix, he could not doubt for an
instant of their identity.
The fisherman, who became interested in the
unfortunate
mariners, promptly received them on board
his boat, and proceeded with them to Boston. On
the way thither, Captain Nix recognized his vessel,
and in an hour after, he made his affidavit before a
Justice
,
on which a warrant was issued, and the
buccaneer
arrested as we have said. On his appearance,
the evidence against him was overwhelming, and
his identity with Captain Nix's mate was
placed
beyond question, by the figure of an anchor
which had been pricked into his arm with India ink,
the letters E. F. beneath it. On the evidence, he
was fully committed for trial.
On the day after, Edward Fitzvassal was arraigned
before the Court to listen to the indictment which was
found against him for piracy on the high seas. An
immense crowd had collected, and filled the
court-room
.
When it was finished the clerk said:
Edward Fitzvassal! you have listened to the
indictment
which the Grand Jurors, &c. have found
against you, charging you with piracy on the high
seas. Are you guilty or not guilty?
Fitzvassal stood in the prisoners dock, and the eyes
of all were fixed upon him. He had recovered his
wonted firmness, and now betrayed no outward sign of
the deep emotion he was feeling. He looked around
composedly on the multitude, and then folding his
arms on his bosom, turned to the clerk, and replied,
in a clear, but melancholy tone:
Guilty!
A murmur of regret and disappointment ran
through the crowd of spectators, whose sympathies
had been deeply awaked in behalf of one to whom
they acknowledged their obligations. A dead silence
followed, when the Judge, after a brief address, in
which he expressed the sorrow and reluctance he
felt in being the minister of justice to him almost at
the very moment when the honors of redeemed
Massachusetts
were green on his brows, said:
Edward Fitzvassal, you have heard the
indictment
which has been preferred against you for the
awful crime of piracy,to which indictment you
have pleaded
guilty!
Have you any thing to say
why sentence of death should not now be pronounced
against you?
Fitzvassal remained silent.
The sentence of the Court, then, is, said the
Judge, that you be conveyed back to the prison from
which you were taken, and from thence to the place
of execution, and that you be there hanged by the
neck until you are dead. And may the Lord have
mercy on your soul!
The Court then made a sign to the officer, and
Fitzvassal was re-conducted to his solitary dungeon,
and there loaded with chains.
The day assigned for the execution of the sentence
was the fifth of June,the place Green Island, where
Captain Nix and the three mariners first landed in
the harbor of Boston. In the interim, great
exertions
were made for a pardon, or a commutation of
the sentence to one of banishment, but not even the
hope of a reprieve was afforded the prisoner.
The night previous to the day of execution,
Fitzvassal
passed in solitude; he refused admittance to
all persons. He would not have a minister of
religion
,
for he declared that he knew well enough that
repentance without reformation would do him no
good.
That night was to him a time of bitter agony. It
was not so much that he cared for the pains of death,
but to die a
felon's
death, and almost in the
presence
of her he still adored, yea, hopelessly, jealously
worshipped, was more than he could endure without
his heartstrings tugging with the effort. Oh God!
thought Fitzvassal, how terrible, yet how just are
thy retributions! Had I confided in thy providence;
my poor mother would not have been left to starve to
death in a cellar;and I should not have been
doomed
to this awful and disgraceful end. But I will not
die a felon's deaththe name of Fitzvassal shall not
be disgraced by the record of such a fatehis body
shall not be dishonored by the scaffold!
He sunk into a profound slumber before morning,
from which he was awakened by the jailor, who
came to bring him his breakfast, and attire him at
once for the gallows and the grave.
Fitzvassal begged to be excused from putting on
the dress till the last minuteand only an hour was
wanting, when he must be conveyed to the place of
execution. He requested to be left alone, and the
jailor withdrew.
My hour is now come! said he to himself
taking
from his bosom the agate which Nameoke had
given him, containing the deadly poisonMy hour
is now come!Thanks, Nameoke, for this cordial!
Grace, I drink to thee!
As he spoke, he drained the deadly fluid from the
hollow stoneand that instant the death-bell told
one!
It is finished! sighed Fitzvassal, in a few
minutes, I shall be removed from the trials and the
calamities of life!
Life!
God of mercy, may I not
live
forever!
The bell now struck again, and as the jailor was
approaching to indicate to the prisoner the necessity
of making the most of the few moments that
remained
to himNameoke, breaking through the guard
Vol. II. 22
without, by the energy and decision of her manner,
cried out
Let Nameoke pass! white-man stand back! she
comes on an errand of mercy!
As she spoke these words, she forced her way into
the dungeonand stood before Fitzvassal in all the
majesty of beauty.
The condemned buccaneer for the moment
forgot
his misery, as his attention was arrested by this
extraordinary apparition.
Nameoke!
he exclaimed.
Son of the Vassal! cried the sibyl, be not
surprised
at the coming of Nameokeyou are free!
Nameoke has brought you a pardon! It would
have been read to you at the scaffoldbut Nameoke
chose to bring it herself.Son of the Vassal, you are
free!
Impossible! replied Fitzvassal, Nameoke you
are mad!
Well! well! she exclaimed, Nameoke may be
madher brain is sicksick, and it whirls even now
fearfully; but mad or not mad, Edward Fitzvassal,
you are free!
And as she uttered these words, she looked the
sibyl in her excitement, while she confirmed her
declaration
by exhibiting the sign manual of the
governor
,
who, in consideration of the signal services
of the buccaneer, and the intervention of Mr.
Temple
,
Horace Seymour, and even the tears of Grace
Wilmer herself, with the superadded request of
Captain
Nix, had published a full pardon of the
offender
.
As Fitzvassal realized the truth of her words, his
heart sunk within him, while a deadly faintness
spread over his frame.
Nameoke saw his condition, and asked
What ails the son of the Vassal? is he not well?
does he not believe Nameoke?
Nameoke! murmured the unhappy man,
pointing
to the talisman she had given him, may the
great God reward you! but the pardon comes too late
that poison!
No! no! the Great Spirit forbid! exclaimed
Nameoke, as the reality burst upon herthe son
of the Vassal
has
not taken the poison!
Yes! groaned Fitzvassal, and my remaining
moments are fewOh Nameoke, for the love of God,
give up thy enchantmentsthey are opposed to the
will of heaven, and only mock us to our eternal
ruin. Nameoke! your handI am dying!
As he spoke he sunk upon the floor of the
dungeon
,
and Nameoke bent over his prostrate body.
Alas! she cried, Nameoke would have saved
thee, Edward Fitzvassal!but Nameoke is the
death of all she loves! farewell, oh unhappy! may
the Great Spirit receive his child!
Fitzvassal opened his eyes upon her, and
groaning
,
closed them again in death.
CONCLUSION.
We
must now, according to custom, give a glance
at some of our dramatis person, who were
necessarily
behind the scenes at the fall of the curtain.
On hearing of the arrest of Fitzvassal, Morgan
immediately
got the Duke of York under weigh, in
company with the Dolphin, and as there were no
armed
vessels in port, they escaped, and were never
afterward heard of in America.
Grace Wilmer was soon after united to Seymour,
when she merged the romance of youth in the
realities
of maturer years. If she sometimes looked back
with sadness, it was only to look forward again with
brighter anticipations. She had passed through few
trials, too few for the formation of a very perfect
character
;
but she had ever a high sense of duty, and for
her obedience to its dictates she was rewarded with
the blessings of tranquillity.
Mr. and Mistress Saultz continued at their old
stand, the former co-operating in sending folks out
of the world, and the latter in bringing them in,
while she always reiterated, to the day of her death,
that there was nothing wanting to make Boston a
perfect paradise, but a lying-in hospital. The boy
Willy finally became a Justice of the Peace.
Harding
died at sea, over which he was passing for his
health, and Bill Grummet, who received his last
breath, became his legatee for a hundred pounds.
Mr. Temple died two years after the Revolution,
while Randal and Bagnal survived for a long time
to narrate the achievements of '89.
Sir Edmund Andros, with Randolph, conciliated
the good opinion of William and Mary, and the
former
was afterward appointed Governor of Virginia.
As for the people of Massachusetts, William and
Mary approved of their conduct, and granted them a
new charter, containing many privileges, but
reserving
to the crown the power of nominating their
governor
.
The body of the buccaneer was buried on Green
Island, which from that time changed its name, and
Nameoke, while she wept over the grave, prophesied
that the place would soon wash away. She never was
seen again at Nahant, but as vessels passed and
repassed
the burial-place of Edward Fitzvassal on
summer
moonlight nights, the sailors often declared that
they could hear sweet music from the island, and see
a female form weeping over the grave of the pirate.
Time passed away, and the island, according to
tradition
,
perceptibly crumbled into the sea, till in a few
years there was nothing to mark the spot but a rough
sunken ledge of rocks, where a monument now
stands to warn the mariner of the dangers of
Nix's
Mate
.
END OF VOL. II.