A 2
NORMAN LESLIE.
CHAPTER I.
In which, what seemed finished appears to have only
commenced
.
How shall we hope for mercy, rendering none?
Shylock
.
Hush
! cried the nurse, he sleeps.
How has he passed the last four hours?
whispered
the doctor.
Quiet as an infant. His pain has left him. He
fell into a doze after taking the medicine, and has
stirred neither hand nor foot since.
They stepped cautiously towards the bed, and
gazed upon the features of the poor, unconscious
old man, with that silent and steady examination
with which the living contemplate the dying or the
dead,awedhorror-struckplunged in mystic
fear and wonder at the vast changes in the fleshly
temple, and those far more vast and sublime which
have stricken the interior, breaking its lighted altar,
and leaving its aisles dark and abandoned.
He's dreadfully fallen away, doctor. His actions
lately have been very strange; but he appeared
more settled and sensible before his slumber. Do
you think there is any hope?
The doctor compressed his lips, and shook his
head.
None, nurse, none; the good old man cannot
last the day.
He has lived a pure life, said the nurse. He
has been a charitable and a religious man, and a
kind friend to me. Alice wiped her eyes with the
corner of her apron. I shall never get such
another
.
The physician gave some trivial instructions.
Can you not stay, doctor, and see the end?
asked Alice.
No, good Alice, my presence can avail him
nothing; but there are others less hopeless whom I
am bound to see. This poor old man's heart is
broken beyond the reach of medicine.
Hush! said the nurse, as a murmured name
broke from the lips of the dying father.
RosalieRosalie! My childmy child! Save
herdo not killLeslieLeslie! Drops of
agony
stood on the dreamer's forehead.
Wake him, said the doctor; this agitation
will destroy him.
With a gentle hand on his skeleton fingers, the
honest nurse dispelled the horrid vision.
Ah! where am I? said he, with a feeble and
repining voice, opening his glassy eyeswhich now,
from the sunken proportions of his ashy face,
appeared
strangely largeand rolling them fearfully
round, with a vacant stare, upon his companions.
It is I, Mr. RomainAlice, and the good
Doctor
Melbourne, said the nurse, carefully wiping his
damp forehead with a handkerchief.
Oh, trueI was dreaming of my poor
daughter
.
My good friend, said the doctor, how are you
this morning?
Ohbetterthank youmuch better, he said,
1*
drawing his short breath quickly with nearly every
word; I shall be well soon.
He smiled. What is there so ghastly as the
smile of a dying man unconscious of his situation?
Alice, he said, peevishly, what is the reason
Rosalie staysso that
His faint breath was exhausted; his heavy eyes
closed again; and he sank once more into a doze.
Yes, said the nurse, there it is; the murder
of poor dear Miss Rosalie has broken the old man's
heart.
But you should not say
murder
, nurse, said
the doctor; it is decided, after an adequate
examination
,
that Miss Romain was not murdered, at
least by that unfortunate Norman Leslie.
Not
murdered!
echoed the nurse, in a
vehement
and sudden whisper. She took the doctor by
the lapel of his coat, and led him from the bed
towards
an embrasure of the window. Doctor
Melbourne
,
that wretch, that monster Leslie
is
her
murderer
, as sure as the sun is in heaven!all the
world knows it.
Nay, nursenay, this is not right, said the
doctor, gravely. I am sorry to find the people so
generally withholding their sanction from the
deliberate
verdict of a jury. The sufferings of poor
Leslie touch my heart.
Blood for blood! said the nurse, her generally
mild features animated with indignation and
merciless
revenge.
But, Mistress Alice, `judge not, lest ye be
judged!'
Whatever be the truth, said the old woman,
solemnlyand God knows it, and will judge the
wickedMr. Romain has lived, and will die, with
the belief that Norman Leslie killed his daughter,
to hide from him and the world the base and cruel
arts he had used against her, and to her destruction.
I have never spoken to any one but yourself,
doctor
,
who was not of this same opinion.
Sorry to hear itsorry to hear it, Alice. A good
citizen should not only obey, but respect, the laws.
In no country are they better and more wisely and
impartially administered than in our own. It is
cruel and wicked to persecute this unhappy man,
regularly and fully acquitted by a court of justice.
He is already half destroyed by this affair. I fear
it will weigh him down yet, and drive him to some
desperate extremity.
I hope it mayall the world hopes it may,
cried Alice. Look at that poor, poor old man,
his gray hairs brought down in sorrow to the grave.
Father and daughterboth fallen beneath
his
hand.
He who did this has money. Wealth can work
wonders
;
he has got himself acquittedin what way
they best know who acquitted him; but the bloody
murderer
walks the streets, free and independent,
seeking whom else he may devourthe horror of
every one that sees him. If I were a man, I would
strike him down in the street. Let him look to
himself. Time will show. He should be, and will
be, hunted down like a wild beast. Were I to meet
him, old woman as I am, I do believe I should tear
his eyes out with my own hands. God forgive me
for such feelings, and by the bed of death, too!
And the highly-excited old woman wiped her eyes,
which were full of tears.
Mistress Alice, Mistress Alice, said the
doctor
,
while you exclaim against one crime, take
care you be not guilty of another yourself. The
terrible
odium poured upon the head of that wretched
and persecuted man, must, sooner or later,
overwhelm
him; he will die, and his blood will be upon
the heads of his oppressors.
Never a bit, replied Alice; the devil will take
care of his own. Oh, doctor, that this blood-stained
assassin should walk the streets is a crying shame
and disgrace to the country! I repeatlet him
look to himself. I have heard hard things said of
him. There are eyes on him he little suspects. I do
think the news of his sacrifice would sweeten the
last moments of that dying old man.
Monstrous! Alice, monstrous! you speak
almost
blasphemy. I have heard much talk of this
kind lately. If you have friends capable of injuring
Leslie, as your words imply, warn them, Alice, of
their wickedness and danger. The law would take
terrible vengeance upon them, should it come before
the court.
Oh yes, forsooth, said Alice; upon the
poor
it would doubtless fall; but the rich can escape, no
matter what
they
have done. Doctor, doctor, I tell
youmark my wordssafe as he thinks himself,
that Norman Leslie is on the brink of a precipice,
and no one will pity himthe villain, the monster!
Words were wasted upon the enraged old
woman
,
and the doctor left her without reply.
CHAPTER II.
A Suspicion
.
This fellow's of exceeding honesty,
And knows all qualities, with a learned spirit,
Of human dealings.
Othello
.
The
eminent physician who had just left the bed
of Mr. Romain was one of the most skilful and
highly esteemed. His noble and gentlemanly
appearance
;
his bland and soothing manner; his
sterling
sense; his profound knowledge upon general
subjects, as well as on his own dignified profession;
his ever cheerful spirits, and excellent heart,
rendered
him a delightful companion even when a
necessary one. Happily married to a woman with
a large fortune, independent of his own ample
income
,
a family of sons and daughters were
growing
up in usefulness and happiness about him; and
his broad forehead was just sufficiently touched with
silver to make him the more appropriate adviser
for those of the fair sex whose fastidiousness, or
whose delicacy, might less frankly receive the
assiduity
and advice of younger men. How many
essentials are there, besides professional skill, to the
complete character of a great physician! His very
manners and appearance had in them something
soothing; something that hushed alarm, quieted
nervous apprehensions, restored hope and
confidence
,
and made the morbid and the cowardly
ashamed of their terrors. Prompt to the call of
pain, he was ever punctually readytoiling more
for humanity than rewarddispelling, like a good
spirit, torment and danger, and guarding from agony
and death. As life is the essence and foundation
of all other blessings, so he who preserves it
exercises
a most elevated and noble office; and if his
duties bring him often into the midst of wo and
mourningif he is daily compelled to behold the
soul and body separate (for the time must come
to all when no earthly aid can save)what a
cheering
and supporting offset does he possess in the
reflection
,
that many walk the blessed earth, behold
the sky and sweet nature, and bless friends and
relations
with their presence, whom
his
hand has
rescued
from the yawning grave. Oh, what joy! what
divine power! to come the saviour of a terrified
A 3
and weeping circle; to raise up the half-lost form
of some sweet child or lovely girl; to give back to
life the father, the wife, the son; to say unto the
dying, who are already mourned as dead, Arise,
and walk.
Doctor Melbourne had known Leslie, and
admired
him sincerely. With the rest of the world,
he had been sometimes staggered by the weight
of evidence brought against him, not only at the
trial, but subsequently through the medium of
the public journals. A good citizen, however, as
well as a benevolent man, he willingly waived his
own opinion in favour of the verdict, and resolved
to believe and to advocate the innocence of the
unfortunate victim of general persecution.
We must remark here, that in no quarter of the
globe are the laws more purely and properly
administered
than in the United States. The
decisions
are probably as equitable as it is in the nature
of human laws to be. In no country, too, are they
regarded with more universal reverence and
confiding
submission. If injustice occurs, it appears in
those fantastic combinations of accidental
circumstances
exceptions
in the usual order of society
which the broad and immutable course of a
general law cannot be turned aside to correct; but
the law itself is acknowledged to be, as far as
mortal institutions may be, broadly and beneficially
adaptedwithout being warped by barbarous ages,
or distorted into uncouth shapes to suit present
individual interestswisely and impartially to the
whole body of the people. No currents flow to
favour particular persons or classes. The mass
of the people, however, in all ages, and under
every form of government, contain materials,
or classes, liable to be inflamed by accidental
causes; and the majesty of mankind, or rather
their strength and power, exhibit themselves at
times independent of lawexamining how far the
bonds they have consented to wear continue to be
adapted to the public good. These outbreaks and
excitements are inherent to the state of earthly
things. The healthiest individual has moments
of depression, illness, and pain; the gentlest, the
most disciplined, are sometimes agitated with
passion
or affected with anguish. Climes of heavenly
purity are awakened by the thunder, the volcano,
and the earthquake;and no government will be
invented to exclude from the ever-floating and
heaving world of human feeling those turbulent
ebbs and flows, those fiery out-bursts, which, amid
universal beauty and order, carry wreck and terror
through the realms of nature herself.
Doctor Melbourne drove from the dwelling of
Mr. Romain to another and yet more elegant
mansion
.
Had his visit not been a sufficient sign,
other indications betrayed, even to the careless
observer, the presence of sickness in the house of
Mr. Temple, once so adorned with gayety and
beauty
,
and so bright with the midnight revel. The
knocker was muffledthe bell was tiedthe
window-shutters
closedand the pavement before the
door thickly bedded with the soft bark of the
tanner
,
over which the wheels of every passing
carriage
rolled inaudibly.
The doctor found the family abandoned to dark
forebodingsperhaps more painful than excited
anguish. The illness and apparently approaching
death of Flora were a fearful and a frightful lesson
to remind them that they belonged to earth, and
were linked, in the midst of their blessings, with
the lowest and vilest, to wretchedness and danger.
Bitter was the pang of each passing hour that
stole the hue from the cheek, and the graceful
roundness from the form, of that lovely, lovely girl
that softened and etherealized her gay sweet
spirit with the prospect of the grave. Vainly had
all human means been exhausted. Day by day,
week by week, she grew paler and paler, thinner
and thinnermore feeble, helpless, and hopeless.
They who loved her most no longer questioned
whether she could recover, but how long she could
remain on earth. Mr. Temple started from his
careless pursuit of pleasure, and concentrated all
the energies and anxieties of his soul upon this
single theme. Mrs. Temple's majestic form bent
beneath the affliction and assiduity that preyed upon
her day and night, and her eyes ever bore traces
of bitter tears. The servants weptthe groom
wiped his eyes as he curried his horsesevery
messenger whom business, or chance, or friendship
brought to the house of sorrow, trod with
apprehension
and awe as he approached the door; and the
whispered inquiry, given with half-held breath and
beating heart, was ever the prelude to, Oh,
fading
,
fading fast away! Oh, worsemuch, much
worse!
Poor Flora!every one remembered the bright
and blooming girl. Whose cheek so radiant?
whose eye so full of joy and kindness? Her voice
and step filled the house with cheerfulness. Her
presence shed a light and a peace even upon the
poor and the unhappy. There was not a beggar,
a decrepit old woman in the neighbourhood, whose
ear had not leaned to hear that sweet voicewhose
heart had not beat with quicker pleasure at the
approach of that light step. Old John, the
wood-sawyer
a
rough and ragged wretch, whose heart
had stood the storms of seventy yearscame every
morning to the door, asked after his young
mistress
,
and turned away with the great tears rolling
down his cheeks like rain. Poor, poor Flora:
Every heart trembled for her.
Some there were, howeverenvious, perhaps,
of the prosperity of the Temples, or offended at
their displaywho did not hesitate, with that
exquisite
cruelty and malicea very snare of Satan
which people of the most ostentatious piety
sometimes fall into (so blind, so weak is the human
heart), to declare aloud, and with cold indifference,
not totally free from a tincture of gratification, that
the calamity of their daughter was a judgment
upon the Temples from a revengeful Heaven, for
having wasted their wealth in idle pleasure.
Amid all this dismal sorrow, Flora was calm and
unsubdued. Her patient and unresisting
gentleness
and sweetness yielded without repining, as a
lamb on the altar. Her voice, though faint and
low, was sweeter in its tremulous tones; her
manner
had gained a new and indescribable grace and
softness; and over her countenance had stolen a
beauty so touching, so exquisite, so unearthly, that
even those beholders who did not weep stood to
wonder. She spent hours of the day in a large
easy-chair, clothed in a robe of vestal whiteher
fragile and beautiful form supported by pillows and
cushions. Sometimes she was assisted in a
laborious
walk across the room, and sometimes moved
near the window, and breathed the air which the
now rich autumn blew gently in, loaded with
incense
.
Her continued cheerfulness, her
uncomplaining
and angelic nature, her gentle tenderness to
all about her, every eloquent look, every accidental
word, bound her as with a spell to all hearts, and
was treasured carefully in all memories, to be dwelt
on and repeated when the eyes that shed, the lips
that breathed them, should exist but in the minds
of the survivers. In her gayest and brightest
monents
,
2
never had she wielded such a power over
the affections.
It is impossible at any time to look on a thing so
fair, except with extreme interest: but when
sickness
descends upon her; when pain racks her
young limbs, even as it does that of a common
brute; when we see the cords of life and happiness
gradually relaxed and falling to pieces; when we
gaze on her patient, sweet face, as something
doomed to pass away prematurely with ordinary
vulgar things, to fall and fade like the leaves and
the flowers: oh, in the bosom that loves, the
impressions
of sadness and agony are indeed almost
unendurable.
Mr. and Mrs. Temple received Doctor Melbourne
with speechless wo.
How is she to-day, my dearest friends?
inquired
he.
Tears were his answer, till Mrs. Temple,
sobbing
,
replied
Weaker, weaker, doctor; and dearer as she
passes away.
Oh, doctor, cried Mr. Temple, Flora is
already an angel. Day by day she has less of
earth and more of heaven; soon we shall be
utterly alone. I cannot bear itI cannot bear it!
Oh, Melbourne, save my daughter!
Be calm, my good friends. I do not attempt to
console you. I cannot. Only be patient under the
will of the Almighty. My heart bleeds for you. I
can only sympathize with you. May God avert
this calamity from your house.
He took Mr. Temple's hand, who, in return,
grasped his with convulsive energy; and turning
away his face, the hardness of his breath, the
heaving
of his bosom, announced the dire pangs with
which, alone, this deeply-rooted affection could be
wrenched from his heart.
Come, said the doctor, kindly and cheerfully,
after a moment of silence, let us see the dear
girl.
The mother, with noiseless step, and wiping her
eyes, carefully disentangled the hand of the doctor
from that of her afflicted husband, and led him
gently to the chamber of Flora.
It was a bewildering morning. The sunshine
gleamed delightfully in through the crimson
curtains
,
the flowers were all blooming in the garden,
and the birds sang merrily beneath the windows.
Flora was seated in her large chair, with a little
stand before her, on which lay a book.
My daughter, said Mrs. Temple, here is
Doctor Melbourne.
Ah, dear motherdoctorshe held out her
faded hand, and with a smilewhat a trouble I
am to you!
Come, said the doctor, with a cheerful,
encouraging
air; we must talk awhile with the
naughty sick girl. How does she do to-day?
Naughty, doctor, as you say; I have forgotten
your injunctions, and indulged myself for a few
moments with reading. I think I feel stronger
to-day.
We shall send you off somewhere in the
country
,
said the doctor; you are too confined here
in this close, noisy town; and the air is
changeable
.
We must take her into a kinder climate, into
a more cheerful land. Come, Miss Flora, what
do you say to a soft, delicious clime all the year
round; where oranges and lemons bloom through
the whole winter, and where snow never approaches
nearer the green and flowery vale than the peaked
tops of silver that shine from the clouds; where
the mild sunshine never ceases to warm, and the
bright verdure never passes away? What say you
to a land of such beauty and enchantment? What
say you to
Italy?
Oh, doctor, said Flora, with a languid smile, I
think all my youthful feelings are dead in my
bosom
.
A few months ago, such a thought would
have kept me wakeful for joy; but now a
half-audible
sigh escaped her lips.
Why, my child? asked the doctor.
And why, my beloved Flora? said Mrs.
Temple
,
kneeling down affectionately, taking her hand
and pressing it to her lips, while the doctor held the
other, and ever and anon felt the pulse.
The pale and feeble girl sighed, but returned no
answer.
You are doing very well this morning, said the
doctor. I have seen a poor man who would like
to own a pulse so strong and regular as thisthe
father of that unfortunate Rosalie RomainHa!
he exclaimed, suddenly, and in a changed tone.
What is the matter? said Mrs. Temple.
I was surprised, replied the doctor, at the
sudden leaping of the pulsewhat! it is quieter
nowsoso. I have been reprimanding Romain's
old nurse for her bitter denunciations of that
unhappy
being, poor NormanHa! again! cried
the doctor.
A transient colour passed across the face of
Flora
,
and she lowered her eyes.
The doctor shook his head. He was a man of
the world, and knew where to read the complaints
of his fellow-creatures elsewhere than in books.
He thought there was more in this than met the
eye.
CHAPTER III.
A Discovery
.
There, in thy scanty mantle clad,
Thy snowy bosom sun-ward spread,
Thou lift'st thy unassuming head
In humble guise;
But now the
share
uptears thy bed,
And low thou lies!
Burns
.
As the doctor entered the adjoining room, Mrs.
Temple followed, and he desired to speak with her
and her husband again.
I am going to ask something, said he; but
I believe we are scarcely calm enough to-day.
Speakoh speak! said Mrs. Temple; if it
concern Flora, another day may be too late.
Well, then, hear me without shrinking. It is
my duty to tell you
The mother motioned her hand for him not to
proceed, and hid her face.
Nay, I am not in despair about your daughter's
recovery, but it is my duty to tell you that she is in
a most perilous crisis. Her disorder increases. It
has baffled my skill; and I am induced to believe,
from something which has taken place this morning,
that we have not fully understood her disease.
You ascribe it to cold and agitation at the trial of
Leslie.
Yes; that monster will have her life to answer
for as well as poor Rosalie's. She was obliged
2*
to attend as a witness, and there took this fatal
disorder
.
You know, Mrs. Temple, said the doctor,
that I have at times thought Flora troubled with
some secret grief.
Oh, doctor, replied Mrs. Temple, what grief,
secret or known, could Flora Temple have ever
suffered? She was never from our sight! She
never had a wish ungratified.
In these cases, sometimes, added the doctor,
the affections prey upon the heart.
Affections! impossible! She has been ever
sought by all.
And all have been refused? inquired the
doctor
.
Always, always! was the reply.
Many offers rejected?
Many, very many, said Mr. Temple; the
richestthe noblest!
I think Flora Temple would scarcely
love
in
vain!
added the proud mother, haughty even in
her grief, and with a sarcastic tone;
that
tale
would meet with
little
credit.
Has she been accustomed to see no one who
might awaken an interest in her?
None, none! I know her heart. It is pure,
and free as ice from such a feeling. I have myself
often
wondered
at it. She not only never loves,
but, by her actions and words, never admits the
possibility of her loving; and yet her nature is all
affection.
And it was at Leslie's trial that she took this
illness?
That fatal trial, said the father.
And since that period she has declined to her
present state? pursued the doctor. Do not be
offended or surprised at any questions I may ask
You alarm me, said Mrs. Temple.
Was your daughter acquainted with Norman
Leslie previous to this trial?
No, no! answered the mother, with an
expression
of anger; she cannot be said to have been
acquainted.
He visited us, said Mr. Temple, perhaps
once a month, and remained a half-hour at a time.
Heaven forbid, ejaculated the mother, that
she should be insulted with the name of his
acquaintance
.
Is it quite
impossible
that your daughter
The doctor paused in some embarrassment.
Doctor Melbourne, said Mrs. Temple, with
severe gravity, and a little elevating her bust, you
do not mean to insult us in our misery?
Let us once more enter her chamber, madam,
said the doctor: watch her face as I speak from
a distance; and, as you value her health, her life,
express no surprise.
They re-entered. The momentary gayety of
Flora was gone. She sat in her chair, languid and
pale, and scarcely spoke as the doctor once more
took her unresisting hand.
My dear young lady, said he, you must not
despond; you are really better to-day; I do hope
to make you well.
She closed her eyes, and, with a heavy sigh,
shook her head.
Here have been visiters to see you this
morning
,
your mother tells me, and they have all gone
away with the hope of your recovery. Count
Clairmont
called.
He is very good, said Flora, quietly.
And Mr. Morton.
Poor Morton! said she, with a faint smile of
half-remembered humour
And Mr. Moreland, added the doctor, walking
carelessly to the window.
I shall never forget the eloquence of Mr.
Moreland
,
replied Flora, with a long-drawn sigh.
And, as I entered, continued the doctor, with
the same air of careless inattentionthere stood
at the door and made many kind inquiries after you,
our poor friend Norman Leslie.Look, said the
doctor to the mother, in a whisper only audible to
her ear; be convinced. He withheld her from
springing to Flora.
There has been Captain Forbes of the army,
and a whole host of others, continued he, aloud,
and calmly, as if he had noticed nothing. They
all join in their warmest prayers for your recovery,
and recommend you to fly this cold climate.
Has she ever heard any thing respecting
Leslie
?
inquired the doctor, when they were again
alone.
Nothing but casual conversation concerning his
guilt, his infamy, and the general execration in
which he is held.
And has she never asked concerning him?
Never.
Not one question?
Nothing.
Nor desired to know aught of the man whom
she avowed herself to believe innocent? never
even mentioned the name at the bare sound of
which she thus starts and trembles?
The mother clasped her hands with a new impulse
of agitation.
Mrs. Temple, said the doctor, solemnly, your
daughter
loves
. The lightest word of Norman
Leslie is dearer to her young heart than all the
world beside.
CHAPTER IV.
An unexpected Medicine
.
Canst thou not minister to a mind diseased!
Macbeth
.
Early
the next morning Doctor Melbourne
visited
,
as usual, the mansion of Mr. Romain. All
was over. The old man had breathed his last.
The news of his decease was already abroad, and
exercised a very unfavourable influence upon the
general indignation against Leslie.
In a few moments he was once more at Mr.
Temple's. Since his last visit he had taken
occasion
to inquire, and his suspicions of Flora's true
malady were more than confirmed. It appeared
now beyond a doubt, even to Mrs. Temple, that her
daughter had entertained a secret attachment for
Leslie; an attachment greatly enhanced by his late
danger and present situation. In the first place,
she knew, or at least thought she knew, him
innocent
.
The awful event which had involved his
reputation and happiness; the struggle of her
soul, necessarily concealed, even from a mother;
the shock of his arrest for murderfor the murder
of one of their familiar companions; the
excitement
,
the hope, the terror of the trial; the
unexpected
,
overwhelming news of his acquittal; the odium
and fearful peril which yet hung over himall fell
with a blighting and crushing power upon a heart
which had never before known sorrow. The cold
and almost bitter sternness, too, with which, at
the trial, he whom in secret she loved,
disclaimed
the possibility of affection on the part of either,
had gone to her heart like a poisoned arrow, and
left a wound rankling beyond the reach of
medicine
.
It appeared that she had attended the trial, not
on compulsion, but, as Mr. Loring had stated,
voluntarily
,
having privately written, on the first day,
the nature of the fact which she was able to testify.
The letter had been accidentally mislaid before it
reached the intended hand, which caused the
lateness
of the period at which she was introduced.
How her sensitive and shrinking nature had endured
that ordeal, made more fiery by the inconsiderate
vehemence of the profession, the reader is already
aware. At her urgent request she had remained
with her father till the return of the verdict. Not
a sound had she uttered to betray the agony with
which she watched the ebbs and flows of opinion
with which she beheld that haughty, that beloved
form, enduring, with fierce and unnatural calmness,
the cold inquirythe quiet sneerthe rude gaze
and the storm of denunciation from all the various
throng of judge, jury, counsel, and spectator. On
her return home commenced the attack, whose
frightful ravages had at length brought her to the
great world's edge.
Under these circumstances, the course to be
adopted was, to her parents, a source of painful
embarrassment. That Leslie was guilty, few, very
few pretended to doubt. The doctor ventured to
express a belief in his innocence; but he perceived
at once that it was in vain. Mrs. Temple, from
some secret antipathy, had conceived a dislike to
him, heightened, probably, by his open contempt
for her favourite Clairmont. She would not
admit
the idea of his innocence.
It is my duty, said the doctor, at last, to say
what I think. The mind and the body are so
wonderfully
connected, by such subtle fibresso
intertwined
with each other in their millions and
millions
of reciprocal influencesthat I frankly
declare
their mutual operations baffle the skill of
surgery, and may alike disappoint every hope and
every fear. They act upon rules independent of
our art. Your daughter suffers under no
cold
.
Her disease is in
the mind
. We must minister to
that. We must pluck from the memory the rooted
sorrow. If Mrs. Temple will allow me to confess
my thoughts
Speak.
I believe Norman Leslie an innocent and noble
being. In faith, I
know it
. Juries and judges,
editors
and the world at large, may be deceived by
evidence; but he who looks narrowly into the
human
heart, when sickness is on it, when death is
near, cannot be deceived. He is innocent, and
your daughter loves him!
Doctor Melbourne does not advise me to link
my daughter with an assassin; rather would I see
her in her coffin.
That she should
marry
Leslie, said the
doctor
,
calmly, can be proposed by no one. That,
I know, circumstances do not permit; not the
soul-stricken
youth himself would dare to dream of
union with her. But as he is now about to leave
this country for ever, should she know what
I
know, that he loves her, and regards her as an
angel
to be worshipped, and above his reach; could
she but once
know
, but once
see
this, she would
part from him with a healed and a peaceful mind.
Her heart would be relieved of its present burden.
If life must be borne, she would bear it with
resignation
.
If death must be encountered, she would
meet it with cheerfulness.
There is reason in your words, said Mr.
Temple.
And wormwood too, added the wife, with a
haughty frown, her high temper rising even through
her grief.
Emily, said Mr. Temple.
She replied quickly,
I know what you would say, but I will never
consent. I wish I had burnt the letter, as before
this I intended. I do not believe, I never will
believe
in his innocence. She shall never see that
letter.
Emily, rejoined her husband, gravely, after a
moment's pause, she
shall
see the letter.
Now, my dear, dear husband, you cannot, you
will not.
I can, and I will, replied he, kindly, but
firmly.
He rarely opposed her; when he did, she knew
resistance would be utterly useless, and bit her lip
in silence.
Doctor Melbourne, said Mr. Temple, I
repose
in you the most implicit confidence. Your
opinion in the innocence of this unfortunate young
man coincides with my own. You must know he
has written to my daughter, very honourably
enclosing
to me, with a hint of its contents. It was
his desire, he said, as in all probability he should
never meet her again, to express his gratitude for
her voluntary appearance at his trial, to which he
owed his life. He added, however, that the letter
might contain sentiments warm beyond the limits
of simple gratitude, and he trusted to my honour
either to give it to Flora or to burn it
unread
.
This conduct is that of an honest and high-minded
man. I sympathize with him sincerely. Flora
shall see the letter immediately; she is already
doomed. It is our only hope. I will speak with
her
myself
.
She had requested to be left alone, and now lay
on her pillow, lost in thought. Oh how had she
suffered! It was not that the strength had left her
once perfect limbs; that her joyous voice had lost
all its tone of mirth; that pain had shot across her,
and laid its unrelenting hand upon a bosom whose
every feeling was pure, compassionate, and tender;
but
thought
had preyed upon her
despair
had
stung her with its fiery fang.
Silence was in the apartment, broken by no
sound but such as harmonized with it, and
rendered
it more eloquent and holy. It was an autumn
afternoon. The air was still, and bright with the
hues and warmth of a mellow heaven. The
window
was open. A bird sat pluming his feathers on
a near branch, ever and anon pouring forth his
warbles, as if his little heart overflowed with a
gushing fulness of music and joy. A cluster of
half-blown roses gathered around the window, all
bright and lovely, as once had been her own
cherished
dreams of life. Her soft blue eyes, after
wandering
out over the painted sky, and upon the
bright green of the garden, rested upon the yet
unshaded
flowers; and thought seemed passing
through her mind, with a darkening, deepening
tide, at first lapsing idly, soft, and tender, then
darting with a more impatient and wilder impulse.
At length she covered her face with her hands,
and tears burst through her whitened and delicate
fingers.
At this moment the door opened gently. It was
her father. He came alone, and held in his hand
Vol. II.B 3
a letter. She strove to brush away her tears,
hastily, almost guiltily. She could not. The more
she dashed them from her long, drenched lashes,
the faster, the heavier, they crowded forth. The
softened father, by a kind of intuition, entered at
once into her feelings. He approached and leaned
over her bed, his own eyes blinded with the heart's
dearest waters. Tenderly, almost convulsively,
he folded her to his breast.
My daughter, he said, Mr. Leslie
He paused again, and looked not on her face as
he spoke. The kindness seemed understood. She
feltwhy, how, she knew notbut she felt that
there was confidence between them, sacred
confidence
,
and unmingled, unbounded love. Yielding
to the gush and whelming flow of her feelings, she
placed her head on his bosom, and wept.
My child, my child! broke from his quivering
lips. They wept together.
In a few moments, after another embrace, and
imprinting upon her forehead a fervid kiss, he
withdrew
in silence. The letter lay beside her. She
opened it tremblingly, breathlessly. Twice, through
the gathering and blinding tears, she essayed in
vain to find meaning in the characters that floated
indistinctly, and all blended together, before her
eyes. At length, raising herself from the pillow,
and putting back the long hair that fell unheededly
around her neck and face, she ran her gaze rapidly
over the lines. A flow of crimson suffused her
cheek. Her eyes softened. Her bosom heaved.
She pressed wildly the half-read page, again and
again to her lips.
Blissful moment! Death itself came now
radiant
with light. No! no, she had not loved in
vain.
CHAPTER V.
A Midnight Ramble and its Consequences
.
Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from the face of the
earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be a fugitive and
a vagabond on the earth; and it shall come to pass that every one
that findeth me shall slay me.
The
storm beat fiercely upon the black, silent
houses. Every window and door was closed
against night and the tempest. Lightnings
enveloped
earth and sky. So intensely brilliant was the
glare, that every object in the street, every shape
of house and tree, the distinct outline of every
cloud, were sharply, vividly visible. Peal after
peal of thunder burst leaping through the heavens.
All nature seemed drenched in an ocean of rain,
and the wind roared in the air.
A single form, muffled in a heavy cloak, was the
only living thing desperate enough to encounter
this discord of the elements. It was Norman
Leslie
.
On the succeeding morning he was to embark
for Europe, with little prospect of ever again
beholding
the country of his birth, his love, and his
ruin. Rendered, by his situation, a subject of the
most painful and even dangerous curiosity, he had
rarely of late ventured out by day. Indeed, from
several circumstances that swelled the proof of his
guilt, and perhaps from the active hatred and
artifices
of Clairmont, the public mind was yet more
than ever bitterly disposed against him. The night
had then been his time for exercise and lonely
B 2
contemplation. Then he had forth issued like a
solitary ghost, prowling around the haunts of his
ancient pleasures; sometimes in the enchanting
moonlight, and sometimes in the tempest, his
companionless
wanderings had been repeated often till
the breaking day warned him to retire.
One only idea had relieved his mind during these
solitary and brooding hours. It was the
declaration
of Flora Temple while giving her testimony
at the trial, that she had
never been affianced in
marriage
, and that she had always believed
Mr.
Leslie attached to Miss Romain
. It burst upon
him like a heaven of warming light to the drooping
and benumbed victim of a wintry storm. For a
time, it had occupied his mind during the trial even
more than his own danger. Strange vicissitudes
of life! that in this, his most terrible and perilous
crisis, touched his soul with the sweetest bliss he
had ever known. Here, then, the whole mystery
of Flora's conduct was explained. He had half
confided to her the passion that gradually mastered
him; nor had his gentle tone, his unguarded looks,
been reproved. Nay, he had deemed it answered,
till Mrs. Temple, in her absorbing admiration of
Clairmont and his title, had crushed his opening
hopes. From that moment Flora Temple had
nearly lost his respect, and, [except when, as vague
surmises crossed him respecting Mrs. Temple's
veracity
,
his repressed affection had risen again,] his
manner to the unsuspecting girl had been cold,
and studiedly careless.
Perhaps, he thought, had I then dared to
strive, I might have won an angel to my side.
But my rude change of manner, which to her must
have seemed the vilest caprice, the most unprin
cipled fickleness, has now lost her to me for
ever.
With these sentiments, he had written to Flora
the letter mentioned in the previous chapter. We
will not transcribe all its deep and fervid
outpourings
of love. He flung away every restraint, for
he wrote to one whom he never expected to behold
again till they met in a brighter world. It was,
therefore, not only a confessionit was a farewell;
and full it was of the melancholy poetry and
tenderness
of his gentle and romantic, but despairing
nature. He sought no responsehe expected, he
wished none. The decree of fate had gone forth.
He dared no longer to hope for love. He was
doomed to wander through the farthest climes,
alone and branded. He bade her, if she had ever
thought of him, to forget himto consider him as
one swallowed in the raging sea. Other thoughts
than happiness, he said, were now to be his
companions
.
He solicited no love in returnsuch
unmerited
bliss it would even be infamy for him to
accept
.
He would link no bright and joyous being
with his dark destiny. No beauteous head should
bow in darkness and shame by
his
side, to be
pointed
out by the finger of scorn in the public streetto
be blighted with a name on the lips of ribalds and
mockers, now common as the steps that mount
the capitol. No! on this wild earth they would
meet no more. Her, his home, his countryhe
turned his face from all; they were things to him
past, though they never could be forgotten. But,
added the glowing and eloquent lover, I will strive
to hear of you even on the opposite side of the
globe. I will watch your fate with unsleeping
solicitude
.
I will think of you, love, adore you.
Every breeze that wanders, every star that rolls to
the beloved west, I will freight with gentle thoughts
of you, and blessings on your head. While I live
you shall influence me to all that I can accomplish
3*
of high and holy; and when death is on me, I will
once more waft to you a message, to say how
faithfully
I have worshipped, how I have fed upon
memory
,
and how I have cherished your image to my
latest hour.
Perhaps, although to her he had disclaimed the
hope of a reply, he had not to himself. No reply,
however, reached him; and on this turbulent night,
the last he was to spend in America, he had
resolved
,
in spite of the raving elements, to walk forth
again, and with the deep but airy tenderness of a
true lover, to gaze, for the last time, on the
mansion
where slept the being who had so deeply
impressed
his soul.
As he approached within sight of it, the tempest
increased. Close, tremendous bursts of thunder
rolled in huge volumes and stupendous seas of
sound along the sky, crushing, mingling, and
crashing
,
as if the very earth rocked on its axle. The
blue and livid lightning shot fiercely from cloud to
cloud, cutting the eyeballs with sudden zigzag
lines of intolerable brightness, and wrapping all
nature
in sheets of gleaming fire, that threatened
utterly
to extinguish the sight.
The dwelling of Mr. Temple was a very large
and prominent one; and as the dazzling and
quick-darting
fluid sometimes lingered with a less vivid
fire, Leslie could distinguish it at a considerable
distance
high amid the elemental war. He was yet
far off, when a bolt, launched with maddened fury,
darted from a black cloud directly upon the
building
.
A towering chimney rolled from its height;
a blaze appeared rapidly mounting along the edges
of the roof, increasing each moment with almost
incredible power, which implied some highly
combustible
material in the upper portion of the house.
Before he could reach the spot, the flames, aided
also by the frightful wind, were sweeping over the
whole mansion, while massy billows of lurid smoke
rolled up upon the gale.
The conflagration had gained a most ominous
height ere the surrounding inhabitants, or those
within, seemed conscious of the danger. Then a
bell rang sharply, and several cries of Fire! fire!
mingled with the crash. The pealing of the bells
immediately became general. A watchman
thundered
at the door with his club. Norman had
approached
before this universal alarm, but his
presence
was but of little use. The doors were closed;
and although he knocked and rang violently, it was
long before he knew whether he had made himself
heard. At last came shrieks from within, and a
throng of people half dressed, domestics, and other
members of the family, appeared in confused, wild
haste, shrieking and clasping their hands: and, as
the light increased, their wild attitudes and
vehement
motions and gestures, gave them a
resemblance
to furies in their abode of eternal fire.
Oh, God! cried a voice of sudden and sharp
agony; FloraFlora
Which way? asked Norman, starting forward.
The speaker was Mrs. Temple.
For the love of Heaven, demanded the youth,
direct me.
But the terrified mother had fainted. Without
further delay he sprang forward, committing his
steps to the guidance of Heaven.
At this instant a figure rushed from the crackling
and crashing house. It was the desperate father.
Where is she? exclaimed a dozen voices.
Here! she
must
be here! he almost
shrieked
;
her room is emptyI have sought her
everywhere
in vain.
Not here! not here! She will perish in the
flames! burst from every lip.
Again the agonized father started into the midst
of the conflagration. Leslie had already entered.
The flames had now reached a height perfectly
furious
and appallingspouting from the windows,
and rolling over the beautiful and doomed mansion
with ravenous and infernal fierceness: now in a
tall and gleaming pyramid, leaping high into the
sable heavens; now sloping back into a huge and
yawning gulf, that buried all things in a deluge and
mad whirlwind of fire. Surge after surge of
quivering
flame and smoke swept hideously on the
gale, rendering it almost impossible for the rapidly
increasing multitude to approach. Far and wide
the surrounding scene lay strongly and
magnificently
visible in the deep red glare. Street and
house, roof and chimney, dome and spire; the huge
dense crowd; and the mantle of cloud and storm,
that veiled the heavens: all glowed like objects in
the near reflection of some heated furnace. So
might have gleamed the buried Pompeii, when the
mountain heaved its fiery tempests to the night.
Leslie had rushed through the crowd, and,
leaping
,
springing, flying, mounted the steps. The
intense
light, the fierce heat, the crackling, crashing,
and falling of rafters, announced too fatally the
awful
progress of the element. Blackened, scorched,
almost suffocated, choking with an agony of
suspense
,
he shouted long and loud. At length he
clambered upon a half-consumed stairway, and,
through the spacious window of an ample cabinet,
beheld the object of his search. She had fallen in
her flight, and lay senseless on the floor. With
an exclamation of tumultuous joy and triumph, he
was in the act of leaping down to her rescue (oh
bliss unspeakable! to bear in his longing arms, from
a dreadful death, that angelic form, more precious
to him than all the world beside), when he felt a
sudden and violent hand on his shoulder. He
turned
the
face of Clairmont was before him.
Villain of villains! shrieked Leslie, mad with
impatience, and striving to shake off the grasp of
his foe. The latter, with a sudden rush, threw him
from his height, fifteen feet down, upon the
opposite
side of the stair, and himself leaped to relieve
the beautiful and unconscious girl.
Gnashing his teeth with impotent indignation,
alarmed for Flora and for himself, Norman only
with ponderous strength, and after repeated efforts,
broke through a way which had been blocked up
by piles of heavy furniture, that had nearly confined
him to a dreadful death. Again he sought the room
where he had seen Flora. She was gone. He
rushed once more into the open air. Clairmont
was just bearing her forth in safety. Her
beautiful
form hung lifeless on his arm. Her long hair
streamed to the ground. Her arm and hand had
fallen heavily by her side.
Her head was on his
bosom
, and one hand he had daringly seized in his
own.
A shout of delight rose from the crowd as the
bold young noble appeared with his lovely prize.
Mrs. Temple received him with a shriek of joy.
He stood proud and high, the object of deep
admiration
and clamorous applause.
With a bursting heart, and half exhausted,
Norman
approached the group who were endeavouring
to recall to life the object of his love; when
Clairmont
,
in a loud voice, and directing the universal
attention with his finger, shouted
Ho!
Leslie the murderer!
Like the shock of agitated waves when a rising
wind sweeps the sea, the mass of human beings
B 3
all visible in that intense light, stirred and heaved
at the sound. The death of Mr. Romain on the
preceding day had fearfully augmented their
indignation
against that now common and execrated
name. The cry arose, the shout went round, a
thousand lips repeated the words, a thousand faces
turned upon the victim, as he stood conspicuous
and in the full gleam of the fireand
Leslie the
murderer!
rose higher than the surrounding
tumult
of heaven and earth.
Bowed down, maddened, crushed to the dust
his proud heart bursting with love, with
indignation
,
with despairhe turned and sought refuge in
flight.
CHAPTER VI.
America and ItalyFlorence, from the HillsA Wanderer,
and the changes of Years
.
The vast, vast plain with ocean's grandeur lies;
Around, sharp hills and banks of verdure rise.
Here the rich vine its weighty tendrils weaves;
And there the olive stirs its silver leaves.
Towns, tow'rs, and convents, lifted to the sky,
Beneath, vales, domes, spires, villas sparkling lie,
While the famed Arno, silvery now and bright,
In frequent bends pursues his course of light.
Anon
.
Time
rolled away. Days expand to years while
we look forward; but years shrink to moments as
we cast our glance back upon the past. Six
winters
had elapsed since the circumstances hitherto
related. Events of a general import, in no way
connected with our story, had erased it from the
conversation and memory of the community; and
the individuals whom we have introduced to the
reader had apparently lost the character of actors
in a continuous drama. No information had ever
transpired concerning the unfortunate Rosalie
Romain
,
and it had been universally conceded, at least
by those who had not intimately known him, that
she had fallen by the hand of her lover. Men shook
their heads, shrugged their shoulders, and called it
a strange affair; and so it faded away among the
thousand marvels of the past. The young man
had been last publicly seen at the conflagration of
Mr. Temple's mansion, where he had been
recognised
by the mob, aided by the exclamation of
Count Clairmont. From that moment his voice
had never been heard nor his face seen by the
public
,
nor even by any of his former acquaintance.
He was supposed to have buried himself in the
oblivion of some foreign clime; and it was
currently
reported that he had fallen in a political fray
in Poland. His family resided in extreme
seclusion
.
The statesman's dreams were shivered to
atoms
.
Howard had married Miss Leslie while the
obloquy against Norman ran the highest, and they
rarely mingled in society. Upon other points our
history itself will contain sufficient information.
We must now bear the reader from that sublime
fragment of the globe which the immortal Genoese
gave to civilized man; and to Americawith her
beautiful and stupendous scenes of nature; her
immense
lakes; her broad and sweeping rivers; her
climes, melting into all the varieties of the globe;
her cataracts, shaking the earth; her mountains,
kissing the heavens; her solitudes and forests, yet
hushed in primeval silence; her Indians, stern and
sad, fading from reality into fable; her broad fabric
of political freedom, already towering up brightly
and boldly amid the wrecks and shadows of
history
;
her magnificent cities; her vast plains,
laughing
with plenty; her healthy breezes, laden with
the voice of contentment and peaceto America,
we bid farewell; and Italy claims our attention.
Italy!what a contrast! On wings mightier than
those of the eagle, you have soared from a world
yet unscathed and new. You have alighted on a
remote, a more wondrous realm. You are as one
born blind, who now first sees those things which before
he only heard of. Objects hitherto but vague, and
hallowed shapes of imagination rise, startling
your very soul with their stern, naked reality, all
rent and wounded, all blackened and blasted, where
the hot and rolling lava of each human volcano has
scattered them, and burnt them, and left them in
their despair. Oh, Italy! who treads thy stricken
and terrible domains, from the fresh and virgin dells
of the new world, feels then, perchance, for the first
time, appalled that he is
man
. Beneath him every
field has a voice, and a storyaround lean
crumbling
monuments full of gloom and agony
unburied
ghosts flit through the dusky shade; like
neas, he shrinks, lest the very branch, as he
plucks it, may shed drops of blood. War and hate,
murder and superstition, have made themselves
tokens
that frown and bristle from every hill and dale.
He beholds the million crippled beneath the
chariot-wheels
of crowned kings. He roams through her
desolate huts; her hideous dungeons; her stately
palaces; her immortal tombs; her blood-soaked
plains; her unpeopled cities. The genius of
aristocracy
and despotism stalks by the prone column
and the broken arch; the bloated tyrant yet revels
in his golden house; the wailing of wo yet mingles
with the tread of stern armies; the ulcerous beggar
starves in the costly temple; the desperate ruffian
stabs in the abandoned amphitheatre This is the
moral aspect of Italy.
It was near the hour of sunset, towards the close
of a golden autumn (though all the autumns of Italy
may be called golden), six years after the events
recorded in the preceding pages, that a single
horseman
,
having sent on his servant in advance to
procure
for him the necessary accommodations, paused
on the brow of the hill which, on the road from
Bologna, commands a near view of the Val d'Arno
and of Florence. Floods of deep splendour,
streaming from the gorgeous west, bathed the
immense
level, and its banks of sloping mountains, in
the softest of all earthly radiance. The plain lay
shining through a half-palpable mist, like a vast still
lake, imbosomed among steep hills. On three sides
rose eminences, each one crowned with some
striking
edifice, celebrated town, or remarkable ruin.
Here a crumbling fortress, there a half-buried wall,
and there an abandoned cathedral; while an old
convent, or a superb villa, seen at frequent intervals
amid palaces and peasants' huts, and immense
broad walls of yellow stone, rendered the view yet
more romantically picturesque. On one hand, in a
sharp and abrupt swell of the Apennine, rose the
steep of Fiesole, capped with its ancient town and
modern villagea monastery built by Michael
Angelo
,
the Franciscan convent, and the spacious
cathedral
,
loftily pressing into view. In the opposite
direction rises a tower erected for the observations
of Galileo, and near stands the villa in which
Boccacio
wrote most of his hundred tales of love. The
Arno glided along on its way of liquid light, while
in the horizon faintly rose the dim blue mountains
of Genoa. Upon the bosom of each green and
leaning hill, and far, far along the extent of the
limitless
plain, the sunshine was brightly reflected from
4
countless villas, huts, towns, and palacesin the
foreground, lifting their stone towers and walls from
out the foliage of cyprus and olive, and in the
distance
faded to dots and specks, sparkling through
the floating gauze of aerial gold. In the midst of
this inexpressibly beautiful scene, swelled darkly
and heavily into the illumined air the gigantic dome
of Santa Maria del Fiore: its filigreed belfry
sprang beautifully up its side, and around rose
the large and massy towers; the tiled, burnt, and
time-scathed roofs; the gloomy, black palaces,
encircled
with gardens, and the crumbling,
moss-painted
,
vine-clothed old walls of the city. The
month of November had just commenced; and
while London was merged in mud, fog, and smoke,
and New-York lay dark and cold amid her naked
trees and wintry winds, this ancient and celebrated
town, sheltered from the north by stupendous
mountains, and basking under a heaven all warm
with hues of pearl and emerald, lay steeped in its
ocean of glowing light, with the exquisite
splendour
of a
Claude
. The air slept in stirless repose
The deepest tranquillity was impressed upon the
scene, over which came neither noise nor motion,
except that through the profound stillness might
sometimes be heard the softened roar of the distant
carriage-wheels, as the nobility hastened to their
evening drive at the Cascine; or the sound of the
peasant's song, as he wound down the road with
his light cart and little white ass; or the ringing
of the bells, each quivering toll wafted over
sparkling
house-top and scented vale in waves of silver
sound.
The traveller slackened the reins of his horse as
he reached a near eminence commanding this
enchanting
prospect. The noble beast paused, arched
his neck, lifted his head, and pricked his ears,
apparently
sharing the pleasure of his master in gazing
down on a picture so lovely. Thus, alone on that
height, the stranger yielded himself to the spirit of
the scene and the hour, and sat silent and lost in
earnest admiration. He was evidently a man of
the higher ranks, whose appearance at once
commanded
attention and respect. He was tall and
graceful, and with a figure well developed, just
passed from youth into the fulness and vigour of
manhood. His countenance was browned, as if
with many climes, but marked by features of
striking
beauty, chastened by melancholy and thought,
and conveyed the idea that you would find him one
dangerous to insult, and yet easy to love; one who
had felt and reflected much; whose heyday of life
had gone with the winds; to whom years had
brought experience and wisdomdisappointment,
and, perhaps, unhappiness. Something there was
in his expression of sweetness, and something of
sternness, all blended into a look care-worn and
subdued, as if his soul were with the past. It was
thus that Norman Leslie, for it was he,after the
lapse of six years, spent in far eastern climes,
eastern
even to the Roman, even to the Greek,it was
thus that Norman Leslie again appeared upon the
stage of this drama, and, though ignorant of it
himself
,
connected with its other characters.
While he muses upon one of the most
extraordinary
scenes for beauty which the globe can
furnish
,
let us also pause briefly to trace the course of
his few past years. The reader is already aware
that the trial which released his person had been
fatal to his reputation. His fate seemed as
embarrassing
as it was terrible. He was cut off from all
the worlda crushed, blackened being; and who
can wonder, however they may blame, if, in the first
agonies of despair, the thought of death, death by
his own hand, had darkly and powerfully presented
itself to his mind. From this despondency and
supineness he at length awoke, and thought of
action
.
Yet what action? what was he to do? On
earth he had no hope but
one
. It was to unravel
the web in which he was entangled; to detect some
clew to guide him through its labyrinth. What was
the
cause
of his present ruin? was it accident? or
was he the victim of some nefarious plot? It was
at the memorable conflagration, and on the eve of
his departure from America, that a secret voice
began
to stir in his breast, whispering the name of
Clairmont as in some way connected with this dire
tragedy. The mere suspicion caused him to
postpone
his voyage. A thousand times his reason
rejected
it as absurdas impossible; a thousand
times it came rolling back upon him with a turbid
violence, like a fever or a nightmare. In his cooler
moments it had no force; there appeared no
foundation
whatever upon which to build such a
conjecture
.
The object of Clairmont's stratagem had
evidently
been Flora. What could
he
have to do with
Rosalie Romain, or she with him? Could she be
alive, and suffer an innocent person to be thus
sacrificed
for a crime which had not been committed?
She was then either dead, or absent from the
country
;
but, if absent, to what place could she have
fled beyond the broad-spread rumour of his guilt?
Wherever the winds of heaven wafted the English
language, the blistering story must have been
echoed
;
and, if she knew it, would she not certainly
refute it? But her absence, or her decease, equally
acquitted Clairmont. If she were indeed murdered,
Norman could not believe
him
the murderer. Crimes
are not committed without an object. Nor,
supposing
her fled, could he believe him implicated in
her flight, or why had he not borne her company?
Besides, she had been seen by Flora. But then
Flora might have been mistaken.
Notwithstanding this conclusion of his calmer
moods, there were moments when imagination
superseded
reason; and imagination, to every
observing
and poetic person, has frequently appeared
endowed with the accuracy of instinct, and the
inspiration
of divinity. He had more than once found
its dictates correct, although in opposition to every
surrounding probability. As to Clairmont's
character
,
from the first moment he saw him, an
indefinable
presentiment had darkened his minda
presentiment
that they were linked together in their
future
career. So they had been. He recalled the
quarrel; that demoniac expression, whose fiendish
malice made him shudder; that oath, that deep,
deep oath; the subsequent look, which had
accidentally
caught his glance a few moments after
their fair-seeming reconciliation; the midnight
attack
his
dim suspicions of which he had never
but once breathed to mortal ear; the interposition
of Clairmont at the fire; the fiendish triumph of
his leer as he shouted his name; his previous
slanders
and avowed enmity. In his solitary
night-wanderings
,
these thoughts gathered and
accumulated
upon him, till Clairmont's agency in the late
tremendous vicissitudes flashed upon him with all
the intensity of conviction. These influences by
degrees powerfully affected his character. He
grew frozen with the sternness of a single
enterprise
and a single resolution. He was no longer
a crushed being, dragging out existence without an
object and without a hope. No, life grew to him
more precious than it was to other menthan it
had ever been before. He was to live hereafter
burning with one wild, mighty hope. He was to
unravel the mystery and clear his fame. The
4*
vague and chaotic mass of darkness he was to
reduce
to light and order. His father and sister
were necessarily involved with him in odium and
ruin. To clear his innocence was a duty he owed
them
even more than himself. Flora Temple, too,
had sympathized with himnay, his audacious
heart half dared to whisper, had loved him. He
knew not whether he could ever behold her again,
but the thought that she might one day witness the
triumph of his character over calumny and
degradation
,
was another sustaining influence which lent
vigour to his mind, and lightness and
determination
to his steps. He resolved, therefore, to
concentrate
all his energies upon this one purpose. It
was vast and vague, but its very vastness and
vagueness only animated and inspired him the
more. Even in wretchedness and shame it was an
object worth living for. All other hopes, and
thoughts, and considerations, he threw away to the
idle air. He wondered at the weakness of his first
despondency. He cast off from his mind every
doubt; and, thus resolved, he experienced the
benefit
of that almost supernatural power which inspires
men whose faculties are all bent to one purpose.
Hitherto his mind had resembled a river, which
meanders idly along a plain, in a thousand devious
and shallow tracks, as if without aim or impulse;
it now flowed with the swift and silent motion of a
stream which condenses its tributary and
wandering
floods into one deep and narrow channel, and
rushes on, darkly and heavily, to the brink of the
cataract.
But in his very commencement difficulties
almost
insuperable blocked up his path.
Where
was
he to look? upon whom was he to fix his eyes?
Was he to seek the bones of that bright girl in the
vague depths of the river, or beneath the earth?
or was he to commence a search among the living?
Which way should he turn his steps? If alive, she
could not be in America. What clime should he
visit? He had no thread through the mazes which
surrounded him, no beam of light, no whisper, no
token, only oneClairmont.
Him
he resolved to
follow. Him, in spite of reason, he regarded as
the secret blaster of his life. Upon him, then, he
determined to fix his gaze.
Sometimes he resolved to seek an interview.
But what could he gain by that? He would,
indeed
,
enjoy the satisfaction of pouring out a bosom
full of hate. He might again denounce him in
public. He might assail him with suspicions, and
threaten to dog his steps over the world. But what
weight would his denunciations have?
his
, the
condemned, the outcast, the murderer, escaped by
chance from the murderer's death? They would be
imputed to the malice of guilt, or the ravings of
madness. Besides, it would put his foe on his
guard. No, he must proceed with caution. He
must guard carefully against secret attacks upon
his own life. Silence and patience were his only
course; secret watchfulness, and a hope that time
would aid him. Oh, then he learned how bitter it
is, when the heart is bursting, and the brain is on
fire with some deep and maddening emotion, to
smother the tumult within; to nurse in the bosom
violence, anguish, and torture, with the faint hope
that
time
may afford relief.
At this period he heard that Clairmont had sailed
suddenly for Europe. He awoke from his reveries
with the intention of taking passage for the same
port, when a fever fell upon him.
For a month he was confined to his bed, and, in
the long solemn hours of the night, delirium often
came over him. Who can paint the ravings of
any imagination disturbed by physical agonies?
but
his
imagination, heated, burning, maddened
as it was, even in its soberest moods! What were
the phantoms that peopled his wandering dreams?
Wild and broken fancies mastered his reason. He
yielded to the workings of the unseen, ungoverned,
fantastic spirit, when the orbs of sight were closed.
Airy and intangible images thronged around him.
Troops of spectral visitants came up and sailed
away. The ghost of the past floated dimly,
silently
,
solemnly byhalf-forgotten scenes and faces
returned upon himold voices rang in his ears,
yet, with a sound that fell noiselessly, as if itself
were but a spectre. Thus, as he lay in the lone
night-watcheslone to him, for although a father,
a sister, a friend, ever bent by his couch, and
wiped the damps from his forehead, and wept, and
whispered the soothing endearments of love, yet he
saw them not, he felt them not, his soul was dead
to outward truths. He was rapt, absorbed, and
lost utterly in his own wild, vast, awful world of the
unreal, the invisible. Slowly, majestically, train
after train of mighty beings swept by, rising out
of darkness as from a deepsinking again into dim
abysses and hushed chasms, that spread around
like
eternity
. Sometimes he called to them, he
shouted, he shrieked. Their cold, dead,
immutable
faces frightened him. He thought that unless
they spoke to him, unless they gave him one
human
look, one human token,
he should go mad
.
Then a change came over him. This illimitable
solitude in which he had seemed to lie on air, as if
the globe were annihilated, and he alone, utterly,
startlingly alone, remained amid these innumerable
throngs and myriads of spiritsthis huge, sublime
void melted away, and the green and scented globe
broke up around him, as through a mist, and he lay
on a cool bank amid flowers, and buds, and leaping
brooks, and murmuring beesand Flora Temple
sat by himand their hands were clasped
tenderly
,
and she kissed him, and looked into his eyes
and made him feel that she loved him unutterably.
Then shrieks burst forth, the blissful scene faded,
and he lay in a prison. Then came the trialthe
judgethe jurythe counselthe witnessesthe
sea of faces, all upturned towards him, all
scorching
him with their numberless and burning eyes
the speeches thundered in his earsand murderer!
murderer! was whispered by fiendish voices,
and shouted by demons; and on the black air rode
ghastly forms, reeking with the fumes of eternal
wo and desperation, flapping their fierce wings in
his face, and writing the word
murderer
, in letters
of flame, everywhere upon the sable mantle of
night. And one of the fiends wore the face of
Clairmont. And he came and stood before him,
and folded his arms, and smiled, and turned white,
and swore again, Remember, Norman Leslie, I
will have your heart's blood!
In this terrible delirium came to his memory
what had never presented itself before, the faces
of the woman and her lovely child whose lives he
had saved from the affrighted steeds months ago.
In his waking and sane moments he had utterly
forgotten them. Now she was with him in his
anguish, and thanked him; and her face, and that
of her child, grew as distinct to him as if he had
seen them but yesterday. There he lay, as it
seemed for ages, while an ocean rolled ever its
floods over him, with a rushing, slow motion that
sometimes gave him pleasure, but afterward, from
its monotony, wearied, and at length almost
maddened
him.
When he recovered, Clairmont had been long
gone. He set off after him, but had never met
him, nor known which way to turn his steps. For
years he had wandered over the globe. The
Turk, the Russ, the Greek, had been his familiars.
Gradually the hope of piercing the gloomy secret
of his life faded away, and he turned his attention
to other subjects. For obvious reasons, he had
substituted a middle name for that by which he
had been usually known, and wrote himself in the
travellers' books Mr. Montfort. He thought by
that means that accident might more probably fling
him in the way of Clairmont. Besides, he was
not, as has been already hinted, without suspicion
that Clairmont, if thrown upon his track, might
secretly attempt his life. Thus, travel-worn and
changedsad, but far, far less unhappyhe now
paused, looking down on the home of Dante,
Lorenzo
,
and Buonarotti, and musing on its romantic
history, and the fiery beings who had trodden its
streets. So had years changed him, so were his
old impressions effaced, or softened, or weakened,
that all the turbulent and heartbroken images of
the pastall his wohis disgracehis very love,
lived in his mind in calmer and milder colours
mellowed, and perchance somewhat faded, like a
Rembrandt or a Corregio, by time. As he pressed
onward his good steed towards the gate where his
servant had been ordered to meet him, neither Flora
Temple nor Rosalie Romain crossed his fancy.
They werehe had compelled them to bedreams
of the past. He had
forced
his mind into new
thoughts and sterner occupations than idle
lamentation
and unrequited love. If such
remembrances
swept over him ever, it was in those intervals
of life when excitement flagswhen the health and
spirits failwhen accident softens the feelings, or
awakens the associations of the inner heart.
The traveller, at a gentle pace, reached and
entered
the
Porta San Gallo
. The valet had found
a hotel to his taste. His rooms were already
prepared
a
fire lighted; and alone, as had been his
custom for many a year, he partook of his simple
and solitary meal.
CHAPTER VII.
A By-scene in Florence
.
And poring o'er her beauties,
Till at length I learned to love them.
A
Sculptor
sat alone in his
studio
. The
sun-shiny
air of his apartment gave almost the warmth
of flesh to the cold marble figures scattered around
here and there on the floor, or leaning from shelves
and frames. A large opened window admitted the
tempered breeze, laden with stolen sweets from the
orangery of an adjoining palace. Large blocks of
the material in which he worked, lay in the court
and antechamber, soon perhaps to be awakened
into those half-breathing shapes which peopled the
solitude of his apartment. The artist was youthful,
and of a most interesting appearance. A character
of melancholy and intellectuality peculiar to his
profession
peculiar,
indeed, to all whose studies lead
them from the outer world into the higher realms
of thought and imaginationwas impressed at once
upon his air, form, and features. Slender, but
gracefully
formed, you saw at a glance that his labours
were not of the body, but of the mind. It was
beneath
the expanded forehead that the glorious circle
of his life and genius lay; and that the intensest toil
might weary or reward him, even in the hour when
to other eyes he seemed most at rest. His
countenance
was of that high and classical mould
frequently
found among cultivated Italians. Pale,
noble, intelligentyou marked him immediately as
one of no common cast. Large black eyes glanced
a softened and shaded ray when unexcited; but,
with animation came light and fire, and a certain
beauty and expression denied to his features in their
ordinary repose, and implying geniusenthusiasm
the yearnings and deep aspirations of a
far-reaching
soul. Many women would have found in him
the dangerous faculty to feel love in its most
passionate
moods; and not only to feel, but to excite
it. His face, too, was full of candour and manly
mind. His smile, when he did smile, was sweet
and still; but the habitual expression was that of
thought and abstracted melancholy. Something
winning and endearing there was, both in the
chiselled
mouth, and the lustrous eyes, and the dazzling
teeth, which shone through his smile. His hair was
profuse for the fastidious fashion of the day, but the
quality made ample amends; and the rich auburn
masses about his white blue-veined temples, and
the two slight curls which added so much to the
expression of his lips, gave his whole bust a
striking
air for a picture. Many a young,
bright-hearted
girl would have imbodied in him her favourite
hero of romance. With all that was amiable and
gentle, too, came ever and anon over his air a
hauteur
and sternness, as the mood of his mind varied.
He was a
beau ideal
for genius.
Before him stood the bust of a young girl. Never
shone a face so sunny and beautiful. Was it some
ideal creation there beaming in immortal marble
the brilliant imbodying of female lovelinessof
girlhoodof hope, joy, and purityas these
attributes
exist in a most fervid imagination? Did not
he who had awakened such a dream of softness and
light from the passionless and inert stonedid he
not tremble with the exquisite appreciation of his
inspired work? Did not his eyes sparkle with
triumph
and joy? Did not his heart heave with the
fulness of a fairy vision for once realized by his
hand?
No. As Angelo gazed on the graceful head, and
the girlish and bright face, his reveries seemed to
partake more of sadness than delight; and after a
long silence, and kissing with an impulse of love the
cold forehead and the unstirring tresses, he sighed,
and the flush of an excited thought came over his
cheek.
Yes, he said, I must lose even thiseven
the work of my toilthe produce of my own eye
and my own hand. I must part with the dear
impress
and faint reflection of what haunts me so
even to thisdull, unanswering marble as it is
I must bid farewell, because fate has cast my lot
in penurybitter, heart-gnawing, soul-corroding
penury. Beautiful, adored, celestial image!he
kissed again the silent headI love thee,
although
dim and dark compared with
her
. Oh, how
I love thee!
He paused, still regarding it, and then continued:
Dim, did I say? Why, I wonder I have
dared
to
hew out this unworthy thing to image forth her
bewildering
charms.
Thou
, Antonia?why, where
are those eyes, more soft than ever gazed from the
fearful fawn? Where the tinges that float over the
tresses? Where the smile that steals across the
rose-bud mouth? Where the voice that so fills and
bewilders my soul, that a thousand thousand times
Vol. II.C 5
I would have flung myself at her feetwept
prayedand adored herbut for that cold priest,
who leers and treads so stealthily about with her,
as if he were my evil demon? Where are the
words that rise from those lipsbeautiful words
all, bright as flowersor seashellsor any
thing that nature made most bright and fair: and
yet, he said, relenting towards the unconscious
object of his displeasure, even this would be a
companion. Thisnameless, friendless, obscure
as I amI might love without dishonourwithout
scorn. Leave me those pouting lips, sweet
heaven
!
dead as they are to my audacious kisses; and
leave me those drooping eyeseven though
unseeing
.
Better, perhaps, that they should not view
my presumptuous homage, lest their marble orbs
dart fire and contempt upon me.
He started up, and paced across the room.
Yes, contempt on mewhose companionship
is with the divinities of the past; whose tread is in
the track of Phidias and Praxitelesof Angelo and
Cellini; whose hand can thus remould the fleeting
features, conferring an immortality which nature
refused
:
on mewhose name and whose productions
shall endure when the frail original of this beautiful
thing lies mingling with the common dust. But,
thank the great God of freedom, the time draws
near. My countrymy bleeding, groaning,
trampled
country! Thy deep, low voice rises to me
from a thousand hills. Why should I waste my
golden youth in idle and unanswered love? Why
should I pursue disappointment, and woo scorn?
Why should I?and yetand yet how fiercely
burns this bewildering passion in my heart for that
careless girl! Shall I yield to it? Shall I leave
my ambition and chain myself with love's flowery
fetters for ever to her feet? Yet she loves me not:
oh, no! not even
my
madness can dream it. But
will she not?may she not, should this deep-laid
plot succeed? Her proud couzin Alezzi is a
leader
,
and so am
I
. Should it succeed, wealth and
fame may be mine. Whose star would then burn
more gloriously than the poor artist's? Oh, I
would people a gallery with her lovely shape!
All my marble should turn to Antonianothing
but Antonia.
CHAPTER VIII.
An insight into the Mind of the WandererNo Misfortune
irreparable but Guilt
.
Oh this learning! what a thing it is!
Taming of the Shrew
.
We
said that the remembrance of Norman's past
agony, and even of his love, only swept over him
now with a softened power. The former sounded
to him like the roar of a far-off city, and his dream
of Flora Temple came floating faintly as the swell
of distant music on the breeze, sometimes with a
tone more audible, and sometimes dying almost
entirely
away. His character was changed. He had
awakened from the confidence, the security, the
thoughtlessness of youth. He had been torn rudely
adrift from all that graced life, and he had learned
to commune with
himself
. Travel, solitary,
observing
travel, amid all that was wonderful on the globe,
had poured into his mind new materials for study
and thought. Sometimes he imagined that his
original
C 2
and boyish character had been all worn away,
and replaced by new opinions and impressions, new
modes of acting and thinking, new memories, new
hopes and ambitions. America, to his lively and
poetic imagination, was but the stage of a theatre,
on which, in times gone by, he had acted a tragic
part. Never, he thought, could those scenes be
revisited. He strove to fancy it all a dream;
rescuing
nothing from the phantoms but two or three
linked most closely to his bosom by ties of
relationship
and love. His father, and sister, and Howard
were among those whom he hoped once more to
behold; but he was to behold them in Europe.
It may be supposed that among his present
feelings
was a distaste for general society. He had
changed his name, not with any intention to deny
his identity among those with whom he might
chance to associate, but for reasons hitherto
mentioned
.
Society exposed him not only to painful
and impertinent curiosity, but to awkward and
embarrassing
predicaments. He met them, however,
when inevitable, with firm moral courage and
dignity
;
but while he never shrank from notice, he
never courted it. His person and bearing, his now
fully developed genius and matured and enriched
understanding, would have secured him an
honourable
reception in any circle, even under his own
name, and with the full knowledge of his story.
Indeed, when connected with his appearance,
around which years, and travel, and melancholy,
and study, had shed a more striking grace and
continual
self-possession, there was in his adventures
something romantic and thrilling. So young, so
noble, so handsomewith such eyes and such a
voice,women pronounced him innocent the
moment
they saw him. His letters of introduction
always alluded to his history; he wished no
concealment
from his friends: but they were also
strong, and even enthusiastic, in expressions of
esteem
,
confidence, and admiration. Many a
pressing
allurement had been laid to seduce the
unfortunate
and handsome young stranger into the circles
of the gay and the lovely. But other aspirations
had awakened within him.
As soon as he had abandoned the definite hope
of discovering any thing respecting Miss Romain
a hope which, however faded, lay yet, perhaps half
unknown to himself, smouldering like hidden fire in
his hearthe had thought to beguile his solitude
and disappointment in
study
. Driven over the
battlements
of the world of external beauty, he
explored
a new and mightier world in books. In his
character lay a deep appreciation of the grandeur
and triumph, of the almost celestial grace and
dignity
,
which rewards the searcher after knowledge.
Wealth he had without limit. Love?he had
tasted the enchanted goblet, and its contents turned
to tears as he drained. Ambition? ambition for the
world?power, influence, applause among men?
he shuddered; for he remembered, with a
writhing
and transpierced heart, that fatal night when,
amid the crash of thunder, and the riot and whirl
of a maddened conflagration, his fellow-beings had
raised against him the yell of the bloodhound; and
Leslie the murderer!
a peal befitting the dun
valuts of hell itselfdrove him from his love and
from his country. No; his path lay no more among
men
. He was to carve it out through the sublime
and lonely altitudes of science. For himselfor,
peradventure (and a solemn thrill of inconceivable
rapture rolled through his vems at the thought), for
the eyes of a race yet unbornhe would kindle
about his brow the steady halo of the
scholar
.
Here was a world of which he might be the monarch.
5*
A world whose numberless and illumined paths he
could mount alone; a world peopled but with the
awful spirits of the great of old; and all conjured
up obedient around him by the wave of his silent
wand, and in the solitude of his midnight hours.
Reader, can you not feel and triumph with the
outcast and the exilewith the homeless and the
hopelesswhen the lofty and splendid aisles of this
holier sphere burst and broadened upon his gaze.
A new gift of wings seemed to unfold themselves at
his shoulder; and spirit voices, inaudible to the
grosser sense of others, spoke sweetly in his ears,
and the scales of mortality fell from his orbs, and
the divinity of the past and the present was upon
him and within him. Roaming over the
magnificent
and wonderful globe, he read its lessons and
penetrated its secrets. Oh! what are the glitter of
wealth and the pride of royalty, the pomp of troops
and the allurements of sensual luxury, to the plain
garb and unattended simplicity of the scholar?
Visiting no spot but its history is familiar; reading
a thousand sweet secrets and eloquent lessons in
every simple flower, in every thronged city, in every
lonely wood; gorgeous visions and stately phantoms
rising up before him upon every plain, by every
ruin! Is he not a monarch? Does he not dwell
in his own solemn kingdom? Are not the air and
the earth, the desert sea and the gold-paved sky,
more to him than to other men?
Norman had been educated only as young men
of his age and country are but too often educated.
The classical studies are got through with at
college
,
and afterward neglected. Business, fashion,
pleasure, then tempt the steps and monopolize the
swift rolling year. New actors are to be seen, new
excursions to be enjoyed. Books soon become
strangers, except the ephemeral works of the day,
where all that is noble and grand is too often made
subservient to amusement. Such a giddy as well
as heartless thing is the
coterie
of fashion.
Perhaps
but for the peal of thunder which had fallen
on his paththus fallen from a heaven of
unstained
bluehe never could have exerted, never known
the divinity within him. Thus often, in this
shadowy
world, the most terrible calamity is but the
sable mantle of some luminous blessing.
Books
soon became to him, not only a refuge, but
a passion. With a matured and firmer
understanding
,
he now retraced his way through those temples
of classic lore where his boyish foot had lingered
but half conscious of their splendour; and oh, what
associations often swept over him, while wandering
again back over those paths of his by-gone days!
Often he stood once more in the sunny haunts of
early life, and the voices of his childhood rose
around him; and hopethen a dear and familiar
spirit, now the spectre of one buriedseemed again
to smile and cheer him on. The modern languages
he mastered with a rapidity that surprised himself;
and every author in the French, the Italian, and the
German, he could read with fluency and delight.
With hushed and solemn joy, too, as one in the
solitude
of night, he stood to gaze on those great and
ever steady stars in the literary firmament, which
have burnt there just so gloriously upon the eyes
of vanished ages. Then he learned how far
exclusive
devotion could carry the mind.
The thirst for
knowledge
, unslaked, unslakable,
grew
upon him. History opened its immense and
sublime realms, to which the narrow present
became
only a point almost invisible. In this
startling
study he forgot himself for monthsfor years.
Here met the lonely student his silent and
unaccusing
companions. Here found he a home where
his footsteps could wander in peace. Alexander
and Pericles, Camillus and Csar, Alaric and
Mahomet
he
walked with these. The Grecian
temple
rose before him against the blue serene. The
streets of old Rome and her mighty millions spread
around. Thebes, Palmyra, and Jerusalem were
the haunts of his spirit.
But history involved other studies of a yet more
astounding natureastronomy, geology,
metaphysics
,
the human mind, the world of inferior living
creatures; and amid them all stood, chaste, stately,
brilliant, and eternaltowering, yet unequalled, yet
unharmed, through every age, every clime, every
languagethose gorgeous monuments which the
poet has reared, those proud battlements of intellect
and genius, defying decay, even as the
cloud-cleaving
and ice-capped Alps dazzle with their silver
tops each rolling generation. Now, for the first
time, he began to comprehend the immensity, the
solemnity of existencethis inexplicable gift, this
ray of immortal divinity, lighting up a handful of
mortal dust. We have said his character was
changed. He had left the circle of
fashion
. He
had burst from the entanglements of youthful hopes
and habitsof selfish pleasures and idle frivolities,
in which so many, capable of nobler enjoyments,
fritter away their years. He was no longer the
sighing boy, nor the musing youth. Manhood had
come upon him, and with manhood,
reflection
.
At this period accident enabled him to render a
very important service to the Marquis Torrini, an
old and wealthy nobleman of the Tuscan court.
Meetings between them took place necessarily and
frequently. To this gentleman Norman had been
presented with a letter of introduction, from one of
his most intimate friends in Vienna. But hearing of
him a character that attracted neither esteem nor
sympathy, he had never commenced the
acquaintance
.
Having it now thrust upon him, he handed
the letter. It touched upon his history. He hoped
that it would frighten his new friend, whose
absorbing
weakness, or passion, was superstition.
But, on the contrary, from some inexplicable
caprice
,
the feeble dotard, who had regarded most
young men with dislike, became enamoured
declared
he knew all the storythat it only rendered
Signore Montfort a greater favouritethat he must
not think of refusing a
suite
of rooms in his palace,
one of the most remarkably splendid, by-the-way,
in all Florence. Leslie
did
think of refusing, and
very seriously; but among the attractions of the
Torrini palace were a spacious and valuable library,
and a gallery of rare old paintings. From severe
studies he had lately turned to paintings for
recreation
,
and delighted to acquaint himself, not only
with the gems of art and the difference between the
schools, but to trace out the singular fortunes of the
immortal and inspired artists. He accepted the
invitation
.
It was about the middle of December when he
entered the palace. He found the old lord much
better than he had been represented, although
utterly
abandoned to the magnificent dreams of the
Catholic persuasion, which walks familiarly with
saints and angels, and sees God's finger writing on
the earth and sky. Perhaps the nature and tender
affection of a father softened the harsher features
of his real character. You cannot
hate
a man who
is reverenced and beloved by a guileless and
beautiful
young daughterat least
I
cannot.
C 3
CHAPTER IX.
A Florentine PalaceAn Italian GirlA Chord struck
Its Vibrations
.
Which out of things familiar, undesigned,
When least we deem of such, calls up to view
The spectres which no exorcism can bind.
As with
the
old
gouvernante
, a few days after
Norman's domiciliation, they leaned from the
marble
balcony of a terrace overlooking the garden,
her father kissed Antonia, and laid his hand on her
headthat very original and bright piece of nature's
workmanship which had caused the rhapsody of the
young sculptor.
I have ordered the rooms to be warmed for
Mr. Montfort to-day, to see the pictures; will you
not go with him and the signora?
Such a
cicerone!
`Oh yes, my father! (how the melody of the
Italian melted from those lips), Signore Angelo
is to bring home my bust this morning, and I will
let Signore Montfort be the judge, if he will stay
away from the Pitti and spend the morning with us.
Signore Montfort bowed. Perhaps the study of
painting had improved his eye, but he could not fail
to see, and to feel, how lovely and graceful was this
rare young creature; how light her step; how warm
and tender her eyes; her voice, how musical; her
form, how fair. He had hitherto met her without
attentively regarding hershe had passed before
his eyes as some bright cloud in the sky, some
gorgeous bird through the grove, or a soft-hued
seashell
on the marble beach. As they commenced
their roundshe, with her beaming and lovely face,
like one of Raphael's Madonas, and the wrinkled
old
gouvernante
by her sidea sudden kindness
stirred in his heart, a sense of her excellence and
surpassing charms. Years had glided away since
he had been the companion of womanyears of
severe solitude and gloom; and now that nameless
light, that exquisite spell which, to those gifted with
the keen perception of female character and beauty,
the form of an innocent, unshaded girl often
conjures
up, was shed upon him. He thought of his
sister, andof Flora. From that moment an airy
link was thrown around him. The careless girl
had touched upon one of the deepest chords of his
soul; and while he yielded, with a half melancholy
delight, to its slow-fading vibrations, he felt that his
guileless and light-hearted companion was no longer
to him only a cloud or a seashell. It was not
love
,
but it touched him for a moment with something of
love's fervour. It was the echo of that blissful
voice, sent back upon his heart from the hollow
solitudes
of his later years.
The
signora
was soon tired, and left her charge
to the guidance of Mr. Montfort, and she led him,
for the first time, through her father's magnificent
palace.
The building was one of those striking, immense,
and durable edifices bequeathed to the Italian
nobles by their wealthy and warlike ancestors.
On approaching it, the stranger, especially from
the north and west, would not be so much
impressed
with its splendour as with its dimensions
for a dwelling. The elegant comfort of a London
or a New-York mansion, the neat, beautiful steps
and doorway, which in the two latter form the
principal entrance, the carpeted halls, and the
comfortable air of home, felt even in the exterior,
were all wanting here. The entrance was a high,
gloomy arch, through which alike horsemen,
pedestrian
,
and carriage passed into the lofty court.
From this arch, heavy steps of stone or marble
led the eye up along a cheerless, broad passage,
stately, dismal, and comfortless. In niches and
on pedestals stood sculptured forms, their spirited
attitudes strangely contrasted with their deathly
faces and voiceless lips, some defaced by time or
chance, and covered with dust never disturbed.
Here a Mars, threatening the world, bereft of
arms; and there a Venus, as simpering and
conscious
of her charms as if the enmity of the three
sisters had yet left her an unbroken nose; while
on each turn in the stairway reposed colossal
sphinxes and couchant lions of Egyptian and
oriental granite. The whole edifice, seen from
the street or the court, more resembled a prison
than a palace, as the reader of poetry and romance
is apt to imagine one; and even after mounting
some distance up the steps, the stranger, untaught
in the fashions of the continent, wonders whether
the vast structure, with its cumbrous strength and
lonely grandeur, is really
inhabited
, or whether it
is not appropriated merely to some public purpose
chambers of council, or tribunals of justice.
Lose yourself in the capitol at Washington, and
fancy it a
family
residence of some prince or
potentate.
But the first disappointment is much more than
compensated by the uncounted wealth lavished
within. Long halls, floored with tesselated and
glassy marbles; ceilings vaulted, loaded with
heavy bassreliefs, or painted with bright-gleaming
and radiant frescoes; immense mirrors, which, in
one room, appeared to constitute the whole breadth
of the walls; windows reaching from floor to
ceiling
,
and composed of enormous slabs of plate-glass
leading forth upon marble balconies, and to scented
groves of orange and lemon. The rooms were
heavily curtained, and draped with silks and
velvet
,
of all hues and kindshere one cerulean as
heaventhere another draped with a forest green
a third flushed with a mellow and a sunshiny
glory, from crimson velvet linked and fastened
with studs and knots of gold. About twenty-five
rooms on one floor, and those set apart mostly for
the mere pomp of display, led the wondering and
dazzled visiter from curiosity to curiosity, and
from splendour to splendournow over carpets of
matchless beauty, now over mosaic floors, whose
glittering surface spread beneath the feet like ice.
The intruder at once fears to trust himself upon
their slippery smoothness, or to tread upon their
pictured beauties. Some dozen rooms were
completely
crowded with paintings, each one by a
master, and many
chefs d'uvres
of the immortal
authors. The stern cliffs of Rosa, the melting
sunshine of
Claude;
Raphael's exquisite and
gentle
grace, and the winning softness of Guido; but
who can enumerate the treasures of an Italian
gallery of paintings? At frequent intervals stood
statues of classic beauty, and often of ancient
workmanship. Other furniture corresponded to
that already described: a profusion of the most
costly clocks and vases; a wilderness of bronze,
crystal, gold, marble, and alabaster; a thousand
exquisite shapes of classic lore; tables of untold
value, inlaid with sparks of gems, brilliantly
disposed
in the polished and gleaming slabs, to
resemble
flowers, insects, shells, &c.; ivory
ornaments
,
6
wrought by Cellini; boxes, altars, and
cases of amber: while, not unfrequently, the doors,
cornices, and walls themselves, were incrusted
with jasper, porphyry, and verd-antique. Scarcely
the eye believed the splendour real, half-deeming
each bright image but the gaud of some
theatrical
show, so prodigal, costly, unused, and useless
appeared the waste and riot of magnificence. The
knees ache in traversing the long apartments, and
the eyes are wearied in attempting to analyze
their bewildering and wanton brightness. But,
however dazzled for a moment, you are still soon
fatigued with this monotonous and unmeaning
grandeur. So much unnecessary parade seems
strained and idle, if not ridiculous and vulgar. If
you have seen the simple dwelling of Ariosto, and
his little garden, or the humble retreat of Petrarch,
among the green Euganean hills, or the damp cell
of poor Tasso, in the madhouse at Ferrara, you
regard this princely pomp with something of
sarcasm
.
In a country, too, where every narrow
street and golden vineyard; every palace, step,
and fountain-pedestal; every mountain-peak and
cathedral floor; every place, indeed, of any
description
,
not guarded perforce by the insolence of
aristocracy or the bayonet of despotism, is haunted
and swarmed with all the forms of loathsome and
blasted misery that ever humanity produced;this
blaze of rank, power, and abundance shows not
only absurd, but shocking and cruel.
But Norman was an old traveller, and these
thoughts had passed away with his first
impressions
of Europe. Now he trod the princely halls
with admiration; and as the fair girl, leaning on his
arm, pointed out, with a pure and sweet familiarity,
each theme of praise in picture or statue, he forgot
his taciturn gloom, and displayed in his manner and
conversation all the unwonted admiration which
she inspired.
In the course of their long ramble through the
superb halls of paintingsthe good old
signora
seizing every possible occasion to throw herself
down upon one of the luxurious
fauteuils
, and the
antiquated
cicerone
waiting at a respectful
distance
,
till the memory of Antonia should need
assistance from his more practised experience
(which, by-the-way, rarely happened)several
incidents
conspired to render her to Norman an
object
of interest. In the first place, he found her
quite a proficient in his native tongue; and he
enjoyed the quiet pleasure of following the
delightful
accent upon her unaccustomed lips. You
really
love your language while hearing it spoken
indifferently well by an agreeable young girl in a
foreign country. Antonia had studied it with zeal,
and music was nothing to her charming errors and
timid hesitation. A being so pure and lovely was
enough at all times to win the eye of the student,
bathed as his spirit was in the fervour of poetry,
and while watching and gently aiding her along the
path of a new language, he found himself
half-unconsciously
yielding to the gentle anxieties, and
half-playful, half-tender alarms of a happy mother,
scarcely trusting the first uncertain steps of a
beautiful
child. He felt that the sportive communion
thus increasing between them would have been
dangerous in other years. But the image of Flora
had to him the sacred sadness of buried love; and
he sighed to look down on Antonia, and think how
cold and dead his heart was; that her radiant face,
her guileless spirit, could now waken in his breast
only those vain regrets, that tender anguish, which,
in the triumphs of study, he had nearly forgotten.
He was struck, too, with the blended artlessness
and intelligence of her nature; with her antique
opinions and utter ignorance of the world, so
strangely contrasted with her high cultivation upon
certain accomplishments.
They were engaged before a celebrated painting;
and while Norman was smiling, with a heart more
at rest than it had been for years, upon the
engaging
and animated face of his guideeven as one
out of the brawling, battling world gazes on a
newly-unfolded
rosebud, wondering how the inert soil
could yield a thing so fair and tenderhe beheld a
third person, in the habit of a priest, close by his
side. He had apparently approached a few
moments
before, with the stealthy pace of a cat, and
now stood smiling upon them as they lingered
before
the broad painting, their shadows lengthened
on the glittering and pictured floor.
The fair Antonia, he said, has not welcomed
her instructer, who has just returned from Pisa.
Anxiety to see my dear child has brought me
unbidden
into her presence.
Oh, Father Ambrose! dear,
dear
Father
Ambrose
!
How good! how kind! Have you speeded
well in your journey? Is your sick friend
recovered
?
Will you remain with us now?
The priest smiled.
If I had as many mouths as the Hydra, yours
would find work for them all.
Oh, then, I know your poor friend is well, or
else you would not smile; and all a girl's idle
questions are answered without a word. But,
Father Ambrose, know Signore Montfort, my
father's most esteemed friend and guest. He has
supplied your place; for he is learned as you, and
I am his debtor for much, much wisdom: and
Signore Montfort will already have conjectured
that this is our honoured Father Ambrose, whom
we have spoken of in his absence often.
The holy man turned his face upon Norman,
and the keen eye of the latter detected, or imagined
that he did so, a certain scarce perceptible ripple
that crossed its singular smoothness. The eye
perused his face a moment with a sinister but
brief shade of displeasure. Norman returned the
gaze with an interest which surprised him. Where
had he seen those features? Where had that
insinuating
smile before crossed his observation?
Had he met him before indeed? What unquiet
association stirred at his heart as he encountered
the glance of those small but keen eyes? He
replied briefly, and took occasion the subsequent
moment, while the intruder was engaged in
conversation
with Antonia, to note him more narrowly.
He was small, but beautifully formed, with a white
slender hand, black eyes and hair, and a silent
smile of singular sweetness. His voice was soft
and musical, and he had the power of modulating
it to harmonize with the secretest chords vibrating
in the bosoms of those he addressed. Yet, with his
intelligent and classical cast of featuresthe wavy
and raven hair parted on that white round brow,
the almost feminine yet voluptuous mouth, and
snowy teeth gleaming throughwith all the graces
of his person and manner, there was about him
something wily and insincere, something which no
sooner fastened admiration than it awakened
distrust
.
There was, besides, that on his features
which impressed Norman powerfully with a sense
of the pastwhich, dimly and mysteriously,
awakened
in his bosom thrilling associations and vague
presentiments. The object of his new interest
soon departed, stealing away with the same
noiseless
tread with which he had entered, and lifting a
heavy curtain of crimson velvet which hung broadly
against the wall, disappeared through the door
concealed
6*
behind. To Norman he seemed to vanish:
an unaccountable foreboding, a feeling of
superstition
,
a willingness to abandon himself to his sudden
emotion, as to an omen, crept over him, and he
longed to be alone. Of Antonia he inquired into
the history of the person he had seen.
Oh! she said, it is the good Father
Ambrose
the
kindestthe bestthe dearestthe
holiest. He was the friend of my fatheroh, a
long,
long
time ago: before I was born.
A long, long time indeed, said Norman,
smiling
at the earnest and becoming enthusiasm which
marked her every word and action, and again
looking
on the beautiful child; for she seemed only
wavering on the fairy limits between girlish
simplicity
and woman's deeper imagination.
Seventeen years full, this spring, said the
signora
, who, having rested herself, had now joined
themfull seventeen years; and a good girl she
is, too, signore, and the old woman smoothed
down the tresses of her head affectionately as she
spoke; and knows as little of the world as a
wild rose.
A sigh from behind attracted their attention. It
was the young sculptor with the bust. The snowy
image rested on a marble table, before an immense
mirror. The artist stood by its side, leaning
against a column, his arms folded upon his bosom.
For a long timewhile all admired his workhe
seemed to be forgotten; and Antonia, leaning on
Norman's arm with a familiar girlishness, and
looking
up with each word confidingly into his face,
little dreamed the pang each random glance, each
gentle and neglectful tone, shot to a heartthough
cast in life's rougher and gloomier paths, yet all as
high, and soft, and passionate as her own.
How strange, she said at length, Signore
Angelo has gone!
Those poor artists, said the
gouvernante
,
arranging
her lace cap, are always so eccentric.
CHAPTER X.
The stirring of Associationsan Italian Picturea
Mystery
and an Adventure
.
That face of his I do remember well.
Twelfth Night
.
The
face of that priest haunted Norman's very
slumber with a dark and ominous meaning, as
inexplicable
as it was unpleasant. He could not
banish from his mind the impression that they had
met before. Where? He had been in all quarters
of the globe; and images of the remarkable climes
where his foot had lingered, and his eyes and his
soul been dazzled, rolled through his imagination
but none touched upon this newly-awakened chord.
Beneath the lofty peaks of Asia, where the
Assyrian
,
the Mede, the Greek, the Roman, and the
Saracen
had left their footmarks, he had strayed. Had
this singular face there greeted him? No. Had
those eyes glanced on him beneath the turban of
the dusky Moor? No. He could reach no
recollection
from the brilliant shadows of the past; nor,
amid all that his memory presented of the varied
zones and people of Europe, could he detect any
link connected with him. America? A dim
conception
rested on him that
there
their paths had
crossed; that those eyes had been on him there, at
some of the terrible moments of which he had
suffered
so many. He inquired particularly into his
history; but all that he learned contradicted
completely
,
incontrovertibly, every suspicion.
Ambrose had spent his life in Italy. For more
than twenty years he had been an inmate in the
family of Torrini. He was trusted by all; and if
remarkable for any thing, it was for his character
of holiness. Norman, therefore, forced himself to
believe that his interest in him was merely an
accidental
coincidence.
But, driven from the idea that he was connected
himself with this man, his disappointment was
relieved
in some measure by the fact that the
character
of the priest grew on him, the more he
studied
it, with deeper hues. He could not help hating
him. He had thought of himself that he was
gifted
with a keen sense of human characterthat he
read men's souls by intuitionthat towards some
his very heart yearned in love, while from others
he recoiled with an instinctive dislike. Some will
smile at the idea of this novel one among the
senses; but there are secret affinities in our nature,
and hidden repulsions, and voices that call out to
us with tones that will not be hushedat least that
was the theory of Leslie, and he yielded to his
distrust.
The holy father was in the habit of giving
lessons
to Antonia in her little boudoir. It was a
lovely place; and the bright girl chose often to sit
and read there, and warble her favourite melodies,
and to receive also her most intimate friends.
Among these very soon she learned to rank
Norman
.
He grew accustomed to her guileless and
affectionate ways, and imperceptibly glided into a
brother's friendship and familiarity.
It is not true that menI speak of the thoughtful
and the pure (are there not such in this bad world?)
cannot pass beyond the limits of mere ordinary
friendship with the more lovely and enchanting of
the other sex without entering into the realms of
lovewithout yielding to the earthlier whirl and
current of a feverish and absorbing passion.
Nothing
could be further from Norman's breast than
love for the unshadowed Italian girl
love
in the
acceptation of the word most familiar to
romance-readers
.
Years, misery, and meditation had made
him prematurely old; and his heart was the heart
of a wanderer over every zoneof one, like those
birds which sleep in the air on their unresting
and outspread wings, doomed to be ever afloat and
ever alone. But he loved her with the purified
and disinterested tenderness of paternal affection.
He saw into the crystal depths of her unsullied and
sunshiny mind and character. He beheld in her
one whose unconscious power over his feelings
was that of awakening mournful memories, but no
selfish passionmemories which subdued,
chastened
,
and exalted his nature. If her young
voice ever thrilled through his soul, it was of
another
that he thought; and in her presence he ever
found himself more softened to his old impressions.
Oh! he one day thought, when the atless
grace of her character and person had struck upon
him with peculiar force, in some of the thousand
little offices and kind communions which each
passing
day seemed to increase between themoh!
had I some young, beloved brothersome bright
boy, yet untouched with carejust awakening to
the dream of lovewith what delight would I
behold
him
by her side, to trace the unfoldings of their
fairy loves; to watch their glances drink the light
of each other's gaze; to see him wander
spell-bound
where her young foot had been; and at
length, from the visionary lover, deepen into the
adoring, the blest husband.
He was passing the boudoir of her who thus
occupied
his thoughts. The door was a-jar. He was
about to enter, when a sight met his eyes that
arrested
him. Antonia was in the act of receiving a
lesson. By her side was the priest. She had
dropped her eyes intently over her book, and sat in
an attitude of careless grace and exquisite girlhood.
Beautiful student! Close to her the priest had
drawn his seat, and had fixed his eyes intently upon
the radiant face which, lost in the earnestness of a
new thought, was all unconscious of his gaze. His
arm, which had been thrown, apparently by
accident
,
across the back of her chair, gradually fell
from its remoter position, till it almost clasped her
waist, while his vivacious features expressed any
thing but their usual meek and holy humility.
As Norman stood regarding the group
picturesque
and beautiful as it wasa feeling, not of
jealousy, but of alarm, shot through his soul. So
pure, artless, and confiding was this rare creature
dreaming no ill, believing ever the promises of
outward
semblance, so ignorant of the world, and
placing such implicit faith in Ambrosethat he
trembled for her opinions, if not for her happiness
and virtue. There was to him, also, about this
priest something quiet, sly, deep, and devilish; and
now, as he sat thus near, thus trusted, pouring into
her young soul his monstrous dogmasand who
can tell what more dangerous poison besidehe
looked like the tempter watching by Eve and
studying
her ruin. It is probable that his surprise was
visible in his face and manner; for Father Ambrose,
after a long breath and the fading away of an
absorbed
smile, on looking up, started perceptibly as
their eyes met, but immediately regained his oily
smoothness of manner.
Why did he start? It was the act of a
hypocrite
of
a devil, who feared lest the cloak might
have fallen from the cloven hoof: and then Norman
smiled at the importance which every trifle
assumed
in the strange mood which had lately come over
him.
On conversing with Torrini, he found him,
although
perfectly doting on his child, yet
abandoning
her education entirely to the Father Ambrose.
Torrini, as he grew old and ill, had fallen into the
very lowest abysses of superstition, and had
conceived
a project, Norman discovered some days
after
,
of consigning Antonia to a convent. On
expressing
his surprise, and probably his abhorrence,
the marquis had betrayed that the priest had first
suggested the measure. In the course of his
subsequent
interviews with Antonia, Norman turned
the subject upon this point. He found her steeped
in the prejudices and unnatural hopes of an
education
the most warped and erroneous.
If a young fawn could speak, it would not more
unguardedly confide its wild thoughts and wishes to
the forest breeze, than Antonia to all whom she
loved, and who sought her thoughts. One day after
Norman had spoken to her of lifeof the great
worldof human destiny and human happiness
she told him, with a light tear glittering from her
long lashes, that a convent was her refuge; and she
knew it would prove a sweet one from a dreadful
fate. It seemed she had been wooed in marriage
by a proud and haughty cousin of her father's
one on whom, from her infancy, she had looked with
terror. But Ambrose and her father both loved
him, and she knew it would grieve their hearts were
she ever to think of another. Nothing, she said,
filled her with more pleasure than the thoughts of
the holy and secure life led by the sister of St.
U. Those tranquil walls were the port where
every vessel reposed in safety. She had been told
that the world was as the terrible sea, smooth to
betray, and merciless in its furywrecking with
equal ease the tallest vessel and the lightest bark;
that beneath every wave lurked a rock, and in every
silver cloud hung a tempest.
If there was something mournful in the sight of
one so unsuspecting and light-hearted thus
entangled
in the meshes of superstition, Norman's
interest
was much enhanced by discovering the secret,
passionate, almost hopeless love entertained for her
by the sculptor Angelo. To the acquaintance of
this youth Norman had been attracted by many
nameless allurements of person, mind, and
character
.
So pure, high, aspiring, and gentle-hearted
was the melancholy artist, that Norman learned to
love him before he was aware. His own princely
fortune enabled him, in the most delicate way, to
relieve the embarrassment of his friend by affording
frequent employment for his chisel. This brought
them often together, until at length something of a
kindred spirit united them in the bands of sincere
friendship. Angelo found in Norman wealth
without
pride or ostentation; a heart sympathizing with
the impulses and recoilings, the pride and the
despair
,
of unfriended merit: while the more matured
and experienced student discovered in the artist
genius and virtue rarely seen: and the more he
studied his character, the more he admired its chaste
symmetry and classic proportions. It stood among
other men like a Grecian temple reared amid the
homely and discoloured mansions of modern
business
.
Imbued with poetryimbued with passion
he was dangerously gifted with capacities both
for happiness and misery. By a series of casual
trifles Norman had learned his love for Antonia.
We will not detain the reader with it; nor with the
fulness of his bliss when he discovered that Leslie
was not a lover. From that moment their
friendship
had become cemented.
One day Norman lounged from the palace after
a half hour of sportive study with Antonia. He had
ordered a Psyche from Angelo, and the latter had
promised him the first sight of it on this morning.
It was his custom to note down, in a kind of diary,
the leading events of the day, with such reflections
as they chanced to elicit, and to sketch in rude
outlines
the most remarkable characters he
encountered
.
These were treasures to his father and sister;
and for their eyes they were intended. On the
present morning, after he left the palace, he
remembered
that he had sallied forth without closing the
volume which lay open on the table. He returned,
therefore, with a hasty step; and mounting
suddenly
to his apartment, was surprised, as he
entered
,
to hear a slight stir and rustle, as if some one,
startled by his approach, had abruptly quitted the
room. But how? Certainly no one had passed
him by the door; and yet the noise had been too
distinctly audible for fancy. He glanced his eyes
around, all was lonely and quiet; but a heavy piece
of silken drapery in one corner seemed to stir, and
gradually settle itself into repose. He walked up
to it and examined it closely, and the wall behind
it. Nothing could he find. His note-book lay, as
he had left it, open upon the table; but, upon
approaching
to take it, he perceived, to his increasing
surprise, that it was upside downnot the position
in which he had left it, certainly, for he had written
in it the moment before his departure. It was
plain that some one had been in his room. Was
there a secret door? He began to fancy the old
days of romance had come back upon him. A
Vol. II.D 7
palacea priesta lovely girl, and a private panel
they were the very materials for a novel.
But the incident left an impression on him too
distinctly unpleasant to be the theme of jest. The
idea of being watched made his blood boil. He
had heard of the numerous
spies
with which Italy
abounds. Perchance the priest acted in that
capacity
.
From a floating conjecture the idea soon
grew into a confirmed truth. It by no means
softened
his feelings of dislike towards his reverend
friend: he resolved to be more wary in future.
But he had nothing to fear from the Tuscan
government
.
He knew Italy too well to be linked with
any attempt at reform or revolution; and he knew,
too, that such attempts, unsuccessful, only increase
her distress.
With these thoughts he resumed his walk. It
led him, in the way to the sculptor's, by the square
of the Duomo, and the glittering and airy tower
with its gorgeous tracery. The doors of the
immense
edifice were open, and, with that feeling of
solemn awe with which these gigantic, time-worn,
and magnificent monuments of ages rolled away
ever inspired him, he entered. Its vast, huge,
naked
interiordim, gloomy, stupendousfor a
moment
,
often as he had before seen it, hushed and
absorbed him. It was on this broad marble floor
that the great Lorenzo had been so nearly
assassinated
;
and here other historical incidents,
conclaves
and councils, had occurred, which forcibly
linked the long aisles and airy dome and vaults with
the splendour, romance, and grandeur of the past.
He pictured the immortal forms in whose steps he
was treadingMichael Angelo and Dante
Petrarch
,
Boccacio, and Galileo. His eye now fell on
the deep-stained windows, and now upon the
statues
,
yellow with age. A procession of priests,
followed
by another composed only of boys, some
almost
infants, and clothed in long black robes hung
with white lace, went shuffling by. Then a
sudden
burst of voices chanted behind the altar, and all
again was lonely and still.
As he lingered a moment by a column, he heard,
or thought he heard, the sound of his own name.
Turning suddenly, a tall and athletic man, wrapped
in a long cloak, stood gazing on him; and near, but
moving away, with a quiet, stealthy pace, he
discovered
one resembling the priest. It struck him that
the two had been engaged in conversation, but that,
on the sudden sight of him, they had parted. To
ascertain whether it was indeed the holy man
who began now to occupy a large portion of his
thoughtshe followed, with a quickened step; but,
entering a side-door, the object of his pursuit
disappeared
before he could actually determine his
identity. On returning, the other also was gone.
He stood alone on the mighty floor, amid the cold
marbles and dusky tombs. Then a sudden peal of
the organ heaved its rolling waves of harmony along
the far-reaching roofdying awayswelling up
and dying away again upon his startled ear.
D 2
CHAPTER XI.
A new MysteryLetters from Home
.
A gloomy sea
Rolls wide between that home and me:
The moon may twice be born and die,
Ere e'en your seal can reach my eye;
And oh! e'en then, that darling seal
(Upon whose print I used to feel
The truth of home, the cordial air
Of warm loved lips still freshly there:)
Must come, alas! through every fate
Of time and distance, cold and late,
When the dear hand, whose touches filled
The leaf with sweetness, may be chilled.
Moore
.
The
old Marquis Torrini held weekly soires at
the palace. A brilliant but extraordinary circle
gathered at these entertainments. Most of the
celebrated
characters of Europe might, at some time
or other, be seen there. Ex-kings and queens
the defeated generals of old wars waltzing by the
side of their victorsEnglish statesmenFrench
heroesthe Russian princetourists and scholars
from far-off countriesand womenall that Italy
could boast of lovely here flashed and floated in the
mazy dance. Among them were belles from other
circleswandering daughters of wealth and beauty,
freed from the restraint of morality prevailing in
other societies  gay, careless, and bewildering
minions of fashion, accomplished in all but morals,
who lived only to shine, to captivate, and to love.
Here the star-wearing lord led down the dance
some dangerous girlthe tender exile of a colder
clime, who now learned to allow as grace what she
had before concealed as shame. This atmosphere
of rank was as a new existence, and stupid virtue
dwelt in the lower world.
In these elegant regions of aristocracy and
splendour
,
notwithstanding the pressing desire of the old
nobleman, Norman rarely ventured. One night he
yielded to his curiosity to make the acquaintance
of a celebrated scholar and travellera man of
high character and science. Evening came, and
he found himself in the superb and dazzling rooms,
thrown open with all their medley of regal
magnificence
,
and thronged with the glittering array of
rank and fashion.
He found Sir Ha man of simple manners
and plain strong sense, in addition to his other great
and well-known merits. Two travellers, mutually
familiar with many places and people on different
sides of the globe, have numerous delightful topics
of conversation. They were pleased with each
other, and again Norman forgot his reserve towards
strangers, especially when his companion kindly,
and with unaffected candour, touched upon his
history
,
which Torrini, at the request of Norman, had
explained to him. The evident sympathy and
confidence
of the good philosopher were like healing
balm to his spirit; and he felt that happiness might
be his, even without the grand denouement which
he had once conceived so necessary to his very
existence
.
A select circle of such friendsthe love
of a being like Floraretirement and studyhe
sighed as these softening and grateful visions stole
over his imagination.
Sir Hto his attainments in philosophy added
no inconsiderable knowledge of the fashionable
world, and he recounted the character and leading
adventures of some of the most distinguished men
7*
and conspicuous women present. Much as he
knew of Italian society, Norman was shocked, and
almost incredulous. The most admired females
were giddy runaways from husbands and fathers
the charming
protges
of lords or kings. English
women, glittering in plumes and diamonds, and the
fair divinities of general worship, who, in their own
northern land, might scarce dare the glances of the
world; some notorious for adventures, which they
took no pains to conceal; and others enveloped in
mystery, which only rendered them more
interesting
.
One beautiful woman attracted much attention.
Her appearance, indeed, was striking. She was
ripened into the full maturity of womanhood. Her
tall, round, perfect figure shone conspicuous amid
the loveliness around. Her complexion was dark
and transparent. Her hairnight was not so sable
was smoothed glossily upon her beaming brow.
The dignity of her countenance was chastened by
a sweet smile. But the most remarkable feature
were the eyeslarge, intently dark and lustrous;
sometimes veiling their fires beneath a softness
that threatened the coldest heart; and again, when
unobserved, darting their glances round the room,
as if in search of some one; bright; haughty
dilated
restless,
and almost wild. At times her
gaze assumed a positive fierceness, and again grew
beautiful and tender as a gazelle's.
One of the curious effects of travelling, said
Norman to Sir H, is to show the pilgrim
facsimiles
of his familiar home-faces in the most
remote
parts of the globe. I am really sometimes
startled to meet in cold strangers the very
counterparts
of my most intimate friends. Now my father
stalks by me in the form of a duke; and now my
old school-friend sits in state upon a throne.
Yonder
superb creature I feel certain I have beheld
before
yet
I am equally certain that it must be an
illusion.
The Countess D, said his companion.
She is one of the most marked women of the day.
That slender young man who attends her is the
Duke de L.
Norman continued to watch this haughty
stranger
with singular interest. As he followed her with
frequent glances, he found that he himself was not
altogether unobserved. His appearance was of a
kind, indeed, to command attention in such a scene.
Among other eyes, those of the stranger were fixed
several times full upon him; and once, when he
suddenly turned towards her, he thought she almost
started in an attempt to avoid encountering his
gaze. Antonia stood near, and saw this species of
communion between them. Norman would have
spoken to her subsequently, but she seemed to have
forgotten his presence; except only once, when he
caught her girlish and usually bright face shaded
with a cloud of melancholy, the eyes fixed on him
a moment with an expression of misery and
reproach
of which he did not conceive her capable.
A short time afterward, curious to observe more
closely the face which still appeared as one not
unknown
to him, he caused himself to be presented
to the Countess D. If, however, his vanity or
his romance had woven any conjectures out of her
former glances, he was now chilled by her cold and
almost severe demeanour. Nothing could be more
civil and courtly; but still she was one in whose
acquaintance he found it impossible to make the
slightest progress. The Duke de L chatted
agreeably; but the countess, with her large eyes
opened upon Norman as if with something of
surprise
at his seeking with her even the ordinary
familiarities of polite life. She spoke no English
had never been out of Italy, Switzerland, and
France; and when the duke ordered her carriage,
she passed from the rooms with a courtesy almost
imperceptible, so that Norman doubted whether or
not she even intended it as a greeting. The
interview
,
however, banished from his mind the
impression
that he had seen her before. Some one very
like her he had certainly beheld, but he
endeavoured
to dismiss the subject.
On retiring for the night, he found on his table a
package of letters and a card from Frederick
Morton
,
with a line in pencil, stating the accident by
which he had learned of his change of name and
presence in Florence, and his anxiety to see his old
friend before his departure for
Rome
.
Nothing rakes up the associations like the sight
of one in a foreign country who has been familiar
with us in our own. Latelate that night did
Norman remain seated by his solitary fire, poring
over lettersoh! how rich with the spirit of
distant
lands and other days! Juliahis father
Howard, had written. A thousand agonizinga
thousand delightful thoughts awoke in his bosom.
Morton had seemed to him singularly interwoven
with his own fate. If, as he darkly suspected,
Clairmont was the author of the prominent
calamity
of his life, it was this very
Morton
who had
been the cause. He smiled as he recalled the
brilliant night at Mrs. Temple's; he sighed as Flora
Temple's image again rose up before himsofter
lovelierdearer than ever. Yes, the presence of
Morton seemed to roll back upon him the stream
of long-buried hope and love, and a flood of
tenderness
gushed over his soul. He smiled once more
while recollecting the B. Hotel, room No. 39, up
stairs: and thus, with sighs and smiles, the airy
tissue of which most men's memory is woven, and
into which fade and melt at last all the
heaven-climbing
schemes of youth and ambition, the
greater part of the night rolled away.
CHAPTER XII.
Contrasts and AspirationsAnd yet another Coincidence
.
Not to the skies in useless columns tossed,
And in proud falls magnificently lost:
But, pure and artless, pouring through the plain
Health to the sick, and solace to the swain.
Pope
.
The
Psyche was finished. Nothing from the
chisel of the young sculptor had equalled it.
Fortune
had thrown into his hands a block of marble
matchlessly perfect; pure and stainless as her
whose attributes it imbodied. Soft fell the drapery,
as if waving with the air; and so exquisitely
graceful
were the tender limbs, so sweet and appealing
the virgin face, that the spectator held his breath
and trod with a hushed step, as if the heavenly
vision, thus betrayed in its visible beauty on the
gross earth, would start from his gaze, and die of
shame.
The artist withdrew a few paces, and, leaning
against a colossal but half-hewn Jupiter, folded his
arms, and waited the examination of his friend and
patron. He had placed the figure on a revolving
pedestal, and arranged the shutters to send down
on it the light most favourable to the potent spell of
imagination. On his auburn hair, veiling even from
D 3
friendship the interest with which he watched the
effect of his power, a dark crimson cap was drawn
down over his eyes, as if carelessly; his arms were
folded; his head thrown slightly back; over his
handsome face a smile had stolenjust lighting his
gazejust parting his lips.
The sense of excellence in works of art had
entered deep into Norman's soul. This delicious
dream of loveliness threw him off his guard. He
forgot the presence of the author. He gazed in
rapturewalked round it again and again with
never-tiring delight, murmuring ever and anon, in
the tone that comes only from the heart
Oh, beautiful! beautiful! Lovely as the soul!
Radiant as the morning!
He breathed at length, as his attention relaxed,
and turned suddenly towards Angelo. The
sculptor
stood, as if himself a statue, in the same
unstirring
attitude; but a change had come over his
countenance: the deep, delighted smile had faded
from his lips, and his eyes were full of tears.
Is it not a high art, he said at length, to cope
with the very hand of nature!
Even so, replied Norman. When I look on
a statue, it is ever with a thrill. Immortality is
written on it, as well as genius.
Ay, rejoined Angelo, his face again lighting
up; will it not go down the tide of ageswill it
not? When kings, who now roll by me as if I
were dust beneath their chariot-wheels, shall be
dust themselveswhen beauties, who deem me,
and such as I, too humble even to
look
on their
radiance
,
shall be kissed by the wormwhen cities,
now thriving and roaring with their millions, shall
be unpeopled, crumbling, grass-grown, and silent
shall not this little image, in which I have again
timidly traced
her
lineaments, shall it not live
among the yet unborn myriads?
Norman saw he was excited, and drew him
gently to the window. It looked out upon a wide
and gorgeous garden, where huge vases of
orange-trees
and lemons were ranged against the sunny
wall, and statues and fountains gleamed through
the leaves.
Angelo, said he, I have observed, of late,
that you have grown more unquiet and gloomy than
is your wont. Does any misfortune prey upon
you? Can I serve you? It has pleased Heaven
to make me wealthy: I know you entertain wild
opinions on many subjects, and on this in
particular
.
But the adage, that wealth is not happiness,
is truer than you suppose.
Wealth may not be happiness, replied the
sculptor; but poverty I know is miserydeep,
writhing misery. Were all the wealthy such as
you, I could be content to behold the golden
abundance
and profuse beauty of the magnificent globe
monopolized, as it is, by a few. But those who
possess it are but too often the grasping, the cold,
the narrow-minded, and the mean. I look back on
my past years. What has life been to me? One
long, burning curse. I have drunk insult and
humiliation
with every breath. Am I less high and
noble than the creeping reptile to whom the laws
of this degenerate land have given yonder palace
those stately fountainsthese scented groves?
This man has spurned me from his gates. He did
not know me. Let him look to himself. We may
one day meet again.
You alarm me, Angelo. What is it you mean?
Nothing, said the sculptor, with some
confusion
.
When I speak on this theme I rave.
See, he added, as if to change the subject, with
the aid of your liberality I have been able myself
to perform a generous action. This pictureit
was the property of a poor old painter, who was
obliged to sell most of his articles for bread.
Many of the Florentine artists assisted him as far
as they were able. I could only take this.
The production he alluded to stood on the floor,
with its face against the wall. He reversed it, and
discovered the head of a fine dog, full of spirit.
There was about it a life and animation
exceedingly
attractive; it evidently came from a pencil
practised
in the higher walks of the art. I bought it,
continued Angelo, because the circumstances of
the poor man's life interested me greatly. With a
powerful genius, and high and noble character, it
has been his misfortune to suffer a life of bitter
povertya continual struggle against ghastly want.
A fashionable artist, in his own walk, has always
eclipsed him; and he is, at this moment, ill, and
has been actually almost starving.
Poor fellow! said Norman. Has he other
productions for sale?
Several, answered Angelo.
And do you know him to be a deserving object
of attention?
Come and see for yourself, said Angelo.
Let us walk forth and taste the breeze. Your
Psyche shall be sent to the palace to-morrow. At
present let us leave it, as I am weary of
confinement
.
Walk with me to Signore Ducci'sso the
painter is namedand you shall judge of him and
his paintings for yourself. It lies without the
walls, and up the hill of
Bellesguardo
. Poverty
has already driven him, body as well as soul, from
the haunts of his fellow-creatures.
The two friends pursued their way towards the
abode of the unfortunate artist, along the black,
discoloured, and wretched lanes and alleys of the
far-famed town overhung as they are with
immense
eaves, and sternly redeemed, ever and anon,
by a huge and gloomy palace, or a ponderous arch
flung across the street; or the heavily-sculptured,
but unfinished facades of cathedrals; or the huge
blank walls of a convent; or the turret of some
immense
antique tower.
They passed towards the
Piazza Santa Trinita
.
The groups of Vetturini, ever lounging before the
black and stupendous
Palazzo Strozzi
, assailed
them with their usual clamorous importunities
Per Roma, Splugen, Napoli, Venezia
.
Upon the bridge, the light and beautiful work of
Ammannati
, their course was impeded by a crowd.
A friar, who had won the right of saintship, stood
in the centre of the pavement, receiving, in
advance
,
the adoration of the Florentines. He was
a coarse, common-looking man, barefooted and
bareheaded, with a cowl and frock, a cord around
his waist, and a pair of brawny shoulders, which
might have better spent their strength in cultivating
the earth than in usurping the honours of Heaven.
The multitude thronged around him with lively
signs of reverence and worship; knelt before him,
kissed the hem of his garment, and stretched their
eager hands tumultuously to touch the stones ere
evaporated the divine virtue imparted by his sacred
feet. The face of Angelo grew almost pale as
Norman turned towards him with an inconsiderate
and incredulous smile, which an instant's reflection
checked.
Can you wonder, he said, dear Montfort, that
I
hate
he gave the word that strong and bitter
emphasis natural to his ardent constitutionthat
I
hate
, deeply, eternally, those who have brought
my noble country to this? those who keep her
8
trampled down in this abasement? Nature gave
me a gentle and a loving heart. I sadden over the
pain of a wounded bird. I cannot see a sheep
slaughtered without a recoiling horror. But for
the tyrants of my country I have no mercy. It
has been drained utterly from my bosom by years
of bitter experience and observation. I hate them.
Oh! how I hate them! I would lay down my life
nay, that were nothing, for often I feel that I
should be glad to be rid of it on any terms; but
were it bright in reality, as it sometimes is in fancy;
had I wealth and powerwere Antonia by my
sidemine, for ever mine,I would even then
lay it down to hurl into the dust these proud,
haughty oppressors. Am I not right?
No, said Norman, not in practice, although
you may be in theory. As your unhappy country
is situated, it resembles the fox in the fable, who
preferred to have his blood sucked by flies already
half sated rather than by a new swarm more fierce
and ravenous. Every revolution, even the most
gloriously successful, is, at first, an appalling evil;
but a failure only rivets and tightens the chain
strengthens the tyrantweakens the hope of future
relief, and pours out that very blood most noble
and most feared by those in power.
You think, then, said Angelo, that the patriot
who now strives to break the fetters of Italy, only
inflicts upon her an injury?
Yes, decidedly.
And no plan to free her would have your
approbation
?
No, by no means. Italy will only be
regenerated
,
if she be
ever
regenerated, by the slow
influence
of opinion; and her first aid will come from
abroad. She might be freed by her own
revolutions
a thousand times, and she would only fall
back again into slavery and degradation. Austria,
Russia, France, must be first changed: in her
struggles she copes with the colossal energies of
all these.
Had your own glorious countrymen thought
so, Montfort, the world had wanted the grandest
example of history.
My own countrymen, said Norman, you
must remember, are separated from Europe.
They breathe an atmosphere all their own; and
were morally prepared to govern themselves long
before they became their own masters.
Oh! said the sculptor, how I have hung
over the romantic story of your country!over its
sublime moral fabricover its godlike statesmen
and soldiers, higher, because more enlightened,
than those of either Rome or Greece. Your
government
and your heroes have been disinterested.
The happiness of their race is their sole object.
Your nation steps along the career of moral right;
never reels with the drunkenness of glorywith
the thirst after empire. Instead of involving
millions
in war, pestilence, and famine, in pursuit of
such designs as, for so many thousand years, have
shaken this old world, you would not, however
easy the enterprise, acquire by force or fraud the
wealthiest portion of the globe. You possess the
principle of growth hidden in an acorn, which, in
its humble origin, affords you at once a hope and
a lesson. Like that insignificant seed, you were
borne by adverse winds to a distant and savage
shore; you were planted by accident, and grew in
neglect; and now you appear flinging abroad your
branches to heaven, striking your roots deep into
the earth, bending and groaning sometimes beneath
the storm, but never yielding to its fury, and tow
ering above the surrounding woods, till the remote
revolutions of time and nature shall lay your lofty
honours in the dust. Oh that
I
had been born in
such a land! where I could tread amid the still
woods and mountains, and feel myself not a
slave
.
Surprised at his eloquence and agitation, Norman
replied
How differently you speak from many of your
European brethren!
No, said Angelo, do not wrong us.
Thousands
of hearts, I know, beat like mine at the
mention
of your distant and noble country. `As Rome
was
and America
is
,' thus runs their whisper when
they form high schemes for their own land. And
are your cities like ours? And is nature bright?
And are there millions who live ever free,
contented
,
and in peace?
Even so, said Norman. You would be
enraptured
to behold my native town. It lies even
more beautiful than Venice; on a flood, and
overarched
by a sky, as lovely.
And all are supplied with the necessaries of
life?
All.
None of these beggars and kings, rioting and
starving side by side? No saints and friars? And
the laws are just and benevolent, and the religion
rational and pure, and the government aids, and
never crushes those beneath it?
All, said Norman, all these blessings gather
under the shelter of my country.
Angelo paused a moment, and added
And what would they deserve who could here
build up another as independent and happy! If
blood must flow, how noble a death thus met in
the pursuit of just laws and human happiness!
He looked around as he finished speaking. They
had been for some time surrounded by a throng of
beggars, orphans, cripples, the blind, the ulcerous,
the dumbcreatures blasted by disease, age, and
accident, the refuse of hospitals, the wreck of wars.
They gathered around, soliciting aid for the love
of God and the Madona! Norman emptied his
purse among them. A handsome girl, who led
her blind father, received nothing from the
scramble
.
See, she said, he has no eyes.
But I have no more, said Norman; nothing
but the purse
Well, then give me the purse! she cried,
snatching it from his hand.
At this moment the cry went forth that the
sovereign
approached.
The duke! the duke! exclaimed the needy
crew, as they shrank on either side against the
wall. The royal party made their appearance in
the most magnificent equipages, covered with
velvet
and gold, everywhere blazing with the imperial
arms, and each carriage drawn by six prancing
steeds, clothed in trappings of gold, surrounded by
chasseurs
, outriders, postillions, and guards. The
horses' hoofs clattered against the pavementthe
dazzling ornaments flashed and glittered in the sun
and the snowy plumes floated in the air. As
the imposing procession advanced, passengers of
all descriptions stopped to give it way. Vehicles
belonging to strangers unacquainted with the
customs
of the place, at a sign from a postillion,
remained
stationary. The starving mendicants bent
the knee, and the passers-by uncovered their heads
with profound humility. The peasant, with his
frail cart and skeleton ass, crouched to salute his
master. All hats were doffedall heads lowered
all eyes drawn towards the single man, who,
with one or two careless responses to the general
8*
salutations, was whirled, flashing, trampling, and
glittering, on his course.
I do not mind, said Angelo, the oppression
of the body so much as the abasement of the mind
the foul opinions with which they blight the
young and the beautiful. Montfort, what think
you!
Antonia
, they tell me, is going to bury
herself
in a convent.
I have spoken to her of it, replied Norman.
She seems to have been educated in the idea, and
has answered my persuasions with the most
enthusiastic
pictures of that gloomy life.
I would even rather see her there, said Angelo,
than in the arms of another. Yet I know I am
mad, worse than mad, to let her image thus haunt
me. Her proud cousin Alezzi, her old father,
would spurn me as a dog, could they think I had
dared to dream
Banish it, my friend, said Norman, kindly.
You are young and ardent; the thought will pass
away.
Yes, when
He stopped suddenly, as if about to reveal
something
which he desired to keep secret.
They soon arrived at the poor old painter's. He
had a miserable room on the eminence of
Bellesguardo
,
and was illconfined to his bed. The two
visitants just sufficiently communicated with him to
announce that he could dispose of several of such
pictures as he chose to part with immediately, and
at his own price. He named a modest sum for the
only two he had left. Norman trebled it, and paid
the money down. The good old man, with a
grateful
look and pressure of the hand, thanked and
blessed his generous patron; who, promising to
send his domestic for the purchase, also assured
him of another visit, and more aid.
He was preparing to pass the evening in solitary
study, when his servant came in with the pictures
from the unfortunate painter. Norman had not
looked at them before. He now turned them
towards
the light for examination. The one was a
half-finished saint, with a halo around its brow, a
crucifix, a scull on the table, and a string of angels'
heads, peeping down from the walls and ceilings.
The other was the face of a blooming and lovely
boy of six, of such remarkable beauty, as, when
once seen, could scarcely be forgotten. Over the
right eye was a scar.
Norman gazed at it a few moments with the most
lively surprise.
Yes, he said, with a smile of pleasant
recollection
,
that brilliant sleighing day in New-York,
seven years ago, and this delicious little face I
saved from the fury of those mad horses. I know
the eyes perfectly. I shall never forget them; and,
now I remember, they are also those of the mother,
to whose singular and beautiful face Howard called
my attention
her
life I also saved; and
she
, he
said, rising in interest and animation, is the one,
unremembered till this moment, whose image last
night I so vainly strove to conjure up, and whom
that remarkable Countess D so closely
resembles
.
It
is
strange.
Can
it be? Can this fair
countess have been in America? Does she really
owe to me her life? But why concealment? Why
disguise herself? Why deny that she had been
out of Europe? I
will
meet those haughty eyes
again, as, I swear, I have met them before. Yet,
why should I? If the lady choose to deny her
travels, and to be somebody else, it is no affair of
mine. This child I
know
, and there is the scar;
but for the mother, I saw her only onceyears
have gone by. Besides, what is it to me?
CHAPTER XIII.
A Dialogue and a Conclusion
.
Look, nymphs and shepherds, look!
What sudden blaze of majesty
Is that which we from hence descry,
Too divine to be mistook:
This, this is she.
Milton's Poems
.
Years
had confirmed and deepened, without
altering
,
the outline of Morton's character. In his
society Norman passed several pleasant hours,
learning many interesting particulars from home;
and among others, that Miss Temple had suddenly
recovered after Norman's departure, and continued
yet the belle of the cityeven improved in charms,
at the age of twenty-four more fascinating than she
had been at eighteenand yet unmarried. It had
been whispered that she, with the whole family,
was about coming abroad.
By-the-way, Leslie, said Morton one day, as
they were riding on horseback to the
Cascine
or,
I beg your pardon, Signore Montfort, I should have
told you, but I declare I forgot, that she desired me,
if I ever crossed you in my travels, todn it,
now!what is it? I neverDo you know,
Leslie
,
I have lost my memory lately?
Norman turned away his face to hide his
emotion
.
He felt in that moment that his soul was a
thousand times more bound up in Flora Temple
than it ever had been before. Assuming, however
an indifferent air, he asked
But, Morton, what was it that Miss Temple
said?
Why, she told me, one night at your sister's
she and your sister, you know, have grown regular
friendsreal hand and glove.
Miss Temple and Julia! faltered Norman, with
a feeling more like his former self than he had
experienced
for years.
Oh, to be surewhy, she half lives at Mrs.
Howard's.
And Julia never even mentioned this in her
letter
how
strange!
Pho! nonsense! I suppose she forgot it.
But what did she say! You have not told me.
Why, she saidas I was sayingone night,
at Mrs. Howard'sthat, if I crossed you in my
travelsyou see, I was going to take the whole
tour of Europeup the Rhine, across the Splugen
VeniceVienna
But the message.
`Tell Mr. Leslie,' she said, `that is, if you see
him in the course of your travels, that'I declare
nowI neverI have lost it entirely. It was
something about friends in Americasomething
aboutaboutthe truth is, I did
not
expect to meet
you much, so I did not bear it in mind.
But she said something of me, and
to
me? And
she is the bosom friend of Julia? said Norman,
with flashing eye.
Yes, bosom friendregular hand and glove.
She is a prime article, buthowever, I have already
written home to our folks, and Maria will go to
Mrs. Howard's at once. I told them how nicely
you were getting on here. I declare, I never
was
so astonished.
Getting on!
echoed Norman; why, how did
you tell them I was `getting on?'
Oh, I told them; leave me alone for that. I
drew a description of you that will do their very
hearts good:Great palace, says I, larger than
City Hall;
suite
of rooms from the marquis, all to
himself; little marchioness, says I, plump as a
peachhalf the day in her
boudoir
with her all
alone, says I; a hundred thousand piasters a year,
at least; and, says I, he's in for itregular, I tell
you.
Morton, exclaimed Norman, in a voice almost
stern, did you, really?
Oh, yes, dn me, I did
so
honour bright;
leave
me
aloneI was really poetical on the little
marchioness.
Poetical
Yes, I enlarged out, you see, and got into a
description
.
Why, she is as far above any thing that
ever was, or ever could be seen in America, as a
sun is above a candle!
And you are sure that this letter will go to
Miss Temple's knowledge?
Why, I was afraid, said Morton, lest Mrs.
Howard might not see it; so, what do you think I
did?
What, in the name of Heaven?
I added a P. S., sending your loveyou know
those things are always of courseand begging
Maria to take my letter round, and read them the
passages.
Norman turned away again, but it was to hide
his vexation.
Whom do you think I saw in Paris?
Whom? said Norman.
Guess.
God bless me, Morton, it would be easier to
guess whom you did
not
see there.
A great friend of yours.
Of mine!
Particular.
I cannot conjecture.
Don't you remember B. Hotel, room No. 39,
up stairs?
Norman turned suddenly, and with breathless
attention
.
Don't you remember `out of one muzzle into
another'the candle-snufferthe Veronese lady?
For Heaven's sake, Morton, who? It was
not
But I say it was, thoughthat dd French
count.
Almighty powers!Whenwherehow? tell
me.
Why, man alive, what's the matter! He is not
here, is he?
Would to Heaven he were!
Would to Heaven he were not, say I.
Morton, I am deeply interested in this man
deeply, painfully. Tell me instantly the
circumstances
under which you saw him.
Well, so I will. I caught him in the most
infernal
but
you shall hear.
Quick! I am on the rack.
You see, resumed Morton, I do take it upon
myself, with pretty considerable certainty, to
declare
that he who would be guilty of such a thing
Guilty! interrupted Norman. Ay, guilty!
I'll be sworn, guilt black as
Yes! dn the fellow. If it were not for his
cursed talent at snuffing candlesditto, menI
would horsewhip him as sure as
What was the circumstance?
Why, you see, when I was in Paris, I used to
go continually into Galignani's reading-room
Yes!
To read the papers
Well!
And there, one day, as I went in, who should
be there but Clairmont. I knew him the very
moment
I set eyes upon him.
What said he? what did he? when was it?
Don't interrupt me, my dear fellow. I never
can tell a story if you interrupt me. So, one day,
as I said, who should be there but Clairmont. I had
been expressly eager to get a view of a certain
New-York paper, and he had it in his hands,
reading
it intently. He was sitting with his head bent
down over the paper. Well, I waited; still he did
not stop reading; well, I waited longer, still he
never stopped, but kept always reading the same
article. I got up, walked backwards and forwards,
with my hands in my pantaloons pocket; swore a
little, hummed a tune, drummed on the table with
my fingers, and got decidedly out of patience for
about an hour. At last I walked pretty near him,
and looked under his hat; andwhat do you
think?
I do not know.
Guess.
Really
The dd fellow was asleep.
And that was all you discovered about him?
All! why, he kept me waiting an hour.
Come, said Norman, as they reached the
beautiful circle where all the gay, fashion, beauty,
and nobility of Florence were assembled, let us
quicken our pace and see who are here. They
accordingly galloped around before long arrays of
splendid equipages, drawn up motionless on one
side, and crowds of others glittering and flashing
as they glided amid the trees.
See! said Norman, the Marquis Torrini and
his beautiful Antonia!
The old nobleman bowed, and the young girl
turned and gazed with such a sweet smile upon
Norman, that Morton's susceptibilities were touched.
Leslie, you are a lucky dog, he said, she is
most beautiful!
Norman ran over the names, great and brilliant
they were, of the gay assembly, and Morton
seemed
quite dazzled. He took every opportunity to
display his fine person to advantage, and kept his
horse in a continual prance. He had suffered a
pair of grim mustaches to curl beneath his nose,
and his whiskers commanded attention even in
Florence.
Ha! said Norman, the Countess D
again!
Which is the Countess D? asked Morton.
That superb woman yonder on horseback, with
the servant in green and gold by her side, riding
with the Duke de L. See, see! Did you
ever before look into such eyes?
What! NoyesI declare, I never said
Morton, as I live. Countess D, did you
say?
Ay, said Norman, somewhat surprised.
Countess Fiddlestick, said Morton: that
woman
is no more a countess than you are. That
very woman I saw in New-York twice, and both
times with that very infernal scoundrel the
Mortongreat heavens! said Norman, turning
pale, speak!
The dd count in the French army.
Clairmont?
Ay, Count Clairmont. Once I saw her at his
door striving to see him, and she was turned away
Vol. II.E 9
by the black snowball who waited at the hotel;
and the second time
Well, quick!
In the night, in the street, by the light of a
lamp, again in close consultation with him; and
they stood scowling on each other like two cocks
a-going to fight.
Almighty Providence! said Norman, plunging
the spurs into his horse's flanks till the blood came.
The startled steed leaped forward with a snort of
pain, leaving Morton in an instant forty yards in
the rear.
Well! I declare! said Morton; what is he
after now? The little marchioness, I vow. No, by
Joe! he passes her carriage! she rises and gazes
at him! He never gives her a look, I do declare.
It's the black-eyed woman he calls the Countess
D. There! he has caught her uphe bows
she bows. Why, dn it, I believe he's after
all the handsome women in Florenceaint he?
I'll have to put another postscriptwon't I? I
declare
I never
did
see such a
He galloped after his friend, muttering the close
of his sentiment inaudibly.
CHAPTER XIV.
The Painter's RoomsHis Fate
.
Noting this penury to myself, I said, &
a
Romeo
.
Turning
from the countess, again baffled by
her perfect composure and distant civility, Norman
pushed his horse towards the gate that led to
Bellesguardo
.
The painter shall unfold this mystery, he
thought, as he hastened along the streets.
He
must know something of the child whose face he
has transcribed. From him I may gain a clew to
lead me out of the maze in which I am so
singularly
bewildered. Fool that I was! I should before
have fathomed the depth of his knowledge on this
subject. I will deal cunningly with him. I will
steal the secret from his unwary lipsfor secret
there is. If this woman
be
the mother, the painter
must know it. I will have the heart out of him,
ere I be again thrown back into doubt.
He reached the door. It led into a wretched
hovel. The common streets were not more filthy
than the rough steps that conducted to his
neglected
apartment. He pulled the little dirty cord at
the opening gate which communicated with the
piano
, where dwelt the object of his search. It
was some time before the gate opened, apparently
of itself. A pretty
cameriera
leaned down from the
third story, and, in a soft voice, asked who desired
entrance.
E 2
On inquiring for Signore Ducci, he was informed
that he was dangerously ill, and not expected to
survive till morning.
Can I see him?
Scarcely, signore.
It is a matter upon which my life may depend,
rejoined Norman.
Then walk in, signore. But stay, the holy man
is there now, added the dark-eyed and modest
young girl; come with me into the adjoining room.
It is the next to the poor Signore Ducci, and when
he is alone I will call you.
She bent her head gracefully as she left him in
the scantily furnished painting-room of the dying
artist. He cast his eyes around. It bore evident
marks of penury. About even an inferior painter
there rests a halo, however feeble, of genius and
ambition. His mind, even if it have not reached
them, has nevertheless grasped at the more radiant
shapes of nature. His life has been one of floating
dreams and brilliant shadows, a continual pursuit
after the striking and the beautiful. He inhabits a
region half ideal, teeming with lovely groups, and
steeped in gay and tender colouring. When he
withdraws his eyes from his own imaginations
imaginations not only more gorgeous than reality,
but even beyond his power to pour upon the
visible
canvasshow much he must behold to blot
out from the picture of common life! how much
he must feel to palsy his arm, and chill his hope,
and teach him to fear that he struggles in vain!
Poor fellow! said Norman, as he gazed around
upon the half-sketched fragmentsa Venus
dripping
from the flood, a helmed head, a startled steed,
the edge of a princely palacepoor fellow!
Shadows indeed! What other men possess in
substantial
forms, he owns only in pictorial
resemblances
;
and nowhis pencil idle, his palette
broken
,
his fervid hues mouldering in the dustfrom
the bright world of glowing light, he goes down to
the shroud, the coffin, and the worm. Rest, chilled
and tired heart! rest from your labours. Peace at
last will still its throbs. I rejoice, he continued,
as he descried in the room several objects provided
by his own benevolent careI rejoice that, ere it
close in darkness and death, my hand has shed on
its gloom and sorrow even one little beam of
pleasure
.
A groan interrupted his reflections. It came
from the chamber of death. In reply, another voice
met his ear. It startled him with its familiar sound.
The room which he then occupied was darkened.
Before the door hung a heavy green curtain. He
approached. Again he heard the voicecool, wily,
and hypocritical. The temptation was irresistible.
He cautiously set the door ajar, and glided between
the aperture and the curtain; a station whence,
himself unseen, he could view the room in which
the patient lay. There were in it three persons.
The first, the wretched sufferer himself, apparently
in the last stage of malady. A light from the west,
which the sun had left an immense wall of emerald
and gold, fell upon his pale dying face. The second
was the girl who had admitted him. In the third,
seated by the bed, in his sable gown, with the
glossy black hair parted over his quiet, artful
features
,
and a subdued look of holiness, he
recognised
the priest.
The painter, with an expression of long
suffering
and exhaustion, was just replying to a question,
with half-spent breath.
No, he said, never a word on that subject.
But he seemed rich?
Ay, and kind as a brother.
9*
Tall?
Yes, and noble; the bearing of a prince.
How often has he been here since?
Once, according to his promise.
And he gave you money without an equivalent?
Yes.
And you know not his name?
No.
You swear, as a dying man, you have never
breathed a word?
I swear.
And that you never will?
I swear.
The priest rose to go, promising to return in the
morning. As he withdrew, the young and
evidently
sinless girl followed him to the door, took his
hand, knelt, and kissed it.
Your blessing, my father, she said, devoutly.
Bless you! bless you, my child.
Again the fair enthusiast kissed, ere she
surrendered
,
the white and pious hand.
When Father Ambrose had withdrawn, Norman
entered at the call of the girl.
The painter, exhausted with the previous
colloquy
,
had sunk back into a doze. Norman gazed
on his broad white forehead. There, perhaps, slept
his secret, at least the faint clew that might lead to
it. Those lips, so cold, so still, could,
peradventure
,
with a breath, direct him to the path. Hours
he lingered, resolving, when the object of his
solicitude
should awake, to attempt the discovery, which,
however remote, he could not help vaguely
supposing
in some way or other linked with his own
mysterious fate.
Late in the night, the pale invalid opened his
eyes wildly, and stretched forth his hands.
My mothermy mother! he said, my gone
yearsmy distant home among the hillstell her
I diedwith her nameon my lipstell her
tell her
Vainvain. To that green home no more his
foot shall stray. That voice the mother never
again shall hear. Already the spirit, free from its
load of anguish, was deep amid the secrets of
another world.
CHAPTER XV.
A Character partly unfoldedThe Wanderer detects a Clew
to lead him through the Labyrinth
.
How I recall Anchiseshow I see
His mother's mien, and all my friend, in thee!
Dryden's
Eneas
.
Before
the information of Morton, which so
singularly
coincided with his own suspicions, Norman
had planned a journey to Pisa with him, and had
formally taken leave of Antonia and the priest. It
had been his intention to depart in the afternoon,
and to spend the evening and night at the villa of a
friend a few miles from town. Now, however, he
changed his mind. He excused himself to
Morton
;
and after visiting, as we have related, the
poor painter Ducci, went alone, and full of
portentous
presentiments, to his apartments. In
order
to exempt himself from interruption, he had not
informed any one of the change of his intentions; and
now, at twelve, sat alone in his room, with a rush
of thoughts, new and strange, rolling through his
mind.
He had overtaken the Countess D. Her
face turned upon himthe very eyes of his
painting
the
very countenance: no mother ever more
resembled her child. His address, however, was
received with the same utter coolness and
self-possession
,
rendering nearer approach impossible.
Did she know him? Was she resolved to
continue
in her mystery? Was there any relation
between
her and Clairmont? Even if there were
what then? Did that prove any thing? Suppose he
could trace and demonstrate all that he suspected
that she was indeed the mother of the childthat
some secret relationship subsisted between her and
Clairmontthat she had been in America: should
she even acknowledge all this, would it realize
those dim and irrepressible forebodings which had
been for some time floating in his mind, respecting
the discovery of his own deep secret; and which
were gradually increased and deepened by several
trifles, individually almost too insignificant to notice,
yet, in the aggregate, striking and inexplicable?
The priest, with his sly smilehis silver words
his mysterious and silent airhis evident desire
on many occasions to avoid himhis appearance
in the Duomo with that gaunt stranger, when his
own name had been mentionedthe secret
intruder
into his room, having evidently perused his
note-book: this womanthis Countess D; her
resemblance to her whose life he had saved in
New-York; the child's picture, with the very scar;
and now, when he had almost abandoned the idea
that these were more than mere coincidences, here
comes Morton, who exclaims at once that this very
Countess D has been in New-York, holding
dark and mysterious communion with Clairmont.
What! is the black veil to be lifted? Are these
extraordinary shadows, that have so weighed upon
me of late, are they really the commencement of
the great work? Is the mighty and accursed
enchantment
which has locked me in odium and in
despair, is it fading away? Do the links begin to
fall from my limbs, and the scales from my eyes?
And this very Mortonhe who has so oddly plunged
me in this dilemmais
he
, silly fool as he is, to be
the instrument? Shall I walk again among men
with the halo of innocence beaming around my
browbeaming to every eye, to every heart?
Flora unmarried, and the friend of Julia! What
delicious hopes! What
He was interrupted by a slight noise. It seemed
close to the wall, behind a heavy curtain. His
heart leaped to his throat. He was already excited
to a most nervous agitation. The heavy toll of the
Duomo was just sounding two. All was silent.
He leaned his ear. Again he heard a rustle; and,
hastily extinguishing the lamp, he silently
withdrew
within a deep embrasure in the window, and
enveloping himself in the folds of a large curtain,
waited in unbreathing silence. A light appeared.
The drapery on the opposite side of the room,
which he remembered had shaken before when he
suspected a similar intrusion, once more moved.
Gently, stealthily, as a cat crouches to watch its
prey, a form emerged from the wall, with a shaded
lantern, bending and listening; prying, step by
step, and on tiptoe. The intruder reached the
table, held the light to the adjoining room, as if to
ascertain whether any one, by chance, was there;
then, apparently satisfied with his scrutiny, and
assuming an easier and bolder air, uncovered his
face, and sat down upon the large chair by the
table. A look sufficed for recognition. It was the
priest.
So ho! he said, to Pisa he has gone! Well,
E 3
let him. If he would but stayif the old tower
would but fall and crush him, we should have easy
work of it. Only
he
prevents heronly he; and
yet the green fool never dreams it. Ha! ha!
Well, let us see; she shall yet be ours.
The worthy man proceeded to examine, very
strictly, all the furniture in the room in any way
appertaining to Leslie. He turned over the
papers
glanced
among the bookslooked carefully
through one or two letters, left by chance on the
tableand opened, with false keys, the trunks.
Norman had sufficient presence of mind to restrain
his impulse to step forth and lay a hand upon his
shoulder, and kept perfectly silent. The priest,
after looking carelessly through such papers as he
found, laid his hand on the packet brought by
Morton
,
and reading the superscription, exclaimed,
No! yes! Holy Virgin! Norman Leslie!
After arranging every thing as it had been before,
he glided out of the apartment.
So, then, thought Norman, as he stepped from
his hiding-place, the infernal rascal is a spy; nay,
something more than a spy. What meant the
ill-omened
raven by the exclamation at my name, and
his courteous wish of the leaning tower? Does he
know me? He spoke too of
her
. Who is
she?
Antoniathe beautiful, the innocent, the
light-hearted
Antonia. I must save that gentle being
from the wiles of this old fox; and since I know
the secret door, I will endeavour to profit by it.
Every day, my reverend brother here goes, at
eleven, for an hour, to the cathedral. I will take a
look into his regions.
The morning came. Norman met the priest at
eleven in an antechamber.
What! said Father Ambrose, in his
smoothcst
tone, Signore Montfort!
Ay, holy father, by the merest chance. I
returned
at daybreak.
I rejoice to see you look so well, rejoined the
priest, with a smile.
When he was gone, Norman ascended into his
apartment; and, after much scrutiny, discovered a
small and well-concealed sliding panel. He opened
it without ceremony. It led into a corridor, and
thence into another suite of rooms less elegantly
furnished. In a small room, with the light from a
high window shed strongly down upon his face,
sat a young boy. He was attentively poring over
a book. The face could not be mistaken; it was
the same sweet countenance which smiled in the
picture, and the scar was distinctly visible over the
eyebrow. The eyes were presently raised and
lowered again. Those same large, black, lustrous
orbs. At that instant a step was heard. Norman
withdrew, unobserved, into his chamber. A
half-hour
afterward, trembling with curiosity, he again
tried the panel. It was fastened on the other
side.
CHAPTER XVI.
The Thread is broken once more
.
There were two portraits.
L. E. L.
The
haughty Countess D led the fashion
of Florence. She was the divinity of general
admiration
.
At the numerous soires, balls, concerts,
and operas, none appeared so marked and dazzling.
The Count D had been a man of ninety; and
scarcely were they united by the priest when they
were separated by death. The old man went
quietly
to the grave, and the magnificent young
countess
to the very meridian blaze and splendour of
fashion.
Her establishment was gorgeous. Her palace
was newly furnished with most costly care. Four
sable coursers drew her every afternoon through
the glittering throng; and after her were turned
all eyes, if not all hearts.
The interest she attracted was not a little
heightened
by her mien of cold and distant pride. Her
manner was even severe and freezing. Her very
face, beautiful as it was, had in it something
passionless
and sepulchral. A colourless transparency
marked her dark complexion. An almost bitter
smile often revealed her snowy teeth; and her
large eyes gleamed, not only brilliantly, but
burningly
around upon her throng of worshippers.
fascinating
the men with a dangerous and lustrous
softness
,
which, on encountering the distrustful look
of her own sex, turned to cool and keen contempt.
One more cordially hated by the fair, more
rapturously
applauded by the manly, more remarked and
courted by all, dwelt not within the walls of
Florence
.
She seemed to delight in her triumphs in the
beau monde;
but with the delight of pride rather
than passion. Her lip curled and her eye flashed;
but her heart never melted. Her countenance still
seemed immutable, passionless, and sometimes
even wretched. She never sighed, it was not in
her nature; but a close observer might discover
that she sufferedthat amid the highest gayety of
the revel, her soul was sad and solitarythat amid
its most melting ardour, her heart was icewas
marble. High, inscrutable, cold, and beautiful, her
course was watched and wondered at. Dukes and
counts, nay, princes and kings, it was said, came to
her feet when her eyes softened with
encouragement
.
Yet even her encouragement was bestowed
with the artificial brilliancy of an actress, who
smiles from the prompt-book, who sustains a
tender
or a gay rle with the ease of her profession;
yet whose radiant joy, or graceful love, falls from
her as an idle mantle the moment she reaches the
side-scene.
There was a magnificent ball at the Prince
M's the second evening after Norman's
adventure
with the panel. Antonia, the Countess
D, Leslie, all the world, were present.
Norman
taxed his powers to make himself agreeable
to the fair siren, who won and flung away a
thousand
hearts, any of which others would be proud
to gain, and prone to treasure. In subsequent
conversations
with Morton, he had learned that the
female
he had seen in New-York was a very
ordinarily
dressed woman, and apparently from the
common
ranks of life; but that she had spoken
English
,
both at Clairmont's hotel and at the
interview
in the street. Norman, with the most courtly
respect, first attached himself to the duke, and quite
succeeded in captivating him. He next contrived
to draw the countess herself into the discourse,
and, with intense but guarded vigilance, watched
to detect the slightest change in her features as,
with artful abruptness, he asked if she had ever
known a distinguished nobleman,
Count
Clairmont
?
Never! she said, with the most perfect ease
and composure. She had heard the name, or one
like it, but had never met the count himself.
During this apparently casual colloquy, Norman
10
regarded her with all his awakened soul. Their
eyes even met, full and uncloudedly, as she replied.
There was no change whatever in her countenance.
It was still cold, high, haughty, calm,not a hue
arosenot a feature changedher lids drooped not
her eyes shed no beam of light the less.
His heart sank within him. It was evidently
impossible
.
He was convinced, and he utterly
abandoned
the idea. Thus completely satisfied of the
fallacy both of his own suspicions and of Morton's,
and with that proneness to confidence peculiar to
warm and candid natures, he addressed the countess
with a respect so sincere and evident, so much
more real than that which he had hitherto assumed,
that she seemed slightly pleased with his attention,
and even bent on him her eyes, divested of their
unmelting and distant coldness, with a shadowed
tenderness that made him whisper to his heart
She is a thousand times more beautiful than
even
I
supposed!
You will excuse me, he said, but you bear
a resemblance so singularly strong to a friend in
whom I am fatally interested, that I could not
forbear
indulging the hope that you might be the
same.
She smiled calmly again; and they were
interrupted
by Prince M. As she turned to reply
to the salutation of the prince, Antonia, with her
father, approached. The marquis entered into
conversation
with the duke. Norman spoke with
Antonia
.
Like all the world, Signore Montfort, she said,
not with her usual free and delightful manner, you
are captivated with the lady at your side, I
perceive
.
The remark was made and answered in
English.
She is a remarkable woman! replied Norman.
A strange interest attaches to her in my eyes.
Seven years since, in New-York, my native city, I
rescued the life of a lady with her child, from the
fury of two maddened horses in full flight. This
lady is the very counterpart of my beautiful
American
friend. In Florence I have accidentally met
with a painting of the very childI cannot be
mistaken
.
And, what is still more singular, I am
certain
that yesterday, at your palace, in the room of
the holy Father Ambrose, I beheld the lovely boy
himself. I knew him by his eyes and face; and
more certainly by the scar over
A faint exclamation caused them to turn. The
prince had just left the countess. Norman fixed his
eyes on her countenance, as if he could pierce to
her very soul; and for the moment his suspicions
were again awakened. She sat leaning back upon
the embroidered couch, her eyes fixed upon a
statueso silent, so thoughtful, so sad and calm,
that it seemed impossible she had uttered the cry,
which was attributed to a lady very near her, whose
coronet of diamonds had nearly fallen. He then
resumed his inquiries of Antonia, who informed
him that the child he had seen was the nephew of
Father Ambrose, who had lately suffered him to
visit Florence for a time, and over whose education
he watched with peculiar care.
Indeed, she added, so great is his anxiety,
that he scarcely permits the young lad to leave his
presence for a moment.
The countess and Antonia stood together in
conversation
.
They were the two most lovely women
in the rooms: but how different! The one had
evidently seen the world, and suffered from its
blight. Splendidly beautiful she was; and as
Norman
gazed upon her tall and majestic form, her
head, in its queenly shape and lift, reminded him
of Cleopatra. Over her remarkable eyes glittered
and trembled a tiara of diamonds of untold value.
Beneath, shone her dark, thoughtful face, with the
romance of eastern beauty. An Asiatic softness
and indolence of manner had crept over her, and
the splendour of her attire recalled recollections of
Arabian tales. Still, even through the whole there
were memory and misery. She seemed a Zenobia
not in the splendour of her Palmyrean throne,
nor fainting in the triumph of Aurelian; but
afterward
,
calmed and subdued, the ambitious victor,
the Syrian queen, sunk into the melancholy Italian
in her Roman villa.
Norman's eyes turned from her to Antonia. In
her shone beauty all unshaded by sorrow, all
untouched
by timea rosebud scarce opened to the
summer light. Could ever tears cross that sunny
face? Dewdrops would be no more prettyno
more lightly wafted away; at least, so thought
Norman.
CHAPTER XVII.
A View behind the Curtain
.
To lie in cold obstruction.
Shakspeare
.
In
a small chamber, far removed from the
gallery
and suite of rooms open to the curiosity and
admiration of visiters, the old Marquis Torrini lay,
couched on a curious bed, surrounded by
mirrors
,
satin, gold, velvet, and precious marble,
preparing
himself to die. The priest sat by his couch,
arrayed in his holy vestments. The patient was
dreadfully emaciated with sickness, and apparently
overcome with terror at the thoughts of his
approaching
fate.
Father Ambrose, said the dying marquis, in a
weak voice, you have desired to see me alone;
speak quick, for they say my time is short.
I could well pray, said the priest, that your
days might be lengthened, but
You think such prayers would be useless?
interrupted
the marquis, his eyes turning with an
expression
of horror upon his companion.
I am certain, replied the other, that the
Marquis
Torrini desires his servant to speak candidly.
The patient cast on him another look of despair,
and murmured, as if half to himself,
It is not
possible
it cannot bethey deceive
me, surely. Die? die? he repeated, with an
emphasis
of terror and bewildered torment; lose
this beingmoulder, dissolve away into nauseous
matter, into living corruption?
He shuddered, and covered his face.
My kind and noble friend, cried the priest.
These eyeballs, continued the marquis, with
which I see thy face, fallen from their sockets
these lips crumbled to ashesthis hand, this
moving
,
sensible, living hand, struck to a motionless,
unmeaning, unfeeling clodthe flesh dropped from
the bones, the sinews unstrungthe joints
unlocked
?
Holy Christ, it is
impossible!
The wretched invalid let fall the skeleton hand
which he had held up and extended before him as
he spoke, and covered his face.
My dear lord, said the priest, in a low voice,
these are the whisperings of the fiend to turn your
10*
thoughts from heaven. He would thus lure you on
till your last moment, not leaving you calmness
sufficient for the arrangement of your earthly
circumstances
.
No! said the dying man, it is not the fiend
it is natureit is instinct. The horror of death
is planted in our breasts. Jesus himself yielded,
and cried out on the cross. Where a God
trembles
,
oh! what is left for man!
The recollection, said the priest gently, but
quickly, that he trembled for us his children
that he put on these mortal sufferings, to open for
us the gates of Paradise. Lift up your eyes to
Heaven!
Ambrose! said the patient, it is a falsehood!
What have I done to you that you join in this
mummerythat you would affright my soul with
idle and dreadful apprehensions? I know I am
weak and nervous; but I may yet live. I am
stronger and much better to-day. Medicine has
enfeebled me more than disease. I am sure
sure
,
dear Ambrose, of regaining my health.
The priest cast his eyes upwards, and his lips
moved.
Why do you pray? asked the marquis.
For you, my brother! I am not one of those
who, for an idle tenderness, would suffer you to
meet the crisis which awaits you, perhaps this day,
perhaps this hour
Holy Christ! murmured the terrified noble.
Blindfolded, and ignorant where you go,
continued
the priest, disregarding the interruption.
The beast brought up for slaughter may yield his
throat to the knife without previous warning. He
may feel the life-blood ebb and bubble away, and
the icy faintness of death steal over his stiffening
and quivering limbs, with only the brutishness of
physical pain.
He
has no
soul
. His obtuse
dulness
is a gift of mercy from God. But
you
are
immortal; and the hour approaches when you must
bid farewell to earth for ever!
The marquis's face whitened to a yet more livid
ghastliness; he rolled his starting eyeballs towards
the solemn and severe face of the speaker.
And you tell me then, Ambrose, with your
priestly sanctity, that this is
death
upon me?
Death! echoed the priest.
That this stately mansionmy villasmy
palaces
my
untold treasuresmy proud hopes, are
all gone?
Bubbles! cried the priestpassing, hollow,
idle bubbles!
Holy Virgin! save me! cried the courtier, in
a changed tone of voice: after a moment's pause
Where are your prayers, priest? and he wiped
off, with his clammy hand, the drops that stood on
his forehead.
They have ascended to Heaven in all the
watches of the night! replied the other, meekly
and devoutly.
And with what avail, Ambrose? asked the
marquis.
The ways of God, said the priest, cannot be
read by mortals. Death comes to all, at some time
or other.
And your miracles, too, said the marquis, who,
while in reality quite destitute of any rational
religion
or supporting belief, was merged in the
darkness
and paradoxes of the blackest superstition
your sacred brethren have raised the dead. Oh!
can they not save the living? Think, Ambrose,
think! has your church no relic? have your saints
no power? You have called the waters of the
clouds upon the earth. You have cured the lame,
the palsied, the ulcerous. Beggars and wretches
have benefited by your intercessions and your
power. I am none of these. I am rich, noble!
Drive this dreadful sickness from my veins. Pour
health and strength into my heart. Give me once
more to tread the green grass, to hear the birds in
the grove, to look on bright natureto be a
man!
Do this, Ambrose, and I will make you wealthy
you shall revel in gold!
The voice of the speaker grew husky and
choked
,
and he fell back exhausted.
The priest looked down a moment on his ghastly
face, his blue shrivelled lips, his loosened and
discoloured
teeth, his emaciated cheeks, his hollow
eyes, his sunken temples, and shook his head.
Marquis Torrini, he said, after looking
cautiously
around the apartment, as if to be secure
against listeners, your hopes of earth are vain. I
may not trifle with you on this your last day
per-adventure
your last hour. The wealth of Europe,
of the world; the powers of science, of
necromancy
;
nay, the virtue of prayer and divine relics, can
stead you nothing.
The marquis groaned fearfully, and cast his eyes
around the apartment, as if to survey for the last
time the objects and images from which he was
about to part for ever.
Oh, save me! he at length mutteredsave
me! save me!
Nay, hear me further, continued his ghostly
adviser. Death alone, the mere bodily pang, is
nothing. Till it touches you, you live: when it
comes, it is gone. I would that death itself were
your only fear.
Sacred Mother! ejaculated the invalid.
You are old, marquis, continued the priest;
your locks are white; your stay has been long in
the land.
Oh! short it seems to me.
You are ungrateful, now in your dying hour, as
you have ever beenungrateful to Heaven! Your
years have been years of pleasure; you have
wallowed
in luxury; you have laughed, revelled,
danced
,
and gambled. What right have you to call on
the Holy Mother? What offering of yours has
ever hung on her altar? When has your knee bent
in her homage?
By all the saints! exclaimed the marquis,
remonstratingly
,
morning and night, for fifty years,
have I knelt before her image.
Ay! cried the priest. Your kneeyour
corporeal knee, has touched the crimson cloth, and
your idle and unthinking tongue has paid her
useless
homage. But the Holy Mother of God is not
propitiated by such valueless breath and
unmeaning
motion. By the true cross! I tell you I cannot,
I dare not, at this instant pray for your soul. The
silent words rise sluggishly in my bosom, and part
heavily from my lips. Some leaden influence, some
fiendish weight, clogs their airy wings, and they
fall back unheard.
Oh, pious father! I confess my sins. Intercede
for mepush, compel your holy prayers upward
urge, urge their flightI will aid you. By Saint
Giovanni, your words startle and affright me!
Rash, careless man! said the priest, in a more
severe tone, perceiving that he had fully aroused
the childish superstition of the sick man, it is in
vain! It is in vain! The fiend has the advantage.
You have deserted HeavenHeaven deserts you!
The evil one, even now, enters your room. He
gloats upon your dying torments.
Saints of heaven!
He passes your bedside unrebuked; he watches
by your pillow, and triumphs in anticipation over
such dreadful vengeance as I dare not even think
of.
Ambrose! by the blood of Christ! for the sake
of the Virgin! aid me, advise me, rescue mewhat
shall I do?
The nervous and dying noble crouched in his
bed, covered his face with the clothes, and spoke
in an agonized voice, which evinced the extremity
of superstitious terror.
My lord marquis, said the priest, you know
I love you. It was to save you that I sought your
bed.
Thanksthe thanks of a lost, dying sinner!
divine Ambrose!
You know, in our holy church, there are divers
relics, impregnate with supernatural virtue. Among
them reposes, in its sacred case, a nail of the true
cross. You know, also, that over the southern
door, not far from the statue of God the Father, is
a group of the Madona and our Saviour, between
two angels. Late last night I entered the deserted
and sacred pile alone; and with devout and earnest
adoration produced the mystic nail. Its wondrous
influence shed through the gloomy and immense
aisles a calm and effulgent light, full of
indescribable
glory. Placing it on the altar, I knelt for an
hour; and, as I have already said, prayed for your
welfarelong, long I prayed!
In vain? in vain? demanded the invalid,
gasping
in his intense anxiety.
In vain! For a slow-rolling hour, much ado I
had, marquis, to gain for you the ear of Heaven.
There are those for whom, at the very first
revealment
of the blessed nail, the Virgin descends at
once, and speaks aloud.
Go ongo onoh, holy man!
At length, as I knelt, the Virgin Mother
descended
from the window, and sat enthroned upon
the altar. I urged your cause. She frowned
severely
on me, and my heart quailed; but at length
she said, `There is one hope on earth for your
dying
sinner. He can yet show that he is willing to
sacrifice to Jesus.'
How? Ambrosehow?
Bending my forehead till it touched the marble
floor, even thus did I ask the sacred Virgin, `How,
oh, Mother of God!' I said, `can the dying sinner
be saved from the flames of hell?'
And thenAmbroseand then?
`Let him bestow his daughter on the convent
of St. U,' she said, and disappeared.
My child! my child! my sweet girl!
murmured
the marquis.
I know, said the priest, that she is the hope
of your heart; but what would become of her
without
you? The vile worldthe bad, corrupt world
the poisonous, polluting, wild world, would
blacken
her pure innocence. The snares of Satan are
already spread for her tender feet. Have you
provided
for her?
She is the heiress of all my wealth.
All? Now, marquis, behold! The Virgin
comesshe descends in a cloud of light and soft
fire. Look, she turns her heavenly eyes on you.
The evil one, whom now I behold lurking by your
side, shrinks away and trembles, lest by one great
act, worthy to make you a saint, you baffle his toils
for ever, and rise among the blessed. Send your
daughter to the convent of St. U; send her
there, a pure, unsoiled victim on the altar. Her
stainless prayers will plead for you like thunder!
Her virtues will be a spell to guard you from wo.
Look, now, marquislook how he trembles!
Who trembles? said the marquis, raising
himself
on his elbow, and casting an affrighted glance
around the room.
Helookthe evil one, with his huge eyes of
fire glaring over you, and breathing of smoke and
sulphur.
Save me, Ambrose!
See! he starts, lest with one fell blow you
strike him for ever to the dust, and send him
howling
and limping back to hell.
I will, AmbroseI will bestow my daughter,
said the half-fainting, wretched victim. But my
wealthwhat will become of my vast treasures?
Thy cousin Alezzi, rejoined the priest.
But my will is made.
Revoke it.
I am faint, I am sick; my eyes grow dim.
Ever watchful for your soul's salvation, cried
the priest, I have already prepared a willyou
have but to sign. Behold, the fiend already retreats
from your bed, and the Mother of God smiles and
nods!
But, Ambrose, my sight is dark, I cannot even
read.
Let me read it.
Holy St. Dominick! a faintness comes over
memy hearing is thick.
Sign it then unread, cried the priest.
The dying man reached forth his hand, and
with blind eagerness scrawled his signature to the
parchment, while the priest supported him on the
bed.
The voices of the procession of the host, in their
long monotonous chant, now floated slowly from the
distance, gradually increasing in sound. The priest
folded up and placed in his bosom the will.
Antonia
rushed into the room, her eyes streaming with
tears. The chant grew nearer and nearer, louder
and louder. It stopped before the palace. It
ascended
the stepsit rang at the door.
I recallI revoke, said the dying marquis,
raising himself on his elbow with momentary
strength.
But the voices of the procession, which now filled
the room, rendered his words nearly inaudible. A
fit of coughing, caused perhaps by his excitement,
exertion, and exposure during the previous hour,
seized him, after which he sank back upon the
pillow
.
Raising himself then again, he rolled his eyes
from form to form, with a glassy, death-like gaze.
At length they rested on the form of Antonia, who,
kneeling at his bedside, was gazing up at him with
a mingled expression of grief, alarm, and horror.
The dying father recognised her, reached forth his
hands to her beautiful young headraised his eyes
attempted twice to speak.
Let us draw a veil over the scene.
CHAPTER XVIII.
The Reader makes an Acquaintance
.
Auri sacra fames.
Quid not mortalia pectora cogit?
Virgil
.
It
was near the hour of morning. The tall and
gaunt Alezzi paced his chamber with impatience.
Now he started at the sound of passing footsteps
now he stopped and leaned his ear, as if expecting
some one's approach.
Vol. II.F 11
By the saints! he exclaimed, at lengthhow
long he lingers! The old dotard is dead these
eight hours. I told him the instantthe very
instant
;
and see, the moon is low in the west. This
creature! she has bewitched me, I think, with that
sweet look of hers. How it glances each moment
across me! and ever associated with her father's
wealth. My heart is a whirlpool of, I know not
how many, contending passionshope, avarice, and
fear. What if he has failed? That world of
treasure falls to the hand of a girla weak,
unprotected
,
unadvised girl, to waste upon that runagate
adventurer Leslie. The old marquis deems me a
saint. It must have been easy for Ambrose to
work upon his feelings in my favour; and
she
, thus
dispossessed of her fortune, let her marry me or
not, the piasters are mine. What! do I shrink at
grasping them? Are they not
better
mine than
hers?mine, who have drained the last of my
resources
?
What can
she
do with so much? Her
equipage, her dresses, are all she wants; and these
she shall have, ay, to dazzle the best of them, if
she wishes not this convent. But had she known
the fierce and infinite joy of the gambler! had she
opened in her girlish heart a mine of ecstasy and
fire, so vivid, so immense!Hark!yes! no! yes!
Ambrose? Speakby the gods, man, speak!
My breath is exhausted! cried the priest,
sinking
into a chair.
Then nod your head. Is all right? Has he
signed the will?
He has, cried Ambrose.
The vehement and fiery noble sprang upon his
feetfor, in his anxiety, he had almost knelt in
bending down his haughty height to the priest
clasped his hands violently and triumphantly
together
,
and cried,
A thousand thanks to the Virgin!
And a thousand piasters to me, said Ambrose,
with one of his quiet smiles.
Dear Ambrose!nay, sit, you are tiredyou
shall be my friend for ever. Ask what you will, it
is yours. They told me long ago that my worthy
cousin had taken the leap. But whence this delay?
Grief and respect for my late honoured
master
,
said the priest, with another smile.
Why, you untoward knave! cried the marquis.
You do not seriously mean that grief or respect
had any thing to do with your tarrying?
Ambrose gave another smile, silently, through
his white teeth, and, as he did so, he took from his
pocket a parchment. Before he proceeded to
unfold
it, he said,
Yes, grief and respect both kept me; but both
belonged to another and a softer bosomAntonia
detained me.
Tell me hastily, best of friends! tell me all.
By the mass, an I can remember it, I will.
Firstly, the old marquis died, and that in the very
moment when about to revoke this precious paper.
As he fell back with his last motion, the girl rushed
in. The death-scene was a
Caravaggio. My
pencil
,
you know, leans towards the warmth and
loveliness
of Titian.
No matter how your pencil leans, priest; on
with your story.
When the poor old nobleman was stiff and cold,
they tore off Antonia with difficulty; she crying
the while that she was now without a friend on the
globe. Seizing this opportunity, I led her into a
secluded apartment, and touched upon the subject
of the will
How? Good Ambrose, quick! I ache! I
burn
F 2
I told her how her honourable and lamented
father had spent his last moments with me, at his
own request. That he had spoken of
you
with the
utmost affection
`The Marquis Alezzi!' interrupted she. `Ah!
I guess to what purpose! I know too well my
lamented
father held him highly in his estimation. I
distrust and despise him.'
Humph! said the marquis.
I am frank, cried the priest; I speak all.
`My lovely child,' said I, `you will not accuse
me
of misrepresenting, when I assure you that your
honourable father has better reasons than you know
of for loving the good marquis.
I
am your friend
and father. I will not deceive you.' She seized
my hand with an impulse of her young, trusting
heart, and
kissed
it; and
Kissed! interrupted the marquis, knitting his
brows.
(You forget, said the priest, in a parenthesis,
and with another of those expressive smiles for
which he was so remarkableyou forget my
profession
)and
begged me to proceed. I then
touched on your noble character; your generous
recklessness, which had in some degree diminished
your estates
Ay, echoed the marquis, diminished
indeed
!
Your pure habitsyour amiable character
(with another deep smile)your
Enough! said the marquis. To the rest.
In fine, then, I told her it was her illustrious
father's last wish and will, knowing none so fit to
protect her youth as you, that she should submit
her actions to your authority, till she saw fit to
enter
the convent of St. U_____. I told her, also, that
you had the guardianship of her fortune.
And what said my sweet mistress?
An your lordship murmured before, said
Ambrose
,
when she but kissed my hand
On! on! said the marquis, sternly.
She threw herself at my feet, seized my hand,
covered it with kisses (you know, my lord, she is
but a child, and so full of feeling and affection that
it overflows without bounds upon every
surrounding
objectshe has a dog which she adores),
begged
me, at least, to save her from the fate of
wedding
you. Her beauteous eyes were drowned in
tears, and her grief was so beautiful that
Silence, knave! enough! Give me the will!
If I am her guardian, I will mould her tastes
differently
.
My honoured lord, it is here. Behold where
the blind, dark hand of expiring life has rudely
traced
the feeble marks. Your lordship is now high
and wealthy again; you will not forget your
faithful
Ambrose?
Not for worlds, good priest! The thousand
piasters are yours. Return to Antonia to-morrow,
and seek to persuade her to my wishes. So much
beauty were better in these arms than in a convent.
But rather than suffer this princely fortune to elude
me, she shall be buried in a convent; or
In a grave! said the priest, smiling.
The marquis replied not, but, with a countenance
full of gloating delight and triumph, unfolded the
parchment: but as he cast his eyes over its broad
page, his hard, gaunt countenance took a paler hue;
his lips were pressed closely together, his nostril
dilated with long-drawn breath, his remarkable
brows were knit into a fierce frown, and his eyes
seemed to shoot sparks of fire.
Fiends! hell! and the raging furies, priest!
at length he said, in a voice so changed that it
11*
seemed that of another speaker, and stamping his
foot against the tesselated floor with the last
imprecation
.
What trash is this?
My noble lord, the willthe signed, legal will
of the Marquis Torrini; bequeathing his daughter
to the convent of St. U_____, or to your arms, and
all his estates to your possession.
Will! will! almost howled the marquis,
furious
passion blackening his face. It is no will!
My lord
Lord me no lordvillain, knave, wretch! you
have been false! This is a worthless sheet of
parchment, the lease of a house, or some such
tradesman's trash, scrawled on the bottom with the
half-legible characters of that stupid, bigoted old
dotard Torrini. Ambrose
He stopped suddenly, and rested his large fierce
eyes full on the face of the priest, while his broad
chest rose and fell with the storm within.
You have not dared to trifle with
me?
By St. Dominick! by St. Paul! by the Virgin
Mother! this is some wondrous transmutation! I
I
He stopped in bewildered confusion, while the
noble stood glaring on him with the ferocious eyes
of a tiger, pausing the moment ere he rends his prey.
Ambrose crossed himself, uttered an exclamation
of horror, and dropped upon his knees.
Alezzi seized him by the breast of his black robe,
a flake of foam specked his lips, he shook his
crouching companion with an iron grasp, and, in a
husky, half-suffocated tone, added,
Speak, slave! speak!
By my hopes of heaven! by earth! by hell!
I am innocent of this.
All the hopes of my life blasted in one
moment
!
cried the marquis.
I know naught of the means by which this
paper
has been transformed, said Ambrose; I swear
by the holy cross and crownI swear by the bones
of my father! I am myself astonished,
bewildered
,
and amazed! What has come over me? but
now I held it in my possession, folded it with my
own hands, and placed it in my bosom; and now
again, while, as far as my scattered senses can
speak, it has never left me, I find this worthless
scrawl, foreign from the purpose, yet signed by
Torrini. What thunderbolt has fallen upon me!
Ambrose! cried the marquis, in a calm,
deliberate
tone, if this be
error
, it is the strangest,
stupidest
,
dst error! If, as it sometimes flashes
upon me may be the case, it is
fraud
fraud on
your partdouble fraudfraud against me, while
you seem
for
me to defraud othersI am an
indifferent
master of my own language, but I cannot
call up words to name the hot, deadly, swift
vengeance
with which I will overwhelm you. I will
stab you at the altar
My honoured, my beloved master! said the
priest, in a supplicating tone and attitude.
I thought to-night, cried the marquis, leaving
his grasp on the throat of Ambrose, and striding
backwards and forwards in deep agitation and
excitement
,
drawing his breath hard through his nostril,
as at each moment his teeth were clinched together
I thought to-night to be the master of princely
richesto tread over floors of precious marbleto
gaze around upon galleries of matchless and
priceless
picturesto look on woman's beauty,
youthful
,
ripe, voluptuous beauty, and to say, these, these
are mine! I was to be master of slavesfor all
men are slaves of the rich. I was to send forth
across the seas for luxuries and refinements. I
was to win back from those who have beggared
me, allall
all
my losses! And last, greatest,
the grand scheme would have been ripe at once.
Visions of greatness and blissimages of warm,
delicious hours, too soft to name, too vast to
measure
,
floated before me, and in my very grasp!
Monarchs might envy, and queens love me.
Beauty would be at my feet, and power in my
hand. With the wealth of this little soft-faced
girl, I could wield Jove's thunder! These were
my thoughts an hour ago. Now, he added,
stopping
suddenly and folding his arms, what am I?
a beggar! the prey of gamblersthe outcast of
his circlea beggara foola wretcha baffled,
useless reptile!
During this long outburst of passion, Ambrose
had collected his senses, and regained his
composure
.
He waited till his companion, or his master,
had concluded, and bent his head down moodily
upon his breast, and then spoke in an insinuating
voice,
My noble lord will hear his servant. You have
wronged me by your suspicions. How can I have
been false? Had I been so, how could I escape
your knowledge, or your just revenge? What
could I gain by falsehood? But you know well
that my loss is heavy. If I had been treacherous,
would not time at once show?
There is reason in your wordsyou could not
deceive, and you could not escape me.
This amazing accident, said the priest, for
accident it is, cannot now be accounted for. It is
probable that I myself have changed the paper by
mistake. But, my lord, though this
will
be lost, all
is not lost. Antonia regards me as her fatheras
her confessoras her only friend; so did the
departed
marquis himself. No quackery was too
gross for me to palm off upon the old man. I won
his name to this paper by such a childish device as
I should be ashamed to relate. Antonia is as easily
governed by those who know how to touch the
springs of her character aright. She shall yet
either seek your arms or the convent, leaving her
property to you. This Montfort we shall find
means to be rid of. He away, her actions I could
mould at will; you shall be master of her coffers!
The marquis regarded him with a look
penetrating
and gloomy.
May my soul never enter the gates of heaven,
said the priest, if I am not fidelity itself!
Ambrose, if you play me false
CHAPTER XIX.
A Quarrel, and a Charge
.
The deadly arrow still clings to his side.
Virgil
.
Beautifully
broke the day upon the stern old
palace on the morning when the body of the poor
marquis had been conveyed to the tomb of his
fathers. The illness of Torrini had in some
measure
diverted the attention of Norman from his own
singular situation. He had found himself in this
foreign land, apparently remote from any thing
connected
with his interests. The years which had
rolled over his head had half healed his wounds.
His mind had been made up never to revisit his
country, unless at a distant period, and then in
disguise
.
The hope of clearing his fameof
discovering
F 3
the secret of Rosalie Romain's fate, had been
completely extinguished. Even his early love had
melted into a dream, and no more mingled in his
thoughts among the realities of the future. He had
formed plans of resuming again his travels into
those oriental lands whose languages and people
were most disjoined from his own; and now he
found himself, by a mere chance, fallen accidentally
upon a vein of the most extraordinary casualties
and coincidences, which, however they sometimes
appeared unimportant, at others stretched to their
most painful tension his curiosity, suspense, and
suspicion. He seemed passed into a magic circle,
where, under the wand of some enchanter, viewless
phantoms of his own fate attended on his steps,
whispering ever in his ear words connected with
the mightiest secret of his soul, brushing by his
elbow
,
darting over his sleep, disappointing him when
most excited, exciting him when most hopeless.
Vainly he had striven to grasp these shifting
shadows
.
It seemed that the more he exerted himself,
the farther he wandered from their aid; that only
when he sat down passively, or abandoned the
pursuit
,
their fantastic and capricious influences again
rose around him.
The possibility, however, of piercing the secret
which hung so darkly over him, had returned
upon his mind, and the spark of hope had been
fanned into a blaze. The feelings he had imagined
long since extinct, recurred to him with redoubled
force. His old impressions were once more
upper-most
in his heart. His suspicion of Clairmont
grew blacker and deeper; with his suspicion, his
hateand with his hate, his hope of crossing him.
The Countess D he had resolved to watch;
but she had left town, and he had not been able to
learn the place of her destination. The child, of
course, he was anxious to find; and the priest,
with his mysteries, he had determined to unravel.
All these plans were interrupted by the illness and
death of Torrini.
The situation of Antonia divided his attention.
He saw her the victim of an infernal design. Her
scheme of entering a convent he had endeavoured
to controvert, but without apparent success. He
had, however, once told her his suspicions; and also,
that if ever in any dilemma she should need a
friend, she must apply to him, as to a brother, or a
father, for advice or aid: and when he spoke, truth
and honour were legibly written on his face and
actions.
He sat alone in his apartment the morning after
the death of the old noble, revolving in his mind
what course he should pursue. Propriety dictated
the impossibility of remaining longer in the
house as a guest, with only this beautiful young
female
and her aged
gouvernante
. Yet, in the palace
were the priest and the child, one of whom was
now so intimately connected with his own fate, and,
by consequence, the other also. By remaining,
might he not protect this defenceless and lovely girl
from the insidious plans of the priest? As he
considered these things, a domestic brought him a
note. It was written in a hasty hand, and signed
Antonia
.
Oh, Signore Montfort!thus it ranyou
once told me, should I ever require the aid of a
brother
, or a
father
, to apply to you. Little did I
think it would so soon be the case. Alas! I am
already in needinexperienced, alone; and, but for
yourself, fiendless. Father Ambrose has told me
you are to leave the palace, and has hinted dark and
dreadful things of you. Oh! come to mecome
to me!
Astonished and alarmed at the import of these
agitated lines, he hastened at once to her boudoir.
It was a lovely spot, overlooking the spacious and
magnificent garden, quite secluded from the
nauseous
streets. It seemed a new world of foliage
and light, the music of birds, and the liquid
murmurs
of bright waters as they leaped into the air,
and fell back into their marble fountains. Trees of
the orange and lemon, ranged in enormous vases,
shaded the narrow winding walks. The bending
willow, the tall dark cypress, the silver olive, and
the silky locust, mingled together in piles of
verdure
;
and high smooth walls bounded the
luxuriant
and summer Eden, along whose sides and
angles
vines and roses clung in odorous loads. Birds
were gathered here by hundreds, and lived the year
round, ever undisturbed, straining their little throats
as if their hearts would burst for joy. Graceful
statues of white marble shone through the green
nymphs and fauns, naiads and goddesses; and in
a large fountain in the centre sat father Neptune
on his car, glittering amid the ever-falling spray.
The outward world of beggars and troopsof
monks and friarsof filth and gloomof poverty
and pompof hollow-eyed despair and supercilious
wealththe lean and starved cripple, the fat and
bloated monkwere utterly shut out from this
sylvan
scene.
As Leslie entered, he cast his eyes through the tall
windows, open even at this late season for the
waftings
of the sweets that floated over the balcony.
He could not help thinking that this bright and
perfumed
retreat was an appropriate abode for its
young charming mistress, whose heart was just so
pure and secluded from the outward world. The
boudoir itself was impregnated with her spirit. Her
taste and refinement were visible in the choice and
disposition of its furniture, which was simple, but
costly and magnificent. A rich carpet covered
the glassy floor. The walls were delicately draped.
Two magnificent marble vases stood on the
balcony
,
breathing in their balmy odours. A harp and
a piano, and piles of music; large mirrors; tables
of rarest marbles; several exquisite pictures,a
Madona, by GuidoSaint Ceciliaa Magdalen
the Crucifixionand a St. Sebastian. Among
them was only one not of a pious charactera
Cupid, by Albano. The arch boy, amid wreaths
of flowers, watched some viewless victim; his bow
bent, his arrow drawn to the head, apparently
waiting
a moment for the most sure and fatal aim. He
had scarcely seated himself, when Antonia entered.
Partly with the half-unrestrained familiarity of an
ardent and affectionate child, partly with the
dignity
of a passionate woman, she advanced hastily
to his side, and was about to speak, when the door
opened.
The intruder, who had so inopportunely
interrupted
the interview, was tall, strikingly tallan
accident which, according to the mood of his mind,
conveyed an impression of awkwardness or
grandeur
.
His frame was bony and muscular, but
gaunt and thin; his hair peculiarly black and
abundant, parted low over his forehead, and shaded
thick and bushy brows. Beneath glanced a pair
of eyes not without beauty, but the beauty was
continually counteracted by a fixed ferocity, that
pained and disconcerted him they looked on. They
were of intense blackness, and full of the vivid fire
which, in this wonderful clime, warms and nurses
the soil, flames in the mountains, glows in the sky,
and burns in the bosoms and along the features of
her children. His complexion was olive, nearly
sallow; his nose aquiline, almost to deformity; his
12
mouth, half concealed by two ample curls of raven
hair, was bold, large, and stern, though, when he
smiled, a light came over his features from the
white handsome teeth. It resembled a gleam of
sunset over a rocky and steril landscape, and for
the moment the fierceness of his eyes was softened.
When he spoke, his lips assumed an expression
which implied the heart of a scoffer. His voice
was deep and rich; the low tones, when he wished
to conciliate, sweet and mellow. Altogether, he
presented that strange mixture of good and bad
which enters, more or less, into almost every thing
human, but seldom in such prominent and
unblended
proportions.
As Leslie regarded him, his first thought was a
brigand; his next, a poet; his third, what could
bring so extraordinary an individual, at so early an
hour, with so little ceremony, to the private boudoir
of the young Antonia? As he flung open the door,
the two gentlemen mutually started, and a species
of surprise appeared so far to arrest them as to
afford
each time to complete his observations.
Leslie
arose; the other paused on beholding him,
started one step back, gazed around a moment as
if to assure himself that he had not entered a
wrong chamber, cast an angry glance on Antonia,
and, knitting together his dark and ample brows,
measured the form of Leslie from head to foot with
a coolness almost insolent. The young man lifted
his stature with an air of surprise as cool and firm;
and a gathering shade upon his face boded no
willingness to undergo such a critical examination.
So proud, too! muttered the stranger.
He shot forth another keen glance, with more
fiery freedom and disdain, upon the now stern and
erect form of Leslie, and withdrew, closing after
him the door with passionate emphasis. It was
the very face which Leslie had seen in the
cathedral
,
in conversation with the priest.
Upon my soul! cried he, with a half smile, for
he could scarcely doubt of some strange error, I
should like to renew my acquaintance with that
brigand-looking gentleman in some more
appropriate
place.
Oh, hush, for Heaven's sake! murmured
Antonia
,
trembling with alarm. It is hemy fear
my abhorrence! It is Alezzi!
As she spoke, footsteps were heard returning.
By the saints! cried a deep voice, in Italian.
Histhist! said another, in a low, anxious
tone.
But I tell you cried the first.
Convince yourself, then, replied the other.
Again the door opened, and the bending form
and smiling face of Father Ambrose entered,
leading
in the haughty figure of his patron.
My lord, cried Ambrose, this is the kind
gentleman to whose friendship the deceased
marquis
,
as well as the fair Antonia, owed so much.
Signore Montfort, this is the Marquis Alezzi.
The angry noble scarcely bent his head.
Norman
did not move.
The guardian of the young marchioness and
her amiable friend should be better acquainted,
said the priest.
We shall be, replied Alezzi.
Not with my permission, said Leslie, sternly,
darting back, flash for flash, the fierce glances of
the marquis. I am accustomed to select friends
for myself, priest.
So high! murmured Alezzi, as if to himself.
We'll try if we cannot find means to put this
eagle down.
The priest, a little behind, made vehement
gestures
to Leslie, deprecating his attitude and anger,
and begging him to yield and conciliate.
Why do you sign to
me
, priest? exclaimed
he, calmly, I have no secrets with you.
It is the Marquis Alezzi, rejoined the priest.
Be it so. And what follows?
Ambrose raised his hands and eyes, as if the
youth were mad in still daring to speak like a man,
even before the Marquis Alezzi.
Who are you? demanded Alezzi, with
unrepressed
contempt.
When I know by what authority I am
questioned
,
said Leslie, I shall be better able to
determine whether the questioner be a knave or a
fool.
Your words, young man, said Alezzi,
trembling
with rage, for he was accustomed to see men
abashed before his searching eyesyour words
are registered where they will not be forgotten;
but I cannot stoop to quarrel. Is it fitting that I,
the guardian of a young and beautiful girl, in
demanding
to know the name and character of a
gentleman in her boudoirher guideand, for
what I know, her lover
I assure you said the priest.
Silence! cried the marquis.
Ambrose withdrew from his flashing look.
Leslie began to reflect that he had been
premature
.
He even commenced to speak, but the
marquis
interrupted him,
Is it proper that I, in the palace of my near
relativeI, a noble of rank and fortune, the
guardian
of Antonia, should be insulted for demanding
at least an acquaintance with those who frequent
her society?
Oh, Montfort, said Antonia, in an under tone
of alarm, speak him kindly!
I might confess that I had been premature,
said Leslie, had I been acquainted with your
person; but your method of seeking information
is somewhat singular and unprepossessing. I
must be bold to add, that even supposing you had
the right to demand it, a more courteous manner
would better become
you
and the young lady of
whom you are, I believe, the self-constituted
guardian
.
He saved my life, said Antonia.
And has been improving your mind, my young
mistress, said Alezzi, sarcasticallyteaching you
English. Hey, priest, went it not so?
philosophy
and nature. My good young folks, I trust I
have come in time. You know, Antonia, your
father's wish, which I am bound to see executed.
I cannot suspect you of stooping in your thoughts
to a nameless adventurer.
My good lord, said Leslie, calmly, but
haughtily
,
I despise and defy you! Your insult take
back in full! I speak to you, and your tool yonder,
without disguise. The world already know you
for an adventurer and a beggar. It is for me to
swell your list of names with that of
villain!
The marquis leaped towards him, as if to crush
him to the earth. Antonia rushed between, and
Ambrose held his arm.
'Tis well, said Alezzi, recovering himself, after
a momentary glance of ungovernable fury; to a
priest and a woman you owe your life. The
transient
impulse which could make me stoop to one
like you (he laughed scornfully) has passed. I
am calm again, young man. But, if you would
brave Jove, try the bolt.
Striding close to Leslie, folding his arms, and
leaning his sallow face towards that of his foe,
while a malignant smile lighted his features, he
said, in a deliberate and low voice,
12*
Hark in your ear!
Leslie stood high and stern, expecting a personal
attack; but at Alezzi's words, inaudible to others,
for a moment he grew pale, and started with signs
of anguish.
You understand me, then, said Alezzi,
triumphantly
and maliciously. You know why I
bear your impotent slanders. I may not even shed
your blood without stooping; and, being what you
are, you can no more receive chastisement from
the hand of an Italian noble, than favour from that
of a high-born maiden.
But Leslie's confusion was only momentary.
My lord marquis, he said, recovering
immediately
his cold and lofty calmness, thank my
moderation, and my resolve never to reply to
that
name
with violence, for your
life
.
Murderer! cried the marquis, begone! I will
see that every door in Florence is closed against
you; and if once more you dare address, even with
a word, this innocent and unsuspecting girl, your
life shall answer it.
A scowl of fearful hate gleamed from his dark
eyes.
The priest, with a meek and supplicating face,
raised his eyes and hands to heaven; then hastened
to the support of the affrighted Antonia, who faintly
murmured,
Go, Montfortoh, go at once!
Norman stood a moment, erect, calm, and even
gentle; and his gentleness, when extended to his
foes, had they better known him, would have made
them shrink.
My good friend, said he, let me show you
as a serpent crushed, which even when alive was
fangless. I have no
friend
in the world
unacquainted
with the history of my life, except this
same youthful girl, who remained ignorant of it at
the suggestion of her father. Himself knew my
misfortune and my innocence. Your brutal
slanders
could inflict upon my reputation not the
slightest
wound, except among strangers with whom I
never mingle. Should circumstances, however,
induce me to leave Florence, as perhaps they may,
let me before I go acquit myself of a debt which I
owe you and your sanctified tool yonder.
Insolent knave!
It was my intention to place this fair girl in
possession of a fact which, for purposes of my own,
I have hitherto been induced to conceal. This
scoundrel priest may thank me that I stood so
quietly
to behold him, with your name familiarly on
his lips, kneeling at midnight, like a common thief,
in my apartments, and over my opened trunks
You
, my haughty lord, are also indebted to me for
having substituted, on the priest's table, a certain
useless paper, which somewhat disappointed, I
believe
,
your lordship's honourable plans of wealth.
What! both dumb? I leave you, worthy pair. I
am armed equally against the intrigues of the one
and the violence of the other. Antonia, beware of
them. They are both hypocrites and villains, and
both your foes. If I can ever aid or advise you,
Antonia, seek me without reserve. Should
you
desire further explanation with me, my lord
marquis
,
you shall never want ample opportunity of
meeting me at your pleasure.
With a look upon Antonia, and a smile that
rivalled
the priest's for coolness, he bent his eyes a
moment upon the astounded marquis, and slowly
withdrew.
CHAPTER XX.
Passages from Letters
.
Let us see;
Leave, gentle wax; and, manners, blame us not.
King Lear
.
Two of the letters, from which are selected the
following passages, were dated somewhat anterior
to this period of our story, the others nearly at the
present time.
Letter from the Priest to the Marquis Alezzi, in Rome
.
Neither do I know who he is, nor whence he
came, as well as I hope one day to do. Rich he is,
as may be seen from all his actions. He has taken
into peculiar favour the artist Angelohe who did
the Psyche your lordship admired so. Of him he
has made many purchases, and paid for them well,
too. They say the poor chiseller of marble was
almost starving, till this same Signore Montfort
relieved
him. I have not written to you before,
because
I desired first to know whether the blind god
had any thing to do with his coming to the palace.
I certainly know he is far from such thoughts. He
spends most of his hours in the library. When
alone with her,
I can answer for it
, he never touches
on the theme. Still, the girl is ardent and
susceptible
,
and it were much better that she saw him not.
I spoke of it to the marquis, but he frowned as I
have not seen him do for twenty years, and bade
me silence. He has at least fascinated
him
. I
should suspect him almost, by his attentive
kindness
to Torrini, of a design upon the piasters, only
there is in the man an open and complete
contradiction
to the thought, a disinterested recklessness
of self, which some would call nobleness, and
others
folly. He has Angelo with him often in his
rooms, not as a slave, but a companion; and the
young sir has even dared, though I really smile
while I write, to look with no icy eyes upon
Antonia
.
You will have a penniless sculptor,
mayhap
,
for your rival, but not this Signore Montfort.
It is the most unfortunate thing, his coming here,
with his silver voice and gallant bearing. I had
already won from Antonia a consent, which she
formally
gave her father, to receive you as her future
husband. But she is now more coy and shy. She
will not yield up to me her heart and soul, as of
wont, and I espy in her new thoughts and new
schemes. I will set on foot inquiry about
Montfort
,
and revolve certain means of rendering you
the old man's successor, either with the pretty sylph
or
without
. She inherits her father's devotional
zeal, and has a dream of a convent, which I have
taken care to strengthen, knowing we might one
day wish to be rid of her. Angelo, too, has
revealed
to me his love. His
love!
Why, the
prating
fool thinks our golden revolution is to be
brought about solely by his genius, and that it will
reward him with all he can ask of wealth and
honour
.
I have found this love for Antonia a tempting
bait, did the fiery boy need urging to the crisis;
but, truly, he is as hot for war, and as full of bitter
hatred against  and , as yourself. I do
think, so inflamed is he with hopes of liberty, that
he fancies all Italy will suddenly turn into a Sparta,
or that the best days of the old city will come back
again by the cutting of a few foolish cardinals'
throats. He believes that he may hereafter claim
the hand of Antonia, and that she will be more
willing
to receive him as a lover, when she finds in
him the deliverer of his country.
The deliverer of
his country!
He moulds under my touch like the
softest wax. His fiery and fearless nature will be
useful to us on the great day.
From the Priest to
.
And with your assistance
here
, so ran on the
letter, much might be done.
Alezzi is now full of money, and only needs a
wary friend to beggar him. The sturdy bully
trusts me altogether, and I have so woven around
him my meshes, that he shows to me like a bullock
drawn up to the ring, and patiently waiting to be
knocked on the head. Come, and you may glut
yourself with his possessions. Never lamb at the
altar bled more unresistingly. Only yesterday he
lost three thousand piasters to B, who, as you
are aware, is but a tyro at the business. Under
your skilful treatment he will yield his all, and you
may walk on gold. Other plans there are too.
You know his cousin the Marquis Torrini, and the
pretty little dark-eyed child Antoniatime has
done wondrous work on both. The former has
dwindled into a trembling dotard, who can scarcely
sleep at night without me by his beside, so
completely
have I mastered his mind; and the infant,
Jesu Maria! has budded into the very loveliest
blossom of girlhood that ever fired the veins of
prince or priest. Even I, the holy Father Ambrose,
even I burnbut, of course, in secret. I am in the
family as a son, and but for the watchfulness of
Alezzi, I know not what would come of it. The
fire that flashes in your veins burns also in mine.
It was but yesterday that this exquisite creature, as I
was alone with her, giving a lesson in English,
which language she speaks quite well, ran hastily
across the room, from some wandering impulse of
tenderness, to caress her favourite bird. Her foot
being entangled in a garland of riband, she would
have fallen had I not caught her in my arms. I
could not helpno, though my whole plans
depended
upon itpressing her with a most paternal
ardour to my bosom. But the little dark-eyed
minion did not, or would not, understand, and
neither
chided nor blushed, but only
thanked me!
The glow of a ripened woman already overspreads
her with the charms of heaven, and
I
am to
educate
her!
Educate
her! Envyme. You do, for I
know you. You and I are none the colder for
having
drawn our first breath beneath those fiery skies
of Naples.
From the Priest to the same
.
The boy is gone. Take care of yourself. I
kept him tenderly for years, and lately, from several
necessary causes, brought him to Florence, where
he was guarded, like a stolen treasure, in my own
most private rooms. The very devil must have had
a hand in it. Who could have abducted him else,
I know not; and as for flying of his own accord,
the innocent young thing could never dream of it.
Gone he is! How and when, I am utterly at a loss
to conjecture.
Never mind the boy, I shall have him again
soon. I cannot think but he has strayed by chance.
and  are both right. I am locked in your
interests as ever.
From the same to the same
.
What! again? with an immense fortuneand
thrown in her way, say you, by
chance?
Lucky
dog! Never will you want three hundred thousand
piasters more than now. The whole field is up.
The carnival will be the most memorable of
carnivals
.
By the Virgin! with many it will be a
farewell
to other things than meat. Be on the spot at
least by then. All you have told me I will
endeavour
to do, but hush your alarms.
He
is yet here;
but fear nothing, all is rightthick walls and iron
locks.
CHAPTER XXI.
An Italian Courtship
.
Was ever woman in this humour wooed?
Richard III
.
The
marquis drew near, and seating himself
respectfully
and tenderly by the side of Antonia,
said,
My sweet girl, hear me. Among all the
miseries
which life has brought me, I have felt none
more bitterly than my wrongs at your hands.
Your wrongs, marquis!
Ay, fair girl, mine! Why do you hatewhy
do you slander me? I have never done you injury.
I have watched over you even when you slept. And
this villain, whose crimes I. have unmasked, would
have succeeded perhaps in bearing you offyou
and your fortunebut for my care.
I thank your care gratefully.
Antonia, I love you!
Antonia was silent.
Father Ambrose has related to you your father's
dying wish, that you should not remain in this bad
world without a proper protector. See, scarcely
are his venerable bones in the earth, ere his
sagacity
is apparent; and the basest and subtlest of
impostors, in the form of youth, beauty,
intelligence
,
and virtue, rises at once to insnare your
young affections.
He paused. Antonia was yet silent.
You revere your father's memory. It was his
last wish that you should be sheltered beneath my
care, not only as a ward, but as a wife.
She looked up into his dark face, cast down her
eyes, and trembled.
I know I am not a gallant like the idle
butterflies
of the day, continued Alezzi; but I trust I
know what tenderness you deserve from a husband.
This youththis Montfort, or Leslie, for he has
names a plentydoubtless stands in my way to
your affections. Nay, start not; turn not pale,
Antionia
I
know
it. Now I have a proposition
marry me, Antonia, let me be your friend, your
protector, your husband; this Leslie, if you still
love him
Well, my lord
Let him still dwell in your heart. We cannot
quell and master our affections at will, Antonia.
They rise and overwhelm usthey bear us away
with their deep and swollen tides. We are light
as thistle-down in their whirling and turbid eddies.
Take then this Leslie. Receive him as your guide.
Bend upon himah! favoured lover!the light of
your eyes, the smiles, the vows, the kisses of your
lips. I will remain your protector in the eyes of
Vol. II.G 13
the world; and you should know, child, that it will
cause scandal if you encourage a lover before you
have a husband.
My lord, said Antonia, for the customs of her
country caused this extraordinary proposition to be
received with less amazement and indignation than
the reader may deem proper, I duly appreciate
your kindness.
if you love this Leslie, you will save him by
yielding to this proposal. He has thrust himself
upon my hatred. I hate him! he said, his white
teeth shining through his curled lip; he is an
adder
in my path, and I will crush him to the dust!
But for your sake, dear girl, he shall pass unscathed
he shall dwell with you in peace, only pledge me
your hand. You will secure his life, his happiness,
and your own.
Antonia was yet silent, but sobbed, and covered
her face with her hands.
My sweet child! cried Alezzi, you have
wronged me cruelly, and misunderstood my
character
.
Being your husband, I will not be your
tyrant
.
Marriage, my dear Antonia, is at once a
freedom from all narrow restraint, which must ever
check the warm heart of the maiden. You are
now a slave to fashion and calumny. Already the
world speak of your familiarity with this stranger
in terms of wonder and reproach. Be mine, the
voice of slander
dies
at once. Women will envy,
but cannot blame; and men will love, while they
dare not importune you. This youth, this Leslie,
we will suppose pure, innocent, wronged, falsely
accusedall that he should beall that you think
him. Be mine, and you shall dwell with him
undisturbed
.
He shall still be the companion of your
steps, and the chosen of your affections. Confess
to me that you love him more than your own soul.
The Blessed Mother protect him! said
Antonia
,
lifting her eyes to a small image of the
Virgin
,
exquisitely carved in ivory, which stood on a
kind of altar before the spacious mirror; the
Blessed Mother protect him! I
live
only in his
presence!
Then, Antonia, rejoined the marquis, without
my aid, without my powerwithout my
protection
as your husband, his absence will be eternal!
his death will be sure and speedy! I know much
of this unhappy manmuch that would plunge him
into the blackest ruin. He has made himself so
deeply my foehe has wronged and insulted me so
bitterly and audaciously, that, without other cause,
he dies. There is here, also, a noble lord from
France, who has sojourned in America, and who
knows the whole history of Leslie. He, too, has
been the victim of this man's haughty temperhe,
too, has sworn revenge before the altar and on the
cross. He has long been the companion of my
convivial hours, and he has confided to me the
secret of his hatred, and of his determined
resolution
to lay your lover at his feet. He will pursue
him over the earth, and his vengeance is deadly as
fate! Antonia, these separate foes direct their
batteries
against the single head of Leslie
unsheltered
,
unfriendeda stranger in the landblackened
in famethe foul and poisonous stigma of murder
fixed upon him by his own countrya fugitivea
wretch! What shield can he lift against this
universal
war? Where can he crawl, or skulk, to hide
himself from this general hate? Even should he
defend his life, what becomes of his happiness?
Shunning all, shunned by all, his existence must be
that of an owlan existence of solitude and night,
and trembling at the very beams of the blessed
sun.
G 2
Poor, poor Montfort! exclaimed Antonia,
tears gushing forth and rolling heavily down her
cheeks; what will become of him. So proudso
highso noble! What will be his fate!
Misery, despair, terror, and a bloody death!
cried Alezzi, in his deepest voice, and with a scowl
that sunk to the soul of the girl. All this anguish
all this wo and ruin, one word from your lips will
change to joy and love. All the clouds that roll and
frown above his head, ready to blast him with their
concentrated thunders, you, Antonia, with one word
a breatha smilea look, can chase for ever
away. Through the pits that yawn about his feet,
you can conduct him in safety. Why do you
hesitate
?
I do not ask his safety at the expense of
his love. I do not ask you, in dismissing him from
death, to banish him from your arms, or your heart.
I ask you to reclaim him from dangerfrom
destruction
from
absence; to lean upon his arm
to sit by his sideto drink in the tones of his
voiceto study, to draw, to sing, to ride, to
dwell with him. And what do you lose?what
sacrifice? You give to meI will be frank with
youa claim to your fortune, which is more than
you can use, can measure; and you give me a
mere formal ceremonyan abstract title to call you
wife.
And what pledge have I, my lord marquis, that
you will keep your word?
You may bind me by
laws
by laws which I
cannot break or elude, to settle upon you such
portions
of your useless and immense grandeur as will
suffice for your wishes and his. You may bind me
by laws, also, to grant you the full freedom of his
society and his love. The country you happily
live in provides you with this power. I tell you,
Antonia more frankly, for the marquis really
warmed on the subject, I am not a boy. I love
you, sweet child, putting back a wandering curl
from her forehead with his finger, but not with
the idle fever of the youthful and the romantic
not with the monopolizing, self-absorbing, unnatural
passion that burns in the pages of poetry and
romance
,
or in bosoms warped from the liberality of
nature. Plainly, I would marry you as I would
purchase some rare and costly ornamentas I
would transplant some rich and beautiful flower,
not to lock you up and gloat on you, Antonia, in
secret selfishness. Woman I have never sought or
loved. I have other, nobler, higher, fiercer joys
ambition, power, wealth. You are different. You
live as a gentle girl shouldto love. Well, love
then, Antonia! Suppose that what you fair women
call `
our hearts
,'  and he smiled, jestingly, have
no share in commanding our union; we have
motives
,
to you as strong, to me stronger.
Interest
commands it. You will purchase your lover; I,
my ambition. Speak, Antonia! say but that you
will be mine! Join yourself to me irrevocably this
night, and I swear to you, by the holiest of saints,
by the most sacred obligations, you shall be as free
as the air to adopt what lover you will; and, if
you desire, I will seek your presence only as a
stranger.
My lord, replied Antonia, pale and faint, and
still perplexed and in doubtfor his soft and
winning
manner and specious eloquence had staggered
her resolution, give me till to-morrow to reflect
upon your offer!
And in the meantime, my good child, said the
marquis, for he saw the danger of deviating from
the cool and unimpassioned manner which he had
assumed, and which rather, throughout the whole
scene, had resembled the sober kindness of an
indulgent
13*
father than the ardour of a lover, or the
tenderness
of a husbandin the meantime, my good
child, I will have papers drawn, so simply and so
palpably unequivocal to ensure to you, without
quibble or evasion, all that I have promised and all
that you can desire, that your timidest doubts will
be allayed, and every alarm of love and hope
hushed
into peace and joy. I return to you, Antonia,
to-morrow.
She motioned him assent and adieu; her heart
was too full and swollen for words. The wily
noble
cast upon her a lingering look, in which a close
observer might detect the lurking warmth of
passion
,
blended with triumph scarcely repressed.
Then, with slow and studied deliberation, he bowed
and departed.
The reader will remember, that the most striking
objects to the traveller are not always the novel
aspects of shores and mountains, the sight of antique
and wonder-raising palaces and ruins, nor cities
fashioned in forms so strange and picturesque, that
even to look upon them stirs the breast with new
sensations. The intelligent wayfarer finds more
themes for reflection in the moods and standards
of the moral world, as they vary according to clime
and country. Italy presents many of these
grotesque
wonders; and her systems of government
and society are as uncouthly shattered into wild
and accidental fragments, as her immense and
mouldering amphitheatres and her ruined towers;
with this exception, that her dilapidated edifices
and walls are the sublime wrecks of once perfect
things, while her monstrous shapes of politics and
morals appear but the phases of a mighty chaos,
which has never had bright order and perfection.
Her morals, her customs, her laws, her
governments
,
have no general connexion with truth,
wisdom
,
and virtue. Every object, every principle is
bent, warped, and distorted from the beauty and
glory of happier countries. Hence, opinion is a
crimethe press a dangerreligion, a cheat
and female dishonour, a fashion.
CHAPTER XXII.
The Cloak falls from the Cloven Hoof
.
A fairer person lost not heaven.
Paradise Lost
.
When
Antonia was left alone, a tempest of
furious
thoughts flew through her mind. Not that she
doubted the propriety, but the policy, of the step
she was urged to take. Many of her noble friends,
the familiar visiters of her father's house, had
entered
into the marriage state from motives equally
unconnected with feeling, and were authorized by
their husbands, and in some parts of Italy, by legal
marriage
settlements, to meet their lords in the
fashionable
circles by accident, and almost as strangers.
Her own mother had united herself to the Marquis
Torrini without love, and for years had met him
with indifference; while a gay young duke was her
constant attendant at home and abroad.
It had been one of Antonia's dreams to gain the
love of Leslie. She had never thought of obstacles.
Visions of happiness had floated in her fancy
travel, study, musiclong and happy visits to other
lands. Her enthusiastic nature had brooded over
these till they had become powerful objects of
hope. They were to be now all blasted. She was
to resign herself to Alezzito be the wife of one
she loved notto yield some vague portion of her
wealth to his grasp.
Should she dismiss his suit, what horrors spread
themselves darkly out before her! Montfort was
doomed. She knew well the unrelenting and
powerful
vengeance of Alezzi. She started to hear
that Montfort was now the victim of another's hate.
Perhaps a dayperhaps a minute, might be too
late. A union with Alezzi would be a union with
Montfort. His life would be saved; his love would
be hers. Her impetuous nature could brook no
delay. With no one to advise or guide her, she
was lost in a whirl of doubt, when a gentle knock
at the door announced a new visiter, and Father
Ambrose entered.
Him of all men she regarded with the
profoundest
reverence. His wisdom came from Heaven
itself. He was the controller of the elements. He
had recounted to her cures which he had effected,
and souls which he had saved. Spectres, whose
unburied bones made them restless in their graves,
had visited him to gain peace from his holy
prayers
.
The Virgin had replied to him in audible
words, when he knelt at her altar. Ships he had
saved at sea amid the tempest. He had guarded
the vineyards from blight. At the call of the
peasants
,
he had unlocked the relics of holy saints, and
by their divine efficacy, added to his pure prayers,
the earth had produced in double abundance, and
the huts of the poor had been sheltered from plague
and famine. He entered. His step was soft and
noiseless. He seated himself by the side of the
beautiful girl, took her hand, kissed it, and said,
Antonia, I come to save you. Alezzi is your
foe, your tyrant. With one word I can hurl him
to destruction.
Oh, welcome! welcome! cried the terrified
girl, exhausted and almost abandoned to despair.
Antonia, you are pale, you tremble, your senses
forsake you. Lean upon me, sweet girldearest,
fondest, loveliest! Ha! she faints.
He received her form in his arms. He pressed
it to his bosom, again and again. He impressed
kisses upon her lips.
What madness, he said, has touched my
brain? The wine, the wine has fired my veins.
Antonia! angel! seraph! beautiful, beautiful girl!
As she lay in his armsher white and jewelled
hand fallen heavily into his ownher long tresses
loosened from their bonds, and hanging to the floor
her face pale, but lovely to the priest beyond his
power to contemplate, tremblingly again he sought
her half-open mouth with kisses.
Ho-ho! she revives.
Roused by the ardour of his embrace, she had
indeed revived, and gazed around as if in a dream.
So implicitly did she rely upon the virtue and divine
purity of the man, that even while he held her
imprisoned
in his arms, she regarded him only as an
over-fond father.
Oh, dear Father Ambrose! she said, what
terrible destiny is mine!
The confiding and unresisting affection with
which the lovely and unconscious girl received his
endearments, cheated him into a momentary
misconstruction
of her character.
By Heaven! he cried, forgetting himself
entirely
in the whirl and fervour of his feelings, I
love you so, Antonia, that my nature is changed.
Will you then save me, holy father?
Save you, Antonia!save you!but in these
arms.
G 3
Oh, I will fly to them with joy unutterable
let us hasten away.
Deceived by her eager attachment, he clasped
her once more to his breast, and once more
approached
his lips to renew the kisses which he had
found so delicious. With eager vehemence he
pressed them to hers. The wily villain little knew
his charge. As if an adder had stung her, as if a
bolt of thunder had fallen upon her, she started
back, her eyes flaming with indignation, her cheek
reddening to crimson with shame and horror.
It is true, then, she said; Montfort is right
he marked you for a villain, and so you are.
What, hoAlezzi!
Child of my age, cried the priest, what would
you do? would you pour out my old blood on this
floor like water? would you see me dashed a stiff
mangled corse at your feet?
Yes, said Antonia, swelling with fury; you
merit such a fate. Alezzi! come forth!
Antonia! said the priest, darting towards her,
his countenance at once losing the soft and holy
humility, and blackening with deep and frightful
rage, hear me! Would you die yourself?Down
upon your knees! Before the Virgin Mother, swear
that what you have suspected you will never reveal,
or I will kill you as you stand.
God have mercy on me! cried Antonia.
Swear!
I swear, murmured the shuddering girl.
What I have done, continued the priest, has
been done at the command of the Virgin, and as a
trial to your virtue. Should you betray her
minister
should
you break your oath, the Mother of
God would start from her pedestal to strike you
dead
.
He fixed upon her his fierce eyes with the
dreadful
malice of a demon. The door opened, and in
a moment the fiendish fury and tempest of his
countenance were changed to the soft smile and
cloudless repose of a summer's day.
CHAPTER XXIII.
The Vicissitudes and the Transformations of Love
.
He knew the stormy souls of womankind;
What secret springs their eager passions move,
How capable of death for injured love.
Dryden
's
Eneas
.
On
Norman's return to his apartment, he had
directed a short note to Antonia, but received no
answer.
Can it be possible, he thought, that the
calumnies
of Alezzi have gained credit in her ear!
The idea stung him, and opened afresh those
wounds in his heart which time and distance had
nearly healed. He lamented his acceptation of
Torrini's invitation to the palace. In the
despondency
of the moment he derided as ridiculous the
hope of discovering any thing of Miss Romain,
which had been lately new-born in his breast. The
boy the Countess D, the picturehe derided
his own infatuation which could detect
encouragement
in trifles so light. Nearly seven years had
passed away, and here he found himself, as at first,
still marked with the awful and burning brand
upon his forehead; all men might readall fingers
might point at it! Against the world's hate and
malice, what defence could he rear? Even should
he lay low in his heart's gore the bully Alezzi,
would that prove his innocence? would that gain
him esteem, respect? would it not rather invest his
name with new horror? would he not be yet more
a shunned being? His imagination looked forward
through the path of his future existence; what did
it discover?gloom, everlasting gloom, and wo,
and ignominyscorn, hatred, and solitude.
Never again, he said, as he paced his room
in the silence of midnightnever again will I
trust myself within the pale of civilized society!
Never again will I fling off my mantle of dark and
terrible loneliness! I see, I see my lot is cast
the doom is sealed. Fate has marked me. Hope
has left me. She whose image has still clung to
meI will forget heray, utterly and for ever.
Parent, friends, home, country, my name, my
language
,
my very selfall shall be forgotten! Yet
do I not despair. No, I will mingle in more
romantic
and brilliant climes. I will change my very
identity. Beings whom I have loved, scenes of
my boyhood, hopes long cherishedall that has
cheered and illumined my gone yearsfarewell!
Antonia, toolight-hearted, exquisite creature!
How gentle, how confiding!with her melting
voice, and yet more melting eyes. Fair, tender,
noble girlcould I but secure her happiness!
A touch upon his shoulder caused him to start.
Sternly he turned. Heavens, what a sight met his
gaze! Antoniaher long black hair loose over her
shoulders, her face pale, her eyes streaming tears
stood before him; one moment stood, and the
next flung herself at once, and with an utter
abandonment
of all restraint, into his arms and upon his
bosom. A flood of tears choked her utterance.
Touched, alarmed, and with all the interest he
had ever felt for herall his admiration suddenly
arousedhe strove, peradventure but feebly, to
remove
the beautiful trembler. Those faint attempts
were unavailing, for, once yielding to the deep and
burning love which had long been hidden in her
breast, she clung to him with fervour which he
could neither explain nor resist.
Againagain, she said at length, passing her
arm around his shoulder, and looking up into his
face with streaming eyes; speak those blessed
words again! Oh! you candear, dear Montfort,
you
can!
My happiness is in your giftone kind
look, one word of tenderness, of love, and I am
steeped, steeped in bliss!
Antonia, he said, my sweet girl, sitsit, dear
Antonia, you are wild, you are agitated, you know
not what you say.
Too welltoo well! she said again, still
clinging
to his bosom, and utterly abandoned to her
feelings. I say, dear Montfort, I love, I loveI
adore you; only, only you. Oh! I am beset with
dangerswith foul, black villains! And youyou,
toobut I will love youI will fly with you.
What have I said!
She covered her now encrimsoned cheeks with
her white hands, and the tears gushed through her
slender delicate fingers.
Leslie at once saw his situation; and it was one
which, whatever it might have been to other men,
presented to him only emotions of pain and
embarrassment
.
Yes, this ardent and passionate girl,
whom he had ever mistaken for a child, loved him
with all a woman's devotion and agony. Young
and light-hearted as she seemed, he had never
dreamed of this. He had forgotten that in Italy
love is everywhere; and that the rich blood which
flows in the veins of her women has been nursed
by voluptuous customs, and kissed for ages by a
14
burning sun, till it flashes to the heart of each
individual
with hereditary fires.
Antonia, he said, as soon as her agitation had
in some measure subsided, my dear, dear sister!
No sister! no sister! she said, seizing his
hand and covering it with kissescold, cold
Montfort!
Antonia, cried Leslie, sit, be calmoblige
me, and hear me speak. Sweet girl, you say you
love me; you must notI should be a villain did
I allow it. I am a friendless, blighted manan
outcastand persecuted by all.
And do you think, oh Montfort! for that cause
that I would love you less? No, nomore, a
thousand
times more!
You must not, noble and generous girl; it is
wild madness; to-morrow I leave you, for ever.
Oh! no, no, she said, shrinking again to his
bosom with the shuddering fondness of an
affrighted
but affectionate child; I know your storyI
know it from Alezzi, Montfort.
Do not call me Montfort. It is a name to hide
one execrable.
Stay, said Antonia, with a calm look, be
you
seated. Alezzi has told me that your name was
Leslie
Norman
Lesliethat you have been charged
with murderthat you escaped by an informality
in your trialthat you won the affections of a
beautiful American girlthat, having won them,
you wearied of them; and, fearful of discovery,
that your handthis hand, Montfort, this very hand
took her life, and threw her body into a stream.
Well, Montfort, I heard him through, as one hears
the wind whistle when beneath a shelter which it
cannot reach. I smiled, and in my smile were
scorn and incredulity, because I knew you,
Montfort
;
though my heart bled at every pore to hear
such blasphemous charges. They told me you
were in the
habit
of winning the affections of
women; and Alezzi denounced you for having
attempted
as
he saidbut too successfully, to gain
my own. Of
that
accusation I felt your
innocence
;
and, by instinct, I felt your innocence of
all.
My
love you have never sought. To me you
have been ever cold as ice. Yet, for that very
coldness, I love you. Woman's shame prompts
me to conceal this love. I cannotit overwhelms
me. Did I not tell you my heart would burst, my
brain would madden, and the springs of my life
would snap asunder.
Antonia, your ardent feelings lead you away.
No, it isit always will be my nature. Had
you ever wooed me, I might have loved you less.
Had you flung yourself at my feet, I never should
have been at yours; nay, I might have frowned and
called you presumptuous. It is your coldness which
has conquered meyour stern, unnatural coldness.
I love you as I have heard men may love a marble
statue; and the hopelessness of such a passion is
its fuel and its madness. I thought all men would
love me
must
love me; all but you
have
. The
iron-hearted Alezzi, the very priest Ambrose
princes, dukesI have felt in the great world that
allall
were at my breath;I could smile them
to my feetI could frown them away; they were
my
lovers
they were my
slaves
all but you; on
your icy soul I have hung till I am spell-bound
and, Montfort, you must be mine!
Once more she flung herself into his arms, and
wept on his bosom.
Many ideas rolled through his mind. Through
his character there ran a vein of philosophical
thought and rapid observation, which rarely
deserted
him, even in the most sudden emergency.
A vague sense crossed him of the vast advantages
which many men would find in the power to marry
this lovely and impassioned being. Wealth
without
end was at his command, if wealth he needed;
and he might procure it without even the shadow
of deception, for she already knew his history, and
confided in his innocence. Perhaps, for a moment,
with her form in his armsbeautiful as she was,
almost beyond comparethe suggestion lingered
in his mind. Then the strange vicissitudes of life
struck upon his fancythat
he
, who had for years
pined in solitude, a distant and timid lover,
counting
the slightest glance of his mistress's eyes, the
most passing smile of her lip, as a stream of light
from the very gates of heavenloving with all the
energy of his nature, yet loving in vainand now,
in his turn, chance had raised
him
to the throne,
and, instead of being himself a trembling supplicant
for favour, lo, it was upon
his
breath that a
beautiful
,
devoted, high-born woman hung for happiness.
He
was now the arbiter of her fate.
His
smile
had caught value
his
look was light from heaven.
The recollection of his own misery as a slave,
contrary
to the usual examples of history, was not ill
calculated to render him indulgent as a despot.
Who shall blame him if, scarcely knowing what he
did, he folded, with a gentle but half-trembling
sympathy, the lovely form in his armsif he kissed
away the tears from that bright child's lidsif,
reckless or forgetful, when he knew that each
touch imparted pleasure, his hand put back the
ringlets from her temples, and laid itself, in a
blessing
,
upon her beautiful head?
You love me, Montfort, she saidI know
you love me. I am alone in the world, surrounded
by dark and bitter enemies. But for you, I should
yield to their snares. Without your continued aid,
I shall yield to them yet. I have no firmness with
them. From my youth, they have been
accustomed
to mould and govern my mind and feelings.
Love me, dear Montfortlove me and save me!
Alone, I am unable to cope with those around me.
Only you will save me. Say, dear Montfort, you
will be mine!
She hid her face in his bosom
Desperate moment! Years had fled since he had
seen Flora Temple. The hope of beholding her
again was nearly extinct. Even if he beheld her,
he was uncertain of her affection. Never had
Antonia
looked so lovelynever so confiding. He
had wooed Flora through doubt and suspense. He
had wooed
in vain
. But this impassioned creature
loved him in spite of reason, prudence, fear, and
suspicionloved him till her guileless heart
seemed
bursting with its load.
The weakness, however, was but momentary. It
was a baseness to suffer, even for an instant, the
warm and inexperienced heart, that beat so
burstingly
against his own, to doubt his feelings and his
intentions. Yet Virginius, when his daughter lay
fainting in his arms, scarce paused with more tender
reluctance to strike the unnatural blow.
At length he said, with a sudden effort, and
grasping
her small soft hand in his own, while still she
clung to him and looked in his face,
Antonia! hear me. I love, deeply,
unchangeably
,
I loveanother.
Not Ithuriel's spear wrought such a
transformation
.
In one moment, the gentle and fond girl
stood erect before himfondgentlenay, a girl
no longer. It was a high, stern woman, whose
tearless eyes and pale calm face froze him with
haughty and majestic contempt.
Antonia, he said, bending like a subject before
14*
an angry queen, forgive meI have never, never
dreamed of this.
She replied not.
You are offended?
Yet she replied not.
You hate?
Yes!
she exclaimed, with a single glance
from her flashing eyes.
And thus we part
For ever!
One word.
Away!
With a gesture of speechless and indignant
scorn, she waved him back, and disappeared.
CHAPTER XXIV.
Scenes at RomeAn old FriendA strange Discovery
.
The welfare of us all
Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.
Henry IV
.
It
was the first night of the carnival of Rome.
There was a masked ball. Lords, dukes, princes,
and noble ladies thronged the splendid dome. A
gorgeous tide of fashion heaved and swelled to its
utmost height.
Could all the thoughts and feelingsall the
burning
passionsthe cunning schemesthe bright
hopesthe black suspicionsthe joy, the agony,
that went on beneath those floating plumes and
sparkling starscould they be laid open to the
day! What clashing characters mingled in the
whirl! Hark to the young sweet voices! Watch
the actions of each passing incognito. Who are
they? The husband is there watching his wife
the lover his mistress; jealousy rolls its eyes
unseen
;
hate lurks beneath a painted smile; the very
air is full of mysteries.
A gay harlequin and one in palmer's weeds met.
Hist! Speak!
The bright stars above us, murmured one.
And the hell beneath, replied the other.
Right, said the first, in a secret whisper; is
he here?
By the Virgin! I saw him. But there are two
in the same dress, and it has thrown me off the
track.
Whistlook!
Can it be?
It is.
The plume of the
right
one is touched with
crimson.
I will speak with him, said the palmer.
In ten minutes meet me by the column where
we parted.
Offhe comes!
They separated.
Holy Mother! cried a cavalier, muffled in a
dark mantle, his broad hat looped up with a
diamond
,
and shaded by a sable plume; bothboth
are here. God! could I mistake?those two
fraternal
fiends! Seesee how the same stealthy
pace shows in eachthe same quiet, soft, hellish
hate! Now, nerve me, heaven! Palmer's weeds,
and the many-coloured harlequinI shall not
forget
;
and both on the blood-track after
him
. Be
still, deep-fraught breast, thy time is almost come!
Gliding swiftly after the two first speakers, the
cavalier disappeared.
All eyes were turned upon him as he passed, so
princely was his port. The young knight won
hearts in all directions. Beautiful he must have
been, though the features could not be distinguished
behind the visor bars; his armour glittered in the
almost noontide splendour; the plume floating over
his helm was touched with crimson.
From the Holy Land, Sir Knight? asked a
palmer.
Ay, good pilgrim.
And the blood of the infidels on thy plume? I
would, Sir Knight, that they
stained with blood
wore
all
the red token as
fairly as thou!
Ha! cried the knight.
The palmer was gone.
A harlequin stood leaning against a column.
Holy Sir Palmer!
Merry fool!
Did you rightly guess?
When was I
ever
mistaken? I touched his
master-chord, and it trembled beneath my hand. It
is himself.
The red plume?
Ay, you cannot be mistaken.
A glitter from the mask of the harlequin showed
the flash of fiery eyes.
It is well.
Can I aid you?
No! alonealone, I do it! Headless shall
lie that lofty plume ere to-morrow's sun!
Again they separated.
The graceful and slender cavalier drew his dark
feathers lower over his brow, and while the
harlequin
stole through the crowd, followed close on his
track.
Two stately forms swept by in royal robes. The
one, a man of imposing aspect, crowned, and in his
hand a sceptre; the other, a lady, a diadem on her
brow. On the monarch's arm hung a girl
unmasked
,
and beautiful as morning. The young knight
saw her, and started abruptly with an exclamation
of delight and amazement.
Fair lady, he said, after an interval, during
which, with the license of the place, he had
regarded
her attentively, may an honourable
knight-errant
lay at your feet his heart, and ever after do
battle in your name?
No, Sir Knight, said Flora, smiling, for it was
she; seek, I pray you, some other lovesome
worthier.
No other love, cried the knight, approaching
with the most guarded respect, and yet with a
tenderness
,
sincere, deep, and agitated, which did not
escape the notice of her who had called it forth.
Than Flora Temple, no wortheir breathes the air
of heaven!
How! she replied, surprised and almost
alarmed
,
you know me?
There is not a page of my heart, replied the
stranger, where your name is not written, where
your image is not engraved.
The lovely girl turned pale and drew back, eying
her companion from head to foot with keen scrutiny,
and then shrunk with something of a tremour close
to her father's arm.
Nonsense, daughter! he said; remember you
are at
Rome
, and in a masked ball; these things
mean nothing but jest.
The knight stood erect and silent, as if deaf to
all sounds but the voice of his lady love.
Mrs. Temple, ever childishly delighted with
adventure
and admiration, smiled on the proud form
who stood thus glittering in his mailed suit, and who
appeared to have thus publicly selected Flora as
the peculiar object of homage. The attention of
the father and mother was, however, immediately
directed to other attractions; and although the
daughter hung on the arm of the former, she could
receive the remarks of the knight, and even reply
to them, without the danger of observation.
Your noble father, said he at length, when he
found another opportunity to address himself to her
ear aloneyour noble sire, fair lady, mistakes.
What I say means more than jest. Do you
remember
He paused, and resumed again, in a tone yet
lower and deeper,
Yes, dear, most beloved Flora! the bosom that
once more, after long and weary years, heaves at
the sound of your voice, has learned nothing from
absence but love, although more hopelessbut
adoration
,
although offered in despair. Farewell again
now, perhaps, for ever.
Staystay! she cried, pale as monumental
marble, yet uttering not the least exclamation to
render the interesting interview less interrupted by
others.
The knight obeyed.
Something tells me, said she, after a short
pause, and with a voice that trembled with emotion,
that I speak to one whom I have met in a distant
land.
To an exile, added the stranger, whose years
of agony would be repaid a thousand fold, if but
one kind word from your lips would bless with hope
that deep and faithful love which absence could
never weaken, nor even despair destroy.
Mr. Leslie?
His very heart stood still. Those same eyes
which had haunted him in the remotest climes were
now turned on him with increased loveliness and
feeling. At this moment the cavalier with the
sable
plume approached, and said,
Ho, Sir Knighta word with you!
He to whom this was addressed showed little
inclination
to accept an invitation so abruptly given,
and was turning away, disdaining reply, when the
speaker, shading his brows with one hand, half
lifted the mask. Beneath it glanced the eyes
of the
Countess D
.
At such periods, years of thought flash over us
in a moment. That remarkable facehe had first
seen it with Howard, and saved her from the mad
steeds. It had floated afterward, darkly, ominously,
in his delirious dreams. Then the haughty
coldness
with which it had mingled in the giddy circles
at Florence, and the firmness with which Morton
had identified it at
Cascine
. The consummate skill
which had guided her through his interviews with
her, so as again to fling suspicion from his mind;
and now, here, beneath a mask, in man's attire, the
same glancebut its coldness changed to fireits
meaning and its mystery unveiled, gleaming on him
amid the riot and confusion of this magnificent
scene! Even Flora was forgotten.
Norman Leslie, she said, after a gaze of
singular
agitation, you are in danger!
How? from whom?
Your lifeyou are watched!
My life I value not; but, mysterious woman,
you know meyou are then she? By Heaven!
he grasped her wrist, you shall not leave me till
For Heaven's sake! I am your friend; stand
aside but for one moment. Seem not to regard me.
Eyes are on useyes of hate, fire, and revenge.
More presently.
She glided away, leaving Norman almost
motionless
with astonishment. He turned to Flora
she also was gone.
Alms! said a holy friar, beneath whose cowl
might be detected the head of a profligate young
noble; alms, I pray you.
Stand! cried a stalwart figure, arrayed as a
robber.
Norman looked around. Nothing could he see
but a wilderness of grotesque forms and masked
faces.
Presently a hand touched his arm.
Look not around, said the voice; I am the
sable plume. If you attempt to gaze, or follow, if
you exhibit any sign to betray to others that I am
addressing you, both of us are lostNay, then, I
will flyyou shall never behold me again.
Speak, then, said he.
Beware the harlequin.
The harlequin? There are
twenty
.
Then avoid them
all
and the palmerthey
seek thy life.
And who are `
they
?'
The one is the subtle priest, the other
There was a pause.
Nay, he has passed; yet he is almost now
within reach of our lowest voice. The other is
move not, stir not
Speak!
Clairmont.
It was with difficulty indeed that the advice
contained
in this last sentence was adopted. His heart
leaped to his throat. His blood rolled and boiled
in his veins.
You know the secret of my life? said he,
however
,
without stirring.
There was no answer.
I will turn, if you speak not, and drag you
before
this whole multitude.
There was no answer. He changed his position.
As he suspected, his informant had disappeared.
He sent a keen glance round amid the thousands.
Palmers and harlequins were passing and repassing
in every direction.
Sir Knight of the Crimson Plume, said a voice.
Well, my fair page?
Beneath the vase, on yon pedestal, lies a scroll.
It is for you; but read it not till you are
alone
.
Bewildered, half believing himself in a romantic
dream, he made his way to the spot designated, and
with a cautious hand moved the small vase.
Passing
his fingers over the marble, he seized a strip of
paper.
Trembling with curiosity, hoping that he was
about to make the discovery which would lift him
at once to bliss unutterable, he forgot the caution
he had so singularly received respecting the
harlequin
;
and, after wrapping around him a heavy black
mantle which he had left in the corridor, without
waiting for his carriage, he hastenedhe almost
flew into the street.
The moon was just emerging from a silver cloud
that lay like a bar along the sky. Its light fell
broadly down from the eaves of an immense palace.
Vol. II.H 15
Pausing in a narrow lane, he held up the scroll. It
contained only a line:By twilight, meet me
tomorrow
night, at St. Peter's, before the
altar of St.
Leo the Great
. Your life, more than your life,
depends
on it.
A short, deep exclamation at his side startled
him; and the glimmer of a bright blade trembled
in the moonbeam.
Ha!at last! cried a well-known voice, as a
dagger was lifted over his breast.
Off his guard, unarmed, utterly exposed, death
once again gleamed before him, from which all his
personal strength and courage would have been
unable
to defend him, when a figure darted upon them
and threw a heavy cloak upon the arm of the
assassin
.
Grasping him, thus entangled, Norman brought
him to the ground, and tore off his mask. The
face of Clairmont met his eyes. It was black with
passion. He wrenched the knife from his hand.
A dreadful feeling flashed across him, but
muttering
,
Nono
blood!
he flung the blade fiercely
away. Dog! assassin! you shall come with me!
A crowd of revellers burst suddenly round the
corner. Several rushed to the spot. Norman stood
alone. His victim, with a sudden and desperate
struggle, had wrenched himself away, leaving only
a few shreds, of various colours, in the hand of his
foe.
CHAPTER XXV.
St. Peter'sThe Denouement approaches
.
Anon out of the earth a fabric huge
Rose like an exhalation.
_____Where pilasters round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With golden architrave; nor did there want
Cornice or frieze, with bossy sculptures graven:
The roof was fretted good.
Paradise Lost
.
The
roar of the carnival had died away, and
dusky twilight had fallen on Rome, when a solitary
passenger, muffled in a cloak, paced thoughtfully
through the black lanes and broken squaresby
the towering palacesthe spouting fountainsthe
sculptured cathedralsthe leaning wallsthe
prostrate
temples. Impatience appeared in his step
and manner. Many a sacred wreck he passed
unpausingly
.
The mute, scarred Pantheonthat gem
rescued from the deep of timewon not his regard.
Old Tiber rolled his yellow waves unseen. Where
was bent his gaze? There!where from the
circus
of the imperial fiend another Pantheon sat
amid the stars, throned in all the pomp of colonnade
and pilaster, of fountain and statueto astound and
dazzle unborn ages. There his eyes were fixed
thither his step advanced.
If you have never seen St. Peter's, reader, you
are to be envied. In your perspective lies the
possibility
H 2
of a
new
impression. Its immensity and
magnificence almost cease to be physical objects.
They strike, they amaze, they exalt the mind.
They awaken, impress, and overwhelm the
imagination
.
They roll over you with the mastery and
solemn thrill of something intellectual and ideal.
Its mighty floor spreads from your feet with the
level that tasks the eye to receiveits brilliant
walls, gorgeous with all that earth can yield, that
genius can create, rise around with an intense
grandeur
that pains the gaze and the comprehension.
You stand in the midst, lost and diminished; now
lifting the eye with mute incredulous wonder to the
golden roofs, the vast and radiant dome; now
measuring
the ponderous monuments, peopled with
exquisitely
majestic, almost breathing forms of
marble
.
With a hesitating step you approach an
infant
angel, that grows as you advance into gigantic
and impossible dimensions. Bewildered you
recede
from some stupendous pile, which, with each
enchanted moment, falls lovelier and yet more lovely
into all the proportions of grace and the perfection
of nature.
The stranger lifted the heavy curtain. He stood
within the wondrous hall. Was his soul struck?
Was his vision dazzled and overwhelmed? No.
Such a powerful charmer is custom, such a yet
more potent necromancer is interest, that he trod
the endless pavement as if it had been the
commonest
sward of green in a silent forest. Mark how
his eye darts around amid the wilderness of
glittering
marbles and beaming pictures.
Who moves on the broad area yonder? It
cannot be she!
No, it is a single traveller, hushed and awe-struck,
gazing and gazing upon the interminable piles of
gorgeousness.
A step approaches our stranger.
'Tis she!
No. A priest glides along with half-heard step,
and disappears.
For the love of the Madona, signore! cries a
voice.
Ha! at last! thus said the eye and start of the
muffled wanderer.
No. A blind beggar, led by a filthy child, craves,
amid this wondrous wealth, for means whereby to
live.
With still and watchful pace, on and on he went
by the cinders of the great, by the works of the
inspired, by sacred statue and holy relic, by
mouldering
king and forgotten pope, by couchant lion and
winged seraph. With a beating heart he stands by
the altar of St. Leo. He stands alone.
Hist!
Was it fancy?
Hist!
Again!
He approached the immense tomb.
Ha! Is it you?
Yes; but away!again you are watched.
I care not. I am armed.
The figure lurked behind a giant image. The
face was half visible.
Mysterious being, said Leslie, for the love
of God, relieve my racked soul.
I dare not now. Yonder priest, who passed us
but now, is, I fear, the companion and agent of
your bitterest foe and mine. I dare not remain.
He knows me. But to-morrow, after the carnival,
15*
meet me at the Coliseum. Watch till I come, if
it be till midnight.
But, one word. Rosalie Romain! does she live?
Can I learn aught of her?
The priest had approached again. He was at
their side before they knew he had turned. His
eyes were fixed upon them. From their evident
disguise and mysterious manner of meeting, they
were well calculated to attract attention. It might
have been mere fancy that he knew aught of them
or their affairs. Leslie bent on him a stern glance.
It seemed to quail him. He shrunk back, and
retreated
.
Now, strange woman!
The figure was gone. He passed behind the
tomb. No one was to be seen but the blind
beggar
with the little girl, who had hobbled after him
with his extended hat, and a group of foreigners,
mute and motionlesstheir eyes fixed on a
magnificent
statue.
CHAPTER XXVI.
Rome during the CarnivalA Ray breaks in upon the
Darkness
.
Hadst thou thy wits, and didst persuade, it
Could not move thus.
Hamlet
.
Whoever
has not witnessed the festivities of the
carnival week at Rome, will scarcely lend credit to
the burlesque extravagances even to this day
committed
by all classes. It is a page of reality
resembling
one of old romance; and the stranger
wonders to see its antique and remarkable leaf thus
bound up in the prosaic volume of common life
The grave and sensible Englishman, the observing
and intelligent American, is astonished at the
spectacle
of a whole people abandoned to the maddest
freaks of frolic and fancydisguising themselves
in grotesque habits, masking their faces, altering
their gait, form, and demeanourentering with
lively ardour into the wildest folly. From the
violent
gesticulations and various costumes, it appears
as if the theatres of the world had emptied their
wardrobes, and sent forth their performers to play
each in the face of Heaven those thousand parts,
in other countriesat least in oursreserved for
the midnight stage. Here a brigand stalks in the
full glory of arms and equipments, with flowing
tresses, dark mustaches, and a countenance of more
than human ferocity. He steals along after the
rolling carriage, and aims his carbine at some
beauteous
victim. There a Spanish lover, with his
graceful cloak, broad hat and feathers, and
love-breathing
guitar, sings his serenade to each passing
fair; sometimes, for the occasion excuses all civil
familiarity, he murmurs a soft air to an English
belle in her carriage; sometimes whispers love to
the gay French girl; sometimes kneels to the
Contadina
in the street; and again, directs his strain to
a bright face peeping from a palace window, or
leaning and laughing over a balcony. Behind him
treads a knight glistering in armour, who bears upon
his lance the favour of his lady-love, or hands a
letter on its point to the first pair of eyes that take
his fancystranger or native, high or low. The
fierce Saracen stalks through the throng,
brandishing
his cimeter and twirling his mustaches. The
copper-coloured Indian, with his tomahawk,
threatens
swift destruction to each shrinking maid. Old
lords and ladies, in dresses of antique magnificence,
recall the splendours of the most celebrated courts.
The frolicksome sailor reels along, as if the light
Italian wines had been too strong for his brain.
The lover sighsthe warrior shoutsthe spectre
glides; and many striking characters are correctly
dressed, and represented with serious accuracy and
excellent effect. Others there are who delight to
fling over the whole the broadest possible air of
ridicule. Humpbacks swelled into mountains
eyes glaring like moonshuge mouthsbald pates
overgrown stomachsstatues of twice the
ordinary
heightdeformed foreheadsand noses of
such ponderous dimensions, magnified proportions,
and rubicund colours, as may chance, if you eat too
heavy a supper, to haunt your late slumber in the
shape of an incubus. All that mirth and ingenuity
can invent to distort and caricature, here floats upon
the vast and ever-moving tide, rising and sinking in
the dense, universal commotiondisappearing and
appearing again; carriages loaded with double
numbershorses rearing with two and four
women seven feet high, and sweet girls in uniform
of banditti. Those whose ambition does not seek
to support distinct and memorable
rles
, content
themselves with the simple, smooth, common mask
a pretty girlish countenance, whose everlasting
repetition at length wearies the eye, and becomes
no theme of curiosity or distinction.
Some, tooso picturesque are the inhabitants of
Romeeven while wearing their every-day
habiliments
,
can with difficulty be distinguished from the
maskers; and the barefooted and cowled monks
and friarsthe long-bearded mendicants, covered
with rags and wrinklesthe fat priest, and the stern
soldier, are only known from the giddy surrounding
concourse by their unmasked faces, steady step,
and grave demeanour. Nearly all the town join
in this sport; or, if they do not actually participate,
at least throng together by thousands and thousands
to witness it and swell the extraordinary spectacle.
Countless numbers of ladies, both natives and
foreigners
,
may be seen either in their carriages or at
the windowsgentleman and noble, young and
old, peasant and duke, all mingled and blended
together
,
in a wild, excited, half-familiar, half-merry,
half-mad mass of human beingscrying, laughing,
screaming, gesticulating, leaping, dancing, singing,
shouting, and pelting each other with flour
sugar-plums
,
or oats steeped in plaster of Paris
resembling
them, and covering the air, the street the walks,
and all the population, with the white of a
universal
snow-storm. A hundred thousand people are
not unfrequently assembled, either as actors or
audience, upon the scene of action, which is in the
Corso and the adjoining streets, squares, and
avenues.
Our readers, on either side of the ocean, need
not be reminded that the Corso is the Regent-street,
or Broadway, of modern Rome, straight and
exceedingly
narrow, built up closely on both sides
with high houses, or gloomy, but immense and
magnificent, old palaces, all of which are crowded
upon every point; where men and women sit,
stand, or climb, from roof to basement, cornice,
pedestal, and balcony. Through this principal
thoroughfare
two processions of carriages and
pedestrians
go slowly, in opposite directions, pelting each
other, and all around them and all above them, with
snowy tributes; and receiving in return discharges
in showers from every quarter. The middle of the
street presents a tide of the gayest and gaudiest
colours, and the most lively motionnot unlike the
H 3
rapid stir and agitation of a fierce battle. On either
side, tiers of seatsa most lucrative profit to the
proprietorsare provided for the thousands who
desire, stationary and secure, to behold the giddy
scene. A sloping bank of faces thus rises on either
hand of those moving in the procession, leaving
only a passage sufficiently wide for the two rows
of carriages to pass each other.
Well, said a stranger, who had taken a seat
before the Dorian palace, and in the midst of the
wildest clash and riot of the revel, it is a brilliant
day, signore.
It is, indeed, cried the other.
Are there ordinarily so many spectators to this
gay fte?
I know not, signore strangerbut I think not.
I have lived in Rome, on and off, for forty years,
and in that period the carnival has been up and
down several times. Lately I have not seen it so
well attended.
What remarkable order is preserved! said the
stranger. I have not heard an angry word, nor
seen a blow, nor a quarrel, nor beheld a man drunk,
except a mad wag of a sailor; and his drunkenness,
like his mask, was only put on.
There are rarely any disorders here, signore,
said the Roman.
One almost envies the character of a crowd
where no brawls disturb the general hilarity. It
speaks well for their morals.
Humph! said the Roman, there are other
things besides morals which may keep folks from
fighting or getting drunk.
Other things besides morals!what other
things?
Sharp bayonets and drawn swords, said the
Roman, dryly.
The stranger in his turn muttered, Humph!
or what in the French is equivalent; but, however,
continued the conversationI am sorry to hear
you backward in doing honour to the Roman
government
.
The city is full of spies, said the Roman;
and one does not like to talk too much to one
whom one does not know.
I approve your prudence; but, in my case, it
is ill applied, as I am quite a stranger, with no
disposition
to meddle in its affairs, either by turning
informer myself, or by expressing any opinions
which might furnish food for the information of
others. I am but a recent visiter to this part of
the world, and know more of my late residence,
China, than of your Eternal City.
I can see by your accent, said the Roman,
that you are not Italian, as no Italian speaks
French like you. However, I neither was, nor need
be, fearful of expressing my opinion. I say, that
one does not like to see double lines of soldiers
stationed about the streets, with their gleaming
helmets and drawn swords, scowling on these poor
children of foolery as if they watched a decent
pretext to cut their noisy throats.
How! said the stranger, is it not the usual
regulation?
No, signore: there is always a military guard
very properly stationed about town to prevent
confusion
;
but look yonderthey do not flock in such
numbers as that, nor do they wear such faces.
Why, they look like wolf-dogs; or, by the Virgin,
wolves themselves, peering and glaring over into
the sheepfold.
And what reason is there for this extra care?
His holiness has discovered a plot again, said
the Roman, with a sneer: arms have been found
is a house, and men who dared to own them. The
muskets and swords are now turned against the
people's own bosoms, and the plotters are
quartered
in St. Angelo and elsewhere. All the
authorities
from Como and Venice to Naples have already
received intelligence, and to-day it is reported that
the rising was to have taken place.
The danger is over, then?
It is: but a strong guard is posted everywhere
through the streets; and there will be some will
feel cold steel or heavy lead for this day's work.
It might have been worse, friend, said the
stranger. Rebellion is a wild business, and is
but too often placing a knife in the hands of a
madman. Butsee this fellow!
Ay, he personates a priest, said the Roman,
and has been going about all day preaching, with
that long beard and huge book.
His lungs must be strong, said the stranger,
laughing.
There is a beautiful creature, observed the
Roman, in that rich carriage.
How the villains pelt her! replied the
stranger
;
why, they will put her eyes out.
And a prettier pair could not be extinguished,
said the Roman.
But, surely, cried the stranger, I know
yonder
partytwo ladies and two gentlemen in that
barouche: see, they are now surrounded by pelters,
and are half lost in a cloud of white. I have seen
them before, I am certain.
They are Americans, said the Roman.
Ha! FloraFlora Temple! exclaimed the
other; I could have sworn I knew her; and yon
tall stately dame is her mother.
And the good-looking, portly gentleman, Mr.
Temple.
And the fourthI know him: it is Clairmont,
as sure as life; it is that reprobate of a count.
You know them well, friend.
Ay: they recall days gone by. It is but a few
hours since I landed at Naples, after a long voyage
from the East Indies. These people I once knew
something of in America. Their story was
interesting
.
I must follow them; make myself known
again; and push some queries, touching old times
and friends.
The stranger was about pressing a passage
through the crowd, but his new acquaintance
stopped
him.
You will easily see them, signore, when the
festivities of the day are over. At present (to say
nothing of the difficulty which you will find in
overtaking
them) you will but mar their sport. See,
they are far away already.
In fact, the party had now nearly disappeared.
They will return again, and we shall have them
by us in a few moments once more; for you
observe
,
signore, that the carriages move, as it were,
in a circledriving into the Corso by the Capitoline
Hill, and leaving it through the
Piazza del Popolo
,
or the
Via Condotti
, and hastening by the parallel
streets back towards their original entrance by the
Capitol.
True, said the stranger; I will waitmore
especially as I believe I must; for yon soldier has
so pressed back the crowd with his drawn sword,
that I can scarcely at present effect my retreat.
Right, answered the other; and surely here
is a spectacle worthy of a few moments' extra
attention
.
What a strange aspect of human nature!
Strange indeed! echoed the foreignerYon
fat fellow with the trumpet.
And this giant upon stilts.
16
And that enormous woman driving the barouche
full of harlequins.
AndHa!
that
is most extraordinary of all,
said the Roman.
Extraordinary indeed! Butnoshe is not
masked. It is really a female. How well she
plays her part!
The object which had thus attracted the attention
of the two chance acquaintances was indeed one
calculated to interest every beholder; and she had
already excited considerable admiration among
those spectators who, amid the discord and
confusion
of the scene, had happened to catch a distinct
view of her. The character represented was that
of a female, pale and wild; her dress disordered;
her hair floating loose about her shoulders; clad in
raiments of white, which appeared to have been
caught up carelessly from a bed, and wrapped
around her in the form of a mantle. In her hand
was a mask, which she sometimes held to her face,
and sometimes waved in the air. She had been
several times seen in opposite parts of the town;
now on some eminence, attracting all eyes by
the singularity of her actions and dress;now
sinking again in the crowd, and lost as in the
general
waves of a heaving sea. No one had time to
regard her long, nor to follow her course; but
many were the remarks drawn forth by the
ingenious
and impressive propriety of her costume, and
the great talent she exhibited in acting her
rle
.
Uniform attention, in such a restless and agitated
scene, where many were much more eagerly intent
on displaying their own persons and powers than
on animadverting upon those of others, she could
not hope to acquire. Every thing around her was
wild, grotesque, and striking as herself. And those
who had the curiosity to fix their eyes upon her
for any length of time, were afterward heard to
declare
,
that her actions were strangely and
powerfully
eloquent and affecting: sometimes singing
wild catches of music; sometimes smiling, and
laughing aloud to herself; again shouting, and
apparently
affrighted by the fear of pursuit; from
which mood she started again into the airs of a
princessbowed her head ostentatiously to the
occupants of the palaces, and smiled upon the gay
equipages as they rolled by. Often, as if appalled
by some awful recollection, she shrank, shuddered,
and trembled at every passing voice and glance;
and, clasping her hands energetically together,
gazed up to heaven with streaming eyes. Yet no
one attended to her, as she was generally in the
midst of the turmoil, pressed by the crowd in the
street, and pelted with plums. Her shrieks, her
prayers, her entreaties, and her agonies, whether
assumed or real, all passed for mere mummery
all for idle show. Now a party whom she
addressed
with extended, imploring hands, shouted in
derision. Another drove carelessly by. Again
lost, again borne out of view by the multitudethe
mirth of some, the wonder, the neglect of allshe
floated with the tide, like mad Ophelia upon the
stream, singing as she sank. At last she became
the theme of general notice; and had, indeed, drawn
towards her all eyes, at the moment when the
masked Roman and the inquisitive stranger had
first discovered her. After a few moments' gaze,
each uttering an involuntary expression of deep
astonishment
and interest, they parted company, and
were soon separated in the crowd.
CHAPTER XXVII.
A FlightA Pursuit
.
This way the noise was, if mine ear be true,
My best guide now.
Comus
.
During
the day, Clairmont had heard of the wild
girl who excited so much curiosity and admiration
among the vast concourse.
Fearful of some catastrophe, he at last caught a
glimpse of her person; and beheld with the most
frightful forebodingswith a burning mixture of
anger and of anguish
To Flora and his other companions, therefore,
pleading sudden illness, he induced them
immediately
to quit the Corso. On reaching his hotel,
he retired at once to his chamberdesiring his
servant to say to all inquirers that he slept, and
could not be disturbed. Enveloping himself in a
domino, and masking his face (for he knew well
that there was one whose encounter might be
death), he started forth with feverish anxiety in the
pursuit.
It seemed that the unhappy being, with the deep
subtlety of madness, had suspected that she was
in danger of being overtaken by too open and too
long exposure of her face at one time. She had
therefore provided herself with a red shawl, which,
at intervals, when the caprice of flight seized her,
as it frequently did, she wrapped around her so
carefully as effectually to envelop her; and hiding
her features in a mask of the most ordinary form
(of which there were hundreds everywhere
precisely
similar), she would stop suddenlyglide
away among the crowd to parts of the city most
remote from that where the fear had seized her.
The task of tracing, of overtaking, and seizing her,
therefore, at any time of doubtful success, in a
multitude so vast and in such rapid motion, was
rendered peculiarly so by the numbers of masks
like hers, and of disguises not greatly different,
which rushed to and fro everywhere around.
Indeed
,
to Clairmont and many others, she appeared
almost endowed with the power of ubiquityto be
a spirit, wild and anguish-struck, riding on the
waves of the commotion, beckoning, weeping,
praying, threatening, and forming a striking
feature
in the picturesque crowd.
With stealthy pace, Clairmont stole after his
object, regardless of all others. Several times,
when he thought he had accomplished his purpose,
he found in the confusion of dresses that he had
mistaken the person. Once, instead of her, he
seized in his arms a pretty Italian girl; and a
by-stander, with the promptness of a lover,
somewhat
rudely dashed him away. Again he believed
himself sure; but, instead of a female, he found in
his arms a slender youth in petticoats, who
exhibited
neither disinclination nor inability to assist
himself.
At length, in a side street, he succeeded in
tracing
her, and suddenly seized her. She screamed
and struggled. A mounted guard, with a drawn
sword, instantly rode up.
Back, signore! he said: no rudenessno
16*
riot. Back, foolback! Are you deaf?
with the point of his drawn sword to the breast of
the once more baffled count, he compelled him to
retire; and the affrighted girl, after a keen look at
his figure and jewelled hand, with an exclamation
of horror, flew swiftly away, and was lost to his
sight.
Almost insane himself with disappointed hope
and idle rage, he forced his way from crowd to
crowd of the now retiring maskers; who,
dispersing
at sunset, sought their houses in straggling
groups. Hour after hour he prowled around the
streets. The sun went down; the multitude
disappeared
;
the shadows of night fell on Rome; the
stars glittered; the round moon rose broadly and
silently over the Eternal Cityand still his victim
had escaped his grasp. Stung with rage and
furious
fears, he knew not where to go, nor what to
dowhen in the distance, and near the outskirts
of the town which lead into the Forum, a white
form was seen stealing along the wall. It was she;
and he sprang after his prey. She perceived that
she was followed, and darted off like the deer
aroused by the hounds. She boundedshe flew
with the speed of desperate fear; and with the
motion of swift revenge, Clairmont pursued to the
arch of Titus. She hid behind it. He approached.
she bounded on. He followed. The huge shadow
of the Coliseum lay black on the green. She rushed
towards it. In its winding labyrinths, Clairmont
knew she might lurk all the night. Silently he
drew one of a pair of pistols. He aimed and fired.
There was a shriekshe fell! He lurked back in
the deep shadow. Like a bird whose wing has
been broken, but who still struggles on through the
grass, to die in some bush away from the
huntsman's
murderous hand, the poor girl rose, and with
a painful motion, gained the entrance of the mighty
pile, and was lost in its midnight vaults.
She would have it, said he, setting his teeth
and flinging away his pistol.
A few moments he lurked in the shadow. No
one appeared. Assassinations in Rome were
common
.
They rarely attracted any attention. He
could not avoid walking hastily to the spot. It
was a green knoll. One or two flowers bloomed
there. The grass seemed uncommonly fresh and
verdant. The moonlight fell broad and full upon
it. He stopped to gazethere was blood! His
heart sickened. He shuddered; turned on his
heel, and walked back towards the city. Suddenly
he stopped. No, he said, it is no time for
childish shudderings. I
must on
.
He was silent, but returned with rapid strides
towards the Coliseum.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
Rome by MoonlightThe Wanderer keeps his Rendezvous
at the ColiseumAnd what he saw there
.
I pray you let us satisfy our eyes
With the memorials and the things of fame
That do renown this city.
Twelfth Night
.
It
was night, and moonlight. Moonlight in
Rome! The Temples had retired early from the
Corso, and, after a few hours' repose and
refreshment
,
had formed a party, to visit, for the first time,
the Forum and Coliseum. Clairmont would have
been a useful guide; but he had been seized on
the Corso with a sudden indisposition, which
caused
,
indeed, their retiring from the ground very early
in the afternoon. He now wrote that his illness,
though but transitory, was sufficient to confine him
to his room. They started for
the ruins
.
Something there was of unusual romance in the
present aspect of the city. The sunlight had faded
from the heavens, and left the blue void hung with
trembling stars, and lighted by the radiance of a
round and spotted moon, that never lent its edges
of silver to objects of such deep and profound
interest
.
The streets were hushed, still, and lonely.
The maskers had vanished. The revelry had died
away. The night was warm and exquisitely clear;
and the light, as it fell across the Roman streets,
as it slanted down upon the sculptured fronts of
the many renowned churches, and touched the
immense and lofty piles, the palaces of the great
and the gay, now gonethere was something,
while it delighted, that saddened and awed the
mind.
Mrs. Temple proposed, that before they visited
the ruins they should drive to the most remarkable
part of the modern city, and receive their first
impression
of its wonders from this heavenly night.
It is the true method to look on an ancient town.
It sends you back a thousand centuriesthe soft
and shadowy reality so indulges and assists the
flowing imagination. Flora, during the latter years
of her life, had applied much to reading. History
had been with her ever a favourite study. Now,
in truth, she would have had her reward. One
richer, more stirring, more pregnant with the spirit
of enchantment, could scarcely be allotted to a
human breast. Ah! a very different thought
occupied
her mind.
They drove to
San Pietro
and the Vatican.
They paused by the portico of the Pantheon, and
the stern and mighty palaces. They gazed at the
slender obelisks and the numberless fountains
the tomb of Adrianthe Tiber, winding its way
silently beneath the arches of the bridgethe
columns
of Antoninus and Trajan against the sky; and
statues and pillars ever and anon struck their gaze.
They stood on the Capitoline Hill, beneath the
equestrian statue of Marcus Aurelius; they
descended
to their carriage, and ordered it to the
Forum and Coliseum. The vast plain was at
length reached. Oh, what a dream of Flora's
young years was here at length imbodied before
her! and yet, as the shadowy and most consecrated
objects fleeted by, she could give to them no thrill,
no attention; but her abstractedness at such a
time seemed no more than natural. The voice of
the
cicerone
sounded like that of a necromancer, as
he pointed out the Tarpeian Rockthe Capitoline
the Palatinecolumns and templesthe
enormous
fragments scattered aboutarches, walls,
baths, aqueducts, lifted broken in the air, or strewn
in pieces on the ground.
At length, huge and vast, tier above tier
blasted
,
ghastly, incredible, sublimethe Coliseum rose,
a startling, stupendous vision. Even Flora, for an
instant, forgot the knight of the red plume. Mute,
chilled, awe-struck, they gazed at its colossal
proportions
its
stupendous walls lifted to the sky, its
broken fragments, the blackness of its shadows
upon the turf, and the bright moonlight streaming
down through its dilapidated apertures and into its
blood-stained arena. Long they gazed. They
walked round it. They raised their eyes to its vast
and rent summit. They entered its crumbling
passages
.
They trod across its earthy floor. They
penetrated its dens, its vomitories, its winding
labyrinths
.
What a world of associations rushed
across their minds. In the absorbed earnestness
of their feelings, they had separated. Each
followed
the bent of her own deep impulse, stealing
along the shadow, and unconscious that they were
not together.
The
cicerone
and guard, with the lantern, had
accompanied Mr. Temple into a dark and winding
passage. Mrs. Temple passed out of the farthest
gate, and Flora, quite removed from both, stood in
the moonlight by an immense fragment of
travertino
,
which had fallen, no one knows when, from the
summit, and lay half buried in the soil. Thus
alone, she abandoned herself to her meditations,
when she heard a voice whose echoes had lived in
her heart for many a long year.
Miss Temple!
She started.
Norman Leslie was at her feet
Flora!
He seized her hand; she trembled, and would
have fallen, but he supported her with his arm.
This agitation, these tears, loveliest, dearest,
what do they mean? Dare I think? Can I be so
deeply, so richly blessed? The hope of your love,
beautiful Flora, has sustained me through many a
weary year. Sweet girl, do I hope in vain?
Mr. Leslie, faltered she, if you value the
love of one so unworthy as I
Flora
It is yours.
An instantshe was in his arms, on his bosom.
But, hark! A shriekshrill, intense, piercing, as
if the voice of some mad spirit, now first whelmed
in its fiery fate, rose on the air. At the sound, Mr.
and Mrs. Temple, with the guide and guard, rushed
forward. Flora and Norman stood together, the
fair girl clinging to his arm. There was a moment's
silence. All stood as if expecting some horrid
apparition
,
when, on the second tier of the
Amphitheatre
,
there rose a wild form, her hair streaming
around her uncovered head, her white robes
floating
in the air, her hands clasped in frantic pain and
terror, and her manner expressive of the wildest
agony and fear.
It is he! it is he! she cried, with wild and
half-choked
accents. O God! save mesave me!
Then stand, fool! cried a hoarse, fierce voice,
while the unseen speaker seemed climbing up after
his victim.
Oh! do notdo not kill me!
It is the wild maniac! exclaimed Mrs. Temple.
Yes! it is the wretched girl of the carnival,
said Flora, trembling with alarm.
God of heaven! cried Norman, it is she
it
is
Rosalie Romain!
It is impossible to depict the amazement of those
who beheld this remarkable scene. But the
current
of intense curiosity was too deep and swift for
remark.
Save me! oh, save me! screamed the maniac.
Stay! cried Norman, in a voice of deep
emotion
,
and stepping into the middle of the arena,
where the moonlight fell full upon him; Rosalie
Romain, I am your friendI will come to your
aid!
The shriek which replied to him froze his blood.
The before invisible pursuer, now first emerging
from the black shadow, stood full in the light. He
had lost his mask. His features were distorted with
rage and violent emotion.
Heavens! said the shuddering Mrs. Temple,
it is Count Clairmont!
Villain! cried Norman, here the great hand
of God has at length held you forth for what you
are. Wretch! if you touch yon creature, I will
crush your head like a reptile's beneath my heel.
Leslie!and, by Gd, Flora Temple! Off,
then, all my vain dreams!
He drew a pistol, which glittered in the
moonbeams
,
cocked it, and, as he spoke, seizing the wrist
of the wretched lunatic, turned to Leslie.
The whole incident had scarce occupied a
minute
.
Leslie still stood alone in the arena.
Clairmont! he said, you cannot escape me!
Detested coward! cried Clairmont, with a
hoarse, fierce laugh, that this gibbering fool is she
you seek I deny, and the world will never believe.
She is my
wife
, and I claim her. Stop us at your
peril! If you permit us free egress, you are safe,
and I will trouble your happiness no more; but
and he uttered an imprecation too dreadful to repeat
if you attempt to impede my way (he raised the
pistol) you
die!
By , the temptation is
almost
too sweet to forego. But I
will
forego it if
you come not in my path.
No! said Norman, not for all your threats
shall you ever pass from this spot. I will grapple
with you if twenty lives be the price. Guard, to
the opposite door! I cross him here!
Clairmont moved to descend; and partly
retreating
,
endeavoured to draw after him the bleeding
girl, when she sank exhausted at his feet. He left
her as she lay, and was about to disappear, when
he paused and said,
Norman Leslie! at length we know each other.
To-night, both of us live, or both die! Pledge me
your sacred word that I may depart unmolested,
and you never hear of me again. Refuse, and this
is your last moment on earth!
Without further reply, Norman sprang forward
towards the eminence where stood his foe, when
Clairmont, with an oath, raised the pistol.
A moment more, and his life-blood would have
flowed. Flora had darted towards Leslie in frantic
terror, when a powerful and unseen arm descended
upon the caitiff in the very act of murder. The
blow was sudden and tremendous, and directed
full against his head with a crushing force. Hurled
from his height as if by some deadly engine, he
was dashed heavily to the ground. For a moment
he lay as if he were indeed a senseless clod. He
turned, and it was observed that But why dwell
on a dreadful scene? His head had struck against
the sharp edge of a stone, and he presented a
spectacle
too fearfully awful for delineation. Rage,
hate, despair, and death, mingled in his dying
features
.
The guard now appeared with the senseless
form of Miss Romain on his arm. Flora and Mrs.
Temple vainly endeavoured to revive her, while a
domestic hastened for the carriage, which had
been left at some distance.
Lift me, said Clairmont, some of you. What
accursed hand struck me?
Mine! said a powerfully formed man, whom
all recognised as Kreutzner. A kind stranger
directed me in time to the spot where, unhappy
man, you stood.
And the stranger is here! said a voice, which,
although a woman's, had in its tones something so
stern, haughty, and bitter, that all started
Clairmont
most of all.
The new-comer stepped up to the side of the
dying man. It was the Countess D. She
regarded him as he lay, with a glance so joyous
and malignant, that she appeared a fiend rather
than a human being.
Vol. II.I 17
Louise! he cried; hateful, detestable wretch!
curses on
you!
Curses, curses on
you!
Miserable, crushed
reptile! she said, gazing down on him as on a
serpent she had slain
die!
I rejoice in your
calamity. I have already betrayed you. I
II
unlocked the cell of your wretched victim Rosalie.
I put Norman Leslie on your track. I saved him
last night from your dagger; and now that I behold
your torments and your death, I smile and
triumph
!
Oh, silence her slanderous tongue! groaned
Clairmont.
No! let me speak to your dying ear. Your
sin and your shame I will spread far and wide.
Do you curse me? You have already; and now I
repay you, and rejoice that I am the instrument.
Peace!peace now, said Norman, fearful
woman. He no longer hears youhe is
dead!
Never fell the cold moonlight, even on that spot,
upon a group more hushed and awful.
CHAPTER XXIX.
A Scene of After-yearsThe storm-beaten Vessel reposes
in the Harbour
.
Fly, envious Time, till thou run out thy race!
On Time
Milton
Onward
, and still onward, speeds the flight of
time. Deaf, blind, relentlessfor nothing he stays
his wing. Ever with the same eternal haste he
presses on. Events that might astound the
universe
,
prayers that might pierce a fiend, never
delay
,
never melt him. Cities roar and are silent.
Empires rise and fall. Mountains bow their
icecrowned
thrones. Seas advance from their
unfathomed
beds. Even worlds, balanced in their
far places, burst asunder, and pass away in the
boundless deep of spaceand yet, even unpausing,
unpitying, unwondering, his course is on, and still
on!
Unpitying, did I say? No, dark, but slandered
divinity, not unpitying. Dread minister of
Providence
,
thou bringest peace as well as a sword. All
that can be spared, remains unharmed by thee; and
in thy path not only ruin lies, but joy and beauty.
It is thy hand that nursed the half-blown rose,
ripened the harvest, and reared the oak. Who
spread nature with the tender spring? Who
clothed the callow bird in his gorgeous coat, and
launched him on the breeze? Who brings every
object to its true use and perfection? Who sweeps
away prejudice and error? Who unveils lustrous
truth? Not all things fall beneath thy scythe. What
blow has thou stricken against Homer and
Shakspeare
,
more than to brighten their radiance, to
secure
their immortality? Does not all that is good
and noble triumph by thy aid? Will not the whole
globe, befriended by thee, grow wise and good?
Will not war and superstition, tyranny and vice, be
banished?
Four years! Like a breath they have passed.
A wreath of vapour, curling on the air, melts not
more lightly. Reader, you have turned a leafand
they are gone. Even so startingly rapid shows the
past. Yesterdayonly yesterdaywe were noisy
children on the green. Images were around all
bright and dear. Look you now what a
transformation
!
Youth is vanished. Yearshow we know
I 2
notare on our foreheads and in our hearts. As
in a theatrethe scene is changed. Other objects,
new characters are before us. They call us by
different names. They woo us to strange
enterprises
.
Go to the haunt of your boyhoodgo
with your grave, cold face, your wearied and
melancholy
heart: stand amid the careless and happy
forms that sport there to-day. You will strike them
with awe. The unshaded glance, the joyous laugh,
the high, happy shout, will be hushed till you pass.
Back from the scathed Europe, with its
footmarks
of gaunt and bloody ages, we are once again
in the fresh and happy scenes of a new world.
Upon the brow of a lovely bank, gorgeous with
massy verdure, and scented with wild perfume, a
white mansion shone through the trees.
Immediately
beneath swept a broad and crystal flood,
eddying and dimpling on its glad course in
sudden
bends and circling meanders. Never looked
the gentle sun on a scene more fair;never, even
in those spots by the Asiatic, the Greek, the Roman,
rendered immortal in story. Directly from the
silver
river sloped up wild and beautiful mountains,
which sometimes giant nature had rent asunder, and
left naked and blasted in perpendicular cliffs. The
shores were richly decked with towns,
countryseats
,
and cottages. The soft sky bent all
unclouded
above. Rich and sweet spread the scented
fields around.
The lovely seat to which we invite the reader
was exquisitely situated, surrounded by giant trees
and sylvan walks, and a fair promenade which led
down to the water's edge. On an ample portico, a
family group watched the changes of a magnificent
sunset.
In an arm-chair sat a silver-headed man, whose
person possessed all the mellow charm which manly
beauty receives from age. His white locks were
smoothed over his high brow with a majesty that at
once won respect and reverence. His face was
mild and happy; but years had impressed it with
heavy marksand yet more than yearssorrow.
A graceful form hung over his chair, with her
arm affectionately upon his shoulder; and by her
side a gentleman had drawn familiary.
It required no more than a glance to discover in
the two latter Julia and Howard; and in their aged
companion, the still noble, but much changed and
time-bowed form of Mordaunt Leslie.
As they thus sat, surrounded by wreathing vines
and bursting flowers, and enjoying the
mild-tempered
and illumined atmosphere, a beautiful child
of about three years, loaded with fruit and flowers,
and playing with a large curly-haired dog, came
laughing and running from a thicket.
There's Floracome, Flora! exclaimed all at
once.
When there is a kind-hearted grandfather, and a
sweet aunt, and a gentle uncle in the familyand
the father is adored as the lost one foundand the
mother is pronounced the
very
sweetest woman
in the worldthe only child, whatever may be its
claims, will be an angel of course. But the little
creature, now staggering under its pretty burden
which the almost laughing dog was sportively, we
had nearly said affectionately, endeavouring to pull
awaywas really altogether lovely. Look, reader!
Did you never see those blue eyes beforethat
little
smile, that lightly-pencilled browupon another
face?
A few moments after the appearance of the child,
two other figures emerged from the imbowered
walk, which wound charmingly in along the high
river-bank. The one was a gentleman, the other
17*
a fair girlyet not altogether a girl. Somewhat
there was in her face of sedateness which girlhood
never knew. Beautiful she wasmore beautiful
than ever! Happiness and love had shed on the
young wife of the wanderer new and dearer
charms. Health glowed on her cheek. She hung
on his arm familiarly and fondly. A moment ere
they came into view, he stopped and looked down
upon her. Back from her forehead he put the soft
hair unreproved. She returned his gaze with a
glance of steady, trusting love. His hand lingered
over her forehead, and he shaded her eyes with
it as one who peruses a painting.
Why do you look at me so? she asked, half
blushing.
It was one of my young dreams, Flora, he said,
thus to scan your facethus to meet your eyes
thus to avowthus to hear how we love each
other!
They approached the mansion.
Ah! there comes father!there comes
mother
!
said the old gentleman, releasing the sunny
infant
from a dear embrace; and off she ran and
bounded into her father's arms.
At this moment one of the magnificent steamers
which ply from New-York up the river to Albany
had sent ashore a boat. A single passenger
landed
.
Conceive the pleasure of all on recognising
Kreutzner, their old and valued friend.
The usual greetings were warmly exchanged,
and the new-comer was welcomed with the
sincerest
friendship and hospitality. When the first
glow of pleasure had subsided, he announced that
he had brought from Europe a letter for Norman.
For me!
Ay! said Kreutzner, handing it to himfrom
one of the most extraordinary of your acpuaintance.
It was sent to my lodgings, before I left Palermo,
with a note requesting me to deliver it into your
hands.
Norman took it eagerly, and broke the seal.
Flora leaned over his shoulder, read the signature,
and turned pale.
Bless mebless me! said Norman. Have
not the fates done with us yet? I thought we had
acted our parts; and with strong signs of
astonishment
he read the name of the Countess
D.
My dear friend, said Kreutzner, this
communication
,
I presume, will throw light upon the
character
of one of the most remarkable women I ever
met. To me it will be interesting to learn any thing
that concerns you; as, owing to our sudden
separation
at Rome, your own eventful story has never,
in any connected form, reached my ears.
There is little to tell, said Norman. The
singular discovery of Rosalie gratified the strongest
wish of my lifethe strongest but one, he said,
turning to Flora; which was, you see, in
consequence
,
gratified also. Miss Romain
Poor Rosalie! sighed Flora.
Miss Romain accompanied us home, where she
was identified by many, and where proper measures
were taken to make her identity and existence
public
.
She continued, however, for several months
after our arrival, the victim of an incurable insanity
shrinking from all who approached, with signs
of the most agonized apprehension and alarm;
sometimes singing and smiling; sometimes
praying
and weeping, and acting over again fragments
of the dreadful scenes through which she had
passed
.
At length she died.
And is nothing particular known of her flight?
No more than that she fled with that arch
villain
Clairmont, whose brutal cruelty drove her to
madness. The Countess D was deeply
implicated
in the affair, but most mysteriously. This
package will doubtless explain. There is one,
however, connected with my adventures in
Florence
,
whom I have met on this side the waterthe
Marquis Alezzi. Betrayed by the priest, who,
while he seemed the partner in a dangerous
conspiracy
,
was in fact only a
spy
, he was stripped of
most of his slender remaining possessions, and
banished from Italy. In this country he has sought
and found a shelter, and long resided in a southern
state. His present destiny I know not. There
are two more friends of mine, continued Norman,
from whom I am anxious to hear.
I have been much since in Rome and
Florence
,
said Kreutzner; I may chance to have
heard of them.
The one, rejoined Norman, is a most gifted
young artista sculptor.
Angelo N?
The same.
If you love him, I shall tell his fate with
reluctance
.
Speak.
He also, with Alezzi, was engaged in the
conspiracy
which occasioned so much talk at the time;
and he also, after having been led on by the priest
too far to retreat, was by him informed against,
and fell on the scaffold. I saw his head roll in the
dust.
Know you, demanded Norman, after a pause
and a slight shudderknow you the fair daughter
of Torrini?
That do I, and well too. She is the gem of
Florence. Young, gay, and beautiful, her joyous
face is pointed out to the stranger as the loveliest
at court. But you are aware of her change?
No. I wrote once, but the letter was
unanswered
.
She is the wife of Prince C, and a
brighter
and happier creature never floated in the dance.
But come, said Norman, the manuscript!
The curious circle gathered around him as he
read.
CHAPTER XXX.
The Manuscript of the CountessThe Mystery laid open
.
Chorus.All is best, though we oft doubt
What th' unsearchable dispose
Of highest Wisdom brings about,
And ever best found in the close.
Oft he seems to hide his face,
But unexpectedly returns,
And to his faithful champion hath in place
Bore witness gloriously.
Samson Agonistes
.
The
letter was written in a strong and bold hand.
It was as follows:
You will be surprised, Mr. Leslie, but not
displeased
,
at these few lines from me. I render them
to you as a duty. I should have performed it
before
,
but for a circumstance mentioned below. I am
going to sketch my history; not to solicit your
sympathy
,
but because it is closely interwoven with
your own. If I utter any sentiment in my own
extenuation
,
I 3
or in my praise, ascribe it, not to vanity,
but to
truth
. I have done with vanity and with
the world. Long before this reaches you I shall
be immured irrevocably within the walls of a holy
sisterhood, where not even the farthest of its
floating
rumours can reach me more. What have I to
do with vanity? I write as one dying, and you
may read my words as those of one
dead
. Dead!
oh, would to God I were!
Fifteen years ago, in the loveliest part of Italy,
there lived a family in easy circumstances, without
rank or fortune, without the wish to obtain them.
They were independent, enlightened, affectionate,
and happy. The villa they inhabited stood on the
seashore near Naples. That scene of heaven!I
will not even attempt to describe it.
The circle that gathered together in the happy
dwelling consisted of four:a kind old father; a
mother, only too fond and indulgent; a brother (I
feel the blood ebb from my cheek as I write); and
a young girl, the most joyous and light-hearted of
all creatures. Her face was ever illumined with a
smile of peace, purity, and happiness. There was
in her heart nothing but sunshine. It resembled
the heaven of her own radiant clime, as clear and
as fervid. Never had she known a sorrow, a
fear, a reproachnever had she heard of illnever
had she practised an artnever had she deceived
a being. She could not deceive. She was too
ingenuous
.
She knew naught of fashion, naught of
splendour. She was all simplicity and confidence,
all hope and truth.
Recall her whom you met at the Prince M's,
seated amid lords, dukes, and nobles, flashing with
diamonds; yet, which vainly flashed over a sternly
melancholy brow, over a dark and broken heart.
You suddenly pronounced to her a name which
struck every drop of blood in her veins to lightning.
Recall her calm look, her full, unflinching eyes.
Can you believe these two beings the same?
The same, did I say? No, there is not a
thought of my mind, an impulse of my heart, but
is now changed. All that then graced me has
vanished
all
that I then was incapable of I have since
learned. The world has so transformed me, that
I
,
who could not endure the gaze of a stranger, can
look down now the fiercest foe; I, who shuddered
at the death of a bird, now can, nay, have stood
tearless by the graves of all I ever loved.
I was nineteen when I met a young Neapolitan,
of very mean extraction, but of great beauty and
talent. It was Clairmont, though that was not his
name. We methe wooed me, he won me. I
had never loved before. I have never loved since.
Such as I love but once, and that once is either
heaven or hell! My story is the story of many a
maiden. The unfriended suiter solicited my hand
in vain. He was poor; and there were, moreover,
suspicions concerning his character, which, while
they made me only cling to him with deeper
devotion
,
caused others to shrink from his side as from
pollution. Love, with me, was more powerful than
all other considerations. It overwhelmed me. I
was whirled off upon its turbid and resistless tide
from all that I had been, all that I had hoped.
Father
,
mother, brother, all were then to me but the
worthless thistle-down that floats away on the
summer
gale. We loved. We married
secretly
. Eve
in Eden was never so happy, till one day I was
disturbed
from a blissful revery by the trampling of
hasty feet, as of men who bore a heavy burden. I
rose. A shriek met my ear from the lips of my
mothera groan from my father. Startled with
fears of I knew not what, I rushed to the chamber
I saweven now my brain whirls at the
recollection
!several
stranger forms: in their hold was
apparently a dead body. The arms and head hung
heavily, lifeless; the hair fell back from the
forehead
,
clotted with gore. It was my brother! He
cast his eyes on me.
`Rinaldo!' he murmured, and died.
We had been watched. My generous and
high-tempered
brother had traced me to Rinaldo. They
fought; and the never-failing pistol of my husband
had lodged a bullet almost in his heart.
I pass over that period. My father and
mother
,
both old, soon followed their darling boy. I was
left with all their property. Rinaldo had fled. I
was alone, and a mother.
Still mad with the passion with which
Clairmont
for
by that name you know himhad
inspired
me, I followed him to Venice. For his love,
what had I not sacrificed?parents, brother,
happiness
!
On rejoining him who had thus bereft me,
I found him cold. He no longer caressed me.
Strange companions lured him from my side.
Strange and mysterious enterprises occupied his
hours. I was unloved, unheeded, almost forgotten.
From many circumstances, I was induced to fear
that I was linked to a villain. I strove tremblingly,
and in anguish, to crush my apprehensions.
At length, one day he announced his intention
of leaving me for an indefinite timeme and my
bright boy! I found growing up in myself then a
new energya power, a fire, equal to his own. I
begged, I prayed; and when he turned away deaf
and cold, I started to my feet, and, with flashing
eyes, I
threatened
him. It was the first unfolding
of that character which neither he nor I knew
belonged
to my nature. It was the first uncoiling of
the basilisk within me. He gazed on me
incredulously
,
and coolly smiled. You remember that
smile!I fainted.
When I recovered he was gone! It was two
years before I could trace him. At length I found
he had sailed for America. I followed him in the
depth of winterI and my child. I knew not that
he resided in New-York; I knew not the name he
had assumed; and I was struck mute with
astonishment
in your city on beholding, surrounded by
fair ladies, the form of my husband, still beautiful
and still adored. You know the rest. My
agitation
had nearly cost me my life, when your daring
arm rescued me from those fierce steeds. I had
seen you before I discovered Clairmont; and,
without
meaning to flatter, they who see you once do
not forget you. Again I saw you subsequently
with Miss Romain. Hence I recognised you
immediately
at Torrini's in Florence.
On recovering from the terror, less of the
accident
than of the discovery by which it was
occasioned
,
I ascertained Clairmont's address; and the
next morning, after being rudely denied admission,
I at length succeeded in gaining an interview. Once
more I entreated, and once more I threatened.
Here I found my threats of more avail, for here his
plans were high and audacious, having conceived
the design of marrying a very wealthy and
beautiful
girl. I accused him of it. He smiled again,
and bade me learn that I was not his wife. The
ceremony had been a feigned one. I would have
cried him through the city for a villain; but, with
a look so sardonic that it affrighted even me, he
solemnly swore that if I breathed his name to any
human being, he would sacrifice every hope, every
consideration, and never sleep till he had taken the
life of myself or my child. He then frankly
confessed
that his passion for Miss Temple was only a
18
maskhe loved her not.
Me
, he said, he loved.
It was his intention to fly when he could raise a
large sum of money; and he declared that I should
be his companion. To what degradation had I
fallen
,
that even after thissuch was my infatuation,
such my loveI consented. He even went so far
as to promise to depart by a certain time. I have
reason to believe that the lady whose fortune he
pursued disliked and rejected him; for, after some
time, he altered his plans, and had proposed to raise
money by a mock union with another, the
miserable
victim with whom But let me not be in
advance
of my story. Rosalie Romain yielded to
his flatteries. By the arts in which he was so
proficient
,
he completely fascinated her, and prevailed
upon her to fly, and to carry with her, upon her
person, a number of diamonds of which she was
very fond, and which he hoped to find sufficient for
the demands of his necessities, which were great.
Against you he had conceived so mortal a hatred,
that, as I subsequently learned, he had already
attempted
your life. He also circulated against you
the most malignant slanders. Partly by
persuasions
,
partly by threats, he had prevailed upon me
to be a participator in the game he was about to
play. He swore to me that, once in Europe, he
would send home again the girl; it was only for
the jewels she brought him that he had wooed her
that he could not procure them unless she fled
with us; that he would marry
me
in Europe, where,
he said, a large sum would soon fall into his hands
from his brother Ambrose: and he threatened me
with the most dreadful revenge if I refused. It was
I, then, who received Rosalie Romain from your
hands on the day of your mysterious ride. It was
then that I saw and knew you. The gig belonged
to Clairmont. Late in the evening he drove us to
town, and left us to walk alone to a boat that was
to carry us on board a vessel which sailed in the
morning for Naples, while he returned the gig to
his servant, who waited at the hotel. In that walk
we encountered yourself and Miss Temple on the
Battery. We hastened on board. I passed for the
mistress, to avoid suspicion, and she for my maid.
She being ill all the voyage, I only was seen. I
was at once known as an Italian lady: we thus
eluded
any inquiries which, when suspicion fell on
you, might have been that way directed. The
vessel
did not sail till the next afternoon. Clairmont
was in the act of coming down; his baggage was
all packed and ready in his chamber, and left to the
direction of his valet, when you encountered him,
and inflicted upon him that new rancorous wound,
which only ceased to sting and torture him in death.
He rushed to his chamber. His temper was
lashed
to its highest, wildest paroxysm of rage and
revenge
,
when the valet accidentally mentioned what
he had heard in the hotel. The disappearance of
Miss Romain had already created a sensation
through the town, and a report had been started that
you had
murdered her
. From that moment his
hellish mind was fixed. He sent a message to me,
stating that, by force or art, I must silence the voice
of Rosalie Romain; that the vessel
must
go
without
him; that the valet would accompany us in his
stead, and that he would, by a Havre ship, meet us
on our landing at Naples. So artfully was it
managed
that we complied, scarce comprehending what
it meant. Rosalie was sick during the whole
passage
.
We met Clairmont a long time after our
arrival
.
The valet had received instructions to
conceal
us, if possible, from all observation. This he
effectually did; but, just before our meeting with
Clairmont, died of a fever. It was Clairmont who
flung the hat and feathers on the stream, and the
handkerchief in the wood. He remained some
time after in America, to guard himself from
suspicion
.
On his arrival in Europe, he had a most
difficult
game to play. It was his determination to
conceal Rosalie Romain from human eyes, that the
suspicion might never be withdrawn from you. I
soon learned to hate the villain more ardently than
I had ever loved him; but, while I hated, I also
feared him. A character so malignant mastered
mine. I knew him capable of the most fiendish
actions, and I soon had an instance of it. Miss
Romain, on finding her situation, and the cruel
baseness of her lover, lost her senses, became a
confirmed maniac, and was most secretly confined
at Rome, under the superintendence of the priest
Ambrose, the brother of Clairmont, and, like him,
a villain. Lest this should be betrayed by me, he
obtained possession of my boy, in whom he knew
my soul was bound up. With this grasp on me,
he told me, with the triumphant hate and ferocity
of a devil, that if ever I betrayed him, nay, if ever
he suspected me, the young head I loved most
should be crushed in the grave. I shuddered. I
believed. I obeyed. How well I kept the secret,
you
can testify.
At Prince M's you unknowingly informed
me of the place where my boy was concealed. I
hastened to his rooms in disguise, when I knew the
priest was away, and recovered my lost treasure.
I should have said, that, on first parting with
Clairmont
,
I had yielded to the solicitations of Count
D, and become his wife. With the intention
of gaining possession of her person, that I might
commit her to your charge, I unlocked the prison
of Rosalie Romain; but, with the subtlety of
madness
,
she eluded my care, and escaped into the
crowded streets. You know the rest. The angel
boy is dead. I have no longer any reason to guard
my reputation. May you be happy.
My
heart is
ice. I have performed my duty. Farewell
for
ever!
THE END.