JACK TIER.
CHAPTER I.
The night has been unruly: where we lay,
Our chimneys were blown down: and, as they say,
Lamentings heard i' the air; strange screams of death;
And prophesying, with accents terrible,
Of dire combustion, and confused events,
New hatched to the woful time.
Macbeth
.
It
is seldom that man is required to make an exertion
as desperate and appalling, in all its circumstances, as that
on which Harry Mulford was now bent. The night was
starlight, it was true, and it was possible to see objects
near by with tolerable distinctness; still, it was midnight,
and the gloom of that hour rested on the face of the sea,
lending its solemn mystery and obscurity to the other
trying
features of the undertaking. Then there was the
uncertainty whether it was the boat at all, of which he
was in pursuit; and, if the boat, it might drift away from
him as fast as he could follow it. Nevertheless, the
perfect
conviction that, without some early succour, the party
on the wreck, including Rose Budd, must inevitably perish,
stimulated him to proceed, and a passing feeling of doubt,
touching the prudence of his course, that came over the
young mate, when he was a few yards from the wreck,
vanished under a vivid renewal of this last conviction. On
he swam, therefore, riveting his eye on the thoughtful
star that guided his course, and keeping his mind as
tranquil as possible, in order that the exertions of his body
might be the easier.
Mulford was an excellent swimmer. The want of food
was a serious obstacle to his making one of his best efforts,
but, as yet, he was not very sensible of any great loss of
strength. Understanding fully the necessity of swimming
easily, if he would swim long, he did not throw out all his
energy at first, but made the movements of his limbs as
regular, continued, and skilful as possible. No strength
was thrown away, and his progress was in proportion to
the prudence of this manner of proceeding. For some
twenty minutes he held on his course, in this way, when
he began to experience a little of that weariness which is
apt to accompany an unremitted use of the same set of
muscles, in a monotonous and undeviating mode.
Accustomed
to all the resources of his art, he turned on his back,
for the double purpose of relieving his arms for a minute,
and of getting a glimpse of the wreck, if possible, in
order
to ascertain the distance he had overcome. Swim
long in this new manner, however, he could not with
prudence, as the star was necessary in order to keep the
direct line of his course. It may be well to explain to
some of our readers, that, though the surface of the
ocean may be like glass, as sometimes really happens, it is
never absolutely free from the long, undulating motion that
is known by the name of a ground swell. This swell,
on the present occasion, was not very heavy, but it was
sufficient to place our young mate, at moments, between
two dark mounds of water, that limited his view in either
direction to some eighty or a hundred yards; then it raised
him on the summit of a rounded wave, that enabled him
to see, far as his eye could reach under that obscure light.
Profiting by this advantage, Mulford now looked behind
him, in quest of the wreck, but uselessly. It might have
been in the trough, while he was thus on the summit of
the waves, or it might be that it floated so low as to be
totally lost to the view of one whose head was scarcely
above the surface of the water. For a single instant, the
young man felt a chill at his heart, as he fancied that the
wreck had already sunk; but it passed away when he
recalled
the slow progress by which the air escaped, and he
saw the certainty that the catastrophe, however inevitable,
could not yet have really arrived. He waited for another
swell to lift him on its summit, when, by treading water,
he raised his head and shoulders fairly above the surface
1*
of the sea, and strained his eyes in another vain effort to
catch a glimpse of the wreck. He could not see it. In
point of fact, the mate had swum much further than he had
supposed, and was already so distant as to render any such
attempt hopeless. He was fully a third of a mile distant
from the point of his departure.
Disappointed, and in a slight degree disheartened,
Mulford
turned, and swam in the direction of the sinking star.
He now looked anxiously for the boat. It was time that it
came more plainly into view, and a new source of anxiety
beset him, as he could discover no signs of its vicinity.
Certain that he was on the course, after making a due
allowance
for the direction of the wind, the stout-hearted
young man swam on. He next determined not to annoy
himself by fruitless searches, or vain regrets, but to swim
steadily for a certain time, a period long enough to carry
him a material distance, ere he again looked for the object
of his search.
For twenty minutes longer did that courageous and
active
youth struggle with the waste of waters, amid the
obscurity
and solitude of midnight. He now believed himself
near a mile from the wreck, and the star which had so long
served him for a beacon was getting near to the horizon.
He took a new observation of another of the heavenly
bodies nigh it, to serve him in its stead when it should
disappear
altogether, and then he raised himself in the water,
and looked about again for the boat. The search was in
vain. No boat was very near him, of a certainty, and the
dreadful apprehension began to possess his mind, of
perishing
uselessly in that waste of gloomy waters. While thus
gazing about him, turning his eyes in every quarter, hoping
intently to catch some glimpse of the much-desired object
in the gloom, he saw two dark, pointed objects, that
resembled
small stakes, in the water within twenty feet of him.
Mulford knew them at a glance, and a cold shudder passed
through his frame, as he recognised them. They were,
out of all question, the fins of an enormous shark; an
animal
that could not measure less than eighteen or twenty
feet in length.
It is scarcely necessary to say, that when our young mate
discovered the proximity of this dangerous animal, situated
as he was, he gave himself up for lost. He possessed his
knife, however, and had heard of the manner in which even
sharks were overcome, and that too in their own element,
by the skilful and resolute. At first, he was resolved to
make one desperate effort for life, before he submitted to a
fate as horrible as that which now menaced him; but the
movements of his dangerous neighbour induced him to wait.
It did not approach any nearer, but continued swimming
back and fro, on the surface of the water, according to the
known habits of the fish, as if watching his own movements.
There being no time to be wasted, our young mate turned
on his face, and began again to swim in the direction of
the setting star, though nearly chilled by despair. For ten
minutes longer did he struggle on, beginning to feel
exhaustion
,
however, and always accompanied by those two
dark, sharp and gliding fins. There was no difficulty in
knowing the position of the animal, and Mulford's eyes
were oftener on those fins than on the beacon before him.
Strange as it may appear, he actually became accustomed
to the vicinity of this formidable creature, and soon felt his
presence a sort of relief against the dreadful solitude of his
situation. He had been told by seamen of instances, and
had once witnessed a case himself, in which a shark had
attended a swimming man for a long distance, either
forbearing
to do him harm, from repletion, or influenced by
that awe which nature has instilled into all of the inferior,
for the highest animal of the creation. He began to think
that he was thus favoured, and really regarded the shark as
a friendly neighbour, rather than as a voracious foe. In
this manner did the two proceed, nearly another third of a
mile, the fins sometimes in sight ahead, gliding hither and
thither, and sometimes out of view behind the swimmer,
leaving him in dreadful doubts as to the movements of the
fish, when Mulford suddenly felt something hard hit his
foot. Believing it to be the shark, dipping for his prey, a
slight exclamation escaped him. At the next instant both
feet hit the unknown substance again, and he stood erect,
the water no higher than his waist! Quick, and
comprehending
everything connected with the sea, the young man
at once understood that he was on a part of the reef where
the water was so shallow as to admit of his wading.
Mulford felt that he had been providentially rescued from
death. His strength had been about to fail him, when he
was thus led, unknown to himself, to a spot where his life
might yet be possibly prolonged for a few more hours, or
days. He had leisure to look about him, and to reflect on
what was next to be done. Almost unwittingly, he turned
in quest of his terrible companion, in whose voracious
mouth he had actually believed himself about to be
immolated
,
a few seconds before. There the two horn-like fins
still were, gliding about above the water, and indicating
the smallest movement of their formidable owner. The
mate observed that they went a short distance ahead of him,
describing nearly a semi-circle, and then returned, doing
the same thing in his rear, repeating the movements
incessantly
,
keeping always on his right. This convinced him
that shoaler water existed on his left hand, and he waded
in that direction, until he reached a small spot of naked
rock.
For a time, at least, he was safe! The fragment of coral
on which the mate now stood, was irregular in shape, but
might have contained a hundred feet square in superficial
measurement, and was so little raised above the level of
the water as not to be visible, even by daylight, at the
distance
of a hundred yards. Mulford found it was perfectly
dry, however, an important discovery to him, as by a close
calculation he had made of the tides, since quitting the Dry
Tortugas, he knew it must be near high water. Could he
have even this small portion of bare rock secure, it made
him, for the moment, rich as the most extensive landholder
living. A considerable quantity of sea-weed had lodged
on the rock, and, as most of this was also quite dry, it
convinced
the young sailor that the place was usually bare.
But, though most of this sea-weed was dry, there were
portions
of the more recent accessions there that still lay in,
or quite near to the water, which formed exceptions. In
handling these weeds, in order to ascertain the facts,
Mulford
caught a small shell-fish, and finding it fresh and easy
to open, he swallowed it with the eagerness of a famishing
man. Never had food proved half so grateful to him as
that single swallow of a very palatable testaceous animal.
By feeling further, he found several others of the same
family, and made quite as large a meal, as, under the
circumstances
,
was probably good for him. Then, grateful
for his escape, but overcome by fatigue, he hastily arranged
a bed of sea-weed, drew a portion of the plant over his body,
to keep him warm, and fell into a deep sleep that lasted for
hours.
Mulford did not regain his consciousness until the rays
of the rising sun fell upon his eye-lids, and the genial
warmth of the great luminary shed its benign influence
over his frame. At first his mind was confused, and it
required
a few seconds to bring a perfect recollection of the
past, and a true understanding of his real situation. They
came, however, and the young man moved to the highest
part of his little domain, and cast an anxious, hurried look
around in quest of the wreck. A knowledge of the course
in which he had swum, aided by the position of the sun,
told him on what part of the naked waste to look for the
object he sought. God had not yet forsaken them! There
was the wreck; or, it might be more exact to say, there
were those whom the remaining buoyancy of the wreck
still upheld from sinking into the depths of the gulf. In
point of fact, but a very little of the bottom of the vessel
actually remained above water, some two or three yards
square at most, and that little was what seamen term nearly
awash. Two or three hours must bury that small portion
of the still naked wood beneath the surface of the sea,
though sufficient buoyancy might possibly remain for the
entire day still to keep the living from death.
There the wreck was, however, yet floating; and, though
not visible to Mulford, with a small portion of it above
water. He saw the four persons only; and what was more,
they saw him. This was evident by Jack Tier's waving
his hat like a man cheering. When Mulford returned this
signal, the shawl of Rose was tossed into the air, in a way
to leave no doubt that he was seen and known. The
explanation
of this early recognition and discovery of the
young mate was very simple. Tier was not asleep when
Harry left the wreck, though, seeing the importance of the
step the other was taking, he had feigned to be so. When
Rose awoke, missed her lover, and was told what had
happened
,
her heart was kept from sinking by his encouraging
tale and hopes. An hour of agony had succeeded,
nevertheless
,
when light returned and no Mulford was to be seen.
The despair that burst upon the heart of our heroine was
followed by the joy of discovering him on the rock.
It is scarcely necessary to say how much the parties were
relieved on ascertaining their respective positions. Faint
as were the hopes of each of eventual delivery, the two or
three minutes that succeeded seemed to be minutes of
perfect
happiness. After this rush of unlooked-for joy,
Mulford
continued his intelligent examination of surrounding
objects.
The wreck was fully half a mile from the rock of the
mate, but much nearer to the reef than it had been the
previous night. Could it but ground on the rocks,
thought the young man, it would be a most blessed
event. The thing was possible, though the first half hour
of his observations told him that its drift was in the
direction
of the open passage so often named, rather than toward
the nearest rocks. Still, that drift brought Rose each
minute nearer and nearer to himself again. In looking
round, however, the young man saw the boat. It was a
quarter of a mile distant, with open water between them,
apparently grounded on a rock, for it was more within the
reef than he was himself. He must have passed it in the
dark, and the boat had been left to obey the wind and
currents
,
and to drift to the spot where it then lay.
Mulford shouted aloud when he saw the boat, and at
once determined to swim in quest of it, as soon as he had
collected a little refreshment from among the sea-weed. On
taking a look at his rock by daylight, he saw that its size
was quadrupled to the eye by the falling of the tide, and
that water was lying in several of the cavities of its uneven
surface. At first he supposed this to be sea-water, left by
the flood; but, reflecting a moment, he remembered the
rain, and hoped it might be possible that one little cavity,
containing two or three gallons of the fluid, would turn out
to be fresh. Kneeling beside it, he applied his lips in
feverish
haste, and drank the sweetest draught that had ever
passed his lips. Slaking his thirst, which had begun again
to be painfully severe, he arose with a heart overflowing
with gratitudecould he only get Rose to that narrow and
barren rock, it would seem to be an earthly paradise.
Mulford
next made his scanty, but, all things considered,
sufficient
meal, drank moderately afterward, and then turned
his attention and energies toward the boat, which, though
now aground and fast, might soon float on the rising tide,
and drift once more beyond his reach. It was his first
intention
to swim directly for his object; but, just when about
to enter the water, he saw with horror the fins of at least a
dozen sharks, which were prowling about in the deeper water
of the reef, and almost encircling his hold. To throw
himself
in the midst of such enemies would be madness, and
he stopped to reflect, and again to look about him. For
the first time that morning, he took a survey of the entire
horizon, to see if anything were in sight; for, hitherto, his
thoughts had been too much occupied with Rose and her
companions, to remember anything else. To the
northward
and westward he distinctly saw the upper sails of a
large ship, that was standing on a wind to the northward
and eastward. As there was no port to which a vessel of
that character would be likely to be bound in the quarter
of the Gulf to which such a course would lead, Mulford at
once inferred it was the sloop-of-war, which, after having
examined the islets, at the Dry Tortugas, and finding them
deserted, was beating up, either to go into Key West, or
to pass to the southward of the reef again, by the passage
through which she had come as lately as the previous day.
This was highly encouraging; and could he only get to the
boat, and remove the party from the wreck before it sunk,
there was now every prospect of a final escape.
To the southward, also, the mate fancied he saw a sail.
It was probably a much smaller vessel than the ship in the
north-west, and at a greater distance. It might, however,
be the lofty sails of some large craft; standing along the
reef, going westward, bound to New Orleans, or to that
new and important port, Point Isabel: or it might be some
wrecker, or other craft, edging away into the passage. As
it was, it appeared only as a speck in the horizon; and was
too far off to offer much prospect of succour.
Thus acquainted with the state of things around him,
Mulford gave his attention seriously to his duties. He was
chiefly afraid that the returning tide might lift the boat
from the rock on which it had grounded, and that it would
float beyond his reach. Then there was the frightful and
ever-increasing peril of the wreck, and the dreadful fate
that so inevitably menaced those that it held, were not
relief
prompt. This thought goaded him nearly to
desperation
,
and he felt at moments almost ready to plunge into
the midst of the sharks, and fight his way to his object.
But reflection showed him a less hazardous way of
making
an effort to reach the boat. The sharks' fins described
a semicircle only, as had been the case of his single
attendant
during the night, and he thought that the shealness of
the water prevented their going further than they did, in a
south-easterly direction, which was that of the boat. He
well knew that a shark required sufficient water to sink
beneath its prey, ere it made its swoop, and that it
uniformly
turned on its back, and struck upward whenever it
gave one of its voracious bites. This was owing to the
greater length of its upper than of its lower jaw, and
Mulford
had heard it was a physical necessity of its formation.
Right or wrong, he determined to act on this theory, and
began at once to wade along the part of the reef that his
enemies seemed unwilling to approach.
Had our young mate a weapon of any sort larger than
his knife, he would have felt greater confidence in his
success
.
As it was, however, he drew that knife, and was
prepared to sell his life dearly should a foe assail him. No
sooner was his step heard in the water, than the whole
group of sharks were set in violent motion, glancing past,
and frequently quite near him, as if aware their intended
prey was about to escape. Had the water deepened much,
Harry would have returned at once, for a conflict with such
numbers would have been hopeless; but it did not; on the
contrary, it shoaled again, after a very short distance, at
which it had been waist-deep; and Mulford found himself
wading over a long, broad surface of rock, and that directly
toward the boat, through water that seldom rose above his
knees, and which, occasionally, scarce covered his feet.
There was no absolutely naked rock near him, but there
seemed to be acres of that which might be almost said to
be awash. Amid the greedy throng that endeavoured to
accompany him, the mate even fancied he recognised the
enormous fins of his old companion, who sailed to and fro
in the crowd in a stately manner, as if merely a curious
looker-on of his own movements. It was the smaller, and
probably the younger sharks, that betrayed the greatest
hardihood and voracity. One or two of these made fierce
swoops toward Harry, as if bent on having him at every
hazard; but they invariably glided off when they found
their customary mode of attack resisted by the shoalness
of the water.
Our young mate got ahead but slowly, being obliged to
pay a cautious attention to the movements of his escort.
Sometimes he was compelled to wade up to his arms in
order to cross narrow places, that he might get on portions
of the rock that were nearly bare; and once he was
actually
compelled to swim eight or ten yards. Nevertheless,
he did get on, and after an hour of this sort of work, he
found himself within a hundred yards of the boat, which
lay grounded near a low piece of naked rock, but separated
from it by a channel of deep water, into which all the
sharks rushed in a body, as if expressly to cut off his
escape
.
Mulford now paused to take breath, and to consider
what ought to be done. On the spot where he stood he
was quite safe, though ancle-deep in the sea, the shallow
water extending to a considerable distance on all sides of
him, with the single exception of the channel in his front.
He stood on the very verge of that channel, and could see
in the pellucid element before him, that it was deep enough
to float a vessel of some size.
To venture into the midst of twenty sharks required
desperation, and Harry was not yet reduced to that. He
had been so busy in making his way to the point where he
stood as to have no leisure to look for the wreck; but he
now turned his eyes in quest of that all-interesting object.
He saw the shawl fluttering in the breeze, and that was all
he could see. Tier had contrived to keep it flying as a
signal where he was to be found, but the hull of the schooner
had sunk so low in the water that they who were seated
on its keel were not visible even at the short distance which
now separated them from Mulford. Encouraged by this
signal, and animated by the revived hope of still saving his
companions, Harry turned toward the channel, half inclined
Vol. II.2
to face every danger rather than to wait any longer. At
that moment the fins were all gliding along the channel
from him, and in the same direction. Some object drew
the sharks away in a body, and the young mate let himself
easily into the water, and swam as noiselessly as he could
toward the boat.
It was a fearful trial, but Mulford felt that everything
depended on his success. Stimulated by his motive, and
strengthened by the food and water taken an hour before,
never had he shown so much skill and power in the water.
In an incredibly short period he was half-way across the
channel, still swimming strong and unharmed. A few
strokes more sent him so near the boat that hope took full
possession of his soul, and he shouted in exultation. That
indiscreet but natural cry, uttered so near the surface of
the sea, turned every shark upon him, as the pack springs
at the fox in view. Mulford was conscious of the folly of
his cry the instant it escaped him, and involuntarily he
turned his head to note the effect on his enemies. Every
fin was gliding toward hima dark array of swift and
furious
foes. Ten thousand bayonets, levelled in their line,
could not have been one-half as terrible, and the efforts of
the young man became nearly frantic. But strong as he
was, and ready in the element, what is the movement of a
man in the water compared to that of a vigorous and
voracious fish? Mulford could see those fins coming on like
a tempest, and he had just given up all hope, and was
feeling
his flesh creep with terror, when his foot hit the rock.
Giving himself an onward plunge, he threw his body
upward toward the boat, and into so much shoaler water,
at least a dozen feet by that single effort. Recovering his
legs as soon as possible, he turned to look behind him.
The water seemed alive with fins, each pair gliding back
and forth, as the bull-dog bounds in front of the ox's
muzzle
.
Just then a light-coloured object glanced past the
young man, so near as almost to touch him. It was a
shark that had actually turned on its back to seize its prey,
and was only prevented from succeeding by being driven
from the line of its course by hitting the slimy rock, over
which it was compelled to make its plunge. The
momentum
with which it came on, added to the inclination of the
rock, forced the head and half of the body of this terrible
assailant into the air, giving the intended victim an
opportunity
of seeing from what a fate he had escaped. Mulford
avoided this fish without much trouble, however, and the
next instant he threw himself into the boat, on the bottom
of which he lay panting with the violence of his exertions,
and unable to move under the reaction which now came
over his system.
The mate lay in the bottom of the boat, exhausted and
unable to rise, for several minutes; during that space he
devoutly returned thanks to God for his escape, and
bethought
him of the course he was next to pursue, in order
to effect the rescue of his companions. The boat was
larger than common. It was also well equippeda mast
and sail lying along with the oars, on its thwarts. The
rock placed Harry to windward of the wreck, and by the
time he felt sufficiently revived to rise and look about him,
his plan of proceeding was fully arranged in his own mind.
Among other things that he saw, as he still lay in the
bottom
of the boat, was a breaker which he knew contained
fresh water, and a bread-bag. These were provisions that
it was customary for the men to make, when employed on
boat duty; and the articles had been left where he now
saw them, in the hurry of the movements, as the brig quitted
the islets.
Harry rose the instant he felt his strength returning.
Striking the breaker with his foot, and feeling the basket
with a hand, he ascertained that the one held its water, and
the other its bread. This was immense relief, for by this
time the sufferings of the party on the wreck must be
returning
with redoubled force. The mate then stepped the
mast, and fitted the sprit to the sail, knowing that the latter
would be seen fluttering in the wind by those on the wreck,
and carry joy to their hearts. After this considerate act,
he began to examine into the position of the boat. It was
still aground, having been left by the tide; but the water
had already risen several inches, and by placing himself
on a gunwale, so as to bring the boat on its bilge, and
pushing
with an oar, he soon got it into deep water. It only
remained to haul aft the sheet, and right the helm, to be
standing through the channel, at a rate that promised a
speedy deliverance to his friends, and, most of all, to
Rose.
Mulford glanced past the rocks and shoals, attended by
the whole company of the sharks. They moved before,
behind, and on each side of him, as if unwilling to
abandon
their prey, even after he had got beyond the limits of
their power to do him harm. It was not an easy thing to
manage the boat in that narrow and crooked channel, with
no other guide for the courses than the eye, and it required
so much of the mate's vigilance to keep clear of the sharp
angles of the rocks, that he could not once cast his eyes
aside, to look for the fluttering shawl, which now composed
the standing signal of the wreck. At length the boat shot
through the last passage of the reef, and issued into open
water. Mulford knew that he must come out half a mile
at least to leeward of his object, and, without even raising
his head, he flattened in the sheet, put his helm down, and
luffed close to the wind. Then, and then only, did he
venture
to look around him.
Our mate felt his heart leap toward his mouth, as he
observed the present state of the wreck. It was dead to
windward of him, in the first place, and it seemed to be
entirely submerged. He saw the shawl fluttering as before;
for Tier had fastened one corner to a button-hole of his
own jacket, and another to the dress of Biddy, leaving the
part which might be called the fly, to rise at moments
almost perpendicularly in the air, in a way to render it
visible at some distance. He saw also the heads and the
bodies of those on the schooner's bottom, but to him they
appeared to be standing in, or on, the water. The
distance
may have contributed a little to this appearance, but
no doubt remained that so much air had escaped from the
hold of the vessel, as to permit it to sink altogether beneath
the surface of the sea. It was time, indeed, to proceed to
the relief of the sufferers.
Notwithstanding the boat sailed particularly fast, and
worked beautifully, it could not equal the impatience of
Mulford to get on. Passing away to the north-east a
sufficient
distance, as he thought, to weather on the wreck,
the young man tacked at last, and had the happiness to see
that every foot he proceeded was now in a direct line
toward
Rose. It was only while tacking he perceived that
all the fins had disappeared. He felt little doubt that they
had deserted him, in order to push for the wreck, which
offered so much larger, and so much more attainable prey.
This increased his feverish desire to get on, the boat
seeming
to drag, in his eyes, at the very moment it was leaving
a wake full of eddies and little whirlpools. The wind was
steady, but it seemed to Mulford that the boat was set to
leeward of her course by a current, though this could
hardly have been the case, as the wreck, the sole mark of
his progress, would have had at least as great a drift as the
boat. At length Mulfordto him it appeared to be an age;
in truth it was after a run of about twenty minutescame
near the goal he so earnestly sought, and got an accurate
view of the state of the wreck, and of those on it. The
hull of the schooner had, in truth, sunk entirely beneath
the surface of the sea; and the party it sustained stood
already knee-deep in the water. This was sufficiently
appalling
;
but the presence of the sharks, who were crowding
around the spot, rendered the whole scene frightful. To
the young mate it seemed as if he must still be too late to
save Rose from a fate more terrible than drowning, for his
boat fell so far to leeward as to compel him to tack once
more. As he swept past the wreck, he called out to
encourage
his friends, begging them to be of good heart for
five minutes longer, when he should be able to reach them.
Rose held out her arms entreatingly, and the screams of
Mrs. Budd and Biddy, which were extorted by the closer
and closer approach of the sharks, proclaimed the
imminency
of the danger they ran, and the importance of not
losing a moment of time.
Mulford took his distance with a seaman's eye, and the
boat went about like a top. The latter fell off, and the sail
filled on the other tack. Then the young mariner saw,
with a joy no description can pourtray, that he looked to
windward of the fluttering shawl, toward which his little
craft was already flying. He afterward believed that shawl
alone prevented the voracious party of fish from assailing
those on the wreck, for, though there might not yet be
sufficient
depth of water to allow of their customary mode of
attack, creatures of their voracity did not always wait for
such conveniences. But the boat was soon in the midst
2*
of the fins, scattering them in all directions; and Mulford
let go his sheet, put his helm down, and sprang forward to
catch the extended arms of Rose.
It might have been accident, or it might have been the
result of skill and interest in our heroine, but certain it is,
that the bows of the boat came on the wreck precisely at
the place where Rose stood, and her hand was the first
object
that the young man touched.
Take my aunt first, cried Rose, resisting Mulford's
efforts to lift her into the boat; she is dreadfully alarmed,
and can stand with difficulty.
Although two of Rose's activity and lightness might have
been drawn into the boat, while the process was going on
in behalf of the widow, Mulford lost no time in discussion,
but did as he was desired. First directing Tier to hold on
to the painter, he applied his strength to the arms of Mrs.
Budd, and, assisted by Rose and Biddy, got her safely into
the boat, over its bows. Rose now waited not for
assistance
,
but followed her aunt with a haste that proved fear
lent her strength in despite her long fast. Biddy came
next, though clumsily, and not without trouble, and Jack
Tier followed the instant he was permitted so to do. Of
course, the boat, no longer held by its painter, drifted away
from the spot, and the hull of the schooner, relieved from
the weight of four human beings, rose so near the surface
again as to bring a small line of its keel out of water. No
better evidence could have been given of the trifling power
which sustained it, and of the timely nature of the succour
brought by Mulford. Had the boat remained near the
schooner, it would have been found half an hour later that
the hull had sunk slowly out of sight, finding its way,
doubtless, inch by inch, toward the bottom of the Gulf.
By this time the sun was well up, and the warmth of the
hour, season, and latitude, was shed on the sufferers.
There was an old sail in the boat, and in this the party
dried their limbs and feet, which were getting to be numb
by their long immersion. Then the mate produced the
bag and opened it, in quest of bread. A small portion was
given to each, and, on looking farther, the mate discovered
that a piece of boiled ship's beef had been secreted in this
receptacle. Of this also he gave each a moderate slice,
taking a larger portion for himself, as requiring less
precaution
.
The suffering of the party from hunger was far less
than that they endured from thirst. Neither had been
endured long enough seriously to enfeeble them or render
a full meal very dangerous, but the thirst had been much
the hardest to be borne. Of this fact Biddy soon gave
audible evidence.
The mate is good, she said, and the bread tastes
swate and refreshing, but wather is a blessed thing. Can
you no give us one dhrap of the wather that falls from
heaven
,
Mr. Mulford; for this wather of the saa is of no use
but to drown Christians in?
In an instant the mate had opened a breaker, and filled
the tin pot which is almost always to be found in a boat.
Biddy said no more, but her eyes pleaded so eloquently,
that Rose begged the faithful creature might have the first
drink. One eager swallow went down, and then a cry of
disappointment succeeded. The water was salt, and had
been put in the breaker for ballast. The other breaker
was tried with the same success.
It is terrible to be without one drop of water,
murmured
Rose, and this food makes it more necessary than
ever.
Patience, patience, dearest Rosepatience for ten
minutes, and you shall all drink, answered the mate, filling
the sail and keeping the boat away while speaking. There
is water, God be praised, on the rock to which I first swam,
and we will secure it before another day's sun help to make
it evaporate.
This announcement quieted the longings of those who
endured a thirst which disappointment rendered doubly
hard to bear; and away the boat glided toward the rock.
As he now flew over the distance, lessened more than
one-half
by the drift of the wreck, Mulford recalled the scene
through which he had so painfully passed the previous night.
As often happens, he shuddered at the recollection of things
which, at the moment, a desperate resolution had enabled
him to encounter with firmness. Still, he thought nothing
less than the ardent desire to save Rose could have carried
him through the trial with the success which attended his
struggles. The dear being at his side asked a few
explanations
of what had passed; and she bowed her head and
wept, equally with pain and delight, as imagination pictured
to her the situation of her betrothed, amid that waste of
water, with his fearful companions, and all in the hours of
deep night.
But that was over now. There was the rockthe blessed
rock on which Mulford had so accidentally struck, close
before themand presently they were all on it. The mate
took the pot and ran to the little reservoir, returning with
a sweet draught for each of the party.
A blessed, blessed thing, is wather! exclaimed Biddy,
this time finding the relief she sought, and a thousand
blessings on
you,
Mr. Mulford, who have niver done us
anything but good.
Rose looked a still higher eulogy on the young man,
and even Mrs. Budd had something commendatory and
grateful to say. Jack Tier was silent, but he had all his
eyes about him, as he now proved.
We've all on us been so much taken up with our own
affairs, remarked the steward's assistant, that we've
taken but little notice of the neighbourhood. If that is n't
the brig, Mr. Mulford, running through this very passage,
with stun'sails set alow and aloft, I do n't know the Molly
Swash when I see her!
The brig! exclaimed the mate, recollecting the vessels
he had seen at the break-of-day, for the first time in hours.
Can it be possible that the craft I made out to the
southward
,
is the brig?
Look, and judge for yourself, sir. There she comes,
like a race-horse, and if she holds her present course, she
must pass somewhere within a mile or so of us, if we stay
where we are.
Mulford did look, as did all with him. There was the
Swash, sure enough, coming down before the wind, and
under a cloud of canvas. She might be still a league, or
a league and a half distant, but, at the rate at which she
was travelling, that distance would soon be past. She was
running through the passage, no doubt with a view to
proceed
to the Dry Tortugas, to look after the schooner, Spike
having the hope that he had dodged his pursuers on the
coast of Cuba. The mate now looked for the ship, in the
north-western board, believing, as he did, that she was the
sloop-of-war. That vessel had gone about, and was
standing
to the southward, on a taut bowline. She was still a
long way off, three or four leagues at least, but the change
she had made in her position, since last seen, proved that
she was a great sailer. Then she was more than hull down,
whereas, now, she was near enough to let the outline of a
long, straight fabric be discovered beneath her canvas.
It is hardly possible that Spike should not see the vessel
here in the northern board, Mulford observed to Tier,
who had been examining the ship with him. The
look-out
is usually good on board the Swash, and, just now,
should certainly be as good as common. Spike is no
dawdler
with serious business before him.
He's a willain! muttered Jack Tier.
The mate regarded his companion with some surprise.
Jack was a very insignificant-looking personage in common,
and one would scarcely pause to give him a second look,
unless it might be to laugh at his rotundity and little
waddling
legs. But, now, the mate fancied he was swelling
with feelings that actually imparted somewhat more than
usual stature and dignity to his appearance. His face was
full of indignation, and there was something about the eye,
that to Mulford was inexplicable. As Rose, however, had
related to him the scene that took place on the islet, at the
moment when Spike was departing, the mate supposed that
Jack still felt a portion of the resentment that such a
collision
would be apt to create. From the expression of
Jack's countenance at that instant, it struck him Spike
might not be exactly safe, should accident put it in the
power of the former to do him an injury.
It was now necessary to decide on the course that ought
to be pursued. The bag contained sufficient food to last
the party several days, and a gallon of water still remained
in the cavity of the rock. This last was collected and put
in one of the breakers, which was emptied of the salt water
in order to receive it. As water, however, was the great
necessity in that latitude, Mulford did not deem it prudent
to set sail with so small a supply, and he accordingly
commenced
a search, on some of the adjacent rocks, Jack Tier
accompanying him. They succeeded in doubling their stock
of water, and collected several shell-fish, that the females
found exceedingly grateful and refreshing. On the score of
hunger and thirst, indeed, no one was now suffering. By
judiciously sipping a little water at a time, and retaining it
in the mouth before swallowing, the latter painful feeling
had been gotten rid of; and as for food, there was even
more than was actually needed, and that of a very good
quality. It is probable that standing in the water for hours,
as Rose, and her aunt, and Biddy had been obliged to do,
had contributed to lessen the pain endured from thirst,
though they had all suffered a good deal from that cause,
especially while the sun shone.
Mulford and Tier were half an hour in obtaining the
water. By the end of that period the brigantine was so
near as to render her hull distinctly visible. It was high
time to decide on their future course. The sail had been
brailed when the boat reached the rock, and the boat itself
lay on the side of the latter opposite to the brig, and where
no part of it could be seen to those on board the Swash,
with the exception of the mast. Under the circumstances,
therefore, Mulford thought it wisest to remain where they
were, and let the vessel pass, before they attempted to
proceed
toward Key West, their intended place of refuge. In
order to do this, however, it was necessary to cause the
whole party to lie down, in such a way as to be hid by
the inequalities in the rock, as it was now very evident the
brig would pass within half a mile of them. Hitherto, it
was not probable that they had been seen, and by using due
caution, the chances of Spike's overlooking them altogether
amounted nearly to certainty.
The necessary arrangements were soon made, the boat's
masts unstepped, the party placed behind their covers, and
the females comfortably bestowed in the spare sail, where
they might got a little undisturbed sleep after the dreadful
night, or morning, they had passed. Even Jack Tier lay
down to catch his nap, as the most useful manner of
bestowing
himself for a couple of hours; the time Mulford had
mentioned as the period of their stay where they were.
As for the mate, vigilance was his portion, and he took
his position, hid like all the rest, where he could watch the
movements of his old craft. In about twenty minutes, the
brig was quite near; so near that Mulford not only saw
the people on board her, who showed themselves in the
rigging, but fancied he could recognise their persons. As
yet, nothing had occurred in the way of change, but, just
as the Swash got abreast of the rock, she began to take in
her studding-sails, and that hurriedly, as is apt to occur on
board a vessel in sudden emergencies. Our young man
was a little alarmed at first, believing that they might have
been discovered, but he was soon induced to think that the
crew of the brigantine had just then begun to suspect the
character of the ship to the northward. That vessel had
been drawing near all this time, and was now only some
three leagues distant. Owing to the manner in which she
headed, or bows on, it was not a very easy matter to tell
the character of this stranger, though the symmetry and
squareness of his yards rendered it nearly certain he was
a cruiser. Though Spike could not expect to meet his old
acquaintance here, after the chase he had so lately led her,
down on the opposite coast, he might and would have his
misgivings, and Mulford thought it was his intention to
haul up close round the northern angle of the reef, and
maintain his advantage of the wind, over the stranger. If
this were actually done, it might expose the boat to view,
for the brig would pass within a quarter of a mile of it, and
on the side of the rock on which it lay. It was too late,
however, to attempt a change, since the appearance of
human beings in such a place would be certain to draw the
brig's glasses on them, and the glasses must at once let
Spike know who they were. It remained, therefore, only
to await the result as patiently as possible.
A very few minutes removed all doubt. The brig hauled
as close round the reef as she dared to venture, and in a
very short time the boat lay exposed to view to all on board
her. The vessel was now so near that Mulford plainly saw
the boatswain get upon the coach-house, or little
hurricane-house
deck, where Spike stood examining the ship with
his glass, and point out the boat, where it lay at the side
of the rock. In an instant, the glass was levelled at the
spot, and the movements on board the brig immediately
betrayed to Mulford that the boat was recognised. Sail
was shortened on board the Swash, and men were seen
preparing to lower her stern boat, while everything
indicated
that the vessel was about to be hove-to. There was
no time now to be lost, but the young man immediately
gave the alarm.
No sooner did the party arise and show themselves, than
the crew of the Swash gave three cheers. By the aid of
the glass, Spike doubtless recognised their persons, and
the fact was announced to the men, by way of stimulating
their exertions. This gave an additional spur to the
movements
of those on the rock, who hastened into their own
boat, and made sail as soon as possible.
It was far easier to do all that has been described, than
to determine on the future course. Capture was certain
if the fugitives ventured into the open water, and their
only hope was to remain on the reef. If channels for the
passage of the boat could be found, escape was highly
probable
,
as the schooner's boat could sail much faster than
the brig's boat could row, fast as Mulford knew the last to
be. But the experience of the morning had told the mate
that the rock rose too near the surface, in many places, for
the boat, small as it was, to pass over it; and he must trust
a great deal to chance. Away he went, however,
standing
along a narrow channel, through which the wind just
permitted him to lay, with the sail occasionally shaking.
By this time the Swash had her boat in the water,
manned with four powerful oars, Spike steering it in his
own person. Our young mate placed Tier in the bows, to
point out the deepest water, and kept his sail a rap full, in
order to get ahead as fast as possible. Ahead he did get,
but it was on a course that soon brought him out in the
open water of the main passage through the reef, leaving
Spike materially astern. The latter now rose in his boat,
and made a signal with his hat, which the boatswain
perfectly
understood. The latter caused the brig to ware short
round on her heel, and boarded his foretack in chase,
hauling
up into the passage as soon as he could again round
the reef. Mulford soon saw that it would never do for him
to venture far from the rocks, the brig going two feet to
his one, though not looking quite as high as he did in the
boat. But the Swash had her guns, and it was probable
they would be used rather than he should escape. When
distant two hundred yards from the reef, therefore, he
tacked. The new course brought the fugitives nearly at
right angles to that steered by Spike, who stood directly on,
as if conscious that, sooner or later, such a rencounter
must occur. It would seem that the tide was setting through
the passage, for when the boat of Mulford again reached
the reef, it was considerably to windward of the channel
out of which she had issued, and opposite to another which
offered very opportunely for her entrance. Into this new
channel, then, the mate somewhat blindly ran, feeling the
necessity of getting out of gun-shot of the brig at every
hazard. She at least could not follow him among the rocks,
let Spike, in his boat, proceed as he might.
According to appearances, Spike was not likely to be
very successful. He was obliged to diverge from his course,
in order to go into the main passage at the very point
where Mulford had just before done the same thing, and
pull along the reef to windward, in order to get into the
new channel, into which the boat he was pursuing had just
entered. This brought him not only astern again, but a
long bit astern, inasmuch as he was compelled to make the
circuit described. On he went, however, as eager in the
chase as the hound with his game in view.
Mulford's boat seemed to fly, and glided ahead at least
three feet to that of Spike's two. The direction of the
channel it was in, brought it pretty close to the wind, but
the water was quite smooth, and our mate managed to keep
the sail full, and his little craft at the same time quite near
the weatherly side of the rocks. In the course of ten
minutes the fugitives were fully a mile from the brig, which
was unable to follow them, but kept standing off and on,
in the main passage, waiting the result. At one time
Mulford
thought the channel would bring him out into open
water again, on the northern side of the reef, and more
than a mile to the eastward of the point where the
ship-channel
in which the Swash was plying commenced; but
an accidental circumstance prevented his standing in far
enough to ascertain the fact. That circumstance was as
follows:
In running a mile and a half over the reef, in the
manner
described, Mulford had left the boat of Spike quite half
Vol. II.3
a mile astern. He was now out of gun-shot from the brig,
or at least beyond the range of her grape, the only missile
he feared, and so far to windward that he kept his eye on
every opening to the southward, which he fancied might
allow of his making a stretch deeper into the mazes of the
reef, among which he believed it easiest for him to escape,
and to weary the oarsmen of his pursuers. Two or three
of these openings offered as he glided along, but it struck
him that they all looked so high that the boat would not
lay through theman opinion in which he was right. At
length he came abreast of one that seemed straight and
clear of obstacles as far as he could see, and through which
he might run with a flowing sheet. Down went his helm,
and about went his boat, running away to the southward as
fast as ever.
Had Spike followed, doubled the same shoal, and kept
away again in the same channel as had been done by the
boat he chased, all his hopes of success must have vanished
at once. This he did not attempt, therefore; but, sheering
into one of the openings which the mate had rejected, he
cut off quite half a mile in his distance. This was easy
enough for him to accomplish, as a row-boat would pull
even easier, near to the wind, than with the wind broad on
its bow. In consequence of this short cut, therefore, Spike
was actually crossing out into Mulford's new channel, just
as the latter had handsomely cleared the mouth of the
opening through which he effected his purpose.
It is scarcely necessary to say that the two boats must
have been for a few minutes quite near to each other; so
near, indeed, did the fugitives now pass to their pursuers,
that it would have been easy for them to have conversed,
had they been so disposed. Not a word was spoken,
however
,
but Mulford went by, leaving Spike about a hundred
yards astern. This was a trying moment to the latter, and
the devil tempted him to seek his revenge. He had not
come unarmed on his enterprise, but three or four loaded
muskets lay in the stern-sheets of his yawl. He looked at
his men, and saw that they could not hold out much longer
to pull as they had been pulling. Then he looked at
Mulford's
boat, and saw it gliding away from him at a rate that
would shortly place it another half mile in advance. He
seized a musket, and raised it to his shoulder, nay, was in
the act of taking aim at his mate, when Rose, who watched
his movements, threw herself before Harry, and if she did
not actually save his life, at least prevented Spike's attempt
on it for that occasion. In the course of the next ten
minutes the fugitives had again so far gained on their
pursuers
,
that the latter began to see that their efforts were
useless. Spike muttered a few bitter curses, and told his
men to lay on their oars.
It's well for the runaway, he added, that the gal put
herself between us, else would his grog have been stopped
for ever. I've long suspected this; but had I been sure
of it, the Gulf Stream would have had the keeping of his
body, the first dark night we were in it together. Lay on
your oars, men, lay on your oars; I'm afeared the villian
will get through our fingers, a'ter all.
The men obeyed, and then, for the first time, did they
turn their heads, to look at those they had been so
vehemently
pursuing. The other boat was quite half a mile
from them, and it had again tacked. This last occurrence
induced Spike to pull slowly ahead, in quest of another
short passage to cut the fugitives off; but no such opening
offered.
There he goes about again, by George! exclaimed
Spike. Give way, ladsgive way; an easy stroke, for
if he is embayed, he can't escape us!
Sure enough, poor Mulford
was
embayed, and could see
no outlet by which to pass ahead. He tacked his boat two
or three times, and he wore round as often; but on every
side shoals, or rocks that actually rose above the surface
of the water, impeded his course. The fact was not to be
concealed; after all his efforts, and so many promises of
success, not only was his further progress ahead cut off,
but equally so was retreat. The passage was not wide
enough to admit the hope of getting by his pursuers, and
the young man came to the conclusion that his better course
was to submit with dignity to his fate. For himself he had
no hopehe knew Spike's character too well for that; but
he did not apprehend any great immediate danger to his
companions. Spike had a coarse, brutal admiration for
Rose! but her expected fortune, which was believed to be
of more amount than was actually the case, was a sort of
pledge that he would not willingly put himself in a situation
that would prevent the possibility of enjoying it. Strange,
hurried, and somewhat confused thoughts passed through
Harry Mulford's mind, as he brailed his sail, and waited
for his captors to approach and take possession of his boat
and himself. This was done quietly, and with very few
words on the part of Spike.
Mulford would have liked the appearance of things better
had his old commander cursed him, and betrayed other
signs of the fury that was boiling in his very soul. On the
contrary, never had Stephen Spike seemed more calm, or
under better self-command. He smiled, and saluted Mrs.
Budd, just as if nothing unpleasant had occurred, and
alluded
to the sharpness of the chase with facetiousness and
seeming good-humour. The females were deceived by this
manner, and hoped, after all, that the worst that would
happen would be a return to their old position on board the
Swash. This was being so much better off than their
horrible
situation on the wreck, that the change was not
frightful to them.
What has become of the schooner, Mr. Mulford?
asked Spike, as the boats began to pass down the channel
to return to the brigtwo of the Swash's men taking their
seats in that which had been captured, along with their
commander, while the other two got a tow from the use
of the sail. I see you have the boat here that we used
alongside of her, and suppose you know something of the
craft itself.
She capsized with us in a squall, answered the mate,
and we only left the wreck this morning.
Capsized!humthat was a hard fate, to be sure, and
denotes bad seamanship. Now I've sailed all sorts of craft
these forty years, or five-and-thirty at least, and never
capsized
anything in my life. Stand by there for'ard to hold
on by that rock.
A solitary cap of the coral rose above the water two or
three feet, close to the channel, and was the rock to which
Spike alluded. It was only some fifty feet in diameter, and
of an oval form, rising quite above the ordinary tides, as
was apparent by its appearance. It is scarcely necessary
to say it had no other fresh water than that which
occasionally
fell on its surface, which surface being quite smooth,
retained very little of the rain it received. The boat was
soon alongside of this rock, where it was held broadside-to
by the two seamen.
Mr. Mulford, do me the favour to step up here, said
Spike, leading the way on to the rock himself. I have a
word to say to you before we get on board the old Molly
once more.
Mulford silently complied, fully expecting that Spike
intended to blow his brains out, and willing the bloody
deed should be done in a way to be as little shocking to
Rose as circumstances would allow. But Spike manifested
no such intention. A more refined cruelty was uppermost
in his mind; and his revenge was calculated, and took care
to fortify itself with some of the quibbles and artifices of
the law. He might not be exactly right in his legal
reservations
,
but he did not the less rely on their virtue.
Hark'e, Mr. Mulford, said Spike, sharply, as soon as
both were on the rock, you have run from my brig,
thereby showing your distaste for her; and I've no
disposition
to keep a man who wishes to quit me. Here you
are, sir, on
terrum firm,
as the scholars call it; and here
you have my full permission to remain. I wish you a good
morning, sir; and will not fail to report, when we get in,
that you left the brig of your own pleasure.
You will not have the cruelty to abandon me on this
naked rock, Captain Spike, and that without a morsel of
food, or a drop of water.
Wather is a blessed thing! exclaimed Biddy. Do not
think of lavin' the gentleman widout wather.
You left
me,
sir, without food or water, and you can
fit out your own rockyes, de, sir, you left me
under fire,
and that is a thing no true-hearted man would have thought
of. Stand by to make sail, boys; and if he offer to enter
the boat, pitch him out with the boat-hooks.
Spike was getting angry, and he entered the boat again,
without perceiving that Rose had left it. Light of foot,
and resolute of spirit, the beautiful girl, handsomer than
ever perhaps, by her excited feelings and dishevelled hair,
had sprung on the rock, as Spike stepped into the boat
3*
forward, and when the latter turned round, after loosening
the sail, he found he was drifting away from the very being
who was the object of all his efforts. Mulford, believing
that Rose was to be abandoned as well as himself, received
the noble girl in his arms, though ready to implore Spike,
on his knees, to return and at least to take her off. But
Spike wanted no solicitation on that point. He returned
of his own accord, and had just reached the rock again
when a report of a gun drew all eyes toward the brig.
The Swash had again run out of the passage, and was
beating up, close to the reef as she dared to go, with a
signal flying. All the seamen at once understood the cause
of this hint. The strange sail was getting too near, and
everybody could see that it was the sloop-of-war. Spike
looked at Rose, a moment, in doubt. But Mulford raised
his beloved in his arms, and carried her to the side of the
rock, stepping on board the boat.
Spike watched the movements of the young man with
jealous vigilance, and no sooner was Rose placed on her
seat, than he motioned significantly to the mate to quit the
boat.
I cannot and will not voluntarily, Captain Spike,
answered Harry, calmly. It would be committing a sort
of suicide.
A sign brought two of the men to the captain's assistance.
While the latter held Rose in her place, the sailors shoved
Harry on the rock again. Had Mulford been disposed to
resist, these two men could not very easily have ejected him
from the boat, if they could have done it at all; but he knew
there were others in reserve, and feared that blood might
be shed, in the irritated state of Spike, in the presence of
Rose. While, therefore, he would not be accessary to his
own destruction, he would not engage in what he knew
would prove not only a most harassing, but a bootless
resistance
.
The consequence was that the boats proceeded,
leaving him alone on the rock.
It was perhaps fortunate for Rose that she fainted. Her
condition occupied her aunt and Biddy, and Spike was
enabled to reach his brig without any further interruption.
Rose was taken on board still nearly insensible, while her
two female companions were so much confused and
distressed
,
that neither could have given a reasonably clear
account of what had just occurred. Not so with Jack
Tier, however. That singular being noted all that passed,
seated in the eyes of the boat, away from the confusion
that prevailed in its stern-sheets, and apparently undisturbed
by it.
As the party was sailing back toward the brig, the
light-house
boat towing the Swash's yawl, Jack took as good an
observation of the channels of that part of the reef as his
low position would allow. He tried to form in his mind a
sort of chart of the spot, for, from the instant Mulford was
thus deserted, the little fellow had formed a stern resolution
to attempt his rescue. How that was to be done, however,
was more than he yet knew; and when they reached the
brig's side, Tier may be said to have been filled with good
intentions, rather than with any very available knowledge
to enable him to put them in execution.
As respects the two vessels, the arrival of Spike on board
his own was not a moment too soon. The Poughkeepsie,
for the stranger to the northward was now ascertained to
be that sloop-of-war, was within long gun-shot by this time,
and near enough to make certain, by means of her glasses,
of the character of the craft with which she was closing.
Luckily for the brig she lay in the channel so often
mentioned
,
and through which both she and her present pursuer
had so lately come, on their way to the northward. This
brought her to windward, as the wind then stood, with a
clear passage before her. Not a moment was lost. No
sooner were the females sent below, than sail was made on
the brig, and she began to beat through the passage, making
long legs and short ones. She was chased, as a matter of
course, and that hard, the difference in sailing between the
two crafts not being sufficiently great to render the
brigantine's
escape by any means certain, while absolutely within
the range of those terrible missiles that were used by the
man-of-war's men.
But Spike soon determined not to leave a point so delicate
as that of his own and his vessel's security to be decided
by a mere superiority in the way of heels. The Florida
Reef, with all its dangers, windings, and rocks, was as well
known to him as the entrances to the port of New York.
In addition to its larger channels, of which there are three
or four, through which ships of size can pass, it had many
others that would admit only vessels of a lighter draught
of water. The brig was not flying light, it is true, but she
was merely in good ballast trim, and passages would be
available to her, into which the Poughkeepsie would not
dare to venture. One of these lesser channels was favourably
placed to further the escape of Spike, and he shoved the
brig into it after the struggle had lasted less than an hour.
This passage offered a shorter cut to the south side of the
reef than the main channel, and the sloop-of-war, doubtless
perceiving the uselessness of pursuit, under such
circumstances
,
wore round on her heel, and came down through
the main channel again, just entering the open water, near
the spot where the schooner had sunk, as the sun was setting.
CHAPTER II.
Shallow
.
Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound?
Evans
.
Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.
Shallow
.
I know the young gentlewoman; she has good gifts.
Evans
.
Seven hundred pounds, and possibilities, is good gifts.
Shakspeare
.
As for Spike, he had no intention of going to the
southward
of the Florida Reef again until his business called
him there. The lost bag of doubloons was still gleaming
before his imagination, and no sooner did the Poughkeepsie
bear up, than he shortened sail, standing back and forth
in his narrow and crooked channel, rather losing ground
than gaining, though he took great pains not to let his artifice
be seen. When the Poughkeepsie was so far to the
northward
as to render it safe, he took in everything but one or
two of his lowest sails, and followed easily in the same
direction. As the sloop-of-war carried her light and loftier
sails, she remained visible to the people of the Swash long
after the Swash had ceased to be visible to her. Profiting
by this circumstance, Spike entered the main channel again
some time before it was dark, and selected a safe anchorage
there that was well known to him; a spot where sufficient
sand had collected on the coral to make good holding
ground, and where a vessel would be nearly embayed,
though always to windward of her channel going out, by
the formation of the reef. Here he anchored, in order to
wait until morning ere he ventured further north. During
the whole of that dreadful day, Rose had remained in her
cabin, disconsolate, nearly unable, as she was absolutely
unwilling to converse. Now it was that she felt the total
insufficiency of a mind feeble as that of her aunt's to
administer consolation to misery like her own. Nevertheless,
the affectionate solicitude of Mrs. Budd, as well as that of
the faithful creature, Biddy, brought some relief, and reason
and resignation began slowly to resume their influence.
Yet was the horrible picture of Harry, dying by inches,
deserted in the midst of the waters on his solitary rock,
ever present to her thoughts, until, once or twice, her feelings
verged on madness. Prayer brought its customary relief,
however; and we do not think that we much exaggerate
the fact, when we say that Rose passed fully one-half of
that terrible afternoon on her knees.
As for Jack Tier, he was received on board the brig
much as if nothing had happened. Spike passed and
repassed him fifty times, without even an angry look, or a
word of abuse; and the deputy-steward dropped quietly into
the duties of his office, without meeting with either reproach
or hindrance. The only allusion, indeed, that was made
to his recent adventures, took place in a conversation that
was held on the subject in the galley, the interlocutors being
Jack himself, Josh, the steward, and Simon, the cook.
Where you been scullin' to, 'bout on dat reef, Jack,
wid dem' ere women, I won'er now? demanded Josh, after
tasting the cabin soup, in order to ascertain how near it
was to being done. It'ink it no great fun to dodge 'bout
among dem rock in a boat, for anudder hurricane might
come when a body least expeck him.
Oh, said Jack, cavalierly, two hurricanes no more
come in one month, than two shot in the same hole. We've
been turtlin', that's all. I wish we had in your coppers,
cook, some of the critturs that we fell in with in our cruise.
Wish'e had, master steward, wid all my heart, answered
the fat, glistening potentate of the galley. But, hark'ee,
Jack; what became of our young mate, can 'e tell? Some
say he get kill at'e Dry Tortugas, and some say he war'
scullin' round in dat boat you hab, wid'e young woman,
eh?
Ah, boys, answered Jack, mournfully, sure enough,
what
has
become of him?
You know, why can't you tell? What good to hab
secret among friend.
Are
ye his friends, lads? Do you really feel as if you
could give a poor soul in its agony a helpin' hand?
Why not? said Josh, in a reproachful way. Misser
Mulford'e bess mate dis brig ebber get; and I don't see why
Cap'in Spike-want to be rid of him.
Because he's a willian! returned Jack between his
grated teeth. D'ye know what that means in English,
master Josh; and can you and cook here, both of whom
have sailed with the man years in and years out, say whether
my words be true or not?
Dat as a body understand 'em. Accordin' to some
rule, Stephen Spike not a werry honest man; but accordin'
to 'nudder some, he as good as any body else.
Yes, dat just be upshot of de matter, put in Simon,
approvingly. De whole case lie in dat meanin'.
D'ye call it right to leave a human being to starve, or
to suffer for water, on a naked rock, in the midst of the
ocean?
Who do dat?
The willian who is captain of this brig; and all because
he thinks young eyes and bloomin' cheeks prefar young
eyes and bloomin' cheeks to his own grizzly beard and old
look-outs.
Dat bad; dat werry bad, said Josh, shaking his head,
a way of denoting dissatisfaction, in which Simon joined
him; for no crime appeared sufficiently grave in the eyes
of these two sleek and well-fed officials to justify such a
punishment. Dat mons'ous bad, and cap'in ought to know
better dan do
dat
. I nebber starves a mouse, if I catches
him in de bread-locker. Now, dat a sort of reason'ble
punishment, too; but I nebber does it. If mouse eat my
bread, it do seem right to tell mouse dat he hab enough,
and dat he must not eat any more for a week, or a mont',
but it too cruel for me, and I nebber does it; no, I t'rows
de little debil overboard, and lets him drown like a
gentle'em
.
Y-e-s, drawled out Simon, in a philanthropical tone of
voice, dat'e best way. What good it do to torment a
fellow critter? If Misser Mulford run, why put him down
run, and let him go, I say, on'y mulk his wages; but what
good it do anybody to starve him? Now dis is my opinion,
gentle'em, and dat is, dat starwation be wuss dan choleric.
Choleric kill, I knows, and so does starwation kill; but of
de two, gib me de choleric fuss; if I gets well of dat, den
try starwation if you can.
I'm glad to hear you talk in this manner, my hearties,
put in Jack; and I hope I may find you accommodatin'
in a plan I've got to help the maty out of this difficulty. As
a friend of Stephen Spike's I would do it; for it must be a
terrible thing to die with such a murder on one's soul.
Here's the boat that we pick'd up at the light-house, yonder,
in tow of the brig at this minute; and there's everything
in her comfortable for a good long run, as I know from
having sailed in her; and what I mean is this: as we left
Mr. Mulford, I took the bearings and distance of the rock
he was on, d'ye understand, and think I could find my way
back to it. You see the brig is travelin' slowly north ag'in,
and afore long we shall be in the neighbourhood of that
very rock. We, cook and stewards, will be called on to
keep an anchor-watch, if the brig fetches up, as I heard the
captain tell the Spanish gentleman he thought she would;
and then we can take the boat that's in the water and go
and have a hunt for the maty.
The two blacks looked at Tier earnestly; then they
turned their heads to look at each other. The idea struck
each as bold and novel, but each saw serious difficulties in
it. At length Josh, as became his superior station, took
on himself the office of expressing the objections that
occurred
to his mind.
Dat nebber do! exclaimed the steward. We be's
quite willin' to sarve'e mate, who's a good gentle'em, and
as nice a young man as ever sung out, `hard a-lee, but we
must t'ink little bit of number one; or, for dat matter, of
number two, as Simon would be implercated as well as
myself. If Cap'in Spike once knew we've lent a hand in
sich a job, he'd never overlook it. I knows him,
well;
and that is sayin' as much as need be said of any man's
character. You nebber catch
me
runnin' myself into his
jaws; would rather fight a shark widout any knife. No,
noI knows him
well
. Den comes anudder werry
unanswerable
objecsh'un, and dat is, dat'e brig owe bot'
Simon and I money. Fifty dollars, each on us, if she owe
one cent. Now, do you t'ink in cander, Jack, dat two
colour' gentle'em, like us, can t'row away our fortins like
two sons of a York merchant dat has inherited a hundred
t'ousand dollar tudder day?
There is no occasion for running at all, or for losing
your wages.
How you get'e mate off, den? Can he walk away on
de water? If so, let him go widout us. A werry good
gentle'em is Misser Mulford, but not good enough to mulk
Simon and me out of fifty dollar each.
You will not hear my project, Josh, and so will never
know what I would be at.
Well, come, tell him jest as you surposes him. Now
listen, Simon, so dat not a word be loss.
My plan is to take the boat, if we anchor, as anchor
I know we shall, and go and find the rock and bring Mr.
Mulford off; then we can come back to the brig, and get
on board ourselves, and let the mate sail away in the boat
by himself. On this plan nobody will run, and no wages
be mulcted.
But dat take time and an anchor-watch last but two
hour, surposin' even dat'ey puts all t'ree of us in de same
watch.
Spike usually does that, you know. `Let the cook
and the stewards keep the midnight watch,' he commonly
says, `and that will give the foremost hands a better snooze.'
Yes, he do say
dat,
Josh, put in Simon, most ebbery
time we comes-to.
I know he does, and surposes he will say it to-night, if
he comes-to to-night. But a two hour watch may not be
long enough to do all you wants; and den, jest t'ink for a
moment, should 'e cap'in come on deck and hail'e
forecastle
,
and find us all gone, I wouldn't be in your skin,
Jack, for dis brig, in sich a kerlamity. I knows Cap'in
Spike well; t'ree time I endebber to run myself, and each
time he bring me up wid a round turn; so, now-a-days, I
nebber t'inks of sich a projeck any longer.
But I do not intend to leave the forecastle without
some one on it to answer a hail. No, all I want is a
companion
;
for I do not like to go out on the reef at midnight,
all alone. If one of you will go with me, the other can
stay and answer the captain's hail, should he really come
on deck in our watcha thing very little likely to happen.
When once his head is on his pillow, a'ter a hard day's
work, it's not very apt to be lifted ag'in without a call, or
a squall. If you do know Stephen Spike
well,
Josh, I know
him better.
Well, Jack, dis here is a new idee, d'ye see, and a body
must take time to consider on it. If Simon and I do ship
for dis v'y'ge, 't will be for lub of Mr. Mulford, and not for
his
money or
your'n
.
This was all the encouragement of his project Jack Tier
could obtain, on that occasion, from either his brother
steward, or from the cook. These blacks were well enough
disposed to rescue an innocent and unoffending man from
the atrocious death to which Spike had condemned his
mate, but neither lost sight of his own security and interest.
They promised Tier not to betray him, however; and he
had the fullest confidence in their pledges. They who live
together in common, usually understand the feeling that
prevails, on any given point, in their own set; and Jack
felt pretty certain that Harry was a greater favourite in and
about the camboose than the captain. On that feeling he
relied, and he was fain to wait the course of events, ere he
came to any absolute conclusion as to his own course.
The interview in the galley took place about half an
hour before the brig anchored for the night. Tier, who
often assisted on such occasions, went aloft to help secure
the royal, one of the gaskets of which had got loose, and
from the yard he had an excellent opportunity to take a
Vol. II.4
look at the reef, the situation of the vessel, and the
probable
bearings of the rock on which poor Mulford had been
devoted to a miserable death. This opportunity was much
increased by Spike's hailing him, while on the yard, and
ordering him to take a good look at the sloop-of-war, and
at the same time to ascertain if any boats were prowlin'
about, in order to make a set upon us in the night. On
receiving this welcome order, Jack answered with a
cheerful
Ay, ay, sir, and standing up on the yard, he placed
an arm around the mast, and remained for a long time
making his observations. The command to look-out for
boats would have been a sufficient excuse had he continued
on the yard as long as it was light.
Jack had no difficulty in finding the Poughkeepsie, which
was already through the passage, and no longer visible
from the deck. She appeared to be standing to the
northward
and westward, under easy canvas, like a craft that
was in no hurry. This fact was communicated to Spike in
the usual way. The latter seemed pleased, and he answered
in a hearty manner, just as if no difficulty had ever occurred
between him and the steward's assistant.
Very well, Jack! bravo, Jack!now take a good look
for boats; you'll have light enough for that this half hour,
cried the captain. If any are out, you'll find them
pulling
down the channel, or maybe they'll try to shorten the
cut, by attempting to pull athwart the reef. Take a good
and steady look for them, my man.
Ay, ay, sir; I'll do all I can with naked eyes,
answered
Jack, but I could do better, sir, if they would only
send me up a glass by these here signal-halyards. With a
glass, a fellow might speak with some sartainty.
Spike seemed struck with the truth of this suggestion;
and he soon sent a glass aloft by the signal-halyards. Thus
provided, Jack descended as low as the cross-trees, where
he took his seat, and began a survey at his leisure. While
thus employed, the brig was secured for the night, her
decks were cleared, and the people were ordered to get
their suppers, previously to setting an anchor-watch, and
turning-in for the night. No one heeded the movements
of Tier,for Spike had gone into his own state-room,
with the exception of Josh and Simon. Those two worthies
were still in the galley, conversing on the subject of Jack's
recent communications; and ever and anon one of them
would stick his head out of the door and look aloft,
withdrawing
it, and shaking it significantly, as soon as his
observations
were ended.
As for Tier, he was seated quite at his ease; and having
slung his glass to one of the shrouds, in a way to admit of
its being turned as on a pivot, he had every opportunity
for observing accurately, and at his leisure. The first
thing Jack did, was to examine the channel very closely,
in order to make sure that no boats were in it, after which
he turned the glass with great eagerness toward the reef,
in the almost hopeless office of ascertaining something
concerning
Mulford. In point of fact, the brig had anchored
quite three leagues from the solitary rock of the deserted
mate, and, favoured as he was by his elevation, Jack could
hardly expect to discern so small and low an object as that
rock at so great a distance. Nevertheless, the glass was
much better than common. It had been a present to Spike
from one who was careful in his selections of such objects,
and who had accidentally been under a serious obligation
to the captain. Knowing the importance of a good look,
as regards the boats, Spike had brought this particular
instrument
,
of which, in common, he was very chary, from
his own state-room, and sent it aloft, in order that Jack
might have every available opportunity of ascertaining his
facts. It was this glass, then, which was the means of the
important discoveries the little fellow, who was thus perched
on the fore-topmast cross-trees of the Swash, did actually
succeed in making.
Jack actually started, when he first ascertained how
distinctly
and near the glass he was using brought distant
objects. The gulls that sailed across its disk, though a
league off, appeared as if near enough to be touched by the
hand, and even their feathers gave out not only their hues,
but their forms. Thus, too, was it with the surface of the
ocean, of which the little waves that agitated the water of
the reef, might be seen tossing up and down, at more than
twice the range of the Poughkeepsie's heaviest gun. Naked
rocks, low and subdued as they were in colour, too, were
to be noted, scattered up and down in the panorama. At
length Tier fancied his glass covered a field that he
recognized
.
It was distant, but might be seen from his present
elevation. A second look satisfied him he was right; and
he next clearly traced the last channel in which they had
endeavoured to escape from Spike, or that in which the
boat had been taken. Following it along, by slowly moving
the glass, he actually hit the rock on which Mulford had
been deserted. It was peculiar in shape, size, and
elevation
above the water, and connected with the circumstance
of the channel, which was easily enough seen by the colour
of the water, and more easily from his height than if he
had been in it, he could not be mistaken. The little
fellow's
heart beat quick as he made the glass move slowly
over its surface, anxiously searching for the form of the
mate. It was not to be seen. A second, and a more
careful
sweep of the glass, made it certain that the rock was
deserted.
Although a little reflection might have satisfied any one
Mulford was not to be sought in that particular spot, so
long after he had been left there, Jack Tier felt grievously
disappointed when he was first made certain of the
accuracy
of his observations. A minute later he began to
reason
on the matter, and he felt more encouraged. The
rock on which the mate had been abandoned was smooth,
and could not hold any fresh water that might have been left
by the late showers. Jack also remembered that it had
neither sea-weed nor shell-fish. In short, the utmost malice
of Spike could not have selected, for the immolation of his
victim, a more suitable place. Now Tier had heard
Harry's explanation to Rose, touching the manner in which
he had waded and swum about the reef that very morning,
and it at once occurred to him that the young man had too
much energy and spirit to remain helpless and inactive to
perish on a naked rock, when there might be a possibility
of at least prolonging existence, if not of saving it. This
induced the steward to turn the glass slowly over the water,
and along all the ranges of visible rock that he could find
in that vicinity. For a long time the search was useless,
the distance rendering such an examination not only
difficult
but painful. At length Jack, about to give up the
matter in despair, took one sweep with the glass nearer to
the brig, as much to obtain a general idea of the
boat-channels
of the reef, as in any hope of finding Mulford,
when an object moving in the water came within the field
of the glass. He saw it but for an instant, as the glass
swept slowly past, but it struck him it was something that
had life, and was in motion. Carefully going over the same
ground again, after a long search, he again found what he
so anxiously sought. A good look satisfied him that he
was right. It was certainly a man wading along the
shallow
water of the reef, immersed to his waistand it must
be Mulford.
So excited was Jack Tier by this discovery that he
trembled
like a leaf. A minute or two elapsed before he could
again use the glass; and when he did, a long and anxious
search was necessary before so small an object could be
once more found. Find it he did, however, and then he
got its range by the vessel, in a way to make sure of it.
Yes, it was a man, and it was Mulford.
Circumstances conspired to aid Jack in the investigation
that succeeded. The sun was near setting, but a stream
of golden light gleamed over the waters, particularly
illuminating
the portion which came within the field of the
glass. It appeared then that Harry, in his efforts to escape
from the rock, and to get nearer to the edge of the main
channel, where his chances of being seen and rescued
would be ten-fold what they were on his rock, had moved
south, by following the naked reef and the shallow places,
and was actually more than a league nearer to the brig than
he would have been had he remained stationary. There
had been hours in which to make this change, and the
young man had probably improved them to the utmost.
Jack watched the form that was wading slowly along
with an interest he had never before felt in the movements
of any human being. Whether Mulford saw the brig or
not, it was difficult to say. She was quite two leagues
from him, and, now that her sails were furled, she offered
but little for the eye to rest on at that distance. At first,
Jack thought the young man was actually endeavouring to
get nearer to her, though it must have been a forlorn hope
that should again place him in the hands of Spike. It was,
however, a more probable conjecture that the young man
4*
was endeavouring to reach the margin of the passage,
where a good deal of rock was above water, and near to
which he had already managed to reach. At one time
Jack saw that the mate was obliged to swim, and he
actually
lost sight of him for a time. His form, however,
reappeared
,
and then it slowly emerged from the water, and
stood erect on a bare rock of some extent. Jack breathed
freer at this; for Mulford was now on the very margin of
the channel, and might be easily reached by the boat, should
he prevail on Josh, or Simon, to attempt the rescue.
At first, Jack Tier fancied that Mulford had knelt to
return
thanks on his arrival at a place of comparative safety;
but a second look satisfied him that Harry was drinking
from one of the little pools of fresh water left by the late
shower. When he rose from drinking, the young man
walked about the place, occasionally stooping, signs that
he was picking up shell-fish for his supper. Suddenly,
Mulford darted forward, and passed beyond the field of the
glass. When Jack found him again, he was in the act of
turning a small turtle, using his knife on the animal
immediately
after. Had Jack been in danger of starvation
himself
,
and found a source of food as ample and as grateful
as this, he could scarcely have been more delighted. The
light now began to wane perceptibly, still Harry's
movements
could be discerned. The turtle was killed and
dressed, sufficiently at least for the mate's purposes, and
the latter was seen collecting sea-weed, and bits of plank,
boards, and sticks of wood, of which more or less, in
drifting
past, had lodged upon the rocks. Is it possible,
thought Jack, that he is so werry partic'lar he can't eat
his turtle raw! Will he, indeed, venture to light a fire, or
has he the means? Mulford was so particular, however,
he did venture to light a fire, and he had the means. This
may be said to be the age of matchesnot in a connubial,
though in an inflammatory senseand the mate had a small
stock in a tight box that he habitually carried on his
person
.
Tier saw him at work over a little pile he had made
for a long time, the beams of day departing now so fast as
to make him fearful he should soon lose his object in the
increasing obscurity of twilight. Suddenly a light gleamed,
and the pile sent forth a clear flame. Mulford went to and
fro, collecting materials to feed his fire, and was soon busied
in cooking his turtle. All this Tier saw and understood,
the light of the flames coming in proper time to supply the
vacuum left by the departure of that of day.
In a minute Tier had no difficulty in seeing the fire that
Mulford had lighted on his low and insulated domains with
the naked eye. It gleamed brightly in that solitary place;
and the steward was much afraid it would be seen by some
one on deck, get to be reported to Spike, and lead to
Harry's destruction after all. The mate appeared to be
insensible to his danger, however, occasionally casting piles
of dry sea-weed on his fire, in a way to cause the flames
to flash up, as if kindled anew by gunpowder. It now
occurred
to Tier that the young man had a double object in
lighting this fire, which would answer not only the purposes
of his cookery, but as a signal of distress to anything
passing
near. The sloop-of-war, though more distant than the
brig, was in his neighbourhood; and she might possibly
yet send relief. Such was the state of things when Jack
was startled by a sudden hail from below. It was Spike's
voice, and came up to him short and quick.
Fore-topmast cross-trees, there! What are ye about
all this time, Master Jack Tier, in them fore-topmast
cross-trees
,
I say? demanded Spike.
Keeping a look-out for boats from the sloop-of-war, as
you bade me, sir, answered Jack, coolly.
D'ye see any, my man? Is the water clear ahead of
us, or not?
It's getting to be so dark, sir, I can see no longer.
While there was day-light, no boat was to be seen.
Come down, mancome down; I've business for you
below. The sloop is far enough to the nor'ard, and we
shall neither see nor hear from her to-night. Come down,
I say, Jackcome down.
Jack obeyed, and securing the glass, he began to descend
the rigging. He was soon as low as the top, when he
paused a moment to take another look. The fire was still
visible, shining like a torch on the surface of the water,
casting its beams abroad like a good deed in a naughty
world. Jack was sorry to see it, though he once more
took its bearing from the brig, in order that he might know
where to find the spot, in the event of a search for it. When
on the stretcher of the fore-rigging, Jack stopped and again
looked for his beacon. It had disappeared, having sunk
below the circular formation of the earth. By ascending
two or three ratlins, it came into view, and by going down
as low as the stretcher again, it disappeared. Trusting
that no one, at that hour, would have occasion to go aloft,
Jack now descended to the deck, and went aft with the
spy-glass.
Spike and the Seor Montefalderon were under the
coach-house, no one else appearing on any part of the
quarter-deck
.
The people were eating their suppers, and Josh
and Simon were busy in the galley. As for the females,
they chose to remain in their own cabin, where Spike was
well pleased to leave them.
Come this way, Jack, said the captain, in his
best-humoured
tone of voice, I've a word to say to you. Put
the glass in at my state-room window, and come hither.
Tier did as ordered.
So you can make out no boats to the nor'ard, ha, Jack!
nothing to be seen thereaway?
Nothing in the way of a boat, sir.
Ay, ay, I dare say there's plenty of water, and some
rock. The Florida Reef has no scarcity of either, to them
that knows where to look for one, and to steer clear of the
other. Hark'e, Jack; so you got the schooner under way
from the Dry Tortugas, and undertook to beat her up to
Key West, when she fancied herself a turtle, and over she
went with youis that it, my man?
The schooner turned turtle with us, sure enough, sir;
and we all came near drowning on her bottom.
No sharks in that latitude and longitude, eh Jack?
Plenty on 'em, sir; and I thought they would have got
us all, at one time. More than twenty set of fins were in
sight at once, for several hours.
You could hardly have supplied the gentlemen with a
leg, or an arm, each. But where was the boat all this time
you had the light-house boat in tow, I suppose?
She had been in tow, sir; but Madam Budd talked so
much dictionary to the painter, that it got adrift.
Yet I found you all in it.
Very true, sir. Mr. Mulford swam quite a mile to
reach the rocks, and found the boat aground on one on 'em.
As soon as he got the boat, he made sail, and came and
took us off. We had reason to thank God he could do
so.
Spike looked dark and thoughtful. He muttered the
words swam, and rocks, but was too cautious to
allow
any expressions to escape him, that might betray to the
Mexican officer that which was uppermost in his mind.
He was silent, however, for quite a minute, and Jack saw
that he had awakened a dangerous source of distrust in the
captain's breast.
Well, Jack, resumed Spike, after the pause, can
you tell us anything of the doubloons? I nat'rally expected
to find them in the boat, but there were none to be seen.
You scarcely pumped the schooner out, without
overhauling
her lockers, and falling in with them doubloons.
We found them, sure enough, and had them ashore
with us, in the tent, down to the moment when we sailed.
When you took them off to the schooner, eh? My life
for it, the gold was not forgotten.
It was not, sure enough, sir; but we took it off with
us to the schooner, and it went down in her when she
finally sunk.
Another pause, during which Seor Montefalderon and
Captain Spike looked significantly at each other.
Do you think, Jack, you could find the spot where the
schooner went down?
I could come pretty near it, sir, though not on the very
spot itself. Water leaves no mark over the grave of a
sunken ship.
If you can take us within a reasonable distance, we
might find it by sweeping for it. Them doubloons are
worth some trouble; and their recovery would be better
than a long v'y'ge to us, any day.
They would, indeed, Don Esteban, observed the
Mexican
;
and my poor country is not in a condition to bear
heavy losses. If Seor Jack Tier can find the wreck, and
we regain the money, ten of those doubloons shall be his
reward, though I take them from my own share, much
diminished
as it will be.
You hear, Jackhere is a chance to make your
fortune
!
You say you sailed with me in old timesand old
times were good times with this brig, though times has
changed; but if you sailed with me, in
old
times, you must
remember that whatever the Swash touched she turned to
gold.
I hope you do n't doubt, Captain Spike, my having
sailed in the brig, not only in old times, but in her best
times.
Jack seemed hurt as he put this question, and Spike
appeared
in doubt. The latter gazed at the little, rotund,
queer-looking figure before him, as if endeavouring to
recognise
him; and when he had done, he passed his hand
over his brow, like one who endeavoured to recall past
objects
by excluding those that are present.
You will then show us the spot where my unfortunate
schooner did sink, Seor Jack Tier? put in the Mexican.
With all my heart, seor, if it is to be found. I think
I could take you within a cable's length of the place, though
hunger, and thirst, and sharks, and the fear of drowning,
will keep a fellow from having a very bright look-out for
such a matter.
In what water do you suppose the craft to lie, Jack?
demanded the captain.
You know as much of that as I do myself, sir. She
went down about a cable's length from the reef, toward
which she was a settin' at the time; and had she kept afloat
an hour longer, she might have grounded on the rocks.
She 's better where she is, if we can only find her by
sweeping. On the rocks we could do nothing with her but
break her up, and ten to one the doubloons would be lost.
By the way, Jack, do you happen to know where that
scoundrel of a mate of mine stowed the money?
When we left the island, I carried it down to the boat
myselfand a good lift I had of it. As sure as you are
there, seor, I was obliged to take it on a shoulder. When
it came out of the boat, Mr. Mulford carried it below; and
I heard him tell Miss Rose, a'terwards that he had thrown
it into a bread-locker.
Where we shall find it, Don Wan, notwithstanding all
this veering and hauling. The old brig has luck when,
doubloons are in question, and ever has had since I've
commanded her. Jack, we shall have to call on the cook
and stewards for an anchor-watch to-night. The people
are a good deal fagged with boxing about this reef so much,
and I shall want 'em all as fresh to-morrow as they can be
got. You idlers had better take the middle watches, which
will give the fore-castle chaps longer naps.
Ay, ay, sir; we'll manage that for 'em. Josh and
Simon
can go on at twelve, and I will take the watch at two,
which will give the men all the rest they want, as I can
hold out for four hours full. I'm as good for an
anchor-watch
as any man in the brig, Captain Spike.
That you are, Jack, and better than some on 'em.
Take you all round, and round it is, you 're a rum 'un, my
ladthe queerest little jigger that ever lay out on a
royal-yard
.
Jack might have been a little offended at Spike's
compliments
,
but he was certainly not sorry to find him so
good-natured
,
after all that had passed. He now left the captain,
and his Mexican companion, seemingly in close conference
together, while he went below himself, and dropped as
naturally into the routine of his duty, as if he had never
left the brig. In the cabin he found the females, of course.
Rose scarce raising her face from the shawl which lay on
the bed of her own berth. Jack busied himself in a locker
near this berth, until an opportunity occurred to touch
Rose, unseen by her aunt or Biddy. The poor
heart-stricken
girl raised her face, from which all the colour
had departed, and looked almost vacantly at Jack, as if to
ask an explanation. Hope is truly, by a most benevolent
provision of Providence, one of the very last blessings to
abandon us. It is probable that we are thus gifted, in order
to encourage us to rely on the great atonement to the last
moment, since, without this natural endowment to cling to
hope, despair might well be the fate of millions, who, there
is reason to think, reap the benefit of that act of divine
mercy. It would hardly do to say that anything like hope
was blended with the look Rose now cast on Jack, but it
was anxious and inquiring.
The steward bent his head to the locker, bringing his
face quite near to that of Rose, and whisperedThere
is hope, Miss Rosebut do not betray me.
These were blessed words for our heroine to hear, and
they produced an immediate and great revolution in her
feelings. Commanding herself, however, she looked her
questions, instead of trusting even to a whisper. Jack did
not say any more, just then; but, shortly after, he called
Rose, whose eyes were now never off him, into the main
cabin, which was empty. It was so much pleasanter to
sleep in an airy state-room on deck, that Seor
Montefalderon
,
indeed, had given up the use of this cabin, in a
great measure, seldom appearing in it, except at meals,
having taken possession of the deserted apartment of
Mulford
.
Josh was in the galley, where he spent most of his
time, and Rose and Jack had no one to disturb their
conference
.
He is safe, Miss RoseGod be praised! whispered
Jack. Safe for the present, at least; with food, and
water, and fire to keep him warm at night.
It was impossible for Rose not to understand to whom
there was allusion, though her head became dizzy under
the painful confusion that prevailed in it. She pressed her
temples with both hands, and asked a thousand questions
with her eyes. Jack considerately handed her a glass of
water before he proceeded. As soon as he found her a
little more composed, he related the facts connected with
his discovery of Mulford, precisely as they had occurred.
He is now on a large rocka little island, indeed
where he is safe from the ocean unless it comes on to blow
a hurricane, concluded Jack, has fresh water and fresh
turtle in the bargain. A man might live a month on one
such turtle as I saw Mr. Mulford cutting up this evening.
Is there no way of rescuing him from the situation
you have mentioned, Jack? In a year or two I shall be
my own mistress, and have money to do as I please with;
put me only in the way of taking Mr. Mulford from that
rock, and I will share all I am worth on earth with you,
dear Jack.
Ay, so it is with the whole sex, muttered Tier; let
them only once give up their affections to a man, and he
becomes dearer to them than pearls and rubies! But you
know me, Miss Rose, and know
why
and
how well
I would
sarve you. My story and my feelin's are as much your
secret, as your story and your feelin's is mine. We shall
pull together, if we do n't pull so very strong. Now, hearken
to me, Miss Rose, and I will let you into the secret of my
plan to help Mr. Mulford make a launch.
Jack then communicated to his companion his whole
project for the night. Spike had, of his own accord, given
to him and his two associates, Simon and Josh, the care
of the brig between midnight and morning. If he could
prevail on either of these men to accompany him, it was
his intention to take the light-house boat, which was riding
by its painter astern of the brig, and proceed as fast as
they could to the spot whither Mulford had found his way.
By his calculations, if the wind stood as it then was, little
more than an hour would be necessary to reach the rock,
and about as much more to return. Should the breeze
lull, of which there was no great danger, since the easterly
trades were again blowing, Jack thought he and Josh might
go over the distance with the oars in about double the time.
Should both Josh and Simon refuse to accompany him, he
thought he should attempt the rescue of the mate alone,
did the wind stand, trusting to Mulford's assistance, should
he need it, in getting back to the brig.
You surely would not come back here with Harry,
did you once get him safe from off that rock! exclaimed
Rose.
Why, you know how it is with me, Miss Rose,
answered
Jack.
My
business is here, on board the Swash,
and I must attend to it. Nothing shall tempt me to give
up the brig so long as she floats, and sartain folk float in
her, unless it might be some such matter as that which
happened on the bit of an island at the Dry Tortugas. Ah!
he's a willian! But if I do come back, it will be only to
get into my own proper berth ag'in, and not to bring Mr.
Mulford into the lion's jaws. He will only have to put me
back on board the Molly here, when he can make the best
of his own way to Key West. Half an hour would place
him out of harm's way; especially as I happen to know
the course Spike means to steer in the morning.
I will go with you, Jack, said Rose, mildly, but with
great firmness.
You, Miss Rose! But why should I show surprise!
Vol. II.5
It's like all the sex, when they have given away their
affections. Yes, woman will be woman, put her on a naked
rock, or put her in silks and satins in her parlour at home.
How different is it with men! They dote for a little while,
and turn to a new face. It must be said, men's willians!
Not Mulford, Jackno, not Harry Mulford! A truer
or a nobler heart never beat in a human breast; and you
and I will drown together, rather than he should not be
taken from that rock.
It shall be as you say, answered Jack, a little
thoughtfully
.
Perhaps it would be best that you should quit the
brig altogether. Spike is getting desperate, and you will
be safer with the young mate than with so great an old
willian. Yes, you shall go with me, Miss Rose; and if
Josh and Simon both refuse, we will go alone.
With you, Jack, but not with Mr. Mulford. I cannot
desert my aunt, nor can I quit the Swash alone in company
with her mate. As for Spike, I despise him too much to
fear him. He must soon go into port somewhere, and at
the first place where he touches we shall quit him. He
dare not detain usnay, he
cannot
and I do not fear him.
We will save Harry, but I shall remain with my aunt.
We'll see, Miss Rose, we'll see, said Tier, smiling.
Perhaps a handsome young man, like Mr. Mulford, will
have better luck in persuading you than an old fellow like
me. If he should fail, 't will be his own fault.
So thought Jack Tier, judging of women as he had found
them, but so did not think Rose Budd. The conversation
ended here, however, each keeping in view its purport,
and the serious business that was before them.
The duty of the vessel went on as usual. The night
promised to be clouded, but not very dark, as there was a
moon. When Spike ordered the anchor-watches, he had
great care to spare his crew as much as possible, for the
next day was likely to be one of great toil to them. He
intended to get the schooner up again, if possible; and
though he might not actually pump her out so as to cause
her to float, enough water was to be removed to enable
him to get at the doubloons. The situation of the
bread-locker
was known, and as soon as the cabin was sufficiently
freed from water to enable one to move about in it, Spike
did not doubt his being able to get at the gold. With his
resources and ingenuity, the matter in his own mind was
reduced to one of toil and time. Eight-and-forty hours,
and some hard labour, he doubted not would effect all he
cared for.
In setting the anchor-watches for the night, therefore,
Stephen Spike bethought him as much of the morrow as
of the present moment. Don Juan offered to remain on
deck until midnight, and as he was as capable of giving an
alarm as any one else, the offer was accepted. Josh and
Simon were to succeed the Mexican, and to hold the
lookout
for two hours, when Jack was to relieve them, and to
continue on deck until light returned, when he was to give
the captain a call. This arrangement made, Tier turned
in at once, desiring the cook to call him half an hour
before the proper period of his watch commenced. That
half hour Jack intended to employ in exercising his
eloquence
in endeavouring to persuade either Josh or Simon
to be of his party. By eight o'clock the vessel lay in a
profound quiet, Seor Montefalderon pacing the
quarter-deck
alone, while the deep breathing of Spike was to be
heard issuing through the open window of his state-room;
a window which it may be well to say to the uninitiated,
opened in-board, or toward the deck, and not outboard, or
toward the sea.
For four solitary hours did the Mexican pace the deck
of the stranger, resting himself for a few minutes at a time
only, when wearied with walking. Does the reader fancy
that a man so situated had not plenty of occupation for his
thoughts? Don Juan Montefalderon was a soldier and a
gallant cavalier; and love of country had alone induced
him to engage in his present duties. Not that patriotism
which looks to political preferment through a popularity
purchased by the valgar acclamation which attends success
in arms, even when undeserved, or that patriotism which
induces men of fallen characters to endeavour to retrieve
former offences by the shortest and most reckless mode, or
that patriotism which shouts our country right or wrong,
regardless alike of God and his eternal laws, that are never
to be forgotten with impunity; but the patriotism which
would defend his home and fire-side, his altars and the
graves of his fathers, from the ruthless steps of the invader.
We shall not pretend to say how far this gentleman entered
into the merits of the quarrel between the two republics,
which no arts of European jealousy can ever conceal from
the judgment of truth, for, with him, matters had gone
beyond the point when men feel the necessity of reasoning,
and when, perhaps, if such a condition of the mind is ever
to be defended, he found his perfect justification in feeling.
He had travelled, and knew life by observation, and not
through traditions and books. He had never believed,
therefore, that his countrymen could march to Washington,
or even to the Sabine; but he had hoped for better things
than had since occurred. The warlike qualities of the
Americans of the North, as he was accustomed to call
those who term themselves,
par excellence,
Americans, a
name they are fated to retain, and to raise high on the scale
of national power and national pre-eminence, unless they
fall by their own hands, had taken him by surprise, as
they have taken all but those who knew the country well,
and who understood its people. Little had he imagined
that the small, widely-spread body of regulars, that figured
in the blue books, almanacs and army-registers of America,
as some six or seven thousand men, scattered along frontiers
of a thousand leagues in extent, could, at the beck of the
government, swell into legions of invaders, men able to
carry war to the capitals of his own states, thousands of
miles from their doors, and formidable alike for their energy,
their bravery, their readiness in the use of arms, and their
numbers. He saw what is perhaps justly called the boasting
of the American character, vindicated by their exploits;
and marches, conquests and victories that, if sober truth
were alone to cover the pages of history, would far outdo
in real labour and danger the boasted passage of the Alps
under Napoleon, and the exploits that succeeded it.
Don Juan Montefalderon was a grave and thoughtful
man, of pure Iberian blood. He might have had about
him a little of the exaltation of the Spanish character; the
overflowings of a generous chivalry at the bottom; and,
under its influence, he may have set too high an estimate
on Mexico and her sons, but he was not one to shut his
eyes to the truth. He saw plainly that the northern
neighbours
of his country were a race formidable and enterprising,
and that of all the calumnies that had been heaped upon
them by rivalries and European superciliousness, that of
their not being military by temperament was, perhaps, the
most absurd of all. On the contrary, he had himself, though
anticipating evil, been astounded by the suddenness and
magnitude of their conquests, which in a few short months
after the breaking out of hostilities, had overrun regions
larger in extent than many ancient empires. All this had
been done, too, not by disorderly and barbarous hordes,
seeking in other lands the abundance that was wanting
at home; but with system and regularity, by men who
had turned the ploughshare into the sword for the
occasion
,
quitting abundance to encounter fatigue, famine,
and danger. In a word, the Seor Montefalderon saw
all the evils that environed his own land, and foresaw
others, of a still graver character that menaced the future.
On matters such as these did he brood in his walk, and
bitter did he find the minutes of that sad and lonely watch.
Although a Mexican, he could feel; although an avowed
foe of this good republic of ours, he had his principles, his
affections, and his sense of right. Whatever may be the
merits of the quarrel, and we are not disposed to deny that
our provocation has been great, a sense of right should
teach every man that what may be patriotic in an American,
would not be exactly the same thing in a Mexican, and
that we ought to respect in others sentiments that are so
much vaunted among ourselves. Midnight at length arrived,
and, calling the cook and steward, the unhappy gentleman
was relieved, and went to his berth to dream, in sorrow,
over the same pictures of national misfortunes, on which,
while waking, he had brooded in such deep melancholy.
The watch of Josh and Simon was tranquil, meeting
with no interruption until it was time to summon Jack.
One thing these men had done, however, that was of some
moment to Tier, under a pledge given by Josh, and which
had been taken in return for a dollar in hand. They had
managed to haul the light-house boat alongside, from its
position astern, and this so noiselessly as not to give the
alarm to any one. There it lay, when Jack appeared,
ready at the main-rigging, to receive him at any moment
he might choose to enter it.
5*
A few minutes after Jack appeared on deck, Rose and
Biddy came stealthily out of the cabin, the latter carrying
a basket filled with bread and broken meat, and not wanting
in sundry little delicacies, such as woman's hands prepare,
and, in this instance, woman's tenderness had provided.
The whole party met at the galley, a place so far removed
from the state-rooms aft as to be out of ear-shot. Here
Jack renewed his endeavours to persuade either Josh or
Simon to go in the boat, but without success. The negroes
had talked the matter over in their watch, and had come
to the conclusion the enterprise was too hazardous.
I tell you, Jack, you does n't know Cap'in Spike as well
as I does, Josh said, in continuance of the discourse. No,
you does n't know him at all as well as I does. If he finds
out that anybody has quit dis brig dis werry night, woful
will come! It no good to try to run; I run t'ree time, an'
Simon here run twice. What good it all do? We got
cotched, and here we is, just as fast as ever. I knows
Cap'in Spike, and does n't want to fall in athwart his hawse
any more.
Y-e-s, dat my judgment too, put in the cook. We
wishes you well, Jack, and we wishes Miss Rose well, and
Mr. Mulford well, but we can't, no how, run ath'art hawse,
as Josh says. Dat is my judgment, too.
Well, if your minds are made up to this, my darkies,
I s'pose there'll be no changing them, said Jack. At
all ewents you'll lend us a hand, by answering any hail
that may come from aft, in my watch, and in keepin' our
secret. There's another thing you can do for us, which
may be of service. Should Captain Spike miss the boat,
and lay any trap to catch us, you can just light this here
bit of lantern and hang it over the brig's bows, where he'll
not be likely to see it, that we may know matters are going
wrong, and give the craft a wide berth.
Sartain, said Josh, who entered heartily into the affair,
so far as good wishes for its success were concerned, at
the very moment when he had a most salutary care of his
own back. Sartain; we do all dat, and no t'ank asked.
It no great matter to answer a hail, or to light a lantern
and sling him over de bows; and if Captain Spike want to
know who did it, let him find out.
Here both negroes laughed heartily, manifesting so little
care to suppress their mirth, that Rose trembled lest their
noise should awaken Spike. Accustomed sounds, however,
seldom produce this effect on the ears of the sleeper, and
the heavy breathing from the state-room, succeeded the
merriment of the blacks, as soon as the latter ceased.
Jack now announced his readiness to depart. Some little
care and management were necessary to get into the boat
noiselessly, more especially with Biddy. It was done
however
,
with the assistance of the blacks, who cast off the
painter, when Jack gave the boat a shove to clear the brig,
and suffered it to drift astern for a considerable distance
before he ventured to cast loose the sail.
I know Spike well, said Jack, in answer to a
remonstrance
from the impatient Rose concerning his delay: A
single flap of that canvas would wake him up, with the
brig anchored, while he would sleep through a salute of
heavy guns if it came in regular course. Quick ears has
old Stephen, and it's best to humour them. In a minute
more we'll set our canvas and be off.
All was done as Jack desired, and the boat got away
from the brig unheard and undetected. It was blowing a
good breeze, and Jack Tier had no sooner got the sail on
the boat, than away it started at a speed that would have
soon distanced Spike in his yawl, and with his best oarsmen.
The main point was to keep the course, though the
direction
of the wind was a great assistant. By keeping the
wind abeam, Jack thought he should be going toward the
rock of Mulford. In one hour, or even in less time, he
expected to reach it, and he was guided by time, in his
calculations, as much as by any other criterion. Previously
to quitting the brig, he had gone up a few ratlins of the
fore-rigging to take the bearings of the fire on Mulford's
rock, but the light was no longer visible. As no star was
to be seen, the course was a little vague, but Jack was
navigator enough to understand that by keeping on the
weather side of the channel he was in the right road, and
that his great danger of missing his object was in
overrunning
it.
So much of the reef was above water, that it was not
difficult to steer a boat along its margin. The darkness,
to be sure, rendered it a little uncertain how near they
were running to the rocks, but, on the whole, Jack assured
Rose he had no great difficulty in getting along.
These trades are almost as good as compasses, he
said, and the rocks are better, if we can keep close aboard
them without going on to them. I do not know the exact
distance of the spot we seek from the brig, but I judged it
to be about two leagues, as I looked at it from aloft. Now,
this boat will travel them two leagues in an hour, with
this breeze and in smooth water.
I wish you had seen the fire again before we left the
brig, said Rose, too anxious for the result not to feel
uneasiness on some account or other.
The mate is asleep, and the fire has burned down;
that's the explanation. Besides, fuel is not too plenty on
a place like that Mr. Mulford inhabits just now. As we
get near the spot, I shall look out for embers, which may
sarve as a light-house, or beacon, to guide us into port.
Mr. Mulford will be charmed to see us, now that we
take him wather! exclaimed Biddy. Wather is a blessed
thing, and it's hard will be the heart that does not fale
gratitude for a planty of swate wather.
The maty has plenty of food and water where he is,
said Jack. I'll answer for both them sarcumstances. I
saw him turn a turtle as plain as if I had been at his elbow,
and I saw him drinking at a hole in the rock, as heartily
as a boy ever pulled at a gimblet-hole in a molasses
hogs-head
.
But the distance was so great, Jack, I should hardly
think you could have distinguished objects so small.
I went by the motions altogether. I saw the man, and
I saw the movements, and I knowed what the last meant.
It's true I couldn't swear to the turtle, though I saw
something
on the rock that I knowed, by the way in which it
was handled,
must
be a turtle. Then I saw the mate kneel,
and put his head low, and then I knowed he was drinking.
Perhaps he prayed, said Rose, solemnly.
Not he. Sailors isn't so apt to pray, Miss Rose; not
as apt as they ought to be. Women for prayers, and men
for work. Mr. Mulford is no worse than many others, but
I doubt if he be much given to
that
.
To this Rose made no answer, but Biddy took the matter
up, and, as the boat went briskly ahead, she pursued the
subject.
Then more is the shame for him, said the Irish woman,
and Miss Rose, and missus, and even I prayin'
for
him,
all as if he was our own brudder. It's seldom I ask
anything
for a heretic, but I could not forget a fine young man
like Mr. Mulford, and Miss Rose so partial to him, and he
in so bad a way. He ought to be ashamed to make his
brags that he is too proud to pray.
Harry has made no such wicked boast, put in Rose,
mildly; nor do we know that he has not prayed for us,
as well as for himself. It may all be a mistake of Jack's,
you know.
Yes, added Jack, coolly, it
may
be a mistake, a'ter
all, for I was lookin' at the maty six miles off, and through
a spy-glass. No one can be sure of anything at such a
distance. So overlook the matter, my good Biddy, and
carry Mr. Mulford the nice things you've mustered in that
basket, all the same as if he was pope.
This is a subject we had better drop, Rose quietly
observed.
Anything to oblige you, Miss Rose, though religion is
a matter it would do me no harm to talk about once and
awhile. It's many a long year since I've had time and
opportunity to bring my thoughts to dwell on holy things.
Ever since I left my mother's side, I've been a wanderer
in my mind, as much as in my body.
Poor Jack! I understand and feel for your sufferings;
but a better time will come, when you may return to the
habits of your youth, and to the observances of your church.
I do n't know that, Miss Rose; I do n't know that,
answered Tier, placing the elbow of his short arm on the
seemingly shorter leg, and bending his head so low as to
lean his face on the palm of the hand, an attitude in which
he appeared to be suffering keenly through his
recollections
.
Childhood and innocence never come back to us
in this world. What the grave may do, we shall all learn
in time.
Innocence can return to all with repentance, Jack;
and the heart that prompts you to do acts as generous as
this you are now engaged in, must contain some good seed
yet.
If Jack will go to a praste and just confess, when he
can find a father, it will do his sowl good, said Biddy,
who was touched by the mental suffering of the strange
little being at her side.
But the necessity of managing the boat soon compelled
its coxswain to raise his head, and to attend to his duty.
The wind sometimes came in puffs, and at such moments
Jack saw that the large sail of the light-house boat required
watching, a circumstance that induced him to shake off his
melancholy, and give his mind more exclusively to the
business
before him. As for Rose, she sympathised deeply
with Jack Tier, for she knew his history, his origin, the
story of his youth, and the well-grounded causes of his
contrition and regrets. From her, Jack had concealed
nothing
,
the gentle commiseration of one like Rose being a
balm to wounds that had bled for long and bitter years.
The great poet of our language, and the greatest that ever
lived, perhaps, short of the inspired writers of the Old
Testament
,
and old Homer and Dante, has well reminded us
that the little beetle, in yielding its breath, can feel a
pang as great as when a giant dies. Thus is it, too, in
morals. Abasement, and misery, and poverty, and sin,
may, and all do, contribute to lower the tone of our moral
existence; but the principle that has been planted by
nature
,
can be eradicated by nature only. It exists as long
as we exist; and if dormant for a time, under the pressure
of circumstances, it merely lies, in the moral system, like
the acorn, or the chestnut, in the ground, waiting its time
and season to sprout, and bud, and blossom. Should that
time never arrive, it is not because the seed is not there,
but because it is neglected. Thus was it with the singular
being of whose feelings we have just spoken. The germ
of goodness had been implanted early in him, and was
nursed with tenderness and care, until, self-willed, and
governed
by passion; he had thrown off the connections of
youth and childhood, to connect himself with Spikea
connection that had left him what he was. Before closing
our legend, we shall have occasion to explain it.
We have run our hour; Miss Rose, resumed Jack,
breaking a continued silence, during which the boat had
passed through a long line of water; we have run our
hour, and ought to be near the rock we are in search of.
But the morning is so dark that I fear we shall have
difficulty
in finding it. It will never do to run past it, and we
must haul closer into the reef, and shorten sail, that we
may be sartain to make no such mistake.
Rose begged her companion to omit no precaution, as
it would be dreadful to fail in their search, after incurring
so much risk in their own persons.
Harry may be sleeping on the sea-weed of which you
spoke, she added, and the danger of passing him will be
much increased in such a case. What a gloomy and
frightful
spot is this, in which to abandon a human being! I fear,
Jack, that we have come faster than we have supposed, and
may already have passed the rock.
I hope not, Miss Roseit seemed to me a good two
leagues to the place where I saw him, and the boat is fast
that will run two leagues in an hour.
We do not know the time, Jack, and are obliged to
guess at that as well as at the distance. How very dark it
is!
Dark, in one sense, it was not, though Rose's
apprehensions
,
doubtless, induced her to magnify every evil. The
clouds certainly lessened the light of the moon; but there
was still enough of the last to enable one to see
surrounding
objects; and most especially to render distinct the
character of the solitude that reigned over the place.
The proximity of the reef, which formed a weather shore
to the boat, prevented anything like a swell on the water,
notwithstanding the steadiness and strength of the breeze,
which had now blown for near twenty-four hours. The
same wind, in open water, would have raised sea enough
to cause a ship to pitch, or roll; whereas, the light-house
boat, placed where she was, scarce rose and fell under the
undulations of the channel through which she was
glancing
.
This is a good boat, and a fast boat too, observed
Jack Tier, after he had luffed up several minutes, in order
to make sure of his proximity to the reef; and it might
carry us all safe enough to Key West, or certainly back to
the Dry Tortugas, was we inclined to try our hands at
either.
I cannot quit my aunt, said Rose, quickly, so we
will not even think of any such thing.
No, 't would never do to abandon the missus, said
Biddy, and she on the wrack wid us, and falin' the want
of wather as much as ourselves.
We three have sartainly gone through much in
company
,
returned Jack, and it ought to make us friends
for life.
I trust it will, Jack; I hope, when we return to New
York, to see you among us, anchored, as you would call
it, for the rest of your days under my aunt's roof, or under
my own, should I ever have one.
No, Miss Rose, my business is with the Swash and
her captain. I shall stick by both, now I've found 'em
again, until they once more desart me. A man's duty is
his
duty, and a woman's duty is
her
duty.
You same to like the brig and her captain, Jack Tier,
observed Biddy, and there's no use in gainsaying such a
likin'. What
will
come to pass, must come to pass.
Captain
Spike is a mighty great sailor, anyway.
He's a willian! muttered Jack.
There! cried Rose, almost breathless, there is a
rock above the water, surely. Do not fly by it so swiftly,
Jack, but let us stop and examine it.
There is a rock, sure enough, and a large piece it is,
answered Tier. We will go alongside of it, and see what
it is made of. Biddy shall be boat-keeper, while you and
I, Miss Rose, explore.
Jack had thrown the boat into the wind, and was
shooting
close alongside of the reef, even while speaking. The
party found no difficulty in landing; the margin of the rock
admitting the boat to lie close alongside of it, and its
surface
being even and dry. Jack had brailed the sail, and
he brought the painter ashore, and fastened it securely to
a fragment of stone, that made a very sufficient anchor. In
addition to this precaution, a lazy painter was put into
Biddy's hands, and she was directed not to let go of it
while her companions were absent. These arrangements
concluded, Rose and Jack commenced a hurried
examination
of the spot.
A few minutes sufficed to give our adventurers a
tolerably
accurate notion of the general features of the place on
which they had landed. It was a considerable portion of
the reef that was usually above water, and which had even
some fragments of soil, or sand, on which was a stinted
growth of bushes. Of these last, however, there were very
few, nor were there many spots of the sand. Drift-wood
and sea-weed were lodged in considerable quantities about
its margin, and, in places, piles of both had been tossed
upon the rock itself, by the billows of former gales of wind.
Nor was it long before Jack discovered a turtle that had
been up to a hillock of sand, probably to deposit its eggs.
There was enough of the sportsman in Jack,
notwithstanding
the business he was on, to turn this animal; though
with what object, he might have been puzzled himself to
say. This exploit effected, Jack followed Rose as fast as
his short legs would permit, our heroine pressing forward
eagerly, though almost without hope, in order to assertain
if Mulford were there.
I am afraid this is not the rock, said Rose, nearly
breathless with her own haste, when Jack had overtaken
her. I see nothing of him, and we have passed over most
of the place.
Very true, Miss Rose, answered her companion, who
was in a good humour on account of his capture of the
turtle
;
but there are other rocks besides this. Ha! what
was that, yonder, pointing with a finger, here, more
toward
the brig. As I'm a sinner, there was a flashing, as
of fire.
If a fire, it must be that made by Harry. Let us go
to the spot at once.
Jack led the way, and, sure enough, he soon reached a
place where the embers of what had been a considerable
body of fire, were smouldering on the rock. The wind had
probably caused some brand to kindle momentarily, which
was the object that had caught Tier's eye. No doubt any
longer remained of their having found the very place where
the mate had cooked his supper, and lighted his beacon,
though he himself was not near it. Around these embers
Vol. II.6
were all the signs of Mulford's having made the meal, of
which Jack had seen the preparations. A portion of the
turtle, much the greater part of it, indeed, lay in its shell;
and piles of wood and sea-weed, both dry, had been placed
at hand, ready for use. A ship's topgallant-yard, with most
of its rope attached, lay with a charred end near the fire,
of where the fire had been, the wood having burned until
the flames went out for want of contact with other fuel.
There were many pieces of boards of pitch-pine in the
adjacent
heap, and two or three beautiful planks of the same
wood, entire. In short, from the character and quantity
of the materials of this nature that had thus been heaped
together, Jack gave it as his opinion that some vessel,
freighted with lumber, had been wrecked to windward, and
that the adjacent rocks had been receiving the tribute of
her cargo. Wrecks are of very, very frequent occurrence
on the Florida Reef; and there are always moments when
such gleanings are to be made in some part of it or other.
I see no better way to give a call to the mate, Miss
Rose, than to throw some of this dry weed, and some of
this lumber on the fire, said Jack, after he had rummaged
about the place sufficiently to become master of its
condition
.
There is plenty of amunition, and here goes for a
broadside.
Jack had no great difficulty in effecting his object. In
a few minutes he succeeded in obtaining a flame, and then
he fed it with such fragments of the brands and boards as
were best adapted to his purpose. The flames extended
gradually, and by the time Tier had dragged the
topgallant-yard
over the pile, and placed several planks, on their edges,
alongside of it, the whole was ready to burst into a blaze.
The light was shed athwart the rock for a long distance,
and the whole place, which was lately so gloomy and
obscure
,
now became gay, under the bright radiance of a
blazing
fire.
There is a beacon-light that might almost be seen on
board! said Jack, exulting in his success. If the mate
is anywhere in this latitude, he will soon turn up.
I see nothing of him, answered Rose, in a melancholy
voice. Surely, surely, Jack, he cannot have left the rock
just as we have come to rescue him!
Rose and her companion had turned their faces from the
fire to look in an opposite direction in quest of him they
sought. Unseen by them, a human form advanced swiftly
toward the fire, from a point on its other side. It advanced
nearer, then hesitated, afterward rushed forward with a
tread that caused the two to turn, and at the next moment,
Rose was clasped to the heart of Mulford.
CHAPTER III.
I might have pass'd that lovely cheek,
Nor, perchance, my heart have left me;
But the sensitive blush that came trembling there,
Of my heart it for ever bereft me.
Who could blame had I loved that face,
Ere my eyes could twice explore her;
Yet it is for the fairy intelligence there,
And her warm, warm heart I adore her.
Wolfe
.
The
stories of the respective parties who had thus so
strangely met on that barren and isolated rock, were soon
told. Harry confirmed all of Jack's statements as to his
own proceedings, and Rose had little more to say than to
add how much her own affections had led her to risk in
his behalf. In a word, ten minutes made each fully
acquainted
with the other's movements. Then Tier
considerately
retired to the boat, under the pretence of minding
it, and seeing everything ready for a departure, but as much
to allow the lovers the ten or fifteen minutes of
uninterrupted
discourse that they now enjoyed, as for any other reason.
It was a strange scene that now offered on the rock. By
this time the fire was burning not only brightly, but fiercely,
shedding its bright light far and near. Under its most
brilliant rays stood Harry and Rose, both smiling and
happy
,
delighted in their meeting, and, for the moment,
forgetful
of all but their present felicity. Never, indeed, had
Rose appeared more lovely than under these circumstances.
Her face was radiant with those feelings which had so
recently
changed from despair to delighta condition that
is ever most propitious to beauty; and charms that always
appeared feminine and soft, now seemed elevated to a bright
benignancy that might best be likened to our fancied images
of angels. The mild, beaming, serene and intelligent blue
eyes, the cheeks flushed with happiness, the smiles that
came so easily, and were so replete with tenderness, and
the rich hair, deranged by the breeze, and moistened by the
air of the sea, each and all, perhaps, borrowed some
additional
lustre from the peculiar light under which they were
exhibited. As for Harry, happiness had thrown all the
disadvantages
of exposure, want of dress, and a face that had not
felt the razor for six-and-thirty hours, into the back-ground.
When he left the wreck, he had cast aside his cap and his
light summer jacket, in order that they might not
encumber
him in swimming, but both had been recovered when
he returned with the boat to take off his friends. In his
ordinary sea attire, then, he now stood, holding Rose's two
hands in front of the fire, every garment clean and white
as the waters of the ocean could make them, but all
betraying
some of the signs of his recent trials. His fine
countenance
was full of the love he bore for the intrepid and
devoted girl who had risked so much in his behalf; and a
painter might have wished to preserve the expression of
ardent, manly admiration which glowed in his face,
answering
to the gentle sympathy and womanly tenderness it met
in that of Rose.
The back-ground of this picture was the wide, even
surface
of the coral reef, with its exterior setting of the dark
and gloomy sea. On the side of the channel, however,
appeared
the boat, already winded, with Biddy still on the
rock, looking kindly at the lovers by the fire, while Jack
was holding the painter, beginning to manifest a little
impatience
at the delay.
They'll stay there an hour, holding each other's hands,
and looking into each other's faces, half grumbled the
little, rotund, assistant-steward, anxious to be on his way
back to the brig, unless a body gives 'em a call. Captain
Spike will be in no very good humour to receive you and
me on board ag'in, if he should find out what sort of a trip
we've been making hereaway.
Let 'em alonelet 'em alone, Jacky, answered the
good-natured and kind-hearted Irish woman. It's happy
they bees, jist now, and it does my eyes good to look at
'em.
Ay, they're happy enough,
now;
I only hope it may
last.
Last! what should help its lasting? Miss Rose is so
good, and so handsomeand she's a fortin', too; and the
mate so nice a young man. Think of the likes of them,
Jack, wantin' the blessed gift of wather, and all within one
day and two nights. Sure it's Providence that takes care
of, and not we ourselves! Kings on their thrones is n't as
happy as
them
at this moment.
Men's willians! growled Jack; and more fools
women
for trustin' 'em.
Not sich a nice young man as our mate, Jacky; no,
not he. Now the mate of the ship I came from Liverpool
in, this time ten years agone, he was a villain. He grudged
us our potaties, and our own bread; and he grudged us
every dhrap of swate wather that went into our mouths.
Call him a villain, if you will, Jack; but niver call the
likes of Mr. Mulford by so hard a name.
I wish him well, and nothing else; and for that very
reason must put a stop to his looking so fondly into that
young woman's face. Time wont stand still, Biddy, to suit
the wishes of lovers; and Stephen Spike is a man not to
be trifled with. Halloo, there, maty! It's high time to
think of getting under way.
At this summons both Harry and Rose started, becoming
aware of the precious moments they were losing. Carrying
a large portion of the turtle, the former moved toward the
craft, in which all were seated in less than three minutes,
with the sail loose, and the boat in motion. For a few
moments the mate was so much occupied with Rose, that
he did not advert to the course; but one of his experience
could not long be misled on such a point, and he turned
suddenly to Tier, who was steering, to remonstrate.
How's this, Jack! cried Mulford; you've got the
boat's head the wrong way.
6*
Not I, sir. She's heading for the brig as straight as
she can go. This wind favours us on both legs; and it's
lucky it does, for't will be hard on upon daylight afore we
are alongside of her. You'll want half an hour of dark,
at the very least, to get a good start of the Swash, in case
she makes sail a'ter you.
Straight for the brig!what have we to do with the
brig? Our course is for Key West, unless it might be
better to run down before the wind to the Dry Tortugas
again, and look for the sloop-of-war. Duty, and perhaps
my own safety, tells me to let Captain Mull know what
Spike is about with the Swash; and I shall not hesitate a
moment about doing it, after all that has passed. Give me
the helm, Jack, and let us ware short round on our heel.
Never, master matynever. I must go back to the
brig. Miss Rose, there, knows that my business is with
Stephen Spike, and with him only.
And I must return to my aunt, Harry, put in Rose,
herself. It would never do for me to desert my aunt, you
know.
And I have been taken from that rock, to be given up
to the tender mercies of Spike again?
This was said rather in surprise, than in a complaining
way; and it at once induced Rose to tell the young man
the whole of their project.
Never, Harry, never, she said firmly. It is our
intention
to return to the brig ourselves, and let you escape in the
boat afterwards. Jack Tier is of opinion this can be done
without much risk, if we use proper caution and do not
lose too much time. On no account would I consent to
place you in the hands of Spike againdeath would be
preferable to that, Harry!
And on no account can or will I consent to place
you
again in the hands of Spike, Rose, answered the young
man. Now that we know his intentions, such an act
would be almost impious.
Remember my aunt, dear Harry. What would be her
situation in the morning, when she found herself deserted
by her niece and Biddyby me, whom she has nursed and
watched from childhood, and whom she loves so well.
I shall not deny your obligations to your aunt, Rose,
and your duty to her under ordinary circumstances. But
these are not ordinary circumstances; and it would be
courting the direst misfortunes, nay, almost braving
Providence
,
to place yourself in the hands of that scoundrel
again, now that you are clear of them.
Spike's a willian! muttered Jack.
And my desartin' the missus would be a sin that no
praste would overlook aisily, put in Biddy. When
Miss Rose told me of this v'y'ge that she meant to make in
the boat wid Jack Tier, I asked to come along, that I
might take care of her, and see that there was plenty of
wather; but ill-luck befall me if I would have t'ought of
sich a thing, and the missus desarted.
We can then run alongside of the brig, and put Biddy
and Jack on board of her, said Mulford, reflecting a
moment
on what had just been said, when you and I can
make the best of our way to Key West, where the means
of sending government vessels out after the Swash will
soon offer. In this way we can not only get our friends out
of the lion's jaws, but keep out of them ourselves.
Reflect a moment, Harry, said Rose, in a low voice,
but not without tenderness in its tones; it would not do
for me to go off alone with you in this boat.
Not when you have confessed your willingness to go
over the wide world with me, Rosewith me, and with
me only?
Not even then, Harry. I know you will think better
of this, when your generous nature has time to reason with
your heart, on my account.
I can only answer in your own words, Rosenever.
If you return to the Swash, I shall go on board with you,
and throw defiance into the very teeth of Spike. I know
the men do not dislike me, and, perhaps, assisted by Seor
Montefalderon, and a few friends among the people, I can
muster a force that will prevent my being thrown into the
sea.
Rose burst into tears, and then succeeded many minutes,
during which Mulford was endeavouring, with manly
tenderness
,
to soothe her. As soon as our heroine recovered
her self-command, she began to discuss the matter at issue
between them more coolly. For half an hour everything
was urged by each that feeling, affection, delicacy, or
distrust
of Spike could well urge, and Mulford was slowly
getting
the best of the argument, as well he might, the truth
being mostly of his side. Rose was bewildered, really
feeling a strong reluctance to quit her aunt, even with so
justifiable a motive, but principally shrinking from the
appearance
of going off alone in a boat, and almost in the
open sea, with Mulford. Had she loved Harry less, her
scruples might not have been so active, but the
consciousness
of the strength of her attachment, as well as her fixed
intention to become his wife the moment it was in her
power to give him her hand with the decencies of her sex,
contributed strangely to prevent her yielding to the young
man's reasoning. On the subject of the aunt, the mate
made out so good a case, that it was apparent to all in the
boat Rose would have to abandon that ground of refusal.
Spike had no object to gain by ill-treating Mrs. Budd; and
the probability certainly was that he would get rid of her
as soon as he could, and in the most easy manner. This
was so apparent to all, that Harry had little difficulty in
getting Rose to assent to its probability. But there
remained
the reluctance to go off alone with the mate in a
boat. This part of the subject was more difficult to
manage
than the other; and Mulford betrayed as much by the
awkwardness with which he managed it. At length the
discussion was brought to a close by Jack Tier suddenly
saying,
Yonder is the brig; and we are heading for her as
straight as if she was the pole, and the keel of this boat was a
compass. I see how it is, Miss Rose, and a'ter all, I must
give in. I suppose some other opportunity will offer for
me to get on board of the brig ag'in, and I'll trust to that.
If you won't go off with the mate alone, I suppose you'll
not refuse to go off in my company.
Will you accompany us, Jack? This is more than I
had hoped for! Yes, Harry, if Jack Tier will be of the
party, I will trust my aunt to Biddy, and go with you to
Key West, in order to escape from Spike.
This was said so rapidly, and so unexpectedly, as to take
Mulford completely by surprise. Scarce believing what he
heard, the young man was disposed, at first, to feel hurt,
though a moment's reflection showed him that he ought to
rejoice in the result let the cause be what it might.
More than I had hoped for! he could not refrain from
repeating a little bitterly; is Jack Tier, then, of so much
importance, that
his
company is thought preferable to
mine!
Hush, Harry! said Rose, laying her hand on
Mulford's
arm, by way of strengthening her appeal. Do not
say
that
. You are ignorant of circumstances; at another
time you shall know them, but not now. Let it be enough
for the present, that I promise to accompany you if Jack
will be of our party.
Ay, ay, Miss Rose, I will be of the party, seeing there
is no other way of getting the lamb out of the jaws of the
wolf. A'ter all, it may be the wisest thing I can do, though
back to the Swash I must and
will
come, powder or no
powder, treason or no treason, at the first opportunity. Yes,
my
business is with the Molly, and to the Molly I shall
return
.
It's lucky, Miss Rose, since you have made up your
mind to ship for this new cruise, that I bethought me of
telling Biddy to make up a bundle of duds for you. This
carpet-bag has a change or two in it, and all owing to my
forethought. Your woman said `Miss Rose will come
back wid us, Jack, and what's the use of rumplin' the
clothes for a few hours' sail in the boat;' but I knew
womankind
better, and foreseed that if master mate fell in
alongside of you ag'in, you would not be apt to part
company
very soon.
I thank you, Jack, for the provision made for my
comfort
;
though some money would have added to it
materially
.
My purse has a little gold in it, but a very little,
and I fear you are not much better off, Harry. It will be
awkward to find ourselves in Key West penniless.
We shall not be quite that. I left the brig absolutely
without a cent, but foreseeing that necessity might make
them of use, I borrowed half a dozen of the doubloons from
the bag of Seor Montefalderon, and, fortunately, they are
still in my pocket. All I am worth in the world is in a
bag of half-eagles, rather more than a hundred altogether,
which I left in my chest, in my own state-room aboard the
brig.
You'll find that in the carpet-bag too, master mate,
said Jack, coolly.
Find what, mannot my money, surely?
Ay, every piece of it. Spike broke into your chest
this a'ternoon, and made me hold the tools while he was
doing it. He found the bag, and overhauled ita hundred
and seven half, eleven quarter, and one full-grown eagle,
was the count. When he had done the job, he put all
back ag'in, a'ter giving me the full-grown eagle for my
share of the plunder, and told me to say nothing of what
I had seen. I did say nothing, but I did a good bit of
work, for, while he was at supper. I confiserated that bag,
as they call itand you will find it there among Miss
Rose's clothes, with the full-grown gentleman back in his
nest ag'in.
This is being not only honest, Tier, cried Mulford,
heartily, but thoughtful. One-half that money shall be
yours for this act.
I thank'e, sir; but I'll not touch a cent of it. It came
hard, I know, Mr. Mulford; for my own hands have
smarted
too much with tar, not to know that the seaman `earns
his money like the horse.'
Still it would not be `spending it like an ass,' Jack,
to give you a portion of mine. But there will be other
opportunities
to talk of this. It is a sign of returning to the
concerns of life, Rose, that money begins to be of interest
to us. How little did we think of the doubloons, or
half-eagles
,
a few hours since, when on the wreck!
It was wather that we t'ought of then, put in Biddy.
Goold is good in a market, or in a town, or to send back
to Ireland, to help a body's aged fader or mudder in
comfort
wid; but wather is the blessed thing on a wrack!
The brig is coming quite plainly into view, and you
had better give me the helm, Jack. It is time to bethink
us of the manner of approaching her, and how we are to
proceed when alongside.
This was so obviously true, that everybody felt disposed
to forget all other matters, in order to conduct the
proceedings
of the next twenty minutes, with the necessary
prudence
and caution. When Mulford first took the helm,
the brig was just coming clearly into view, though still
looking a little misty and distant. She might then have
been half a league distant, and would not have been visible
at all by that light, but for the circumstance that she had
no back-ground to swallow up her outlines. Drawn against
clouds, above which the rays of the moon were shed, her
tracery was to be discerned, however, and, minute by
minute, it was getting to be more and more distinct, until
it was now so plainly to be seen as to admonish the mate
of the necessity of preparation in the manner mentioned.
Tier now communicated to the mate his own proposed
manner of proceeding. The brig tended to the trades, the
tides having very little influence on her, in the bight of the
reef where she lay. As the wind stood at about east
south-east
,
the brig's stern pointed to about west north-west,
while the boat was coming down the passage from a
direction
nearly north from her, having, as a matter of course,
the wind just free enough to lay her course. Jack's plan
was to pass the brig to windward, and having got well on
her bow, to brail the sail, and drift down upon her,
expecting
to fall in alongside, abreast of the fore-chains, into
which he had intended to help Biddy, and to ascend
himself
,
when he supposed that Mulford would again make
sail, and carry off his mistress. To this scheme the mate
objected that it was awkward, and a little lubberly. He
substituted one in its place that differed in seamanship, and
which was altogether better. Instead of passing to
windward
,
Mulford suggested the expediency of approaching
to leeward, and of coming alongside under the open
bow-port
,
letting the sheet fly and brailing the sail, when the
boat should be near enough to carry her to the point of
destination without further assistance from her canvass.
Jack Tier took his officer's improvement on his own
plan in perfect good part, readily and cheerfully expressing
his willingness to aid the execution of it all that lay in his
power. As the boat sailed unusually well, there was barely
time to explain to each individual his or her part in the
approaching
critical movements, ere the crisis itself drew
near; then each of the party became silent and anxious,
and events were regarded rather than words.
It is scarcely necessary to say that Mulford sailed a boat
well. He held the sheet in his hand, as the little craft
came up under the lee-quarter of the brig, while Jack stood
by the brail. The eyes of the mate glanced over the hull
of the vessel to ascertain, if possible, who might be stirring;
but not a sign of life could he detect on board her. This
very silence made Mulford more distrustful and anxious,
for he feared a trap was set for him. He expected to see
the head of one of the blacks at least peering over the
bulwarks
,
but nothing like a man was visible. It was too late
to pause, however, and the sheet was slowly eased off, Jack
hauling on the brail at the same time; the object being to
prevent the sail's flapping, and the sound reaching the ears
of Spike. As Mulford used great caution, and had
previously
schooled Jack on the subject, this important point
was successfully achieved. Then the mate put his helm
down, and the boat shot up under the brig's lee-bow. Jack
was ready to lay hold of one of the bow-sprit shrouds, and
presently the boat was breasted up under the desired port,
and secured in that position. Mulford quitted the
stern-sheets
,
and cast a look in upon deck. Nothing was to be
seen, though he heard the heavy breathing of the blacks,
both of whom were sound asleep on a sail that they had
spread on the forecastle.
The mate whispered for Biddy to come to the port. This
the Irishwoman did at once, having kissed Rose, and
taken her leave of her previously. Tier also came to the
port, through which he passed, getting on deck with a view
to assist Biddy, who was awkward, almost as a matter of
course, to pass through the same opening. He had just
succeeded, when the whole party was startled, some of them
almost petrified, indeed, by a hail from the quarter-deck
in the well-known, deep tones of Spike.
For'ard, there? hailed the captain. Receiving no
answer, he immediately repeated, in a shorter, quicker
call, Forecastle, there?
Sir, answered Jack Tier, who by this time had come
to his senses.
Who has the look-out on that forecastle?
I have it, sirI, Jack Tier. You know, sir, I was to
have it from two 'till daylight.
Ay, ay, I remember now. How does the brig ride to
her anchor?
As steady as a church, sir. She's had no more sheer
the whole watch than if she was moored head and starn.
Does the wind stand as it did?
No change, sir. As dead a trade wind as ever blowed.
What hard breathing is that I hear for'ard?
'T is the two niggers, sir. They've turned in on
deck, and are napping it off at the rate of six knots.
There's no keepin' way with a nigger in snorin'.
I thought I heard loud whispering, too, but I suppose
it was a sort of half-dream. I'm often in that way
now-a-days
.
Jack!
Sir.
Go to the scuttle-butt and get me a pot of fresh water
my coppers are hot with hard thinking.
Jack did as ordered, and soon stood beneath the
coach-house
deck with Spike, who had come out of his state-room,
heated and uneasy at he knew not what. The captain
drank a full pint of water at a single draught.
That's refreshing, he said, returning Jack the
tin-pot
,
and I feel the cooler for it. How much does it want
of daylight, Jack?
Two hours, I think, sir. The order was passed to me
to have all hands called as soon as it was broad day.
Ay, that is right. We must get our anchor and be off
as soon as there is light to do it in. Doubloons may melt
as well as flour, and are best cared for soon when cared
for at all.
I shall see and give the call as soon as it is day. I
hope, Captain Spike, I can take the liberty of an old
shipmate
,
however, and say one thing to you, which is this
look out for the Poughkeepsie, which is very likely to be
on your heels when you least expect her.
That's your way of thinking, is it, Jack. Well, I
thank you, old one, for the hint, but have little fear of that
craft. We've had our legs together, and I think the brig
has the longest.
As the captain said this, he gaped like a hound, and
went into his state-room. Jack lingered on the
quarter-deck
,
waiting to hear him fairly in his berth, when he made
a sign to Biddy, who had got as far aft as the galley, where
she was secreted, to pass down into the cabin, as silently
Vol. II.7
as possible. In a minute or two more, he moved forward,
singing in a low, cracked voice, as was often his practice,
and slowly made his way to the forecastle. Mulford was
just beginning to think the fellow had changed his mind,
and meant to stick by the brig, when the little, rotund
figure
of the assistant-steward was seen passing through the
port, and to drop noiselessly on a thwart. Jack then moved
to the bow, and cast off the painter, the head of the boat
slowly falling off under the pressure of the breeze on that
part of her mast and sail which rose above the hull of the
Swash. Almost at the same moment, the mate let go the
stern-fast, and the boat was free.
It required some care to set the sail without the canvas
flapping. It was done, however, before the boat fairly took
the breeze, when all was safe. In half a minute the wind
struck the sail, and away the little craft started, passing
swiftly ahead of the brig. Soon as far enough off, Mulford
put up his helm and wore short round, bringing the boat's
head to the northward, or in its proper direction; after
which they flew along before the wind, which seemed to
be increasing in force, with a velocity that really appeared
to defy pursuit. All this time the brig lay in its silence
and solitude, no one stirring on board her, and all, in fact,
Biddy alone excepted, profoundly ignorant of what had just
been passing alongside of her. Ten minutes of running
off with a flowing sheet, caused the Swash to look indistinct
and hazy again; in ten minutes more she was swallowed
up, hull, spars, and all, in the gloom of night.
Mulford and Rose now felt something like that security,
without the sense of which happiness itself is but an
uneasy
feeling, rendering the anticipations of evil the more
painful by the magnitude of the stake. There they sat,
now, in the stern-sheets by themselves, Jack Tier having
placed himself near the bows of the boat, to look out for
rocks, as well as to trim the craft. It was not long before
Rose was leaning on Harry's shoulder, and ere an hour
was past, she had fallen into a sweet sleep in that attitude,
the young man having carefully covered her person with a
capacious shawl, the same that had been used on the wreck.
As for Jack, he maintained his post in silence, sitting with
his arms crossed, and the hands thrust into the breast of
his jacket, sailor fashion, a picture of nautical vigilance.
It was some time after Rose had fallen asleep, that this
singular being spoke for the first time.
Keep her away a bit, maty, he said, keep her away,
half a point or so. She's been travelin' like a racer since
we left the brig; and yonder's the first streak of day.
By the time we have been running, observed Mulford,
I should think we must be getting near the northern side
of the reef.
All of that, sir, depend on it. Here's a rock close
aboard on us, to which we're comin' fastjust off here,
on our weather-bow, that looks to me like the place where
you landed a'ter that swim, and where we had stowed
ourselves
when Stephen Spike made us out, and gave chase.
It is surprising to me, Jack, that you should have any
fancy to stick by a man of Spike's character. He is a
precious rascal, as we all can see, now, and you are rather
an honest sort of fellow.
Do you love the young woman there, that's lying in
your arms, as it might be, and whom you say you wish to
marry.
The question is a queer one, but it is easily answered.
More than my life, Jack.
Well, how happens it that
you
succeed, when the world
has so many other young men who might please her as
well as yourself.
It may be that no other loves her as well, and she has
had the sagacity to discover it.
Quite likely. So it is with me and Stephen Spike. I
fancy a man whom other folk despise and condemn.
Why
I stand by him is my own secret; but stand by him I do
and will.
This is all very strange, after your conduct on the
island, and your conduct to-night. I shall not disturb your
secret, however, Jack, but leave you to enjoy it by
yourself
.
Is this the rock of which you spoke, that we are now
passing?
The same; and there's the spot in which we was
stowed when they made us out from the brig; and
hereaway
,
a cable's length, more or less, the wreck of that
Mexican craft must lie.
What is that rising above the water, thereaway, Jack;
more on our weather-beam?
I see what you mean, sir; it looks like a spar. By
George! there's two on 'em; and they
do
seem to be the
schooner's masts.
Sure enough! a second look satisfied Mulford that two
mast-heads were out of water, and that within a hundred
yards of the place the boat was running past. Standing
on a short distance, or far enough to give himself room,
the mate put his helm down, and tacked the boat. The
flapping of the sail, and the little movement of shifting over
the sheet, awoke Rose, who was immediately apprized of
the discovery. As soon as round, the boat went glancing
up to the spars, and presently was riding by one, Jack Tier
having caught hold of a topmast-shroud, when Mulford let
fly his sheet again, and luffed short up to the spot. By
this time the increasing light was sufficiently strong to
render
objects distinct, when near by, and no doubt remained
any longer in the mind of Mulford about the two
mast-heads
being those of the unfortunate Mexican schooner.
Well, of all I have ever seen I've never see'd the like
of this afore! exclaimed Jack. When we left this here
craft, sir, you'll remember, she had almost turned turtle,
laying over so far as to bring her upper coamings under
water; now she stands right side up, as erect as if docked!
My navigation can't get along with this, Mr. Mulford, and
it does seem like witchcraft.
It is certainly a very singular incident, Jack, and I have
been trying to come at its causes.
Have you succeeded, Harry? asked Rose, by this
time wide awake, and wondering like the others.
It must have happened in this wise. The wreck was
abandoned by us some little distance out here, to windward.
The schooner's masts, of course, pointed to leeward, and
when she drifted in here, they have first touched on a
shelving rock, and as they have been shoved up, little by
little, they have acted as levers to right the hull, until the
cargo has shifted back into its proper berth, which has
suddenly set the vessel up again.
Ay, ay, sir, answered Jack, all that might have
happened
had she been above water, or any part of her above
water; but you'll remember, maty, that soon after we left
her she went down.
Not entirely. The wreck settled in the water no faster
after we had left it, than it had done before. It continued
to sink, inch by inch, as the air escaped, and no faster
after it had gone entirely out of sight than before; not as
fast, indeed, as the water became denser the lower it got.
The great argument against my theory, is the fact, that
after the hull got beneath the surface, the wind could not
act on it. This is true in one sense, however, and not in
another. The waves, or the pressure of the water produced
by the wind, might act on the hull for some time after we
ceased to see it. But the currents have set the craft in
here, and the hull floating always, very little force would
cant the craft. If the rock were shelving and slippery, I
see no great difficulty in the way; and the barrels may
have been so lodged, that a trifle would set them rolling
back again, each one helping to produce a change that
would move another. As for the ballast, that, I am certain,
could not shift, for it was stowed with great care. As the
vessel righted, the air still in her moved, and as soon as
the water permitted, it escaped by the hatches, when the
craft went down, as a matter of course. This air may
have aided in bringing the hull upright by its movements
in the water.
This was the only explanation to which the ingenuity
of Mulford could help him, under the circumstances, and
it may have been the right one, or not. There lay the
schooner, however, in some five or six fathoms of water,
with her two topmasts, and lower mast-heads out of the
element, as upright as if docked! It may all have
occurred
as the mate fancied, or the unusual incident may have
been owing to some of the many mysterious causes which
baffle inquiry, when the agents are necessarily hidden from
examination.
Spike intends to come and look for this wreck, you
tell me, Jack; in the hope of getting at the doubloons it
contains? said Mulford; when the boat had lain a minute
or two longer, riding by the mast-head.
Ay, ay, sir; that's his notion, sir, and he'll be in a
great stew, as soon as he turns out, which must be about
7*
this time, and finds me missing; for I was to pilot him to
the spot.
He'll want no pilot now. It will be scarcely possible
to pass anywhere near this and not see these spars. But
this discovery almost induces me to change my own plans.
What say
you,
Rose? We have now reached the northern
side of the reef, when it is time to haul close by the wind,
if we wish to beat up to Key West. There is a moral
certainty
,
however, that the sloop-of-war is somewhere in the
neighbourhood of the Dry Tortugas, which are much the
most easily reached, being to leeward. We might run
down to the light-house by mid-day, while it is doubtful if
we could reach the town until to-morrow morning. I
should like exceedingly to have five minutes conversation
with the commander of the Poughkeepsie.
Ay, to let him know where he will be likely to fall in
with the Molly Swash and her traitor master, Stephen
Spike, cried Jack Tier. Never mind, maty; let 'em
come on; both the Molly and her master have got long
legs and clean heels. Stephen Spike will show 'em how
to thread the channels of a reef.
It is amazing to me, Jack, that you should stand by
your old captain in feeling, while you are helping to thwart
him, all you can, in his warmest wishes.
He's a willian! muttered Jacka reg'lar willian is
Stephen Spike!
If a villain, why do you so evidently wish to keep him
out of the hands of the law? Let him be captured and
punished
,
as his crimes require.
Men's willians, all round, still muttered Jack.
Hark'e, Mr. Mulford, I've sailed in the brig longer than
you, and know'd her in her comeliest and best dayswhen
she was young, and blooming, and lovely to the eye, as the
young creature at your sideand it would go to my heart
to have anything happen to
her
. Then, I've know'd
Stephen
a long time, too, and old shipmates get a feelin' for
each other, sooner or later. I tell you now, honestly, Mr.
Mulford, Captain Adam Mull shall never make a prisoner
of Stephen Spike, if I can prevent it.
The mate laughed at this sally, but Rose appeared
anxious to change the conversation, and she managed to
open a discussion on the subject of the course it might be
best to steer. Mulford had several excellent reasons to urge
for wishing to run down to the islets, all of which, with a
single exception, he laid before his betrothed. The
concealed
reason was one of the strongest of them all, as
usually
happens when there is a reason to conceal, but of that
he took care to say nothing. The result was an
acquiescence
on the part of Rose, whose consent was yielded
more to the influence of one particular consideration than
to all the rest united. That one was this: Harry had
pointed out to her the importance to himself of his
appearing
early to denounce the character and movements of the
brig, lest, through his former situation in her, his own
conduct
might be seriously called in question.
As soon as the matter was determined, Jack was told to
let go his hold, the sheet was drawn aft, and away sped the
boat. No sooner did Mulford cause the little craft to keep
away than it almost flew, as if conscious it were bound to
its proper home, skimming swiftly over the waves, like a
bird returning eagerly to its nest. An hour later the party
breakfasted. While at this meal, Jack Tier pointed out
to the mate a white speck, in the south-eastern board, which
he took to be the brig coming through the passage, on her
way to the wreck.
No matter, returned the mate. Though we can see
her, she cannot see us. There is that much advantage in
our being small, Rose, if it do prevent our taking exercise
by walking the deck.
Soon after, Mulford made a very distant sail in the
north-western
board, which he hoped might turn out to be the
Poughkeepsie. It was but another speck, but its position
was somewhat like that in which he had expected to meet
the sloop-of-war. The two vessels were so far apart that
one could not be seen from the other, and there was little
hope that the Poughkeepsie would detect Spike at his toil
on the wreck; but the mate fully expected that the ship
would go into the anchorage, among the islets, in order to
ascertain what had become of the schooner. If she did not
go in herself, she would be almost certain to send in a
boat.
The party from the brigantine had run down before the
wind more than two hours before the light-house began to
show itself, just rising out of the waves. This gave them
the advantage of a beacon, Mulford having steered hitherto
altogether by the sun, the direction of the wind, and the
treading of the reef. Now he had his port in sight, it
being
his intention to take possession of the dwelling of the
light-house keeper, and to remain in it, until a favourable
opportunity occurred to remove Rose to Key West. The
young man had also another important project in view,
which it will be in season to mention as it reaches the
moment
of its fulfillment.
The rate of sailing of the light-house boat, running
before
a brisk trade wind, could not be much less than nine
miles in the hour. About eleven o'clock, therefore, the
lively craft shot through one of the narrow channels of the
islets, and entered the haven. In a few minutes all three
of the adventurers were on the little wharf where the
light-house
people were in the habit of landing. Rose proceeded
to the house, while Harry and Jack remained to secure the
boat. For the latter purpose a sort of slip, or little dock,
had been made, and when the boat was hauled into it, it
lay so snug that not only was the craft secure from injury,
but it was actually hid from the view of all but those who
stood directly above it.
This is a snug berth for the boat, Jack, observed the
mate, when he had hauled it into the place mentioned,
and by unstepping the mast, a passer-by would not
suspect
such a craft of lying in it. Who knows what
occasion
there may be for concealment, and I'll e'en do that
thing.
To a casual listener, Harry, in unstepping the mast,
might have seemed influenced merely by a motiveless
impulse
;
but, in truth, a latent suspicion of Jack's intentions
instigated him, and as he laid the mast, sprit and sail on
the thwarts, he determined, in his own mind, to remove
them all to some other place, as soon as an opportunity for
doing so unobserved should occur. He and Jack now
followed
Rose to the house.
The islets were found deserted and tenantless. Not a
human being had entered the house since Rose left it, the
evening she had remained so long ashore, in company with
her aunt and the Seor Montefalderon. This our heroine
knew from the circumstance of finding a slight fastening
of the outer door in the precise situation in which she had
left it with her own hands. At first a feeling of oppression
and awe prevailed with both Harry and Rose, when they
recollected the fate of those who had so lately been tenants
of the place; but this gradually wore off, and each soon got
to be more at home. As for Jack, he very coolly
rummaged
the lockers, as he called the drawers and closets of
the place, and made his preparations for cooking a very
delicious
repast, in which
callipash
and
callipee
were to be
material ingredients. The necessary condiments were
easily enough found in that place, turtle being a common
dish there, and it was not long before steams that might
have quickened the appetite of an alderman filled the
kitchen. Rose rummaged, too, and found a clean
tablecloth
,
plates, glasses, bowls, spoons, and knives; in a
word, all that was necessary to spread a plain but plentiful
board. While all this was doing, Harry took some
fishing-tackle
,
and proceeded to a favourable spot among the rocks.
In twenty minutes he returned with a fine mess of that
most delicious little fish that goes by the very unpoetical
name of hog-fish, from the circumstance of its giving a
grunt not unlike that of a living porker, when rudely drawn
from its proper element. Nothing was now wanting to
not only a comfortable, but to what was really a most
epicurian
meal, and Jack just begged the lovers to have
patience
for an hour or so, when he promised them dishes
that even New York could not furnish.
Harry and Rose first retired to pay a little attention to
their dress, and then they joined each other in a walk.
The mate had found some razors, and was clean shaved.
He had also sequestered a shirt, and made some other little
additions to his attire, that contributed to give him the
appearance
of being, that which he really was, a very
gentleman-like
looking young sailor. Rose had felt no necessity
for taking liberties with the effects of others, though a good
deal of female attire was found in the dwelling. As was
afterward ascertained, a family ordinarily dwelt there, but
most of it had gone to Key West, on a visit, at the moment
when the man and boy left in charge had fallen into the
hands of the Mexicans, losing their lives in the manner
mentioned.
While walking together, Harry opened his mind to Rose,
on the subject which lay nearest to his heart, and which
had been at the bottom of this second visit to the islets of
the Dry Tortugas. During the different visits of Wallace
to the brig, the boat's crew of the Poughkeepsie had held
more or less discourse with the people of the Swash. This
usually happens on such occasions, and although Spike had
endeavoured to prevent it, when his brig lay in this bay,
he had not been entirely successful. Such discourse is
commonly jocular, and sometimes witty; every speech,
coming from which side it may, ordinarily commencing
with shipmate, though the interlocutors never saw each
other before that interview. In one of the visits an
allusion
was made to cargo, when the pretty gal aft, was
mentioned
as being a part of the cargo of the Swash. In answer
to this remark, the wit of the Poughkeepsie had told the
brig's man, you had better send her on board us,
for we
carry a chaplain, a regular-built one, that will be a bishop
some day or other, perhaps,
and we can get her spliced to
one of our young officers. This remark had induced the
sailor of the Molly to ask if a sloop-of-war really carried
such a piece of marine luxury as a chaplain, and the
explanation
given went to say that the clergyman in question
did not properly belong to the Poughkeepsie, but was to be
put on board a frigate, as soon as they fell in with one that
he named. Now, all this Mulford overheard, and he
remembered
it at a moment when it might be of use.
Situated
as he and Rose were, he felt the wisdom and propriety
of their being united, and his present object was to
persuade
his companion to be of the same way of thinking.
He doubted not that the sloop-of-war would come in, ere
long, perhaps that very day, and he believed it would be an
easy matter to induce her chaplain to perform the
ceremony
.
America is a country in which every facility exists,
with the fewest possible impediments, to getting married;
and, we regret to be compelled to add, to getting
unmarried
also. There are no banns, no licenses, no consent of
parents even, usually necessary, and persons who are of
the age of discretion, which, as respects females and
matrimony
,
is a very tender age indeed, may be married, if they
see fit, almost without form or ceremony. There existed,
therefore, no legal impediment to the course Mulford
desired
to take; and his principal, if not his only difficulty,
would be with Rose. Over her scruples he hoped to
prevail
,
and not without reason, as the case he could and did
present, was certainly one of a character that entitled him
to be heard with great attention.
In the first place, Mrs. Budd had approved of the
connection
,
and it was understood between them, that the
young people were to be united at the first port in which a
clergyman of their own persuasion could be found, and
previously to reaching home. This had been the aunt's
own project, for, weak and silly as she was, the relict had
a woman's sense of the proprieties. It had occured to her
that it would be more respectable to make the long journey
which lay before them, escorted by a nephew and husband,
than escorted by even an accepted lover. It is true that
she had never anticipated a marriage in a light-house, and
under the circumstances in which Rose was now placed,
though it might be more reputable that her niece should
quit the islets as the wife of Harry than as his betrothed.
Then Mulford still apprehended Spike. In that remote
part of the world, almost beyond the confines of society, it
was not easy to foretell what claims he might set up, in the
event of his meeting them there. Armed with the
authority
of a husband, Mulford could resist him, in any such
case, with far better prospects of success than if he should
appear only in the character of a suitor.
Rose listened to these arguments, ardently and
somewhat
eloquently put, as a girl of her years and habits would
be apt to listen to a favoured lover. She was much too
sincere to deny her own attachment, which the events of
the last few days had increased almost to intenseness, so
apt is our tenderness to augment in behalf of those for
whom we feel solicitude; and her judgment told her that
the more sober part of Harry's reasoning was entitled to
consideration. As his wife, her situation would certainly
be much less equivocal and awkward, than while she bore
a different name, and was admitted to be a single woman,
and it might yet be weeks before the duty she owed her
aunt would allow her to proceed to the north. But, after
all, Harry prevailed more through the influence of his hold
on Rose's affections, as would have been the case with
almost
every other woman, than through any force of
reasoning
.
He truly loved, and that made him eloquent when
he spoke of love; sympathy in all he uttered being his
great ally. When summoned to the house, by the call of
Jack, who announced that the turtle-soup was ready, they
returned with the understanding that the chaplain of the
Poughkeepsie should unite them, did the vessel come in,
and would the functionary mentioned consent to perform
the ceremony.
It would be awkwardnay, it would be distressing,
Harry, to have him refuse, said the blushing Rose, as they
walked slowly back to the house, more desirous to prolong
their conversation than to partake of the bountiful provision
of Jack Tier. The latter could not but be acceptable,
nevertheless, to a young man like Mulford, who was in
robust health, and who had fared so badly for the last
eight-and-forty
hours. When he sat down to the table,
therefore
,
which was covered by a snow-white cloth, with
smoking
and most savoury viands on it, it will not be surprising
if we say it was with a pleasure that was derived from one
of the great necessities of our nature.
Sancho calls for benediction on the man who invented
sleep. It would have been more just to have asked this
boon in behalf of him who invented eating and turtle-soup.
The wearied fall into sleep, as it might be unwittingly;
sometimes against their will, and often against their
interests
;
while many a man is hungry without possessing the
means of appeasing his appetite. Still more daily feel
hunger without possessing turtle-soup. Certain persons
impute this delicious compound to the genius of some
London
alderman, but we rather think unjustly. Aldermanic
genius is easily excited and rendered active, no doubt, by
strong appeals on such a theme, but our own experience
inclines us to believe that the tropics usually send their
inventions
to the less fruitful regions of the earth along
with their products. We have little doubt, could the fact
be now ascertained, that it would be found turtle-soup was
originally invented by just some such worthy as Jack Tier,
who in filling his coppers to tickle the captain's appetite,
had used all the condiments within his reach; ventured on
a sort of Regent's punch; and, as the consequence, had
brought forth the dish so often eulogized, and so well
beloved
.
It is a little extraordinary that in Paris, the seat of
gastronomy, one rarely, if ever, hears of or sees this dish;
while in London it is to be met in almost as great
abundance
as in one of our larger commercial towns. But so
it is, and we cannot say we much envy a
cuisine
its
pats,
and
soufflets,
and its
la
this and
la
thats, but which
was never redolent with the odours of turtle-soup.
Upon my word, Jack, you have made out famously
with your dinner, or supper, whichever you may please
to call it, cried Mulford gaily, as he took his seat at
table
,
after having furnished Rose with a chair. Nothing
appears to be wanting; but here is good pilot bread,
potatoes
even, and other little niceties, in addition to the turtle
and the fish. These good people of the light seem to have
lived comfortably, at any rate.
Why should they not, maty? answered Jack,
beginning
to help to soup. Living on one of these islets is
like living afloat. Everything is laid in, as for an outward
bound craft; then the reef must always furnish fish and
turtle. I've overhauled the lockers pretty thoroughly, and
find a plenty of stores to last
us
a month. Tea, sugar,
coffee, bread, pickles, potatoes, onions, and all other
knick-knacks
.
The poor people who own these stores will be
heavy-hearted
enough when they come to learn the reason why
we have been put in undisturbed possession of their
property
,
said Rose. We must contrive some means of
repaying them for such articles as we may use, Harry.
That's easily enough done, Miss Rose. Drop one of
the half-eagles in a tea-pot, or a mug, and they'll be
certain
to fall in with it when they come back. Nothin' is
easier than to pay a body's debts, when a body has the will
and the means. Now, the worst enemy of Stephen Spike
must own that his brig never quits port with unsettled bills.
Stephen has his faults, like other mortals; but he has his
good p'ints, too.
Still praising Spike, my good Jack, cried the mate,
Vol. II.8
a little provoked at this pertinacity in the deputy-steward,
in sticking to his ship and his shipmate. I should have
thought that you had sailed with him long enough to have
found him out, and to wish never to put your foot in his
cabin again.
Why, no, maty, a craft is a craft, and a body gets to
like even the faults of one in which a body has gone through
gales, and squalls, with a whole skin. I like the Swash,
and, for sartain things I like her captain.
Meaning by that, it is your intention to get on board
of the one, and to sail with the other, again, as soon as you
can.
I do, Mr. Mulford, and make no bones in telling on't.
You know that I came here without wishing it.
Well, Jack, no one will attempt to control your
movements
,
but you shall be left your own master. I feel it to
be a duty, however, as one who may know more of the law
than yourself, as well as more of Stephen Spike, to tell you
that he is engaged in a treasonable commerce with the
enemy
,
and that he, and all who voluntarily remain with him,
knowing this fact, may be made to swing for it.
Then I'll swing for it, returned Jack, sullenly.
There is a little obstinacy in this, my good fellow, and
you must be reasoned out of it. I am under infinite
obligations
to you, Jack, and shall ever be ready to own them.
Without you to sail the boat, I might have been left to
perish on that rock,for God only knows whether any
vessel would have seen me in passing. Most of those who
go through that passage keep the western side of the reef
aboard, they tell me, on account of there being better
water on that side of the channel, and the chance of a
man's being seen on a rock, by ships a league or two off,
would be small indeed. Yes, Jack, I owe my life to you,
and am proud to own it.
You owe it to Miss Rose, maty, who put me up to the
enterprise, and who shared it with me.
To her I owe more than life, answered Harry,
looking
at his beloved as she delighted in being regarded by
him, but even she, with all her wishes to serve me, would
have been helpless without your skill in managing a boat.
I owe also to your good-nature the happiness of having
Rose with me at this moment; for without you she would
not have come.
I'll not deny it, matytake another ladle-full of the
soup, Miss Rosy: a quart of it would n't hurt an infant
I'll not deny it, Mr. MulfordI know by the way you've
got rid of the first bowl-full that
you
are ready for another,
and there it isI'll not deny it, and all I can say is that
you are heartily welcome to my sarvices.
I thank you, Jack; but all this only makes me more
desirous of being of use to you, now, when it's in my
power. I wish you to stick by me, and not to return to
the Swash. As soon as I get to New York I shall build
or buy a ship, and the berth of steward in her shall always
be open to you.
Thank'e, maty; thank'e, with all my heart. It's
something to know that a port is open to leeward, and,
though I cannot
now
accept your offer, the day
may
come
when I shall be glad to do so.
If you like living ashore better, our house will always
be ready to receive you. I should be glad to leave as
handy a little fellow as yourself behind me whenever I went
to sea. There are a hundred things in which you might
be useful, and fully earn your biscuit, so as to have no
qualms about eating the bread of idleness.
Thank'e, thank'e, maty, cried Jack, dashing a tear
out of his eye with the back of his hand, thank'e, sir,
from the bottom of my heart. The time
may
come, but
not now. My papers is signed for this v'y'ge. Stephen
Spike has a halter round his neck, as you say yourself, and
it's necessary for me to be there to look to't. We all
have our callin's and duties, and this is mine. I stick by
the Molly and her captain until both are out of this scrape,
or both are condemned. I know nothin' of treason; but
if the law wants another victim, I must take my chance.
Mulford was surprised at this steadiness of Jack's, in
what he thought a very bad cause, and he was quite as
much surprised that Rose did not join him, in his
endeavours
to persuade the steward not to be so foolhardy, as to
endeavour to go back to the brig. Rose did not, however;
sitting silently eating her dinner the whole time, though
she occasionally cast glances of interest at both the
speakers
the while. In this state of things the mate abandoned
the attempt, for the moment, intending to return to the
subject, after having had a private conference with his
betrothed
.
Notwithstanding the little drawback just related, that
was a happy as well as a delicious repast. The mate did
full justice to the soup, and afterward to the fish with the
unpoetical name; and Rose ate more than she had done in
the last three days. The habits of discipline prevented
Jack from taking his seat at table, though pressed by both
Rose and Harry to do so, but he helped himself to the
contents
of a bowl and did full justice to his own art, on one
aside. The little fellow was delighted with the praises
that were bestowed on his dishes; and for the moment, the
sea, its dangers, its tornadoes, wrecks and races, were all
forgotten in the security and pleasures of so savoury a
repast.
Folk ashore do n't know how sailors sometimes live,
said Jack, holding a large spoon filled with the soup ready
to plunge into a tolerably capacious mouth.
Or how they sometimes starve, answered Rose.
Remember
our own situation, less than forty-eight hours
since!
All very true, Miss Rose; yet, you see, turtle-soup
brings us up, a'ter all. Would you like a glass of wine,
maty?
Very much indeed, Jack, after so luscious a soup; but
wishing for it will not bring it here.
That remains to be seen, sir. I call this a bottle of
something that looks wery much like a wine.
Claret, as I live! Why, where should light-house
keepers get the taste for claret?
I've thought of that myself, Mr. Mulford, and have
supposed that some of Uncle Sam's officers have brought
the liquor to this part of the world. I understand a party
on 'em was here surveyin' all last winter. It seems they
come in the cool weather, and get their sights and measure
their distances, and go home in the warm weather, and
work out their traverses in the shade, as it might be.
This seems likely, Jack; but, come whence it may it
is welcome, and we will taste it.
Mulford then drew the cork of this mild and grateful
liquor, and helped his companions and himself. In this
age of moral
tours de force,
one scarcely dare say anything
favourable of a liquid that even bears the name of wine, or
extol the shape of a bottle. It is truly the era of
exaggeration
.
Nothing is treated in the old-fashioned, natural,
common
sense way. Virtue is no longer virtue, unless it get
upon stilts; and, as for sin's being confined to
transgression
against the law of God, audacious would be the
wretch who should presume to limit the sway of the
societies
by any dogma so narrow! A man may be as
abstemious
as an anchorite and get no credit for it, unless he
sigu the pledge; or, signing the pledge, he may get
fuddled
in corners, and be cited as a miracle of sobriety. The
test of morals is no longer in the abuse of the gifts of
Providence
,
but in their use; prayers are deserting the closet
for the corners of streets, and charity (not the giving of
alms) has got to be so earnest in the demonstration of its
nature, as to be pretty certain to begin at home, and to
end where it begins. Even the art of mendacity has been
aroused by the great progress which is making by all around
it, and many manifest the strength of their ambition by
telling ten lies where their fathers would have been
satisfied
with telling only one. This art has made an
extraordinary
progress within the last quarter of a century, aspiring
to an ascendency that was formerly conceded only to truth,
until he who gains his daily bread by it has some such
contempt for the sneaking wretch who does business on
the small scale, as the slayer of his thousands in the field
is known to entertain for him who kills only a single man
in the course of a long life.
At the risk of damaging the reputations of our hero and
heroine, we shall frankly aver the fact that both Harry and
Rose partook of the
vin de Bordeaux,
a very respectable
bottle of
Medoc,
by the way, which had been forgotten by
Uncle Sam's people, in the course of the preceding winter,
agreeably to Jack Tier's conjecture. One glass sufficed
for Rose, and, contrary as it may be to all modern theory,
she was somewhat the better for it; while the mate and
Jack Tier quite half emptied the bottle, being none the
worse. There they sat, enjoying the security and
abundance
8*
which had succeeded to their late danger, happy in
that security, happy in themselves, and happy in the
prospects
of a bright future. It was just as practicable for
them to remain at the Dry Tortugas, as it was for the
family
which ordinarily dwelt at the light. The place was
amply supplied with everything that would be necessary
for their wants, for months to come, and Harry caused his
betrothed to blush, as he whispered to her, should the
chaplain arrive, he should delight in passing the honey-moon
where they then were.
I could tend the light, he added, smiling, which
would be not only an occupation, but a useful occupation;
you could read all those books from beginning to end, and
Jack could keep us suplied with fish. By the way,
master
steward, are you in the humour for motion, so soon
after your hearty meal?
Anything to be useful, answered Jack, cheerfully.
Then do me the favour to go up into the lantern of the
light-house, and take a look for the sloop-of-war. If she's
in sight at all, you'll find her off here to the northward;
and while you are aloft you may as well make a sweep of
the whole horizon. There hangs the light-house keeper's
glass, which may help your eyes, by stepping into the
gallery
outside of the lantern.
Jack willingly complied, taking the glass and
proceeding
forthwith to the other building. Mulford had two
objects
in view in giving this commission to the steward. He
really wished to ascertain what was the chance of seeing
the Poughkeepsie, in the neighbourhood of the islets, and
felt just that indisposition to move himself, that is apt to
come over one who has recently made a very bountiful
meal, while he also desired to have another private
conversation
with Rose.
A good portion of the time that Jack was gone, and he
stayed quite an hour in the lantern, our lovers conversed as
lovers are much inclined to converse; that is to say, of
themselves, their feelings, and their prospects. Mulford
told Rose of his hopes and fears, while he visited at the
house of her aunt, previously to sailing, and the manner in
which his suspicions had been first awakened in reference
to the intentions of Spikeintentions, so far as they were
connected with an admiration of his old commander's niece,
and possibly in connection also with the little fortune she
was known to possess, but not in reference to the bold
project
to which he had, in fact, resorted. No distrust of the
scheme finally put in practice had ever crossed the mind
of the young mate, until he received the unexpected order,
mentioned in our opening chapter, to prepare the brig for
the reception of Mrs. Budd and her party. Harry confessed
his jealousy of one youth whom he dreaded far more even
than he had ever dreaded Spike, and whose apparent favour
with Rose, and actual favour with her aunt, had given him
many a sleepless night.
They next conversed of the future, which to them seemed
full of flowers. Various were the projects started,
discussed
,
and dismissed, between them, the last almost as
soon as proposed. On one thing they were of a mind, as soon
as proposed. Harry was to have a ship as quick as one
could be purchased by Rose's means, and the promised
bride laughingly consented to make one voyage to Europe
along with her husband.
I wonder, dear Rose, my poverty has never presented
any difficulties in the way of our union, said Harry,
sensibly
touched with the free way his betrothed disposed of
her own money in his behalf; but neither you nor Mrs.
Budd has ever seemed to think of the difference there is
between us in this respect.
What is the trifle I possess, Harry, set in the balance
against your worth? My aunt, as you say, has thought I
might even be the gainer by the exchange.
I am sure I feel a thousand times indebted to Mrs.
Budd
Aunt
Budd. You must learn to say, `
my
Aunt Budd,'
Mr. Henry Mulford, if you mean to live in peace with her
unworthy niece.
Aunt
Budd, then, returned Harry, laughing, for the
laugh came easily that evening; Aunt Budd, if you wish
it, Rose. I can have no objection to call any relative of
yours, uncle or aunt.
I think we are intimate enough, now, to ask you a
question or two, Harry, touching my aunt, continued
Rose, looking stealthily over her shoulder, as if
apprehensive
of being overheard. You know how fond she is of
speaking of the sea, and of indulging in nautical phrases?
Any one must have observed that, Rose, answered
the young man, gazing up at the wall, in order not to be
compelled to look the beautiful creature before him in the
eyesMrs. Budd has very strong tastes that way.
Now tell me, Harrythat is, answer me franklyI
meanshe is not
always
right, is she?
Why, no; not absolutely sothat is, not absolutely
always
sofew persons are
always
right, you know.
Rose remained silent and embarrassed for a moment;
after which she pursued the discourse.
But aunty does not know as much of the sea and of
ships as she thinks she does?
Perhaps not. We all overrate our own acquirements.
I dare say that even I am not as good a seaman as I fancy
myself to be.
Even Spike admits that you are what he calls `a prime
seaman.' But it is not easy for a woman to get a correct
knowledge of the use of all the strange, and sometimes
uncouth
,
terms that you sailors use.
Certainly not, and for that reason I would rather you
should never attempt it, Rose. We rough sons of the
ocean would prefer to hear our wives make divers pretty
blunders, rather than to be swaggering about like so many
`old salts.'
Mr. Mulford! Does Aunt Budd swagger like an old
salt?
Dearest Rose, I was not thinking of your aunt, but of
you
. Of you, as you are, feminine, spirited, lovely alike
in form and character, and of you a graduate of the ocean,
and full of its language and ideas.
It was probable Rose was not displeased at this allusion
to herself, for a smile struggled around her pretty mouth,
and she did not look at all angry. After another short
pause, she resumed the discourse.
My aunt did not very clearly comprehend those
explanations
of yours about the time of day, and the longitude,
she said, nor am I quite certain that I did myself.
You understood them far better than Mrs. Budd, Rose.
Women are so little accustomed to
think
on such subjects
at all, that it is not surprising they sometimes get confused.
I do wish, however, that your aunt could be persuaded to
be more cautious in the presence of strangers, on the
subject
of terms she does not understand.
I feared it might be so, Harry, answered Rose, in a
low voice, as if unwilling even he should know the full
extent
of her thoughts on this subject; but my aunt's heart
is most excellent, though she may make mistakes
occasionally
,
I owe her a great deal, if not absolutely my
education
,
certainly my health and comfort through childhood,
and more prudent, womanly advice than you may suppose,
perhaps, since I have left school. How she became the
dupe of Spike, indeed, is to me unaccountable; for in all
that relates to health, she is, in general, both acute and
skilful.
Spike is a man of more art than he appears to be to
superficial observers. On my first acquaintance with him,
I mistook him for a frank, fearless but well-meaning sailor,
who loved hazardous voyages and desperate speculation
a sort of innocent gambler; but I have learned to know
better. His means are pretty much reduced to his brig,
and she is getting old, and can do but little more service.
His projects are plain enough, now. By getting you into
his power, he hoped to compel a marriage, in which case
both your fortune and your aunt's would contribute to
repair
his.
He might have killed me, but I never would have
married
him, rejoined Rose, firmly. Is not that Jack
coming
down the steps of the light-house?
It is. I find that fellow's attachment to Spike very
extraordinary, Rose. Can you, in any manner, account
for it?
Rose at first seemed disposed to reply. Her lips parted,
as if about to speak, and closed again, as glancing her eyes
toward the open door, she seemed to expect the appearance
of the steward's little, rotund form on its threshold, which
held her tongue-tied. A brief interval elapsed, however,
ere Jack actually arrived, and Rose, perceiving that Harry
was curiously expecting her answer, said hurriedlyIt
may be hatred, not attachment.
The next instant Jack Tier entered the room. He had
been gone rather more than an hour, not returning until
just as the sun was about to set in a flame of fire.
Well, Jack, what news from the Poughkeepsie?
demanded
the mate. You have been gone long enough to
make sure of your errand. Is it certain that we are not
to see the man-of-war's-men to-night.
Whatever you see, my advice to you is to keep close,
and to be on your guard, answered Jack, evasively.
I have little fear of any of Uncle Sam's craft. A plain
story, and an honest heart, will make all clear to a
well-disposed
listener. We have not been accomplices in
Spike's treasons, and cannot be made to answer for them.
Take my advice, maty, and be in no hurry to hail
every vessel you see. Uncle Sam's fellows may not always
be at hand to help you. Do you not know that this island
will be tabooed to seamen for some time to come?
Why so, Jack? The islet has done no harm, though
others may have performed wicked deeds near it.
Two of the drowned men lie within a hundred yards
of this spot, and sailors never go near new-made graves, if
they can find any other place to resort to.
You deal in enigmas, Jack; and did I not know that
you are very temperate, I might suspect that the time you
have been gone has been passed in the company of a bottle
of brandy.
That will explain my meanin', said Jack, laconically,
pointing as he spoke seemingly at some object that was to
be seen without.
The door of the house was wide open, for the admission
of air. It faced the haven of the islets, and just as the
mate's eyes were turned to it, the end of a flying-jib-boom,
with the sail down, and fluttering beneath it, was coming
into the view. The Poughkeepsie! exclaimed Mulford,
in delight, seeing all his hopes realized, while Rose
blushed
to the eyes. A pause succeeded, during which Mulford
drew aside, keeping his betrothed in the back-ground, and
as much out of sight as possible. The vessel was shooting
swiftly into view, and presently all there could see it was
the Swash.
CHAPTER IV.
But nohe surely is not dreaming.
Another minute makes it clear,
A scream, a rush, a burning tear,
From Inez' cheek, dispel the fear
That bliss like his is only seeming.
Washington Alston
.
A moment
of appalled surprise succeeded the instant
when Harry and Rose first ascertained the real character
of the vessel that had entered the haven of the Dry
Tortugas
.
Then the first turned toward Jack Tier, and sternly
demanded an explanation of his apparent faithlessness.
Rascal, he cried, has this treachery been intended?
Did you not see the brig and know her?
Hush, Harry
dear
Harry, exclaimed Rose,
entreatingly
.
My life for it, Jack has
not
been faithless.
Why, then, has he not let us know that the brig was
coming? For more than an hour has he been aloft, on
the look-out, and here are we taken quite by surprise.
Rely on it, Rose, he has seen the approach of the brig, and
might have sooner put us on our guard.
Ay, ay, lay it on, maty, said Jack, coolly, neither
angry nor mortified, so far as appearances went, at these
expressions of dissatisfaction; my back is used to it. If
I did n't know what it is to get hard raps on the knuckles,
I should be but a young steward. But, as for this
business
,
a little reflection will tell you I am not to blame.
Give us your own explanations, for without them I
shall trust you no longer.
Well, sir, what good would it have done,
had
I told
you the brig was standing for this place? There she came
down, like a race-horse, and escape for you was impossible.
As the wind is now blowin', the Molly would go two feet
to the boat's one, and a chase would have been madness.
I do n't know that, sirrah answered the mate. The
boat might have got into the smaller passages of the reef,
where the brig could not enter, or she might have dodged
about among these islets, until it was night, and then
escaped
in the darkness.
I thought of all that, Mr. Mulford, but it came too late.
When I first went aloft, I came out on the north-west side
of the lantern, and took my seat, to look out for the
sloop-of-war
,
as you bade me, sir. Well, there I was sweepin'
the horizon with the glass for the better part of an hour,
sometimes fancyin' I saw her, and then givin' it up; for to
this moment I am not sartain there is n't a sail off here to
the westward, turning up toward the light on a bowline;
but if there be, she's too far off to know anything
partic'lar
about her. Well, sir, there I sat, looking for the
Poughkeepsie, for the better part of an hour, when I
thought I would go round on t' other side of the lantern
and take a look to windward. My heart was in my mouth,
I can tell you, Miss Rose, when I saw the brig; and I felt
both glad and sorry. Glad on my own account, and sorry
on your'n. There she was, however, and no help for it,
within two miles of this very spot, and coming down as if
she despised touching the water at all. Now, what could
I do? There was n't time, Mr. Mulford, to get the boat
out, and the mast stepped, afore we should have been
within
reach of canister, and Stephen Spike would not have
spared
that,
in order to get you again within his power.
Depend on it, Harry, this is all true, said Rose,
earnestly
.
I know Jack well, and can answer for his
fidelity
.
He wishes to, and if he can he
will
return to the brig,
whither he thinks his duty calls him, but he will never
willingly betray
us
least of all,
me
. Do I speak as I ought,
Jack?
Gospel truth, Miss Rose, and Mr. Mulford will get
over this squall, as soon as he comes to think of matters as
he ought. There 's my hand, maty, to show I bear no
malice.
I take it, Jack, for I must believe you honest, after all
you have done for us. Excuse my warmth, which, if a
little
unreasonable, was somewhat natural under the
circumstances
.
I suppose our case is now hopeless, and that we
shall all be soon on board the brig again; for Spike will
hardly think of abandoning me again on an island
provisioned
and fitted as is this!
It's not so sartain, sir, that you fall into his hands at
all, put in Jack. The men of the brig will never come
here of their own accord, depend on that, for sailors don't
like graves. Spike has come in here a'ter the schooner's
chain, that he dropped into the water when he made sail
from the sloop-of-war, at the time he was here afore, and
is not expectin' to find us here. Nonohe thinks we
are beatin' up toward Key West this very minute, if,
indeed
,
he has missed us at all. 'T is possible he believes
the boat has got adrift by accident, and has no thought of
our bein' out of the brig.
That is impossible, Jack. Do you suppose he is
ignorant
that Rose is missing?
Sartain of it, maty, if Mrs. Budd has read the letter
well that Miss Rose left for her, and Biddy has obeyed
orders
.
If they've followed instructions, Miss Rose is
thought to be in her state-room, mournin' for a young man
who was abandoned on a naked rock, and Jack Tier, havin'
eat somethin' that has disagreed with him, is in his berth.
Recollect, Spike will not be apt to look into Miss Rose's
state-room or my berth, to see if all this is true. The
cook and Josh are both in my secret, and know I mean to
come back, and when the fit is over I have only to return
to duty, like any other hand. It is my calculation that
Spike believes both Miss Rose and myself on board the
Molly at this very moment.
And the boatwhat can he suppose has become of the
boat?
Sartainly, the boat makes the only chance ag'in us.
But the boat was ridin' by its painter astarn, and accidents
sometimes happen to such craft. Then we two are the
wery last he will suspect of havin' made off in the boat by
ourselves. There'll be Mrs. Budd and Biddy as a sort of
pledge that Miss Rose is aboard, and as for Jack Tier, he
is too insignificant to occupy the captain's thoughts just
now. He will probably muster the people for'ard, when
he finds the boat is gone, but I do not think he'll trouble
the cabins or state-rooms.
Mulford admitted that this was
possible,
though it
Vol. II.9
scarcely seemed probable to him. There was no help,
however, for the actual state of things, and they all now
turned their attention to the brig, and to the movements
of those on board her. Jack Tier had swung-to the
outer-door
of the house, as soon as the Swash came in view
through it, and fortunately none of the windows on that
side of the building had been opened at all. The air
entered
to windward, which was on the rear of the dwelling,
so that it was possible to be comfortable and yet leave the
front, in view from the vessel, with its deserted air. As
for the brig, she had already anchored and got both her
boats into the water. The yawl was hauled alongside, in
readiness for any service that might be required of it, while
the launch had been manned at once, and was already
weighing the anchor, and securing the chain to which Tier
had alluded. All this served very much to lessen the
uneasiness
of Mulford and Rose, as it went far to prove that
Spike had not come to the Dry Tortugas in quest of them,
as, at first, both had very naturally supposed. It might,
indeed, turn out that his sole object was to obtain this
anchor
and chain, with a view to use them in raising the
ill-fated
vessel that had now twice gone to the bottom.
I wish an explanation with you, Jack, on one other
point, said the mate, after all three had been for sometime
observing the movements on board and around the Swash.
Do you actually intend to get on board the brig?
If it's to be done, maty. My v'y'ge is up with you
and Miss Rose. I may be said to have shipped for Key
West and a market, and the market's found at this port.
You will hardly leave us
yet,
Jack, said Rose, with a
manner and emphasis that did not fail to strike her
betrothed
lover, though he could in no way account for either.
That Rose should not wish to be left alone with him in
that solitary place was natural enough; or, might rather
be referred to education and the peculiar notions of her
sex; but he could not understand why so much importance
should be attached to the presence of a being of Jack Tier's
mould and character. It was true, that there was little
choice, under present circumstances, but it occurred to
Mulford that Rose had manifested the same strange
predilection
when there might have been something nearer to a
selection. The moment, however, was not one for much
reflection on the subject.
You will hardly leave us yet, Jack? said Rose, in
the manner related.
it's now or never, Miss Rose. If the brig once gets
away from this anchorage without me, I may never lay eyes
on her ag'in. Her time is nearly up, for wood and iron
wont hold together always, any more than flesh and blood.
Consider how many years I've been busy in huntin' her
up, and how hard 't will be to lose that which has given
me so many weary days and sleepless nights to find.
Rose said no more. If not convinced, she was evidently
silenced, while Harry was left to wonder and surmise, as
best he might. Both quitted the subject, to watch the
people of the brig. By this time the anchor had been
lifted
,
and the chain was heaving in on board the vessel, by
means of a line that had been got around its bight. The
work went on rapidly, and Mulford observed to Rose that
he did not think it was the intention of Spike to remain
long at the Tortugas, inasmuch as his brig was riding by
a very short range of cable. This opinion was confirmed,
half an hour later, when it was seen that the launch was
hooked on and hoisted in again, as soon as the chain and
anchor of the schooner were secured.
Jack Tier watched every movement with palpable
uneasiness
.
His apprehensions that Spike would obtain all he
wanted, and be off before he could rejoin him, increased
at each instant, and he did not scruple to announce an
intention
to take the boat and go alongside of the Swash at
every hazard, rather than be left.
You do not reflect on what you say, Jack, answered
Harry; unless, indeed, it be your intention to betray us.
How could you appear in the boat, at this place, without
letting it be known that we must be hard by?
That don't follow at all, maty, answered Jack.
Suppose I go alongside the brig and own to the captain
that I took the boat last night, with the hope of findin' you,
and that failin' to succeed, I bore up for this port, to look
for provisions and water. Miss Rose he thinks on board
at this moment, and in my judgment he would take me at
my word, give me a good cursing, and think no more about
it.
It would never do, Jack, interposed Rose, instantly.
It would cause the destruction of Harry, as Spike would
not believe you had not found him, without an examination
of this house.
What are they about with the yawl, Mr. Mulford?
asked Jack, whose eye was never off the vessel for a single
moment. It's gettin' to be so dark that one can hardly
see the boat, but it seems as if they're about to man the
yawl.
They are, and there goes a lantern into it. And that
is Spike himself coming down the brig's side this instant.
They can only bring a lantern to search this house,
exclaimed Rose. Oh! Harry, you are lost!
I rather think the lantern is for the light-house,
answered
Mulford, whose coolness, at what was certainly a
most trying moment, did not desert him. Spike may
wish to keep the light burning, for once before, you will
remember, he had it kindled after the keeper was removed.
As for his sailing, he would not be apt to sail until the
moon rises; and in beating back to the wreck the light
may serve to let him know the bearings and position of the
reef.
There they come, whispered Rose, half breathless
with alarm. The boat has left the brig, and is coming
directly hither!
All this was true enough. The yawl had shoved off,
and with two men to row it, was pulling for the wharf in
front of the house, and among the timbers of which lay the
boat, pretty well concealed beneath a sort of bridge.
Mulford
would not retreat, though he looked to the fastenings
of the door as a means of increasing his chances of defence.
In the stern-sheets of the boat sat two men, though it was
not easy to ascertain who they were by the fading light.
One was known to be Spike, however, and the other, it
was conjectured, must be Don Juan Montefalderon, from the
circumstance of his being in the place of honour. Three
minutes solved this question, the boat reaching the wharf
by that time. It was instantly secured, and all four of the
men left it. Spike was now plainly to be discerned by
means of the lantern which he carried in his own hands,
He gave some orders, in his customary authoritative way,
and in a high key, after which he led the way from the
wharf, walking side by side with the Seor Montefalderon.
These two last came up within a yard of the door of the
house, where they paused, enabling those within not only
to see their persons and the working of their countenances,
but to hear all that was said; this last the more especially,
since Spike never thought it necessary to keep his
powerful
voice within moderate limits.
It's hardly worth while, Don Wan, for you to go into
the light-house, said Spike. 'T is but a greasy, dirty
place at the best, and one's clothes are never the better for
dealin' with ile. Here, Bill, take the lantern, and get a
filled can, that we may go up and trim and fill the lamp,
and make a blaze. Bear a hand, lads, and I'll be a'ter
ye afore you reach the lantern. Be careful with the flame
about the ile, for seamen ought never to wish to see a
light-house
destroyed.
What do you expect to gain by lighting the lamps
above, Don Esteban? demanded the Mexican, when the
sailors had disappeared in the light-house, taking their own
lantern with them.
It's wisest to keep things reg'lar about this spot, Don
Wan, which will prevent unnecessary suspicions. But, as
the brig stretches in toward the reef to-night, on our way
back, the light will be a great assistance. I am short of
officers, you know, and want all the help of this sort I can
get.
To be sincere with you, Don Esteban, I greatly regret
you
are
so short of officers, and do not yet despair of
inducing
you to go and take off the mate, whom I hear you
have left on a barren rock. He was a fine young fellow,
Seor Spike, and the deed was not one that you will wish
to remember a few years hence.
The fellow run, and I took him at his word, Don Wan.
I'm not obliged to receive back a deserter unless it suits
me.
We are all obliged to see we do not cause a fellow
creature the loss of life. This will prove the death of the
charming young woman who is so much attached to him,
unless you relent and are merciful!
Women have tender looks but tough hearts, answered
9*
Spike, carelessly, though Mulford felt certain, by the tone
of his voice, that great bitterness of feeling lay smothered
beneath the affected indifference of his manner; few die
of love.
The young lady has not been on deck all day; and the
Irish woman tells me that she does nothing but drink water
the certain proof of a high fever.
Ay, ay, she keeps her room if you will, Don Wan, but
she is not about to make a dupe of me by any such tricks.
I must go and look to the lamps, however, and you will
find the graves you seek in the rear of this house, about
thirty yards behind it, you'll remember. That's a very
pretty cross you've made, seor, and the skipper of the
schooner's soul will be all the better for settin' it up at the
head of his grave.
It will serve to let those who come after us know that
a Christian sleeps beneath the sand, Don Esteban,
answered
the Mexican, mildly. I have no other
expectation
from this sacred symbol.
The two now separated, Spike going into the light-house,
little in a hurry, while Don Juan Montefalderon walked
round the building to its rear in quest of the grave.
Mulford
waited a moment for Spike to get a short distance up
the stairs of the high tower he had to ascend, when placing
the arm of Rose within his own, he opened the door in
the rear of the house, and walked boldly toward the
Mexican
.
Don Juan was actually forcing the pointed end of
his little cross into the sand, at the head of his
countryman's
grave, when Mulford and his trembling companion
reached the spot. Although night had shut in, it was not
so dark that persons could not be recognised at small
distances
.
The Seor Montefalderon was startled at an
apparition
so sudden and unexpected, when Mulford saluted
him by name; but recognising first the voice of Harry,
and then the persons of himself and his companion,
surprise
,
rather than alarm, became the emotion that was
uppermost
.
Notwithstanding the strength of the first of these
feelings, he instantly saluted the young couple with the
polished ease that marked his manner, which had much of
the courtesy of a Castilian in it, tempered a little, perhaps,
by the greater flexibility of a Southern American.
I
see
you, exclaimed Don Juan, and must believe
my eyes. Without their evidence, however, I could scarce
believe it can be you two, one of whom I thought on board
the brig, and the other suffering a most miserable death on
a naked rock.
I am aware of your kind feelings in our behalf, Don
Juan, said Mulford, and it is the reason I now confide
in you. I was taken off that rock by means of the boat,
which you doubtless have missed; and this is the gentle
being who has been the means of saving my life. To her
and Jack Tier, who is yonder, under the shadows of the
house, I owe my not being the victim of Spike's cruelty.
I now comprehend the whole matter,
Don Henrique
.
Jack Tier has managed the boat for the seorita; and
those whom we were told were too ill to be seen on deck,
have been really out of the brig!
Such are the facts, seor, and from
you
there is no
wish to conceal them. We are then to understand that
the absence of Rose and Jack from the brig is not known
to Spike.
I believe not, seor. He has alluded to both, once or
twice to-day, as being ill below; but would you not do
well to retire within the shade of the dwelling, lest a glance
from the lantern might let those in it know that I am not
alone.
There is little danger, Don Juan, as they who stand
near a light cannot well see those who are in the darkness.
Beside, they are high in the air, while we are on the
ground, which will greatly add to the obscurity down here.
We can retire, nevertheless, as I have a few questions to
ask, which may as well be put in perfect security, as put
where there is any risk.
The three now drew near the house, Rose actually
stepping
within its door, though Harry remained on its
exterior
,
in order to watch the proceedings of those in the
light-house. Here the Seor Montefalderon entered into
a more detailed explanation of what had occurred on board
the brig, since the appearance of day, that very morning.
According to his account of the matter, Spike had
immediately
called upon the people to explain the loss of the
boat. Tier was not interrogated on this occasion, it being
understood he had gone below and turned in, after having
the look-out for fully half the night. As no one could, or
would, give an account of the manner in which the boat
was missing, Josh was ordered to go below and question
Jack on the subject. Whether it was from consciousness
of his connection with the escape of Jack, and
apprehensions
of the consequences, or from innate good-nature, and
a desire to befriend the lovers, this black now admitted
that Jack confessed to him that the boat had got away from
him while endeavouring to shift the turns of its painter from
a cleet where they ought not to be, to their proper place.
This occurred early in Jack's watch, according to Josh's
story, and had not been reported, as the boat did not
properly
belong to the brig, and was an incumbrance rather
than an advantage. The mate admired the negro's
cunning
,
as Don Juan related this part of his story, which put
him in a situation to throw all the blame on Jack's
mendacity
in the event of a discovery, while it had the effect to
allow the fugitives more time for their escape. The result
was, that Spike bestowed a few hearty curses, as usual, on
the clumsiness of Jack Tier, and seemed to forget all about
the matter. It is probable he connected Jack's abstaining
from showing himself on deck, and his alleged
indisposition
,
with his supposed delinquency in this matter of the
boat. From that moment the captain appeared to give
himself no further concern on the subject, the boat having
been, in truth, an incumbrance rather than a benefit, as
stated.
As for Rose, her keeping her room, under the
circumstances
,
was so very natural, that the Seor Montefalderon
had been completely deceived, as, from his tranquillity on
this point, there was no question was the case with Spike
also. Biddy appeared on deck, though the widow did not,
and the Irish woman shook her head anxiously when
questioned
about her young mistress, giving the spectators
reason
to suppose that the latter was in a very bad way.
As respects the brig and her movements, Spike had got
under way as soon as there was light enough to find his
course, and had run through the passage. It is probable
that the boat was seen; for something that was taken for
a small sail had just been made out for a single instant, and
then became lost again. This little sail was made, if made
at all, in the direction of the Dry Tortugas, but so
completely
was all suspicion at rest in the minds of those on
the quarter-deck of the Swash, that neither Spike nor the
Mexican had the least idea what it was. When the
circumstance
was reported to the former, he answered that it
was probably some small wrecker, of which many were
hovering about the reef, and added, laughingly, though in
a way to prove how little he thought seriously on the
subject
at all, who knows but the light-house boat has fallen
into their hands, and that they've made sail on
her;
if
they have, my word for it, that she goes, hull, spars, rigging,
canvas, and cargo, all in a lump, for salvage.
As the brig came out of the passage, in broad day, the
heads of the schooner's masts were seen, as a matter of
course. This induced Spike to heave-to, lower a boat, and
to go in person to examine the condition of the wreck.
It will be seen that Jack's presence could now be all the
better
dispensed with. The examination, with the soundings,
and other calculations connected with raising the vessel,
occupied hours. When they were completed, Spike
returned
on board, run up his boat, and squared away for the
Dry Tortugas. Seor Montefalderon confirmed the justice
of Jack Tier's surmises, as to the object of this
unexpected
visit. The brig had come solely for the chain and
anchor
mentioned, and having secured them, it was Spike's
intention to get under way and beat up to the wreck again
as soon as the moon rose. As for the sloop-of-war, he
believed
she had given him up; for by this time she must
know that she had no chance with the brig, so long as the
latter kept near the reef, and that she ran the constant
hazard of shipwreck, while playing so near the dangers
herself.
Before the Seor Montefalderon exhausted all he had to
communicate, he was interrupted by Jack Tier with a
singular
proposition. Jack's great desire was to get on board
the Swash; and he now begged the Mexican to let Mulford
take the yawl and scull him off to the brig, and return to
the islet before Spike and his companions should descend
from the lantern of the light-house. The little fellow
insisted
there was sufficient time for such a purpose, as the
three in the lantern had not yet succeeded in filling the
lamps with the oil necessary to their burning for a night
a duty that usually occupied the regular keeper for an hour.
Five or six minutes would suffice for him; and if he were
seen going up the brig's side, it would be easy for him to
maintain that he had come ashore in the boat. No one
took such precise note of what was going on; as to be able
to contradict him; and as to Spike and the men with him,
they would probably never hear anything about it.
Don Juan Montefalderon was struck with the boldness
of Jack Tier's plan, but refused his assent to it. He
deemed
it too hazardous, but substituted a project of his own.
The moon would not rise until near eleven, and it wanted
several hours before the time of sailing. When they
returned
to the brig, he would procure his cloak, and scull
himself ashore, being perfectly used to managing a boat in
this way, under the pretence of wishing to pass an hour
longer near the grave of his countryman. At the
expiration
of that hour he would take Jack off, concealed beneath
his cloakan exploit of no great difficulty in the darkness,
especially as no one would be on deck but a hand or two
keeping the anchor-watch. With this arrangement,
therefore
,
Jack Tier was obliged to be content.
Some fifteen or twenty minutes more passed; during
which the Mexican again alluded to his country, and his
regrets at her deplorable situation. The battles of the 8th
and 9th of May; two combats that ought to, and which will
reflect high honour on the little army that won them, as
well as on that hardly worked, and in some respects hardly
used, service to which they belong, had been just fought.
Don Juan mentioned these events without reserve; and
frankly
admitted that success had fallen to the portion of much the
weaker party. He ascribed the victory to the great
superiority
of the American officers of inferior rank; it being
well known that in the service of the Republic of the
North, as he termed America, men who had been
regularly
educated at the military academy, and who had
reached
the period of middle life, were serving in the stations
of captains, and sometimes in that of lieutenants; men who,
in many cases, were fitted to command regiments and
brigades
,
having been kept in these lower stations by the
tardiness
with which promotion comes in an army like that
of this country.
Don Juan Montefalderon was not sufficiently conversant
with the subject, perhaps, else he might have added, that
when occasions
do
offer to bestow on these gentlemen the
preferment they have so hardly and patiently earned, they
are too often neglected, in order to extend the circle of
vulgar political patronage. He did not know that when a
new regiment of dragoons was raised, one permanent in
its character, and intended to be identified with the army
in all future time, that, instead of giving its commissions
to those who had fairly earned them by long privations and
faithful service, they were given, with one or two
exceptions
,
to strangers.
No government trifles more with its army and navy than
our own. So niggardly are the master-spirits at
Washington
of the honours justly earned by military men, that we
have fleets still commanded by captains, and armies by
officers
whose regular duty it would be to command brigades.
The world is edified with the sight of forces sufficient, in
numbers, and every other military requisite, to make one
of Napoleon's
corps de arme,
led by one whose commission
would place him properly at the head of a brigade, and
nobly led, too. Here, when so favourable an occasion
offers
to add a regiment or two to the old permanent line of
the army, and thus infuse new life into its hope deferred,
the opportunity is overlooked, and the rank and file are to
be obtained by cramming, instead of by a generous regard
to the interests of the gallant gentlemen who have done so
much for the honour of the American name, and,
unhappily
,
so little for themselves. The extra-patriots of the
nation, and they form a legion large enough to trample the
Halls of the Montezumas under their feet, tell us that
the reward of those other patriots beneath the shadows of
the Sierra Madre, is to be in the love and approbation of
their fellow citizens, at the very moment when they are
giving the palpable proof of the value of this esteem, and
of the inconstancy of popular applause, by pointing their
fingers, on account of an inadvertent expression in a letter,
at the gallant soldier who taught, in our own times, the
troops of this country to stand up to the best appointed
regiments
of England, and to carry off victory from the pride
of Europe, in fair field-fights. Alas! alas! it is true of
nations as well as of men, in their simplest and earliest
forms of association, that there are secrets in all families;
and it will no more do to dwell on our own, than it would
edify us to expose those of poor Mexico.
The discourse between the Seor Montefalderon and
Mulford was interesting, as it ever has been when the
former
spoke of his unfortunate country. On the subject of
the battles of May he was candid, and admitted his deep
mortification and regrets. He had expected more from the
force collected on the Rio Grande, though, understanding
the northern character better than most of his countrymen,
he had not been as much taken by surprise as the great
bulk of his own nation.
Nevertheless, Don Henrique, he concluded, for the
voice of Spike was just then heard as he was descending
the stairs of the light-house, nevertheless, Don Henrique,
there is one thing that your people, brave, energetic, and
powerful as I acknowledge them to be, would do well to
remember, and it is thisno nation of the numbers of ours
can be, or ever was conquered, unless by the force of
political
combinations. In a certain state of society a
government
may be overturned, or a capital taken, and carry a
whole country along with it, but our condition is one not
likely to bring about such a result. We are of a race
different
from the Anglo-Saxon, and it will not be easy either
to assimilate us to your own, or wholly to subdue us. In
those parts of the country, where the population is small,
in time, no doubt, the Spanish race might be absorbed,
and your sway established; but ages of war would be
necessary
entirely to obliterate our usages, our language, and
our religion from the peopled portions of Mexico.
It might be well for some among us to reflect on these
matters. The opinions of Don Juan, in our judgment,
being entitled to the consideration of all prudent and
considerate
men.
As Spike descended to the door of the light-house,
Harry
,
Rose, and Jack Tier retired within that of the dwelling.
Presently the voice of the captain was heard hailing the
Mexican, and together they walked to the wharf, the
former boasting to the latter of his success in making a
brilliant light. Brilliant it was, indeed; so brilliant as to
give Mulford many misgivings on the subject of the boat.
The light from the lantern fell upon the wharf, and he
could see the boat from the window where he stood, with
Spike standing nearly over it, waiting for the men to get
his own yawl ready. It is true, the captain's back was
toward the dangerous object, and the planks of the bridge
were partly between him and it; but there was a serious
danger that was solely averted by the circumstance that
Spike was so earnestly dilating on some subject to Don
Juan, as to look only at that gentleman's face. A minute
later they were all in the yawl, which pulled rapidly toward
the brig.
Don Juan Montefalderon was not long absent. Ten
minutes sufficed for the boat to reach the Swash, for him
to obtain his cloak, and to return to the islet alone, no one
in the vessel feeling a desire to interfere with his imaginary
prayers. As for the people, it was not probable that one
in the brig could have been induced to accompany him to
the graves at that hour; though everybody but Josh had
turned-in, as he informed Mulford, to catch short naps
previously
to the hour of getting the brig under way. As for
the steward, he had been placed on the look-out as the
greatest idler on board. All this was exceedingly
favourable
to Jack Tier's project, since Josh was already in the
secret of his absence, and would not be likely to betray his
return. After a brief consultation, it was agreed to wait
half an hour or an hour, in order to let the sleepers lose all
consciousness, when Don Juan proposed returning to the
vessel with his new companion.
The thirty or forty minutes that succeeded were passed
in general conversation. On this occasion the Seor
Montefalderon
spoke more freely than he had yet done of recent
events. He let it be plainly seen how much he despised
Spike, and how irksome to him was the intercourse he was
obliged to maintain, and to which he only submitted
through a sense of duty. The money known to be in the
schooner, was of a larger amount than had been supposed;
and every dollar was so important to Mexico, at that
moment
,
that he did not like to abandon it, else, did he
declare
,
Vol. II.10
that he would quit the brig at once, and share in the
fortunes of Harry and Rose. He courteously expressed
his best wishes for the happiness of the young couple, and
delicately intimated that, under the circumstances, he
supposed
that they would be united as soon as they could
reach a place where the marriage rite could be celebrated.
This was said in the most judicious way possible; so
delicately
as not to wound any one's feelings, and in a way to
cause it to resemble the announcement of an expectation,
rather than the piece of paternal advice for which it was
really intended. Harry was delighted with this suggestion
of his Mexican friendthe most loyal American may still
have a sincere friend of Mexican birth and Mexican
feelings
,
toosince it favoured not only his secret wishes, but
his secret expectations also.
At the appointed moment, Don Juan Montefalderon and
Jack Tier took their leave of the two they left behind them.
Rose manifested what to Harry seemed a strange
reluctance
to part with the little steward; but Tier was bent on
profiting by this excellent opportunity to get back to the
brig. They went, accordingly, and the anxious listeners,
who watched the slightest movement of the yawl, from the
shore, had reason to believe that Jack was smuggled in
without detection. They heard the familiar sound of the
oar falling in the boat, and Mulford said that Josh's voice
might be distinguished, answering to a call from Don Juan.
No noise or clamour was heard, such as Spike would
certainly
have made, had he detected the deception that had
been practised on himself.
Harry and Rose were now alone. The former
suggested
that the latter should take possession of one of the little
bed-rooms that are usually to be found in American
dwellings
of the dimensions and humble character of the
lighthouse
abode, while he kept watch until the brig should sail.
Until Spike was fairly off, he would not trust himself to
sleep; but there was no sufficient reason why Rose should
not endeavour to repair the evil of a broken night's rest,
like that which had been passed in the boat. With this
understanding, then, our heroine took possession of her
little apartment, where she threw herself on the bed in her
clothes, while Mulford walked out into the air, as the most
effective means of helping to keep his eyes open.
It was now some time past ten, and before eleven the
moon would rise. The mate consequently knew that his
watch could not be long before Spike would quit the
neighbourhood
a
circumstance pregnant with immense relief
to him, at least. So long as that unscrupulous, and now
nearly desperate, man remained anywhere near Rose, he
felt that she could not be safe; and as he paced the sands,
on the off, or outer side of the islet, in order to be beyond
the influence of the light in the lantern, his eye was
scarcely
a moment taken away from the Swash, so impatiently
and anxiously did he wait for the signs of some movement
on board her.
The moon rose, and Mulford heard the well-known raps
on the booby-hatch, which precedes the call of all hands,
on board a merchant-man. All hands up anchor, ahoy!
succeeded, and in less than five minutes the bustle on
board the brig announced the fact, that her people were
getting the anchor. By this time it had got to be so
light that the mate deemed it prudent to return to the
house, in order that he might conceal his person within its
shadows. Awake Rose he would not, though he knew she
would witness the departure of the Swash with a
satisfaction
little short of his own. He thought he would wait,
that when he did speak to her at all, it might be to
announce
their entire safety. As regarded the aunt, Rose
was much relieved on her account, by the knowledge that
Jack Tier would not fail to let Mrs. Budd know everything
connected with her own situation and prospects. The
desertion
of Jack, after coming so far with her, had pained
our heroine in a way we cannot at present explain; but go
he would, probably feeling assured there was no longer any
necessity for his continuance with the lovers, in order to
prevail on Rose to escape from Spike.
The Swash was not long in getting her ground-tackle,
and the brig was soon seen with her topsail aback, waiting
to cat the anchor. This done, the yards swung round, and
the topsail filled. It was blowing just a good breeze for
such a craft to carry whole sail on a bow-line with, and
away the light and active craft started, like the racer that
is galloping for daily exercise. Of course there were
several
passages by which a vessel might quit the group of
islets
,
some being larger, and some smaller, but all having
sufficient water for a brigantine of the Molly's draught.
Determined not to lose an inch of distance unnecessarily,
Spike luffed close up to the wind, making an effort to pass
out to windward of the light. In order to do this,
however
,
it became necessary for him to make two short tacks
within the haven, which brought him far enough to the
southward and eastward to effect his purpose. While this
was doing, the mate, who perfectly understood the object
of the manuvres, passed to the side of the light-house that
was opposite to that on which the dwelling was placed,
with a view to get a better sight of the vessel as she stood
out to sea. In order to do this, however, it was necessary
for the young man to pass through a broad bit of moonlight
but he trusted for his not being seen, to the active manner
in which all hands were employed on board the vessel. It
would seem that, in this respect, Mulford trusted without
his host, for as the vessel drew near, he perceived that six
or eight figures were on the guns of the Swash, or in her
rigging, gesticulating eagerly, and seemingly pointing to
the very spot where he stood. When the brig got fairly
abeam of the light, she would not be a hundred yards
distant
from it, and fearful to complete the exposure of his
person, which he had so inadvertently and unexpectedly
commenced, our mate drew up close to the wall of the
light-house, against which he sustained himself in a
position
as immovable as possible. This movement had been
seen by a single seaman on board the Swash, and the man
happened to be one of those who had landed with Spike
only two hours before. His name was Barlow.
Captain Spike, sir, called out Barlow, who was
coiling
up rigging on the forecastle, and was consequently
obliged to call out so loud as to be heard by all on board,
yonder is a man at the foot of the light-house.
By this time, the moon coming out bright through an
opening in the clouds, Mulford had become conscious of
the risk he ran, and was drawn up, as immovable as the
pile itself, against the stones of the light-house. Such an
announcement brought everybody to leeward, and every
head over the bulwarks. Spike himself sprang into the lee
main-chains, where his view was unobstructed, and where
Mulford saw and recognised him, even better than he was
seen and recognised in his own person. All this time the
brig was moving ahead.
A man, Barlow! exclaimed Spike, in the way one a
little bewildered by an announcement expresses his
surprise
.
A man! that can never be. There is no one at
the light-house, you know.
There he stands, sir, with his back to the tower, and
his face this way. His dark figure against the
whitewashed
stones is plain enough to be seen. Living, or dead,
sir, that is the mate!
Living
it cannot be, answered Spike, though he
gulped at the words the next moment.
A general exclamation now showed that everybody
recognised
the mate, whose figure, stature, dress, and even
features, were by this time all tolerably distinct. The
fixed attitude, however, the immovable statue-like rigidity
of the form, and all the other known circumstances of
Harry's case, united to produce a common and
simultaneous
impression among the superstitious mariners, that
what they saw was but the ghostly shadow of one lately
departed
to the world of spirits. Even Spike was not free
from this illusion, and his knees shook beneath him, there
where he stood, in the channels of a vessel that he had
handled like a top in so many gales and tempests. With
him, however, the illusion was neither absolute nor lasting.
A second thought told him it could scarcely be so, and
then he found his voice. By this time the brig was nearly
abreast of where Harry stood.
You Josh! called out Spike, in a voice of thunder,
loud enough to startle even Mrs. Budd and Biddy in their
berths.
Lor' help us all! answered the negro, what
will
come next t'ing aboard dis wessel! Here I be, sir.
Pass the fowling-piece out of my state-room. Both
barrels are loaded with ball; I'll try him, though the
bullets
are
only lead.
A common exclamation of dissatisfaction escaped the
men, while Josh was obeying the order. It's no use.
10*
You never can hurt one of them things, Something will
befall the brig on account of this, and It's the mate's
sperit, and sperits can't be harmed by lead or iron, were
the sort of remarks made by the seamen, during the short
interval between the issuing the order for the fowling-piece
and its execution.
There 't is, Cap'in Spike, said Josh, passing the piece
up through the rigging, but 't will no more shoot
that
thing, than one of our carronades would blow up Gibraltar.
By this time Spike was very determined, his lips being
compressed and his teeth set, as he took the gun and
cocked it. Then he hailed. As all that passed occurred,
as it might be, at once, the brig even at that moment was
little more than abreast of the immovable mate, and about
eighty yards from him.
Light-house, there! cried SpikeLiving or dead,
answer or I fire.
No answer came, and no motion appeared in the dark
figure that was now very plainly visible, under a bright
moon, drawn in high relief against the glittering white of
the tower. Spike dropped the muzzle to its aim, and fired.
So intense was the attention of all in the Swash, that a
wink of Harry's could almost have been seen, had he
betrayed
even that slight sign of human infirmity at the flash
and the report. The ball was flattened against a stone of
the building, within a foot of the mate's body; but he did
not stir. All depended now on his perfect immovability,
as he well knew; and he so far commanded himself, as to
remain rigid as if of stone himself.
There! one can see how it isno life in that being,
said one. I know'd how it would end, added another.
Nothing but silver, and that cast on purpose, will ever
lay it, continued a third. But Spike disregarded all.
This time he was resolved that his aim should be better,
and he was inveterately deliberate in getting it. Just as he
pulled the trigger, however, Don Juan Montefalderon
touched his elbow, the piece was fired, and there stood the
immovable figure as before, fixed against the tower. Spike
was turning angrily to chide his Mexican friend for
deranging
his aim, when the report of an answering musket came
back like an echo. Every eye was turned toward the
figure, but it moved not. Then the humming sound of an
advancing ball was heard, and a bullet passed, whistling
hoarsely, through the rigging, and fell some distance to
windward. Every head disappeared below the bulwarks.
Even Spike was so far astonished as to spring in upon deck,
and, for a single instant, not a man was to be seen above
the monkey-rail of the brig. Then Spike recovered
himself
and jumped upon a gun. His first look was toward
the light-house, now on the vessel's lee-quarter; but the
spot where had so lately been seen the form of Mulford,
showed nothing but the glittering brightness of the
whitewashed
stones!
The reader will not be surprised to learn that all these
events produced a strange and deep impression on board
the Molly Swash. The few who might have thrown a little
light on the matter were discreetly silent, while all that
portion of the crew which was in the dark, firmly believed
that the spirit of the murdered mate was visiting them, in
order to avenge the wrongs inflicted on it in the flesh.
The superstition of sailors is as deep as it is general. All
those of the Molly, too, were salts of the old school,
seadogs
of a past generation, properly speaking, and mariners
who had got their notions in the early part of the century,
when the spirit of progress was less active than it is at
present.
Spike himself might have had other misgivings, and
believed
that he had seen the living form of his intended
victim
,
but for the extraordinary and ghost-like echo of his
last discharge. There was nothing visible, or intelligible,
from which that fire could have come, and he was perfectly
bewildered by the whole occurrence. An intention to
round-to, as soon as through the passage, down boat and
land, which had been promptly conceived when he found
that his first aim had failed, was as suddenly abandoned,
and he gave the command to board fore-tack;
immediately
after, his call was to pack on the brig, and not
without
a little tremour in his voice, as soon as he perceived
that the figure had vanished. The crew was not slow to
obey these orders, and in ten minutes, the Swash was a
mile from the light, standing to the northward and eastward,
under a press of canvas, and with a freshening breeze.
To return to the islets. Harry, from the first, had seen
that everything depended on his remaining motionless. As
the people of the brig were partly in shadow, he could not,
and did not, fully understand how completely he was
himself
exposed, in consequence of the brightness of all around
him, and he had at first hoped to be mistaken for some
accidental
resemblance to a man. His nerves were well
tried by the use of the fowling-piece, but they proved equal
to the necessities of the occasion. But, when an
answering
report came from the rear, or from the opposite side of
the islet, he darted round the tower, as much taken by
surprise
,
and overcome by wonder, as any one else who heard
it. It was this rapid movement which caused his flight to
be unnoticed, all the men of the brig dodging below their
own bulwarks at that precise instant.
As the light-house was now between the mate and the
brig, he had no longer any motive for trying to conceal
himself. His first thought was of Rose, and, strange as it
may seem, for some little time he fancied that she had
found a musket in the dwelling, and discharged it, in order
to aid his escape. The events had passed so swiftly, that
there was no time for the cool consideration of anything,
and it is not surprising that some extravagances mingled
with the first surmises of all these.
On reaching the door of the house, therefore, Harry was
by no means surprised at seeing Rose standing in it, gazing
at the swiftly receding brigantine. He even looked for the
musket, expecting to see it lying at her feet, or leaning
against the wall of the building. Rose, however, was
entirely
unarmed, and as dependent on him for support, as
when he had parted from her, an hour or two before.
Where did you find that musket, Rose, and what have
you done with it? inquired Harry, as soon as he had
looked in every place he thought likely to hold such an
implement.
Musket, Harry! I have had no musket, though the
report of fire-arms, near by, awoke me from a sweet sleep.
Is this possible! I had imprudently trusted myself on
the other side of the light-house, while the moon was
behind
clouds, and when they broke suddenly away, its light
betrayed me to those on board the brig. Spike fired at me
twice, without injuring me; when, to my astonishment, an
answering report was heard from the islet. What is more,
the piece was charged with a ball-cartridge, for I heard the
whistling of the bullet as it passed on its way to the brig.
And you supposed I had fired that musket?
Whom else could I suppose had done it? You are
not a very likely person to do such a thing, I will own, my
love; but there are none but us two here.
It must be Jack Tier, exclaimed Rose suddenly.
That is impossible, since he has left us.
One never knows. Jack understood how anxious I
was to retain him with us, and he is so capricious and full
of schemes, that he may have contrived to get out of the
brig, as artfully as he got on board her.
If Jack Tier be actually on this islet, I shall set him
down as little else than a conjuror.
Hist! interrupted Rose, what noise is that in the
direction of the wharf? It sounds like an oar falling in a
boat.
Mulford heard that well-known sound, as well as his
companion, and, followed by Rose, he passed swiftly
through the house, coming out at the front, next the wharf.
The moon was still shining bright, and the mystery of the
echoing report, and answering shot, was immediately
explained
.
A large boat, one that pulled ten oars, at least,
was just coming up to the end of the wharf, and the
manner
in which its oars were unshipped and tossed, announced
to the mate that the crew were man-of-war's men. He
walked hastily forward to meet them.
Three officers first left the boat together. The gold
bands of their caps showed that they belonged to the
quarter-deck
,
a fact that the light of the moon made apparent
at once, though it was not strong enough to render features
distinct. As Mulford continued to advance, however, the
three officers saluted him.
I see you have got the light under way once more,
observed the leader of the party. Last night it was as
dark as Erebus in your lantern.
The light-house keeper and his assistant have both
been drowned, answered Mulford. The lamps have
been lit to-night by the people of the brig which has just
gone out.
Pray, sir, what brig may that be?
The Molly Swash, of New York; a craft that I lately
belonged to myself, but which I have left on account of her
evil doings.
The Molly Swash, Stephen Spike master and owner,
bound to Key West and a market, with a cargo of eight
hundred barrels of flour, and that of a quality so lively and
pungent that it explodes like gunpowder! I beg your
pardon
,
Mr. Mate, for not recognising you sooner. Have you
forgotten the Poughkeepsie, Captain Mull, and her
far-reaching
Paixhans?
I ought to ask your pardon, Mr. Wallace, for not
recognising
you
sooner, too. But one does not distinguish
well by moonlight. I am delighted to see you, sir, and
now hope that, with my assistance, a stop can be put to
the career of the brig.
What, Mr. Mate, do
you
turn against your craft?
said Wallace, under the impulsive feeling which induces
all loyal men to have a distaste for treachery of every sort,
the seaman should love the very planks of his vessel.
I fully understand you, Mr. Wallace, and will own
that, for a long time, I was tied to rascality by the opinions
to which you allude. But, when you come to hear my
explanation
,
I do not fear your judgment in the least.
Mulford now led the way into the house, whither Rose
had already retreated, and where she had lighted candles,
and made other womanly arrangements for receiving her
guests. At Harry's suggestion, some of the soup was
placed over coals, to warm up for the party, and our
heroine
made her preparations to comfort them also with a cup
of tea. While she was thus employed, Mulford gave the
whole history of his connection with the brig, his
indisposition
to quit the latter, the full exposure of Spike's treason,
his own desertion, if desertion it could be called, the loss
of the schooner, and his abandonment on the rock, and the
manner in which he had been finally relieved. It was
scarcely possible to relate all these matters, and altogether
avoid allusions to the schemes of Spike in connection with
Rose, and the relation in which our young man himself
stood toward her. Although Mulford touched on these
points with great delicacy, it was as a seaman talking to
seamen, and he could not entirely throw aside the
frankness
of the profession. Ashore, men live in the privacy of
their own domestic circles, and their secrets, and secret
thoughts, are family secrets, of which it has passed into
a proverb to say, that there are always some, even in the
best of these communities. On shipboard, or in the camp,
it is very different. The close contact in which men are
brought with each other, the necessity that exists for
opening
the heart and expanding the charities, gets in time to
influence the whole character, and a certain degree of
frankness and simplicity, takes the place of the reserve and
acting that might have been quickened in the same
individual
,
under a different system of schooling. But Mulford
was frank by nature, as well as by his sea-education, and
his companions on this occasion were pretty well possessed
of all his wishes and plans, in reference to Rose, even to
his hope of falling in with the chaplain of the
Poughkeepsie
,
by the time his story was all told. The fact that Rose
was occupied in another room, most of the time, had made
these explanations all the easier, and spared her many a
blush. As for the man-of-war's men, they listened to the
tale, with manly interest and a generous sympathy.
I am glad to hear your explanation, Mr. Mate, said
Wallace, cordially, as soon as Harry had done, and
there's my hand, in proof that I approve of your course. I
own to a radical dislike of a turncoat, or a traitor to his
craft, Brother Hollinslooking at the elder of his two
companions, one of whom was the midshipman who had
originally accompanied him on board the Swashand am
glad to find that our friend Mulford here is neither. A
true-hearted sailor can be excused for deserting even his
own ship, under such circumstances.
I am glad to hear even this little concession from you,
Wallace, answered Hollins, good-naturedly, and speaking
with a mild expression of benevolence, on a very calm and
thoughtful countenance. Your mess is as heteredox as
any I ever sailed with, on the subject of our duties, in this
respect.
I hold it to be a sailor's duty to stick by his ship,
reverend
and dear sir.
This mode of address, which was used by the ship's
gentleman in the cant of the ward-room, as a pleasantry of
an old shipmate, for the two had long sailed together in
other vessels, at once announced to Harry that he saw the
very chaplain for whose presence he had been so anxiously
wishing. The reverend and dear sir smiled at the sally
of his friend, a sort of thing to which he was very well
accustomed
,
but he answered with a gravity and point that,
it is to be presumed, he thought befitting his holy office.
It may be well to remark here, that the Rev. Mr. Hollins
was not one of the lunch'd chaplains, that used to do
discredit to the navy of this country, or a layman dubbed
with such a title, and rated that he might get the pay and
become a boon companion of the captain, at the table and
in his frolics ashore. Those days are gone by, and
ministers
of the gospel are now really employed to care for the
souls of the poor sailors, who so long have been treated by
others, and have treated themselves, indeed, as if they were
beings without souls, altogether. In these particulars, the
world has certainly advanced, though the wise and the
good, in looking around them, may feel more cause for
astonishment
in contemplating what it once was, than to
rejoice
in what it actually is. But intellect has certainly
improved in the aggregate, if not in its especial
dispensations
,
and men will not now submit to abuses that, within
the recollections of a generation, they even cherished. In
reference to the more intellectual appointments of a ship
of war, the commander excepted, for we contend he who
directs all, ought to possess the most capacity, but, in
reference
to what are ordinarily believed to be the more
intellectual
appointments of a vessel of war, the surgeon and
the chaplain, we well recollect opinions that were expressed
to us, many years since, by two officers of the highest rank
known to the service. When I first entered the navy,
said one of these old Benbows, if I had occasion for the
amputation of a leg, and the question lay between the
carpenter
and the doctor, de, but I would have tried the
carpenter first, for I felt pretty certain he would have been
the most likely to get through with the job. In old
times, said the other, when a chaplain joined a ship, the
question immediately arose, whether the mess were to
convert
the chaplain, or the chaplain, the mess; and the mess
generally got the best of it. There was very little
exaggeration
in either of these opinions. But, happily, all this
is changed vastly for the better, and a navy-surgeon is
necessarily
a man of education and experience; in very many
instances, men of high talents are to be found among them;
while chaplains can do something better than play at
backgammon
,
eat terrapins, when in what may be called
terrapin-ports
,
and drink brandy and water, or pure Bob Smith.
1
1.
In the palmy days of the service, when Robert Smith was so
long Secretary of the Navy, the ship's whisky went by this
familiar
sobriquet
.
It is a great mistake, Wallace, to fancy that the
highest
duty a man owes, is either to his ship or to his
country
,
observed the Rey. Mr. Hollins, quietly. The highest
duty of each and all of us, is to God; and whatever
conflicts
with that duty, must be avoided as a transgression of
his laws, and consequently as sin.
You surprise me, reverend and dear sir! I do not
remember
ever to have heard you broach such opinions
before
,
which might be interpreted to mean that a fellow
might be disloyal to his flag.
Because the opinion might be liable to
misinterpretation
.
Still, I do not go as far as many of my friends on
this subject. If Decatur ever really said, `Our country,
right or wrong,' he said what might be just enough, and
creditable enough, in certain cases, and taken with the fair
limitations that he probably intended should accompany
the sentiment; but, if he meant it as an absolute and
controlling
principle, it was not possible to be more in error.
In this last sense, such a rule of conduct might, and in old
times often would, have justified idolatry; nay, it
is
a
species
of idolatry in itself, since it is putting country before
God. Sailors may not always be able to make the just
distinctions
in these cases, but the quarter-deck should be so,
irreverend and dear sir.
Wallace laughed, and then he turned the discourse to
the subject more properly before them.
I understand you to say, Mr. Mulford, he remarked,
Vol. II.11
that, in your opinion, the Swash has gone to try to raise
the unfortunate Mexican schooner, a second time, from the
depths of the ocean?
From the rock on which she lies. Under the
circumstances
,
I hardly think he would have come hither for the
chain and cable, unless with some such object. We know,
moreover, thut such
was
his intention when we left the
brig.
And you can take us to the very spot where that wreck
lies?
Without any difficulty. Her masts are partly out of
water, and we hung on to them, in our boat, no later than
last night, or this morning rather.
So far, well. Your conduct in all this affair will be
duly appreciated, and Captain Mull will not fail to
represent
it in a right point of view to the government.
Where is the ship, sir? I looked for her most
anxiously
,
without success, last evening; nor had Jack Tier, the
little fellow I have named to you, any better luck; though
I sent him aloft, as high as the lantern in the light-house,
for that purpose.
The ship is off here to the northward and westward,
some six leagues or so. At sunset she may have been a
little further. We have supposed that the Swash would be
coming back hither, and had laid a trap for her, which
came very near taking her alive.
What is the trap you mean, sirthough taking
Stephen
Spike alive, is sooner said than done.
Our plan has been to catch him with our boats. With
the greater draft of water of the Poughkeepsie, and the
heels of your brig, sir, a regular chase about these reefs, as
we knew from experience, would be almost hopeless. It
was, therefore, necessary to use head-work, and some
man-of-war
traverses, in order to lay hold of him. Yesterday
afternoon we hoisted out three cutters, manned them, and
made sail in them all, under our luggs, working up against
the trades. Each boat took its own course, one going off,
the west end of the reef, one going more to the eastward,
while I came this way, to look in at the Dry Tortugas.
Spike will be lucky if he do not fall in with our third
cutter
,
which is under the fourth lieutenant, should he stand
on far on the same tack as that on which he left this place.
Let him try his fortune, however. As for our boat, as soon
as I saw the lamps burning in the lantern, I made the best
of my way hither, and got sight of the brig, just as she
loosened her sails. Then I took in my own luggs, and
came on with the oars. Had we continued under our
canvas
,
with this breeze, I almost think we might have
overhauled
the rascal.
It would have been impossible, sir. The moment he
got a sight of your sails, he would have been off in a
contrary
direction, and that brig really seems to fly, whenever
there is a pressing occasion for her to move. You did the
wisest thing you could have done, and barely missed him,
as it was. He has not seen you at all, as it is, and will be
all the less on his guard, against the next visit from the
ship.
Not seen me! Why, sir, the fellow fired at us
t
wice
with a musket; why he did not use a carronade, is more
than I can tell.
Excuse me, Mr. Wallace; those two shots were
intended
for me, though I now fully comprehend why you
answered them.
Answered them! yes, indeed; who would not answer
such a salute, and gun for gun, if he had a chance. I
certainly
thought he was firing at us, and having a musket
between my legs, I let fly in return, and even the chaplain
here will allow that was returning `good for evil.' But
explain your meaning.
Mulford now went into the details of the incidents
connected
with his coming into the moon-light, at the foot of
the light-house. That he was not mistaken as to the party
for whom the shots were intended, was plain enough to him,
from the words that passed aloud among the people of the
Swash, as well as from the circumstance that both balls
struck the stones of the tower quite near him. This
statement
explained everything to Wallace, who now fully
comprehended
the cause and motive of each incident.
It was now near eleven, and Rose had prepared the table
for supper. The gentlemen of the Poughkeepsie
manifested
great interest in the movements of the Hebe-like little
attendant who was caring for their wants. When the cloth
was to be laid, the midshipman offered his assistance, but
his superior directed him to send a hand or two up from
the wharf, where the crew of the cutter were lounging or
sleeping after their cruise. These men had been thought
of, too; and a vessel filled with smoking soup was taken to
them, by one of their own number.
The supper was as cheerful as it was excellent. The
dry humour of Wallace, the mild intelligence of the
chaplain
,
the good sense of Harry, and the spirited information
of Rose, contributed, each in its particular way, to make
the meal memorable in more senses than one. The laugh
came easily at that table, and it was twelve o'clock, before
the party thought of breaking up.
The dispositions for the night were soon made. Rose
returned to her little room, where she could now sleep in
comfort, and without apprehension. The gentlemen made
the disposition of their persons, that circumstances
allowed
;
each finding something on which to repose, that was
preferable to a plank. As for the men, they were
accustomed
to hard fare, and enjoyed their present good-luck, to
the top of their bent. It was quite late, before they had
done spinning their yarns, and cracking their jokes,
around the pot of turtle-soup, and the can of grog that
succeeded it. By half-past twelve, however, everybody
was asleep.
Mulford was the first person afoot the following morning.
He left the house just as the sun rose, and perceiving that
the coast was clear of sharks, he threw off his light
attire
,
and plunged into the sea. Refreshed with this
indulgence
,
he was returning toward the building, when he met
the chaplain coming in quest of him. This gentleman, a
man of real piety, and of great discretion, had been
singularly
struck, on the preceding night, with the narrative of
our young mate; and he had not failed to note the
allusions
,
slight as they were, and delicately put as they had
been, to himself. He saw, at once, the propriety of
marrying
a couple so situated, and now sought Harry, with a
view to bring about so desirable an event, by intimating his
entire willingness to officiate. It is scarcely necessary to
say that very few words were wanting, to persuade the
young man to fall into his views; and as to Rose, he had
handed her a short note on the same subject, which he was
of opinion, would be likely to bring her to the same way
of thinking.
An hour later, all the officers, Harry and Rose, were
assembled
in what might be termed the light-house parlour.
The Rev. Mr. Hollins had neither band, gown, nor
surplice
;
but he had what was far better, feeling and piety.
Without a prayer-book he never moved; and he read the
marriage ceremony with a solemnity that was
communicated
to all present. The ring was that which had been
used at the marriage of Rose's parents, and which she wore
habitually, though not on the left hand. In a word, Harry
and Rose were as firmly and legally united, on that solitary
and almost unknown islet, as could have been the case,
had they stood up before the altar of mother Trinity itself,
with a bishop to officiate, and a legion of attendants. After
the compliments which succeeded the ceremony, the whole
party sat down to breakfast.
If the supper had been agreeable, the morning meal was
not less so. Rose was timid and blushing, as became a
bride, though she could not but feel how much more
respectable
her position became under the protection of Harry
as his wife, than it had been while she was only his
betrothed
.
The most delicate deportment, on the part of her
companions, soon relieved her embarrassment however, and
the breakfast passed off without cause for an unhappy
moment
.
The ship's standing in toward the light, sir, reported
the cockswain of the cutter, as the party was still lingering
around the table, as if unwilling to bring so pleasant a meal
to a close. Since the mist has broke away, we see her,
sir, even to her ports and dead-eyes.
In that case, Sam, she can't be very far off, answered
Wallace. Ay, there goes a gun from her, at this
moment
,
as much as to say, `what has become of all of my
boats?' Run down and let off a musket; perhaps she will
make out to hear that, as we must be rather to windward,
if anything.
The signal was given and understood. A quarter of an
hour later, the Poughkeepsie began to shorten sail. Then
Wallace stationed himself in the cutter, in the centre of
11*
one of the passages, signalling the ship to come on. Ten
minutes later still, the noble craft came into the haven,
passing the still burning light, with her topsails just lifting,
and making a graceful sweep under very reduced sail, she
came to the wind, very near the spot where the Swash had
lain only ten hours before, and dropped an anchor.
CHAPTER V.
The gull has found her place on shore;
The sun gone down again to rest;
And all is still but ocean's roar;
There stands the man unbless'd.
But see, he moveshe turns, as asking where
His mates? Why looks he with that piteous stare?
Dana
.
Superstition
would seem to be a consequence of a state
of being, in which so much is shadowed forth, while so
little
is accurately known. Our far-reaching thoughts range
over the vast fields of created things, without penetrating
to the secret cause of the existence of even a blade of grass.
We can analyze all substances that are brought into our
crucibles, tell their combinations and tendencies, give a
scientific history of their formation, so far as it is
connected
with secondary facts, their properties, and their uses;
but in each and all, there is a latent natural cause, that
baffles all our inquiries, and tells us that we are merely
men. This is just as true in morals, as in physicsno
man living being equal to attaining the very faith that is
necessary to his salvation, without the special aid of the
spirit of the godhead; and even with that mighty support,
trusting implicitly for all that is connected with a future
that we are taught to believe is eternal, to the substance
of things
hoped
for, and the evidence of things
unseen
.
In a word, this earthly probation of ours, was intended for
finite beings, in the sense of our present existence, leaving
far more to be conjectured, than is understood.
Ignorance and superstition ever bear a close, and even
a mathematical relation to each other. The degrees of the
one, are regulated by the degrees of the other. He who
knows the least believes the most; while he who has seen
the most, without the intelligence to comprehend that
which he has seen, feels, perhaps, the strongest inclination
to refer those things which to him are mysteries, to the
supernatural
and marvellous. Sailors have been, from time
immemorial, more disposed than men of their class on the
land, to indulge in this weakness, which is probably
heightened
by the circumstance of their living constantly and
vividly in the presence of powers that menace equally their
lives and their means, without being in any manner subject
to their control.
Spike, for a seaman of his degree of education, was not
particularly addicted to the weakness to which we have
just alluded. Nevertheless, he was not altogether free from
it; and recent circumstances contributed to dispose him so
much the more to admit a feeling which, like sin itself, is
ever the most apt to insinuate itself at moments of
extraordinary
moral imbecility, and through the openings left by
previous transgression. As his brig stood off from the
light, the captain paced the deck, greatly disturbed by what
had just passed, and unable to account for it. The boat
of the Poughkeepsie was entirely concealed by the islet,
and there existing no obvious motive for wishing to return,
in order to come at the truth, not a thought to that effect,
for one moment, crossed the mind of the smuggler. So far
from this, indeed, were his wishes, that the Molly did not
seem to him to go half as fast as usual, in his keen desire
to get further and further from a spot where such strange
incidents had occurred.
As for the men forward, no argument was wanting to
make
them
believe that something supernatural had just
passed before their eyes. It was known to them all, that
Mulford had been left on a naked rock, some thirty miles
from that spot; and it was not easy to understand how he
could now be at the Dry Tortugas, planted, as it might be,
on purpose to show himself to the brig, against the tower,
in the bright moonlight, like a pictur' hung up for his
old shipmates to look at.
Sombre were the tales that were related that night
among them, many of which related to the sufferings of
men abandoned on desert islands; and all of which
bordered
,
more or less, on the supernatural. The crew
connected
the disappearance of the boat with Mulford's apparition,
though the logical inference would have been, that the
body which required planks to transport it, could scarcely
be classed with anything of the world of spirits. The links
in arguments, however, are seldom respected by the
illiterate
and vulgar, who jump to their conclusions, in cases of
the marvellous, much as politicians find an expression of
the common mind in the prepared opinions of the few who
speak for them, totally disregarding the dissenting silence
of the million. While the men were first comparing their
opinions on that which, to them, seemed to be so
extraordinary
,
the Seor Montefalderon joined the captain in his
walk, and dropped into a discourse touching the events
which had attended their departure from the haven of the
Dry Tortugas. In this conversation, Don Juan most
admirably
preserved his countenance, as well as his
self-command
,
effectually preventing the suspicion of any
knowledge
on his part, that was not common to them both.
You did leave the port with the salutes observed, the
Mexican commenced, with the slightest accent of a
foreigner
,
or just enough to show that he was not speaking in his
mother tongue; salutes paid and returned.
Do you call that saluting, Don Wan? To me, that
infernal shot sounded more like an echo, than anything
else.
And to what do
you
ascribe it, Don Esteban?
I wish I could answer that question. Sometimes I
begin to wish I had not left my mate on that naked rock.
There is still time to repair the last wrong; we shall
go within a few miles of the place where the Seor
Enrique
was left; and I can take the yawl, with two men,
and go in search of him, while you are at work on the
wreck.
Do you believe it possible that he can be still there?
demanded Spike, looking suddenly and intently at his
companion
,
while his mind was strangely agitated between
hatred
and dread. If he is there, who and what was
he
that
we all saw so plainly at the foot of the light-house?
How should he have left the rock? He was without
food or water; and no man, in all his vigour, could swim
this distance. I see no means of his getting here.
Unless some wrecker, or turtler, fell in with him, and
took him off. Ay, ay, Don Wan; I left him that much
of a chance, at least. No man can say I
murdered
my
mate.
I am not aware, Don Esteban, that any one
has
said
so hard a thing of you. Still, we have seen neither
wrecker
nor turtler since we have been here; and that lessens
the excellent chance you left Don Enrique.
There is no occasion, seor, to be so particular,
growled Spike, a little sullenly, in reply. The chance,
I say, was a
good
one, when you consider how many of
them devils of wreckers hang about these reefs. Let this
brig only get fast on a rock, and they would turn up, like
sharks, all around us, each with his maw open for salvage.
But this is neither here nor there; what puzzles me, was
what we saw at the light, half an hour since, and the
musket
that was fired back at us! I
know
that the figure at the
foot of the tower did not fire, for my eye was on him from
first to last; and he had no arms. You were on the island
a good bit, and must have known if the light-house keeper
was there or not, Don Wan?
The light-house keeper
was
there, Don Estebanbut
he was in his
grave
.
Ay, ay, one, I know, was drowned, and buried with
the rest of them; there might, however, have been more
than one. You saw none of the people that had gone to
Key West, in or about the house, Don Wan?
None. If any persons have left the Tortugas to go to
Key West, within a few days, not one of them has yet
returned
.
So I supposed. No, it can be none of
them
. Then I
saw his face as plainly as ever I saw it by moon-light, from
aft, for'ard. What is your opinion about seeing the dead
walk on the 'arth, Don Wan?
That I have never seen any such thing myself, Don
Esteban, and consequently know nothing about it.
So I supposed; I find it hard to believe it, I do. It
may be a warning to keep us from-coming any more to the
Dry Tortugas; and I must say I have little heart for
returning
to this place, after all that has fell out here. We
can go to the wreck, fish up the doubloons, and be off for
Yucatan. Once in one of your ports, I make no question
that the merits of the Molly will make themselves
understood
,
and that we shall soon agree on a price.
What use could we put the brig to, Don Esteban, if
we had her all ready for sea?
That is a strange question to ask in time of war! Give
me
such a craft as the Molly, with sixty or eighty men on
board her, in a war like this, and her 'arnin's should not
fall short of half a million within a twelvemonth.
Could we engage you to take charge of her, Don
Esteban
?
That would be ticklish work, Don Wan. But we can
see. No one knows what he will do until he is tried. In
for a penny, in for a pound. A fellow never knows! Ha!
ha! ha! Don Wan, we live in a strange worldyes, in a
strange world.
We live in strange
times,
Don Esteban, as the situation
of my poor country proves. But let us talk this matter
over a little more in confidence.
And they did thus discuss the subject. It was a
singular
spectacle to see an honourable man, one full of zeal of
the purest nature in behalf of his own country, sounding a
traitor as to the terms on which he might be induced to do
all the harm he could, to those who claimed his allegiance.
Such sights, however, are often seen; our own especial
objects too frequently blinding us to the obligations that we
owe morality, so far as not to be instrumental in effecting
even what we conceive to be good, by questionable
agencies
.
But the Seor Montefalderon kept in view,
principally
,
his desire to be useful to Mexico, blended a little too
strongly, perhaps, with the wishes of a man who was born
near the sun, to avenge his wrongs, real or fancied.
While this dialogue was going on between Spike and
his passenger, as they paced the quarter-deck, one quite as
characteristic occurred in the galley, within twenty feet of
themSimon, the cook, and Josh, the steward, being the
interlocutors. As they talked secrets, they conferred
together
with closed doors, though few were ever disposed
to encounter the smoke, grease, and fumes of their narrow
domains, unless called thither by hunger.
What
you
t'ink of dis matter Josh? demanded Simon,
whose skull having the well-known density of his race, did
not let internal ideas out, or external ideas in as readily as
most men's. Our young mate
was
at de light-house
beyond
all controwersy; and how can he be den on dat rock
over yonder, too?
Dat is imposserbul, answered Josh; derefore I says
it is n't true. I surposes you know dat what is
imposserbul
is n't true, Simon. Nobody can't be out yonder and
down here at de same time. Dat is imposserble, Simon.
But what I wants to intermate to you, will explain all dis
difficulty; and it do show de raal super'ority of a coloured
man over de white poperlation. Now, you mark my
words, cook, and be full of admiration! Jack Tier came
back along wid de Mexican gentle'em, in my anchor-watch,
dis very night! You see, in de first place, ebbery t'ing
come to pass in nigger's watch.
Here the two dark-skinned worthies haw-haw'd to their
heart's content; laughing very much as a magistrate or a
minister of the gospel might be fancied to laugh, the first
time he saw a clown at a circus. The merriment of a
negro
will have its course, in spite of ghosts, or of anything
else; and neither the cook nor the steward dreamed of
puting
in another syllable, until their laugh was fairly and duly
ended. Then the cook made his remarks.
How Jack Tier comin' back explain der differculty,
Josh? asked Simon.
Did n't Jack go away wid Miss Rose and de mate, in
de boat dat got adrift, you know, in Jack's watch on
deck?
Here the negroes laughed again, their imaginations
happening
to picture to each, at the same instant, the
mystification
about the boat; Biddy having told Josh in
confidence
,
the manner in which the party had returned to the
brig, while he and Simon were asleep; which fact the
steward
had already communicated to the cook. To these two
beings, of an order in nature different from all around
them, and of a simplicity and of habits that scarce placed
them on a level with the intelligence of the humblest white
man, all these circumstances had a sort of mysterious
connection
,
out of which peeped much the most
conspicuously
to their faculties, the absurdity of the captain's imagining
that a boat had got adrift, which had, in truth, been taken
away by human hands. Accordingly, they laughed it out;
and when they had done laughing, they returned again to
the matter before them with renewed interest in the
subject
.
Well, how all dat explain dis differculty? repeated
Simon.
In dis wery manner, cook, returned the steward, with
a little dignity in his manner. Ebbery t'ing depend on
understandin', I s'pose you know. If Mr. Mulford got
taken off dat rock by Miss Rose and Jack Tier, wid de
boat, and den dey comes here altogedder; and den Jack
Tier, he get on board and tell Biddy all dis matter, and
den Biddy tell Josh, and den Josh tell de cookwhat for
you surprise, you black debbil, one bit?
Dat all! exclaimed Simon.
Dat just alldat ebbery bit of it, do n't I say.
Here Simon burst into such a fit of loud laughter, that
it induced Spike himself to shove aside the galley-door,
and thrust his own frowning visage into the dark hole
within
,
to inquire the cause.
What's the meaning of this uproar? demanded the
captain, all the more excited because he felt that things
had reached a pass that would not permit him to laugh
himself. Do you fancy yourself on the Hook, or at the
Five Points?
The Hook and the Five Points are two pieces of tabooed
territory within the limits of the good town of Manhattan,
that are getting to be renowned for their rascality and
orgies
.
They probably want nothing but the proclamation
of a governor in vindication of their principles, annexed to
a pardon of some of their unfortunate children, to render
both classical. If we continue to make much further
progress
in political logic, and in the same direction as that
in which we have already proceeded so far, neither will
probably long be in want of this illustration. Votes can
be given by the virtuous citizens of both these purlieus, as
well as by the virtuous citizens of the anti-rent districts,
and votes contain the essence of all such principles, as well
as of their glorification.
Do you fancy yourselves on the Hook, or at the Five
Points? demanded Spike, angrily.
Lor', no sir! answered Simon, laughing at each pause
with all his heart. Only laughs a little at
ghost
dat
all, sir.
Laugh at ghost! Is that a subject to laugh at? Have
a care, you black rascal, or he will visit you in your galley
here, when you will least want to see him.
No care much for
him,
sir, returned Simon, laughing
away as hard as ever.
Sich
a ghost ought n't to skear
little baby.
Such
a ghost? And what do you know of
this
ghost
more than any other?
Well, I seed him, Cap'in Spike; and what a body sees,
he is acquainted wid.
You saw an image that looked as much like Mr.
Mulford
,
my late mate, as one timber-head in this brig is like
another.
Yes, sir, he like enoughmust say
dat
so wery like,
could n't see any difference.
As Simon concluded this remark, he burst out into
another
fit of laughter, in which Josh joined him, heart and
soul, as it might be. The uninitiated reader is not to
imagine
the laughter of those blacks to be very noisy, or to be
raised on a sharp, high key. They
could
make the welkin
ring, in sudden bursts of merriment, on occasion; but, at a
time like this, they rather caused their diversion to be
developed
by sounds that came from the depths of their
chests. A gleam of suspicion that these blacks were
acquainted
with some fact that it might be well for him to
know, shot across the mind of Spike; but he was turned
from further inquiry by a remark of Don Juan, who
intimated
that the mirth of such persons never had much
meaning to it, expressing at the same time a desire to
pursue
the more important subject in which they were engaged.
Admonishing the blacks to be more guarded in their
manifestations
of merriment, the captain closed the door on
Vol. II.12
them, and resumed his walk up and down the quarter-deck.
As soon as left to themselves, the blacks broke out afresh,
though in a way so guarded, as to confine their mirth to
the galley.
Cap'in Spike t'ink
dat
a ghost! exclaimed Simon,
with contempt.
Guess if he see
raal
ghost, he find 'e difference,
answered
Josh. One look at raal sperit wort' two at dis
object.
Simon's eyes now opened like two saucers, and they
gleamed, by the light of the lamp they had, like dark balls
of condensed curiosity, blended with awe, on his
companion
.
You ebber see him, Josh? he asked, glancing over
each shoulder hurriedly, as it might be, to make sure that
he could not see him, too.
How you t'ink I get so far down the wale of life, Simon,
and nebber see sich a t'ing? I seed t'ree of the crew of the
`Maria Sheffington,' that was drowned by deir boat's
capsizin'
,
when we lay at Gibraltar, jest as plain as I see you
now. Then
But it is unnecessary to repeat Josh's experiences in this
way, with which he continued to entertain and terrify
Simon
for the next half-hour. This is just the difference
between
ignorance and knowledge. While Spike himself,
and every man in his brig who belonged forward, had
strong misgivings as to the earthly character of the figure
they had seen at the foot of the light-house, these negroes
laughed at their delusion, because they happened to be in
the secret of Mulford's escape from the rock, and of that
of his actual presence at the Tortugas. When, however,
the same superstitious feeling was brought to bear on
circumstances
that lay
without
the sphere of their exact
information
,
they became just as dependent and helpless as all
around them; more so, indeed, inasmuch as their previous
habits and opinions disposed them to a more profound
credulity
.
It was midnight before any of the crew of the Swash
sought their rest that night. The captain had to remind
them that a day of extraordinary toil was before them, ere
he could get one even to quit the deck; and when they did
go below, it was to continue to discuss the subject of what
they had seen at the Dry Tortugas. It appeared to be the
prevalent opinion among the people, that the late event
foreboded evil to the Swash, and long as most of these men
had served in the brig, and much as they had become
attached
to her, had she gone into port that night, nearly
every man forward would have run before morning. But
fatigue and wonder, at length, produced their effect, and
the vessel was silent as was usual at that hour. Spike
himself
lay down in his clothes, as he had done ever since
Mulford had left him; and the brig continued to toss the
spray from her bows, as she bore gallantly up against the
trades, working her way to windward. The light was
found to be of great service, as it indicated the position of
the reef, though it gradually sunk in the western horizon,
until near morning it fell entirely below it.
At this hour Spike appeared on deck again, where, for
the first time since their interview on the morning of
Harry's
and Rose's escape, he laid his eyes on Jack Tier.
The little dumpling-looking fellow was standing in the
waist, with his arms folded sailor-fashion, as composedly as
if nothing had occurred to render his meeting with the
captain
any way of a doubtful character. Spike approached
near the person of the steward, whom he surveyed from
head to foot, with a sort of contemptuous superiority, ere
he spoke.
So, Master Tier, at length the captain commenced,
you have deigned to turn out at last, have you? I hope
the day's duty you've forgotten, will help to pay for the
light-house boat, that I understand you've lost for me,
also.
What signifies a great clumsy boat that the brig
could n't hoist in nor tow, answered Jack, coolly, turning
short round at the same time, but not condescending to
uncoil his arms as he did so, a mark of indifference that
would probably have helped to mystify the captain, had he
even actually suspected that anything was wrong beyond
the supposed accident to the boat in question. If you
had had the boat astarn, Captain Spike, an order would
have been given to cut it adrift the first time the brig made
sail on the wind.
Nobody knows, Jack; that boat would have been very
useful to us while at work about the wreck. You never
even turned out this morning to let me know where that
craft lay, as you promised to do, but left us to find it out
by our wits.
There was no occasion for my tellin' you anything
about it, sir, when the mast-heads was to be seen above
water. As soon as I heard that them 'ere mast-heads was
out of water, I turned over and went to sleep upon it. A
man can't be on the doctor's list and on duty at the same
time.
Spike looked hard at the little steward, but he made no
further allusion to his being off duty, or to his failing to
stand pilot to the brig as she came through the passage in
quest of the schooner's remains. The fact was, that he
had discovered the mast-heads himself, just as he was on
the point of ordering Jack to be called, having allowed him
to remain in his berth to the last moment after his watch,
according to a species of implied faith that is seldom
disregarded
among seamen. Once busied on the wreck, Jack
was forgotten, having little to do in common with any one
on board, but that which the captain termed the women's
mess.
Come aft, Jack, resumed Spike, after a considerable
pause, during the whole of which he had stood regarding
the little steward as if studying his person, and through
that his character. Come aft to the trunk; I wish to
catechise you a bit.
Catechise! repeated Tier, in an under tone, as he
followed the captain to the place mentioned. It's a long
time since I've done anything at
that!
Ay, come hither, resumed Spike, seating himself at
his ease on the trunk, while Jack stood near by, his arms
still folded, and his rotund little form as immovable, under
the plunges that the lively brig made into the head-seas
that she was obliged to meet, as if a timber-head in the
vessel itself. You keep your sea-legs well, Jack, short
as they are.
No wonder for that, Captain Spike; for the last twenty
years I've scarce passed a twelvemonth ashore; and what
I did before that, no one can better tell than yourself, since
we was ten good years shipmates.
So you say, Jack, though I do not remember
you
as
well as you seem to remember
me
. Do you not make the
time too long?
Not a day, sir. Ten good and happy years did we
sail together, Captain Spike; and all that time in this
very
Hushh-u-s-h, man, hush! There is no need of
telling
the Molly's age to everybody. I may wish to sell her
some day, and then her great experience will be no
recommendation
.
You should recollect that the Molly is a
female
,
and the ladies do not like to hear of their ages after
five-and-twenty.
Jack made no answer, but he dropped his arms to their
natural position, seeming to wait the captain's
communication
,
first referring to his tobacco-box and taking a fresh
quid.
If you was with me in the brig, Jack, at the time you
mention, continued Spike, after another long and
thoughtful
pause, you must remember many little things that I
do n't wish to have known; especially while Mrs. Budd
and her handsome niece is aboard here.
I understand you, Captain Spike. The ladies shall
l'arn no more from me than they know already.
Thank 'e for that Jackthank 'e with all my heart
Shipmates of our standing ought to be fast friends; and so
you'll find me, if you'll only sail under the true colours,
my man.
At that moment Jack longed to let the captain know how
strenuously he had insisted that very night on rejoining his
vessel; and this at a time, too, when the brig was falling
into disrepute. But this he could not do, without betraying
the secret of the loversso he chose to say nothing.
There is no use in blabbing all a man knows, and the
galley is a sad place for talking. Galley news is poor news,
I suppose you know, Jack.
I've hear'n say as much on board o' man-of-war. It's
a great place for the officers to meet and talk, and smoke,
in Uncle Sam's crafts; and what a body hears in such
places, is pretty much newspaper stuff, I do suppose.
12*
Ay, ay, that's it; not to be thought of half-an-hour
after it has been spoken. Here's a doubloon for you,
Jack; and all for the sake of old times. Now, tell me, my
litle fellow, how do the ladies come on? Does n't Miss
Rose get over her mourning on account of the mate?
Ar' n't we to have the pleasure of seein' her on deck soon?
I can't answer for the minds and fancies of young
women, Captain Spike. They are difficult to understand;
and I would rather not meddle with what I can't
understand
.
Poh, poh, man; you must get over that. You might
be of great use to me, Jack, in a very delicate affairfor
you know how it is with women; they must be handled as
a man would handle this brig among breakers; Rose, in
partic'lar, is as skittish as a colt.
Stephen Spike, said Jack, solemnly, but on so low a
key that it entirely changed his usually harsh and cracked
voice to one that sounded soft, if not absolutely pleasant,
do you never think of hereafter? Your days are almost
run; a very few years, in your calling it may be a very few
weeks, or a few hours, and time will be done with you, and
etarnity will commence.Do you never think of a
hereafter
?
Spike started to his feet, gazing at Jack intently; then
he wiped the perspiration from his face, and began to pace
the deck rapidly, muttering to himselfthis has been a
most accursed night! First the mate, and now
this!
Blast
me, but I thought it was a voice from the grave! Graves!
can't they keep those that belong to them, or have rocks
and waves no graves?
What more passed through the mind of the captain must
remain a secret, for he kept it to himself; nor did he take
any further notice of his companion. Jack, finding that
he was unobserved, passed quietly below, and took the
place in his berth, which he had only temporarily
abandoned
.
Just as the day dawned, the Swash reached the vicinity
of the wreck again. Sail was shortened, and the brig stood
in until near enough for the purpose of her commander,
when she was hove-to, so near the mast-heads that, by
lowering
the yawl, a line was sent out to the fore-mast, and the
brig was hauled close alongside. The direction of the reef
at that point formed a lee; and the vessel lay in water
sufficiently
smooth for her object.
This was done soon after the sun had risen, and Spike
now ordered all hands called, and began his operations in
earnest. By sounding carefully around the schooner when
last here, he had ascertained her situation to his entire
satisfaction
.
She had settled on a shelf of the reef, in such
a position that her bows lay in a sort of cradle, while her
stern was several feet nearer to the surface than the
opposite
extremity. This last fact was apparent, indeed, by
the masts themselves, the lower mast aft being several feet
out of water, while the fore-mast was entirely buried,
leaving
nothing but the fore-topmast exposed. On these great
premises Spike had laid the foundation of the practical
problem he intended to solve.
No expectation existed of ever getting the schooner
afloat again. All that Spike and the Seor Montefalderon
now aimed at, was to obtain the doubloons, which the
former
thought could be got at in the following manner. He
knew that it would be much easier handling the wreck, so
far as its gravity was concerned, while the hull continued
submerged. He also knew that one end could be raised
with a comparatively trifling effort, so long as the other
rested on the rock. Under these circumstances, therefore,
he proposed merely to get slings around the after body of
the schooner, as near her stern-post, indeed, as would be
safe, and to raise that extremity of the vessel to the surface,
leaving most of the weight of the craft to rest on the bows.
The difference between the power necessary to effect this
much, and that which would be required to raise the whole
wreck, would be like the difference in power necessary to
turn over a log with one end resting on the ground, and
turning the same log by lifting it bodily in the arms, and
turning it in the air. With the stern once above water, it
would be easy to come at the bag of doubloons, which Jack
Tier had placed in a locker above the transoms.
The first thing was to secure the brig properly, in order
that she might bear the necessary strain. This was done
very much as has been described already, in the account
of the manner in which she was secured and supported in
order to raise the schooner at the Dry Tortugas. An
anchor
was laid abreast and to windward, and purchases were
brought to the masts, as before. Then the bight of the
chain brought from the Tortugas, was brought under the
schooner's keel, and counter-purchases, leading from both
the fore-mast and main-mast of the brig, were brought to it,
and set taut. Spike now carefully examined all his
fastenings
,
looking to his cables as well as his mechanical power
aloft, heaving in upon this, and veering out upon that, in
order to bring the Molly square to her work; after which
he ordered the people to knock-off for their dinners. By
that time, it was high noon.
While Stephen Spike was thus employed on the wreck,
matters and things were not neglected at the Tortugas.
The Poughkeepsie had no sooner anchored, than Wallace
went on board and made his report. Capt. Mull then sent
for Mulford, with whom he had a long personal conference.
This officer was getting grey, and consequently he had
acquired
experience. It was evident to Harry, at first, that
he was regarded as one who had been willingly engaged in
an unlawful pursuit, but who had abandoned it to push
dearer interests in another quarter. It was some time
before
the commander of the sloop-of-war could divest
himself
of this opinion, though it gradually gave way before the
frankness of the mate's manner, and the manliness,
simplicity
,
and justice of his sentiments. Perhaps Rose had
some influence also in bringing about this favourable change.
Wallace did not fail to let it be known that turtle-soup
was to be had ashore; and many was the guest our heroine
had to supply with that agreeable compound, in the course
of the morning. Jack Tier had manifested so much skill
in the preparation of the dish, that its reputation soon
extended
to the cabin, and the captain was induced to land,
in order to ascertain how far rumour was or was not a liar,
on this interesting occasion. So ample was the custom,
indeed, that Wallace had the consideration to send one of
the ward-room servants to the light-house, in order to
relieve
Rose from a duty that was getting to be a little
irksome
.
She was seeing company as a bride, in a novel
and rather unpleasant manner; and it was in consequence
of a suggestion of the ship's gentleman, that the remains
of the turtle were transferred to the vessel, and were put
into the coppers,
secundum artem,
by the regular cooks.
It was after tickling his palate with a bowl of the soup,
and enjoying a half-hour's conversation with Rose, that
Capt. Mull summoned Harry to a final consultation on the
subject of their future proceedings. By this time the
commander
of the Poughkeepsie was in a better humour with
his new acquaintance, more disposed to believe him, and
infinitely more inclined to listen to his suggestions and
advice
,
than he had been in their previous interviews.
Wallace
was present in his character of ship's gentleman,
or, as having nothing to do, while his senior, the first
lieutenant
,
was working like a horse on board the vessel, in the
execution of his round of daily duties.
At this consultation, the parties came into a right
understanding
of each other's views and characters. Capt. Mull
was slow to yield his confidence, but when he did bestow
it, he bestowed it sailor-fashion, or with all his heart.
Satisfied
at last that he had to do with a young man of
honour
,
and one who was true to the flag, he consulted freely
with our mate, asked his advice, and was greatly
influenced
in the formation of his final decision by the opinions
that Harry modestly advanced, maintaining them, however,
with solid arguments, and reasons that every seaman could
comprehend.
Mulford knew the plans of Spike by means of his own
communications with the Seor Montefalderon. Once
acquainted
with the projects of his old commander, it was
easy for him to calculate the time it would require to put
them in execution, with the means that were to be found
on board the Swash. It will take the brig until near
morning, he said, to beat up to the place where the
wreck lies. Spike will wait for light to commence
operations
,
and several hours will be necessary to moor the brig,
and get out the anchors with which he will think it
necessary
to stay his masts. Then he will hook on, and he may
partly raise the hull before night return. More than this
he can never do; and it would not surprise me were he
merely to get everything ready for heaving on his purchases
to-morrow, and suspend further proceedings until the next
day, in preference to having so heavy a strain on his spars
all night. He has not the force, however, to carry on such
duty to a very late hour; and you may count with perfect
security, Captain Mull, on his being found alongside of the
wreck at sunrise the next day after to-morrow, in all
probability
with his anchors down, and fast to the wreck. By
timing your own arrival well, nothing will be easier than to
get him fairly under your guns, and once under your guns,
the brig must give up. When you chased her out of this
very port, a few days since, you would have brought her
up could you have kept her within range of those terrible
shells ten minutes longer.
You would then advise my not sailing from this place
immediately, said Mull.
It will be quite time enough to get under way late in
the afternoon, and then under short canvas. Ten hours
will be ample time for this ship to beat up to that passage
in, and it will be imprudent to arrive too soon; nor do I
suppose you will wish to be playing round the reef in the
dark.
To the justice of all this Capt. Mull assented; and the
plan of proceedings was deliberately and intelligently
formed
.
As it was necessary for Mulford to go in the ship, in
order to act as pilot, no one else on board knowing exactly
where to find the wreck, the commander of the
Poughkeepsie
had the civility to offer the young couple the
hospitalities
of his own cabin, with one of his state-rooms.
This offer Harry gratefully accepted, it being understood
that the ship would land them at Key West, as soon as the
contemplated duty was executed. Rose felt so much
anxiety
about her aunt, that any other arrangement would
scarcely have pacified her fears.
In consequence of these arrangements, the
Poughkeepsie
lay quietly at her anchors until near sunset. In the
interval
her boats were out in all directions, parties of the
officers visiting the islet where the powder had exploded,
and the islet where the tent, erected for the use of the
females
,
was still standing. As for the light-house island, an
order of Capt. Mull's prevented it from being crowded in
a manner unpleasant to Rose, as might otherwise have been
the case. The few officers who did land there, however,
appeared much struck with the ingenuous simplicity and
beauty of the bride, and a manly interest in her welfare
was created among them all, principally by means of the
representations of the second lieutenant and the chaplain.
About five o'clock she went off to the ship, accompanied
by Harry, and was hoisted on board in the manner usually
practised by vessels of war which have no
accommodation-ladder
rigged. Rose was immediately installed in her
state-room, where she found every convenience necessary
to a comfortable though small apartment.
It was quite late in the afternoon, when the boatswain
and his mate piped all hands up anchor,! Harry
hastened into the state-room for his charming bride,
anxious
to show her the movements of a vessel of war on such
an occasion. Much as she had seen of the ocean, and of
a vessel, within the last few weeks, Rose now found that
she had yet a great deal to learn, and that a ship of war
had many points to distinguish her from a vessel engaged
in commerce.
The Poughkeepsie was only a sloop-of-war, or a corvette,
in construction, number of her guns, and rate; but she
was a ship of the dimensions of an old-fashioned frigate,
measuring about one thousand tons. The frigates of which
we read half a century since, were seldom ever as large as
this, though they were differently built in having a regular
gun-deck, or one armed deck that was entirely covered,
with another above it; and on the quarter-deck and
forecastle
of the last of which were also batteries of lighter
guns. To the contrary of all this, the Poughkeepsie had
but one armed deck, and on that only twenty guns. These
pieces, however, were of unusually heavy calibre, throwing
thirty-two pound shot, with the exception of the Paixhans,
or Columbiads, which throw shot of even twice that weight.
The vessel had a crew of two hundred souls, all told; and
she had the spars, anchors, and other equipments of a light
frigate.
In another great particular did the Poughkeepsie differ
from the corvette-built vessels that were so much in favour
at the beginning of the century; a species of craft obtained
from the French, who have taught the world so much in
connection with naval science, and who, after building
some of the best vessels that ever floated, have failed in
knowing how to handle them, though not always in that.
The Poughkeepsie, while she had no spar, or upper deck,
properly speaking, had a poop and a topgallant-forecastle.
Within the last were the cabins and other accommodations
of the captain; an arrangement that was necessary for a
craft of her construction, that carried so many officers, and
so large a crew. Without it, sufficient space would not be
had for the uses of the last. One gun of a side was in the
main cabin, there being a very neat and amply spacious
after-cabin between the state-rooms, as is ordinarily the
case in all vessels from the size of frigates up to that of
three-deckers. It may be well to explain here, while on
this subject of construction, that in naval parlance, a ship
is called a single-decked vessel; a
two-
decker, or a
three-decker,
not from the number of decks she actually
possesses
,
but from the number of
gun-
decks that she has, or of
those that are
fully
armed. Thus a frigate has four decks,
the spar, gun, berth, and orlop (or haul-up) decks; but she
is called a single-decked ship, from the circumstance
that only one of these four decks has a complete range of
batteries. The two-decker has two of these fully armed
decks, and the three-deckers three; though, in fact, the
two-decker has five, and the three-decker six decks.
Asking
pardon for this little digression, which we trust will be
found useful to a portion of our readers, we return to the
narrative.
Harry conducted Rose to the poop of the Poughkeepsie,
where she might enjoy the best view of the operation of
getting so large a craft under way, man-of-war fashion.
The details were mysteries, of course, and Rose knew no
more of the process by which the chain was brought to the
capstan, by the intervention of what is called a messenger,
than if she had not been present. She saw two hundred
men distributed about the vessel, some at the capstan, some
on the forecastle, some in the tops, and others in the waist,
and she heard the order to heave round. Then the shrill
fife commenced the lively air of the girl I left behind
me, rather more from a habit in the fifer, than from any
great regrets for the girls left at the Dry Tortugas, as was
betrayed to Mulford by the smiles of the officers, and the
glances they cast at Rose. As for the latter, she knew
nothing
of the air, and was quite unconscious of the sort of
parody that the gentlemen of the quarter-deck fancied it
conveyed on her own situation.
Rose was principally struck with the quiet that prevailed
in the ship, Captain Mull being a silent man himself, and
insisting on having a quiet vessel. The first lieutenant
was not a noisy officer, and from these two, everybody else
on board received their cues. A simple all ready, sir,
uttered by the first to the captain, in a common tone of
voice, answered by a very well, sir, get your anchor,
in the same tone, set everything in motion. Stamp and
go, soon followed, and taking the whole scene together,
Rose felt a strange excitement come over her. There
were the shrill, animating music of the fife; the stamping
time of the men at the bars; the perceptible motion of the
ship, as she drew ahead to her anchor, and now and then
the call between Wallace, who stood between the
knight-heads
,
as commander-in-chief on the forecastle, (the second
lieutenant's station when the captain does not take the
trumpet, as very rarely happens,) and the executive
officer
aft, was carrying on duty, all conspiring to produce
this effect. At length, and it was but a minute or two from
the time when the stamp and go commenced, Wallace
called out a short stay-peak, sir. Heave and pull,
followed, and the men left their bars.
The process of making sail succeeded. There was no
letting fall a fore-topsail here, as on board a
merchantman
,
but all the canvas dropped from the yards, into
festoons
,
at the same instant. Then the three topsails were
sheeted home and hoisted, all at once, and all in a single
minute of time; the yards were counter-braced, and the
capstan-bars were again manned. In two more minutes it
was heave and she's up and down. Then heave and
in sight, and heave and pull again. The cat-fall was
ready, and it was hook on, when the fife seemed to turn
its attention to another subject as the men catted the
anchor
.
Literally, all this was done in less time than we
have taken to write it down in, and in very little more time
than the reader has wasted in perusing what we have here
written.
The Poughkeepsie was now free of bottom, as it is
Vol. II.13
called, with her anchor catted and fished, and her position
maintained in the basin where she lay, by the
counter-bracing
of her yards, and the counteracting force of the
wind on her sails. It only remained to fill away, by
bracing her head-yards sharp up, when the vast mass
overcame
its inertia, and began to move through the water.
As this was done, the jib and spanker were set. The two
most beautiful things with which we are acquainted, are a
graceful and high-bred woman entering or quitting a
drawing-room
,
more particularly the last, and a man-of-war
leaving
her anchorage in a moderate breeze, and when not
hurried for time. On the present occasion, Captain Mull
was in no haste, and the ship passed out to windward of
the light, as the Swash had done the previous night, under
her three topsails, spanker and jib, with the light sails
loose and flowing, and the courses hanging in the brails.
A great deal is said concerning the defective
construction
of the light cruisers of the navy, of late years, and
complaints are made that they will not sail, as American
cruisers ought to sail, and were wont to sail in old times.
That there has been some ground for these complaints, we
believe; though the evil has been greatly exaggerated, and
some explanation may be given, we think, even in the cases
in which the strictures are not altogether without
justification
.
The trim of a light, sharp vessel is easily deranged;
and officers, in their desire to command as much as
possible
,
often get their vessels of this class too deep. They
are, generally, for the sort of cruiser, over-sparred,
over-manned
,
and over-provisioned; consequently, too deep.
We recollect a case in which one of these delicate craft,
a half-rigged brig, was much abused for having lost her
sailing. She did, indeed, lose her fore-yard, and, after that,
she sailed like a witch, until she got a new one! If the
facts were inquired into, in the spirit which ought to
govern
such inquiries, it would be found that even most of
the much-abused ten sloops proved to be better
vessels
than common. The St. Louis, the Vincennes, the
Concord, the Fairfield, the Boston, and the Falmouth, are
instances of what we mean. In behalf of the Warren, and
the Lexington, we believe no discreet man was ever heard
to utter one syllable, except as wholesome crafts. But the
Poughkeepsie was a very different sort of vessel from any
of the ten sloops. She was every way a good ship, and,
as Jack expressed it, was a good goer. The most
severe
nautical critic could scarcely have found a fault in
her, as she passed out between the islets, on the evening
of the day mentioned, in the sort of undress we have
described
.
The whole scene, indeed, was impressive, and
of singular maritime characteristics.
The little islets scattered about, low, sandy, and
untenanted
,
were the only land in sightall else was the
boundless
waste of waters. The solitary light rose like an
aquatic
monument, as if purposely to give its character to the
view. Captain Mull had caused its lamps to be trimmed
and lighted for the very reason that had induced Spike to
do the same thing, and the dim star they presented was
just struggling into existence, as it might be, as the
briliance
left by the setting sun was gradually diminished, and
finally disappeared. As for the ship, the hull appeared
dark, glossy, and graceful, as is usual with a vessel of war.
Her sails were in soft contrast to the colour of the hull,
and they offered the variety and divergence from straight
lines which are thought necessary to perfect beauty.
Those that were set, presented the symmetry in their trim,
the flatness in their hoist, and the breadth that distinguish
a man-of-war; while those that were loose, floated in the
air in every wave and cloud-like swell, that we so often see
in light canvas that is released from the yards in a fresh
breeze. The ship had an undress look from this
circumstance
,
but it was such an undress as denotes the man or
woman of the world. This undress appearance was
increased
by the piping down of the hammocks, which left
the nettings loose, and with a negligent but still knowing
look about them.
When half a mile from the islets, the main-yard was
braced aback, and the maintopsail was laid to the mast.
As soon as the ship had lost her way, two or three boats
that had been towing astern, each with its boat-sitter, or
keeper, in it, were hauled up alongside, or to the quarters,
were hooked on, and run up to the whistling of the
call. All was done at once, and all was done in a couple
of minutes. As soon as effected, the maintopsail was again
filled, and away the ship glided.
Captain Mull was not in the habit of holding many
consultations
with his officers. If there be wisdom in a
multitude
of counsellors, he was of opinion it was not on
board a man-of-war. Napoleon is reported to have said
that
one
bad general was better than
two
good ones;
meaning
that one head to an army, though of inferior quality, is
better than a hydra of Solomons, or Csars. Captain Mull
was much of the same way of thinking, seldom troubling
his subordinates with anything but orders. He interfered
very little with working Willy, though he saw
effectually
that he did his duty. The ship's gentleman might
enjoy his joke as much as he pleased, so long as he chose
his time and place with discretion, but in the captain's
presence joking was not tolerated, unless it were after
dinner
,
at his own table, and in his own cabin. Even there
it was not precisely such joking as took place daily, not to
say hourly, in the midshipmen's messes.
In making up his mind as to the mode of proceeding on
the present occasion, therefore, Captain Mull, while he had
heard all that Mulford had to tell him, and had even
encouraged Wallace to give his opinions, made up his
decision
for himself. After learning all that Harry had to
communicate
,
he made his own calculations as to time and
distance, and quietly determined to carry whole sail on the
ship for the next four hours. This he did as the wisest
course of making sure of getting to windward while he
could, and knowing that the vessel could be brought under
short canvas at any moment when it might be deemed
necessary
.
The light was a beacon to let him know his
distance
with almost mathematical precision. It could be
seen so many miles at sea, each mile being estimated by so
many feet of elevation, and having taken that elevation, he
was sure of his distance from the glittering object, so long
as it could be seen from his own poop. It was also of use
by letting him know the range of the reef, though Captain
Mull, unlike Spike, had determined to make one leg off to
the northward and eastward until he had brought the light
nearly to the horizon, and then to make another to the
southward and eastward, believing that the last stretch
would bring him to the reef, almost as far to windward as
he desired to be. In furtherance of this plan, the sheets
of the different sails were drawn home, as soon as the boats
were in, and the Poughkeepsie, bending a little to the
breeze, gallantly dashed the waves aside, as she went
through and over them, at a rate of not less than ten good
knots in the hour. As soon as all these arrangements were
made, the watch went below, and from that time
throughout
the night, the ship offered nothing but the quiet
manner
in which ordinary duty is carried on in a
well-regulated
vessel of war at sea, between the hours of sun and sun.
Leaving the good craft to pursue her way with speed and
certainty, we must now return to the Swash.
Captain Spike had found the mooring of his brig a much
more difficult task, on this occasion, than on that of his
former attempt to raise the schooner. Then he had to lift
the wreck bodily, and he knew that laying the Swash a
few feet further ahead or astern, could be of no great
moment
,
inasmuch as the moment the schooner was off the
bottom, she would swing in perpendicularly to the
purchases
.
But now one end of the schooner, her bows, was
to remain fast, and it became of importance to be certain
that the purchases were so placed as to bring the least strain
on the masts while they acted most directly on the after
body of the vessel to be lifted. This point gave Spike
more trouble than he had anticipated. Fully one half of
the remainder of the day, even after he had begun to heave
upon his purchases, was spent in rectifying mistakes in
connection with this matter, and in getting up additional
securities to his masts.
In one respect Spike had, from the first, made a good
disposition. The masts of the brig raked materially, and
by bringing the head of the Swash in the direction of the
schooner, he converted this fact, which might otherwise
have been of great disadvantage, into a circumstance that
was favourable. In consequence of the brig's having been
thus moored, the strain, which necessarily led forward,
came nearly in a line with the masts, and the latter were
much better able to support it. Notwithstanding this
advantage
,
however, it was found expedient to get up
preventer-stays
,
and to give the spars all the additional support
13*
could be conveniently bestowed. Hours were passed in
making these preliminary, or it might be better to say,
secondary
arrangements.
It was past five in the afternoon when the people of the
Swash began to heave on their purchases as finally disposed.
After much creaking, and the settling of straps and
lashings
into their places, it was found that everything stood,
and the work went on. In ten minutes Spike found he had
the weight of the schooner, so far as he should be obliged
to sustain it at all, until the stern rose above the surface;
and he felt reasonably secure of the doubloons. Further
than this he did not intend to make any experiment on her,
the Seor Montefalderon having abandoned all idea of
recovering
the vessel itself, now so much of the cargo was
lost. The powder was mostly consumed, and that which
remained in the hull must, by this time, be injured by
dampness, if not ruined. So reasoned Don Juan at least.
As the utmost care was necessary, the capstan and
windlass
were made to do their several duties with great caution.
As inch by inch was gained, the extra supports of the
masts were examined, and it was found that a much
heavier
strain now came on the masts than when the schooner
was raised before. This was altogether owing to the
direction
in which it came, and to the fact that the anchor
planted off abeam was not of as much use as on the former
occasion, in consequence of its not lying so much in a
straight line with the direction of the purchases. Spike
began to have misgivings on account of his masts, and this
so much the more because the wind appeared to haul a little
further to the northward, and the weather to look unsettled.
Should a swell roll into the bight of the reef where the brig
lay, by raising the hull a little too rudely, there would be
the imminent danger of at least springing, if not of
absolutely
carrying away both the principal spars. It was
therefore necessary to resort to extraordinary precautions,
in order to obviate this danger.
The captain was indebted to his boatswain, who was now
in fact acting as his mate, for the suggestion of the plan
next adopted. Two of the largest spare spars of the brig
were got out, with their heads securely lashed to the links
of the chain by which the wreck was suspended, one on
each side of the schooner. Pig-iron and shot were lashed
to the heels of these spars, which carried them to the bottom.
As the spars were of a greater length than was necessary
to reach the rock, they necessarily lay at an inclination,
which was lessened every inch the after body of the wreck
was raised, thus forming props to the hull of the schooner.
Spike was delighted with the success of this scheme, of
which he was assured by a single experiment in heaving.
After getting the spars well planted at their heels, he even
ordered the men to slacken the purchases a little, and
found that he could actually relieve the brig from the strain,
by causing the wreck to be supported altogether by these
shores. This was a vast relief from the cares of the
approaching
night, and indeed alone prevented the necessity
of the work's going on without interruption, or rest, until
the end was obtained.
The people of the Swash were just assured of the
comfortable
fact related, as the Poughkeepsie was passing out
from among the islets of the Dry Tortugas. They
imagined
themselves happy in having thus made a sufficient
provision against the most formidable of all the dangers
that beset them, at the very moment when the best laid
plan for their destruction was on the point of being
executed
.
In this respect, they resembled millions of others of
their fellows, who hang suspended over the vast abyss of
eternity, totally unconscious of the irretrievable character
of the fall that is so soon to occur. Spike, as has been
just stated, was highly pleased with his own expedient, and
he pointed it out with exultation to the Seor
Montefalderon
,
as soon as it was completed.
A nicer fit was never made by a Lunnun leg-maker,
Don Wan, the captain cried, after going over the
explanations
connected with the shoresthere she stands, at
an angle of fifty, with two as good limbs under her as a
body could wish. I could now cast off everything, and
leave the wreck in what they call `
statu quo,
' which, I
suppose
,
means on its pins, like a statue. The tafferel is not
six inches below the surface of the water, and half an hour
of heaving will bring the starn in sight.
Your work seems ingeniously contrived to get up one
extremity of the vessel, Don Esteban, returned the
Mexican
;
but are you quite certain that the doubloons are in
her?
This question was put because the functionary of a
government
in which money was very apt to stick in passing
from hand to hand was naturally suspicious, and he found
it difficult to believe that Mulford, Jack Tier, and even
Biddy, under all the circumstances, had not paid special
attention to their own interests.
The bag was placed in one of the transom-lockers
before
the schooner capsized, returned the captain, as Jack
Tier informs me; if so, it remains there still. Even the
sharks will not touch gold, Don Wan.
Would it not be well to call Jack, and hear his account
of the matter once more, now we appear to be so near the
Eldorado of our wishes?
Spike assented, and Jack was summoned to the
quarter-deck
.
The little fellow had scarce showed himself
throughout
the day, and he now made his appearance with a slow
step, and reluctantly.
You've made no mistake about them 'ere doubloons,
I take it, Master Tier? said Spike, in a very nautical sort
of style of addressing an inferior. You
know
them to be
in one of the transom-lockers?
Jack mounted on the breech of one of the guns, and
looked over the bulwarks at the dispositions that had been
made about the wreck. The tafferel of the schooner
actually
came in sight, when a little swell passed over it,
leaving it for an instant in the trough. The steward thus
caught a glimpse again of the craft on board which he had
seen so much hazard, and he shook his head and seemed
to be thinking of anything but the question which had just
been put to him.
Well, about that gold? asked Spike, impatiently.
The sight of that craft has brought other thoughts than
gold into my mind, Captain Spike, answered Jack,
gravely
,
and it would be well for all us mariners, if we thought
less of gold and more of the dangers we run. For hours
and hours did I stand over etarnity, on the bottom of that
schooner, Don Wan, holdin' my life, as it might be, at the
marcy of a few bubbles of air.
What has all that to do with the gold? Have you
deceived
me about that locker, little rascal?
No, sir, I've
not
deceived youno, Captain Spike,
no
.
The bag is in the upper transom-locker, on the starboard
side. There I put it with my own hands, and a good lift
it was; and there you'll find it, if you'll cut through the
quarter-deck at the spot I can p'int out to you.
This information seemed to give a renewed energy to all
the native cupidity of the captain, who called the men from
their suppers, and ordered them to commence heaving
anew. The word was passed to the crew that it was now
for doubloons, and they went to the bars and handspikes,
notwithstanding the sun had set, cheerfully and cheering.
All Spike's expedients admirably answered the intended
purposes. The stern of the schooner rose gradually, and
at each lift the heels of the shores dropped in more
perpendicularly
,
carried by the weights attached to them, and the
spars stood as firm props to secure all that was gained. In
a quarter of an hour, most of that part of the stern which
was within five or six feet of the tafferel, rose above the
water, coming fairly in view.
Spike now shouted to the men to pall! then he
directed
the falls to be very gradually eased off, in order to
ascertain if the shores would still do their duty. The
experiment
was successful, and presently the wreck stood in
its upright position, sustained entirely by the two spars. As
the last were now nearly perpendicular, they were capable
of bearing a very heavy weight, and Spike was so anxious
to relieve his own brig from the strain she had been
enduring
,
that he ordered the lashings of the blocks to be
loosened
,
trusting to his shores to do their duty. Against this
confidence the boatswain ventured a remonstrance, but the
gold was too near to allow the captain to listen or reply.
The carpenter was ordered over on the wreck with his
tools, while Spike, the Seor Montefalderon, and two men
to row the boat and keep it steady, went in the yawl to
watch the progress of the work. Jack Tier was ordered
to stand in the chains, and to point out, as nearly as
possible
,
the place where the carpenter was to cut.
When all was ready, Spike gave the word, and the chips
began to fly. By the use of the saw and the axe, a hole
large enough to admit two or three men at a time, was soon
made in the deck, and the sounding for the much-coveted
locker commenced. By this time, it was quite dark; and
a lantern was passed down from the brig, in order to enable
those who searched for the locker to see. Spike had
breasted the yawl close up to the hole, where it was held
by the men, while the captain himself passed the lantern
and his own head into the opening to reconnoitre.
Ay, it's all right! cried the voice of the captain from
within his cell-like cavity. I can just see the lid of the
locker that Jack means, and we shall soon have what we
are a'ter. Carpenter, you may as well slip off your clothes
at once, and go inside; I will point out to you the place
where to find the locker. You're certain, Jack, it was the
starboard locker?
Ay, ay, sir, the starboard locker, and no other.
The carpenter had soon got into the hole, as naked as
when he was born. It was a gloomy-looking place for a
man to descend into at that hour, the light from the lantern
being no great matter, and half the time it was shaded by
the manner in which Spike was compelled to hold it.
Take care and get a good footing, carpenter, said the
captain, in a kinder tone than common, before you let go
with your hands; but I suppose you can swim, as a matter
of course?
No, sir, not a strokeI never could make out in the
water at all.
Have the more 'care, then. Had I known as much, I
would have sent another hand down; but mind your
footing
.
More to the left, manmore to the left. That is
the lid of the lockeryour hand is on it; why do you not
open it?
It is swelled by the water, sir, and will need a chisel,
or some tool of that sort. Just call out to one of the men,
sir, if you please, to pass me a chisel from my tool-chest.
A good stout one will be best.
This order was given, and, during the delay it caused,
Spike encouraged the carpenter to be cool, and above all
to mind his footing. His own eagerness to get at the gold
was so great that he kept his head in at the hole,
completely
cutting off the man within from all communication with
the outer world.
What's the matter with you? demanded Spike, a
little sternly. You shiver, and yet the water cannot be
cold in this latitude. No, my hand makes it just the right
warmth to be pleasant.
It's not the water, Captain SpikeI wish they would
come with the chisel. Did you hear nothing, sir? I'm
certain I did!
Hear!what is there here to be heard, unless there
may be some fish inside, thrashing about to get out of the
vessel's hold?
I am sure I heard something like a groan, Captain
Spike. I wish you would let me come out, sir, and I'll go
for the chisel myself; them men will never find it.
Stay where you are, coward! are you afraid of dead
men standing against walls? Stay where you are. Ah!
here is the chiselnow let us see what you can do with
it.
I am certain I heard another groan, Captain Spike. I
cannot work, sir. I'm of no use here
do
let me come
out, sir, and send a hand down that can swim.
Spike uttered a terrible malediction on the miserable
carpenter, one we do not care to repeat; then he cast the
light of the lantern full in the man's face. The quivering
flesh, the pallid face, and the whole countenance wrought
up almost to a frenzy of terror, astonished, as well as
alarmed
him.
What ails you, man? said the captain in a voice of
thunder. Clap in the chisel, or I'll hurl you off into the
water. There is nothing here, dead or alive, to harm ye!
The groan, sirI hear it again!
Do
let me come out,
Captain Spike.
Spike himself, this time, heard what even
he
took for a
groan. It came from the depths of the vessel, apparently,
and was sufficiently distinct and audible. Astonished, yet
appalled, he thrust his shoulders into the aperture, as if to
dare the demon that tormented him, and was met by the
carpenter endeavouring to escape. In the struggle that
ensued, the lantern was dropped into the water, leaving the
half-frenzied combatants contending in the dark. The
groan was renewed, when the truth flashed on the minds
of both.
The shores! the shores! exclaimed the carpenter
from within. The shores! repeated Spike, throwing
himself back into the boat, and shouting to his men to
see all clear of the wreck! The grating of one of the
shores on the coral beneath was now heard plainer than
ever, and the lower extremity slipped outward, not astern,
as had been apprehended, letting the wreck slowly settle to
the bottom again. One piercing shriek arose from the
narrow cavity within; then the gurgling of water into the
aperture was heard, when naught of sound could be
distinguished
but the sullen and steady wash of the waves of the
gulf over the rocks of the reef.
The impression made by this accident was most
profound
.
A fatality appeared to attend the brig; and most
of the men connected the sad occurrence of this night with
the strange appearance of the previous evening. Even the
Seor Montefalderon was disposed to abandon the
doubloons
,
and he urged Spike to make the best of his way for
Yucatan, to seek a friendly harbour. The captain
wavered
,
but avarice was too strong a passion in him to be
easily
diverted from its object, and he refused to give up his
purpose.
As the wreck was entirely free from the brig when it
went down for the third time, no injury was sustained by
the last on this occasion. By renewing the lashings,
everything
would be ready to begin the work anewand this,
Spike was resolved to attempt in the morning. The men
were too much fatigued, and it was too dark to think of
pushing matters any further that night; and it was very
questionable whether they could have been got to work.
Orders were consequently given for all hands to turn in,
the captain, relieved by Don Juan and Jack Tier, having
arranged to keep the watches of the night.
This is a sad accident, Don Esteban, observed the
Mexican, as he and Spike paced the quarter-deck together,
just before the last turned in; a sad accident! My
miserable
schooner seems to be deserted by its patron saint.
Then your poor carpenter!
Yes, he was a good fellow enough with a saw, or an
adze, answered Spike, yawning. But we get used to
such things at sea. It's neither more nor less than a
carpenter
expended. Good night, Seor Don Wan; in the
morning we'll be at that gold ag'in.
CHAPTER VI.
She's in a scene of nature's war,
The winds and waters are at strife;
And both with her contending for
The brittle thread of human life.
Miss Gould
.
Spike
was sleeping hard in his berth, quite early on the
following morning, before the return of light, indeed, when
he suddenly started up, rubbed his eyes, and sprang upon
deck like a man alarmed. He had heard, or fancied he
had heard, a cry. A voice once well known and listened
to, seemed to call him in the very portals of his ear. At
first he had listened to its words in wonder, entranced like
the bird by the snake, the tones recalling scenes and
persons
that had once possessed a strong control over his rude
feelings. Presently the voice became harsher in its
utterance
,
and it said.
Stephen Spike, awake! The hour is getting late, and
you have enemies nearer to you than you imagine. Awake,
Stephen, awake!
When the captain was on his feet, and had plunged his
head into a basin of water that stood ready for him in the
state-room, he could not have told, for his life, whether he
had been dreaming or waking, whether what he had heard
was the result of a feverish imagination, or of the laws of
nature. The call haunted him all that morning, or until
events of importance so pressed upon him as to draw his
undivided attention to them alone.
It was not yet day. The men were still in heavy sleep,
lying about the decks, for they avoided the small and
Vol. II.14
crowded forecastle in that warm climate, and the night was
apparently at its deepest hour. Spike walked forward to
look for the man charged with the anchor-watch. It proved
to be Jack Tier, who was standing near the galley, his
arms folded as usual, apparently watching the few signs of
approaching day that were beginning to be apparent in the
western sky. The captain was in none of the best humours
with the steward's assistant; but Jack had unaccountably
got an ascendency over his commander, which it was
certainly
very unusual for any subordinate in the Swash to
obtain. Spike had deferred more to Mulford than to any
mate he had ever before employed; but this was the
deference
due to superior information, manners, and origin. It
was common-place, if not vulgar; whereas, the ascendency
obtained by little Jack Tier was, even to its subject,
entirely
inexplicable. He was unwilling to admit it to
himself
in the most secret manner, though he had begun to
feel it on all occasions which brought them in contact, and
to submit to it as a thing not to be averted.
Jack Tier, demanded the captain, now that he found
himself once more alone with the other, desirous of
obtaining
his opinion on a point that harassed him, though he
knew not why; Jack Tier, answer me one thing. Do
you believe that we saw the form of a dead or of a living
man at the foot of the light-house?
The dead are never seen leaning against walls in that
manner, Stephen Spike, answered Jack, coolly, not even
taking the trouble to uncoil his arms. What you saw
was a living man; and you would do well to be on your
guard against him. Harry Mulford is not your friend
and there is reason for it.
Harry Mulford, and living! How can that be, Jack?
You know the port in which he chose to run.
I know the rock on which you chose to abandon him,
Captain Spike.
If so, how could he be living and at the Dry Tortugas.
The thing is impossible!
The thing is so. You saw Harry Mulford, living and
well, and ready to hunt you to the gallows. Beware of
him, then; and beware of his handsome wife!
Wife! the fellow has no wifehe has always professed
to be a single man!
The man is marriedand I bid you beware of his
handsome wife. She, too, will be a witness ag'in you.
This will be news, then, for Rose Budd. I shall
delight
in telling it to
her,
at least.
'T will be
no
news to Rose Budd. She was present at
the wedding, and will not be taken by surprise. Rose loves
Harry too well to let him marry, and she not present at the
wedding.
Jack, you talk strangely! What is the meaning of all
this? I am captain of this craft, and will not be trifled
withtell me at once your meaning, fellow.
My meaning is simple enough, and easily told. Rose
Budd is the wife of Harry Mulford.
You're dreaming, fellow, or are wishing to trifle with
me!
It may be a dream, but it is one that will turn out to
be true. If they have found the Poughkeepsie
sloop-of-war
,
as I make no doubt they have by this time, Mulford
and Rose are man and wife.
Fool! you know not what you say! Rose is at this
moment in her berth, sick at heart on account of the young
gentleman who preferred to live on the Florida Reef rather
than to sail in the Molly!
Rose is
not
in her berth, sick or well; neither is she on
board this brig at all. She went off in the light-house boat
to deliver her lover from the naked rockand well did she
succeed in so doing. God was of her side, Stephen Spike;
and a body seldom fails with such a friend to support one.
Spike was astounded at these words, and not less so at
the cool and confident manner with which they were
pronounced
.
Jack spoke in a certain dogmatical, oracular
manner, it is true, one that might have lessened his
authority
with a person over whom he had less influence; but
this in no degree diminished its effect on Spike. On the
contrary, it even disposed the captain to yield an implicit
faith to what he heard, and all so much the more because
the facts he was told appeared of themselves to be nearly
impossible. It was half a minute before he had sufficiently
recovered from his surprise to continue the discourse.
The light-house boat! Spike then slowly repeated.
Why, fellow, you told me the light-house boat went adrift
from your own hands!
So it did, answered Jack, coolly, since I cast off the
painterand what is more, went in it.
You! This is impossible. You are telling me a
fabricated
lie. If you had gone away in that boat, how could
you now be here? No, noit is a miserable lie, and Rose
is below!
Go and look into her state-room, and satisfy yourself
with your own eyes.
Spike did as was suggested. He went below, took a
lamp that was always suspended, lighted in the main cabin,
and, without ceremony, proceeded to Rose's state-room,
where he soon found that the bird had really flown. A
direful execration followed this discovery, one so loud as
to awaken Mrs. Budd and Biddy. Determined not to do
things by halves, he broke open the door of the widow's
state-room, and ascertained that the person he sought was
not there. A fierce explosion of oaths and denunciations
followed, which produced an answer in the customary
screams. In the midst of this violent scene, however,
questions were put, and answers obtained, that not only
served to let the captain know that Jack had told him
nothing
but truth, but to put an end to everything like
amicable
relations between himself and the relict of his old
commander. Until this explosion, appearances had been
observed between them; but, from that moment, there must
necessarily be an end of all professions of even civility.
Spike was never particularly refined in his intercourse with
females, but he now threw aside even its pretension. His
rage was so great that he totally forgot his manhood, and
lavished on both Mrs. Budd and Biddy epithets that were
altogether inexcusable, and many of which it will not do
to repeat. Weak and silly as was the widow, she was not
without spirit; and on this occasion she was indisposed to
submit to all this unmerited abuse in silence. Biddy, as
usual, took her cue from her mistress, and between the two,
their part of the wordy conflict was kept up with a very
respectable degree of animation.
I know youI know you, now! screamed the widow,
at the tope of her voice; and you can no longer deceive
me, unworthy son of Neptune as you are! You are unfit
to be a lubber, and would be log-booked for an or'nary by
every gentleman on board ship. You, a full-jiggered
seaman
!
No, you are not even half-jiggered, sir; and I tell
you so to your face.
Yes, and it is n't
half
that might be tould the likes of
yees! put in Biddy, as her mistress stopped to breathe.
And it's Miss Rose you'd have for a wife, when Biddy
Noon would be too good for ye! We knows ye, and all
about ye, and can give yer history as complate from the
day ye was born down to the prisent moment; and not find
a good word to say in yer favour in all that time  and a
precious time it is, too, for a gentleman that would marry
pretthy,
young
Miss Rose! Och! I scorn to look at ye,
yer so ugly!
And trying to persuade me you were a friend of my
poor, dear Mr. Budd, whose shoe you are unworthy to
touch, and who had the heart and soul for the noble
profession
you disgrace, cut in the widow, the moment Biddy
gave her a chance, by pausing to make a wry face as she
pronounced the word ugly. I now believe you
capasided
them poor Mexicans, in order to get their money;
and the moment we cast anchor in a road-side, I'll go ashore,
and complain of you for murder, I will.
Do, missus, dear, and I'll be your bail, will I, and
swear to all that happened, and more too. Och! yer a
wretch, to wish to be the husband of Miss Rose, and she
so young and pretthy, and you so ould and ugly!
Come awaycome away, Stephen Spike, and do not
stand wrangling with women, when you and your brig, and
all that belongs to you, are in danger, called out Jack Tier
from the companion-way. Day is come; and what is
much worse for you, your most dangerous enemy is coming
with it.
Spike was almost livid with rage, and ready to burst out
in awful maledictions; but at this summons he sprang to
the ladder, and was on deck in a moment. At first, he felt
a strong disposition to wreak his vengeance on Tier, but,
fortunately for the latter, as the captain's foot touched the
quarter-deck, his eye fell on the Poughkeepsie, then within
14*
half a league of the Swash, standing in toward the reef,
though fully half a mile to leeward. This spectre drove
all other subjects from his mind, leaving the captain of the
Swash in the only character in which he could be said to
be respectable, or that of a seaman. Almost instinctively
he called all hands, then he gave one brief minute to a
survey
of his situation.
It was, indeed, time for the Swash to be moving. There
she lay, with three anchors down, including that of the
schooner, all she had, in fact, with the exception of her
best bower, and one kedge, with the purchases aloft, in
readiness for hooking on to the wreck, and all the extra
securities
up that had been given to the masts. As for the
sloop-of-war, she was under the very same canvas as that
with which she had come out from the Dry Tortugas, or
her three top-sails, spanker, and jib; but most of her other
sails were loose, even to her royals and flying-jibs; though
closely gathered into their spars by means of the running
gear. In a word, every sailor would know, at a glance,
that the ship was merely waiting for the proper moment to
spread her wings, when she would be flying through the
water at the top of her speed. The weather looked dirty,
and the wind was gradually increasing, threatening to blow
heavily as the day advanced.
Unshackle, unshackle! shouted Spike to the
boatswain
,
who was the first man that appeared on deck. The
bloody sloop-of-war is upon us, and there is not a moment
to lose. We must get the brig clear of the ground in the
shortest way we can, and abandon everything. Unshackle,
and cast off for'ard and aft, men.
A few minutes of almost desperate exertion succeeded.
No men work like sailors, when the last are in a hurry,
their efforts being directed to counteracting squalls, and
avoiding emergencies of the most pressing character.
Thus was it now with the crew of the Swash. The
clanking
of chains lasted but a minute, when the parts attached
to the anchors were thrust through the hawse-holes, or were
dropped into the water from other parts of the brig. This
at once released the vessel, though a great deal remained
to be done to clear her for working, and to put her in the
best trim.
Away with this out-hauler! again shouted Spike,
casting
loose the main-brails as he did so; loose the jibs!
All went on at once, and the Swash moved away from
the grave of the poor carpenter with the ease and facility
of motion that marked all her evolutions. Then the
topsail
was let fall, and presently all the upper square-sails
were sheeted home, and hoisted, and the fore-tack was
hauled aboard. The Molly was soon alive, and jumping
into the seas that met her with more power than was
common
,
as she drew out from under the shelter of the reef
into rough water. From the time when Spike gave his
first order, to that when all his canvas was spread, was just
seven minutes.
The Poughkeepsie, with her vastly superior crew, was
not idle the while. Although the watch below was not
disturbed
,
she tacked beautifully, and stood off the reef, in a
line parallel to the course of the brig, and distant from her
about half a mile. Then sail was made, her tacks having
been boarded in stays. Spike knew the play of his craft
was short legs, for she was so nimble in her movements that
he believed she could go about in half the time that would
be required for a vessel of the Poughkeepsie's length.
Ready about, was his cry, therefore, when less than a
mile distant from the reefready about, and let her go
round. Round the Molly did go, like a top, being full on
the other tack in just fifty-six seconds. The movement of
the corvette was more stately, and somewhat more
deliberate
.
Still, she stayed beautifully, and both Spike and
the boatswain shook their heads, as they saw her coming
into the wind with her sails all lifting and the sheets
flowing.
That fellow will fore-reach a cable's length before he
gets about! exclaimed Spike. He will prove too much
for us at this sport! Keep her away, my mankeep the
brig away for the passage. We must run through the reef,
instead of trusting ourselves to our heels in open water.
The brig was kept away accordingly, and sheets were
eased off, and braces just touched, to meet the new line of
sailing. As the wind stood, it was possible to lay through
the passage on an easy bowline, though the breeze, which
was getting to be fresher than Spike wished it to be,
promised
to haul more to the southward of east, as the day
advanced. Nevertheless, this was the Swash's best point
of sailing, and all on board of her had strong hopes of her
being too much for her pursuer, could she maintain it.
Until this feeling began to diffuse itself in the brig, not a
countenance was to be seen on her decks that did not
betray
intense anxiety; but now something like grim smiles
passed among the crew, as their craft seemed rather to fly
than force her way through the water, toward the entrance
of the passage so often adverted to in this narrative.
On the other hand, the Poughkeepsie was admirably
sailed and handled. Everybody was now on deck, and the
first lieutenant had taken the trumpet. Captain Mull was
a man of method, and a thorough man-of-war's man.
Whatever
he did was done according to rule, and with great
system. Just as the Swash was about to enter the passage,
the drum of the Poughkeepsie beat to quarters. No sooner
were the men mustered, in the leeward, or the starboard
batteries, than orders were sent to cast loose the guns, and
to get them ready for service. Owing to the more leeward
position of his vessel, and to the fact that she always
head-reached
so much in stays, Captain Mull knew that she
would not lose much by luffing into the wind, or by making
half-boards, while he might gain everything by one
well-directed
shot.
The strife commenced by the sloop-of-war, firing her
weather bow-gun, single-shotted, at the Swash. No damage
was done, though the fore-yard of the brig had a very
narrow
escape. This experiment was repeated three times,
without even a rope-yarn being carried away, though the
gun was pointed by Wallace himself, and well pointed, too.
But it is possible for a shot to come very near its object
and still to do no injury. Such was the fact on this
occasion
,
though the ship's gentleman was a good deal
mortified
by the result. Men look so much at success as the
test of merit, that few pause to inquire into the reasons of
failures, though it frequently happens that adventures
prosper
by means of their very blunders. Captain Mull now
determined on a half-board, for his ship was more to
leeward
than he desired. Directions were given to the officers
in the batteries to be deliberate, and the helm was put
down. As the ship shot into the wind, each gun was fired,
as it could be brought to bear, until the last of them all
was discharged. Then the course of the vessel was
changed, the helm being righted before the ship had lost
her way, and the sloop-of-war fell off again to her course.
All this was done in such a short period of time as
scarcely to cause the Poughkeepsie to lose anything, while
it did the Swash the most serious injury. The guns had
been directed at the brig's spars and sails, Captain Mull
desiring no more than to capture his chase, and the
destruction
they produced aloft was such as to induce Spike
and his men, at first, to imagine that the whole hamper
above their heads was about to come clattering down on
deck. One shot carried away all the weather
fore-topmast
rigging of the brig, and would no doubt have brought
about the loss of the mast, if another, that almost instantly
succeeded it, had not cut the spar itself in two, bringing
down, as a matter of course, everything above it. Nearly
half of the main-mast was gouged out of that spar, and the
gaff was taken fairly out of its jaws. The fore-yard was
cut in the slings, and various important ropes were carried
away in different parts of the vessel.
Flight, under such circumstances, was impossible,
unless
some extraordinary external assistance was to be
obtained
.
This Spike saw at once, and he had recourse to
the only expedient that remained; which might possibly
yet save him. The guns were still belching forth their
smoke and flames, when he shouted out the order to put
the helm hard up. The width of the passage in which the
vessels were was not so great but that he might hope to
pass across it, and to enter a channel among the rocks,
which was favourably placed for such a purpose, ere the
sloop-of-war could overtake him. Whither that channel
led, what water it possessed, or whether it were not a
shallow
cul de sac,
were all facts of which Spike was ignorant.
The circumstances, however, would not admit of an
alternative
.
Happily for the execution of Spike's present design,
nothing from aloft had fallen into the water, to impede the
brig's way. Forward, in particular, she seemed all wreck;
her fore-yard having come down altogether, so as to
enried
the forecastle, while her top-mast, with its
dependent
spars and gear, was suspended but a short distance
above. Still, nothing had gone over the side, so as actually
to touch the water, and the craft obeyed her helm as usual.
Away she went, then, for the lateral opening in the reef
just mentioned, driven ahead by the pressure of a strong
breeze on her sails, which still offered large surfaces to the
wind, at a rapid rate. Instead of keeping away to follow,
the Poughkeepsie maintained her luff, and just as the Swash
entered the unknown passage, into which she was blindly
plunging, the sloop-of-war was about a quarter of a mile to
windward, and standing directly across her stern. Nothing
would have been easier, now, than for Captain Mull to
destroy his chase; but humanity prevented his firing. He
knew that her career must be short, and he fully expected
to see her anchor; when it would be easy for him to take
possession with his boats. With this expectation, indeed,
he shortened sail, furling top-gallant-sails, and hauling up
his courage. By this time, the wind had so much
freshened
,
as to induce him to think of putting in a reef, and
the step now taken had a double object in view.
To the surprise of all on board the man-of-war, the brig
continued on, until she was fully a mile distant, finding
her way deeper and deeper among the mazes of the reef
without meeting with any impediment! This fact induced
Captain Mull to order his Paixhans to throw their shells
beyond her, by way of a hint to anchor. While the guns
were getting ready, Spike stood on boldly, knowing it was
neck or nothing, and beginning to feel a faint revival of
hope, as he found himself getting further and further from
his pursuers, and the rocks not fetching him up. Even the
men, who had begun to murmur at what seemed to them
to be risking too much, partook, in a slight degree, of the
same feeling, and began to execute the order they had
received
to try to get the launch into the water, with some
appearance of an intention to succeed. Previously, the
work could scarcely be said to go on at all; but two or
three of the older seamen now bestirred themselves, and
suggestions were made and attended to, that promised
results
But it was no easy thing to get the launch out of a
half-rigged brig, that had lost her fore-yard, and which
carried
nothing square abaft. A derrick was used in
common
,
to lift the stern of the boat, but a derrick would now
be useless aft, without an assistant forward. While these
things were in discussion, under the superintendence of
the boatswain, and Spike was standing between the
knight-heads
,
conning the craft, the sloop-of-war let fly the first of
her hollow shot. Down came the hurtling mass upon the
Swash, keeping every head elevated and all eyes looking
for the dark object, as it went booming through the air
above their heads. The shot passed fully a mile to
leeward
,
where it exploded. This great range had been given
to the first shot, with a view to admonish the captain how
long he must continue under the guns of the ship, and as
advice to come to. The second gun followed immediately.
Its shot was seem to ricochet, directly in a line with the
brig, making leaps of about half a mile in length. It struck
the water about fifty yards astern of the vessel, bounded
directly over her decks, passing through the main-sail and
some of the fallen hamper forward, and exploded about a
hundred yards ahead. As usually happens with such
projectiles
,
most of the fragments were either scattered
laterally
,
or went on, impelled by the original momentum.
The effect of this last gun on the crew of the Swash
was instantaneous and deep. The faint gleamings of hope
vanished at once, and a lively consciousness of the
desperate
nature of their condition succeeded in every mind.
The launch was forgotten, and, after conferring together
for a moment, the men went in a body, with the boatswain
at their head, to the forecastle, and offered a remonstrance
to their commander, on the subject of holding out any
longer, under circumstances so very hazardous, and which
menaced their lives in so many different ways. Spike
listened
to them with eyes that fairly glared with fury. He
ordered them back to their duty in a voice of thunder,
tapping
the breast of his jacket, where he was known to carry
revolvers, with a significance that could convey but one
meaning.
It is wonderful the ascendency that men sometimes
obtain
over their fellows, by means of character, the habits
of command, and obedience, and intimidation. Spike was
a stern disciplinarian, relying on that and ample pay for
the unlimited control he often found it necessary to
exercise
over his crew. On the present occasion, his people
were profoundly alarmed, but habitual deference and
submission
to their leader counteracted the feeling, and held
them in suspense. They were fully aware of the nature
of the position they occupied in a legal sense, and were
deeply reluctant to increase the appearances of crime; but
most of them had been extricated from so many grave
difficulties
in former instances, by the coolness, nerve and
readiness of the captain, that a latent ray of hope was
perhaps
dimly shining in the rude breast of every old sea-dog
among them. As a consequence of these several causes,
they abandoned their remonstrance, for the moment at
least, and made a show of returning to their duty; though
it was in a sullen and moody manner.
It was easier, however, to make a show of hoisting out
the launch, than to effect the object. This was soon made
apparent on trial, and Spike himself gave the matter up.
He ordered the yawl to be lowered, got alongside, and to
be prepared for the reception of the crew, by putting into
it a small provision of food and water. All this time the
brig was rushing madly to leeward, among rocks and
breakers
,
without any other guide than that which the visible
dangers afforded. Spike knew no more where he was
going than the meanest man in his vessel. His sole aim
was to get away from his pursuers, and to save his neck
from the rope. He magnified the danger of punishment
that he really ran, for he best knew the extent and nature
of his crimes, of which the few that have been laid before
the reader, while they might have been amongst the most
prominent, as viewed through the statutes and international
law, were far from the gravest he had committed in the eyes
of morals.
About this time the Seor Montefalderon went forward
to confer with Spike. The calmness of this gentleman's
demeanour, the simplicity and coolness of his movements,
denoted a conscience that saw no particular ground for
alarm. He wished to escape captivity, that he might
continue
to serve his country, but no other apprehension
troubled
him.
Do you intend to trust yourself in the yawl, Don
Esteban
?
demanded the Mexican quietly. If so, is she not
too small to contain so many as we shall make altogether?
Spike's answer was given in a low voice; and it
evidently
came from a very husky throat.
Speak lower, Don Wan, he said. The boat would
be greatly overloaded with all hands in it, especially among
the breakers, and blowing as it does; but we may leave
some of the party behind.
The brig
must
go on the rocks, sooner or later, Don
Esteban; when she does, she will go to pieces in an hour.
I expect to hear her strike every minute, seor; the
moment she does, we must be off. I have had my eye on
that ship for some time, expecting to see her lower her
cutters
and gigs to board us.
You
will not be out of the way,
Don Wan; but there is no need of being talkative on the
subject of our escape.
Spike now turned his back on the Mexican, looking
anxiously
ahead, with the desire to get as far into the reef as
possible with his brig, which he conned with great skill
and coolness. The Seor Montefalderon left him. With
the chivalry and consideration of a man and a gentleman,
he went in quest of Mrs. Budd and Biddy. A hint sufficed
for them, and gathering together a few necessaries they
were in the yawl in the next three minutes. This
movement
was unseen by Spike, or he might have prevented it.
His eyes were now riveted on the channel ahead. It had
been fully his original intention to make off in the boat, the
instant the brig struck, abandoning not only Don Juan,
with Mrs. Budd and Biddy to their fates, but most of the
crew. A private order had been given to the boatswain,
and three of the ablest-bodied among the seamen, each and
all of whom kept the secret with religious fidelity, as it
was believed their own personal safety might be connected
with the success of this plan.
Nothing is so contagious as alarm. It requires not only
great natural steadiness of nerve, but much acquired
firmness
to remain unmoved when sudden terror has seized on
the minds of those around us. Habitual respect had
prevented
the crew from interfering with the movements of
the Mexican, who not only descended into the boat with
his female companions uninterrupted, but also took with
Vol. II.15
him the little bag of doubloons which fell to his share from
the first raising of the schooner. Josh and Jack Tier
assisted in getting Mrs. Budd and Biddy over the side, and
both took their own places in the yawl, as soon as this
pious duty was discharged. This served as a hint to others
near at hand; and man after man left his work to steal
into the yawl, until every living being had disappeared
from the deck of the Swash, Spike himself excepted. The
man at the wheel had been the last to desert his post, nor
would he have done so then, but for a signal from the
boatswain
,
with whom he was a favourite.
It is certain there was a secret desire among the people
of the Swash, who were now crowded into a boat not large
enough to contain more than half their number with safety,
to push off from the brig's side, and abandon her
commander
and owner to his fate. All had passed so soon,
however, and events succeeded each other with so much
rapidity, that little time was given for consultation. Habit
kept them in their places, though the appearances around
them were strong motives for taking care of themselves.
Notwithstanding the time necessary to relate the
foregoing
events, a quarter of an hour had not elapsed, from
the moment when the Swash entered this unknown
channel
among the rocks, ere she struck. No sooner was her
helm deserted than she broached-to, and Spike was in the
act of denouncing the steerage, ignorant of its cause, when
the brig was thrown, broadside-to, on a sharp, angular bed
of rocks. It was fortunate for the boat, and all in it, that
it was brought to leeward by the broaching-to of the
vessel
,
and that the water was still sufficiently deep around
them to prevent the waves from breaking. Breakers there
were, however, in thousands, on every side; and the
seamen
understood that their situation was almost
desperately
perilous, without shipwreck coming to increase the
danger.
The storm itself was scarcely more noisy and boisterous
than was Spike, when he ascertained the manner in which
his people had behaved. At first, he believed it was their
plan to abandon him to his fate; but, on rushing to the
lee-gangway, Don Juan Montefalderon assured him that no
such intention existed, and that he would not allow the
boat to be cast off until the captain was received on board.
This brief respite gave Spike a moment to care for his
portion
of the doubloons; and he rushed to his state-room to
secure them, together with his quadrant.
The grinding of the brig's bottom on the coral,
announced
a speedy breaking up of the craft, while her
commander
was thus employed. So violent were some of the
shocks with which she came down on the hard bed in
which she was now cradled, that Spike expected to see her
burst asunder, while he was yet on her decks. The
cracking
of timbers told him that all was over with the Swash,
nor had he got back as far as the gangway with his prize,
before he saw plainly that the vessel had broken her back,
as it is termed, and that her plank-sheer was opening in a
way that threatened to permit a separation of the craft into
two sections, one forward and the other aft.
Notwithstanding
all these portentous proofs that the minutes of the
Molly were numbered, and the danger that existed of his
being abandoned by his crew, Spike paused a moment, ere
he went over the vessel's side, to take a hasty survey of the
reef. His object was to get a general idea of the position
of the breakers, with a view to avoid them. As much of
the interest of that which is to succeed is connected with
these particular dangers, it may be well to explain their
character
,
along with a few other points of a similar bearing.
The brig had gone ashore fully two miles within the
passage
she had entered, and which, indeed, terminated at the
very spot where she had struck. The Poughkeepsie was
standing off and on, in the main channel, with her boats
in the water, evidently preparing to carry the brig in that
mode. As for the breakers, they whitened the surface of
the ocean in all directions around the wreck, far as the eye
could reach, but in two. The passage in which the
Poughkeepsie
was standing to and fro was clear of them, of
course; and about a mile and a half to the northward,
Spike saw that he should be in open water, or altogether
on the northern side of the reef, could he only get there.
The gravest dangers would exist in the passage, which led
among breakers on all sides, and very possibly among rocks
so near the surface as absolutely to obstruct the way. In
one sense, however, the breakers were useful. By
avoiding
them as much as possible, and by keeping in the
unbroken
water, the boat would be running in the channels
of the reef, and consequently would be the safer. The
result of the survey, short as it was, and it did not last a
minute, was to give Spike something like a plan; and when
he went over the side, and got into the boat, it was with a
determination to work his way out of the reef to its northern
edge, as soon as possible, and then to skirt it as near as he
could, in his flight toward the Dry Tortugas.
CHAPTER VII.
The screams of rage, the groan, the strife,
The blow, the grasp, the horrid cry,
The panting, throttled prayer for life,
The dying's heaving sigh,
The murderer's curse, the dead man's fixed, still glare,
And fear's and death's cold sweatthey all are there.
Matthew Lee
.
It
was high time that Captain Spike should arrive when
his foot touched the bottom of the yawl. The men were
getting impatient and anxious to the last degree, and the
power of Seor Montefalderon to control them was
lessening
each instant. They heard the rending of timber, and
the grinding on the coral, even more distinctly than the
captain himself, and feared that the brig would break up
while they lay alongside of her, and crush them amid the
ruins. Then the spray of the seas that broke over the
weather side of the brig, fell like rain upon them; and
everybody in the boat was already as wet as if exposed to
a violent shower. It was well, therefore, for Spike that he
descended into the boat as he did, for another minute's
delay might have brought about his own destruction.
Spike felt a chill at his heart when he looked about him
and saw the condition of the yawl. So crowded were the
stern-sheets into which he had descended, that it was with
difficulty he found room to place his feet; it being his
intention
to steer, Jack was ordered to get into the eyes of
the boat, in order to give him a seat. The thwarts were
crowded, and three or four of the people had placed
themselves
in the very bottom of the little craft, in order to be
as much as possible out of the way, as well as in readiness
to bail out water. So seriously, indeed, were all the
seamen
impressed with the gravity of this last duty, that nearly
every man had taken with him some vessel fit for such a
purpose. Rowing was entirely out of the question, there
being no space for the movement of the arms. The yawl
was too low in the water, moreover, for such an operation
in so heavy a sea. In all, eighteen persons were squeezed
into a little craft that would have been sufficiently loaded,
for moderate weather at sea, with its four oarsmen and as
many sitters in the stern-sheets, with, perhaps, one in the
eyes to bring her more on an even keel. In other words,
she had twice the weight in her, in living freight, that it
would have been thought prudent to receive in so small a
craft, in an ordinary time, in or out of a port. In addition
to the human beings enumerated, there was a good deal of
baggage, nearly every individual having had the forethought
to provide a few clothes for a change. The food and water
did not amount to much, no more having been provided
than enough for the purposes of the captain, together with
the four men with whom it had been his intention to
abandon
the brig. The effect of all this cargo was to bring the
yawl quite low in the water; and every sea-faring man in
her had the greatest apprehensions about her being able to
float at all when she got out from under the lee of the
Swash, or into the troubled water. Try it she must,
however
,
and Spike, in a reluctant and hesitating manner, gave
the final order to Shove off!
The yawl carried a lugg, as is usually the case with boats
at sea, and the first blast of the breeze upon it satisfied
Spike that his present enterprise was one of the most
dangerous
of any in which he had ever been engaged. The
puffs of wind were quite as much as the boat would bear;
but this he did not mind, as he was running off before it,
and there was little danger of the yawl capsizing with such
15*
a weight in her. It was also an advantage to have swift
way on, to prevent the combing waves from shooting into
the boat, though the wind itself scarce outstrips the send
of the sea in a stiff blow. As the yawl cleared the brig
and began to feel the united power of the wind and waves,
the following short dialogue occurred between the
boatswain
and Spike.
I dare not keep my eyes off the breakers ahead, the
captain commenced, and must trust to you, Strand, to
report what is going on among the man-of-war's men.
What is the ship about?
Reefing her top-sails just now, sir. All three are on
the caps, and the vessel is laying-to, in a manner.
And her boats?
I see none, siray, ay, there they come from
alongside
of her in a little fleet! There are four of them, sir,
and all are coming down before the wind, wing and wing,
carrying their luggs reefed.
Ours ought to be reefed by rights, too, but we dare
not stop to do it; and these infernal combing seas seem
ready to glance aboard us with all the way we can gather.
Stand by to bail, men; we must pass through a strip of
white waterthere is no help for it. God send that we go
clear of the rocks!
All this was fearfully true. The adventurers were not
yet more than a cable's length from the brig, and they found
themselves so completely environed with the breakers as to
be compelled to go through them. No man in his senses
would ever have come into such a place at all, except in
the most unavoidable circumstances; and it was with a
species of despair that the seamen of the yawl now saw
their little craft go plunging into the foam.
But Spike neglected no precaution that experience or
skill could suggest. He had chosen his spot with coolness
and judgment. As the boat rose on the seas he looked
eagerly ahead, and by giving it a timely sheer, he hit a sort
of channel, where there was sufficient water to carry them
clear of the rock, and where the breakers were less
dangerous
than in the shoaler places. The passage lasted
about a minute; and so serious was it, that scarce an
individual
breathed until it was effected. No human skill
could prevent the water from combing in over the
gunwales
;
and when the danger was passed, the yawl was a
third filled with water. There was no time or place to
pause, but on the little craft was dragged almost gunwale
to, the breeze coming against the lugg in puffs that
threatened
to take the mast out of her. All hands were bailing;
and even Biddy used her hands to aid in throwing out the
water.
This is no time to hesitate, men, said Spike, sternly.
Everything must go overboard but the food and water.
Away with them at once, and with a will.
It was a proof how completely all hands were alarmed
by this, the first experiment in the breakers, that not a man
stayed his hand a single moment, but each threw into the
sea, without an instant of hesitation, every article he had
brought with him and had hoped to save. Biddy parted
with the carpet-bag, and Seor Montefalderon, feeling the
importance of example, committed to the deep a small
writing-desk that he had placed on his knees. The
doubloons
alone remained, safe in a little locker where Spike
had deposited them along with his own.
What news astern, boatswain? demanded the
captain
,
as soon as this imminent danger was passed, absolutely
afraid to turn his eyes off the dangers ahead for a single
instant. How come on the man-of-war's men?
They are running down in a body toward the wreck,
though one of their boats does seem to be sheering out of
the line, as if getting into our wake. It is hard to say, sir,
for they are still a good bit to windward of the wreck.
And the Molly, Strand?
Why, sir, the Molly seems to be breaking up fast; as
well as I can see, she has broke in two just abaft the
fore-chains
,
and cannot hold together in any shape at all many
minutes longer.
This information drew a deep groan from Spike, and the
eye of every seaman in the boat was turned in melancholy
on the object they were so fast leaving behind them. The
yawl could not be said to be sailing very rapidly,
considering
the power of the wind, which was a little gale, for she
was much too deep for that, but she left the wreck so fast
as already to render objects on board her indistinct.
Everybody
saw that, like an overburthened steed, she had more
to get along with than she could well bear; and,
dependent
as seamen usually are on the judgment and orders of
their superiors, even in the direst emergencies, the least
experienced man in her saw that their chances of final
escape from drowning were of the most doubtful nature.
The men looked at each other in a way to express their
feelings
;
and the moment seemed favourable to Spike to
confer
with his confidential sea-dogs in private; but more
white water was also ahead, and it was necessary to pass
through it, since no opening was visible by which to avoid
it. He deferred his purpose, consequently, until this
danger
was escaped.
On this occasion Spike saw but little opportunity to
select a place to get through the breakers, though the
spot, as a whole, was not of the most dangerous kind. The
reader will understand that the preservation of the boat at
all, in white water, was owing to the circumstance that the
rocks all around it lay so near the surface of the sea as to
prevent the possibility of agitating the element very
seriously
,
and to the fact that she was near the lee side of the reef.
Had the breakers been of the magnitude of those which
are seen where the deep rolling billows of the ocean first
meet the weather side of shoals or rocks, a craft of that
size, and so loaded, could not possibly have passed the first
line of white water without filling. As it was, however,
the breakers she had to contend with were sufficiently
formidable
,
and they brought with them the certainty that the
boat was in imminent danger of striking the bottom at any
moment. Places like those in which Mulford had waded
on the reef, while it was calm, would now have proved
fatal to the strongest frame, since human powers were
insufficient
long to withstand the force of such waves as did
glance over even these shallows.
Look out! cried Spike, as the boat again plunged
in among the white water. Keep bailing, menkeep
bailing.
The men did bail, and the danger was over almost as
soon as encountered. Something like a cheer burst out
of the chest of Spike, when he saw deeper water around
him, and fancied he could now trace a channel that would
carry him quite beyond the extent of the reef. It was
arrested
,
only half uttered, however, by a communication
from the boatswain, who sat on a midship thwart, his arms
folded, and his eye on the brig and the boats.
There goes the Molly's masts, sir! Both have gone
together; and as good sticks was they, before them
bomb-shells
passed through our rigging, as was ever stepped in a
keelson.
The cheer was changed to something like a groan, while
a murmur of regret passed through the boat.
What news from the man-of-war's men, boatswain?
Do they still stand down on a mere wreck?
No, sir; they seem to give it up, and are getting out
their oars to pull back to their ship. A pretty time they'll
have of it, too. The cutter that gets to windward half a
mile in an hour, ag'in such a sea, and such a breeze, must
be well pulled and better steered. One chap, however,
sir, seems to hold on.
Spike now ventured to look behind him, commanding
an experienced hand to take the helm. In order to do this
he was obliged to change places with the man he had
selected to come aft, which brought him on a thwart
alongside
of the boatswain and one or two other of his
confidants
.
Here a whispered conference took place, which
lasted several minutes, Spike appearing to be giving
instructions
to the men.
By this time the yawl was more than a mile from the
wreck, all the man-of-war boats but one had lowered their
sails, and were pulling slowly and with great labour back
toward the ship, the cutter that kept on, evidently laying
her course after the yawl, instead of standing on toward
the wreck. The brig was breaking up fast, with every
probability that nothing would be left of her in a few more
minutes. As for the yawl, while clear of the white water,
it got along without receiving many seas aboard, though
the men in its bottom were kept bailing without
intermission
.
It appeared to Spike that so long as they remained
on the reef, and could keep clear of breakersa most
difficult
thing, howeverthey should fare better than if in
deeper water, where the swell of the sea, and the combing
of the waves, menaced so small and so deep-loaded a craft
with serious danger. As it was, two or three men could
barely keep the boat clear, working incessantly, and much
of the time with a foot or two of water in her.
Josh and Simon had taken their seats, side by side, with
that sort of dependence and submission that causes the
American black to abstain from mingling with the whites
more than might appear seemly. They were squeezed on
to one end of the thwart by a couple of robust old sea-dogs,
who were two of the very men with whom Spike had been
in consultation. Beneath that very thwart was stowed
another confidant, to whom communications had also been
made. These men had sailed long in the Swash, and
having been picked up in various ports, from time to time,
as the brig had wanted hands, they were of nearly as many
different nations as they were persons. Spike had
obtained
a great ascendency over them by habit and
authority
,
and his suggestions were now received as a sort of law.
As soon as the conference was ended, the captain returned
to the helm.
A minute more passed, during which the captain was
anxiously surveying the reef ahead, and the state of things
astern. Ahead was more white waterthe last before they
should get clear of the reef; and astern it was now settled
that the cutter that held on through the dangers of the
place, was in chase of the yawl. That Mulford was in her
Spike made no doubt; and the thought embittered even
his present calamities. But the moment had arrived for
something decided. The white water ahead was much
more formidable than any they had passed; and the
boldest
seamen there gazed at it with dread. Spike made a
sign to the boatswain, and commenced the execution of his
dire project.
I say, you Josh, called out the captain, in the
authoritative
tones that are so familiar to all on board a ship,
pull in that fender that is dragging alongside.
Josh leaned over the gunwale, and reported that there
was no fender out. A malediction followed, also so
familiar
to those acquainted with ships, and the black was told
to look again. This time, as had been expected, the negro
leaned with his head and body far over the side of the yawl,
to look for that which had no existence, when two of the
men beneath the thwart shoved his legs after them. Josh
screamed, as he found himself going into the water, with
a sort of confused consciousness of the truth; and Spike
called out to Simon to catch hold of his brother-nigger.
The cook bent forward to obey, when a similar assault on
his
legs from beneath the thwart, sent him headlong after
Josh. One of the younger seamen, who was not in the
secret, sprang up to rescue Simon, who grasped his extended
hand, when the too generous fellow was pitched headlong
from the boat.
All this occurred in less than ten seconds of time, and
so unexpectedly and naturally, that not a soul beyond those
who were in the secret, had the least suspicion it was
anything
but an accident. Some water was shipped, of
necessity
,
but the boat was soon bailed free. As for the victims
of this vile conspiracy, they disappeared amid the troubled
waters of the reef, struggling with each other. Each and
all met the common fate so much the sooner, from the
manner in which they impeded their own efforts.
The yawl was now relieved from about five hundred
pounds of the weight it had carriedSimon weighing two
hundred alone, and the youngish seaman being large and
full. So intense does human selfishness get to be, in
moments of great emergency, that it is to be feared most
of those who remained, secretly rejoiced that they were so
far benefited by the loss of their fellows. The Seor
Montefalderon was seated on the aftermost thwart, with his
legs in the stern-sheets, and consequently with his back
toward the negroes, and he fully believed that what had
happened was purely accidental.
Let us lower our sail, Don Esteban, he cried, eagerly,
and save the poor fellows.
Something very like a sneer gleamed on the dark
countenance
of the captain, but it suddenly changed to a look
of assent.
Good! he said, hastilyspring forward, Don Wan,
and lower the sailstand by the oars, men!
Without pausing to reflect, the generous-hearted
Mexican
stepped on a thwart, and began to walk rapidly forward,
steadying himself by placing his hands on the heads of the
men. He was suffered to get as far as the second thwart
or past most of the conspirators, when his legs were seized
from behind. The truth now flashed on him, and grasping
two of the men in his front, who knew nothing of Spike's
dire scheme, he endeavoured to save himself by holding to
their jackets. Thus assailed, those men seized others
with like intent, and an awful struggle filled all that part
of the craft. At this dread instant the boat glanced into
the white water, shipping so much of the element as nearly
to swamp her, and taking so wild a sheer as nearly to
broach-to. This last circumstance probably saved her,
fearful as was the danger for the moment. Everybody in
the middle of the yawl was rendered desperate by the
amount and nature of the danger incurred, and the men
from the bottom rose in their might, underneath the
combatants
,
when a common plunge was made by all who stood
erect, one dragging overboard another, each a good deal
hastened by the assault from beneath, until no less than
five were gone. Spike got his helm up, the boat fell off,
and away from the spot it flew, clearing the breakers, and
reaching the northern wall-like margin of the reef at the
next instant. There was now a moment when those who
remained could breathe, and dared to look behind them.
The great plunge had been made in water so shoal, that
the boat had barely escaped being dashed to pieces on the
coral. Had it not been so suddenly relieved from the
pressure of near a thousand pounds in weight, it is
probable
that this calamity would have befallen it, the water
received on board contributing so much to weight it down.
The struggle between these victims ceased, however, the
moment they went over. Finding bottom for their feet,
they released each other, in a desperate hope of prolonging
life by wading. Two or three held out their arms, and
shouted to Spike to return and pick them up. This
dreadful
scene lasted but a single instant, for the waves dashed
one after another from his feet, continually forcing them
all, as they occasionally regained their footing, toward the
margin of the reef, and finally washing them off it into
deep water. No human power could enable a man to swim
back to the rocks, once to leeward of them, in the face of
such seas, and so heavy a blow; and the miserable wretches
disappeared in succession, as their strength became
exhausted
,
in the depths of the Gulf.
Not a word had been uttered while this terrific scene
was in the course of occurrence; not a word was uttered
for some time afterward. Gleams of grim satisfaction had
been seen on the countenances of the boatswain and his
associates, when the success of their nefarious project was
first assured; but they soon disappeared in looks of horror,
as they witnessed the struggles of the drowning men.
Nevertheless, human selfishness was strong within them
all, and none there was so ignorant as not to perceive how
much better were the chances of the yawl now than it had
been on quitting the wreck. The weight of a large ox
had been taken from it, counting that of all the eight men
drowned; and as for the water shipped, it was soon bailed
back again into the sea. Not only, therefore, was the
yawl in a better condition to resist the waves, but it sailed
materially faster than it had done before. Ten persons
still remained in it, however, which brought it down in the
water below its proper load-line; and the speed of a craft
so small was necessarily a good deal lessened by the least
deviation from its best sailing, or rowing trim. But Spike's
projects were not yet completed.
All this time the man-of-war's cutter had been rushing
as madly through the breakers, in chase, as the yawl had
done in the attempt to escape. Mulford was, in fact, on
board it; and his now fast friend, Wallace, was in
command
.
The latter wished to seize a traitor, the former to
save the aunt of his weeping bride. Both believed that
they might follow wherever Spike dared to lead. This
reasoning was more bold than judicious notwithstanding,
since the cutter was much larger, and drew twice as much
water as the yawl. On it came, nevertheless, faring much
better in the white water than the little craft it pursued,
but necessarily running a much more considerable risk of
hitting the coral, over which it was glancing almost as
swiftly as the waves themselves; still it had thus far
escapedand little did any in it think of the danger. This
cutter pulled ten oars; was an excellent sea boat; had four
armed marines in it, in addition to its crew, but carried all
through the breakers, receiving scarcely a drop of water
Vol. II.16
on board, on account of the height of its wash-boards, and
the general qualities of the craft. It may be well to add
here, that the Poughkeepsie had shaken out her reefs, and
was betraying the impatience of Captain Mull to make sail
in chase, by firing signal-guns to his boats to bear a hand
and return. These signals the three boats under their oars
were endeavouring to obey, but Wallace had got so far to
leeward as now to render the course he was pursuing the
wisest.
Mrs. Budd and Biddy had seen the struggle in which
the Seor Montefalderon had been lost, in a sort of stupid
horror. Both had screamed, as was their wont, though
neither probably suspected the truth. But the fell designs
of Spike extended to them, as well as to those whom he
had already destroyed. Now the boat was in deep water,
running along the margin of the reef, the waves were much
increased in magnitude, and the comb of the sea was far
more menacing to the boat. This would not have been
the case had the rocks formed a lee; but they did not,
running too near the direction of the trades to prevent the
billows that got up a mile or so in the offing, from sending
their swell quite home to the reef. It was this swell,
indeed
,
which caused the line of white water along the
northern
margin of the coral, washing on the rocks by a sort
of lateral effort, and breaking, as a matter of course. In
many places, no boat could have lived to pass through it.
Another consideration influenced Spike to persevere.
The cutter had been overhauling him, hand over hand, but
since the yawl was relieved of the weight of no less than
eight men, the difference in the rate of sailing was
manifestly
diminished. The man-of-war's boat drew nearer,
but by no means as fast as it had previously done. A
point was now reached in the trim of the yawl, when a
very few hundreds in weight might make the most
important
change in her favour; and this change the captain was
determined to produce. By this time the cutter was in
deep water, as well as himself, safe through all the dangers
of the reef, and she was less than a quarter of a mile astern.
On the whole, she was gaining, though so slowly as to
require
the most experienced eye to ascertain the fact.
Madame Budd, said Spike, in a hypocritical tone,
we are in great danger, and I shall have to ask you to
change your seat. The boat is too much by the starn,
now we've got into deep water, and your weight amidships
would be a great relief to us. Just give your hand to the
boatswain, and he will help you to step from thwart to
thwart, until you reach the right place, when Biddy shall
follow.
Now Mrs. Budd had witnessed the tremendous struggle
in which so many had gone overboard, but so dull was she
of apprehension, and so little disposed to suspect anything
one-half so monstrous as the truth, that she did not hesitate
to comply. She was profoundly awed by the horrors of
the scene through which she was passing, the raging
billows
of the Gulf, as seen from so small a craft, producing
a deep impression on her; still a lingering of her most
inveterate
affectation was to be found in her air and
language
,
which presented a strange medley of besetting
weakness
,
and strong, natural, womanly affection.
Certainly, Captain Spike, she answered, rising. A
craft should never go astern, and I am quite willing to
ballast
the boat. We have seen such terrible accidents
today
,
that all should lend their aid in endeavouring to get
under way, and in averting all possible hamper. Only
take me to my poor, dear Rosy, Captain Spike, and
everything
shall be forgotten that has passed between us. This
is not a moment to bear malice; and I freely pardon you
all and everything. The fate of our unfortunate friend,
Mr. Montefalderon, should teach us charity, and cause us
to prepare for untimely ends.
All the time the good widow was making this speech,
which she uttered in a solemn and oracular sort of manner,
she was moving slowly toward the seat the men had
prepared
for her, in the middle of the boat, assisted with the
greatest care and attention by the boatswain and another
of Spike's confidants. When on the second thwart from
aft, and about to take her seat, the boatswain cast a look
behind him, and Spike put the helm down. The boat
luffed and lurched, of course, and Mrs. Budd would
probably
have gone overboard to leeward, by so sudden and
violent a change, had not the impetus thus received been
aided by the arms of the men who held her two hands.
The plunge she made into the water was deep, for she was
a woman of great weight for her stature. Still, she was
not immediately gotten rid of. Even at that dread instant,
it is probable that the miserable woman did not suspect
the truth, for she grasped the hand of the boatswain with
the tenacity of a vice, and, thus dragged on the surface of
the boiling surges, she screamed aloud for Spike to save
her. Of all who had yet been sacrificed to the captain's
selfish wish to save himself, this was the first instance in
which any had been heard to utter a sound, after falling
into the sea. The appeal shocked even the rude beings
around her, and Biddy chiming in with a powerful appeal
to save the missus! added to the piteous nature of the
scene.
Cast off her hand, said Spike reproachfully, she'll
swamp the boat by her strugglesget rid of her at once!
Cut her fingers off, if she wont let go!
The instant these brutal orders were given, and that in
a fierce, impatient tone, the voice of Biddy was heard no
more. The truth forced itself on her dull imagination,
and she sat a witness of the terrible scene, in mute despair.
The struggle did not last long. The boatswain drew his
knife across the wrist of the hand that grasped his own,
one shriek was heard, and the boat plunged into the trough
of a sea, leaving the form of poor Mrs. Budd struggling
with the wave on its summit, and amid the foam of its
crest. This was the last that was ever seen of the
unfortunate
relict.
The boat has gained a good deal by that last discharge
of cargo, said Spike to the boatswain, a minute after they
had gotten rid of the struggling womanshe is much
more lively, and is getting nearer to her load-line. If we
can bring her to
that,
I shall have no fear of the
man-of-war's
men; for this yawl is one of the fastest boats that
ever floated.
A very little
now,
sir, would bring us to our true
trim.
Ay, we must get rid of more cargo. Come, good
woman, turning to Biddy, with whom he did not think it
worth his while to use much circumlocution,
your
turn
is next. It's the maid's duty to follow her mistress.
I know'd it
must
come, said Biddy, meekly. If there
was no mercy for the missus, little could I look for. But
ye'll not take the life of a Christian woman widout giving
her so much as one minute to say her prayers?
Ay, pray away, answered Spike, his throat becoming
dry and husky, for, strange to say, the submissive quiet of
the Irish woman, so different from the struggle he had
anticipated
with
her,
rendered him more reluctant to proceed
than he had hitherto been in all of that terrible day. As
Biddy kneeled in the bottom of the stern-sheets, Spike
looked behind him, for the double purpose of escaping the
painful spectacle at his feet, and that of ascertaining how
his pursuers came on. The last still gained, though very
slowly, and doubts began to come over the captain's mind
whether he could escape such enemies at all. He was too
deeply committed, however, to recede, and it was most
desirable to get rid of poor Biddy, if it were for no other
motive than to shut her mouth. Spike even fancied that
some idea of what had passed was entertained by those in
the cutter. There was evidently a stir in that boat, and
two forms that he had no difficulty, now, in recognizing as
those of Wallace and Mulford, were standing on the
grating
in the eyes of the cutter, or forward of the foresail.
The former appeared to have a musket in his hand, and
the other a glass. The last circumstance admonished him
that all that was now done would be done before dangerous
witnesses. It was too late to draw back, however, and the
captain turned to look for the Irish woman.
Biddy arose from her knees, just as Spike withdrew his
eyes from his pursuers. The boatswain and another
confidant
were in readiness to cast the poor creature into the
sea, the moment their leader gave the signal. The
intended
victim saw and understood the arrangement, and
she spoke earnestly and piteously to her murderers.
It's not wanting will be violence! said Biddy, in a
quiet tone, but with a saddened countenance. I know
it's my turn, and I will save yer sowls from a part of the
burden of this great sin. God, and His Divine Son, and
the Blessed Mother of Jesus have mercy on me if it be
wrong; but I would far radder jump into the saa widout
having the rude hands of man on me, than have the
dreadful
16*
sight of the missus done over ag'in. It's a fearful thing
is wather, and sometimes we have too little of it, and
sometimes
more than we want
Bear a hand, bear a hand, good woman, interrupted
the boatswain, impatiently. We must clear the boat of
you, and the sooner it is done the better it will be for all
of us.
Don't grudge a poor morthal half a minute of life, at
the last moment, answered Biddy. It's not long that
I'll throuble ye, and so no more need be said.
The poor creature then got on the quarter of the boat,
without any one's touching her; there she placed herself
with her legs outboard, while she sat on the gunwale. She
gave one moment to the thought of arranging her clothes
with womanly decency, and then she paused to gaze with
a fixed eye, and pallid cheek, on the foaming wake that
marked the rapid course of the boat. The troughs of the
sea seemed less terrible to her than their combing crests,
and she waited for the boat to descend into the next.
God forgive ye all, this deed, as I do! said Biddy,
earnestly, and bending her person forward, she fell, as it
might be without hands, into the gulf of eternity.
Though all strained their eyes, none of the men, Jack Tier
excepted, ever saw more of Biddy Noon. Nor did Jack
see much. He got a frightful glimpse of an arm, however,
on the summit of a wave, but the motion of the boat was
too swift, and the water of the ocean too troubled, to admit
of aught else.
A long pause succeeded this event. Biddy's quiet
submission
to her fate had produced more impression on her
murderers than the desperate, but unavailing, struggles of
those who had preceded her. Thus it is ever with men.
When opposed, the demon within blinds them to
consequences
as well as to their duties; but, unresisted, the
silent influence of the image of God makes itself felt, and
a better spirit begins to prevail. There was not one in
that boat who did not, for a brief space, wish that poor
Biddy had been spared. With most, that feeling, the last
of human kindness they ever knew, lingered until the
occurrence
of the dread catastrophe which, so shortly after,
closed the scene of this state of being on their eyes.
Jack Tier, called out Spike, some five minutes after
Biddy was drowned, but not until another observation had
made it plainly apparent to him that the man-of-war's men
still continued to draw nearer, being now not more than
fair musket-shot astern.
Ay, ay, sir, answered Jack, coming quietly out of his
hole, from forward of the mast, and moving aft as if
indifferent
to the danger, by stepping lightly from thwart to
thwart, until he reached the stern-sheets.
It is your turn, little Jack, said Spike, as if in a sort
of sorrowful submission to a necessity that knew no law,
we cannot spare you the room.
I have expected this, and am ready. Let me have my
own way, and I will cause you no trouble. Poor Biddy
has taught me how to die. Before I go, however, Stephen
Spike, I must leave you this letter. It is written by
myself
,
and addressed to you. When I am gone, read it, and
think well of what it contains. And now, may a merciful
God pardon the sins of both, through love for His Divine
Son. I forgive you, Stephen; and should you live to
escape from those who are now bent on hunting you to the
death, let this day cause you no grief on my account.
Give me but a moment of time, and I will cause you no
trouble.
Jack now stood upon the seat of the stern-sheets,
balancing
himself with one foot on the stern of the boat. He
waited until the yawl had risen to the summit of a wave,
when he looked eagerly for the man-of-war's cutter. At
that moment she was lost to view in the trough of the sea.
Instead of springing overboard, as all expected, he asked
another instant of delay. The yawl sank into the trough
itself, and rose on the succeeding billow. Then he saw
the cutter, and Wallace and Mulford standing in its bows.
He waved his hat to them, and sprang high into the air,
with the intent to make himself seen; when he came down
the boat had shot her length away from the place, leaving
him to buffet with the waves. Jack now managed
admirably
,
swimming lightly and easily, but keeping his eyes on
the crests of the waves, with a view to meet the cutter.
Spike now saw this well-planned project to avoid death,
and regretted his own remissness in not making sure of
Jack. Everybody in the yawl was eagerly looking after
the form of Tier.
There he is on the comb of that sea, rolling over like
a keg! cried the boatswain.
He 's through it, answered Spike, and swimming
with great strength and coolness.
Several of the men started up involuntarily and
simultaneously
to look, hitting their shoulders and bodies
together
.
Distrust was at its most painful height; and
bull-dogs
do not spring at the ox's muzzle more fiercely than
those six men throttled each other. Oaths, curses, and
appeals for help, succeeded; each man endeavouring, in
his frenzied efforts, to throw all the others overboard, as
the only means of saving himself. Plunge succeeded
plunge; and when that combat of demons ended, no one
remained of them all but the boatswain. Spike had taken
no share in the struggle, looking on in grim satisfaction,
as the Father of Lies may be supposed to regard all human
strife, hoping good to himself, let the result be what it
might to others. Of the five men who thus went overboard,
not one escaped. They drowned each other by continuing
their maddened conflict in an element unsuited to their
natures.
Not so with Jack Tier. His leap had been seen, and a
dozen eyes in the cutter watched for his person, as that boat
came foaming down before the wind. A shout of There
he is! from Mulford succeeded; and the little fellow was
caught by the hair, secured, and then hauled into the boat
by the second lieutenant of the Poughkeepsie and our
young mate.
Others in the cutter had noted the incident of the hellish
fight. The fact was communicated to Wallace, and
Mulford
said, That yawl will outsail this loaded cutter, with
only two men in it.
Then it is time to try what virtue there is in lead,
answered Wallace. Marines, come forward, and give
the rascal a volley.
The volley was fired; one ball passed through the head
of the boatswain, killing him dead on the spot. Another
went through the body of Spike. The captain fell in the
stern-sheets, and the boat instantly broached-to.
The water that came on board apprised Spike fully of
the state in which he was now placed, and by a desperate
effort, he clutched the tiller, and got the yawl again before
the wind. This could not last, however. Little by little,
his hold relaxed, until his hand relinquished its grasp
altogether
,
and the wounded man sank into the bottom of the
stern-sheets, unable to raise even his head. Again the
boat broached-to. Every sea now sent its water aboard,
and the yawl would soon have filled, had not the cutter
come glancing down past it, and rounding-to under its lee,
secured the prize.
CHAPTER VIII.
Man hath a weary pilgrimage,
As through the world he wends;
On every stage, from youth to age,
Still discontent attends;
With heaviness he casts his eye,
Upon the road before,
And still remembers with a sigh
The days that are no more.
Southey
.
It
has now become necessary to advance the time three
entire days, and to change the scene to Key West. As
this latter place may not be known to the world at large,
it may be well to explain that it is a small seaport, situate
on one of the largest of the many low islands that dot the
Florida Reef, that has risen into notice, or indeed into
existence as a town, since the acquisition of the Floridas by
the American Republic. For many years it was the resort of
few besides wreckers, and those who live by the business
dependent on the rescuing and repairing of stranded
vessels
,
not forgetting the salvages. When it is remembered
that the greater portion of the vessels that enter the Gulf
of Mexico stand close along this reef, before the trades,
for a distance varying from one to two hundred miles, and
that nearly everything which quits it, is obliged to beat
down its rocky coast in the Gulf Stream for the same
distance
,
one is not to be surprised that the wrecks, which so
constantly occur, can supply the wants of a considerable
population. To live at Key West is the next thing to
being at sea. The place has sea air, no other water than
such as is preserved in cisterns, and no soil, or so little as
to render even a head of lettuce a rarity. Turtle is
abundant
,
and the business of turtling forms an occupation
additional to that of wrecking. As might be expected, in
such circumstances, a potato is a far more precious thing
than a turtle's egg, and a sack of the tubers would
probably
be deemed a sufficient remuneration for enough of
the materials of callipash and callipee to feed all the
aldermen
extant.
Of late years, the government of the United States has
turned its attention to the capabilities of the Florida Reef,
as an advanced naval station; a sort of Downs, or St.
Helen's Roads, for the West Indian seas. As yet little
has been done beyond making the preliminary surveys, but
the day is not probably very distant when fleets will lie at
anchor among the islets described in our earlier chapters,
or garnish the fine waters of Key West. For a long time
it was thought that even frigates would have a difficulty in
entering and quitting the port of the latter, but it is said
that recent explorations have discovered channels capable
of admitting anything that floats. Still Key West is a
town yet in its chrysalis state, possessing the promise rather
than the fruition of the prosperous days which are in
reserve
.
It may be well to add, that it lies a very little north
of the 24th degree of latitude, and in a longitude quite
five degrees west from Washington. Until the recent
conquests
in Mexico it was the most southern possession of
the American government, on the eastern side of the
continent
;
Cape St. Lucas, at the extremity of Lower
California
,
however, being two degrees farther south.
It will give the foreign reader a more accurate notion
of the character of Key West, if we mention a fact of
quite recent occurrence. A very few weeks after the
closing scenes of this tale, the town in question was, in a
great measure, washed away! A hurricane brought in the
sea upon all these islands and reefs, water running in swift
currents over places that within the memory of man were
never before submerged. The lower part of Key West
was converted into a raging sea, and everything in that
quarter of the place disappeared. The foundation being
of rock, however, when the ocean retired the island came
into view again, and industry and enterprise set to work to
repair the injuries.
The government has established a small hospital for
seamen
at Key West. Into one of the rooms of the building
thus appropriated our narrative must now conduct the
reader. It contained but a single patient, and that was
Spike. He was on his narrow bed, which was to be but
the pucursor of a still narrower tenement, the grave. In
the room with the dying man were two females, in one of
whom our readers will at once recognize the person of
Rose Budd, dressed in deep mourning for her aunt. At
first sight, it is probable that a casual spectator would
mistake
the second female for one of the ordinary nurses of
the place. Her attire was well enough, though worn
awkwardly, and as if its owner were not exactly at ease in
it. She had the air of one in her best attire, who was
unaccustomed
to be dressed above the most common mode.
What added to the singularity of her appearance, was the
fact, that while she wore no cap, her hair had been cut
into short, gray bristles, instead of being long, and turned
up, as is usual with females. To give a sort of climax
to this uncouth appearance, this strange-looking creature
chewed tobacco.
The woman in question, equivocal as might be her
exterior
,
was employed in one of the commonest avocations of
her sexthat of sewing. She held in her hand a coarse
garment, one of Spike's, in fact, which she seemed to be
intently busy in mending; although the work was of a
quality that invited the use of the palm and sail-needle,
rather than that of the thimble and the smaller implement
known to seamstresses, the woman appeared awkward in
her business, as if her coarse-looking and dark hands
refused
to lend themselves to an occupation so feminine.
Nevertheless, there were touches of a purely womanly
character about this extraordinary person, and touches that
particularly attracted the attention, and awakened the
sympathy
of the gentle Rose, her companion. Tears
occasionally
struggled out from beneath her eyelids, crossed her
dark, sun-burnt cheek, and fell on the coarse canvas
garment
that lay in her lap. It was after one of these sudden
and strong exhibitions of feeling that Rose approached her,
laid her own little, fair hand, in a friendly way, though
unheeded
,
on the other's shoulder, and spoke to her in her
kindest and softest tones.
I do really think he is reviving, Jack, said Rose,
and that you may yet hope to have an intelligent
conversation
with him.
They all agree he
must
die, answered Jack Tier
for it was
he,
appearing in the garb of his proper sex, after
a disguise that had now lasted fully twenty yearsand
he will never know who I am, and that I forgive him. He
must think of me in another world, though he is n't able
to do it in this; but it would be a great relief to his soul
to know that I forgive him.
To be sure, a man must like to take a kind leave of
his own wife before he closes his eyes for ever; and I dare
say it would be a great relief to you to tell him that you
have forgotten his desertion of you, and all the hardships
it has brought upon you in searching for him, and in
earning
your own livelihood as a common sailor.
I shall not tell him I've
forgotten
it, Miss Rose; that
would be untrueand there shall be no more deception
between us; but I shall tell him that I
forgive
him, as I
hope God will one day forgive me all
my
sins.
It is, certainly, not a light offence to desert a wife in a
foreign land, and then to seek to deceive another woman,
quietly observed Rose.
He's a willian! muttered the wifebutbut
You forgive him, Jackyes, I'm sure you do. You
are too good a Christian to refuse to forgive him.
I'm a woman a'ter all, Miss Rose; and that, I believe,
is the truth of it. I suppose I ought to do as you say, for
the reason you mention; but I'm his wifeand once he
loved me, though that has long been over. When I first
knew Stephen, I'd the sort of feelin's you speak of, and
was a very different creatur' from what you see me to-day.
Change comes over us all with years and sufferin'.
Rose did not answer, but she stood looking intently at
the speaker more than a minute. Change had, indeed,
come over her, if she had ever possessed the power to
please the fancy of any living man. Her features had
always seemed diminutive and mean for her assumed sex,
as her voice was small and cracked; but, making every
allowance for the probabilities, Rose found it difficult to
imagine that Jack Tier had ever possessed, even under the
high advantages of youth and innocence, the attractions
so common to her sex. Her skin had acquired the tanning
of the sea; the expression of her face had become hard
and worldly; and her habits contributed to render those
natural consequences of exposure and toil even more than
usually marked and decided. By saying habits,
however
,
we do not mean that Jack had ever drunk to excess,
as happens with so many seamen, for this would have been
doing her injustice, but she smoked and chewedpractices
that intoxicate in another form, and lead nearly as many to
the grave as excess in drinking. Thus all the accessories
about this singular being, partook of the character of her
recent life and duties. Her walk was between a waddle
and a seaman's roll, her hands were discoloured with tar,
and had got to be full of knuckles, and even her feet had
degenerated into that flat, broad-toed form that, perhaps,
sooner distinguishes caste, in connection with outward
appearances
,
than any one other physical peculiarity. Yet
this being
had
once been younghad once been even
fair;
and had once possessed that feminine air and lightness of
form, that as often belongs to the youthful American of her
sex, perhaps, as to the girl of any other nation on earth.
Rose continued to gaze at her companion for some time,
when she walked musingly to a window that looked out
upon the port.
I am not certain whether it would do him good or
not to see this sight, she said, addressing the wife kindly,
doubtful of the effect of her words even on the latter.
But here are the sloop-of-war, and several other vessels.
Ay, she is
there;
but never will his foot be put on
Vol. II.17
board the Swash ag'in. When he bought that brig I was
still young, and agreeable to him; and he gave her my
maiden name, which was Mary, or Molly Swash. But
that is all changed; I wonder he did not change the name
with his change of feelin's.
Then you did really sail in the brig in former times,
and knew the seaman whose name you assumed?
Many years. Tier, with whose name I made free, on
account of his size, and some resemblance to me in form,
died under my care; and his protection fell into my hands,
which first put the notion into my head of hailing as his
representative. Yes, I knew Tier in the brig, and we
were left ashore at the same time; I, intentionally, I make
no question; he, because Stephen Spike was in a hurry,
and did not choose to wait for a man. The poor fellow
caught the yellow fever the very next day, and did not live
eight-and-forty hours. So the world goes; them that wish
to live, die; and them that wants to die, live!
You have had a hard time for one of your sex, poor
Jackquite twenty years a sailor, did you not tell me?
Every day of it, Miss Roseand bitter years have they
been; for the whole of that time have I been in chase of
my husband, keeping my own secret, and slaving like a
horse for a livelihood.
You could not have been old when he leftthat is
when you parted.
Call it by its true name, and say at once, when he
desarted
me. I was under thirty by two or three years, and
was still like my own sex to look at. All
that
is changed
since; but I
was
comely
then
.
Why
did Captain Spike abandon you, Jack; you have
never told me
that
.
Because he fancied another. And ever since that time
he has been fancying others, instead of remembering me.
Had he got
you,
Miss Rose, I think he would have been
content for the rest of his days.
Be certain, Jack, I should never have consented to
marry Captain Spike.
You're well out of his hands, answered Jack,
sighing
heavily, which was the most feminine thing she had
done during the whole conversation, well out of his
handsand God be praised it is so. He should have died,
before I would let him carry you off the islandhusband
or no husband.
It might have exceeded your power to prevent it under
other circumstances, Jack.
Rose now continued looking out of the window in
silence. Her thoughts reverted to her aunt and Biddy,
and tears rolled down her cheeks as she remembered the
love of one, and the fidelity of the other. Their horrible
fate had given her a shock that, at first, menaced her with
a severe fit of illness; but her strong, good sense, and
excellent
constitution, both sustained by her piety and Harry's
manly tenderness, had brought her through the danger, and
left her, as the reader now sees her, struggling with her
own griefs, in order to be of use to the still more unhappy
woman who had so singularly become her friend and
companion
.
The reader will readily have anticipated that Jack Tier
had early made the females on board the Swash her
confidants
.
Rose had known the outlines of her history from
the first few days they were at sea together, which is the
explanation of the visible intimacy that had caused
Mulford
so much surprise. Jack's motive in making his
revelations
might possibly have been tinctured with jealousy,
but a desire to save one as young and innocent as Rose
was at its bottom. Few persons but a wife would have
supposed our heroine could have been in any danger from
a lover like Spike; but Jack saw him with the eyes of her
own youth, and of past recollections, rather than with those
of truth. A movement of the wounded man first drew
Rose from the window. Drying her eyes hastily, she
turned toward him, fancying she might prove the better
nurse of the two, notwithstanding Jack's greater interest
in the patient.
What place is thisand why am I here? demanded
Spike, with more strength of voice than could have been
expected, after all that had passed. This is not a cabin
not the Swashit looks like a hospital.
It is a hospital, Captain Spike, said Rose, gently
drawing near the bed; you have been hurt, and have
been brought to Key West, and placed in the hospital. I
hope you feel better, and that you suffer no pain.
My head is n't rightI do n't knoweverything seems
turned round with meperhaps it will all come out as it
should. I begin to rememberwhere is my brig?
She is lost on the rocks. The seas have broken her
into fragments.
That's melancholy news, at any rate. Ah! Miss Rose!
God bless youI've had terrible dreams. Well, it's
pleasant
to be among friendswhat creature is thatwhere
does
she
come from?
That is Jack Tier, answered Rose, steadily. She
turns out to be a woman, and has put on her proper dress,
in order to attend on you during your illness. Jack has
never left your bedside since we have been here.
A long silence succeeded this revelation. Jack's eyes
twinkled, and she hitched her body half aside, as if to
conceal
her features, where emotions that were unusual were
at work with the muscles. Rose thought it might be well
to leave the man and wife aloneand she managed to get
out of the room unobserved.
Spike continued to gaze at the strange-looking female,
who was now his sole companion. Gradually his
recollection
returned, and with it the full consciousness of his
situation. He might not have been fully aware of the
absolute certainty of his approaching death, but he must
have known that his wound was of a very grave character,
and that the result might early prove fatal. Still that
strange and unknown figure haunted him; a figure that
was so different from any he had ever seen before, and
which, in spite of its present dress, seemed to belong quite
as much to one sex as to the other. As for Jack, we call
Molly, or Mary Swash by her masculine appellation, not
only because it is more familiar, but because the other
name seems really out of place, as applied to such a person
as for Jack, then, she sat with her face half averted,
thumbing the canvas, and endeavouring to ply the needle,
but perfectly mute. She was conscious that Spike's eyes
were on her; and a lingering feeling of her sex told her
how much time, exposure, and circumstances, had changed
her personand she would gladly have hidden the defects
in her appearance.
Mary Swash was the daughter as well as the wife of a
ship-master. In her youth, as has been said before, she
had even been pretty, and down to the day when her
husband
deserted her, she would have been thought a female
of a comely appearance rather than the reverse. Her hair
in particular, though slightly coarse, perhaps, had been
rich and abundant; and the change from the long, dark,
shining, flowing locks which she still possessed in her
thirtieth
year, to the short, grey bristles that now stood exposed
without a cap, or covering of any sort, was one very likely
to destroy all identity of appearance. Then Jack had
passed from what might be called youth to the verge of old
age, in the interval that she had been separated from her
husband. Her shape had changed entirely; her
complexion
was utterly gone; and her features, always
unmeaning
,
though feminine, and suitable to her sex, had become
hard and slightly coarse. Still there was something of her
former self about Jack that bewildered Spike; and his
eyes continued fastened on her for quite a quarter of an
hour in profound silence.
Give me some water, said the wounded man, I wish
some water to drink.
Jack arose, filled a tumbler and brought it to the side of
the bed. Spike took the glass and drank, but the whole
time his eyes were riveted on the strange nurse. When
his thirst was appeased, he asked
Who are you? How came you here?
I am your nurse. It is common to place nurses at the
bedsides of the sick.
Are you man or woman?
That is a question I hardly know how to answer.
Sometimes
I think myself each; sometimes neither.
Did I ever see you before?
Often, and quite lately. I sailed with you in your last
voyage.
You! That cannot be. If so, what is your name?
Jack Tier.
A long pause succeeded this announcement, which
induced
Spike to muse as intently as his condition would
17*
allow, though the truth did not yet flash on his
understanding
.
At length the bewildered man again spoke.
Are
you
Jack Tier? he said slowly, like one who
doubted. YesI now see the resemblance, and it was
that
which puzzled me. Are they so rigid in this hospital
that you have been obliged to put on woman's clothes in
order to lend me a helping hand?
I am dressed as you see, and for good reasons.
But Jack Tier run, like that rascal Mulforday, I
remember
now; you were in the boat when I overhauled you
all on the reef.
Very true; I was in the boat. But I never run,
Stephen
Spike. It was
you
who abandoned
me,
on the islet
in the Gulf, and that makes the second time in your life
that you left me ashore, when it was your duty to carry me
to sea.
The first time I was in a hurry, and could not wait
for you; this last time you took sides with the women.
But for your interference, I should have got Rose, and
married her, and all would now have been well with me.
This was an awkward announcement for a man to make
to his legal wife. But after all Jack had endured, and all
Jack had seen during the late voyage, she was not to be
overcome by this avowal. Her self-command extended so
far as to prevent any open manifestation of emotion,
however
much her feelings were excited.
I took sides with the women, because I am a woman
myself, she answered, speaking at length with decision,
as if determined to bring matters to a head at once. It
is natural for us all to take sides with our kind.
You a woman, Jack! That is very remarkable. Since
when have you hailed for a woman? You have shipped
with me twice, and each time as a manthough I've never
thought you able to do seaman's duty.
Nevertheless, I am what you see; a woman born and
edicated; one that never had on man's dress until I knew
you.
You
supposed me to be a man, when I came off to
you in the skiff to the eastward of Riker's Island, but I
was then what you now see.
I begin to understand matters, rejoined the invalid,
musingly. Ay, ay, it opens on me; and I now see how
it was you made such fair weather with Madam Budd and
pretty, pretty Rose. Rose
is
pretty, Jack; you
must
admit
that,
though you be a woman.
Rose
is
prettyI do admit it; and what is better,
Rose is
good.
It required a heavy draft on Jack's justice
and magnanimity, however, to make this concession.
And you told Rose and Madam Budd about your
sex; and that was the reason they took to you so on the
v'y'ge?
I told them who I was, and why I went abroad as a
man. They know my whole story.
Did Rose approve of your sailing under false colours,
Jack?
You must ask that of Rose herself. My story made
her my friend; but she never said anything for or against
my disguise.
It was no great disguise a'ter all, Jack. Now you're
fitted out in your own clothes, you've a sort of half-rigged
look; one would be as likely to set you down for a man
under jury-canvas, as for a woman.
Jack made no answer to this, but she sighed very heavily.
As for Spike himself, he was silent for some little time,
not only from exhaustion, but because he suffered pain from
his wound. The needle was diligently but awkwardly
plied in this pause.
Spike's ideas were still a little confused; but a silence
and rest of a quarter of an hour cleared them materially.
At the end of that time he again asked for water. When
he had drunk, and Jack was once more seated, with his
side-face toward him, at work with the needle, the captain
gazed long and intently at this strange woman. It
happened
that the profile of Jack preserved more of the
resemblance
to her former self, than the full face; and it
was this resemblance that now attracted Spike's attention,
though not the smallest suspicion of the truth yet gleamed
upon him. He saw something that was familiar, though
he could not even tell what that something was, much less
to what or whom it bore any resemblance. At length he
spoke.
I was told that Jack Tier was dead, he said; that
he took the fever, and was in his grave within
eight-and-forty
hours after we sailed. That was what they told me
of
him
.
And what did they tell you of your own wife,
Stephen
Spike. She that you left ashore at the time Jack
was left?
They said she did not die for three years later. I heard
of her death at New Or
leens,
three years later.
And how could you leave her ashoreshe, your true
and lawful wife?
It was a bad thing, answered Spike, who, like all
other mortals, regarded his own past career, now that he
stood on the edge of the grave, very differently from what
he had regarded it in the hour of his health and strength.
Yes, it
was
a very bad thing; and I wish it was ondone.
But it is too late now. She died of the fever, toothat's
some comfort; had she died of a broken heart, I could not
have forgiven myself. Molly was not without her faults
great faults, I considered them; but, on the whole, Molly
was a good creatur'.
You liked her, then, Stephen Spike?
I can truly say that when I married Molly, and old
Captain Swash put his da'ghter's hand into mine, that the
woman was n't living who was better in my judgment, or
handsomer in my eyes.
Ay, aywhen you
married
her; but how was it
a'terwards
?when
you was tired of her, and saw another that
was fairer in your eyes?
I desarted her; and God has punished me for the sin!
Do you know, Jack, that luck has never been with me
since that day. Often and often have I bethought me of
it; and sartain as you sit there, no great luck has ever been
with me, or my craft, since I went off, leaving my wife
ashore. What was made in one v'y'ge, was lost in the
next. Up and down, up and down the whole time, for so
many, many long years, that grey hairs set in, and old age
was beginning to get close aboardand I as poor as ever.
It has been rub and go with me ever since; and I have had
as much as I could do to keep the brig in motion, as the
only means that was left to make the two ends meet.
And did not all this make you think of your poor wife
she whom you had so wronged?
I thought of little else, until I heard of her death at
New Or
leens
and then I gave it up as useless. Could I
have fallen in with Molly at any time a'ter the first six
months of my desartion, she and I would have come
together
again, and everything would have been forgotten. I
knowed her very nature, which was all forgiveness to me
at the bottom, though seemingly so spiteful and hard.
Yet you wanted to have this Rose Budd, who is only
too young, and handsome, and good for you.
I was tired of being a widower, Jack; and Rose
is
wonderful pretty. She has money, too, and might make
the evening of my days comfortable. The brig was old,
as you must know, and has long been off of all the
Insurance
Offices' books; and she could n't hold together much
longer. But for this sloop-of-war, I should have put her
off on the Mexicans; and they would have lost her to our
people in a month.
And was it an honest thing to sell an old and worn-out
craft to any one, Stephen Spike?
Spike had a conscience that had become hard as iron
by means of trade. He who traffics much, most especially
if his dealings be on so small a scale as to render constant
investigations of the minor qualities of things necessary,
must be a very fortunate man, if he preserve his
conscience
in any better condition. When Jack made this
allusion, therefore, the dying manfor death was much
nearer to Spike that even be supposed, though he no longer
hoped for his own recoverywhen Jack made this
allusion
,
then, the dying man was a good deal at a loss to
comprehend
it. He saw no particular harm in making the
best bargain he could; nor was it easy for him to
understand
why he might not dispose of anything he possessed
for the highest price that was to be had. Still he answered
in an apologetic sort of way.
The brig was old, I acknowledge, he said, but she
was strong, and
might
have run a long time. I only spoke
of her capture as a thing likely to take place soon, if the
Mexicans got her; so that her qualities were of no great
account, unless it might be her speedand that you know
was excellent, Jack.
And you regret that brig, Stephen Spike, lying as you
do on your death-bed, more than anything else.
Not as much as I do pretty Rose Budd, Jack; Rosy
is so delightful to look at!
The muscles of Jack's face twitched a little, and she
looked deeply mortified; for, to own the truth, she hoped
that the conversation had so far turned her delinquent
husband's thoughts to the past, as to have revived in him
some of his former interest in herself. It is true, he still
believed her dead; but this was a circumstance Jack
overlooked
so
hard is it to hear the praises of a rival, and be
just. She felt the necessity of being more explicit, and
determined at once to come to the point.
Stephen Spike, she said, steadily, drawing near to
the bed-side, you should be told the truth, when you are
heard thus extolling the good looks of Rose Budd, with
less than eight-and-forty hours of life remaining. Mary
Swash did not die, as you have supposed, three years a'ter
you desarted her, but is living at this moment. Had you
read the letter I gave you in the boat, just before you made
me jump into the sea,
that
would have told you where she
is to be found.
Spike stared at the speaker intently; and when her
cracked voice ceased, his look was that of a man who was
terrified as well as bewildered. This did not arise still from
any gleamings of the real state of the case, but from the
soreness with which his conscience pricked him, when he
heard that his much-wronged wife was alive. He fancied,
with a vivid and rapid glance at the probabilities, all that
a woman abandoned would be likely to endure in the course
of so many long and suffering years.
Are you sure of what you say, Jack? You would n't
take advantage of my situation to tell me an untruth?
As certain of it as of my own existence. I have seen
her quite latelytalked with her of
you
in short, she is
now at Key West, knows your state, and has a wife's
feelin's
to come to your bed-side.
Notwithstanding all this, and the many gleamings he had
had of the facts during their late intercourse on board the
brig, Spike did not guess at the truth. He appeared
astounded
,
and his terror seemed to increase.
I have another thing to tell you, continued Jack,
pausing but a moment to collect her own thoughts. Jack
Tierthe real Jack Tierhe who sailed with you of old,
and whom you left ashore at the same time you desarted
your wife,
did
die of the fever, as you was told, in
eight-and-forty
hours a'ter the brig went to sea.
Then who, in the name of Heaven, are you? How
came you to hail by another's name as well as by another
sex?
What could a woman do, whose husband had desarted
her in a strange land?
That is remarkable! So
you
've been married? I
should not have thought
that
possible; and your husband
desarted you, too. Well, such things
do
happen.
Jack now felt a severe pang. She could not but see
that her ungainlywe had almost said her unearthly
appearance
prevented
the captain from even yet suspecting
the truth; and the meaning of his language was not easily
to be mistaken. That any one should have married
her,
seemed to her husband as improbable as it was probable he
would run away from her as soon as it was in his power
after the ceremony.
Stephen Spike, resumed Jack, solemnly,
I
am Mary
Swash
I
am your wife!
Spike started in his bed; then he buried his face in the
coverletand he actually groaned. In bitterness of spirit
the woman turned away and wept. Her feelings had been
blunted by misfortune and the collisions of a selfish world;
but enough of former self remained to make this the
hardest
of all the blows she had ever received. Her husband,
dying as he was, as he must and did know himself to be,
shrunk from one of her appearance, unsexed as she had
become by habits, and changed by years and suffering.
CHAPTER IX.
The trusting heart's repose, the paradise
Of home, with all its loves, doth fate allow
The crown of glory unto woman's brow.
Mrs. Hemans
.
It
has again become necessary to advance the time; and
we shall take the occasion thus offered to make a few
explanations
touching certain events which have been passed
over without notice.
The reason why Captain Mull did not chase the yawl
of the brig in the Poughkeepsie herself, was the necessity
of waiting for his own boats that were endeavouring to
regain
the sloop-of-war. It would not have done to abandon
them, inasmuch as the men were so much exhausted by
the pull to windward, that when they reached the vessel
all were relieved from duty for the rest of the day. As
soon, however, as the other boats were hoisted in, or run
up, the ship filled away, stood out of the passage and ran
down to join the cutter of Wallace, which was
endeavouring
to keep its position, as much as possible, by making
short tacks under close-reefed luggs.
Spike had been received on board the sloop-of-war, sent
into her sick bay, and put under the care of the surgeon
and his assistants. From the first, these gentlemen
pronounced
the hurt mortal. The wounded man was
insensible
most of the time, until the ship had beat up and gone
into Key West, where he was transferred to the regular
hospital, as has already been mentioned.
The wreckers went out the moment the news of the
calamity of the Swash reached their ears. Some went in
quest of the doubloons of the schooner, and others to pick
up anything valuable that might be discovered in the
neighbourhood
of the stranded brig. It may be mentioned
here, that not much was ever obtained from the brigantine,
with the exception of a few spars, the sails, and a little
rigging; but, in the end, the schooner was raised, by means
of the chain Spike had placed around her, the cabin was
ransacked, and the doubloons were recovered. As there
was no one to claim the money, it was quietly divided
among the conscientious citizens present at its re-visiting
the glimpses of the moon, making gold plenty.
The doubloons in the yawl would have been lost but for
the sagacity of Mulford. He too well knew the character
of Spike to believe he would quit the brig without taking
the doubloons with him. Acquainted with the boat, he
examined the little locker in the stern-sheets, and found
the two bags, one of which was probably the lawful
property
of Captain Spike, while the other, in truth, belonged
to the Mexican government. The last contained the most
gold, but the first amounted to a sum that our young mate
knew to be very considerable. Rose had made him
acquainted
with the sex of Jack Tier since their own
marriage
;
and he at once saw that the claims of this uncouth
wife, who was so soon to be a widow, to the gold in
question
,
might prove to be as good in law, as they
unquestionably
were in morals. On representing the facts of the case
to Captain Mull and the legal functionaries at Key West,
it was determined to relinquish this money to the heirs of
Spike, as, indeed, they must have done under process, there
being no other claimant. These doubloons, however, did
not amount to the full price of the flour and powder that
composed the cargo of the Swash. The cargo had been
purchased with Mexican funds; and all that Spike or his
heirs could claim, was the high freight for which he had
undertaken the delicate office of transporting those
forbidden
articles, contraband of war, to the Dry Tortugas.
Mulford by this time was high in the confidence and
esteem of all on board the Poughkeepsie. He had frankly
explained his whole connexion with Spike, not even
attempting
to conceal the reluctance he had felt to betray the brig
after he had fully ascertained the fact of his commander's
treason. The manly gentlemen with whom he was now
brought in contact entered into his feelings, and admitted
that it was an office no one could desire, to turn against
Vol. II.18
the craft in which he sailed. It is true, they could not
and would not be traitors, but Mulford had stopped far
short of this; and the distinction between such a character
and that of an informer was wide enough to satisfy all their
scruples.
Then Rose had the greatest success with the gentlemen
of the Poughkeepsie. Her youth, beauty, and modesty,
told largely in her favour; and the simple, womanly
affection
she unconsciously betrayed in behalf of Harry, touched
the heart of every observer. When the intelligence of
her aunt's fate reached her, the sorrow she manifested was
so profound and natural, that every one sympathized with
her grief. Nor would she be satisfied unless Mulford
would consent to go in search of the bodies. The latter
knew the hopelessness of such an excursion, but he could
not refuse to comply. He was absent on that melancholy
duty, therefore, at the moment of the scene related in our
last chapter, and did not return until after that which we
are now about to lay before the reader. Mrs. Budd, Biddy,
and all of those who perished after the yawl got clear of
the reef, were drowned in deep water, and no more was
ever seen of any of them; or, if wreckers did pass them,
they did not stop to bury the dead. It was different,
however
,
with those, who were first sacrificed to Spike's
selfishness
.
They were drowned on the reef, and Harry did
actually recover the bodies of the Seor Montefalderon,
and of Josh, the steward. They had washed upon a rock
that is bare at low water. He took them both to the Dry
Tortugas, and had them interred along with the other dead
at that place. Don Juan was placed side by side with his
unfortunate countryman, the master of his equally
unfortunate
schooner.
While Harry was absent and thus employed, Rose wept
much and prayed more. She would have felt herself
almost alone in the world, but for the youth to whom she
had so recently, less than a week before, plighted her faith
in wedlock. That new tie, it is true, was of sufficient
importance
to counteract many of the ordinary feelings of
her situation; and she now turned to it as the one which
absorbed most of the future duties of her life. Still she
missed the kindness, the solicitude, even the weaknesses
of her aunt; and the terrible manner in which Mrs. Budd
had perished, made her shudder with horror whenever she
thought of it. Poor Biddy, too, came in for her share of
the regrets. This faithful creature, who had been in the
relict's service ever since Rose's infancy, had become
endeared
to her, in spite of her uncouth manners and
confused
ideas, by the warmth of her heart, and the singular
truth of her feelings. Biddy, of all her family, had come
to America, leaving behind her not only brothers and
sisters
,
but parents living. Each year did she remit to the
last a moiety of her earnings, and many a half-dollar that
had come from Rose's pretty little hand, had been
converted
into gold, and forwarded on the same pious errand
to the green island of her nativity. Ireland, unhappy
country! at this moment what are not the dire necessities
of thy poor! Here, from the midst of abundance, in a
land that God has blessed in its productions far beyond the
limits of human wants, a land in which famine was never
known, do we at this moment hear thy groans, and listen
to tales of suffering that to us seem almost incredible. In
the midst of these chilling narratives, our eyes fall on an
appeal to the English nation, that appears in what it is the
fashion of some to term the first journal of Europe (!) in
behalf of thy suffering people. A worthy appeal to the
charity of England seldom fails; but it seems to us that
one sentiment of this might have been altered, if not spared.
The English are asked to be
forgetful
of the past, and
to come forward to the relief of their suffering
fellow-subjects
.
We should have written
mindful
of the past, in
its stead. We say this in charity, as well as in truth. We
come of English blood, and if we claim to share in all the
ancient renown of that warlike and enlightened people, we
are equally bound to share in the reproaches that original
misgovernment has inflicted on thee. In this latter sense,
then, thou hast a right to our sympathies, and they are not
withheld.
As has been already said, we now advance the time
eight-and-forty hours, and again transfer the scene to that
room in the hospital which was occupied by Spike. The
approaches of death, during the interval just named, had
been slow but certain. The surgeons had announced that
the wounded man could not possibly survive the coming
night; and he himself had been made sensible that his end
was near. It is scarcely necessary to add that Stephen
Spike, conscious of his vigour and strength, in command
of his brig, and bent on the pursuits of worldly gains, or
of personal gratification, was a very different person from
him who now lay stretched on his pallet in the hospital of
Key West, a dying man. By the side of his bed still sat
his strange nurse, less peculiar in appearance, however,
than when last seen by the reader.
Rose Budd had been ministering to the ungainly
externals
of Jack Tier. She now wore a cap, thus concealing
the short, grey bristles of hair, and lending to her
countenance
a little of that softness which is a requisite of
female character. Some attention had also been paid to
the rest of her attire; and Jack was, altogether, less
repulsive
in her exterior than when, unaided, she had
attempted to resume the proper garb of her sex. Use and
association, too, had contributed a little to revive her
woman's nature, if we may so express it, and she had begun,
in particular, to feel the sort of interest in her patient which
we all come in time to entertain toward any object of our
especial care. We do not mean that Jack had absolutely
ever ceased to love her husband; strange as it may seem,
such had not literally been the case; on the contrary, her
interest in him and in his welfare had never ceased, even
while she saw his vices and detested his crimes; but all
we wish to say here is, that she was getting, in addition to
the long-enduring feelings of a wife, some of the interest
of a nurse.
During the whole time which had elapsed between
Jack's revealing her true character, and the moment of
which we are now writing, Spike had not once spoken to
his wife. Often had she caught his eyes intently riveted
on her, when he would turn them away, as she feared, in
distaste; and once or twice he groaned deeply, more like a
man who suffered mental than bodily pain. Still the patient
did not speak once in all the time mentioned. We should
be representing poor Jack as possessing more philosophy,
or less feeling, than the truth would warrant, were we to
say that she was not hurt at this conduct in her husband.
On the contrary, she felt it deeply; and more than once it
had so far subdued her pride, as to cause her bitterly to
weep. This shedding of tears, however, was of service to
Jack in one sense, for it had the effect of renewing old
impressions, and in a certain way, of reviving the nature
of her sex within hera nature which had been sadly
weakened by her past life.
But the hour had at length come when this long and
painful silence was to be broken. Jack and Rose were
alone with the patient, when the last again spoke to his
wife.
Mollypoor Molly! said the dying man, his voice
continuing full and deep to the last, what a sad time you
must have had of it after I did you that wrong!
It is hard upon a woman, Stephen, to turn her out,
helpless, on a cold and selfish world, answered Jack,
simply
,
much too honest to affect a reserve she did not feel.
It was hard, indeed; may God forgive me for it, as I
hope ye do, Molly.
No answer was made to this appeal; and the invalid
looked anxiously at his wife. The last sat at her work,
which had now got to be less awkward to her, with her eyes
bent on her needle,her countenance rigid, and, so far
as the eye could discern, her feelings unmoved.
Your husband speaks to you, Jack Tier, said Rose,
pointedly.
May
yours
never have occasion to speak to you, Rose
Budd, in the same way, was the solemn answer. I do
not flatter myself that I ever was as comely as you, or that
yonder poor dying wretch was a Harry Mulford in his
youth; but we were young and happy, and respected once,
and loved each other, yet you see what it's all come to!
Rose was silenced, though she had too much tenderness
in behalf of her own youthful and manly bridegroom to
dread a fate similar to that which had overtaken poor Jack.
Spike now seemed disposed to say something, and she went
to the side of his bed, followed by her companion, who
kept a little in the back-ground, as if unwilling to let the
emotion she really felt be seen, and, perhaps, conscious that
her ungainly appearance did not aid her in recovering the
lost affections of her husband.
18*
I have been a very wicked man, I fear, said Spike,
earnestly.
There are none without sin, answered Rose. Place
your reliance on the mediation of the Son of God, and sins
even far deeper than yours may be pardoned.
The captain stared at the beautiful speaker, but
self-indulgence
,
the incessant pursuit of worldly and selfish
objects for forty years, and the habits of a life into which
the thought of God and the dread hereafter never entered,
had encased his spiritual being in a sort of brazen armour,
through which no ordinary blow of conscience could
penetrate
.
Still he had fearful glimpses of recent events, and
his soul, hanging as it was over the abyss of eternity, was
troubled.
What has become of your aunt? half whispered Spike
my old captain's widow. She ought to be here; and
Don Wan Montezumawhere is he?
Rose turned aside to conceal her tearsbut no one
answered
the questions of the dying man. Then a gleaming
of childhood shot into the recollection of Spike, and,
clasping his hands, he tried to pray. But, like others who
have lived without any communication with their Creator
through long lives of apathy to his existence and laws,
thinking only of the present time, and daily, hourly
sacrificing
principles and duty to the narrow interests of the
moment, he now found how hard it is to renew
communications
with a being who has been so long neglected. The
fault lay in himself, however, for a gracious ear was open,
even over the death-bed of Stephen Spike, could that rude
spirit only bring itself to ask for mercy in earnestness and
truth. As his companions saw his struggles, they left him
for a few minutes to his own thoughts.
Molly, Spike at length uttered, in a faint tone, the
voice of one conscious of being very near his end, I hope
you will forgive me, Molly. I know you must have a hard,
hard time of it.
It is hard for a woman to unsex herself, Stephen; to
throw off her very natur', as it might be, and to turn man.
It has changed you sadlyeven your speech is altered.
Once your voice was soft and womanishmore like that
of Rose Budd's than it is now.
I speak as them speak among whom I've been forced
to live. The forecastle and steward's pantry, Stephen
Spike, are poor schools to send women to l'arn language
in.
Try and forget it all, poor Molly! Say to me, so that
I can hear you, `I forget and forgive, Stephen.' I am
afraid God will not pardon my sins, which begin to seem
dreadful to me, if my own wife refuse to forget and forgive,
on my dying bed.
Jack was much mollified by this appeal. Her interest
in her offending husband had never been entirely
extinguished
.
She had remembered him, and often with woman's
kindness, in all her wanderings and sufferings, as the
preceding
parts of our narrative must show; and though
resentment
had been mingled with the grief and mortification
she felt at finding how much he still submitted to Rose's
superior charms, in a breast as really generous and humane
as that of Jack Tier's, such a feeling was not likely to
endure
in the midst of a scene like that she was now called
to witness. The muscles of her countenance twitched,
the hard-looking, tanned face began to lose its sternness,
and every way she appeared like one profoundly disturbed.
Turn to Him whose goodness and marcy may sarve
you, Stephen, she said, in a milder and more feminine
tone than she had used now for years, making her more
like herself than either her husband or Rose had seen her
since the commencement of the late voyage; my sayin'
that I forget and forgive cannot help a man on his
deathbed
.
It will settle my mind, Molly, and leave me freer to
turn my thoughts to God.
Jack was much affected, more by the countenance and
manner of the sufferer, perhaps, than by his words. She
drew nearer to the side of her husband's pallet, knelt, took
his hands, and said solemnly,
Stephen Spike, from the bottom of my heart, I
do
forgive
you; and I shall pray to God that he will pardon your
sins as freely and more marcifully than I now pardon all,
and try to forget all that you have done to me.
Spike clasped his hands, and again he tried to pray; but
the habits of a whole life are not to be thrown off at will;
and he who endeavours to regain, in his extremity, the
moments that have been lost, will find, in bitter reality,
that he has been heaping mountains on his own soul, by
the mere practice of sin, which were never laid there by
the original fall of his race. Jack, however, had
disburthened
her spirit of a load that had long oppressed it, and,
burying her face in the rug, she wept.
I wish, Molly, said the dying man, several minutes
later, I wish I had never seen the brig. Until I got that
craft, no thought of wronging human being ever crossed
my mind.
It was the Father of Lies that tempts all to do evil,
Stephen, and not the brig which caused the sins.
I wish I could live a year longer
only
one year; that
is not much to ask for a man who is not yet sixty.
It is hopeless, poor Stephen. The surgeons say you
cannot live one day.
Spike groanedfor the past, blended fearfully with the
future, gleamed on his conscience with a brightness that
appalled him. And what is that future, which is to make
us happy or miserable through an endless vista of time?
Is it not composed of an existence, in which conscience,
released from the delusions and weaknesses of the body,
sees all in its true colours, appreciates all, and punishes
all? Such an existence would make every man the keeper
of the record of his own transgressions, even to the most
minute exactness. It would of itself mete out perfect
justice
,
since the sin would be seen amid its accompanying
facts, every aggravating or extenuating circumstance.
Each man would be strictly punished according to his
talents. As no one is without sin, it makes the necessity
of an atonement indispensable, and, in its most rigid
interpretation
,
it exhibits the truth of the scheme of salvation
in the clearest colours. The soul, or conscience, that can
admit the necessary degree of faith in that atonement, and
in admitting,
feels
its efficacy, throws the burthen of its
own transgressions away, and remains for ever in the
condition of its original existence, pure, and consequently
happy.
We do not presume to lay down a creed on this mighty
and mysterious matter, in which all have so deep an
interest
,
and concerning which so very small a portion of the
human race think much, or think with any clearness when
it does become the subject of their passing thoughts at all
We too well know our own ignorance to venture on
dogmas
which it has probably been intended that the mind of
man should not yet grapple with and comprehend. To
return to our subject.
Stephen Spike was now made to feel the incubus-load,
which perseverance in sin heaps on the breast of the
reckless
offender. What was the most grievous of all, his
power to shake off this dead weight was diminished in
precisely the same proportion as the burthen was increased,
the moral force of every man lessening in a very just ratio
to the magnitude of his delinquencies. Bitterly did this
deep offender struggle with his conscience, and little did
his half-unsexed wife know how to console or aid him.
Jack had been superficially instructed in the dogmas of
her faith, in childhood and youth, as most persons are
instructed
in what are termed Christian communitieshad
been made to learn the Catechism, the Lord's Prayer, and
the Creedand had been left to set up for herself on this
small capital, in the great concern of human existence, on
her marriage and entrance on the active business of life.
When the manner in which she had passed the last twenty
years is remembered, no one can be surprised to learn that
Jack was of little assistance to her husband in his
extremity
.
Rose made an effort to administer hope and
consolation
,
but the terrible nature of the struggle she
witnessed
,
induced her to send for the chaplain of the
Poughkeepsie
.
This divine prayed with the dying man; but
even he, in the last moments of the sufferer, was little
more than a passive but shocked witness of remorse,
suspended
over the abyss of eternity in hopeless dread. We
shall not enter into the details of the revolting scene, but
simply add that curses, blasphemy, tremulous cries for
mercy, agonized entreaties to be advised, and sullen
defiance
,
were all strangely and fearfully blended. In the
midst of one of these revolting paroxysms, Spike breathed
his last. A few hours later, his body was interred in the
sands of the shore. It may be well to say in this place,
that the hurricane of 1846, which is known to have
occurred
only a few months later, swept off the frail
covering
,
and that the body was washed away to leave its bones
among the wrecks and relics of the Florida Reef.
Mulford did not return from his fruitless expedition
in quest of the remains of Mrs. Budd, until after the death
and interment of Spike. As nothing remained to be done
at Key West, he and Rose accompanied by Jack Tier,
took passage for Charleston in the first convenient vessel
that offered. Two days before they sailed, the
Poughkeepsie
went out to cruise in the Gulf, agreeably to her
general orders. The evening previously Captain Mull,
Wallace, and the chaplain, passed with the bridegroom
and bride, when the matter of the doubloons found in the
boat was discussed. It was agreed that Jack Tier should
have them; and into her hands the bag was now placed.
On this occasion, to oblige the officers, Jack went into a
narrative of all she had seen and suffered, from the
moment when abandoned by her late husband down to
that when she found him again. It was a strange account,
and one filled with surprising adventures. In most of the
vessels in which she had served, Jack had acted in the
steward's department, though she had frequently done duty
as a fore-mast hand. In strength and skill she admitted
that she had often failed; but in courage, never. Having
been given reason to think her husband was reduced to
serving in a vessel of war, she had shipped on board a
frigate bound to the Mediterranean, and had actually made
a whole cruise as a ward-room boy on that station. While
thus employed, she had met with two of the gentlemen
present; Captain Mull and Mr. Wallace. The former was
then first-lieutenant of the frigate, and the latter a
passed-midshipman
;
and in these capacities both had been well
known to her. As the name she then bore was the same
as that under which she now hailed, these officers were
soon made to recollect her, though Jack was no longer the
light, trim-built lad he had then appeared to be. Neither
of the gentlemen named had made the whole cruise in the
ship, but each had been promoted and transferred to
another
craft, after being Jack's shipmate rather more than a
year. This information greatly facilitated the affair of the
doubloons.
From Charleston the travellers came north by rail-road.
Harry made several stops by the way, in order to divert
the thoughts of his beautiful young bride from dwelling
too much on the fate of her aunt. He knew that home
would revive all these recollections painfully, and wished
to put off the hour of their return, until time had a little
weakened Rose's regrets. For this reason, he passed a
whole week in Washington, though it was a season of the
year that the place is not in much request. Still,
Washington
is scarce a town, at any season. It is much the
fashion to deride the American capital, and to treat it as a
place of very humble performance with very sounding
pretensions. Certainly, Washington has very few of the
peculiarities of a great European capital, but few as these
are, they are more than belong to any other place in this
country. We now allude to the
distinctive
characteristics
of a capital, and not to a mere concentration of houses
and shops within a given space. In this last respect,
Washington is much behind fifty other American towns,
even while it is the only place in the whole republic which
possesses specimens of architecture, on a scale
approaching
that of the higher classes of the edifices of the old
world. It is totally deficient in churches, and theatres,
and markets; or those it does possess are, in an
architectural
sense, not at all above the level of village or
country-town
pretensions, but one or two of its national edifices
do approach the magnificence and grandeur of the old
world. The new Treasury Buildings are unquestionably,
on the score of size, embellishments and finish,
the
American
edifice that comes nearest to first class architecture
on the other side of the Atlantic. The Capitol comes
next, though it can scarce be ranked, relatively, as high.
As for the White House, it is every way sufficient for its
purposes and the institutions; and now that its grounds are
finished, and the shrubbery and trees begin to tell, one
sees about it something that is not unworthy of its high
uses and origin. Those grounds, which so long lay a
reproach
to the national taste and liberality, are now fast
becoming beautiful, are already exceedingly pretty, and
give to a structure that is destined to become historical,
having already associated with it the names of Jefferson,
Madison, Jackson, and Quincy Adams, together with the
ci polloi
of the later Presidents, an
entourage
that is
suitable
to its past recollections and its present purposes.
They are not quite on a level with the parks of London,
it is true; or even with the Tuileries, or Luxembourg, or
the Boboli, or the Villa Reale, or fifty more grounds and
gardens, of a similar nature, that might be mentioned;
but, seen in the spring and early summer, they adorn the
building they surround, and lend to the whole
neighbourhood
a character of high civilization, that no other place
in America can show, in precisely the same form, or to the
same extent.
This much have we said on the subject of the White
House and its precincts, because we took occasion, in a
former work, to berate the narrow-minded parsimony
which left the grounds of the White House in a condition
that was discreditable to the republic. How far our
philippic
may have hastened the improvements which have
been made, is more than we shall pretend to say; but
having made the former strictures, we are happy to have an
occasion to say (though nearly twenty years have
intervened
between the expressions of the two opinions) that
they are no longer merited.
And here we will add another word, and that on a
subject
that is not sufficiently pressed on the attention of a
people, who, by position, are unavoidably provincial. We
invite those whose gorges rise at any stricture on anything
American, and who fancy it is enough to belong to the
great republic to be great in itself, to place themselves in
front of the State Department, as it now stands, and to
examine its dimensions, material and form with critical
eyes, then to look along the adjacent Treasury Buildings,
to fancy them completed, by a junction with new edifices
of a similar construction to contain the department of
state; next to fancy similar works completed for the two
opposite departments; after which, to compare the past
and present with the future as thus finished, and
remember
how recent has been the partial improvement which
even now exists. If this examination and comparison do
not show, directly to the sense of sight, how much there
was and is to criticise, as put in contrast with other
countries
,
we shall give up the individuals in question, as too
deeply dyed in the provincial wool ever to be whitened.
The present Trinity church, New York, certainly not more
than a third class European church, if as much, compared
with its village-like predecessor, may supply a practical
homily of the same degree of usefulness. There may be
those among us, however, who fancy it patriotism to
maintain
that the old Treasury Buildings were quite equal
to the new, and of these intense Americans we cry their
mercy!
Rose felt keenly on reaching her late aunt's very neat
dwelling in Fourteenth Street, New York. But the manly
tenderness of Mulford was a great support to her, and a
little time brought her to think of that weak-minded, but
well-meaning and affectionate relative, with gentle regret,
rather than with grief. Among the connexions of her
young husband, she found several females of a class in life
certainly equal to her own, and somewhat superior to the
latter in education and habits. As for Harry, he very
gladly passed the season with his beautiful bride, though a
fine ship was laid down for him, by means of Rose's
fortune
,
now much increased by her aunt's death, and he was
absent in Europe when his son was born; an event that
occurred only two months since.
The Swash, and the shipment of gunpowder, were
thought of no more in the good town of Manhattan. This
great emporiumwe beg pardon, this great
commercial
emporiumhas a trick of forgetting, condensing all
interests
into those of the present moment. It is much
addicted
to believing that which never had an existence, and
of overlooking that which is occurring directly
under its
nose
. So marked is this tendency to forgetfulness, we
should not be surprised to hear some of the Manhattanese
pretend that our legend is nothing but a fiction, and deny
the existence of the Molly, Captain Spike, and even of
Biddy Noon. But we know them too well to mind what
they say, and shall go on and finish our narrative in our
own way, just as if there were no such raven-throated
commentators
at all.
Jack Tier, still known by that name, lives in the family
of Captain Mulford. She is fast losing the tan on her face
and hands, and every day is improving in appearance. She
now habitually wears her proper attire, and is dropping
gradually into the feelings and habits of her sex. She
never can become what she once was, any more than the
blackamoor can become white, or the leopard change his
spots; but she is no longer revolting. She has left off
chewing and smoking, having found a refuge in snuff.
Her hair is permitted to grow, and is already turned up
with a comb, though constantly concealed beneath a cap.
The heart of Jack, alone, seems unaltered. The strange,
tiger-like affection that she bore for Spike, during twenty
years of abandonment, has disappeared in regrets for his
end. It is succeeded by a most sincere attachment for
Rose, in which the little boy, since his appearance on the
scene, is becoming a large participator. This child Jack
is beginning to love intensely; and the doubloons, well
invested
,
placing her above the feeling of dependence, she is
likely to end her life, once so errant and disturbed, in
tranquillity
and a home-like happiness.
THE END.