A 2
THE HEIDENMAUER.
CHAPTER I.
Ah, now soft blushes tinge her cheeks,
And mantle on her neck of snow.
Rogers
.
The
cottage of Lottchen, the mother of
Berchthold
,
was distinguished from the other habitations of
the hamlet, only by its greater neatness, and by that
air of superior comfort which depends chiefly on
taste and habit, and of which poverty itself can
scarcely deprive those who have been educated in the
usages and opinions of a higher caste. It stood a
little apart from the general cluster of humble roofs;
and, in addition to its other marks of superiority, it
possessed the advantage of a small inclosure, by
which it was partially removed from the publicity
and noise that rob most of the villages and hamlets
of Europe of a rural character.
We have had frequent occasions to allude to the
difficulty of conveying accurate ideas of positive
things, or even of moral and political truths, while
using the terms which use has appropriated to the
two hemispheres, but which are liable to so much
qualification in their respective meanings. What is
comfort in one country would be thought great
discomfort
in another, and even the two higher degrees
of comparison must always be understood subject
to a right knowledge of their positive qualities. Thus
most beautiful conveys nothing clear, unless we
can agree on what is beautiful; while neatness and
elegance, and even size, taken in their popular
significations
,
become purely terms of local
convention
.
Were we to say that the cottage of Lottchen
Hintermayer resembled, in the least, one of those
white and spotless dwellings, with its Venetian
blinds and pillared piazzas, its grassy court in front,
and its garden teeming with golden fruit in the rear,
its acacias and willows shading the low roof, and
its shrubbery exhaling the odors that a generous
sun can extract, we should give such a picture to
the reader as Europe nowhere presentsnowhere,
because in those regions in which nature has been
bountiful, man has been held in mental duress; and
in those in which man is sufficiently advanced and
free to require the indulgences we have named,
nature
denies the boons so necessary to their existence.
Here, and here only, do those whom fortune has
not smiled upon, possess the union of comfort, space,
retirement, and luxury, which depend on the causes
named, for it is only here that are found the habits
necessary to their production, in conjunction with
the required climate and a cheapness of material
and land, to place the whole within the reach of
those who are not affluent. We wish, therefore, to
be understood as speaking, at all times, under the
consciousness of this difference in the value of terms,
for, without such an understanding, there will be
little intelligence between us and our countrymen.
We have made this explanation, lest the reader
might fancy some affinity between the hamlet of
Hartenburg and one in the older settlements of the
Union. The remoteness of the period might indeed
give some reason to suspect such a resemblance,
but were the tale one of our own times, it would be
scarcely probable. The Germans, like all the more
northern nations, are neat, in proportion to their
several degrees of civilization; and the great
frequency
of the little capitals which dot its surface,
and which have all been, more or less, beautified by
their respective princes, has caused it to possess a
greater number of spacious and cleanly towns, in
proportion to its population, than are to be met with
in most of the other countries of the European
continent
;
but, as elsewhere in that quarter of the world,
the poor are poor indeed.
The little cluster of houses that were grouped
beneath
the salient bastions of Hartenburg, had the
general character of poverty and humility which
still belongs to nearly all such hamlets. The
buildings
were constructed of timber and mud, with
thatched roofs, and openings to which, in that age,
glass was a stranger. In speaking of the comfort
of the dwelling of Lottchen, we wish to say little
more than that it was superior to its fellows in these
particulars, and that it had the additional merit of
faultless neatness. The furniture, however, gave
much stronger evidence of the former condition of
its tenant. Enough of this description of property
had been saved from the wreck of her husband's
fortunes, to leave before the eyes of its mistress these
traces of happier daysone of those melancholy
consolations in adversity which are common among
those whose fall has been broken by some light
circumstances
of mitigation, and which, as monitors
to delicacy and tenderness, make touching appeals
to the recollections of the spectator. But
Berchthold's
mother had still better claims to the respect
of those who came beneath her humble lintel. As
we have already said, she had been the bosom friend
of Ulrike in early youth, and, by education and
character, she was still every way worthy of
holding
so near a trust with the wife of the
Burgomaster
.
The allowance of her son was small in money,
but the Count permitted his forester to use the game
freely; and, as German frugality left her mistress
of the wardrobes of several generations, the
respectable
matron had never known absolute want,
and was at all times able to make such a personal
appearance as better suited her former than her
present means. In addition to these advantages,
Ulrike never visited the Jaegerthal without thought
of her friend's necessities; and full often, at times
and seasons when this sacred duty could not be
performed in person, was Ilse dispatched to the
hamlet
as the substitute of her considerate and affection
ate mistress.
The cavalcade from the Abbey had, of necessity,
passed the door of Lottchen, and she was fully
aware of the intended visit. When, therefore, Meta,
blooming and happy, entered the cottage, attended
by the warder's daughter, and accompanied by
Berchthold, though secretly rejoicing in what she
saw, the pleased and watchful matron neither
expressed
nor felt surprise.
Thy mother? were the first words which
passed the lips of the widowed Lottchen, after
she had kissed the glowing and warm cheek of the
girl.
Is closeted with the Herr Emich, my father
says; else would she be sure to be here. She has
sent me to say this.
And thy father? added Lottchen, with
emphasis
,
glancing an uneasy eye from Meta to her son.
He drinks of rhenish with the castle wassailers.
Truly, my mother Lottchen, thou must find the
hamlet unquiet with these graceless spirits in the
hold. Our Limburg monks are scarcely so thirsty;
and for idle discourse, I know not their equal in
Duerckheim, town of vanities and folly though it be,
as good Ilse is apt to say.
Lottchen smiled, for she saw by the playful eye
of her young visitor, that nothing unpleasant had
occurred; and giving Gisela welcome, she led the
way within.
Does Heinrich know of this visit? asked the
widow, when her young guests were seated, and
with a painful interest in the answer.
I tell thee, Lottchen, that my father quaffs with
the strangers. Here is Berchthold, thy sonthe
restless, impatient Berchtholdhe can tell thee,
mother, into what goodly company the Burgomaster
of Duerckheim hath fallen!
As Meta said this, she laughed, though, in very
sooth, she scarce knew why. The more experienced
Lottchen saw little else in the mirth of her young
visitor than one of those buoyant impulses of youth
which lead equally to gaiety and sorrow, without
sufficient cause; but she watched the countenance
of her own child with solicitude, to note how far he
sympathized with the merriment of Meta.
Berchthold
,
by speaking, was the interpreter of his own
thoughts.
Since thou appealest to me, he said, my
answer
is, that Heinrich Frey consorts at present
with two as hopeless idlers as ever darkened door
in Hartenburg. Truly, Brother Luther needs bestir
himself for the Church, when such as these go forth
in its garments!
Say what thou wilt, Master Berchthold, cried
Gisela, of the prating half-shaven Abb, but respect
him of Rhodes, as a soldier in evil fortune, and one
that is both gentle and gallant.
As gallant as thou wilt, cried Meta, with warmth.
Thy humor for mild discourse must be formed
by the rude company of the bold, if thou stylest these
gentle!
Lottchen had examined each face earnestly, and
her countenance brightened with the frankness and
fervor of the last speaker. She was about to say
something in guarded commendation of her
judgment
,
when a light step was heard before the outer
door, and Ulrike herself entered. Notwithstanding
the early departure of the young people from the
castle, and the trifling distance between its walls
and the hamlet, so much leisure had been wasted in
idle laughter by the way, or in culling flowers on the
hill-side, that she had sufficient time to exhaust all
that old Ilse had to recount concerning the manner
in which she had disposed of her charge, and to
follow them to the cottage, ere the discourse had
gone farther. The meeting between the friends
was, as wont, warm and happy. When the usual
inquiries were exhausted, and a few unmeaning
observations had been made by the girls, the younger
part of the company were gotten rid of, under
pretence of conducting Meta to witness the manner
in which Berchthold had arranged the nests for some
doves, which had been a present from herself to
his mother. The two parents saw the departure of
their children, always accompanied by Gisela, with
satisfaction; for each had need of a secret
conference
with the other, and both knew how apt
youth and inclination were to prolong their
absence
,
by means of those thousand little delays
which form the unconscious and innocent coquetry
of love.
When left to themselves, Ulrike and Lottchen
sat, for some time, with hands interlocked, regarding
one another earnestly.
Thou hast borne the trying season of the spring
time well, good Lottchen, said the former, with
affection. I have no longer any fear that thy
health might suffer in this damp abode.
And thou lookest youthful and fair as when we
strolled, like thy Meta there, laughing and
thoughtless
girls, on the heath of the Heidenmauer. Of all I
have known, Ulrike, thou art the least changed by
time, either in form or heart.
The gentle pressure, before they released each
other's hands, was a silent pledge of their mutual
esteem.
Thou findest Meta blooming and happy?
As she meriteth to beand BerchtholdI think
him fast growing into the comeliness and form of
his sire?
He is all I could wishone qualification
excepted
,
my friend; and that, thou well knowest, I do not
wish him for any other reason than to satisfy
Heinrich's
scruples.
For my child, that qualification is hopeless.
Berchthold has too much generous indifference to
gold, ever to accumulate, were the means his. But
what hope is there for an humble forester, who travels
his range of chase, follows his lord to ceremonies,
or attends him in battle?
The Herr Emich values thy son, and I do think
would fain do him favor. Were the Count earnestly
to reason with Heinrich, all hope would not yet be
lost.
Lottchen dropped her eyes to the work on which
her needle was employed, for necessity had
rendered
her systematically industrious. The pause was
long and thoughtful. But while Ulrike pondered on
the chances of overcoming her husband's love of
money and his worldly views, a very different
picture had presented itself to the mind of her
friend. The eye-lids of the latter trembled, and a
hot tear fell upon the linen in her lap.
I have thought much of late, Ulrike, she said,
of the justice of burthening thy happiness and
golden fortunes with the load of our adversity.
Berchthold is young and brave, and there seems as
little necessity as there is right, in weighing thee
and Meta down to our own level. I have anxiously
wished for the means of counselling with some
friend less interested than thou, on the fitness of
what we do; but it is difficult to speak of so delicate
a subject without wronging thy daughter.
If thou wouldest have the most disinterested and
wisest of all advisers, Lottchen, take counsel of thine
own heart.
That tells me to be just to thee and Meta.
Dost thou know aught of Berchthold's manners
or mind, that may have escaped the observation of
an anxious mother, who desires to match her own
child with none but the deserving?
Lottchen smiled through her tears, and gazed at
the mild features of Ulrike with reverence.
If thou wouldest hear evil of the youth, do not
come to her who hath no other hope, for the tidings.
The orphan is the sole riches of his widowed mother,
and thou mayest not get the truth from one that
regards
her treasure wth so much covetousness.
And dost thou fancy, Lottchen, that thy son in
poverty is dearer to thee than is Meta to her mother,
though Providence may have left us wealth and
consideration? Misfortune hath indeed changed
thee, and thou art no longer the Lottchen of my
young days!
I will say no more, Ulrike, answered the
widow, in a low voice, speaking like one rebuked;
I leave all to heaven and thee! Thou art certain
that were Berchthold Count of Leiningen, his and
my desire would be to see Meta his bride.
A nearly imperceptible smile played upon the
sweet mouth of Ulrike, for she bethought her of
the recent discourse with Emich; but there was
neither suspicion nor discontent in the passing
thought. She was too wise to put human nature
to very severe tests, and much too meek to believe
all who fell short of perfection unworthy of her
esteem.
We will think of things as they are, she
answered
,
and not dwell on impossible chances. Wert
thou Ulrike and I Lottchen, none can believe more
fervently than I, that these opinions would undergo
no change. Of Meta thou art sure, my friend; but
Vol. II. B
truth bids me say, that I fear Heinrich will never
yield. His mind is much occupied with what the
world deems its equality of interests; and it will be
hard, indeed, to bring him to balance virtues against
gold.
And is he so wrong? Of what excellence is
Berchthold possessed, that does not find at least its
equal in Meta?
Happiness cannot be bartered for, as we would
look into the value of houses and lands. He is wrong;
and I could weepoh, how bitterly I have wept!
that Heinrich Frey should be thus bent on casting
the happiness of that artless and unpractised child,
on the rude chances of so narrow calculations. But
we will still hope, added Ulrike, drying her tears,
and turn our thoughts to the more cheerful side.
Thou saidst something of the power of my boy
with the Count, and of his wish to do us service?
I know no other means to move Heinrich's mind.
Though kind and yielding to me, in all matters that
he believes touch my state, he believes that no
woman is a fit judge of the world's interests; and, I
fear I should add, that, from too much familiarity
with my poor means, he places his wife lowest
among her sex in this particular: there is no hope,
therefore, that any words of mine can change him.
But the Lord Emich has great hold on his judgment,
for, Lottchen, they who prize the world's smiles,
ever yield reverence to those that chance to
possess
them largely.
The widow dropped her eyes, for rarely, in their
numerous and friendly conferences, did her friend
allude to the weaknesses of her husband.
And the Herr Emich? she asked, desirous to
change the discourse.
The Count is much disposed to aid us, as I
have said; for I have laid bare to him our wishes
this morning, and have much entreated him to do
this kind act.
It is not wont for thee to be the solicitor with the
Herr von Hartenburg, Ulrike! rejoined Lottchen,
raising her eyes again to the countenance of her
friend, across whose cheek there passed a flush so
faint as to resemble the reflection of some bright
color of her attire, while a still less obvious smile
dimpled the skin. The looks that were exchanged
told of recollections that were both joyous and
melancholy, being, as it were, hasty but
comprehensive
glances into the pregnant volume of the past.
It was the first request, resumed Ulrike; nor
can I say the boon was absolutely refused, though
its gift was coupled with a condition impossible to
grant.
If it were too much for thy friendship, it must
have been hard indeed!
Lottchen spoke under the influence of one of
those sudden and keen impulses of disappointment,
which sometimes make the strong in principle
momentarily
forget their justice; and Ulrike perfectly
understood the meaning of her words. The
difference
in their fortunes, the hopelessness of the future
with the fallen Lottchen, and all the bitterness of
unmerited contumely and poverty, the severe
judgments
which a thoughtless world inflicts on the
unlucky
,
passed quickly through the mind of the latter,
amid a tumult of regrets and recollections.
Of this thou shalt judge for thyself, Lottchen,
she answered calmly; and when thou hast heard
me, I require thy unconcealed reply, conjuring thee,
by that long and constant friendship across which
no cloud has ever yet passed, to lay bare thy soul,
shading no thought, nor desiring to color even the
most latent of thy wishes!
Thou hast only to speak.
Hast thou never suspected, that all this warlike
preparation in the hold, in the presence of the
men-at-arms
in Limburg, tends to no good?
Both speak of war; but the Elector is sore
pressed
,
and it is now long since our Germany was at
perfect peace.
Nay, thy surmises must have gone beyond these
general causes.
The look of surprise assured Ulrike she was
mistaken.
And Berchthold? Has he said naught of his
Lord's intentions? continued the latter.
He talks of battles and sieges, like most of his
years, and he often essays the armor of his
grandfather
,
which lumbers yon closet; for thou knowest,
though not of knightly rank, we have had soldiers
in our race.
Is he not angered against Limburg?
He is, and yet is he not. There is a little flame
of resentment, I regret to say, in all of the
Jaegerthal
against the monks, which is much fanned in my
son by his foster-brother, Gottlob, the cow-herd.
This flame hath descended to the hind from
his Lord. All that Gottlob says, Emich hath more
than hinted.
Nay, there was revelling in the hold, between
Bonifacius and the Count, no later than the night
past!
Too much blindness to that which passeth
before thy eyes, dear Lottchen, is a virtuous feeling
of thy nature. The Count of Hartenburg plots the
downfall of the Abbey-altars, and he has this day
sworn to me, that if I will win Heinrich to his
wishes, no influence or authority of his shall be
wanting to make Berehthold and Meta happy.
Lottchen heard this announcement with the silent
amazement with which the unsuspecting and meek
first hearken to the bold designs of the ambitious
and daring.
This would be sacrilege! she exclaimed with
emphasis.
'Twould be to disgrace the altars of God, that
our desires might prevail.
There was a pause. Lottchen rose from her
chair, with so little effort, that, to the imagination
of her excited friend, it seemed her stature grew by
supernatural means. Then raising her arms, the
widowed mother poured out her feelings in words.
Ulrike, thou knowest my heart, she said: thou,
who art the sister of my love, if not of my blood
thou, from whom no childish thought was hid, no
maiden feeling concealedthou, to whom my mind
was but a mirror of thine own, reflecting every
wish, all impulses, each desireand well dost thou
know how dear to me is Berchthold! Thou canst
say, that when Heaven took his father, the
yearnings
of a mother alone tempted me to live; that for
him, I have borne adversity with contentment,
smiling when he smiled, and rejoicing when the
buoyancy of youth made him rejoice; that as for
him I have lived, so that for him would I die.
Thou canst say, Ulrike, that my own youthful and
virgin affections were not yielded with greater
delight
and confidence than I have witnessed this
growing tenderness for Meta; and yet do I here
declare, in the presence of God and his works, that
before a rebel wish of mine shall aid Count Emich
in this act, there is no earthly sorrow I will not
welcome, no humility that I will dread!
The pious Lottchen sank into her seat, pale,
trembling
,
and exhausted with an effort so unusual. The
widowed mother of Berchthold had never possessed
the rare personal attractions of her friend, and those
which were left by time, had suffered cruel marks
from sorrow and depression. Still, where she now
sat, her face beaming with the inspiration of the
reverence she felt for the Deity, and her soul charged
B 2
to bursting, Ulrike thought she had never seen one
more fair. Her own eyes brightened with delight,
for at that moment of spiritual elevation, neither
thought of any worldly interests; and her strongest
wish was that the Count of Hartenburg could be a
witness of this triumph of principle over selfishness.
Her own refusal, though so similar in manner and
words, the natural result of their great unity of
character, seemed destitute of all merit; for what
was the simple denial of one of her means,
compared
to this lofty readiness to encounter a
contumely
that was already so bitterly understood.
I expected no less, answered Ulrike, when
emotion permitted speech: from thee, Lottchen,
less would have been unworthy, and more could
scarcely come! We will now speak of other things,
and trust to the power of the dread Being whose
majesty is menaced. Hast thou yet visited the
Heidenmauer
?
Notwithstanding the excited state of her own
feelings, which were, however, gradually subsiding to
their usual calm, Lottchen took heed of the change
of manner in her friend as she uttered the last
words, and the slight tremor of the voice with which
her question was put.
The kindness of the anchorite to Berchthold, and
his great reputation for sanctity, drew me thither.
I found him of mild discourse, and a recluse of great
wisdom.
Didst note him well, Lottchen?
As the penitent regards him who offers
consolation
.
I would thou hadst been more particular!
The widow glanced towards her friend in surprise,
but immediately turned her eyes, that were still filled
with tears, to her work. There was a moment of
musing and painful pause, for each felt the want of
their usual and entire confidence.
Dost thou distrust him, Ulrike?
Not as a penitent, or one willing to atone.
Thou disapprovest of the deference he receives
from the country round?
Of that thou mayest judge, Lottchen, when I
tell thee that I suffer Meta to seek counsel from him.
Lottchen showed greater surprise, and the silence
was longer than before, and still more embarrassing.
It is long since thou hast named to me, good
Lottchen, one that was so much and so warmly in
our discourse when we were girls!
The amazement of the listener was sudden and
marked. She dropped her work, and clasped her
hands together with force.
Dost thou believe this? burst from her lips.
Ulrike bowed her head, apparently to examine
the linen, though really unconscious of the act, while
the hand she extended trembled violently.
I have sometimes thought it, she answered,
scarce speaking above a whisper.
A merry laugh, one of those joyous impulses which
spring from the gaiety of youth, was heard at the
door, and Meta entered, followed by Berchthold and
the warder's daughter. At this interruption the
friends arose, and withdrew to an inner room.
CHAPTER II.
I pray thee, loving wife, and gentle daughter,
Give even way unto my rough affairs.
King Henry IV
.
About
an hour after the moment when Ulrike and
Lottchen disappeared, as described in the close of
the last chapter, the cavalcade of Heinrich Frey
was seen moving along the Jaergerthal, beneath the
hill of Limburg, on its way towards the town. Four
light-armed followers of Emich accompanied the
party on foot, under the pretence of doing honor to
the Burgomaster, but in truth to protect him against
insult from any stragglers belonging to the
men-at-arms
who lay in the Abbeya precaution that was
not altogether without utility, as the reader will
remember
that the path ran within call of the
ecclesiastical
edifices.
As the beasts ambled past the imposing towers
and wide roofs, that were visible even to those who
journeyed in that deep glen, Heinrich's countenance,
which had been more than usually thoughtful ever
since he passed beneath the gate of Hartenburg,
grew graver; and Meta, who rode as usual at his
crupper, heard him draw one of those heavy
respirations
which were so many infallible signs that
the mental part of her worthy parent was
undergoing
extraordinary exercises.
Nor did this shade appear only on the face of the
Burgomaster. A deep and thoughtful gloom clouded
the fine features of his wife, while the countenance
of the blooming daughter betrayed that sort of
sombre rest which is apt to succeed high excitement;
a moment in which the mind appears employed in
examining the past, as if disposed to dissect the
merits and demerits of its recent enjoyments. Of
them all, the male attendants alone excepted, old
Ilse returned as she had gone, self-satisfied, unmoved,
and talkative.
Count Emich hath displeased thee, father, Meta
said quickly, when a respiration, which in one less
physical would have been termed a sigh, gave her
reason to think the Burgomaster's bosom was
struggling
with some bitter vexation; else wouldest thou
be more cheerful, and better disposed to give me thy
parental counsel, as is thy habit, when we go
together
on the pillion.
The occasion shall not fail, girl; and these
Abbey-walls
offer in good time to prick my fatherly
memory. But thou art in error, if thou thinkest
that the souls of the Herr Emich and mine are not
bound together like those of David and Jonathan. I
know not the man I more love, or, the Emperor and
the Elector apart, as is my duty, the noble I so much
respect.
It is well it is so, for I greatly value these airy
rides among the hills, and most of all do I prize a
visit to the cottage of Lottchen!
Heinrich ejaculated audibly. Then, riding a short
distance in silence, he continued the dialogue.
Meta, he said, thou art now getting to be of
a womanish age, and it is time to fortify thy young
mind in a manner that it may meet the cunning and
malice of the world. Life is of great
precariousness
,
especially to the valiant and enterprising, and
we live in perilous times. He that is in his prime
to-day, honored and of credit, may be cut down
to-morrow
,
or even to-night, to bring the allusion more
closely to ourselves; and thine own parent is as
mortal as any reptile that creeps, or even as the
most worthless roisterer of the Electorate, that
wasteth his substance, the saving of some gainful
parent perhaps, in riotousness!
This is true, father, rejoined the girl, who,
though accustomed to the homely morality of the
good citizen, never before had heard the
Burgomaster
deal with so little deference to himself, and who
spoke in a lowered tone, as if the reflection of his
sudden humility produced a withering influence on
her own self-esteem. We are no better than the
poorest of Deurckheim, and scarcely as good as
poor Lottchen and Berchthold.
A stronger ejaculation betrayed Heinrich's
displeasure
.
Let these honest people alone, he answered;
since each must be saved or be damned on his own
account, let Lottchen and her son take such fare as
Providence shall send; we have just now serious
matters of great family concernment to occupy us.
I would reason with thee gravely, child, and
therefore
I have need of thy closest attention. It being
conceded that I am mortalan admission thou
mayest
be certain, Meta, I should not loosely make or
without necessityit follows, as a consequence, that,
sooner or later, I must be taken from thee, when
thou wilt be left an orphan. Now this great
calamity
may befall us both much sooner than thou
fanciest
;
for, I repeat it, we live in perilous times, when
hot-headedness and valor may any day bring a man
to a premature end.
The round arm of Meta clung more forcibly to
the body of the Burgomaster, who took the gentle
pressure as so much proof of his child's concern
in his suppositious end.
Why tell me of this, father? she exclaimed,
when thou knowest it only makes both unhappy!
Though young, it may be my fate to die first.
That is possible, but little probable, returned
Heinrich, with a melancholy air. Giving nature
a fair chance, it will be my turn to precede even thy
mother, since I have ten good years the start of
her; and as for thee, I greatly dread it will be, one
day, thy misfortune to be left an orphan. God knows
what will be the end of all these contentions that
now beset us, and therefore I hold it wise to be
prepared
.
Whenever the evil day of parting may
come, Meta, thou wilt be left with a sore companion
for one of tender years and little experience.
Father!
I mean money, child, which is a blessing, or a
curse, as it proveth. Were I taken suddenly away,
many idle and dissolute gallants would beset thee,
swearing by their mustachios and beards, that thou
wert dearer to them than the air they breathe, when
in truth their sole desire would be to look into the
leavings of the departed Burgomaster. There is
great difficulty in marrying one of thy neutral
condition
happily, for, while want of birth closeth the
door of the castle and the palace against thy
entrance
,
ample means give thee right to look beyond
the mere burgher. I would fain have one of good
hopes for a son-in-law, and yet no spendthrift.
That may not be so easy of accomplishment,
good father, returned Meta, laughing, for few girls
of her years listen to conjectures or plans
concerning
their future establishment, without a nervous
irritability
that easily takes the appearance of
merriment
to
me the world seems divided into those
who get and those who spend.
Or into the wise and foolish. There are three
great ingredients that commonly enter into all
marriages
of girls in thy condition, and without which
there is little hope of happiness, or even of
everyday
respect. The first is the means of livelihood,
the second is the consent and blessing of the parents,
and the third is equality of condition.
I had thought thee about to say something of
tastes and inclinations, father!
Idle conceit, child, that any whim may change.
Look at yonder peasant, who is trimming the Abbey
vinesdost think him less happy with his cup of sour
liquor, than if he quaffed of the best rhenish in
Bonifacius's
cellar? And yet, had the hind his choice,
doubt it not he would be ready to swear none but
the liquor of Hockheim should wet lip of his! The
fellow might make himself miserable, by mere dint
of fancy, were he once to set his mind on other
fare; but, taking life soberly and industriously, who
so content as he? Oh! I have often envied these
knaves their happiness, when vexation and losses
have weighed upon my spirits!
And wouldest thou change conditions with these
vine-trimmers, father?
What art thinking of, wench? Is there not such
a thing as order and propriety on earth?And this
brings me to my purpose. There has been question
to-day concerning some silliness, not to say
presumption
,
on the part of young Berchthold
Hintermayer
,
in wishing to couple his poverty with thy
means
The head of Meta fell abashed, and the arm,
which clasped the body of her father, trembled
perceptibly
.
I doubt that Berchthold has not thought of this,
she answered, in a voice but little above her breath,
though her respiration was very audible.
All the better for him, since such a desire would
he just as unreasonable as it would be, on thy part,
to wish to wed with Count Emich's heir.
Nay, that silly thought never crossed me!
exclaimed
Meta, frankly.
All the better for thee, girl, since the Herr von
Hartenburg has had the boy betrothed these many
years. Well, as we now understand each other so
well, leave me to my thoughts, for weighty matters
press on my mind.
So saying, Heinrich composed himself to
reflection
,
fully content with the parental lesson he had
just imparted to his daughter. But, in the few and
vague remarks that had fallen from the
Burgomaster
,
Meta found sufficient food for uncomfortable
conjecture for the rest of the ride.
During the short dialogue between Heinrich and
Meta, there had also been a discourse between Ulrike
and the crone that rode on her pillion. The
propensity
of old Ilse to talk, and the well-tried
indulgence
of her mistress, induced the former to break
silence the moment they were clear of the hamlet,
and were so far advanced beyond the rest of the
party, as to render it safe to speak freely.
Well, exclaimed the nurse, this hath been,
truly, a day! First had we matins in Deurckheim;
and then, the stirring words of Father Johan, with
the Abbey mass; and lastly, this high demeanor
of the Count Emich! I do not think, good wife, that
thou hast ever before seen the Burgomaster so
preferred
!
He is ever in the graces of the Herr von
Hartenburg
,
as thou mayest know, Ilse, returned
Heinrich's
partner, speaking like one that thought of
other things. I would that they were less friendly
at this moment.
Nay, therein thou dost little justice to thy
husband
.
It is honorable to be honored by the world's
honored, and thou shouldest wish the Burgomaster
favor with all such, though it were even with the
Emperor. But thou wert ever particular, even as
a child; and I should not deal too harshly with a
propensity that, coming as it were of nature, is not
without reason. Ah! Heaven is ever tender with
the good! Now, what a happy life is thine, Ulrike;
here canst thou go forth before all that were once
thy equals, a Burgomaster's companion,and not a
varlet between Deurckheim-gate, or indeed thine
own gate, and the hold of Hartenburg, shall stand
covered as thy steed shuffles past. This is it to be
fortunate! Then have we worthy Heinrich for a
Vol. II. C
master, and such another for keeping all in due
respect
,
is not to be seen in our town; and Meta, who,
beyond dispute, is both the fairest and the wisest of
her years among all the maidens, and thyself
scarcely
less blooming than of old, with such health and
contentment as might even disarm widowhood of
its sorrows. Ah! what a life hath been thine!
Ulrike seemed to arouse herself from a trance, as
the nurse thus chanted praises in honor of her good
fortune, and the sigh she drew, unconscious of its
meaning, was long and tremulous.
I complain not of my fate, good Ilse.
If thou didst, I would cause the beast to halt,
that I might quickly descend, for nothing good could
come of a journey so blasphemous! No, gratitude
before all other virtues, except humility; for
humility
leadeth to favors, and favor is the lawful parent
of gratitude itself. I would thou couldest have been
at my last shriving, Ulrike, and thou shouldest have
heard questions of nice meaning closely reasoned!
It happened that Father Johan was in the
confessional
,
and when he had got the little I had to say
of myself in the way of acknowledgment, (for, though
a great sinner like all human, it is little I can do
against Heaven at threescore and ten,) we came to
words concerning doctrine. The Monk maintained
that the best of us might fall away, so as to merit
condemnation; while I would have sworn, had it
been seemly to swear in such a place, that the late
Prior, than whom none better ever dwelt in
Limburg
,
always gave comfortable assurance of mercy
being safe, when fairly earned. I wonder not that
these heresies should be abroad, when the professed
throw this discouragement in the way of the old
and weak!
Thou art too apt, good Ilse, to dwell on
subtleties
,
when a meeker faith might better become thy
condition.
And what is this condition, prithee, that thou
namest it as a disqualifier? Am I not agedand
can any say better what is sin, or what not? Didst
thou know what sin was thyself, child, till I taught
thee? Am I not mortal, and therefore frailam I
not a woman, and therefore inquiringand am I
not aged, and therefore experienced? No, come to
me, an' thou wouldest get an insight into real sin
sin that hath much need of grace!
Well, let it be thus. But, Ilse, I would recall thy
mind to days long past, and take counsel of thy
experience in a matter that toucheth me nearly.
That must be some question of Meta; naught
else could touch a mother nearly.
Thou hast reason in part: 'tis of Meta, and of
us all, in sooth, that I would speak. Thou hast
now been to the Heidenmauer more than once with
our girl, in quest of the holy Anchorite?
Have I not! Thou mayest well say more than
once, since I have twice made that weary journey;
and few of my years would have come off so lightly
from the fatigue.
And what is said in the country round of the
holy manof his origin and history, I mean?
Much is said; and much that is good and
edifying
is said. It is thought that one blessing of his
is as good as two from the Abbey; for of him no
harm is known, whereas there is much reputed of
Limburg that had better not be true. For myself,
Ulrikeand I am one that does not treat these
matters lightlyI should go away with more surety
of favor with a single touch of the Hermit's hand,
than if honored with blows from all of Limburg.
But, from the account I except Father Arnolph, who,
if he be not an Anchorite, well deserves, from his
virtues, to be one. Oh! that is a man, were justice
done him, who ought never to taste other liquor
than water of the spring, or other food than bread,
hard as a rock?
And hast thou seen him of the Heidenmauer?
It hath been sufficient for me to be in sight of
his hut. I am none of those that cannot have a
good thing in possession, without using it up. I
have never laid eyes on the holy man, for that is a
virtue I keep in store against some of the sore evils
that beset all in age. Let any of the autumn plagues
come upon me, and thou shalt see in what manner
I will visit him!
Ilse, thou mayest yet remember the days of my
infancy, and hast some knowledge of most of the
events of Deurckheim for these many, many years?
I know not what thou callest infancy, but if it
mean the first cry thy feeble voice ever made, or
the first glance of thy twinkling eyes, I remember
both an' it were yesterday's vespers.
And thou hast not forgotten the youths and
maidens
that then sported at our merry-makings, and
were gay in their time, as these we see to-day?
Call you these gay? These are hired mourners
compared to those of my youth. You that have
been born in the last fifty years know little of mirth
and gaiety. If thou wouldest learn
Of this we can speak at another season. But
since thy memory remains so clear, thou canst not
have forgotten the young Herr von Ritterstein; he
that was well received of old within my father's
doors?
Ulrike spoke in a low voice, but the easy
movement
of the beast they rode suffered every word to
reach the ear of her companion.
Do I remember Odo von Ritterstein? exclaimed
the crone. Am I a heathen, to forget him or his
crime?
Poor Odo! Bitterly hath he repented that
transgression
in banishment, as I have heard. We may
hope that his offence is forgiven!
Of whomof Heaven? Never, as thou livest,
Ulrike, can such a crime be pardoned. It will be
twenty years this night since he did that deed, as all
in the Jaegerthal well know; for there have beer
masses and exorcisms without number said in the
Abbey-chapel on his account. What dost take
Heaven to be, that it can forget an offence like that!
It was a dreadful sin! answered Ulrike,
shuddering
,
for though she betrayed a desire to
exonerate
the supposed penitent, horror at his offence was
evidently uppermost in her mind.
It was blasphemy to God, and an outrage to
man. Let him look to it, I say, for his soul is in
cruel jeopardy!
A heavy sigh was the answer of the
Burgomaster's
wife.
I knew young Odo von Ritterstein well,
continued
the crone, and, though not ill gifted as to
outward
appearance, and of most seductive discourse
to all who would listen to a honied tongue, I can
boast of having read his inmost nature at our very
first acquaintance.
Thou understood a fearful mystery! half
whispered
Ulrike.
It was no mystery to one of my years and
experience. What is a comely face, and a noble
birth, and a jaunting air, and a bold eye, to your
woman that hath had her opportunities, and who
hath lived long? Nay, nayyoung Odo's soul was
read by me, as your mass-saying priest readeth his
missal; that is, with half a glance.
It is surprising that one of thy station should have
so quickly and so well understood him, that most
have found inexplicable. Thou knowest he was long
in favor with my parents?
Ay, and with thee, Ulrike; and this proves the
C 2
great difference of judgments. But not a single
day, nay not even an hour, was I mistaken in his
character. What was his name to me? They say
he had crusaders among his ancestors, and that
nobles of his lineage bore the sign of the cross, under
a hot sun and in a far land, in honor of God; but
none of this would I hear. I saw the man with
mine own eyes, and with mine own judgment did I
judge.
Thou sawest one, Ilse, of no displeasing mien.
So thought the young and light-minded. I deny
not his appearance; 'twas according to Heaven's
pleasurenor do I say aught against his readiness
in exercises, or any other esteemed and knightly
qualities, for I am not one to backbite a fallen enemy.
But he had a way! Now, when he came first to
visit thy father, here did he enter the presence of
the honest Burgomaster an' he had been the Elector,
instead of a mere Baron; and though there I stood,
waiting to do him reverence as became his rank
and my breeding, nay, doing him reverence, and
that oft repeated, not a look of grace, nor a thank,
nor a smile of condescension did I get, for my pains.
His eyes could not stoop to the old nurse, but were
fastened on the face of the young beauty, besides
many other levities.Oh! I quickly accounted him
for what he was!
He was of contradictory qualities.
Worse than thata hundred-fold worse. I can
count you up his graces in brief speechFirst was
he a roisterer, that never missed occasion to enter
into all debaucheries with the very monks he
dishonored
,
Nay, that I did never hear!
Is it reasonable to suppose otherwise, after what
we know of a certainty? Give me but one bold vice
in a man, and I will quickly show you all its
companions
.
And is this true? Ought we not rather to think
that most yield in their weakest points, while they
may continue to resist in their strongest?That
there are faults, which, inviting the world's
condemnation
,
produce indifference to the world's opinion,
may be true; but I hope few are so evil as not to
retain some portion of their good qualities.
Hadst thou ever seen a siege, good wife, thou
wouldest not say this. Here is your enemy, without
the ditch, shouting, and screaming, and doing his
worst to alarm the garrison.I say now but what
I have thrice seen here, in our very Deurckheim
but so long as the breach is not made, or the ladders
placed, each goes his way in the streets, quietly and
unharmed. But let the enemy once enter, though
it be but by a window, or down a chimney, open
fly the gates, and in pour the columns, horsemen and
footmen, till not a house escapes rifling, nor a
sanctuary
violation. Now this blasphemy of Herr Odo
was much as if a curtain of wall had fallen at once,
letting in whole battalions and squadrons of vices in
company.
That the act was fearful, is as certain as that it
was heavily punished; but still may it have been the
fault of momentary folly, or of provoked
resentment
.
It was blasphemy, and as such it is punished;
why then say more in its defence? Here cometh
Meta within call, and it were well she should not
hear her mother justify sin. Remember thou art a
mother, and bear thy charge with prudence.
As the horse ridden by the Burgomaster and his
daughter drew near, Ulrike ceased speaking, with
the patient forbearance that distinguished her
intercourse
with the old woman. And during the rest
of the ride, little more passed among the equestrians.
On reaching his own abode, however, Heinrich
hastened to hold a secret council with the chief men
of the place.
The remainder of the day passed as was wont in
the towns of that age. The archers practised with
their bows, without the walls; the more trained
arquebusiers were exercised with their unwieldy but
comparatively dangerous weapons; the youthful of
the two sexes danced, while the wine-houses were
thronged with artisans, who quaffed, after the toil
of the week, the cheap and healthful liquor of the
Palatinate, in a heavy animal enjoyment. Here and
there a monk of the neighboring Abbey appeared in
the streets, though it was with an air less
authoritative
and assured, than before the open promulgation
of the opinions of Luther had brought into question
so many of the practices of the prevailing Church.
CHAPTER III.
Thus I renounce the world and worldly things.
Rogers.
It
will be remembered, that the time of this tale
was in the winning month of June. When the sun
had fallen beneath those vast and fertile plains of
the west, among which the Rhine winds its way, a
swift and turbid though noble current, that, like
some bold mountaineer, has made a descent from
the passes of Switzerland, to gather tribute from
every valley on his passage, there remained in the
air the bland and seductive warmth of the season.
Still the evening was not a calm moonlight night, like
those which grace a more alluring climate; but
there reigned in its quiet, a character of sombre
repose that constantly reminded all of the hour. It
seemed a moment more adapted to rest than to
indulgence
.
The simple habits of Deurckheim caused
its burghers to shut their doors early, and, as usual,
the gates of the town were closed when the bells
sounded the stroke of eight. The peasants of the
Jaegerthal had not even waited so long, before they
sought their beds.
It was, however, near ten, when a private door
in the dwelling of Heinrich Frey opened, and a
party of three individuals issued into the street. All
were so closely muffled as effectually to conceal
their persons. The leader, a man, paused to see
that the way was clear, and then, beckoning to his
companions, who were of the other sex, to follow,
he pursued his way within the shadows thrown from
the houses. It was not long ere they all reached
the gate of the town, which opened to the hill of
the Heidenmauer.
There was a stronger watch afoot that night, than
was usual in Deurckheim, though the city, and
especially
at a moment when armies ravaged the
Palatinate, was never left without a proper guard.
A few armed men paced the street, at the point
where it terminated with the defences, and a sentinel
was visible on the superior wall.
Who cometh? demanded an arquebusier.
The muffled man approached, and spoke to the
leader of the guard in a low voice. It would seem,
that he spoke him fair; for no sooner did he utter
the little he had to say, than a bustle among the
citizens announced an eager desire to do his
pleasure
.
The keys were produced, and a way made
for the exit of the party. But the man went no
farther. Having procured the egress of his
companions
,
he returned into the town, stopping, however,
to hold discourse with those on watch, before he
disappeared.
When without the gate, the females began to ascend.
The way was difficult, for it lay among terraces
and vineyards, by means of winding narrow
footpaths
,
and, as it appeared, the limbs of those who
were now obliged to thread them, felt all the
difficulties
of the steep acclivity. At length, though not
without often stopping to breathe and rest, they
reached the fallen pile of the ancient wall of the
camp. Here both seated themselves, to recover
their strength, in profound silence. They had
mounted by means of a path that conducted them
towards that extremity of the mountain which
overlooked
the valley of our tale.
The sky was covered with fleecy clouds, that
dimmed
the light of the moon so as to render objects
beneath uncertain and dull; though occasionally the
mild orb seemed to sail into a little field of blue,
shedding all its light below. But these momentary
illuminations were too fitful to permit the eye to
become
accustomed to the change, and ere any saw
distinctly, the driving vapor would again intercept
the rays. To this melancholy character of the hour,
must be added the plaintive sound of a night-breeze,
which audibly rustled the cedars.
A heavy respiration from the one of the two who,
by her air and attire, was evidently the superior,
was taken by the other as a permission to speak.
Well, thrice in my life have I mounted this hill,
at night! she said: and few of my years could
do the deed, by the light of the sun
Hist, Ilse! Hearest thou naught uncommon?
Naught but mine own voice, which, for so mute
a person, is, in sooth, of little wont,
Truly, there is other sound! Come hither to the
ruin; I fear we are abroad at a perilous moment!
As both arose, there was but a minute before their
persons were concealed in such a manner as to
render
it little probable that any but a very curious eye
would remark their presence. It was evident that
many footsteps were approaching, and nearly in
their direction. Ilse trembled, but her companion,
more self-possessed, and better supported by her
reason, was as much or even more excited by
curiosity
than by fear. The ruined hut, in which they
stood, was within the cover of the cedars, where
a dull light alone penetrated. By means of this
light, however, a band of men was seen moving
across the camp. They came in pairs, and their
march was swift and nearly noiseless. The
glittering
of a morion, as it passed beneath some opening
in the trees, and the reclining arquebuses, no less
than their order, showed them to be warriors.
The line was long, extending to some hundreds
of men. They came, in this swift and silent
manner
,
from the direction of the Jaegerthal, and passed
away, among the melancholy cedars, in that of the
plain of the Rhine.
When the last of this long and ghost-like band
had disappeared, Ilse appeared to revive.
In very sooth, she said, they seem to be
men! Do they, too, come to visit the Holy Hermit?
Believe it not. They have gone down by the
rear of Deurckheim, and will soon be beyond our
wishes, or our fears.
Lady! Of what origin are theyand on what
errand do they come?
This exclamation of old Ilse sufficiently betrayed
the nature of her own doubts, though the firmness
of her companion's manner proved that, now the
armed men were gone, she no longer felt distrust.
This may, or may not, be a happy omen, she
answered, musingly. There was a goodly
number
,
and warriors, too, of fair appearance!
Thrice have I visited this camp at night, and
never before has it been my fate to view its tenants!
Thinkest thou they were Romansor are they the
followers of the Hun?
They were living menbut let us not forget
our errand.
Without permitting further discourse, the superior
of the two then took the way towards the hut of the
Hermit. At first her footstep was timid and
unassured
;
for, strengthened as she was by reflection
and knowledge, the sudden and sprite-like passage
of such a line of warriors across the deserted camp,
was indeed likely to affect the confidence of one
even more bold.
Rest thy old limbs on this bit of fallen wall, good
nurse, said the muffled female, while I go within.
Thou wilt await me here.
Go, of Heaven's mercy! and speak the holy
Anchorite fair. Take what thou canst of comfort
and peace for thine own soul, and if there should be
a blessing, or a relic more than thou needest,
remember
her who fondled thy infancy, and who, I
may say, and say it I do with pride, made thee the
woman of virtue and merit thou art.
God be with theeand with me! murmured
the female, as she moved slowly away.
The visitor of the Anchorite hesitated at the door
of his hut. Encouraged by sounds within, and
certain
that the holy man was still afoot, by the strong
light that shone through the fissures of the wall, she
at length summoned resolution to knock.
Enter, of God's will! returned a voice from
within.
The door opened, and the female stood
confronted
to the person of the Anchorite. The cloak and
hood both fell from the female's head, as by an
involuntary
weakness of her handsand each stood
gazing long, wistfully, and perhaps in doubt, at the
other. The female, more prepared for the interview,
was the first to speak.
Odo! she said, with melancholy emphasis.
Ulrike!
Eye then studied eye, in that eager and painful
gaze, with which the memory traces the changes
that time and the passions produce in the human
face. In that of Ulrike, however, there was little
to be noted but the development of more mature
womanhood, with such a shadowing of thought as
deeper reflection and diminished hopes are apt to
bring; but, had she not been apprized of the person
of him she sought, and had her memory not retained
so vivid an impression of the past, it is probable
that the wife of Heinrich Frey might not have
recognized
the features of the gayest and handsomest
cavalier of the Palatinate, in the sunken but still
glowing eye, the grizzled beard, and the worn though
bold lineaments of the Anchorite.
Thou Odo, and a penitent! Ulrike added.
One of a stricken soul. Thou seest me, sworn
to mortifications and sorrow.
If repentance come at all, let it be welcome.
Thou leanest on a rock, and thy soul will be upheld.
The Recluse made a vague gesture, which his
companion believed to be the usual sign of the cross.
She meekly imitated the symbol, and, bowing her
head, repeated an
ave
. In all great changes in
religions
and politics, the spirit of party attaches
importance
to immaterial things, which, by practice
and convention, come to be considered as the
evidences
of opinion. Thus it is, when revolutions are
sudden and violent, that so many mistake their
symbols
for their substance, and men cast their lives on
the hazards of battle, in order to support an empty
name, a particular disposition of colors in an ensign,
or some idle significations of terms that were never
well explained, long after the real merits of the
controversy have been lost by the cupidity and
falsehood
of those intrusted with the public welfare;
and thus it is, that here, where all change has been
gradual and certain, that the neglect of these trifles
has subjected the country to the imputation of
inconsistency
,
because, in attending so much to the
Vol. II. D
substance of their work, it has overlooked so many
of those outward signs, which, by being the
instruments
of excitement in other regions, obtain a value
that has no influence among ourselves. The
Reformation
made early and rude inroads upon the
formula
of the Romish church. The cross ceased to
be a sign in favor with the Protestant; and, after
three centuries, it is just beginning to be admitted
that this sacred symbol is a more fitting ornament
of one of those silent fingers pointing to the skies,
which so touchingly adorn our churches, than the
representation of a barn-yard fowl! Had Ulrike
been more critical in this sort of distinctions, or had
her mind been less occupied with her own sad
reflections
,
she might have thought the movement of
the Hermit's hand, when he made the sign alluded
to, had such a manner of indecision and doubt, as
equally denotes one new in practices of this nature,
or one about to abandon any long-established ritual.
As it was, however, she noted nothing extraordinary,
but silently took the seat to which the Anchorite
pointed, while he placed himself on another.
The earnest, wistful, and half mournful look of
each was renewed. They sat apart, with the torch
throwing its light fully upon both.
Grief hath borne heavily upon thee, Odo, said
Ulrike. Thou art much changed!
And innocence and happiness have dealt
tenderly
by thee! Thou hast well merited this favor,
Ulrike.
Art thou long of this manner of lifeor touch
I on a subject that may not be treated?
I know not that I may refuse to give the world
the profit of my lessonmuch less can I pretend to
mystery with thee.
I would gladly give thee consolation. Thou
knowest there is great comfort in sympathy.
Thy pity is next to the love of angelsbut why
speak of this? Thou art in the hut of a Hermit
condemned, of his own conscience, to privation and
penitence. Go to thy happy home, and leave me
to the solemn duty which I have allotted to be done
this night.
As he spoke, the Anchorite folded his head in a
mantle of coarse cloth, for he was evidently clad
to go abroad, and he groaned.
Nay, Odo, I quit thee not, in this humor of thy
mind. The sight of me hath added to thy grief,
and it were uncharitablemore, it were unkind, to
leave thee thus.
What wouldest thou, Ulrike?
Disburthen thy soul; this life of seclusion hath
heaped a load too heavy on thy thoughts. Where
hast thou passed the years of thy prime, Odowhat
hath brought thee to this condition of bitterness?
Hast thou still so much of womanly mercy, as
to feel an interest in the fate of an outcast?
The paleness of Ulrike's cheek was succeeded by
a mild glow. It was no sign of tumultuous feeling,
but a gentle proof that a heart like hers never lost
the affinities it had once fondly and warmly
cherished
.
Can I forget the past? she answered. Wert
thou not the friend of my youthnay, wert thou not
my betrothed?
And dost thou acknowledge those long-cherished
ties? Oh Ulrike! with what maddened folly did I
throw away a jewel beyond price! But listen, and
thou shalt know in what manner God hath avenged
himself and thee.
The Burgomaster's wife, though secretly much
agitated, sat patiently awaiting, while the Hermit
seemed preparing his mind for the revelation he was
about to make.
Thou hast no need to hear aught of my youth,
he at length commenced. Thou well knowest that,
an orphan from childhood, of no mean estate, and
of noble birth, I entered on life exposed to all the
hazards that beset the young and thoughtless. I had
most of the generous impulses of one devoid of care,
and a heart that was not needlessly shut against
sympathy with the injured, and, I think, I may say
one that was not closed against compassion
Thou dost not justice to thyself, Odo! Say that
thy hand was open, and thy heart filled with
gentleness
.
The Anchorite, humbled as he was by penitence
and self-devotion, did not hear this opinion, uttered
by lips so gentle and so true, without a change of
features. His eye lighted, and for a moment it gazed
towards his companion with some of its former
bright youthful expression. But the change escaped
Ulrike, who was occupied with the generous impulse
that caused her, thus involuntarily, to vindicate the
Hermit to himself.
It might have been so, the latter resumed, coldly,
after a moment of thought; but in youth, unless
watched and wisely directed, our best qualities may
become instruments of our fall. I was of violent
passions above all; miserable traces in that unerring
index, the countenance, prove how violent!
Ulrike had no answer to this remark; for she had
felt how easy it is for the strong of character to
attach the mild, and how common it is for the human
heart to set value on qualities that serve to throw its
own into relief.
When I knew thee, Ulrike, the influence of thy
gentleness, the interest thou gavest me reason to
believe thou felt in my happiness, and the reverence
which the young of our sex so readily pay to
innocence
,
and beauty, and faith, in thine, served to
tame the lion of my reckless temper, and to bring
me, for a time, in subjection to thy gentleness.
His companion looked grateful for his praise, but
she remained silent.
The tie between the young and guiltless is one
of nature's holiest mysteries! I loved thee, Ulrike,
purely, and in perfect faith! The reverence I bear,
here in my solitude and penance, to these signs of
sacred character, is not deeper, less tinctured with
human passion, or more fervent, than the respect I
felt for thy virgin innocence!
Ulrike trembled, but it was like the leaf quivering
at the passage of a breath of air.
For this I gave thee credit, Odo, she whispered,
evidently afraid to trust her voice.
Thou didst me justice. When thy parents
consented
to our union, I looked forward to the
marriage
with blessed hope; for young though I was, I
so well understood myself, as to foresee that some
spirit, persuasive, good, and yet firm as thine, was
necessary to tame me. Woman winds herself about
the heart of man by her tenderness, nay, by her
very dependence, in a manner to effect that which
his pride would refuse to a power more evident.
And couldst thou feel all this?
Ulrike, I felt more, was convinced of more,
and dreaded more, than I ever dared avow. But
all feelings of pride are now past. What further
shall I say? Thou knowest the manner in which
bold spirits began to assail the mysteries and dogmas
of the venerable Church that has so long governed
Christendom, and that some were so hardy as to
anticipate the reasonings and changes of more
prudent
heads, by rash acts. 'Tis ever thus with young
and heated reformers of abuses. Seeing naught
but the wrong, they forget the means by which it
has been produced, and overlook the sufficient
causes which may mitigate, if they do not justify,
the evil.
And this unhappily was thy temper?
D 2
I deny it not. Young, and without knowledge
of the various causes that temper every theory
when reduced to practice, I looked eagerly to the
end alone.
Though Ulrike longed to extort some apology
from the penitent for his own failings, she continued
silent. After minutes of thought, the discourse at
length proceeded.
There were some among thy friends, Odo, who
believed the outrage less than the convent reported?
They trusted too much to their wishes, said
the Anchorite, in a subdued tone. It is most true,
that, heated with wine, and maddened with anger, I
did violence, in presence of my armed followers, to
those sacred elements which Catholics so reverence.
In a moment of inebriated frenzy, I believed the
hoarse applause of drunken parasites, and the
confusion
of a priest, of more account than the just
anger of God! I impiously trampled on the host,
and sorely hath God since trampled on my spirit!
Poor Odo!That wicked act changed the course
of both our lives! and dost thou now adore that
Being to whom this great indignity was offered
Hast thy mind returned to the faith of thy youth?
Tis not necessary, in order to feel the burthen
of my guilt! exclaimed the Anchorite, whose eye
began to lose the human expression which had been
kindled by communion with this gentle being, in
gleamings of a remorse that had been so long
fed by habits of morbid devotion. Is not the Lord
of the universe my God? The insult was to him;
whether there be error in this or that form of
devotion
,
I was in his temple, at the foot of his altar, in
the presence of his spiritThere did I mock his
rule, and defy his power; and this for a silly triumph
over a terrified monk!
Heart-stricken Odo! Where soughtest thou
refuge, after the frantic act?
The Anchorite looked intently at his companion,
as if a flood of distressing and touching images
were pressing painfully upon his memory. My
first thought was of thee, he said; the rash blow
of my sword was no sooner given, than it seemed
suddenly to open an abyss between us. I knew thy
gentle piety, and could not, even in that moment of
frenzy, deceive myself as to thy decision. When
in a place of safety, I wrote the letter which thou
answered, and which answer was so firm and
admirable
a mixture of holy horror and womanly
feeling. When thou renounced me, I became a
vagrant on earth, and from that hour to the moment
of my return hither, have I been a wanderer. Much
influence and heavy fines saved my estates, which
the life of a pilgrim and a soldier has greatly
augmented
,
but never till this summer have I felt the
courage necessary to revisit the scenes of my youth.
And whither strayed thou, Odo?
I have sought relief in every device of man:
the gaiety and dissipation of capitalshermitages
(for this is but the fourth of which I am the tenant)
armsand rude hazards by sea. Of late have I
much occupied myself in the defence of Rhodes,
that unhappy and fallen bulwark of Christendom.
But wherever I have dwelt, or in whatever
occupation
I have sought relief, the recollection of my
crime, and of its punishment, pursues me. Ulrike, I
am a man of woe!
Nay, dear Odo, there is mercy for offenders
more heavy than thou. Thou wilt return to thy
long-deserted castle, and be at peace.
And thou, Ulrike! hath my crime caused thee
sorrow? Thou, at least, art happy?
The question caused the wife of Heinrich Frey
uneasiness. Her sentiments towards Odo von
Ritterstein
had partaken of passion, and were still clothed
with hues of the imagination; while her attachment
to the Burgomaster ran in the smoother channel of
duty and habit:Still time, a high sense of her sex's
obligations, and the common bond of Meta, kept
her feelings in the subdued state which most fitted
her present condition. Had her will been consulted,
she would not have touched on this portion of the
subject at all; but since it was introduced, she felt
the absolute necessity of meeting it with composure.
I am happy in an honest husband and an
affectionate
child, she said; set thy heart at rest on
this accountwe were not fitted for each other,
Odo; thy birth, alone, offered obstacles we might
not properly have overcome.
The Anchorite bowed his head, appearing to
respect her reserve. The silence that succeeded
was not free from embarrassment. It was relieved
by the tones of a bell that came from the hill of
Limburg. The Anchorite arose, and all other
feeling
was evidently lost in a sudden return of that
diseased repentance which had so long haunted him,
and which, in truth, had more than once gone nigh
to unsettle his reason.
That signal, Ulrike, is for me.
And dost thou go forth to Limburg at this hour?
An humble penitent. I have made my peace
with the Benedictines by means of gold, and I go
to struggle for my peace with God. This is the
anniversary of my crime, and there will be
midnight
masses for its expiation.
The wife of Heinrich Frey heard of his intention
without surprise, though she regretted the sudden
interruption of their interview.
Odo, thy blessing! said Ulrike, kneeling.
Thou, ask this mockery of me! cried the
Hermit
,
wildly.Go, Ulrike!leave me with my sins.
The Anchorite appeared irresolute for a moment,
and then he rushed madly from the hut, leaving the
wife of Heinrich Frey still kneeling in its centre.
CHAPTER IV.
Mona, thy Druid rites awake the dead!
Rogers.
Ulrike
was in the habit of making frequent and
earnest appeals to God, and she now prayed
fervently
,
where she knelt. Her attention was recalled
to earth, by a violent shaking of the shoulder.
Ulrike, child!Frau Frey! exclaimed the
assiduous
Ilse.Art glued to the ground by
necromancy
?
Why art thou here, and whither hath the
holy man sped?
Sawest thou Odo von Ritterstein?
Whom! Art mad, Frau? I saw none but the
blessed Anchorite, who passed me an' he were an
angel taking wing for heaven; and though I knelt
and beseeched but a look of grace, his soul was too
much occupied with its mission to note a sinner.
Had I been evil as some that might be named, this
slight might give some alarm; but being that I am,
I set it down rather to the account of merit than to
that of any need. Nay, I saw naught but the
Hermit.
Then didst thou see the unhappy Herr von
Ritterstein
!
Ilse stood aghast.
Have we harbored a wolf in sheep's clothing!
she cried, when the power of speech returned.
Hath the Palatinate knelt, and wept, and prayed at
the feet of a sinner, like ourselvesnay, even worse
than ourselves, after all! Hath what hath passed
for true coin been naught but base metalour
unction
,
hypocrisyour hopes, wicked delusionsour
holy pride, vanity?
Thou sawest Odo von Ritterstein, Ilse, returned
Ulrike, rising, but thou sawest a devout man.
Then giving her arm to the nurse, for of the two
the attendant most required assistance, she took the
way from the hut. While walking among the fallen
walls of the deserted camp, Ulrike endeavored to
bring her companion to consider the character and
former sins of the Anchorite with more lenity. The
task was not easy, for Ilse had been accustomed to
think the truant Odo altogether abandoned of God,
and opinions that have been pertinaciously
maintained
for twenty years, are not gotten rid of in a
moment. Still there is a process by which the
human
mind can be made to do more than justice,
when prejudice is finally eradicated. It is by this
species of reaction, that we see the same individuals
now reprobated as monsters, and now admired as
heroes; the common sentiment as rarely doing strict
justice in excessive applause as in excessive
condemnation
.
We do not mean to say, however, that the
sentiment of Ilse towards the Anchorite underwent
this violent revulsion from detestation to reverence;
for the utmost that Ulrike could obtain in his
favor
,
was an admission that he was a sinner in
whose behalf all devout Christians might without
any manifest impropriety occasionally say an
ave
.
This small concession of Ilse sufficiently favored the
wishes of her mistress, which were to follow the
Hermit to the Abbey church, to kneel at its altars,
and to mingle her prayers with those of the penitent,
on this the anniversary of his crime, for pardon
and peace. We pretend not to show by what cord
of human infirmity the wife of Heinrich Frey was
led into the indulgence of a sympathy so delicate,
with one to whom her hand had formerly been
plighted; for we are not acting here in the capacity
of censors of female propriety, but as those who
endeavor to expose the workings of the heart, be
they for good or be they for evil. It is sufficient
for our object, that the result of the whole picture
shall be a lesson favorable to virtue and truth.
So soon as Ulrike found she could lead her
companion
in the way she wished, without incurring the
risk of listening to stale morals dealt out with a
profuse garrulity, she took the path directly towards
the convent. As the reader has most probably
perused
our Introduction, there is no necessity of
saying
more than that Ulrike and her attendant
proceeded
by the route we ourselves took in going from
one mountain to the other. But the progress of Ilse
was far slower than that described as our own, in
ascending to the Heidenmauer under the guidance
of Christian Kinzel. The descent itself was long
and slow, for one of her infirmities and years, and
the ascent far more tedious and painful. During
the latter, even Ulrike was glad to halt often, to
recover breath, though they went up by the
horse-path
over which they had ridden in the morning.
The character of the night had not changed.
The moon appeared to wade among fleecy clouds
as before, and the light was misty but sufficient to
render the path distinct. At this hour, the pile of
the convent loomed against the sky, with its dark
Gothic walls and towers, resembling a work of
giants, in which those who had reared the structure
were reposing from their labors. Accustomed as
she was to worship at its altars, Ulrike did not now
approach the gate without a sentiment of admiration.
She raised her eyes to the closed portal, to the long
ranges of dark and sweeping walls, and
everywhere
she met evidences of midnight tranquillity.
There was a faint glow upon the side of the narrow,
giddy tower, that contained the bells, and which
flanked the gate; and she knew that it came from a
lamp that burnt before the image of the Virgin in
the court. This gave no sign that even the porter
was awake. She stepped, however, to the wicket,
and rang the night-bell. The grating of the bolts
quickly announced the presence of one within.
Who cometh to Limburg at this hour?
demanded
the porter, holding the wicket chained, as if
distrusting
treachery.
A penitent to pray.
The tones of the voice assured the keeper of the
gate, who had means also of examining the stranger
with the eye, and he so far opened the wicket as to
permit the form of Ulrike to be distinctly seen.
It is not usual to admit thy sex within these
holy walls, after the morning mass hath been said,
and the confessionals are empty.
There are occasions on which the rule may be
broken, and the solemn ceremony of to-night is one.
I know not that.Our reverend Abbot is severe
in the observance of all decencies,
Nay, I am one closely allied to him in whose
behalf this service is given, said Ulrike, hastily.
Repel me not, for the love of God!
Art thou of his kin and blood?
Not of that tie, she answered, in the checked
manner of one who felt her own precipitation, but
bound to his hopes by the near interests of affection
and sympathy.
She paused, for at that instant the form of the
Anchorite filled the space beside the porter. He
had been kneeling before the image of a crucifix
hard by, and had been called from his prayers by
the soft appeal that betrayed Ulrike's interest in him,
every tone of which went to his heart.
She is mine, he said, authoritatively;she
and her attendant are both mine.Let them enter!
Ulrike hesitatedshe scarce knew why,and
Ilse, wearied with her efforts, and impatient to be at
rest, was obliged to impel her forward. The
Hermit
,
as if suddenly recalled to the duty on which
he had come to the convent, turned and glided away.
The porter, who had received his instructions
relative
to him for whom the mass was to be said,
offered
no further obstacle, but permitted Ilse to
conduct
her mistress within. No sooner were the
females
in the court, than he closed and barred the
wicket.
Ulrike hesitated no longer, though she trembled
in every limb. Dragging the loitering Ilse after her,
with difficulty, she took the way directly towards the
door of the chapel. With the exception of the
porter at the wicket, and the lamp before the
Virgin
,
all seemed as dim and still within as it had been
without the Abbey-walls. Not even a sentinel of
Duke Friedrich's men-at-arms was visible; but this
occasioned no surprise, as these troops were known
to keep as much aloof from the more religious part
of the tenants of Limburg, as was possible. The
spacious buildings, in the rear of the Abbot's
dwelling
,
might well have lodged double their number,
and in these it was probable they were now housed.
As for the monks, the lateness of the hour, and the
nature of the approaching service, fully accounted
for their absence.
The door of the Abbey-church was always open.
This usage is nearly common to every Catholic place
of worship in towns of any size, and it contains an
affecting appeal, to the passenger, to remember the
Being in whose honor the temple has been raised.
The custom is, in general, turned to account equally
by the pious and the inquisitive, the amateur of the
arts, and the worshipper of God; and it is to be
regretted
that the former, more especially when they
belong to a different persuasion or sect, should not
oftener remember, that their taste becomes bad,
when it is indulged at the expense of that reverence
which should mark all the conduct of man in the
immediate presence of his Creator. On the present
occasion, however, there were none present to
Vol. II. E
treat either the altar or its worship with levity.
When Ulrike and Ilse entered the chapel, the candles
of the great altar were lighted, and the lamps of
the choir threw a gloomy illumination on its sombre
architecture. The fretted and painted vault above,
the carved oak of the stalls, the images of the altar,
and the grave and kneeling warriors in stone, that
decorated the tombs, stood out prominent in the
relief
of their own deep shadows.
If it be desirable to quicken devotion by physical
auxiliaries, surely all that was necessary to reduce
the mind to deep and contemplative awe existed
here. The officials of the altar swept past the
gorgeous
and consecrated structure, in their robes of
duty; grave, expectant monks were in their stalls,
and Boniface himself sat on his throne, mitred and
clad in vestments of embroidery. It is possible that
an inquisitive and hostile eye might have detected
in some weary countenance or heavy eyelid,
longings
for the pillow, and little sympathy in the offices;
but there were others who entered on their duties
with zeal and conviction. Among the last was
Father Arnolph, whose pale features and thoughtful
eye were seen in his stall, where he sat regarding
the preparations with the tranquil patience of one
accustomed to seek his happiness in the duties of
his vow. To him might be put in contrast the
unquiet
organs and severe, rather than mortified,
lineaments
of Father Johan, who glanced hurriedly from
the altar, and its rich decorations, to the spot where
the Anchorite knelt, as if to calculate to what degree
of humiliation and bitterness it were possible to
reduce the bruised spirit of the penitent.
Odo of Ritterstein, for there no longer remains a
reason for refusing to the Anchorite his proper
appellation
,
had placed himself near the railing at the
foot of the choir, on his knees, where he continued
with his eyes fixed on the golden vessel that
contained
the consecrated host he had once outraged
the offence which he had now come, as much as in
him lay, to expiate. The light fell but faintly on his
form, but it served to render every furrow that grief
and passion had drawn athwart his features more
evident. Ulrike studied his countenance, seen as it
was in circumstances of so little flattery; and,
trembling, she knelt by the side of Ilse, on the other
side of the little gate that served to communicate
between the body of the church and the choir. Just
as she had assumed this posture, Gottlob stole from
among the pillars, and knelt in the distance, on the
flags of the great aisle. He had come to the mass
as a ceremony refused to none.
So strong was the light around the altar, and so
obscure the aisles below, that it was with difficulty
Bonifacius could assure himself of the presence of
him in whose behalf this office was had. But when,
by contracting his heavy front, so as to form a sort
of screen of his shaggy brows, he was enabled to
distinguish the form of Odo, he seemed satisfied, and
motioned for the worship to proceed.
There is little need to repeat the details of a
ceremony
it has been our office already to relate in
these pages; but as the music and other services
had place in the quiet and calm of midnight, they
were doubly touching and solemn. There was the
same power of the single voice as in the morning,
or rather on the preceding day, for the turn of the
night was now passed, and the same startling effect
was produced, even on those who were accustomed
to its thrilling and superhuman melody. As the
mass proceeded, the groans of the Anchorite became
so audible, that, at times, these throes of sorrow
threatened to interrupt the ceremonies. The heart
of Ulrike responded to each sigh that escaped the
bosom of Odo, and, ere the first prayers were ended,
her face was bathed in tears.
The examination of the different countenances of
the brotherhood, during this scene, would have been
a study worthy of a deep inquirer into the varieties
of human character, or of those who love to trace
the various forms in which the same causes work
on different tempers. Each groan of the Anchorite
lighted the glowing features of Father Johan with a
species of holy delight, as if he triumphed in the
power of the offices; and, at each minute, his head
was bent inquiringly in the direction of the railing,
while his ear listened eagerly for the smallest sound
that might favor his desires. On the other hand,
the workings of the Prior's features were those of
sorrow and sympathy. Every sigh that reached
him awakened a feeling of pityblended with pious
joy, it is truebut a pity that was deep, distinct,
and human. Bonifacius listened like one in authority,
coldly, and with little concern in what passed,
beyond
that which was attached to a proper
observance
of the ritual; and, from time to time, he bent
his head on his hand, while he evidently pondered
on things that had little connexion with what was
passing before his eyes. Others of the fraternity
manifested more or less of devotion, according to
their several characters; and a few found means to
obtain portions of sleep, as the rites admitted of the
indulgence.
In this manner did the community of Limburg
pass the first hours of the day, or rather of the
morning, that succeeded the sabbath of this tale. It
may have been, afterwards, source of consolation
to those among them that were most zealous in the
observance of their vows, that they were thus
passed
;
for events were near that had a lasting
influence
not only on their own destinies, but on those
of the very region in which they dwelt.
The strains of the last hymn were rising into the
vault above the choir, when, amid the calm that
exquisite voice never failed to produce, there came
a low rushing sound, which might have been taken
for the murmuring of wind, or for the suppressed
hum of a hundred voices. When it was first heard,
stealing among the ribbed arches of the chapel, the
cow-herd arose from his knees, and disappeared in
the gloomy depths of the church. The monks turned
their heads, as by a general impulse, to listen, but
the common action was as quickly succeeded by
grave attention to the rites. Bonifacius, indeed,
seemed uneasy, though it was like a man who scarce
knew why. His gray eyes roamed over the body
of darkness that reigned among the distant columns
of the church, and then they settled, with vacancy,
on the gorgeous vessels of the altar. The hymn
continued, and its soothing power appeared to quiet
every mind, when the sound of tumult at the great
gate of the outer wall became too audible and
distinct
to admit of doubt. The whole brotherhood
arose as a man, and the voice of the singer was
mute. Ulrike clasped her hands in agony, while
even Odo of Ritterstein forgot his grief, in the rude
nature of the interruption.
E 2
CHAPTER V.
Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason!
Twelfth Night
.
It
is scarcely necessary to explain, that the man
who had accompanied Ulrike and Ilse to the gate
of Deurckheim, was Heinrich Frey. No sooner
had his wife disappeared, and his short conference
with the men on watch was ended, than the
Burgomaster
hurried towards that quarter of the town
which lay nearest to the entrance of the Jaegerthal.
Here he found collected a band of a hundred
burghers, chosen from among their townsmen, for
resolution and physical force. They were all
equipped
,
according to the fashion of the times, with such
weapons of offence as suited their several habits and
experience. We might also add, that, as each good
man, on going forth on the present occasion, had
seen fit to consult his bosom's partner, there was
more than the usual display of headpieces, and
breastplates, and bucklers.
When with his followers, and assured of their
exactitude and numbers, the Burgomaster, who was
a man nowise deficient in courage, ordered the
postern to be opened, and issued first himself into
the field. The townsmen succeeded in their allotted
order, observing the most profound silence. Instead
of taking the direct road to the gorge, Heinrich
crossed the rivulet, by a private bridge, pursuing a
footpath that led him up the ascent of the most
advanced
of the mountains, on that side of the valley.
The reader will understand, that this movement
placed the party on the hill which lay directly
opposite
to that of the Heidenmauer. At the period of the
tale, cedars grew on the two mountains alike, and
the townsmen, of course, had the advantage of
being
concealed from observation. A half-hour was
necessary to effect this lodgment, with sufficient
caution and secrecy; but once made, the whole
band seemed to consider itself beyond the danger
of discovery. The men then continued the march
with less attention to order and silence, and even
their leaders began to indulge in discourse. Their
conversation was, however, guarded, like that of
those who felt they were engaged in an enterprise
of hazard.
'Tis said, neighbor Dietrich, commenced the
Burgomaster, speaking to a sturdy smith, who acted
on this occasion as lieutenant to the
commander-in-chief
,
an honor that was mainly due to the power
of his arm, and who, emboldened by his temporary
rank, had advanced nearly to Heinrich's side, 'Tis
said, neighbor Dietrich, that these Benedictines are
like bees, who never go forth but in the season of
plenty, and rarely return without rich contribution
to their hive. Thou art a reflecting and solid
townsman
;
one that is little moved by the light opinions
of the idle, and a burgher that knoweth his own
rights, which is as much as to say, his own interests,
and one that well understandeth the necessity of
preserving all of our venerable usages and laws, at
least in such matters as touch the permanency of
the welfare of those that may lay claim to have a
welfare. I speak not now of the varlets who
belong
,
as it were, neither to heaven nor earth, being
condemned of both to the misery of houseless and
irresponsible knaves; but of men of substance, that,
like thee and thy craft, pay scot and lot, keep bed
and board, and are otherwise to be marked for their
usefulness and natural rights;and this brings me
to my point, which is neither more nor less than to
say, that God hath created all men equal, and
therefore
it is our right, no less than our duty, to see that
Deurckheim is not wronged, especially in that part
of her interests that belong, in particularity, to her
substantial inhabitants. Do I say that which is
reasonable
,
or do I deceive both myself and thee, friend
smith?
Heinrich had a reputation for eloquence and logic,
especially among his own partisans, and his appeal
was now made to one who was little likely to refuse
him any honor. Dietrich was one of those animal
philosophers who seem specially qualified by nature
to sustain a parliamentary leader, possessing a good
organ, with but an indifferent intellect to derange
its action. His mind had precisely the description
of vacuum which is so necessary to produce a good
political or moral echo, more particularly when the
proposition is false; for the smallest addition to his
capacity might have had such an effect on his
replies
,
as a sounding-board is known to possess in
defeating the repetitions of the voice.
By Saint Benedict, Master Heinrich, he
answered
,
for it is permitted to invoke the saint
though we so little honor his monks, it were well for
Duke Friedrich had he less wine in his Heidelburg
tuns, and more of your wisdom in his councils!
What you have just proclaimed, is no other than
what I have myself thought these many years,
though never able to hammer down an idea into
speech so polished and cutting as this of your
worship
!
Let them that deny what I say, take up their
weapons, and I will repose on my sledge as on an
argument not to be answered. We must, in sooth,
see Deurckheim righted, and more is the need, since
there is this equality between all men, as hath just
been so well said.
Nay, this matter of equality is one much spoken
of, but as little understood. Look you, good
Dietrich
;
give me thy ear for a few minutes, and thou
shalt get an insight into its justice. Here are we
of the small towns born with all properties and wants
of those in your large capitalsare we not men to
need our privilegesor are we not human, that air
is unnecessary for breathI think thou wilt not
gain-say
either of these truths.
He that would do it, is little better than an ass!
This being established, therefore, naught remains
but to show the conclusion. We, having the same
rights as the largest towns in the Empire, should be
permitted to enjoy them; else is language little
better
than mockery, and a municipal privilege of no
more value than a serf's oath.
This is so clear, I marvel any should deny it!
And what say they of the villages, Master
Burgomaster
?
Will they, think you, sustain us in this holy
cause?
Nay, I touch not on the villages, good smith,
since they have neither burgomasters nor burghers;
and where there is so little to sustain a cause, of
what matter is resistance. I speak chiefly of
ourselves
,
and of towns having means, which is a case
so clear, that it were manifest weakness to
confound
it with any other. He that hath right of his
side were a fool to enter into league with any of
doubtful franchises. All have their natural and holy
advantages, but those are the best which are most
clear by their riches and force.
I pray you, worshipful Heinrich, grant me but
a single favor, an' you love me so much as a hair?
Name thy will, smith.
That I may speak of this among the
townsmen
!such
wisdom, and conclusion so evident,
should not be cast to the winds!
Thou knowest I do not discourse for vain
applause
.
By my father's bones! I will touch upon it with
discretion, most honorable Burgomaster, and not as
one of vain speechyour honor knows the difference
between a mere street babbler and one that hath a
shop.
Have it as thou wilt; but I take not the merit of
originality, for there are many good and substantial
citizens, and some statesmen, who think much in
this manner.
Well, it is happy that God hath not gifted all
alike, else might there have been great and
unreasonable
equality, and some would have arrived to
honors they were little able to bear. But having so
clearly explained your most excellent motives,
worshipful
Heinrich, wilt condescend to lighten the
march by an application of its truth to the
enterprise
on which we go forth?
That may be done readily, for no tower in the
Palatinate is more obvious. Here is Limburg, and
yon is Deurckheim; rival communities, as it were, in
interests and hopes, and of necessity but little
disposed
to do each other favor. Nature, which is a
great master of all questions of right and wrong,
sayeth that Deurckheim shall not harm Limburg, nor
Limburg, Deurckheim.Is this clear?
Himmel! as the flame of a furnace, honorable
Burgomaster.
Now, it being thus settled, that there shall be no
interference in each other's concerns, we yield to
necessity, and go forth armed, in order to prevent
Limburg doing wrong to a principle that all just
men admit to be inviolable. You perceive the nicety;
we confess that what we do is weak in argument,
and the greater need it should be strong in execution.
We are no madcaps to unsettle a principle to gain
our ends, but then all must have heed to their
interests
,
and what we do is with a reserve of doctrine.
This relieves my soul from a mountain!
exclaimed
the smith, who had listened with a sort of
earnestness that denotes honesty of purpose; naught
can be more just, and woe to him that shall gainsay
it, while back of mine carries harness!
In this manner did Heinrich and his lieutenant
lighten the way by subtle discourse, and by
arguments
that we feel some consciousness may
subject
us to the imputation of plagiarisms, but for
which we can vouch as genuine, on the authority
of Christian Kinzel, already so often named.
The high and disinterested intellect that is active
in regulating the interests of the world has been so
often alluded to, in other places and on different
occasions, that it is quite useless to expatiate on it
here. We have already said, that Heinrich Frey
was a stout friend of the conservative principle,
which, reduced to practice, means little more than,
that
They shall get, who have the power,
And they shall keep, who can.
Justice, like liberality, has great reservations, and
perhaps there are few countries in the present
advanced
condition of the human species, that does
not daily employ some philosophy of the same
involved character as this of Heinrich, supported
by reasoning as lucid, irresistible, and nervous.
The direction in which the band of
Deurckheimers
proceeded, led them, by a tortuous way, it is
true, but surely, to the side of the valley on which
the castle of Hartenburg stood. Heinrich,
however
,
brought his followers to a halt long before
they had made the circuit which would have been
necessary to reach the hold of Count Emich. The
place he chose for the collection and review of the
band, was about midway between Deurckheim and
the castle, pursuing a line that conformed to the
sinuosities and variations of the foot of the
mountain
.
It was in an open grove, where the shadows
of the trees effectually concealed the presence of
the unusual company. Here refreshments were taken
by all, for the good people of the town were much
addicted to practices of this consolatory nature, and
the occasion must have been doubly urgent that
could induce them to overlook the calls of the
appetite
.
Seest thou aught of our allies, honest smith?
demanded Heinrich of his lieutenant, who had been
sent a short distance along the brow of the hill to
reconnoitre. It were unseemly in men so trained
as our friends, to be lacking at need.
Doubt them not, Master Heinrich. I know the
knaves well; they merely tarry to lighten their packs
by the way, in consumptions like this of our own.
Dost see the manner in which the Benedictines affect
tranquillity, worshipful Burgomaster?
'Tis their usual ghostly hypocrisy, brave
Dietrich
;
but we shall uncloak them! Good will come
of our enterprise, for, of a truth, by this spirit on
our part, which shall for ever demonstrate the
necessity
of not meddling in the concerns of a neighbor,
we settle all uncertainties between us. By the
Kings of Koeln! is it to be tolerated, that a
gownsman
shall hoodwink a townsman to the day of
judgment
?Is
there not a light in the Abbey-chapel?
The reverend fathers pray against their enemies.
Dost think, worshipful Burgomaster, that the tale
concerning the manner in which those heavy stones
were carried upon Limburg hill, has received small
additions by oft telling?
It may be thus, Dietrich; for naught, unless it
may be damp snow, gaineth more by repeated
rolling
,
than your story.
And gold, rejoined the smith, chuckling in a
manner not to displease his superior, since it
palpably
intimated the idea he entertained of the
Burgomaster's
success in accumulating money, an idea
that is always pleasant to those who deem
prosperity
of this nature to be the principal end of life.
Gold well rolled increases marvellously! I am
of your mind, Master Heinrich; for to speak truth,
I much question whether the Evil Spirit would have
troubled himself with so light an affair as carrying
the smaller materials a foot.As to the heavy
columns
,
and the hewn key-stones, with other loads of
weight, it was not so much beneath his character,
and may be considered as probable. I have never
contradicted that part of the legend, for it hath
likelihood
to back it, butha! here cometh the succor.
The approach of a band of men, who came from
the direction of Hartenburg, always keeping along
the margin of the hills, and within the shadows,
absorbed all attention. This second party was
treble the force of the townsmen, like them it was
armed, and, like them, it showed every sign of
military preparation. When it had halted, which
it did at a little distance from the band of Heinrich,
as if it were not deemed advisable to blend the two
bodies in one, a warrior advanced to the spot where
the Burgomaster had taken post. The new comer
was well but lightly armed, wearing head-piece and
harness, and carrying his sword at rest.
Who leadeth the Deurckheimers? he demanded,
when near enough to trust his voice.
Their poor Burgomaster, in person; would there
had been a better for the duty!
Welcome, worshipful sir, said the other,
bowing
with more than usual respect. In my turn, I
come at the head of Count Emich's followers.
How art thou styled, brave captain?
'Tis a name but little worthy to be classed with
yours, Herr Frey. But such as it is, I disown it
not. I am Berchthold Hintermayer.
Umph!A young leader for so grave an
enterprise
!I
had hoped for the honor of thy lord's
company
.
I am commanded to explain this matter to your
Vol. II. F
worship. Berchthold then walked aside with the
Burgomaster, while Dietrich proceeded to take a
nearer view of the allied force.
It is well known to most of our readers, that
every baron of note, at the time of which we write,
entertained more or fewer dependants, who,
succeeding
to the regularly banded vassals of the earlier ages,
held a sort of middle station between the servitor
and the soldier. There stands a noble ruin, called
Pierrefont, within a day's ride of Paris, and on the
very verge of a royal forest,a forest that in some
of its features approaches nearer to an American
wood than any we have yet met in the other
hemisphere
,which
castle of Pierrefont is known to have
been the hold of one of these warlike nobles, who
did many and manifest wrongs to the lieges of the
king, even in an age considerably later than this of
our tale. In short, European society, just then, was
in the state of transition, beginning to reject the
trammels of feudalism, and struggling to wear its
bonds, at least in a new and less troublesome form.
But the importance and political authority of the
Counts of Leiningen fully entitled them to preserve
a train that barons of lesser note were beginning to
abandon, and consequently all of their castles had
many of these loose followers, who have since been
entirely superseded by the regularly embodied and
trained troops of our own time.
The smith found much to approve, and something
to censure, in the party that Berchthold had led to
their support. So far as recklessness of character
and object, audacity in acts, and indifference to moral
checks, were concerned, a better troop could not
have been desired, for more than half of them were
men who lived by the excesses of the community,
occupying exactly that position in the social scale
that fungi do in the vegetable, or that sores and
blotches fill in the physical economy of the species.
But in respect to thewes and sinews, a primary
consideration
with the smith in estimating the value of
every man he saw, they were much inferior, as a
body, to the townsmen, in whom orderly living,
gainful and regular industry, had permitted the
animal
to become developed. There was, however, a
band of peasants, drawn from among the mountains,
or inhabitants of the hamlet beneath the castle walls,
who, though less menacing in air, and bold of speech,
were youths that Dietrich thought only required the
Deurckheim training to become heroes.
When Heinrich and Berchthold rejoined their
respective
followers, after the private discourse, all
discontent was banished from the former's brow,
and both immediately occupied themselves in making
the dispositions necessary to the success of the
common
enterprise. The wood, in which they had halted,
lay directly opposite to the inner extremity of the
Abbey hill, from which it was separated by a broad
and perfectly even meadow. The distance, though
not great, was sufficient to render it probable, that
the approach of the invaders would be seen by some
of the sentinels, who, there was little doubt, the
men-at-arms
,
lent by the Elector to the monks,
maintained
,
were it only for their own security. Limburg
was not a fortress, its impunity being due altogether
to the moral power that the Church, to which it
belonged, still wielded, though it were so much
weakened in that part of Germany; but its walls
were high and solid, its towers numerous, its edifices
massive, and all was so disposed that a body within,
resolutely bent on resistance, might well have set at
defiance a force like that which now came against it.
Of all these truths Heinrich was sensible, for he
had shown courage and gained experience in the
defence of places, during a life that was now past
its meridian, and which had been necessarily spent
amid the tumults and contentions of that troubled
age. He looked about him, therefore, with greater
seriousness, in order to ascertain on whom he might
rely, and the fine and collected deportment of
Berchthold
Hintermayer gave him that sort of satisfaction
which brave men feel by communion with kindred
spirits in the moment of danger. When every
necessary
disposition was made, the party advanced,
moving deliberately to preserve their order, and
conscious that breath would be necessary in
mounting
the steep acclivity.
Perhaps there is no time in which the ingenuity
of man is more active, than in those moments when
he has a sensitive consciousness of being wrong,
and consequently a feverish desire to vindicate his
works or acts to himself, as well as to others. A
deep conviction of truth, and the certainty of being
right, fortifies the mind with a high moral dignity,
that even disinclines it to the humility of vindication.
Thus he who rushes from a dispute in which his
own convictions cause him to distrust his own
arguments
,
into rash and general asseverations, betrays
the goadings of conscience rather than spirit, and
weakens the very cause that it may be his wish to
establish. An arrogant assumption of knowledge,
especially in matters that our previous habits and
education rather disqualify than teach us to
comprehend
,
can only lead to contradiction and detection;
and although circumstances may lend a momentary
and fallacious support to error, the triumph of truth
is as certain as its punishments are severe. Happily,
this is an age, in which no sophistry can long escape
unscathed, nor any injury to natural justice go long
unrequited. No matter where the wrong to truth
has been committedon the throne, or in the cabinet,
in the senate, or by means of the presssociety is
certain to avenge itself for the deceptions of which
it has been the dupe, and its final judgments are
recorded
on that opinion which lasts long after the
specious triumphs of the plausible are forgotten. It
were well that they who abuse their situations, by a
reckless disregard of consequences, in order to
obtain
a momentary object, oftener remembered this
fact, for they would spare themselves the
mortification
,
and in some cases the infamy, that is so sure
to rest on him who disregards right to attain an
end.
Heinrich Frey greatly distrusted the lawfulness
of the enterprise in which he was engaged; for,
unlike his companions, he had the responsibility of
advising, as well as that of execution, on his head.
He had, therefore, a restless wish to find reasons of
justification for what he did; and as he marched
slowly across the meadows, with Berchthold and
the smith at his side, his tongue gave utterance to
his thoughts.
There cannot be any manner of doubt of the
necessity and justice of what we do to Limburg,
Master Hintermayer, he said; for men usually
affirm in all dubious cases with a confidence
precisely
in an inverse ratio to the distrust they feel of
the rectitude of their cause:else why are we
here? Is Limburg for ever to trouble the valley and
the plain, with its accursed exactions and avarice,
or are we slaves for shaven monks to trample on?
There are sufficient reasons, of a truth, for what
we do, Herr Burgomaster, answered Berchthold,
whose mind had taken a strong bias to the new
change in religious opinions, that were then fast
gaining ground. When we have so good motives,
let us look no farther.
Nay, young man, I am certain that the honest
smith here will say, no nail that he drives into a
hoof can be too well clenched.
That fact is out of all question, Master
Berchthold
,
answered Dietrich, and therefore must his
worship be right in the whole argument.
F 2
Let it be so; I shall never gainsay the
necessity
of breaking up a nest of drones.
I call them not drones, young Berchthold, nor
do I come to break them up; but simply to show
the world, that he who would deal with the affairs
of Deurckheim, hath need of a lesson to teach him
not to enter his neighbor's grounds.
This is wholesome, and will bring great credit
on our town! responded the smith. The more
the pity that we do not press the same matter home
upon the Elector too, who hath of late raised new
pretensions to our earnings.
With the Elector the affair may not be discussed,
for his interference is of too strong a quality to call
upon our manhood in maintaining the right of
noninterference
.
These subtle questions of law are not
to be learned over a furnace, but need nice
capacities
to render them clear; but clear they are,to
all who have the power to understand them. It is
more than probable, that to thee, Dietrich, they are
not so manifest; but wert thou one of the town
council, thou shouldst look into the question with
different eyes.
That I doubt not, honorable Heinrich, that I
doubt not. Could but such an honor light on one of
my name and breedingHimmel! the worshipful
council should find a man ready to believe any
nicety of this sort, or indeed of any other sort!
Ha! There is a light at yonder loop!
exclaimed
Berchthold. This bodes well.
Hast a friend in the Abbey?
Go to, Herr BurgomasterThis touches on
excommunication;but I much like yon light at the
loop!
Let there be silence, whispered Heinrich to
those in his rear, who passed the order to their
fellows
.
We draw near.
The party was now at the foot of the hill. Not a
sign of their approach being known had yet met
them; unless a single taper placed at a
dungeon-loop
could thus be interpreted. On the contrary,
the stillness already described in the approach of
Ulrike, reigned over the whole of the vast pile.
But, neither Heinrich nor his companion liked this
fearful quiet, for it boded a defence the more serious
when it did come. They would have greatly
preferred
an open resistance, and nothing would have
more relieved the minds of the two leaders, than to
have been able to command a rush, under a hot
discharge
from the arquebusiers of Duke Friedrich.
But this relief was refused them, and the whole
band reached a point of the hill, under a flanking
tower, where it became necessary to abandon all
idea of cover, and to make a swift movement, to
gain the road. It was the rush of this evolution
which first disturbed the monks in the chapel. The
second interruption proceeded from the ruder sounds
of the assault, that immediately after was made
upon the outer gate, itself.
CHAPTER VI.
I'll never
Be such a ghostling to obey instinct, but stand
As if a man were author of himself,
And knew no other line.
Coriolanus
.
The
assailants, as has been seen, were led by the
Burgomaster, and his two lieutenants, Berchthold and
the smith. Close at the heels of the latter followed
three of his own journeymen, each, like his master,
armed with a massive sledge. No sooner did the
party reach the gate, than these artisans commenced
the duty of pioneers, with great readiness and skill.
At the third blow, from Dietrich's brawny arm, the
gate flew open, and those in front rushed into the
court.
Who art thou? cried Berchthold, seizing a man
who knelt with a knee on another's breast,
immediately
across his passage; Speak, for this is not a
moment of trifling!
Master Forester, be less hot, and remember
thy friends. Dost not see it is Gottlob, that holdeth
the convent porter, lest the knave should use the
additional bars. There are strangers within, and,
to consult his ease, the faithless varlet hath not done
his fastenings properly, else mightest thou have
pounded
till Duke Friedrich's men were upon thee.
Bravely done, foster brother! Thy signal was
seen and counted on; but, since thou knowest the
ways so well, lead on, at once, against the
men-at-arms
.
Himmel! The rogues have bristly beards, well
grizzled with war, and may not like to have their
sleep thus suddenly broken; but service must be
doneChoose the most godly of thy followers,
worshipful
Burgomaster, to go against the monks, who
are fortified in their choir, and well armed with
prayer; while I will lead the more carnal to another
sort of work against the Elector's people.
While this short dialogue had place, the whole of
the assailants poured through the gate, their officers
endeavoring to maintain something like order, among
the ill-trained band. All felt the imperious necessity
of first disposing of the troops; for as respects the
monks themselves, there was certainly no cause of
immediate apprehension. A few were left, therefore,
to guard the gate, while Heinrich, guided by the
cow-herd, led his followers toward the buildings,
where the men-at-arms were known to lodge.
If we were to say that the party advanced to this
attack without concern, we should overrate their
valor, and do the reputation of the Elector's men
injustice. There was sacrilege in the invasion of
the convent, according to the predominant opinions
of the age; for though Protestantism had made great
progress, even reformers had grievous doubts in
severing the bonds of habit and long-established
prejudices. To this lurking sentiment was added
the unaccountable silence that still reigned among
the men-at-arms, who, as Gottlob had said, were
known to be excellent soldiers at need. They lay in
the rear of the Abbot's dwelling, and were
sufficiently
intrenched behind walls, and among the gardens,
to make a fierce resistance.
But all these considerations rather flashed upon
the minds of the leaders, than they were maturely
weighed. In the moment of assault there is little
leisure for thought, especially when the affair gets
to be as far advanced as this we are now describing.
The men rushed towards the point of attack,
accordingly
,
beset by misgivings rather than entertaining
any very clear ideas of the dangers they ran.
Gottlob had evidently made the best of the time
he had been at liberty in the Abbey, to render
himself
master of the intricate windings of the
different
passages. He was soon at the door of the
Abbot's
abode, which was dashed into splinters by a
single blow of Dietrich's sledge, when there poured
a stream of reckless, and we may add lawless,
soldiery through the empty apartments. In another
moment, the whole of the assailants were in the
grounds, in the rear of this portion of the dwellings.
As there is nothing that more powerfully rebukes
violence than a calm firmness, so is there nothing so
appalling to or so likely to repulse an assault, as a
coolness that seems to set the onset at defiance.
In such moments, the imagination is apt to become
more formidable than the missiles of an enemy;
conjuring dangers in the place of those, which, in
the ordinary course of warfare, might be lightly
estimated were they seen. Every one knows, that
the moment which precedes the shock of battle, is
by far the most trying to the constancy of man,
and a reservation of the means of resistance is
prolonging
that moment, and of course increasing its
influence.
Every man among the hostile band, even to the
leaders, felt the influence of this mysterious quiet
among the troops of the Elector. So imposing in
fact did it become, that they halted in a group, a
position of all others most likely to expose them to
defeat,and there was a low rumor of mines and
ambuscades.
Berchthold perceived that the moment was
critical
,
and that there was imminent danger of defeat.
Follow! he cried, waving his sword, and
springing
towards the silent buildings in which it was known
the men-at-arms were quartered. He was valiantly
seconded by the Burgomaster and the smith, when
the whole party resumed its courage, and advanced
tumultuously against the doors and windows. The
sounds of the sledges, and the yielding of bars and
bolts, came next; after which the rush penetrated to
the interior. The cries of the assailants rang among
empty vaults. There was the straw, the remnants
of food, the odor of past debauches, and all the
usual disgusting signs of ill-regulated barracks; for
in that day, neatness and method did not descend
far below the condition of the affluent; but no cry
answered cry, no sword or arquebuse was raised
to meet the blow of the invader. Stupor was the
first feeling, on gaining the knowledge of this
important
fact. Then Heinrich and Berchthold both
issued orders to bring the captured porter, who was
in the centre of the assailants, before them.
Explain this, said the Burgomaster,
authoritatively
;
what hath become of Duke Friedrich's
followers?
They departed at the turn of the night,
worshipful
Herr, leaving Limburg to the care of its
patron saint.
Gone! whither, and in what manner?If thou
deceivest me, knave, thy saint Benedict himself
shall not save thee from a flaying!
I pray you be not angered, great magistrate,
for I say nothing but truth. There came an order
from the Elector, as the sun set, recalling his
meanest
warrior: for, it is said, he is sore pressed, and
hath great need of succor.
The silence which followed this explanation, was
succeeded by a shout, and individuals began to
steal eagerly away from the main body, bent on
their own designs of pillage.
What road took the Duke's men?
Worshipful Heinrich, they went down by the
horse-path, in great secrecy and order, and passed
up the opposite mountain, in order to escape
troubling
the townsmen to open the gates at that late
hour. It was their intention to cross the cedars of
the Heidenmauer, and, descending on the other
side of the camp, to gain the plain in the rear of
Deurckheim.
There no longer remained a doubt that the
conquest
was achieved, and the entire party broke off
in bands; some to execute their private orders, and
others, like those who had already proved
delinquent
,
to look after their own particular interests.
Until this moment not a solitary straggler had
gone near the chapel. As it was not the wish of
those who had planned the assault, to do personal
injury to any of the fraternity, the orders had been
so worded, as to leave this portion of the Abbey for
a time unvisited, in the expectation that the monks
would profit by the omission, to escape by some of
the many private posterns that communicated with
the cloisters. But, as there no longer was an armed
enemy to subdue, it now became necessary to think of
the fraternity. The process of sacking their
dormitories
was already far advanced, and the bursts of
exultation, that began to issue from the buildings,
announced that the rich and commodious dwelling
of the Abbot himself was undergoing a similar
summary process.
Himmel! muttered Gottlob, who from the
moment
of his liberation had not quitted the side of his
foster brother, our castle rogues are taking deep
looks into the books of the most reverend
Bonifacius
,
Master Berchthold! It were good to tell them
which are Latin, at least, lest they burthen their
shoulders with learning they can never use.
Let the knaves plunder, replied Heinrich, gruffly;
as much evil as good hath come from that store of
letters, and it will be all the better for Deurckheim
were the damnable ammunition of the Benedictines
a little less plenty. There are those on the plains
who doubt that necromancy is bound up in some
of the volumes that bear a saint's name on their
backs.
Perhaps Berchthold might have remonstrated,
had not his instinct told him, that remonstrance on
such a subject, in that moment of riot and confusion,
would have been worse than useless. The
consequence
was, that valuable works and numerous
manuscripts, which had been collected during
centuries
of learned ease, were abandoned to the humor
of men incapable of estimating their value, or even
of understanding their objects.
Let us to the monks, said Heinrich, sheathing
his heavy blade, for the first time since they had
quitted the wood. Friend smith, thou wilt look to
the duties here, and see that what is done is done
thoroughly. Remember that thy metal is well
heated
,
and on the anvil, waiting thy pleasure; it must
be beaten flat, lest at another day it be remoulded
into a weapon to do us harm. Go to, Dietrich; thou
knowest what we of the town would have, and what
we expect of thy skill.
Taking Berchthold by the arm, the Burgomaster
led the way towards that far-famed pile, the
Abbey-church
.
They were followed by a body of some
twenty chosen artisans, who, throughout the whole
of that eventful night, kept close to the two leaders,
like men who had been selected for this particular
duty.
The same ominous silence reigned around the
chapel as had rendered the approach to the quarters
of the men-at-arms imposing. But here the invaders
went against a different enemy. With most then
living, the mysterious power of the Church still
possessed a deep and fearful interest. Dissenters
had spoken boldly, and the current of public opinion
had begun to set strongly against the Romish Church,
in all that region, it is true; but it is not easy to
eradicate by the mere efforts of reason, the deep
roots that are thrown out by habit and sentiment.
At this very hour, we see nearly the entire civilized
world committing gross and evident wrongs, and
justifying its acts, if we look closely into its
philosophy
,
on a plea little better than that of a sickly taste
formed by practices which in themselves cannot be
plausibly vindicated. The very vicious effects of
every system are quoted as arguments in favor of
its continuance; for changes is thought to be, and
sometimes is, a greater evil than the existing wrong;
and men, in millions, are doomed to continue
degraded
,
ignorant, and brutal, simply because vicious
opinions refuse all sympathy with those whose
hopeless
lot it has been to have fallen, by the adventitious
chances of life, beneath the ban of society. In this
manner does error beget error, until even philosophy
and justice are satisfied with making abortive
attempts
to palliate a disease that a bolder and better
Vol. II. G
practice might radically cure. It will not occasion
surprise, therefore, when we say, that both
Heinrich
and Berchthold had heavy misgivings
concerning
the merit of their enterprise, as they drew near
the church. Perhaps no man ever much preceded
his age, without at moments distrusting his own
principles; and it is certain, that Luther himself
was often obliged to wrestle with harassing doubts.
Berchthold was less troubled, however, than his
companion, for he acted under the orders of a
superior, and was both younger and better taught
than the Burgomaster. The first of these facts was
sufficient of itself, under his habits, to remove a
load of responsibility from his shoulders, while the
latter not only weakened the influence of previous
opinions, but caused those which he had adopted to
be well fortified. In short, there existed between
Heinrich and Berchthold that sort of difference
which all must have remarked in the advancing age
in which we live, between him who has inherited
his ideas from generations that have passed, and
him who obtains them from his contemporaries.
The young Forester had grown into manhood since
the voice of the Reformer was first heard in Germany,
and as it happened to be his lot to dwell among those
who listened to the new opinions, he had imbibed
most of their motives of dissent, without ever
having
been much subject to the counteracting influence
of an opposite persuasion. It is in this gradual
manner
,
that nearly all salutary moral changes are
effected, since they who first entertain them, are
rarely able to do more, in their generation, than to
check the progress of habit; while the duty of
causing the current to flow backward, and to take
a new direction, devolves on their succassors.
In believing that Wilhelm of Venloo would be
foremost in deserting his post, in this moment of
outrage and tumult, the authors of the assault did
him injustice. Though little likely to incur the
hazards
,
or to covet the honors of martyrdom, the
masculine mind of the Abbot elevated him altogether
above the influence of any very abject passion; and
if he had not self-command to curtail the appetites,
he had a dignity of intellect which rarely deserts
the mentally-gifted in situations of difficulty. When
Heinrich and Berchthold, therefore, entered the
church, they found the entire community in the choir,
remaining, like Roman senators, to receive the blow
in their collective and official character. There
might have been artifice, as well as magnanimity,
in the resolution which had decided Bonifacius to
adopt this course; for, coming as they did from the
scene of brutal violence without, those who entered
the church were much impressed by the quiet
solemnity
which met them.
The candles still burned before the altar, the lamps
threw their flickering light on the quaint architecture
and the gorgeous ornaments of the chapel, while
every pale face and shaven head beneath, looked
like some consecrated watchman, placed near the
shrine to protect it from pollution. Each monk was
in his stall, with the exception of the Prior and
Father
Johan, who had stationed themselves on the
steps of the altar; the first as the officiating priest
of the late mass, and the latter under an impulse of
his governing and natural exaggeration, which
moved him to throw his person as a shield before the
vessel that contained the host. The Abbot was on
his throne, motionless, indisposed to yield, and
haughty, though with features that betrayed great
and condensed passion.
The Burgomaster and Berchthold advanced into
the choir alone, for their followers remained in the
body of the church, in obedience to a sign from the
former. Both were uncovered, and while they
walked slowly up the choir, scarce a head moved.
Every eye seemed riveted, by a common spell, on
the crucifix of precious stones and ivory that stood
upon the altar. The blood of Heinrich creeped
under
the influence of this solemn calm, and by the
time he had reached the steps, where he stood
confronted
equally to the Abbot and the Prior, for the
former of whom he had quite as much fear as hatred,
and for the latter an unfeigned love and reverence,
the resolution of the honest Burgomaster was
sensibly
weakened.
Who art thou? demanded Bonifacius,
admirably
timing his question, by the indecision and the
quailing eye of him he addressed.
By Saint Benedict! my face is no such stranger
in Limburg that you put this question, most holy
Abbot, answered Heinrich, making an effort to
imitate the other's composure, that was very sensible
to himself, but better concealed from others; though
not shaven and blessed, like a monk, I am one well
known to most that dwell in or near Deurckheim!
I had better said, `
What
art thou?' Thy name
and office are known to me, Heinrich Frey; but in
what character dost thou now presume to enter
Limburg church, and to show this want of reverence
to our altars?
To speak thee fairly, reverend Bonifacius, 'tis in
the character of the head-man of Deurckheim, a
much-injured and long-abused town, that is tired of
monkish exactions and monkish pride, and which
hath at length assumed the office of doing itself
justice
,
that I appear. We are here to night, not as
peaceful citizens bent on prayers and hymn-singing,
but armed, as thou seest, and bold in the intention
to do away a nuisance from the neighborhood for
ever.
Thy words are as little friendly as thy guise,
and what thou sayest here, but too well answers to
that which thy rude followers perform beyond the
walls of this consecrated spot. Hast thou well
pondered on this bold step of thy town, Herr
Heinrich
?
If often pondering be well pondering, it hath
been before us, Bonifacius, at different meetings,
and in various discussions, any time this year past.
And hast thou no dread of Rome?
That is an authority which lessens daily in this
region, holy Benedictine. Not to deal doubly by
thee, of the two we have most distrusted the anger
of Duke Friedrich; but that fear is diminished by
the certainty that he hath so much on his hands just
now, that his thoughts cannot easily turn to other
affairs. We did not know, in sooth, that he had
recalled his men-at-arms, but had counted on some
angry discussion with those obstinate warriors; and
thou wilt easily comprehend that their absence hath,
in no manner, lessened our faith in our own cause.
The Elector may regain his power, when a day
of reckoning will come for those who have dared
to profit by his present distress.
We are traders and artisans, good Bonifacius,
and have made our estimates with some nicety. If
the Abbey must be paid foran event by no means
certainwe shall count the bargain profitable so
long as it cannot be rebuilt. Brother Luther, we
think, is laying a corner-stone that will prevent the
devil from ever attempting to set up that which we
now propose to throw down.
This is thy final answer, Burgomaster?
Nay, I say not that, Abbot. Send in thy terms
to the town-council to-morrow, and, if we can
entertain
them, it may happen that a present
accommodation
shall stop all further claims. But what
has here been so happily commenced, must be as
happily finished.
Then before I quit these holy walls, hearken to
my malediction, returned Bonifacius, rising with
G 2
priestly and practised dignity: on thee and on
thy townon all that call thee magistrate
parent
Stay the dreadful words! cried a piercing
female
voice from among the columns behind the choir.
Reverend and holy Abbot, have mercy! added
Ulrike, pale, trembling, and shaken equally with
horror and alarm, though her eye was bright and
wild, like that of one sustained by more than human
purpose: Holy Priest, forbear! He knows not what
he does. Madness hath seized on him and on the
town. They are but tools in the hands of one more
powerful than they.
At the appearance of Ulrike, Bonifacius resumed
his seat, disposed to await the effect of her appeal.
Thou here! said Heinrich, regarding his wife
with surprise, but entirely without anger or
suspicion
.
Happily here, to avert this fearful crime from
thee and thy household.
I had thought thee at thy prayers with the poor
Herr von Ritterstein, in his comfortless hermitage
of the Heidenmauer!
And canst thou think of the deed which hath
driven the Herr Odo to this penitence and suffering,
and stand here armed and desperate! Thou seest
that years do not suffice to relieve a soul on which
the weight of sacrilege rests; oh! hadst thou been
with me, to witness the agony that preyed upon
poor Odo, as he knelt at yonder step, listening to
the mass that hath this night been said in his behalf,
thou mightest better know how deep is the wound
made on the heart that hath been seared by God's
anger!
This is most strange! rejoined the wondering
Burgomaster; that those whom I had hoped well
disposed of, and that in a manner neither to suspect
nor to trouble our enterprise, should cross us at the
moment when all is so near completion!
Sapperment
!
young Berchthold, thou seest in what manner
matrimony clogs the stoutest of us, though girded
with the sword.
And thou, Berchthold Hintermayer, son of my
dearest friendchild of my fondest hope,thou
comest, too, on this unholy errand, like the midnight
robber, stealing upon the unarmed and
consecrated
!
None love, or none reverence thee, more than
I, Madame Ulrike, answered the youth, bowing
with sincere respect; but wert thou to address
thy speech to the Herr Heinrich, it would go at
once to him who directs our movements.
Then on thee, Burgomaster, will be thrown the
heaviest load of Heaven's displeasure, as on the
leader of the outrage. What matters it that the
Benedictines are grasping, or overweening in their
respect for themselves, or that some among them
have forgotten their vows? Is not this temple
devoted
to God? Are not these his altars, before which
thou hast dared to come, with a hostile heart and an
angry purpose?
Go to, good Ulrike, returned Heinrich, saluting
the cold but ever handsome cheek of his wife, who
leaned her head on his shoulder to recall her
faculties
,
while she firmly held his hand with both her
own, as if to stay his acts; Go to, thou art
excellent
in thy way, but what can thy sex know of
policy
?
This matter hath been had up before many
councils; andby my beard!tongue of woman
cannot shake the resolutions of Deurckheim. Go,
depart with thy nurse, and leave us to do our
pleasure
.
Is it thy pleasure, Heinrich, to brave Heaven?
Dost thou not know, that the crimes of the parent
are visited on the childthat the wrong done to-day,
however we may triumph in present success, is sure
to revisit us in the dread shape of punishment? Were
there no other power than conscience, so long as
that fearful scourge remains on earth, 'tis vain to
expect immunity. Dost thou owe all to thy
Deurckheim
council and its selfish policy? Hast thou
forgotten
the hour that my pious parents gave thee my
hand, and the manner in which thou then plighted
thy faith to protect me and mine, to assume the place
of these departed friends, to be father, and mother,
and husband, to her thou took to thy bosom? Is
Metathat child of our mutual esteemnaught, that
thou triflest with her peace and hopes? Lay aside,
then, these hasty intentions, and turn thy mind to
thine own abode; bethink thee of those whom nature
and the law condemn to suffer for thy faults, or to
whom both have given the dearer right to rejoice
in thy clemency and mercy.
Was ever woman so bent on crossing the noble
duties of man! said the Burgomaster, who, spite
of himself, had been sensibly moved by this hasty
and comprehensive picture of his domestic duties,
and who was greatly troubled to find the means of
extricating himself from the position in which he
stood. Thou art better in thy chamber, good
Ulrike. Meta will hear of this onset, and have her
fears.Go then, and calm the child; thou shalt have
such escort as becometh my quality and thy
deserts
.
Berchthold, I make the last appeal to thee. This
cruel father, this negligent husband, is too madly bent
on his council, and on the wild policy of the town, to
remember God! But thou hast young hopes, and
sentiments
that become thy years and virtue. Dost think,
rash boy, that one like Meta will dare trust the last
chance of happiness to a participator in this crime,
when such an inheritance of guilt will be the portion
that shall descend from her own father?
A stir among the monks, who had hitherto listened
with an attention that vacillated between hope and
fear, interrupted the answers of the wavering
Burgomaster
and his young companion. The
movement
was caused by the entrance of the group,
which, until now, had stood aloof in the obscurity
of the great aisle, but which seized the moment of
doubt, to advance into the centre of the choir. One,
closely muffled, walked from out its centre, and
throwing aside the cloak that had concealed his
form, showed the armed person of Emich of
Leiningen
.
The moment Ulrike recognized the
unbending
eye of the Baron, she buried her face in her
hands, and quitted the place. She went not
unattended
,
however, for both her husband and
Berchthold
followed anxiously; nor did either return to
the work of the night, until he had seen the
heart-stricken
wife and mother under the protection of a
well-chosen company of the townsmen.
CHAPTER VII.
He, who the sword of heaven will bear,
Should be as holy as severe
Measure for Measure
.
The
first glances between Emich and Bonifacius
were filled with those passions which each had so
long dissembled, and of which the reader has
already
had glimpses during the more unguarded
moments
of the recent debauch. In the eyes of the
Count, triumph mingled with hatred; while there
still remained a slight covering of artifice and
caution
about the lineaments of the Abbot, masks that
he scarcely thought it yet expedient to throw
entirely
aside.
We owe this visit, then, to thee, Herr Emich?
said the latter, struggling to appear calm.
And to thine own desert, most holy Bonifacius.
What wouldst thou, audacious Baron?
Peace in this oft-violated valleyhumility in
shaven crownsreligion without hypocrisyand
mine own.
I will not talk to thee of Heaven, bold man, for
the word were blasphemy in such a presence; but
thou art not yet so lost to worldly policy as to
overlook
the punishment of the Empire. Hast thou well
counted thy gold, and art thou sure thy coffers are
sufficiently stored to rebuild the sainted pile which
thy hand would fain destroyor dost think thy riches
can replace all that pious princes have here
bestowed
,
during ages in which the Church hath been duly
reverenced?
As to thy vessels and precious stones, reverend
Abbot, it shall be my heed to preserve them to meet
this demand, which haply may never be made; and
as to the cost of rebuilding the Abbey, why the
same notable workman that helped first to set it up,
will owe me a good turn for punishing those that
outwitted him, and sent him away without the
promised
boon of souls. Though, God's truth! were the
fact fairly dived into, I am of opinion that Limburg,
after all, hath sent more customers to his furnaces,
than all the drinking-inns and pot-houses of the
Palatinate
!
This sally of their Lord produced a general and
deriding laugh among his followers, who now began
to flock into the church from other parts of the
Abbey, with the expectation that there was rich
plunder to be had in the sanctuary. It was about
this time, too, that a brand was cast among the
straw of the barracks, and the strong light which
glared through the stained windows very effectually
told the monks of the inefficiency of further
remonstrances
.
Notwithstanding his known licentiousness, and the
general freedom of his life, the Abbot had imbibed,
from the high objects of his calling, by that secret
process that renders even the least deserving in
some measure subject to the influence of their
professions
,
a cast of dignity, and perhaps we might
add even of sincerity (for there is often a strange
admixture of inherent faith and practical unbelief
about the dissolute) that caused him frequently to
rise to the level of his most solemn duties, A
character
strong and masculine as his, could not be
aroused without displaying some of its latent
energies
,
be it for good or be it for evil; and Emich had
doubts of the result, when he witnessed the manner
in which his enemy succeeded in repressing his
fierce resentment, and the expression of clerical
dignity and official calmness that reigned in his
countenance. The Abbot arose, like a prelate in
the undisturbed exercise of his functions, and
raising
his voice, so as to send his words to the deepest
recesses of the chapel, he spoke after the manner
of the peculiar rites of the Church he served.
God, in his hidden wisdom, hath permitted to
the wicked a momentary triumph, he said; we
search not now into the reasons of this mysterious
dispensation; the truth will be known in his own
time:but, as servitors of the altaras guardians
of this holy sanctuaryas the sworn and professed
of Heavenas one consecrated and blessedthere
remaineth a solemn, an imperative duty to perform.
Bonifacius, beware! interrupted the Count of
Leiningen; thou dealest not now with burgomasters
and weeping wives.
In the behalf, then, of that God to whom this
shrine hath been raised, continued the unmoved
Abbot, in his holy interest, and in his holy name
At thy peril, priest! and Emich shook, partly
in anger, and partly in a terror he could scarce
explain
.
As his unworthy but necessary ministeras
consecrated and blessedgifted with the power by
the head of the Church, and now required to use it,
do I pronounce thee
Where are ye, followers of Hartenburg? Down
with the silly maledictions of this mad monk;
remember
ye are not trembling women, to need a
Benedictine's blessing!
The voice of Emich was drowned, as well as
that of the Abbot, by the noises that were now
raised in the chapel. The first interruption came
from a long dark instrument, that was thrust from
out of the aisle behind the throne of Bonifacius, and
within a few feet of his head; an interruption that
filled the whole edifice with the wild, plaintive
strains of the mountains.
This signal, which came from the cherry-wood
trumpet of Gottlob, who rarely went abroad without
this badge of his profession, was immediately
followed
by a general shout from the band of the
Count, and by a variety of similar sounds, that were
raised by different instruments that had hitherto been
mute. The effect of these shrill strains, echoing
among the vaulted and fretted roofs, which were
brightly illuminated by the growing and fierce light
that now pervaded the church, and of the seeming
calm of the Abbot, who ended his malediction, spite
of the uproar, is left to the reader's imagination.
When he had finished the unheard curse, Bonifacius
looked about him in gloomy observation.
It was evident to his cool and instructed mind,
which was far too earthly in its habits, to cling to
any hopes of a merely spiritual nature, that the
out-rage
had already gone so far, as to render it more
hazardous to his enemy to retreat than to advance.
Signing to the community, he descended slowly, and
with dignity, from his throne, and led the way from
the choir. The ready monks obeyed, the fraternity
walking from that extraordinary scene, in their
customary
silent order. Emich followed the dark
procession
with a troubled eye, for even the conqueror
regards the calm retreat of his foes with uneasiness,
and there was an instant of painful distrust of his
own purpose, as the last flowing robe vanished
through a private door that led to a secret postern,
by which the routed Benedictines quitted a mountain,
where they had so long dwelt, in the calm, and, we
might add, in the ease, of an affluent and privileged
seclusion.
The invaders of the Abbey took this open
abandonment
of the place by its ancient possessors, to
be an unequivocal admission of their triumph. There
is no moment so likely to produce excesses, as that
in which the uncertainty of strife is changed to the
certainty of victory. The feelings seem willing to
avenge themselves for all their previous doubts, and
man is ever too ready to ascribe his successes to some
inherent qualities, which give him an apparent right
to abuse any advantages that may happen to be
their consequence. The band of the castle and the
people of the town, among whom a large
proportion
had to the last distrusted the presence of the
community, to which vulgar opinion attributed the
power of working miracles, no sooner found
themselves
,
as they believed, in undisputed possession of
the mountain, than the reaction of feeling, to which
there has just been allusion, urged them to increase
their violence, and to redouble those efforts which
had momentarily been checked.
A shout of triumph was the common signal for
renewing the assault. It was followed by the
crashing
of windows, and the overthrow of every fixture
in the body of the church, that was not too solid to
resist their first and ill-directed efforts, and a
general
mutilation of the monuments and labored statuary.
Marble cherubs fell on every side, wings and limbs
Vol. II. H
of angels separated from the trunks, and the grave
and bearded visages of many an honored saint were
doomed to endure contumely and fractures. Even
the inferior altars were no longer respected, but they
and their decorations were ruthlessly scattered, as
if the enmity of the conquerors was
tranferred
from
those who had administered at them, to the dreaded
Being in whose name the rites had been celebrated.
The reader will imagine the confusion and tumult
that attended a scene like this. During the uproar,
Emich buried his face in his mantle, and paced to
and fro in the choir, which his presence, and
perhaps
some lingering reverence for the sacred spot,
still preserved from violence. He was joined only
by the Burgomaster and Berchthold, the remainder
of the party having mingled with those who were
destroying the chapels and decorations of the church.
Heinrich seated himself in one of the vacant stalls,
for the recent scene and the subsequent parting with
his wife had shaken his resolution; while the young
Forester advanced respectfully to the side of his
lord.
Is the Herr Count troubled? demanded the
latter, after a moment of deferential silence.
Emich dropped the cloak, and leaning a hand
familiarly on the shoulder of his young servitor, he
stood regarding the gorgeous riches and the
elaborate
beauty of the high altar, all of which was
rendered
doubly imposing by the powerful light that
now illuminated the whole interior of the edifice,
which was never more beautiful than as then seen,
with its strong relief and deep shadows.
Berchthold, there is a God! he said with
emphasis
.
None but the fool doubts it, Herr Emich.
And he hath his ministers on earththose whom
he hath commissioned to do him pleasure, and to
burn his incense.
We have high authority for this belief, my good
Lord.
We havethe authority is high, that hath so
much antiquitywhich so suits our secret desires
which descends to us from our fathers.
And which is so supported by proofs, sacred
and profane.
Thou hast been well schooled, good Berchthold,
said the Count, looking earnestly at his companion.
Heaven left me a pious and tender mother,
when it took my father away.
Emich continued to lean on the shoulder of
Berchthold
,
while his eye, in which sternness of purpose
was singularly blended with the waverings of doubt,
never turned from its contemplation of the altar.
Above the chased and gilded cabinet which
contained
the host, was a small picture of the Mother of
Christ, delineated in those mild and attractive colors
with which the pencil is accustomed to portray the
Virgin Wife of Joseph. Her eye seemed to meet
the gaze of Emich in sorrow. It was easy to fancy
the gentle expression was in reproach of the
sacrilege
.
These Benedictines are at length unhoused
he continued, trying fruitlessly to avert his look
from that mild but expressive image; they have
too long ridden roughly on their betters.
Berchthold bowed.
Dost thou see aught strange, youth, in that image
of Maria?
'Tis a skilful design, Herr Count, and a fair face
to regard.
Methinks it looks upon this violence with an evil
eye!
'Tis but the work of an ingenious man, my
Lord, and cannot look other than it hath always
seemed.
Dost think thus, Berchthold? There are many
who pretend that images and paintings have been
known to speak, when it was Heaven's pleasure.
They relate such legends, my good Lord, but
these are events that are little wont to touch those
who are not much disposed to see them.
And yet in these facts had my fathers faith, and
in this belief was I trained!
Berchthold was mute, his own education having
been more suited to the growing opinions of the
times.
That God
can
surpass the ordinary workings
of nature, to effect his pleasure, continued Emich,
we may at least believe.
It may be believed, Herr Count, but is it
necessary
?
He who made nature may use it at his
pleasure
.
Ha! thou hast no faith in miracles, boy!
I am myself a miracle, that tells me every
moment
of the existence of a superior power; and in
that much I bend to its control. But it hath never
been my fortune to hear an image speak, or see it
do aught else that belongs to the will.
By my father's bones! but thou art fit to deal
with the cunningest knave that wears a cowl! How
now, brave followers! turning towards his people;
leave no vestige of the roguery and abominations
that have so long been done within these polluted
walls!
Herr Count! said Berchthold eagerly,
presuming
in his haste to touch the cloak of Emich, here
are the Benedictines!
The word caused the bold, and at that moment the
independent Baron to turn suddenly, laying a hand
on his sword, as he did so. But the hand released
its grasp, and the features of Emich immediately
reverted to their former expression of anxiety and
doubt, at what he now beheld.
By this time all of the different edifices which
composed the Abbey of Limburg were fired, the
church and its immediate appendages alone
excepted
.
The consequence was such an increase of light
within the latter, as penetrated the most obscure of
its Gothic recesses. The choir, above all, received
the strongest illumination; and young Berchthold
thought its tracery never appeared so beautiful as in
that fearful moment of impending destruction. The
candles and lamps of the great altar began to look
dim, and all around prevailed the glorious and fiery
brightness which accompanies a fierce conflagration.
During the instant that Emich was turned towards
his people, two monks had come from the sacristy,
and placed themselves on the steps of the altar. They
were the Prior and Father Johan. The former bore
a small ivory crucifix, which from time to time he
kissed, while the latter placed at his feet a massive
and curiously carved chest, of sufficient size and
weight to have required the aid of a lay-brother to
bring it from its repository.
The countenance of the Prior was mild,
persuasive
,
and filled with holy concern. That of his
companion flushed, excited, and bearing the look of
feverish fire, which is the effect of an enthusiasm
that springs as much from temperament, as from
conviction.
Emich looked at the Benedictines uneasily, and
he advanced so near, always attended by the
Forester
,
as to be within reach of his arm.
'Fore God, but ye are tardy, Fathers, he said,
determined to assume an indifference he was far
from feeling; the pious Bonifacius hath departed
many minutes, and quickened, as he is, by love of
his person, I make no question that his footsteps
have already gone down the mountain side!
Thou hast at length yielded to the whispering
of the devil, Count of Leiningen! returned the
H 2
Prior; thou art resolute that this blot shall rest
upon thy soul!
We are not at confession, holy Arnolph, but
engaged
in a knightly redressing of our rights; if thou
hast aught here, that is dear to thee, take it, of God's
name, and go thy way. Thou shalt have safe
conduct
,
were it to the gates of Rome; for, of all thy
fraternity, thou art he for whom alone I feel regret
or amity, in this just enterprise.
I know not this difference in love, when it touches
the existence of our shrine, or the duty that ties us
to its service. This question is not between thee and
me, Lord Emich, but between thee and God!
Have it as thou wilt, Herr Prior, so thou dost
but depart in peace.
I am not weak enough to resist when resistance
is vain, mildly answered the Monk; nor am I
quick to desert my post, while there is hope. Thou
hast not well bethought thee of this act, Emich;
thou hast not remembered thy posterity, nor thy kind
interest in the noble Ermengarde!
Dost fancy me an uxorious citizen, reverend
Arnolph, that thou wouldest fain stop a knight in his
onset, by speaking of the good wife and her babes?
As he concluded, Emich laughed.
Thou hast not well conceived me. This is not
a question of death in battle, or of the grief of those
who survive; for such thoughts are, unhappily, but
too common with those who rule the earth, to raise
disquiet; but I would speak to thee of the long
future and of its pains. Dost thou know, irreverend
Baron, that the God of Israelwho is my God and
thinethe God of Israel hath said, that he will visit
the sins of the parent upon the descendant, from
generation to generation? and yet, blinded by this
specious success, thou seemest to court his anger.
This may be so or not; for ye of the cloisters
have many subtle ways of reasoning as you wish:
but to me it appeareth better that each should suffer
for his own sins; and such, I take it, is what the
community of Limburg doth now undergo.
That we have done much evil, and neglected
much good, is, alas, too true!
By the kings of Koeln! thou art getting to be
of our side, holy Arnolph!
For such is the common course, continued the
unmoved Prior,but that thou art not our judge
is equally certain. That each does and will suffer
for his own acts is beyond denial, but the fearful
consequences of crime do not stop with him who
hath committed it. This much is taught us by reason;
and what is still more sure, it is consecrated by
words from God's own mouth. Ponder, then, whilst
thou may, on the load of sorrow thou art heaping on
thy descendants: remember that thou standest there,
subject to goading passions, the miserable being
thou art, simply that in thy person thou payest the
price of a parent's sins. What our common father
did, is still avenged on us his children.
How now, Herr Prior, thou pushest my
pedigree
much beyond its pretensions. Noble and
princely
,
if thou wilt, but I pass not the dark ages in any
of my claims. Let them that have greater ambition
pay for the purchase in the way thou namest; I am
content with more modern honors.
Emich spoke jeeringly, but the attentive Monk
saw that he was troubled.
If thou hast no thought for posteritynone for
thyselfnone for thy God, Emich, the latter
resumed
,
bethink thee of those who have gone before.
Hast already forgotten thy visit to the tombs of
thy family?
Thou hast me there, Arnolph!those sacred
vaults have been thy convent's shield these many
months!
And thou art now disposed to forget them?
If thou wilt ask yon honest men, they will tell
thee, Prior, they have no order to spare the meanest
of thy marble cherubs, even though it hover over
a grave of mine own house.
Then do I indeed despair of touching thy heart!
answered Father Arnolph, sorrowing as much for
the crime as for its consequences. Then indeed
art thou madly and ruthlessly bent, not only on our
destruction, but on thine own; for pity for the child,
and love of the parent, are equally despised. Emich
of Leiningen, I curse thee notthis is a weapon
too fearful for human hands lightly to wield.I
bless thee not; duty to God forbids the holy office.
Hold! reverend Arnolph, let us not part in anger
I would, in sooth, crave from thy worthy hands
some touch of consolationifayif there be
chapel in this church, for which thou hast more than
usual reverence, let it be named, and I swear, by
knight's faith, unless the work be already done, it
shall stand unscathed amid the ruins, in testimony
of my love for theeor if thou hast aught here of
price, whether of monkish or worldly value, point
it out, that it may be held safe for thy better leisure.
In return, I ask but the parting words of peace.
'Tis forbidden to those who war against God,
returned the grieved Prior, releasing his robe from
the eager grasp of the Baron.I can and will pray
for thee, Emich; but to bless thee were treachery
to Heaven!
So saying, the pious Arnolph buried his face in
his dress, to shut out the view of the profanation
that was working around him, and withdrew slowly
from the choir.
CHAPTER VIII.
Avaunt!
Incarnate Lucifer! 'tis holy ground:
A martyr's ashes now lie there, which make it
A shrine
Byron.
During
the foregoing scene, the Benedictine,
already known to the reader as Father Johan, had
awaited its issue with a species of lofty patience on
the steps of the altar. But in a character so
exaggerated
,
there remained little that was purely
natural; even the forbearance of the Monk partook
of the forced and fervid qualities of his mind.
Conventual
discipline, deep and involuntary respect for
the Prior, and that very disdain which he felt for
all gentle means of recalling a sinner to the fold,
kept him tolerably tranquil, while Emich and his
spiritual superior held their parley; but there was a
gleam of wild delight in his eye, when he found, of
all that powerful and boasted fraternity, that he
alone remained to defend the altars. The feeling
of the moment in such a breast, notwithstanding
the scene of tumult that rather increased than
diminished
in the church, was that of triumph. He
exulted in his own constancy, and he anticipated the
effects which were to follow from his firmness, with
the self-complacency of a prurient confidence, and
with the settled conviction of an enthusiast.
Emich took little heed of his presence, during
the first moments that succeeded the departure of
the Prior. There is a majesty, and a quiet energy,
in truth and sound principles, that happily form
their constant buttresses. Without this wise
provision
of Providence, the world would be hopelessly
abandoned to the machinations of those who
consider
all means lawful, provided the ends tend to
their own success. All near the Abbey of Limburg
had felt the influence of these high qualities in
Father Arnolph, and it is more than probable that,
as in the case of the city of Canaan, had the
community
contained four of his spiritual peers the
Abbey would not have fallen.
The Count, in particular, who, like all that first
break from mental servitude, was so often troubled
with strong doubts, had long entertained a deep
respect for this monk; and it is not improbable, that
had the pious Arnolph fully understood his own
power, by an earlier and more vigilant use of his
means, he might have found a way to avert the
blow that had now alighted on Limburg. But the
meekness and modesty of the Prior were qualities
as strongly marked as his more active virtues, and
the policy of Limburg was not of a character to
rely on either for its security.
There is good in that brother, said Emich to
Berchthold, when his thoughtful eye again rose to
the face of the young Forester.Had he been
mitred, instead of Bonifacius, our rights might have
still suffered.
Few are more beloved than Father Arnolph,
Herr Count, and none so deserve to be.
Thou art of this mind! How now, Master
Heinrich! art in monkish meditation in thy stall, or
dost dispose of the lesson of the virtuous Ulrike,
more at thy ease, in a seat where so much
substantial
carnal aliment hath been digested by godly
Benedictines! Come to the front, like a stout soldier,
and give us the savor of thy good wisdom in this
strait.
Methinks, our work is well-nigh done, Lord Emich,
answered Heinrich, complying with the request;
my faithful townsmen are not idle in the chapels
and among the tombs, and the sledge of yon smith
dealeth with an angel an' it were a bar of molten
iron. Each stroke leaves a mark that no chisel will
repair!
Let the knaves amuse themselves; every blow
is quickened by the recollection of some hard
penance
.
Thou seest that they place the confessionals
in a pile ready for the torch! This is attacking the
enemy in his citadel. But Heinrich, is the excellent
Ulrike wont to come forth with thee in thy frays
against the church? God's judgments! Were
Ermengarde
of this humor, we should have no hope of
salvation in our castle!
You do my wife injustice, Herr Count; Ulrike
was here to pray, and not to encourage.
Thou mightest have spared the explanation, for
truly such encouragement never did soldier need!
Wert privy to the visit,ha!wert privy, worthy
Burgomaster?
To speak you honestly, Herr Emich, I thought
the woman otherwise bestowed.
By the Magi!in her bed?
Nay, at her prayers, but in a different place.
But we do her too much honor, noble Emich, to let
the movements of a mere housewife occupy our
high thoughts in this busy moment.
Nothing that touches thee is of light concern
with thy friends, good Burgomaster, answered the
Baron, who pondered with instinctive uneasiness,
even in that moment of tumult, on this visit of
Ulrike to the Benedictines, at an hour so unusual.
Thou art well wived, Herr Heinrich, and all
that know thy consort do her honor!
The Burgomaster was a man by far too well
satisfied
with his own superior merits to harbor
jealousy
.
Self-complacency might have been at the
bottom of his security, though it were scarce
possible
for one even much more addicted by nature to
that tormenting passion, to have lived so long in
perfect familiarity with the pure mind of Ulrike,
without feeling reverence for its principles and virtue.
The sentiments of the Baron were very different;
for though in his heart equally convinced of the
character of her to whom he alluded, he could not
altogether exclude the suspicions of a man of loose
habits, nor the uneasiness of one who had himself
been discarded. The answer of the husband,
however
,
served to turn the discourse, by giving the
Burgomaster
an opportunity of placing himself in the
most prominent relief.
A thousand thanks, illustrious Herr, he said,
raising his cap; the woman is not amiss, though
much troubled with infirmity on the score of altars
and penances. When we shall have fairly disposed
of Limburg, another reign will commence among
our wives and daughters, and we can hope for more
quiet Sabbaths. As to this grace of your present
speech, Lord Count, I take it, as it was no doubt
meant, to be another pledge of our lasting amity
and close alliance.
Thou talkest well, quickly answered Emich,
losing the passing feeling of distrust in the
recollection
of his present purpose; no words of
friendship
are lost, on a true and sworn supporter. Well,
Heinrich, is our affair finally achieved?
Sapperment! Herr Count, if not finished, it is
in a fair way to be so quickly.
Here remaineth a Benedictine!' said Berchthold,
drawing their attention to the Monk, who still
maintained
his post on the steps of the altar.
The bees do not relish quitting their hive, while
any of the hard earnings are left, said the Count,
laughing; what wouldst thou, Father Johan?if
thy careful mind hath had thought of the precious
vessels, make thy choice and depart.
The Benedictine returned the laugh of the noble,
with a smile of deep but quiet exultation.
Assemble thy followers, rude Baron, he said;
call all within thy control to this sanctified spot,
for there yet remaineth a power to be overcome of
which thou hast not taken heed; at the moment
when thou fanciest thyself most secure, art thou
nearest to disgrace and to destruction.
As the excited Monk suited his words by a
corresponding
energy of emphasis and tone, Emich
recoiled a step, like one who distrusted a secret
mine. The desperate character of Father Johan's
enthusiasm was well known, and neither of the
three listeners was without apprehension, that the
fraternity, aware of the invasion, had plotted some
deep design of vengeance, which this exaggerated
brother had been deputed to execute.
Ho! without there! cried the CountLet a
party descend quickly to the crypt, and look to the
villanies of these pretended saints; cousin of
Viederbach
,
revealing in the eagerness of the moment
the presence of this sworn soldier of the Cross, see
thou to our safety, for the Rhodian warfare hath
made thee familiar with these treacheries.
The call of the Count, which was uttered like a
battle cry, stayed the hands of the destroyers.
Some rushed to obey the order, while most of the
others gathered hastily into the choir. It is certain
that the presence of fellow-sufferers diminishes the
force of fear, even though it may in truth increase
the danger; for such is the constitution of our minds,
that they willingly admit the influence of sympathy,
whether it be in pain or pleasure. When Emich
found himself backed by so many of his band, he
thought less of the apprehended mine, and he turned
to question the Monk, with more of the calmness
that became his condition.
Thou wouldst have the followers of
Hartenburg
,
Father, he said, ironically, and thou seest
how readily they come!
I would that all who have listened to schismatics
Vol. II. I
all who refuse honor to the holy Churchall who
deny Romeand all that believe themselves on
earth freed from the agency of Heaven, now stood
before me! answered the Benedictine, examining
the group of heads that clustered among the stalls,
with the bright but steady eye of one engrossed
with the consciousness of his force. Thou art in
hundreds, Count Leiningenwould it were God's
pleasure that it had been in millions!
We are of sufficient strength for our object,
Monk.
That remaineth to be seen. Now, listen to a
voice from above!I speak to you, unhallowed
ministers of the will of this ambitious Baronto
you, misguided and ignorant tools of a scheme
that hath been plotted of evil, and hath been brought
forth from the prolific brain of the restless Father
of Sin. Ye have come at the heels of your lord,
vainly rejoicing in a visible but impotent power
impiously craving the profits of your unholy
enterprise
,
and forgetting God!
By the mass, priest! interrupted Emich; thou
hast once already given us a sermon to day, and
time presseth. If thou hast an enemy to present,
bring him forth; but we tire of these churchly
offices.
Thou hast had thy moment of wanton will,
abandoned Emich, and now cometh the judgment
seest thou this box of precious relics!dost thou
forget that Limburg is rich in these holy remains,
and that their virtues are yet untried?Woe to
him who scoffeth at their character, and despiseth
their power!
Stay thy hand, Johan! cried the Count hastily,
when he saw that the Monk was about to expose
some of those well-known vestiges of mortality to
which the Church of Rome then, as now, attributed
miraculous interventions; this is no moment for
fooleries!
Callest thou this sacred office by so profane a
name!abide the issue, foul-mouthed asperser of
our holy authority, and triumph if thou canst!
The Count was much disturbed, for his reason
had far less influence now in supporting him than
his ambition. The party in the rear, too, began to
waver, for opinion was not then sufficiently
confirmed
to render the mass indifferent to such an
exposure
of clerical power. Whatever may be the
difference that exists between Christian sects
concerning
the validity of modern miracles, all will
allow, that, when trained in the belief of their
reality
,
the mind is less prepared to resist their influence
than that of any other engine by which it can be
assailed, since it is placing the impotency of man
in direct and obvious collision with the power of
the Deity. Before such an exhibition of force,
nature
offers no means of resistance; and the
mysterious
and unseen agency by which the wonder is
produced, enlists in its interest both the imagination
and that innate dread of omnipotence which all
possess
.
'Twere well this matter went no farther! said
Emich, uneasily whispering his principal agents.
Nay, my Lord Count, answered Berchthold,
calmly, it may be good to know the right of the
matter. If we are not of Heaven's side in this
affair
,
let it be shown in our own behalf; and if the
Benedictines are no better than pretenders, our
consciences
will be all the easier.
Thou art presuming, boynone know the end
of this!Herr Heinrich, thou art silent?
What would you have, noble Emich, of a poor
Burgomaster? I will own, I think it were more for
the advantage of Deurckheim that the matter went
no farther.
Thou hearest, Benedictine! said the Count,
laying the point of his sheathed sword on the richly
chased and much reverenced box that the Monk had
already unlocked,this must stop here!
Take away the weapon, Emich of Leiningen,'
said father Johan, with dignity.
The Count obeyed, though he scarce knew why
This is a fearful instant for the unbeliever,
continued
the Monk; the moment is near when our
altars shall be avengednay, recoil not, bold Baron
remain to the end, ye dissolute and forsaken
followers
of the wicked, for in vain ye hope to flee
the judgment.
There was so much of tranquil enthusiasm in the
air and faith of Father Johan, that, spite of a general
wish to be at a distance from the relics, curiosity,
and the inherent principle of religious awe, held each
man spell-bound; though every heart beat quicker
as the Monk proceeded, calmly, and with a
reverential
mien, to expose the bones of saints, the remnants
of mantles, the reputed nails of the true cross, and
morsels of its wood, with divers other similar
memorials
of holy events, and of sainted martyrs. Not
a foot had power to retire. When all were laid, in
solemn silence, on the bright and glowing shrine,
Father Johan, crossing himself, again turned to the
crowd.
What may be Heaven's purpose in this strait, I
know not, he said; but withered be the hand, and
for ever accursed the soul, of him who dareth
violence
to these holy vestiges of Christian faith!
Uttering these ominous words, the Benedictine
faced the crucifix, and kneeled in silent prayer. The
minute that followed was one of fearful portent to
the cause of the invaders. Eye sought eye in doubt,
and one regarded the fretted vault, another gazed
intently at the speaking image of Maria, as if each
expected some miraculous manifestation of divine
displeasure. The issue would have been doubtful, had
not the cherry-wood trumpet of the cow-herd again
sounded most opportunely in his master's behalf. The
wily knave blew a well-known and popular imitation
of the beasts of his herd, among the arches of the
chapel, striking at the effect of what had just passed
by the interposition of a familiar and vulgar idea
The influence of the ludicrous, at moments when
the passions vacillate, or the reason totters, is too
well known to need elucidation. It is another of
those caprices of humanity that baffle theories,
proving
how very far we are removed from being the
exclusively reasoning animal we are fond of
thinking
the species.
The expedient of the ready-witted Gottlob
produced
its full effect. The most ignorant of the castle
followers, those even whose dull minds had been on
the verge of an abject deference to superstition, took
courage at the daring of the cow-herd; and, as the
least founded in any belief are commonly the most
vociferous in its support, this portion of the band
echoed the interruption from fifty hoarse throats.
Emich felt like a man reprieved; for under the
double
influence of his own distrust, and the wavering
of his followers, the Count for a moment had
fancied
his long-meditated destruction of the
community
of Limburg in great danger of being frustrated.
Encouraged by each other's cries, the invaders
returned to their work laughing at their own alarm.
The chairs and confessionals had been already
heaped in the great aisle, and a brand was thrown
into the pile. Fire was applied to the church
wherever
there was food for the element, and some of
the artisans of Deurckheim, better instructed than
their looser associates, found the means to light the
conflagration in such parts of the roofs and the other
superior stories, as would insure the destruction of
the pile. In the mean time, all the exterior edifices
I 2
had been burning, and the whole hill, to the eye of
him who dwelt in the valley beneath, presented
volumes of red flame, or of lurid smoke.
During the progress of this scene, Emich paced
the choir, partly exulting in his success, and partly
doubting of its personal fruits. Over the temporal
consequences he had well pondered; but the
motionless
attitude of Father Johan, the presence of the
long-reverenced relics, and the denunciations of the
Church, still had their terrors for one whose mind
had few well-grounded resources to sustain it. From
this state of uneasiness he was aroused by the noise
of the sledge, at work in the crypt. Followed by
Heinrich and Berchthold, the Count hastened to
descend
to this place, which it will be remembered
contained the tombs and the chapel of his race.
Here, as above, all was in bright light, and all was
in confusion. Most of the princely and noble tombs
had already undergone mutilation, and no chapel
had been respected. Before that of Hartenburg,
however, Albrecht of Viederbach stood, with folded
arms and a thoughtful eye. The cloak which,
during
the commencement of the attack, had served to
conceal his person, was now neglected, and he
seemed to forget the prudence of disguise, in deep
contemplation.
We have at length got to the monuments of
our fathers, cousin; said the Count, joining him.
To their very bones, noble Emich!
The worthy knights have long slept in evil
company
;
there shall be further rest for them in the
chapel of Hartenburg.
I hope it may be found, Herr Graf, that this ad
venture is lawful!
How!dost thou doubt, with the work so near
accomplished?
By the mass! a soldier of Rhodes might better
be fighting your turbaned infidel, than awakening
the nobles of his own house from so long a sleep, at
so short a summons!
Thou canst retire into my hold, Herr Albrecht,
if thy arm is wearied, said Emich, coldly; not a
malediction can reach thee there.
That would be poor requital for a free hospital
ity, cousin; the travelling knight is the ally of the
last friend, even though there be some wrong to
general duties. But we cavaliers of the island well
know, that a retreat, to be honorable, must be
orderly
,
and not out of season. I am with thee,
Emich, for the hour, and so no more parley. This
was the image of the good Bishop of our line?
He had some such reverend office, I do believe;
but speak of him as thou wilt, none can say he was
a Benedictine.
It had been better, cousin, since this church is
to be sacked, that our predecessors had found other
consecrated ground for their dust. Well, we sworn
soldiers pass uneven lives! It is now some twelve
months or so, that like a loyal and professed
Rhodian
,
I stood to my knees in water, making good a
trench against your believer in Houris and your
unbeliever in Christ; and now, forsooth, I am here
as a spectator (none call me more with honesty),
while a Christian altar is overturned, and a
brotherhood
of shaven monks are sent adrift upon earth,
like so many disbanded mercenaries!
By the Three Kings! my cousin, thou makest
a fit comparison; for like disbanded mercenaries
have they gone forth to prey upon society in a
new shape.Spare the angel of my grandfather,
good smith, cried Emich, interrupting himself; if
there be any virtue in the image, 'tis for the benefit
of our house!
Dietrich stayed his uplifted arm, and directed the
intended blow at another object. The marble flew
in vast fragments at each collision with his sledge,
and the leaders of the party soon found it necessary
to retire, to avoid the random efforts of the heated
crowd.
There no longer remained a doubt of the fate
of these long-known and much-celebrated
conventual
buildings. Tomb fell after tomb, monuments
were defaced, altars were overturned, chapels sacked,
and every object that was in the least likely to
resist
the action of fire, received such indelible injuries
as rendered its restoration difficult or impossible.
During the continuance of their efforts, the
conflagration
had advanced, as the fierce element that
had been called in to assist the destroyers is known
to do its work. Most of the dormitories, kitchens,
and outer buildings were consumed, so far as the
materials allowed, beyond redress; and it became
apparent that the great church and its dependencies
would soon be untenable.
Emich and his companions were still in the crypt,
when a cry reached them, admonishing all within
hearing to retreat, lest they become victims to the
flames. Berchthold and the smith drove before them
the crowd from the crypt, and there was a general
rush to gain the outer door.
When the interior of the church was clear, the
Count and his followers paused in the court,
contemplating
the scene, with curious eyes, like men
satisfied with their work. No sooner was the
common
attention directed back towards the spot from
whence they had just escaped, than a general cry,
that partook equally of wonder and horror, broke
from the crowd. As the doors were all thrown wide,
and every cranny of the building was illuminated
by the fierce light of the flames that were raging in
the roofs, the choir was nearly as visible to those
without, as if it stood exposed to the rays of a
noon-day
sun. Father Johan was still kneeling before the
altar.
In obedience to the commands of Emich, the
sacred shrine had been stript of its precious vessels,
but none had presumed to touch a relic. On these
long-venerated memorials, the Benedictine kept his
eyes riveted, in the firm conviction that, sooner or
later, the power of God would be made manifest in
defence of his violated temple.
The monk! the monk! exclaimed fifty eager
voices.
I would fain save the fanatic! said Emich, with
great and generous concern.
He may listen to one who beareth this holy
emblem
,
cried the Knight of Rhodes, releasing his
cross from the doublet in which it had been
concealed
.
Will any come with me, to the rescue of
this mad Benedictine?
There was as much of repentant atonement in
the offer of Albrecht of Viederbach, as there was
of humanity. But the impulse which led young
Berchthold forward, was purely generous.
Notwithstanding
the imminent peril of the attempt, they
darted together into the building, and passed swiftly
up the choir. The heat was getting to be oppressive,
though the great height of the ceilings still rendered
it tolerable. They approached the altar, advising
the monk of his danger by their cries.
Do ye come to be witnesses of Heaven's power?
demanded Father Johan, smiling with the calm of
an inveterate enthusiast; or do ye come,
sore-stricken
penitents that ye have done this deed?
Away, good father! hurriedly answered
Berchthold
;
Heaven is against the community to-night;
in another minute, yon fiery roof will fall.
Hearest thou the blasphemer, Lord? Is it thy
holy will, that
Listen to a sworn soldier of the cross,
interrupted
Albrecht, showing his Rhodian emblem
we are of one faith, and we will now depart
together
for another trial.
Away! false servant! and thou, abandoned boy!
See ye these sainted relics?
At a signal from the knight, Berchthold seized the
monk by one side, while Albrecht did the same
thing on the other, and he was yet speaking as they
bore him down the choir. But they struggled with
one that a long-encouraged and morbid view of
life had rendered mad. Before they reached the
great aisle, the fanatic had liberated himself, and,
while his captors were recovering breath, he was
again at the foot of the altar. Instead of kneeling,
however, Father Johan now seized the most
venerated
of the relics, which he held on high, audibly
imploring Heaven to hasten the manifestation of its
majesty.
He is doomed! said Albrecht of Viederbach,
retiring from the church.
As the Knight of Rhodes rushed through the
great door, a massive brand fell from the ceiling
upon the pavement, scattering its coals like so many
twinkling stars.
Berchthold! Berchthold! was shouted from a
hundred throats.
Come forth, rash boy! cried Emich, with a
voice in which agony was blended with the roar of
the conflagration.
Berchthold seemed spell-bound. He gazed
wistfully
at the monk, and darted back again towards
the altar. An awful crashing above, which
resembled
the settling of a mountain of snow about to
descend in an avalanche, grated on the ear. The
very men who, so short a time before, had come
upon the hill ready and prepared to slay, now uttered
groans of horror at witnessing the jeopardy of their
fellow-creatures; for, whatever we may be in
moments
of excitement, there are latent sympathies in
human nature, which too much use may deaden,
but which nothing but death can finally extinguish.
Come forth, young Berchthold! come forth, my
gallant forester! shouted the voice of the Count
above the clamor of the crowd, as if rallying his
followers with a battle-cry. He will die with the
wretched monk!The youth is mad!
Berchthold was struggling with the Benedictine,
though none knew what passed between them. There
was another crash, and the whole pavement began
to glow with fallen brands. Then came a breaking
of rafters, and a scattering of fire that denoted the
end. The interior of the chapel resembled the
burning
shower which usually closes a Roman girandola,
and the earth shook with the fall of the massive
structure. There are horrors on which few human
eyes can bear to dwell. At this moment nearly
every hand veiled a face, and every head was
averted
.
But the movement lasted only an instant. When
the interior was again seen, it appeared a fiery
furnace
.
The altar still stood, however, and Johan
miraculously kept his post on its steps. Berchthold
had disappeared. The gesticulations of the
Benedictine
were wilder than ever, and his countenance
was that of a man whose reason had hopelessly
departed
.
He kept his feet only for a moment, but
withering fell. After which his body was seen to
curl like a green twig that is seared by the flames.
CHAPTER IX.
Masters, you ought to consider with yourselves.
Midsummer Night's Dream
.
The
constant moral sentinel that God hath set on
watch in every man's breast, but which acts so
differently
in different circumstances, though, perhaps,
in no condition of humiliation and ignorance does it
ever entirely desert its trust, is sure to bring
repentance
with the sense of error. It is vain to say that
this innate sentiment of truth, which we call
conscience
,
is the mere result of opinion and habit, since
it is even more apparent in the guileless and
untrained
child than in the most practised man, and
nature has so plainly set her mark upon all its
workings
,
as to prove its identity with the fearful being
that forms the incorporeal part of our existence.
Like all else that is good, it may be weakened and
perverted, or be otherwise abused; but, like every
thing that comes from the same high source, even
amid these vicious changes, it will retain traces of
its divine author. We look upon this unwearied
monitor as a vestige of that high condition from
which the race fell; and we hold it to be beyond
dispute, that precisely as men feel and admit its
influence
do they approach, or recede from, their
original condition of innocence.
The destruction of the Abbey was succeeded by
most of those signs which attend all acts of violence,
in degrees that are proportioned to previous habits.
Even they who had been most active in
accomplishing
this long-meditated blow, began to tremble for
its consequences; and few in the Palatinate heard
of the deed, without holding their breaths like men
who expected Heaven would summarily avenge the
sacrilege. But in order that the thread of the
narrative
should not be broken, we will return to our
incidents in their proper order, advancing the time
but a few days after the night of the conflagration.
The reader will have to imagine another view of
the Jaegerthal. There was the same smiling sun,
and the same beneficent season; the forest was as
green and waving, the meadows were as smooth and
dark, the hill-sides as bright beneath the play of
light and shade, while the murmuring brook was as
limpid and swift, as when first presented to his eye
in these pages. Not a hut or cottage was disturbed,
either in the hamlets or along the travelled paths,
and the Hold of Hartenburg still frowned in feudal
power and baronial state, on the well-known pass of
the mountains, gloomy, massive, and dark. But the
hill of Limburg presented one of those sad and
melancholy
proofs of the effects of violence which are
still scattered over the face of the old world, like so
many admonitory beacons of the scenes through
which its people have reached their present state of
comparative security;beacons that should be as
useful in communicating lessons for the future, as
they are pregnant with pictures of the past.
The outer wall remained unharmed, with the
single exception of the principal gate, which bore
the indelible marks of the smith's sledges; but above
this barrier the work of devastation appeared in
characters not to be mistaken. Every roof, and
there had been fifty, was fallen; every wall, some
of which were already tottering, was blackened;
and not a tower pointed towards the sky, that did
not show marks of the manner in which the flames
had wreathed around its slender shaft. Here and
there, a small thread of white smoke curled upwards,
losing itself in the currents of the air, resembling
so many of the lessening symptoms of a volcano
after an explosion. A small crucifix, which popular
rumor said was wood, but which, in fact, was
Vol. II. K
of painted stone, still kept its place on a gable of
the ruined church; and many a peasant addressed
to it his silent prayers, firm in the belief that God
had protected this image of his sacrifice, throughout
the terrors of the memorable night.
In and about the castle, there appeared the usual
evidences of a distrustful watch;such ward as is
kept by him who feels that he has justly become
obnoxious
to the hand of the constituted powers. The
gates were closed; the sentinels on the walls and
bastions were doubled; and, from time to time, signals
were made that communicated with look-outs, so
stationed
on the hills that they could command views
of the roads which led towards the Rhine, beyond
the gorge of the valley.
The scene in Deurckheim was different, though
it also had some points of resemblance with that in
the hold. There was the same apprehension of
danger from without, the same watchfulness on the
walls and in the towers, and the same unusual
display
of an armed force. But in a town of this
description, it was not easy to imitate the gloomy
reserve of baronial state. The citizens grouped
together in the streets, the women gossipped as in
all sudden and strong cases of excitement, and even
the children appeared to reflect the uneasiness and
indecision of their parents; for as the hand of
authority
relaxed in their seniors, most wandered idly
and vaguely among the men, listening to catch such
loose expressions as might enlighten their growing
understandings. The shops were opened, as usual,
but many stopped to discourse at the doors, while
few entered; and most of the artisans wasted their
time in speculations on the consequence of the hardy
step of their superiors.
In the mean time there was a council held in the
town-hall. Here were assembled all who laid claim
to civic authority in Deurckheim, with some who
appeared under the claim of their services in the
late assault upon the monks. A few of the anxious
wives of the burghers, also, were seen collected in
the more public rooms of the building; for domestic
influence was neither covert nor trifling in that
uxorious
and simple community. We shall resume the
narrative within the walls of this municipal edifice.
The Burgomaster and other chief men were much
moved, by the vague apprehension which was the
consequence of their hazardous experiment. Some
were bold in the audacity of success; some doubted
merely because the destruction of the brotherhood
seemed too great a good, to come unmixed with
evil; some held their opinions in suspense, waiting
for events to give a value to their predictions, and
others shook their heads in a manner that would
appear to imply a secret knowledge of consequences
that were not apparent to vulgar faculties. The
latter
class was more remarkable for its pretension to
exclusive merit than for numbers, and would have
been equally prompt to exaggerate the advantages
of the recent measure, had the public pulse just then
been beating on the access. But the public pulse
was on the decline, and, as we have said, seeing and
understanding all the advantages that were to be
hoped from the defeat of Bonifacius, uncertainty
quickened most imaginations in a manner to conjure
disagreeable pictures of the future. Even Heinrich,
who wanted for neither moral nor physical
resolution
,
was disturbed at his own victory, though if
questioned he could scarcely have told the reason
why. This uneasiness was heightened by the fact,
that most of his compeers regarded him as the man,
on whom the weight of the Church's and of the
Elector's displeasure was most likely to fall, though
it is more than probable that his situation would have
been far less prominent, had there been no question
of any results but such as were agreeable.
This sort of distinction, so isolated in defeat, and
so social in prosperity, is a species of revenge that
society is very apt to take of all who pretend to be
wiser or better than itself, by presuming to point the
way in cases of doubtful expediency, or in
presuming
to lead the way in those that require decision
and nerve. He alone is certain of an unenvied
reputation who, in preceding the main body in the
great march of events, leaves no very sensible space
between him and his fellows; while he alone can
hope for impunity, who keeps so near his backers
as to be able to confound himself in the general
mass, when singularity brings comment and censure.
Heinrich fully felt the awkwardness of his position,
and, just then, he would gladly have compounded
for less of the fame acquired by the bold manner in
which he had led the attack, in order to be rid of
some of his anxiety. Still a species of warlike
instinct
led him to put the best face on the affair, and
when he addressed his colleagues, it was with
cheerfulness
in his tones, however little there might have
been of that desirable feeling in his heart.
Well, brethren, he said, looking around at the
knot of well-known faces, which surrounded him in
the gravity of civic authority, this weighty matter
is, at length, happily, and, as it has been effected
without bloodshed, I may say, peaceably over! The
Benedictines are departed, and though the excellent
Abbot hath taken post in a neighboring abbey, whence
he sends forth brave words to frighten those who are
unused to more dangerous missiles, it will be long
before we shall again hear Limburg bell tolling in
the Jaergerthal.
For that I can swear, said the smith, who was
among the inferiors that crowded a corner of the
hall, occupying as little space as possible, in
deference
to their head-men;my own sledge hath
helped to put the fine-tuned instrument out of tune!
We are now met to hear further propositions
from the monks; but as the hour set for the arrival
of their agent is not yet come, we can lighten the
moments by such discourse as the circumstances
may seem to require. Hast any thing to urge that
will ease the minds of the timid, brother Wolfgang,
if so, of God's name, give it utterance, that we
may know the worst at once.
The affinity between Wolfgang and Heinrich
existed
altogether in their civic relations. The former,
although he coveted the anticipated advantages that
were to result from the downfall of Limburg, had a
constitutional deference for all superior power, and
was unable to enjoy the triumph, without the
bitterest
misgivings concerning the displeasure of the
Elector and Rome. He was aged, too,a fact that
served to heighten the tremor of tones, that, by a
very general convention, are termed raven.
It is wise to call upon the experienced and wise,
for counsel, in pressing straits, returned the old
burgher, for years teach the folly of every thing
human, inclining us to look at the world with
moderation
,
and with less love for ourselves, and our
interests
Brother Wolfgang, thou art not yet yielding so
fast as thou wouldest have us believe, interrupted
Heinrich, who particularly disliked any discouraging
views of the future. Thou art but a boythe
difference between us cannot be greater than some
five-and-twenty years.
Not that, not that;I count but
three-and-seventy
,
and thou mayest fairly number fifty-and-five.
Thou heapest honors on me I little deserve, friend
Wolfgang. I shall not number the days thou namest
these many months, and time marches fast enough
without any fillips from us to help him. If I have
yet seen more than fifty-four, may my fathers arise
K 2
from their graves to claim the little they left behind,
when they took leave of earth!
Words will make neither young, but I could
wish we had found means to lay this unquiet spirit
of Limburg, without so much violence and danger
to ourselves. I am old, and have little interest in
life, except to see those who will come after me
happy and peaceful. Thou knowest that I have
neither chick nor child, neighbor Heinrich, and the
heart of such a man can only beat for all. 'Twere,
indeed, folly in me to think of much else, than of
that great future which lies before us.
Sapperment! exclaimed the smith, who was
disposed to presume a little on the spirit he had
shown in the late attack.Worshipful
Burgomaster
,
were Master Wolfgang to deal out some of his
stores a little freely to the Benedictines, the whole
affair might be quietly settled, and Deurckheim
would be a great gainer. I warrant you now, that
Bonifacius would be glad to receive a well-told sum
in gold, without question or farther account, in lieu
of his lodgings and fare in Limburg, of which he
was only a life-tenant at best. At least, such had
been my humor, an' it had pleased Heaven to have
made me a Benedictine, and Bonifacius a smith.
And where is this gold to be had, bold-speaking
artisan? demanded the aged burgher, severely.
Where but from your untouched stores,
venerable
Wolfgang, answered the single-minded smith;
thou art old, father, and, as thou truly sayest,
without
offspring; the hold of life is getting loose, and to
deal with thee in frankness, I see no manner in which
the evil may be so readily turned from our town.
Peace, senseless talker! dost think thy betters
have no other employment for their goods than to
cast them to the winds, as thy sparks scatter at the
stroke of the sledge? The little I have hath been
gained
with sore toil and much saving, and it may yet be
needed to keep want and beggary from my door.
Nay, nay, when we are young we think the dirt
may be turned to gold; hot blood and lusty limbs
cause us to believe man equal to any labor, ay, even
to living without food; but when experience and
tribulation have taught us truth, we come to know,
neighbors, the value of pence. I am of a
long-living
stock, Heaven help us! and there is greater
likelihood of my yet becoming a charge to the town,
than of my ever doing a tithe of that, this heedless
smith hath hinted.
By St. Benedict, master! I hinted naught: what
I said was in plain words, and it is this, that one so
venerable for his years, and so respected for his
means, might do great good in this strait! Such
an act would sweeten the few days thou yet hast.
Get thee away, fellow; thou talkest of death an'
it were a joke. Do not the young go to their graves
as well as the old, and are there not instances of
thousands that have outlived their means? No, I
much fear that this matter will not be appeased
without mulcting the artisans in heavy sums;
but happily, most that belong to the crafts are young
and able to pay!
The reply of the smith, who was getting warm
in a dispute in which he believed all the merit was
on his own side, was cut short by a movement
among the populace, who crowded the outer door
of the town-house; the burghers seemed uneasy, as
if they saw a crisis was near, and then a beadle
announced the arrival of a messenger from the
routed community of Limburg. The civic
authorities
of Deurckheim, although assembled
expressly
with the expectation of such a visit, were,
like all men of but indifferently regulated minds,
taken by surprise at the moment. Nothing was
digested
,
no plan of operations had been proposed,
and, although all had dreamed for several nights of
the very subject before them, not one of them all
had thought upon it. Still it was now necessary to
act, and after a little bustle, which had no other
object
than an idle attempt to impose upon the senses
of the messenger, by a senseless parade, orders
were given that the latter should be admitted.
The agent of the monks was himself a
Benedictine
.
He entered the hall, attended only by the
city-guard who had received him at the gate, with
his cowl so far drawn upon his head as to conceal
the features. There was a moment of curiosity,
and the name of Father Siegfried was whispered
from one to another, as each judged of the man by
the exterior.
Uncover, of Heaven's mercy! Father, said
Heinrich, and seat thyself as freely in the
town-hall
of Deurckheim, as if thou wert at thine ease in
the ancient cloisters of Limburg. We are lions
in the attack, but harmless as thy marble cherubs,
when there is not occasion for your true manly
qualities
;
so take thy seat, of God's name! and be of good
cheer;none will harm thee.
The voice of the Burgomaster lost its confidence
as he concluded. The Benedictine was calmly
removing
the cowl; and when the cloth fell, it exposed
the respected features of Father Arnolph.
He that comes in the service of him I call
master
,
needeth not this assurance, answered the monk;
still I rejoice to find ye in this mood, and not bent
on maintaining an original error, by further
out-rages
.
It is never too late to see our faults, nor yet
to repair them.
I cry thy mercy, Holy Prior! we had taken
thee for a very different member of the fraternity,
and thou art not the less welcome for being him
thou art.
Heinrich arose respectfully, and his example was
followed by all present. The Prior seemed pleased,
and a glow, like that which a benevolent hope
creates
,
passed athwart his countenance. With
perfect
simplicity he took the offered stool, as the least
obtrusive manner of inducing the burghers to
resume
their seats. The experiment produced the
effect he intended.
I should pretend to an indifference I do not feel,
were I to say, Heinrich Frey, that I come among
you, men to whom I have often administered the
rites of the church during long and watchful years,
without the wish to find that my ministrations are
remembered.
If there dwelleth knave in Deurckheim whose
heart hath not been touched by thy good works,
Father, the hound is without bowels, and unfit to
live among honest people.
Most true! exclaimed the smith, in his audible
by-play. The Burgomaster doth us all justice! I
never struck spark from iron, more freely than I will
render respect to the most reverend Prior. His
prayers are like tried steel, and next to those of him
of the hermitage are in most esteem among us.
Fill me an abbey with such men, and for one, I
shall be ready to trust all our salvation to their
godliness, without thought or concern for ourselves.
Sapperment! could such a community be found, it
would be a great relief to the laymen, and more
particularly to your artisan, who might turn all
his thoughts to his craft, with the certainty of being
watched by men capable of setting the
quickest-witted
devil at defiance!
Arnolph listened to this digression with patience,
and he acknowledged the courtesy and friendliness
of his reception, by a slow inclination of the head.
He was too much accustomed to hear these
temporal
applications of the spiritual interests of which
he was a minister, to be surprised at any thing; and
he was too meek on the subject of his own
deserving
,
to despise any because they were weaker than
himself. The Christian religion seems to be divided
into two great classes of worshippers; those who
think its consolations are most palpable in their
direct and worldly form, and those whose
aspirations
are so spiritualized, and whose thoughts are
so sublimated, as to consider it a metaphysical
theory
,
in which the principal object is to preserve the
logical harmony. For ourselves, we believe it to
be a dispensation from God, to those of his creatures
who are fearfully composed of the material and
immaterial, and that so far as it is connected with
our probation here, it is never to be considered as
entirely distinct from one or the other of the great
attributes of our nature. It is evident that such
were not the views of the honest smith; and it is
probable, had the matter been thoroughly sifted, it
would have been found that, as respects
Deurckheim
,
he was altogether of the popular party.
Thou comest, Father, like the dove to the ark,
the bearer of the olive-branch, resumed Heinrich;
though for our northern regions a leaf of the oak
would more likely have been the emblem, had
Ararat
been one of these well-wooded hills of ours.
I come to offer the conditions of our
brotherhood
,
and to endeavor to persuade the misguided in
Deurckheim to accept them. The holy abbots, with
the right reverend fathers in God, the Bishops of
Spires and Worms, now assembled in the latter city,
have permitted me to be the bearer of their terms,
an office I have sought, lest another should forget
to entreat and influence, in the desire to menace.
Gott bewahre! thou hast done well, as is thy
wont, excellent Arnolph! Threats are about as
useful
with Deurckheim, as the holy water is in our
rhenish, both being well enough in their places; but
he that cannot be driven must be led, and liquor
that is right good in itself needeth no flavor from
the church. As for this old misunderstanding
between
Limburg of the one side, and the noble
Count of Hartenburg with our unworthy town of
the other, the matter may be said to be now of
easy adjustment, since the late events have cleared
it of its greatest difficulty; and so, from my heart,
I wish thee joy of thy mission, and felicitate the
town that it hath to treat with one so skilful and so
reasonable. Thou wilt find us in a friendly humor,
and ready to meet thee half-way; for I know not
the man in Deurckheim that desireth to push the
controversy a foot further, or who is not at heart
content.
No, that would be out of reason and charity,
said the smith, speaking again among the auditors,
We ought to show these Benedictines an
example
of moderation, neighbors; and therefore for
one, though no better than a poor artisan that
gaineth
his bread by blows on the anvil, do I agree with
the worshipful Heinrich, and say, of God's name!
let us be reasonable in our demands, and be content
with as little as may be, in the settlement of our
dispute.
The Prior listened patiently, as usual, but a hectic
glowed, for an instant, on his cheek. It disappeared,
and the benevolent blue eye was again seen shining
amid features that the cloister and the closet had
long since robbed of all other bloom. Ye know,
burghers of Deurckheim, he answered, that in
assailing the altars of Limburg ye set a double
power at defiance;that of the Church, as it is
constituted and protected on earth, and that of God.
My errand, at this moment, is to speak of the first.
Our Father of Worms is sorely angered, and he
has not failed to address himself directly and
promptly
to our Father at Rome. In addition to this
reverend
appeal, messengers have been dispatched to
both the Elector and Emperor, as well as to divers
of the Ecclesiastical Princes who rule on the banks
of the Rhine. This is a fearful array of power to be
met by a mountain baron, and a city whose walls
can be measured by the leg in so short a time.
But chiefly would I lay stress on the evil that may
flow from the displeasure of the Head of the Church.
And should he read the late exploit with severity,
reverend Prior, what are we to look to, as its fruits?
To be denounced as excluded from the fold,
and to be left to the wickedness and folly of your
own hearts. In a word, excommunication.
Umph!this might prove a short way of
recruiting
the followers of Brother Luther! thou
knowest
,
holy Arnolph, that men look more and more
closely, every day, into these disputed points.
Would that they looked with more humility and
understanding! If ye consider the denunciations
and benedictions of him to whom has been confided
the authority to bless and to curse, as of little weight,
no words of mine can heighten their effect; but all
among ye who are not prepared to go the length
that your Burgomaster hath just hinted, may deem
it prudent to pause, ere they incur the heavy risk of
living under such a weight of Heaven's displeasure.
The burghers regarded each other in doubt, few
among them being yet prepared to push resistance
so far. Some inwardly trembled, for habit and
tradition were too strong for the new opinions;
some shrewdly weighed the temporal rather than
the spiritual consequences, and others ruminated on
the possibility of enduring the anathema in so good
company. There are thousands that are willing to
encounter danger in large bodies, who shrink from
its hazards alone; and perhaps the soldier goes to
the charge quite as much stimulated by the
sympathy
of association, as he is sustained by the dread
of shame or the desire of renown. The civic
counsellors
of Deurckheim now found themselves in
some such plight, and each man felt assurance or
doubt, much as he happened to meet with either of
those feelings expressed in the eyes of his neighbor.
Have ye any less godly proposition to make?
asked Heinrich, who perceived that the moral part
of his civic support began to waver, for these are
points in which we are better skilled, than on those
that touch your doctrinal niceties.
I am commanded to say, that, as becomes their
divine office, the brotherhood of Limburg is
disposed
to pardon and forget, inasmuch as duty will
allow, the late act of Deurckheim, on conditions
that may be named.
Ay, this is christian-like, and will meet with a
ready return, in our dispositions. On our side, too,
holy Prior, there is every wish to forget the past,
and to look only to a quiet and friendly future
do I interpret the intentions of the town well, my
neighbors?
To the letter!no clerk could do it better.
Yes, we are of the community's mind; it is wise
to live at peace, and to pardon and overlook; were
ready answers to this appeal.
Thou hearest, father! a better mood no minister
or messenger need wish! 'Fore Heaven! we are
all of one mind in this particular; and I know not
that the man would find safety in Deurckheim, who
should talk of aught but peace!
It is to be mourned, that ye have not always
been of this humor; I come not, however, to
reproach
,
but to reclaim; not to defy, but to persuade;
not to intimidate, but to convince. Here are the
written propositions of the holy divines by whom I
am charged with this office of mediator, and I leave
it for a time to your private consultations. When
ye shall have well digested this fit offer, I will come
among ye in peace and friendliness.
The written proposals were received, and the
Vol. II. L
whole assembly rose to do the Prior honor. As the
latter left the hall, he asked permission of several
of the burghers, among whom was Heinrich Frey,
to visit their families, in the spirit of Christian
guardianship
.
The desired consents were obtained
without
demur or doubt, on the part of any; for
whatever
may be said or thought of the errors of public
opinion, it is usually right where the means are
possessed of at all giving it a true direction. The
high estimation in which Arnolph was held, by the
mere force of popular instinct, was never more
plainly seen than on the present occasion, when
even those who had so lately warred against the
community, threw open their doors without reserve;
though it was well known, that the late policy of the
town had many a secret enemy, and many a bitter
commentator, in that sex which is sometimes as
slow to incite to violence and resistance, as at others
it is thoughtless and hasty.
CHAPTER X.
What well-appointed leader fronts us here?
King Henry IV
.
The
missive of the monks was written in Latin.
At that period few wrote but the learned, and every
noble or town was obliged to maintain a scholar to
perform what are now the commonest duties of
intercourse. The clerkly agent of Deurckheim had
been educated for the Church, and had even
received
the tonsure; but some irregularities of life,
which, as it would appear, were not within the pale
of clerical privileges, or which had been so
unguarded
as to bring scandal on the profession,
compelled
him to give his destinies a new direction.
As happens with most men who have expended
much time and labor in qualifying themselves for
any particular pursuit, and who are unexpectedly
driven from its exercise, this individual, who was
named Ludwig, and who was often ironically styled
in common parlance Father Ludwig, never
completely
succeeded in repairing the injury done by
the first false step he had made. His acquirements
procured for him a certain amount of consideration;
but as he was known to be somewhat free in his
manner of life, and, especially as schism grew strong
in Germany, a bold sceptic on most of the
distinctive
doctrines of the Catholic Church, he ever wore
about his character some of that fancied looseness,
which insensibly attaches itself to all renegades,
whether their motives be more or less corrupt. Still
as he was known to be instructed, the multitude
ascribed more virtue to his secession than it would
have imputed to the withdrawal from the fold of
fifty sincere believers; for most believed there were
means of judging that belonged to the initiated,
which did not fall to the lot of those who
worshipped
in the outer court. We have daily proofs that
this weakness reaches into the temporal interests of
life, and that opinions are valued in proportion as
there is believed to be some secret means of
acquiring
information; though men rarely conceal any
thing that they know which may be revealed, and
few indeed are disposed to hide their lights under
a bushel.
Ludwig forgot no part of the intonation or
emphasis
,
while he uttered the unintelligible phrases of the
monkish missive. His auditors listened the more
attentively, because they did not understand a
syllable
of what was said; attention seeming usually
to be riveted in an inverse ratio to the facilities of
comprehension. Perhaps some of the higher
dignitaries
flattered themselves, that their inferiors might
be duped into the belief of their attainments; a fact
that could not fail to increase their influence, since
there is no better evidence of the innate aspirations
of our intellectual being, than the universal
deference
that is paid to knowledge. We have hazarded
this supposition against the civic authorities of
Deurckheim, because we believe it depends upon a
general principle of human ambition; and because
in our own case, we well remember hearing out a
sermon of more than an hour's duration delivered
in Low Dutch, and in a damp church in Holland,
when not a word, from the text to the benediction,
was understood.
Right learnedly worded, and no doubt of proper
courtesy! exclaimed Heinrich, when the letter was
ended, and while the clerk was clearing his
spectacles
,
preparatory to the more vulgar version
It is a happy strife, neighbors, in which such
language
passes between the parties; for it proves that
charity is stronger than malice, and that reason is
not forgotten merely because there have been
blows!
I have rarely heard braver words, answered
a fellow-burgher, or those that are better penned!
Potz-tausend! muttered the smith; it were
almost a sin to dispossess men that can write thus!
Murmurs of approbation passed through the
crowd, and not an individual was there, with the
solitary exception of a gaping idiot that had stolen
into the hall, who did not affect to have received
more or less pleasure from the communication.
Even the idiot had his share of satisfaction, for, by
the pure force of sympathy, he caught gleamings
of a delight that seemed so strong and so general.
Ludwig now commenced translating the letter
into the harsh, energetic, German of the Rhine.
The wonderful capabilities of the language enabled
him to convert the generalities and comprehensive
terms of the Latin, with a minuteness of
signification
,
which put the loss of any shade of idea utterly
out of the question.
What the monks had meant, and perhaps even
more, was laboriously, and with malignant pleasure,
rendered; and so rendered, as to give to each
expression the fullest weight and meaning.
We have no intention of attempting the office of
translating this harsh summons ourselves, but must
be content with a brief summary of its contents.
The instrument opened with a greeting that was not
unlike those which were sent, in the first ages of
the present dispensation, from the apostles to the
churches of the east. It then contained a short but
pointed narrative of the recent events, which were
qualified in a way that the reader can easily
imagine
;
it proceeded to refer to the spiritual and
temporal
authorities from which the brotherhood had
assurances of support; and it concluded by
demanding
,
under the penalty of incurring every earthly
and heavenly risk, an enormous sum in gold, as a
pecuniary reparation for the injury donea
complete
and absolute submission of the town to the
jurisdiction of the community, even more than was
ever before pretended toa public and general
acknowledgment of error, with a variety of
penances
and pilgrimages to be performed by
functionaries
that were namedand the delivery of
Heinrich Frey, with eleven others of the principal
inhabitants, into the Abbot's hands as hostages, until
all of these exactions and conditions should be
completely
and satisfactorily fulfilled.
Wheeew! whistled Heinrich, when
Ludwig ended, after a most provoking prolixity,
that had completely exhausted the Burgomaster's
patience. Himmel! here is a victory that is likely
to cost us our means, our characters, our liberties, our
consciences, and our ease! Are the monks mad,
Master Ludwig, or art thou sporting with our
credulity
:Do
L 2
they really speak of hostages, and of
gold?
Of a surety, worshipful Herr, and seemingly
with a right good will.
Wilt read the part touching the hostages again,
in the Latin; thou mayest have indiscreetly
overlooked
a conjunction or a pronoun, as I think thou
callest these notable figures of speech.
Ay, it were well to judge of the letter by the
Latin, echoed the smith; one never knows the
quality of his metal, at the first touch of the
hammer
.
Ludwig read, a second time, extracts in the
original
,
and, through a species of waggery, by which
he often took a secret and consolatory revenge for
the indignities he frequently received from the
ignorant
,
and which served him as food of merriment
and as a vent to his confined humors in occasional
interviews with others of his own class, he gave
with singular emphasis the terms of greeting, which
were, as usual, embellished with phrases of priestly
benediction, as the part that especially demanded
the prompt delivery of Heinrich Frey and his
fellows
into the hands of the Benedictines.
Gott bewahre! cried the Burgomaster, who
had shifted a leg each time the clerk glanced an
eye at him over his spectaclesI have other
concerns
than to sit in a cell, and Deurckheim would
fare but badly were the town left without so large
a share of its knowledge and experience. Prithee,
Master Ludwig, give us the kinder language of these
Benedictines; for methinks there may be found
some words of peace in the blessings they bestow.
The crafty clerk now read, in the original, the
strongest of the denunciations, and the parts of the
letter which so peremptorily demanded the hostages.
How now, knave! said the hasty Burgomaster,
thou hast not been faithful in thy former readings!
Thou hearest, neighbors, I am named especially
in their benedictions; for you must know, worthy
burghers, that Henricus means Heinrich, and Frey,
well pronounced, is much the same in all languages.
This I know from long experience in these cunning
instruments. I owe the reverend Benedictines grace
for their good wishes, expressed with this
particularity
;
though the manner in which they introduce
the hostages is unseemly.
I thought when it came to the worst, muttered
the smith, that Master Heinrich would be
considered
with especial favor. This it is, brother
artisans
,
to be honored in one's town, and to have a
name!
There sounds a parley! interrupted the
Burgomaster
.
Can these crafty monks have dared
to trifle with us, by sending the choicest of their
flock to hold us in discourse, while they steal upon
us in armor?
The idea was evidently unpleasant to most of the
council, and to none more so than to the aged
Wolf-gang
,
whose years would seem to have given less
value to his personal safety than to the rest. Many
quitted the hall, while those that remained appeared
to be detained more by their apprehensions than by
their fortitude. Heinrich, who was constitutionally
firm, continued the most undisturbed of them all,
though even he went from window to window, like
a man that was uneasy.
If the godly villains have done this treachery,
let them look to itwe are not vassals to be
hood-winked
with a cowl!
Perhaps, worshipful and wise Heinrich, said
the crafty Ludwig, they send the trumpet, in
readiness
to receive the hostages.
The holy magi curse them, and their impudent
long-winded musician!How now, fellow!who
maketh this tantarara at our gate?
The noble Count of Hartenburg is at the valley
side of the town, honorable Burgomaster, with a
stout troop of mounted followers, announced the
breathless runner, who came on this errand. He
chafes at the delay, but as the order to keep fast is
so rigid, the captain of the watch dares not unbar
and unbolt without permission had.
Bid the valiant and faithful burgher undo his
fastenings, o' Heaven's name!and right speedily.
We should have bethought us, excellent neighbors,
of the chances of this visit, and had a care that
our princely friend were without this cause of
complaint
.
But we should rejoice, too, that our people
are so true, as to keep their trust even against
one so known and honored. I warrant ye, neighbors,
were it the imperial Karl himself, he would fare no
better:
Heinrich was interrupted while vaunting and
extolling
the civic discipline, by the trampling of horses'
feet on the pavement below the windows, and on
looking out he saw Emich and all his cortge coolly
alighting.
Umph! ejaculated the Burgomastergo forth,
and do reverence to my Lord the Count.
The council awaited in deep silence the
appearance
of their visitor. Emich entered the hall with
the assured step of a superior, and with a
countenance
that was clouded. He bowed to the
salutations
of the council, signed for his armed followers
to await at the door, and walked himself to the seat
which Heinrich had previously vacated, and which
in truth was virtually the throne of Deurckheim.
Placing his heavy form in the chair, with the air of
one accustomed to fill it, he again bowed, and made
a gesture of the hand, which the burghers
understood
to be an invitation to be seated. With
doubting
faces the awed authorities submitted, receiving
that permission as a boon, which they were ready
so lately themselves to urge as a civility. Heinrich
looked surprised, but, accustomed to pay great
deference
to his noble friend, he returned the bow and
smilefor he was especially saluted with a smile
and took the second place.
It was not well, my worthy townsmen, to close
your gates thus churlishly against me, commenced
the baron; there are rights and honors that ought
to be respected, at all hours and seasons, and I
marvel
that this need be taught to the Deurckheimers
by a Count of Leiningen. I and my train were
held at parlance at your barriers, an' we had been
so many wandering gipsies, or some of the
free-bands
that sell their arquebuses and lances to the
highest bidder!
That there may have been some little delay, my
Lord Count answered Heinrich
Little, Burgomaster! dost thou call that little
which keeps a noble of Leiningen chafing at a gate,
amid dust and heat, and gaping mouths? thou
knowest not the spirit of our steeds, Herr Frey, if
thou imaginest they like such sudden checks of the
curb. We are of high mettle, horses and riders,
and must have our way when fairly spurred!
There was every desire, nobly born Emich, to
do you honor, and to undo our bolts as speedily as
might be done; for this end we were about to depute
the necessary orders, when we were suddenly
favored with your gracious and high dispensing
company. We doubt not that the captain of the
watch reasoned with himself, and did that, of good
intention and of his own accord, which he would
speedily have been called upon to do, by our
commands
.
God's truth! that may not prove so true,
answered
Emich, laughing. Our impatience was
stronger than your bolts, and lest the same oversight
might renew the inconvenience, we found means to
enter with little formality.
The burghers in general seemed greatly troubled,
and Heinrich as greatly surprised. The baron saw
that enough had been said, for the moment; and,
assuming a more gracious mien, he continued in
another strain.
Well, loving townsmen, he said, it is now a
happy week, since all our desires have been
accomplished
.
The Benedictines are defeated, the
Jaegerthal
is at peace and under the sway of its rightful
Lord, and yet the sun rises and sets as before, the
heavens seem as smiling, the rains as refreshing,
and all our hopes as reasonable, as of old! There is
to be no miracle in their behalf, Herr Heinrich, and
we may fain sleep in peace.
That may depend, Lord Count, on other humors
than ours. Here are reports abroad that are any
thing but pleasant to the ear, and our honest
towns-men
are troubled lest, after doing good service in
behalf of their betters, they may yet be made to
pay all the charges of the victory.
Set their hearts at peace, worthy Burgomaster,
for I have not thrust a hand into the ecclesiastical
flame, without thought of keeping it from being
scorched. Thou knowest I have friends, and 'twill
not be easy to put a Count of Leiningen to the ban.
Nay, we doubt but little, illustrious noble, of your
safety, and of your house's; our fear is for
ourselves
.
Thou hast only to lean on me, Master Frey.
When the tie between us shall be explained more
clearly to the Emperor and the Diet, and when our
loving wishes, as respects each other, shall be better
understood, all will know that to strike Deurckheim
is to aim a blow at me. Whence cometh this
sudden
fear, for last reports touching your condition
said that the town was firm of heart, and bent on
joining Luther, rather than confess?
Sapperment! the heart must not always be
judged by the countenance! Here is the smith, who
is seldom of a bright visage, but were it said that
his heart is as black as his face, great injustice
would be done the man.
A movement and a murmur betrayed the
admiration
of those who crowded the door, at this figure
of the Burgomaster.
Thou hast some reason for this sudden
despondency
?
rejoined the Count, glancing a look of
indifference
at the artisans.
Why, to speak the truth, Lord Emich,
Bonifacius
hath sent us a missive, written in very fair
Latin, and in a scholarly manner, that threatens us
to a man with every Christian wish, from plagues to
downright and incurable damnation.
And art thou troubled, Heinrich, at a scrawl of
unintelligible words!
I know not what is to be understood, Herr
Count, if a demand for Heinrich Frey, with eleven
others of our most respected, as hostages, doubtless
to be kept from their affairs in some convent cells,
on hard fare, and hard penance, for weary months,
be not plain! To this they add demands for gold,
with pilgrimages, and penances, and other godly
recreations
.
By whose hand got ye this?
By that of the honest Prior, a man of so much
bowels, that I marvel he should be the bearer of a
message so unwelcome and so uncharitable. But
the best of us have our moments of weakness, for
all are not always thoughtful or just.
Ha! Arnolph is afoot!Hath he departed?
He tarries, my good lord; for look you, we have
not yet determined on the fashion of our reply.
Thou wouldst not have thought of sending
answer
,
without taking counsel of me, Herr Frey!
said Emich, sharply, and much in the manner that
a parent reproves his child. I am luckily arrived,
and the matter shall be looked to. Have ye
bethought
ye of the fitting terms?
No doubt all have bethought them much, though
as yet, none have uttered their secret opinions. For
one, I cry out loudly against all hostages, though
none could be readier than I to undergo this risk to
serve the town; but it is admitting an error in too
plain evidence, and carrieth with it a confession that
our faith is not to be depended on.
This sentiment, which had long been struggling in
Heinrich's breast, met with an audible echo in that
of every one of the eleven who were likely, by
situation
and years, to be chosen for this honorable
distinction; and every man among them uttered
some proper phrase concerning the value of
character
,
and the necessity of so demeaning themselves,
as not to cheapen that of Deurckheim. Emich
listened
coolly, for it was of great indifference to him
how much the burghers were alarmed, since their
fears could only induce them the more to seek
support
from his interest and power.
Thou hast then refused the conditions?
We have done nothing, Herr Count, but we have
thought much and sorely, as hath just been said. I
take it, the gold and the hostages will find but little
favor among us; but, rather than keep the
Palatinate
in a disturbed and insecure state, and as we
are quiet burghers, who look to peace and the means
of getting their bread, our answer may not be so
short, could the matter be brought down to a few
chosen penitents and pilgrimages. Though half of
Brother Luther's mind in many things, it were well
to get quit of even the chances of damnation, for a
few sore feet and stripes, that might be so managed
as to do little civic harm.
By the lineage of my house! excellent Heinrich,
thou dost but echo my thoughts. The Prior is a
man with bowels, and this matter shall be speedily
arranged. We must bethink us of the details, for
these monks are close calculators, and on a time are
said to have outwitted Lucifer. First then, there
shall be an offering of gold.
Nay, my Lord Count will consider the means of
our town!
Peace, honest Heinrich, whispered Emich,
leaning towards the place where the Burgomaster
and two or three of the principal members of the
council satWe have accounts from the Hebrews
at Koeln, which say the Limburg treasures may be
well applied, in this manner, to purchase a little
peace. We will be liberal as becomes our names,
he now spoke to all, and not send the brotherhood
naked into a world, which is getting every day less
disposed to clothe them; we must drain our coffers
rather than they should starve, and this point may
be looked upon as settled. As for our penitents and
pilgrims, the castle and the town shall equally
furnish
a share. I can send the lieutenant of my
men-at-arms
,
who hath a nimble footGottlob the
cowherd
,
to whom punishment is fairly due, on many
general accountsand others doubtless that may
be found. What good, of this nature, can
Deurckheim
supply?
We are a homely people, high-born Graf, and
having fewer virtues than our betters, are not so
well gifted either in vices. As becometh a middle
state, we are content with no great excess in the
one or the other of the more striking qualities; and
yet I doubt not, neighbors, that at need there might
be among us men, who would not fare the worse
for wholesome correction and fitting penances?
Heinrich looked about him, in an inquiring
manner
,
while each burgher passed the investigation on
Vol. II. M
to the next, as men forward a glance that they wish
to think has no application to themselves. The
crowd at the door recoiled a pace, and heads were
turned curiously, and eyes roamed among the
inferiors
,
with quite as much expression as had just
been done by their superiors.
There are delinquents, young and thoughtless
varlets, who vex the town with their ribaldry and
noise, that it might do to scourge with the church's
rod,suggested the tremulous and aged Wolfgang.
St. Benedict will be put off with none of these,
bluffly answered the Burgomaster; he must have
men of substance and of some esteem, or the
affair will be as far as ever from a happy conclusion.
What thinkest thou, honest and patriotic Dietrich?
Thou hast a constitution to endure, and a heart of
iron.
Tausend sex und zwanzig! returned the smith;
you little know all my ailings, most worshipful
masters, if you think I am near this force! I have
difficulties of breath, that are only at peace near
the heat of the forge, and my heart gets soft as a
feather on a journey. Then there is the wife and
the young to wail my absence, and I am not scholar
enough to repeat a prayer more than some six or
ten times in a day.
This excuse did not appear to satisfy the council,
who, acting on that principle of exaction which is
found among all people and in all communities, felt
disposed to recollect the former services of the
artisan, as a sort of apology for further claims on
his exertions.
Nay, for one that hath ever been so free at the
wish of Deurckheim, this plea cometh with an ill
grace, answered Heinrich,a sentiment that was
audibly repeated in a general exclamation of
discontent
by all the other burghers.
We expected other reply from thee!
Well, since the worshipful council expectsbut
there will be the wife and the young, with none to
care for them!
That difficulty may be disposed ofthou hast
six, if I remember, in thy household?
Ten, honorable Heinrichnot a mouth less than
half a score, and all of an age to require much
food and strong.
Here are all but two of our dozen, in a word,
noble Emich, promptly added the Burgomaster;
and of a scriptural quality, for we are told, the
prayers and sacrifices of the young and innocent
are acceptable. Thanks, honest smith, and more
than thanks: thou shalt have marks of a quality
different from those left by the scourge. No doubt
the others may be picked up among the useless and
idle.
Our affairs seem settled, loving burghers,
answered
the Count. Leave me to dispose of the
question of indemnity, and look ye to the penitents,
and to the seemliness of the atonement. Ye may
retire, ye that throng the way.The mandate was
hurriedly obeyed, and the door closed.As for
support at Heidelburg and Madrid, continued the
Count, the matter hath been looked to; and should
the complaint be pushed beyond decency at Rome,
we have always brother Luther as an ally.
Bonifacius
wanteth not for understanding, and when he
looks deeper into our defences, and into the humor
of the times, I know him for one that will be disposed
to stay an evil, before it becomes an incurable sore.
These shaven crowns, master Heinrich, are not like
us fathers of families, much troubled for posterity;
for they leave no name or blood behind them; and
so long as we can fairly satisfy their present
longings
,
the truce may be considered as more than half
concluded. To strip a churchman of his hoardings,
needeth but a bold spirit, a present bribe, and a
strong hand.
The whole council murmured its approval of this
reasoning, and the discussion now took a turn more
inclining to the details.
Emich grew gracious, and the burghers bolder.
Some even laughed openly at their late
apprehensions
,
and nearly all thought they saw a final
settlement
of this long-disputed and serious question. The
Prior, who had been engaged in visits of religious
charity in the town, was soon summoned, and the
Count assumed the office of communicating the
common answer.
The meeting between Emich and Father Arnolph
was characteristic. It took place in the public
hall, and in the presence of a few of the principal
burghers. The Count was at first disposed to be
haughty, imperious, and even repulsive; but the
Monk was meek, earnest, and calm. The effect of
this forbearance was quickly apparent. Their
intercourse
soon grew more courteous, for Emich,
when not excited, or misled by the cupidity that
disgraced
the age, possessed most of the breeding of
his peers. On the other hand, Arnolph never lost
sight of his duties, the chiefest of which he believed
to be charity.
Thou art the bearer of the olive-branch, holy
Prior, said the Count, as they took their seats,
after some little previous parley; and pity 'tis,
that all who wear the cowl, did not as well
comprehend
the pleasantest quality of their sacred
characters
.
The world would grow less quarrelsome, and
we who worship in the court of the temple, would
be less disturbed by doubts touching those who lift
its veil.
I did not look to hold discussion of clerkly duties
with thee, Lord Count, when my superior sent me
on this errand to the town of Deurckheim, mildly
answered the monk, indifferent to the other's wily
compliments. Am I, then, to consider the castle
and the council as one?
In heart, humor, and interests;I might add,
also, in rights and sovereignty; for, now all question
of the Abbey is settled, the ancient temporal rule is
replaced.Say I well, loving burghers?
Umph! ejaculated Heinrich. The rest bent
their heads, though doubtingly like men taken by
surprise. But Emich seemed perfectly satisfied.
It is of no great moment who governs here,
since the wrong done to God and our brotherhood
must be repaired by those who have committed it.
Hast thou examined the missive of the Abbey,
Herr Burgomaster, and art ready with the reply?
This duty hath been done, reverend Arnolph,
and here is our answer. As for the letter, it is our
mature opinion, that it hath been indited in a fair
hand, and in very learned Latin, as befitteth a
brotherhood of so much repute. We deem this
more creditable, since there have been some late
heavy losses in books, and he who did this might
not have the customary aid of materials to which
use had made him familiar. As for what hath been
said in the way of greeting and benedictions, holy
Prior, we are thankful, and most especially for the
part that is of thy share, which we esteem to be of
particular unction; in mine own behalf, especially,
would I thank all of the convent for the manner in
which my name hath been introduced into their
good wishes; though I must add, it were better that
he who wrote had been content to stop there, since
these frequent introductions of private personages,
in matters of general concernment, are apt to raise
envy and other evil passions. As respecting,
moreover
,
any especial pilgrimages and penances in my
own person, I feel not the occasion, as would
doubt-less
M 2
be the fact at need, since we see most men
pricked on to these mortifications by their own
consciences
.
The expiation is not sought for particular
consolation
,
neither is it desired as a balm to the
Convent's
wounds, but as an humble and a necessary
atonement to God. In this view have we deemed it
important to choose those who are most esteemed
among men, since it is before the eyes of mankind
that the expiation must be made. I am the bearer
of similar proposals to the Castle, and, by high
ecclesiastical
authority, am I charged to demand that
its well-born Lord, himself, make these
acknowledgments
in his own person. The sacrifice of the
honored
and innocent hath more flavor than that of the
mean and wicked.
Potz Tausend! muttered Heinrich.I see
little
use for leading a clean life with such doctrines
and discipline!
But Emich heard the proposal without a frown.
Bold, haughty, and audacious, he was also deeply
artful and superstitious. For years, his rude mind
had been tormented by conflicting passionsthose
of cupidity and religious dread; and now that the
former was satisfied, he had begun to reflect
seriously
of appeasing his latent apprehensions in some
effectual manner. Plans of various expiatory
offerings
had already crossed his mind, and so far from
hearing the declaration of the Benedictine with
resentment
,
he entertained the idea with pleasure. It
seemed an easy and cheap expedient of satisfying
all scruples; for the re-establishment of the
community
on the hill of Limburg was a condition he
knew to be entirely out of the question, in the present
state of the public mind in Germany. In this humor,
then, did he reply. The conference of course
proceeded
harmoniously, and it was protracted for
several hours. But as its results will be more
regularly
developed in the course of the narrative, we
shall not anticipate events.
CHAPTER XI.
In a strange land
Such things, however trivial, reach the heart,
And through the heart the head, clearing away
The narrow notions that grew up at home,
And in their place grafting good will to all
Rogers
.
It
is necessary to advance a few weeks in the
order of time; a change that will bring us to the
middle of the warm and generous month of July.
The hour was towards the close of day, and the
place and scenery such as it is now our duty to
describe
.
Let the reader imagine a high naked down, whose
surface was slightly broken by irregularities. Scarce
a tree was visible over the whole of its bald face,
though a few stunted shrubs betrayed the efforts of
the earth to push forth a meager vegetation. The
air was pure, thin, and volatile, and, together with
the soft blue of the void, denoted a great elevation
above the vapors and impurities which linger nearer
to regions that lie on the level of the sea.
Notwithstanding
these never-failing signs of a mountain
country, here and there were to be seen distant
peaks, that shot upward into the fierce light,
glittering
with everlasting frost. Along one side of this
naked expanse, the land fell suddenly away, towards
a long, narrow, sheet of water, which lay a
thousand
feet below. The shores of this lake, for such
it was, were clothed with innumerable white
dwellings
,
and garnished with hamlets and vineyards,
while a walled town, with its towers and battlements,
occasionally darkened the shores. But these were
objects scarcely to be seen, from the precise
situation
which we desire the mind of the reader to
occupy. In the distant view, always in that
direction
,
one favorably placed might have seen a vast
range of undulating country, stretching towards
the north and east, that had the usual characteristics
of a region in which Alpine mountains begin
gradually
to melt into the plain. This region was
beautified
with several spots of dark blue, resembling so
many deep reflections of the skies, which were
sheets of limpid and tranquil water. Towards the
south and west, the down was bounded by a natural
wall of rude and gray rock, the rose, in nearly all
its line, to the elevation of a mountain, and which
shot up to a giddy height, near its centre, in two
pointed cones, that, by their forms, coupled with
other circumstances that shall be soon explained,
had obtained the name of the `Mitres.'
Near the barrier of mountain, and almost directly
beneath these natural mitres, was a small village,
whose houses, constructed of wood, had the wide
roofs, numerous windows, and the peculiar
resin-like
color of Swiss habitations.
The place was a hamlet rather than a village,
and most of the land around it lay at waste, like all
that was visible for miles, in every direction. On a
rising ground near the hamlet, from which it was
separated merely by a large esplanade, or green as
we should be apt to term the spot, stood one of
those mazes of roofs, chimneys, and towers, which
in that age, and indeed even now, mark a
conventual
pile. The edifices were large, complicated in
their forms and order, and had been constructed
without much architectural knowledge or taste; the
air of the whole being that of rude but abundant
wealth. In the centre was a church, or chapel,
evidently of ancient existence and simple origin,
though its quaint outlines were elaborately decorated,
after the fashion of the times, by a variety of after
thoughts, and in a manner to show that means were
not wanting to render the whole more magnificent,
and that the fault of the construction lay rather in
the first idea, than in any subsequent ability or
inclination
to repair it.
The site of this hamlet and down was in the
celebrated Canton of Schwytz, a small district that
has since given its name to the heroic confederation,
that occupies so much of the country among and
near the Western Alps. Its name was Einsiedlen;
the monastic buildings belonged to a convent of
Benedictines, and the church contained one of the
shrines even then most in repute, after that of Loretto.
Time and revolutions have since elevated our Lady
of Einsiedlen, perhaps, to the very highest rank
among the pilgrimages of the Catholic; for we have
lately seen thousands crowding her altars, while we
found the Santa Casa abandoned chiefly to the care
of its guardians, or subject to the casual inspection
of curious heretics.
Having thus described the spot to which the scene
is shifted, it is proper to refer to the actors.
At a point distant less than a league from the
hamlet, and on the side of the open down just
mentioned
,
which lies next to the steep ascent from the
lake of Zurich, and in the direction of the Rhine,
there came a group of travellers of both sexes, and
apparently of all ages, between declining manhood
and vigorous youth. They were afoot, wearing the
garb and symbols of pilgrims. Weariness had caused
them to lengthen their line, and they went in pairs,
the strongest in front, the feeble and more fatigued
in the rear.
In advance marched two men. One wore the
gown and cowl of a Benedictine, while he carried,
like the rest, the staff and wallet of a pilgrim. His
companion had the usual mantle decorated with
scollop
shells, and also bore his scrip and stick. The
others had the same attire, with the usual exceptions
that distinguish the sexes. They consisted of two
men of middle age, who followed those in front;
two of each sex in pairs, all still young and active;
two females, who were in their prime, though
wearied and sad; and a maiden, who dragged her
limbs after them with a difficulty disproportioned
to her years. At the side of the latter was a crone,
whose infirmities and age had enabled her to obtain
the indulgence of an ass, on which she was seated
comparatively at her ease; though, by a license that
had been winked at by the monk, her saddle was
encumbered with the scrips of most of the female
penitents. In the rear of all came two males, who
seemed to form a sort of rear guard to the whole
party.
This group was composed of the Prior and Emich,
who led the van; of Heinrich, and Dietrich, the
smith; of Gisela and Gottlob, with a youth and
maiden from Deurckheim; of Ulrike and Lottchen;
of Meta and Ilse, and of M. Latouche and the
Knight of Rhodes. These were the penitents chosen
to expiate the late offence to the majesty of God,
by prayers and mortifications before the shrine of
Einsiedlen. The temporal question had been partially
put at rest, by the intrigues and influence of the
Count, backed, as he was, by timely applications of
gold, and by the increasing heresy that had
effectually
shaken the authority of the Church throughout
all Germany, and which had sufficiently apprized
the practised Bonifacius, and his superiors, of the
expediency of using great moderation in their
demands
.
St. Benedict make us thankful, holy father!
said the Count, as his gratified eye first beheld the
long wished-for roofs of the convent.We have
journeyed a weary distance; and this snail's pace,
which, in deference to the weak, we are bound to
observe, but little suits the impatience of a warrior,
accustomed to steed and spur. Thou hast often
visited this sacred shrine, pious Arnolph?
The Monk had stopped, and with a tearful eye
he stood gazing, in religious reverence, at the
distant
pile. Then kneeling on the grass, he prayed;
while the others, accustomed to these sudden
demonstrations
of zeal, gladly rested their limbs, the
while.
Never before hath eye of mine greeted yon
holy pile, answered the Prior, as they slowly
resumed
their journey; though often, in night dreams,
hath my soul yearned for the privilege!
Methinks, father, thou hast little occasion for
penitence, or pilgrimage:thou, whose life hath
rolled on in deeds of Christian charity and love.
Each day brings its evil, and each day should
have its expiation.
Truly, not in marches over stony and mountain
paths, like these we travel. Einsiedlen must have
especial virtue, to draw men so far from their homes
to do it honor. Hast the history of the shrine at
command, reverend Prior?
It should be known to all Christians, and chiefly
to the pilgrim. I had thought thee instructed in
these great events!
By the Magi!to speak thee honestly, Father
Arnolph, the little friendship which hath subsisted
between Limburg and my house, had given a
disrelish
for any Benedictine miracle, let it be of what
quality it would; but now that we are likely to be
so lovingly united, I could gladly hear the tale, which
will at least serve to divert our thoughts from a
subject
so grovelling as our own feet; for to conceal
nothing, mine make most importunate appeals to be
at rest!
Our journey draweth near its end; but, as thy
request is reasonable, it shall be answered. Listen,
then, Emich, and may the lesson profit thy soul!
During the reign of the illustrious and warlike
Charlemagne
,
who governed Gaul, with so much of our
Germany and the country of the Franks, there lived
a youth of the ancient family of Hohenzollern,
branches of which still possess principalities and
marches in the empire. The name of this learned
and pious youth was Meinard. Early fatigued with
the vanities of life, he sought a hermitage, nearer
than this to the banks of that lake which we so
lately
crossed at Rapperschwyl. But, overburdened by
the number of the curious and pious who visited his
cell, the holy Meinard, after seven years of prayer,
retired to a clear fountain, which must still run near
yonder church, where another cell and a chapel
were built for him, expressly by command of
Hildegarde
,
a royal lady, and the Abbess of a monastery
in the town of Zurich. Here Meinard lived and
here he died, filled with grace, and greatly blessed
by godly exercises.
Father, had he a profitable and happy end, in
this wild region?
Spiritually, nothing could have been more
desirable
;
temporally, naught more foul. He died by
the hands of vile assassins, to whom he had
rendered
hospitality. The deed was discovered by means
of two crows, who followed the murderers to
Zurich
,
where they were taken and executedat least,
so sayeth tradition. In a later age, the holy Meinard
was canonized by Benedict VIII. For nearly half
a century, the cell of Meinard, though in great
request
as a place of prayer, remained without a
tenant
;
but at the end of that period, Beurun, a canon
of the house of Burgundy, which house then ruled
most of the country far and near, caused the chapel
and cell to be repaired, replaced the image of the
blessed Maria, and devoted his own life to the
hermitage
.
The neighboring Seigneurs and Barons
contributed to endow the place, and divers holy men
joined themselves to the service of the altar, from
which circumstance the shrine obtained the name
of our `Lady of the Hermits,' its true appellation to
this hour. It would weary thee to listen to the tale
of miracles performed in virtue of their prayers,
even in that early and less gifted condition of the
place; but its reputation so circulated, that many
came from afar to see and to believe. In the process
of time, a regular community was established, and
the church thou seest was erected, containing in its
nave the original cell, chapel, and image of Saint
Meinard. Of the brotherhood, Saint Eberhaud was
named the Abbot.
I had thought there was still higher virtue in the
place! observed Emich, when the Prior paused,
and seemingly a little disappointed; for your deep
sinner as little likes a simple dispensation, as the
drunkard relishes small drinks.
Thou shalt hear. When the buildings were
completed, and it became necessary to consecrate
the place, agreeably to the forms and usages of the
Church, Conrad, Bishop of Constance, was invited
to discharge the holy office. Here cometh the
wonderful
favor of Heaven! As Conrad of Constance,
with other pious men, arose to pray, at midnight of
the day appointed for the service, they suddenly
heard divine music most sweetly chanted by angels.
Though sore amazed and impressed, they were still
sufficiently masters of their reason to discover that
the unseen beings sang the prescribed formula of the
consecration, that office which they were preparing
themselves to perform a few hours later. Satisfied
with this especial and wonderful interference,
Conrad
would have abstained from repeating a service
which had already been thus performed, but for the
demands and outcries of the ignorant. But when,
Vol. II. N
after hours of delay, he was about to yield to their
impatience, a clear voice three times admonished
him of the blasphemy, by saying, `Cease, brother!
thy chapel is divinely consecrated!' From that
moment
the place is so esteemed, and all our rites are
performed as at a shrine of high behest and
particular
virtue.
Emich crossed himself devoutly, having listened
in perfect faith, and with deep interest;for at that
moment early impressions were stronger than the
modern doubts.
It is good to be here, father, he reverently
answered
;
I would that Ermengarde, and all of my
house, were at my side! But are there any especial
favors accorded to those who come hither, in a
fitting
temper, in the way of temporal gifts or political
considerations; since, being before a shrine so holy,
I could fain profit by the sore pains and privations
by which the grace is gained?
The Prior seemed mortified, for, though he lent
the faith required by the opinions of the age, to the
tradition he had recounted, he was too well
instructed
in the true doctrines of his Church, not to
perceive
the false bias of his companion's mind. The
embarrassment caused a silence, during which the
reader is to imagine that they passed on, giving
place to other personages of the tale.
Before turning to another group, however, we
desire
to say distinctly, that, in relating the manner of
the miraculous consecration of the chapel of `Our
Lady of the Hermits,' we have wished merely to
set the tradition before the reader, without inferring
aught for, or against, its authenticity. It is well
known that the belief of these supernatural
interferences
of Divine Power forms no necessary part
of doctrine, even in that Church which is said to be
the most favored by these dispensations; and it
ought always to be remembered, that those sects
which impugn these visible and physical signs of
Omnipotence, entertain opinions, of a more purely
spiritual character, that are scarcely less out of the
course of ordinary and vulgar nature. In cases in
which there exist so nice shades of distinction, and
in which truth is so difficult of discovery, it is our
duty to limit ourselves to popular facts, and as such
have we given the history of Einsiedlen, its Abbey,
and its Virgin. The opinion of Father Arnolph is
the local opinion of our own times, and it is the
opinion of thousands who, even now, yearly frequent
the shrine.
Heinrich and the smith were the couple next to
the Count and the Prior, and of course they were
the next to cross the stage.
It is no doubt much, or I may add altogether as
you say, worshipful Burgomaster
Brother Pilgrim; ruefully interrupted Heinrich.
I should have said, Brother Worshipful Pilgrim,
though, Heaven it knows, the familiarity goes
nigh to choke me!but it is much as you say, that
whether we cling to Rome, or finally settle quietly
into the new worship of Brother Luther, this
journey
ought, in all fairness, to be set down to our
account
,
as of so much virtue; for, look you, brother
worshipful, it is made at the cost of Christian flesh
and blood, and therefore should it be savory,
without
much particularity concerning mere outward
appearances. I do not think, were truth spoken, that
wielding the sledge a twelvemonth would have done
this injury to my feet!
Have mercy on thyself and me, good smith, and
think less of these trifling grievances. What Heaven
wills must happen, else would one of thy merit
have risen higher in the world.
Thanks, Worshipful Brother Pilgrim and
Burgomaster
;
I will bethink me of resignation, though
these wire-drawn pains are never to the liking of
your men of muscle and great courage. A knock
o' the head, or the bullet of an arquebuse gives less
uneasiness than smaller griefs much endured. Were
things properly governed, the penances and
pilgrimages
,
and other expiations of the Church, would be
chiefly left to the women.
We shall see hereafter how Luther hath ordered
this: but having ourselves embarked in this journey
for the good of Deurckheim, to say nothing of our
own souls, it behoveth us to hold out manfully;a
duty the more easily performed, as we can now see
the end of it. To speak thee fair, Dietrich, I do
not remember ever to have beheld Benedictine abode
with so much joy, as this we see at yonder
mountain's
foot!
Be of cheer, most honorable and excellent
brother worshipful pilgrim; the trial is near its end,
and if we come thus far to do this honor to our
own community, why,Himmel! it is but the price
paid for getting rid of another!
Be of cheer, truly, brother smith, for it is but
some kneeling, and a few stripes that each is to
apply to his own back; after which the return will
reasonably be more joyous than the advance.
Encouraged by each other, the devotees hobbled
on, their heavy massive frames yielding at every
step, like those of overgrown oxen which had been
but indifferently shod. As they passed by, their
places were filled by the four, of whom Gisela and
Gottlob formed a part. Among these the discourse
was light and trifling, for bodily fatigue had little
influence on the joyous buoyancy of such spirits;
especially at a moment when they saw before them
the immediate termination of their troubles. Not
so with those that came next; these were Ulrike
and her friend, who moved along the path, like those
who were loaded with griefs of the soul.
God is among these hills, as he is on our plains,
Lottchen! said the former, continuing the discourse.
Yon temple is his shrine, as was that of Limburg;
and it is as vain for man to think of forgetting him
on earth, as it would be to invade him in that
Heaven
which is his throne! What he doth is wise, and
we will endeavor to submit.
The words of Ulrike were perhaps more touched
with resignation than her manner. The latter, though
subdued, was filled with sorrow, and her voice was
tremulous nearly to tears. Though the exhibition
of her melancholy was deep and evident, it was of
a character which denotes no extinction of hope.
On the other hand, the features, eye, and entire
manner of her friend, bore the heavy and fatal
impress
of incurable woe.
God is among these hills! repeated Lottchen,
though she scarce seemed to hear the words; God
is among these hills!
We approach a much-esteemed shrine, dearest
Lottchen: the Being, in whose name it hath been
raised, will not permit us to depart from it unblessed.
We shall be blessed, Ulrike!
Thou dwellest hopelessly on thy loss, my
Lottchen
!
Would thou had less thought of the past,
and more of the future!
The smile with which the widow regarded her
friend was full of anguish.
I have no future, Ulrike, but the grave!
Dearest Lottchen!we will speak of this holy
shrine! Emotion smothered her voice.
Speak of what thou wilt, my friend, answered
the childless widow, with a frightful calm. I see
no difference in subjects.
Lottchen!not when we discourse of Heaven!
The widow bowed her vacant eyes to earth, and
they passed on. Their footsteps were succeeded by
those of the beast ridden by Ilse, and by the
faltering
tread of Meta.
N 2
Ay,yon is the shrine of our Lady of the
Hermits
!
said the former; a temple of surpassing
virtue! Well, Heaven is not in Churches and
chapels, and that of Limburg may yet be spared;
the more especially as the brotherhood was far from
being of unexceptionable lives. Keep up thy heart,
Meta, and think not of weariness, for not a pain dost
thou now bear, that will not be returned to thee,
another day, in joy, or in some other precious gift.
This is Heaven's justice, which is certain to requite
all equally, for good or evil. Well-a-day!it is this
certainty that comforteth the godly, and giveth
courage to the tottering.
She spoke to an insensible listener. The
countenance
of Meta, like that of Lottchen, expressed
hopelessness, though it were in less palpable and
certain signs. The eye was dull but wandering, the
cheek pale, the mouth convulsive and at times
compressed
,
the step languid, and the whole being of
this young and innocent creature, seemed wasting
under a premature and unnatural blight! She
looked
at the convent with indifference, though it brought
relief to her bodily pains. The mountains rose dark
and rugged near, or glittered in the distance like
hills of alabaster, without giving birth to a single
exclamation of that delight, which these scenes are
known to excite in young breasts; and even the
pure void above was gazed at, though it seemed to
invite to a more tranquil existence, with vacuity and
indifference.
Ah's me! continued Ilse, whose observation
rarely penetrated beyond her own feelings, and
whose tongue was never known to wax weary.
Ah's me! Meta. O! it must be a wicked world
that needs all these pilgrimages and burnings.But
they are only types, child, of the past and of the
future; of the `has been,' and of the `to come.'
First, life is a pilgrimage, and a penance; though
few of us think so while journeying on its way, but
so it is to all; especially to the little favoredbut a
penance it is, by means of our ailings and other
infirmities
,
particularly in age; and therefore do I
bear with it cheerfully, since penances are to be
borne; and the burnings of convents and villages
are types of the burnings of the wicked. Thou dost
not answer, child?
Dost think, nurse, that they who die by fire are
blessed!
Of what art speaking, Meta!Poor Berchthold
Hintermayer perished, as thou knowest, in the flames
of Limburg; so did Father Johan, and so did one,
far more evil than either!Oh! I could reveal
secrets
,
an' I had not a prudent tongue!But wisdom
lieth in prudence, and I say naught: therefore, Meta,
be thou silent.
I will obey thee, nurse.
The tones of the girl trembled, and the smile
with which she gladly acquiesced in the demand of
Ilse, was such as the sinking invalid gives the kind
attendant.
Thou art dutiful, and it is a merit. I never knew
thee more obedient, and less given to merriment or
girlish exclamations, than on this very pilgrimage;
all of which shows that thy mind is in a happy state,
for these holy offices. Well-a-day!the pious
Arnolph
has halted, and now we are about, in sooth, to
reap the virtue of all our labors. Oh! an' I had
been a monk, thou wouldest have had a leader!
Ilse beat the sides of the patient animal she rode,
and Meta toiled after, as well as her trembling
limbs permitted. The Knight and the Abb came
last.
Thou hast made many of these pious expiations,
reverend Abb? observed the former, when they
had risen the hill, which commanded a view of the
convent.
Never another. Had not chance made me an
innocent participator in the destruction of Limburg,
this indignity would have been spared.
How! callest thou a pilgrimage, and prayer at a
shrine, an indignity?thou, a churchman!
Gallant Knight, I speak to thee as to a comrade
of many days, and of weary passages; as one
enlightened
.
Thou knowest the constitution of earth,
and the divers materials that compose society. We
have doctrines for all; but practices must be
mitigated
,
like medicaments to the sick. Your
pilgrimage
is well enough for the peasant, or the citizen, or
even for your noble of the Provinces, but their merit
is much questioned among us of the capitalsunless,
indeed, there should mingle some hope for the future;
but penance for deeds accomplished we hold to be
supererogatory.
By my rapier! no such doctrine was in vogue
at Rhodes, where all ordinances were much
respected
,
and uniformly admitted.
And had ye then these familiar practices of
religion
in your daily habits, Sir Knight?
I say not in practice; but ever in admission.
Thou knowest the distinction, Sir Abb, between
the purity of doctrine, and some constructions of
practice.
That doubtless. Were we to tie the gentle down
to all the observances and exactions of a severe
theory, there would grow up numberless
inconveniences
.
For myself, had it been possible to
preserve
the ecclesiastical character, without penance,
under the odium of this unhappy but accidental visit
to our host the Count, I could have dispensed with
the last act of the drama.
'Tis whispered, Herr Latouche, my cousin
bethought
him, that the presence of an ecclesiastic
might prove a cloak to his intentions, and that we
owe the pleasure of thy agreeable society to a
policy that is deeper than chance!
Albrecht of Viederbach laughed, as he intimated
this ruse of Emich; and his companion, who had
long perceived how completely he had been the
dupe of his host, for in truth he knew nothing
previously
of the intended assault, was fain to make
the best of his situation. He laughed, in his turn,
as the loose of principle make light of any
misadventure
that may happen to be the consequence of
their laxity of morals; and, pressing each other, on
their several parts in the late events, the two
proceeded
leisurely towards the spot where the Prior
and Emich, as leaders of the party, had now come
to a halt. We shall profit by the occasion to make
some necessary explanations.
We are too much accustomed in this Protestant
country, to believe, that most of the piety of those
who profess the religion of Rome consists in
externals
.
When the great antiquity of this Church
shall be remembered, as well as the general
tendency
,
in the early ages, to imitate the forms and
habits of their immediate predecessors, it should not
occasion surprise if some observances were
retained
,
that cannot very clearly be referred, either to
apostolic authority or to reason. The promulgation
of abstract truth does not necessarily infer a
departure
from those practices which have become of
value by use, even though they may not materially
assist in the attainment of the great end. We have
inherited many of the vestments and ceremonies,
which are retained in the Protestant churches, from
Pagan priests; nor is there any sufficient motive for
abandoning them, so long as they aid the decencies
of worship, without weakening its real objects. The
Pagans themselves probably derived some of these
very practices, from those whom we are taught to
believe held direct communion with God, and who
should have best known in what manner to render
human adoration most acceptable to the ruler of the
universe.
In this country, Catholicism, in its limited and
popular meaning, is no longer catholic, since it is in
so small a minority, as to have no perceptible
influence
on the opinions or customs of the country.
The outward symbols, the processions, and all the
peculiar ceremonies of the Romish Church are
confined
to the temples, and the eye rarely or never
meets any evidence of its existence, beyond their
walls. But in Europe the reverse is altogether the
case, more particularly in those countries in which
the spiritual sway of the head of the Church has
not been interrupted by any adventitious changes,
proceeding from political revolutions, or other
powerful
causes. The crucifix, the spear, the cock, the
nails, and the sponge, are erected at cross-roads,
chapels dedicated to Mary are seen near many a
spring, or at the summit of some weary mountain;
while the usual symbols of redemption are found
scattered along the highways, marking the site of
some death by accident, or the scene of a murder.
In no part of the other hemisphere are these
evidences
of faith and zeal more common, than in the
Catholic cantons of Switzerland. Hermitages are
still frequent among the rugged rocks of that region,
and it is usual to see near these secluded abodes a
sort of minor chapel, that is termed, in ordinary
language, a `station.' These stations are so many
tabernacles raised by the way-side, each containing
a representation of one of the twelve sufferings of
Christ. They are met equally on the side of
Vesuvius
,
overlooking the glorious sea and land, of that
unequalled country; among the naked wastes of the
Apennines; or buried in gorgeous groves; as
accident
may have determined their location. In some
of the valleys of Switzerland, these little tabernacles
dot the mountain side for miles, indicating by
zigzag
lines, and white walls, the path that leads from
the village beneath to some shrine, that is perhaps
perched on the pinnacle of a naked rock, or which
stands on a spur of the nearest range.
The shrine of Einsiedlen possessed the usual
number
of these tabernacles, stretching along the path
that communicated with the Lake of Zurich. They
were designated in the customary manner; each
alluding
to some one of those great personal
afflictions
that preceded the crucifixion, and each having
sentences of holy writ, to incite the pious to
devotion
.
Here the pilgrims ordinarily commenced the
worship peculiar to the place, and it was here that
the Prior now awaited his companions.
CHAPTER XII.
Was Godde to serche our hertes and reines,
The best were synners grete;
Christ's vycarr only knowes ne synne,
Ynne alle thys mortall state.
Chatterton.
When
all were arrived, the pilgrims divided
themselves along the path, some kneeling before one
tabernacle, and some at another. Ulrike and
Lottchen
,
followed by the pallid Meta, prayed long at
each in succession. The other females imitated
their example, though evidently with less zeal and
earnestness. The Knight of Rhodes and Monsieur
Latouche limited their observances to a few
genuflexions
,
and much rapid crossing of themselves with
the fingers, appearing to think their general
professions
of faith possessed a virtue, that superseded the
necessity of any extraordinary demonstrations of
piety. Heinrich and the smith were more particular
in showing respect for the prescribed forms; the
latter, who was secretly paid by his townsmen for
what he did, feeling himself bound in honor to give
them the worth of their money, and the
Burgomaster
,
in addition to his looking for great temporal
advantages from the whole affair, being much
influenced
by paternal regard for Deurckheim. As
for Ilse, none was more exact than she; and, we
may add, none more ostentatious.
Hast bethought thee, Dietrich, to say an extra
word in behalf of the general interests? demanded
Heinrich, while he patiently awaited the removal of
the other, from before the last tabernacle, in order
to assume the post himself.
Nay worshipful Burgomaster
Brother Pilgrim, good smith!
Nay, worshipful Brother, and good pilgrim,
there was no question of this duty in the
understanding
.
Himmel! Art such a hound, Dietrich, as to
need a bribe to pray in thine own interest? Do
that thou hast promised, for the penance, and in the
interest of the monks, and then bethink thee, like an
honest artisan, of the town of which thou art a
citizen
.
I never rise from my knees without counting
a few beads on the score of Deurckheim, and others
for favor on the family of Frey.
I cry you mercy, honorable Heinrich and
excellent
brother Pilgrim; the wish is reasonable, and
it shall be performed.
The smith then counted off his rosary, making
place for the Burgomaster as soon as he could
conveniently
get through with the duty. In the mean
time, Arnolph had prayed devoutly, and with
sincere
mental abasement, before each station.
The pilgrims then arranged themselves in two
lines, a form of approaching the convent of
Einsiedlen
that is still observed by thousands annually; the
men placing themselves on the right of the path in
single files, and the females on its left, in a similar
order. Arnolph walked ahead, and the whole
proceeded
.
Then began the repetition of the short
prayers aloud.
Whoever has wandered much through this
remarkable
and wild country, must have frequently met with
parties of pilgrims, marching in the manner described,
and uttering their aspirations in the pure air, as they
ascend to, or descend from, the altar of our Lady
of the Snow, on the Rhigi, or wend their way
among rocky and giddy paths, seeking or returning
from some other shrine. We know of no display
of human worship that is more touching or
impressive
than this. The temple is the most magnificent
on earth, the air is as limpid as mountain torrents
and a high region can bestow, while sound is
conveyed
to the ear, in its clearest and most distinct
tones, aided perhaps by the echoes of dells that are
nearly unfathomable, or of impending masses that
appear to prop the skies. Long before the party is
seen, the ear announces its approach by the music
of the prayers; for music it is in such a place, the
notes alternating regularly between the deep bass
of the male to the silvery softness of the female
voice.
Such was now the effect produced by the advance
of our party from the Palatinate. Father Arnolph
gave the lead, and the powerful lungs of Heinrich
and the smith, though much restrained, uttered the
words in tones impressively deep and audible. The
response of the women was tremulous, soft, and
soothing. In this manner did they proceed for a
mile, when they entered the street of the hamlet.
An express had announced to the community of
Einsiedlen the approach of the German penitents.
By a singular perversion of the humble doctrines
of the founder of the religion, far more importance
was attached to the expiations and offerings of
princes, and of nobles of high degree, than to those
Vol. II. O
which proceeded from sources that were believed to
be meaner. All the dwellers of the hamlet,
therefore
,
and most of the others that frequented the
shrine, were abroad to witness this expected
procession
.
The name of Emich was whispered from
ear to ear, and many curious eyes sought the form
of the powerful baron, under the guise common to
the whole party. By general consent, after much
speculation, the popular opinion settled on the
person
of the smith, as on the illustrious penitent; a
distinction which Dietrich owed to the strength of
his lungs, to some advantage in stature, and
particularly
to the zeal which, as a hireling, he thought
it just to throw into his air and manner.
Among the other traditions that serve to give a
popular celebrity to the shrine of our Lady of the
Hermits, is one which affirms that, on an occasion
it is unnecessary to relate, the Son of God, in the
form of man, visited this favored shrine. He is
said to have assuaged his thirst at the fountain
which flows, with Swiss purity and profusion, before
the door of the building; and as the clear element
has been made to run through different metal tubes,
it is a custom of the Pilgrims, as they arrive, to
drink a hasty swallow at each, in order to obtain
the virtue of a touch so revered. There was also
a plate of silver, that had marks which were said
to have been left by the fingers of Jesus, and to
these it was the practice to apply the hand. The
former usage is still universal; though modern
cupidity
has robbed the temple of the latter evidence
of the reputed visit, in consequence of the value of
the metal which bore its memorial.
Arnolph halted at the fountain, and, slowly making
its circuit, drank at each spout. He was followed
by all of his companions. But he passed the silver
plate, and entered the building, praying aloud until
his foot was on the threshold. Without stopping,
he advanced and knelt on the cold stones before the
shrine, fastening his eye the whle on the carved
image of Mary. The others imitated his
movements
,
and, in a few minutes, all were kneeling
before the far-famed chapel of the Divine
Consecration
.
The ancient church of Einsiedlen (for the building
has since been replaced by another still larger and
more magnificent) had been raised around the spot
where the cell of Saint Meinard originally stood.
The chapel reputed to have been consecrated by
angels, was in this revered cell, and the whole stood
in the centre of the more modern edifice. It was
small, in comparison with the pile which held it, but
of sufficient size to admit of an officiating priest,
and to contain many rich offerings of the pious.
The whole was encased in marble, blackened by
time and the exhalations of lamps; while the front,
and part of the sides, permitted a view of the
interior
,
through openings that were protected by
gratings
curiously and elaborately wrought.
In the farther and dark extremity of this sacred
chapel, were the images of the Mother and Child.
Their dresses, as is usual at all much-worshipped
shrines, were loaded with precious stones and plates
of gold. The face of each had a dark and bronzed
color, resembling the complexion of the far east,
but which probably is a usage connected with the
association of an origin and destiny that are
super-human
.
The whole was illuminated by strong lights,
in lamps of silver-gilt, and the effect, to a mind
indisposed
to doubt, was impressive, and of a
singularly
mysterious influence. Such was the shrine of
our Lady of the Hermits at the time of our tale,
and such it continues to be to this day, with some
immaterial additions and changes, that are more the
results of time than of opinion.
We have visited this resort of Catholic devotion,
in that elevated region of hill and frost; have
strolled
,
near the close of day, among its numerous and
decorated chapels; have seen the bare-kneed
peasant
of the Black Forest, the swarthy Hungarian,
the glittering-eyed Piedmontese, and the fair-haired
German, the Tyrolese, and the Swiss, arrive, in
groups, wearied and foot-sore; have watched them
drinking with holy satisfaction at the several spouts,
and, having followed them to the front of the altar,
have wondered at the statue-like immovability with
which they have remained kneeling, without
changing
their gaze from that of the unearthly looking
image that seemed to engross their souls. Curiosity
led us to the spot alone, and at no moment of a
pilgrimage
in foreign lands, that has now extended to
years, do we remember to have felt so completely
severed from all to which we were most
accustomed
,
as at that hour. The groups arrived in scores,
and, without pausing to exchange a greeting,
without
thought of lodging or rest, each hurried to the
shrine, where he seemed embodied with the stone
of the pavement, as, with riveted eye and abased
mien, he murmured the first prayers of expiation
before the image of Mary.But to return to the
narrative.
For the first hour after the arrival of the expected
pilgrims of Deurckheim, not a sign of recognition,
or of grace, was manifested in the convent. The
officials came and went, as if none but of common
character made their expiations; and the fixed eye
and swarthy face of the image seemed to return
each steady gaze, with supernatural tranquillity. At
length Arnolph arose, and, as if his movements were
watched, a bell rang in a distant aisle. A lateral
door, which communicated with the conventual
buildings, opened, and the whole brotherhood issued
through it into the body of the church. Arnolph
immediately kneeled again, and, by a sign,
commanded
his companions to maintain their places.
Though grievously wearied with their positions, the
men complied, but neither of the females had yet
stirred.
The Benedictines of Einsiedlen entered the church,
in the order that has been already described in th
processions of Limburg. The junior monks cam
first, and the dignitaries last. In that age, thei
Abbot was commonly of a noble and ancient, and
sometimes of a princely house; for, in maintaining
its influence, the Church has rarely been known to
overlook the agency of those opinions and prejudices
that vulgarly exist among men. In every case,
however, the prelate who presided over this favored
community, possessed, in virtue of his office, the
latter
temporal distinction; being created a mitred
Abbot and a Prince of the Empire, on the day of
his consecration.
During the slow advance of the long line of monks,
that now drew near the shrine, there was a chant
in the loft, and the deep organ accompanied the
words, on a low key. Even Albrecht and the Abb
were much impressed, while Emich fairly trembled,
like one that had unwittingly committed himself into
the hands of his enemies.
The head of the train swept round the little
chapel, and passed with measured steps before the
pilgrims. The Prior and the females only prayed
the more devoutly, but neither the Count nor the
Burgomaster could prevent their truant eyes from
watching the movement. Dietrich, little schooled in
his duties, fairly arose, and stood repeating
reverences
to the whole fraternity, as it passed. When
the close drew near, Emich endeavored to catch a
glance of the Abbot's eyes, hoping to exchange one
of those secret signs of courtesy, with which the
initiated, in every class of life, know how to express
their sympathies. To his confusion, and slightly to
O 2
his uneasiness, he saw the well-known countenance
of Bonifacius, at the side of the dignitary who
presided
over the brotherhood of Einsiedlen. The
glances of these ancient and seemingly
irreconcilable
rivals, were such as might have been
anticipated
.
That of Bonifacius was replete with religious
pride, and a resentment that was at least
momentarily
gratified; though it still retained glimmerings
of conscious defeat; while that of Emich was
fierce, mortified, and alarmed, all in a moment.
But the train swept on, and it was not long ere
the music announced the presence of the procession
in the choir. Then Arnolph again arose, and,
followed
by all the pilgrims, he drew near to listen to
the vespers. After the prayers, the usual hymn was
sung.
Himmel! master brother Pilgrim, whispered
the smith to the Burgomaster, that should be a
voice known to all of Deurckheim!
Umph!ejaculated Heinrich, who sought the
eye of Emich. These Benedictines sing much in
the same strain, Herr Emich, whether it be in
Limburg
,
or here in the church of our Lady of the
Hermits.
By my fathers! master Frey, but thou sayest
true! To treat thee as a confidant, I little like this
intimate correspondence between the Abbots, and,
least of all, to see the reverend Bonifacius enthroned
here, in this distant land, much as he was wont to
be in our valley. I fear me, Burgomaster, that we
have entered lightly on this penance!
If you can say this, well-born Emich, what
should be the reply of one that hath wife and child,
in addition to his own person, in the risk? It would
have been better to covet less of Heaven, the least
portion of which must naturally be better than the
best of that to which we are accustomed on earth,
and to be satisfied with the advantages we have.
Do you note, noble Count, the friendly manner in
which Bonifacius regards us, from time to time?
His favors do not escape me, Heinrich;but,
peace! we shall learn more, after the vespers are
ended.
Then came the soothing power of that remarkable
voice. The singer had been presented to the
convent
of Einsiedlen, by Bonifacius, to whom he was
now useless, as a boon that was certain to give him
great personal favor: and so it had proved; for in
those communities, that passed their lives in the
exercise
of the offices of the Church, the different
shades of excellence in the execution, or the greater
external riches and decorations of their several
shrines, often usurped the place of a nobler strife in
zeal and self-denial. The ceremony now ended, and
a brother approaching whispered Father Arnolph.
The latter proceeded to the sacristy, attended by
the pilgrims, for it was forbidden, even to the
trembling
Meta, to seek refreshment or rest, until another
important duty had been performed.
The sacristy was empty, and they awaited still
in silence, while the music of the organ announced
the retiring procession of the monks. After some
delay, a door opened, and the Abbot of Einsiedlen,
accompanied by Bonifacius, appeared. They were
alone, with the exception of the treasurer of the
Abbey; and as the place was closed, the interview
that now took place, was no longer subject to the
vulgar gaze.
Thou art Emich, Count of
Hartenburg-Leiningen
,
said the prelate, distinguishing the noble, spite
of his mean attire, by a single glance of an eye
accustomed
to scan its equals;a penitent at our
shrine, for wrongs done the Church, and for dishonor
to God?
I am Emich of Leiningen, holy Abbot!
Dost thou disclaim the obligation to be here?
And a penitent; the words for being here
being bitterly added, in a mental reservation.
The Abbot regarded him sternly, for he disliked
the reluctance of his tongue. Taking Bonifacius
apart, they consulted together for a few minutes;
then returning to the group of pilgrims, he resumed
Thou art now in a land that listeneth to no
heresies
,
Herr von Hartenburg; and it would be well
to remember thy vow, and thy object. Hast thou
aught to say?
Emich slowly undid his scrip, and sought his
offerings among its scanty contents.
This crucifix was obtained by a noble of my
house, when a crusader. It is of jasper, as thou
seest, reverend Abbot, and it is not otherwise
wanting
in valuable additions.
The Abbot bowed, in the manner of one
indifferent
to the richness of the boon, signing to the
treasurer
to accept the gift. There was then a brief
pause.
This censer was the gift of a noble far less
possessed than thee! said he who kept the treasures
of the Abbey, with an emphasis that could not easily
be mistaken.
Thy zeal outstrippeth the limbs of a weary man,
brother.Here is a diamond, that hath been
heirloom
of my house, a century. 'Twas an emperor's
gift!
It is well bestowed on our Lady of the
Hermits
;
though she can boast of far richer offerings
from names less known than thine.
Emich now hesitated, but only for an instant,
and then laid down another gift.
This vessel is suited to thy offices, he said,
being formed for the altar's services.
Lay the cup aside; sternly and severely
interrupted
Bonifacius: it cometh of Limburg!
Emich colored, more in anger than in shame,
however, for in that age plunder was one of the
speediest and most used means of acquiring wealth.
He eyed the merciless Abbot, fiercely, but without
speaking.
I have no more, he said; the warsthe
charges of my houseand gold given the routed
brotherhood, have left me poor!
The treasurer turned to Heinrich, with an
eloquent
expression of countenance.
Thou wilt remember, master Treasurer, that
there is no longer any question of a powerful baron,
said the Burgomaster, but that the little I have to
give, cometh of a poor and saddled town. First
we offer our wishes and our prayers,secondly, we
present, in all humility, and with the wish they may
prove acceptable, these spoons, which may be of
use in some of thy many ceremonies,thirdly, this
candlestick, which though small is warranted to be
of pure gold, by jewellers of Frankfort:and lastly,
this cord, with which seven of our chief men have
grievously and loyally scourged themselves, in
reparation
of the wrong done thy brethren.
All these offerings were graciously received, and
the monk turned to the others. It is unnecessary to
repeat the different donations that were made by
the inferiors, who came from the castle and the
town. That of Gottlob was, or pretended to be,
the offending horn, which had so irreverently been
sounded near the altar of Limburg, and a piece of
gold. The latter was the identical coin he had
obtained
from Bonifacius, in the interview which led
to his arrest; and the other was a cracked
instrument
,
that the roguish cow-herd had often essayed
among his native hills, without the least success.
In after life, when the spirit of religious party grew
bolder, he often boasted of the manner in which he
had tricked the Benedictines by bestowing an
instrument
so useless.
Ulrike made her offering, with sincere and meek
penitence. It consisted of a garment for the image
of the Virgin, which had been chiefly wrought by
her own fair hands, and on which the united tributes
of her townswomen had been expended, in the way
of ornaments, and in stones of inferior price. The
gift was graciously received; for the community
had been well instructed in the different characters
of the various penitents.
Hast thou aught in honor of Maria? demanded
the treasurer of Lottchen.
The widowed and childless woman endeavored
to speak, but her power failed her. She laid upon
the table, however, a neatly bound and illuminated
missal; a cap that seemed to have no particular
value, except its tassel of gold and green, and a
hunting horn; all of which, with many others of the
articles named, had made part of the load borne on
the furniture of the ass.
These are unusual gifts at our shrine! muttered
the monk.
Reverend Benedictine, interrupted Ulrike,
nearly breathless in the generous desire to avert
pain from her friend, they are extorted from her
who gives, like drops of blood from the heart. This
is Lottchen Hintermayer, of whom thou hast
doubtless
heard?
The name of Lottchen Hintermayer had never
reached the treasurer's ear; but the sweet and
persuasive
manner of Ulrike prevailed. The monk
bowed, and he seemed satisfied. The next that
advanced
was Meta. The Benedictines all appeared
struck by the pallid color of her cheek, and the
vacant
,
hopeless, expression of an eye that had lately
been so joyous.
The journey hath been hard upon our
daughter
!
said the princely Abbot, with gentleness and
concern.
She is young, reverend Father, answered
Ulrike
;
but God will temper the wind to the shorn
lamb.
The Abbot looked surprised, for the tones of the
mother met his ear with an appeal as touching as
that of the worn countenance of the girl.
Is she thy child, good pilgrim?
Father, she isHeaven make me grateful, for
its blessed gift!
Another gaze from the wondering priest, and he
gave place to the treasurer, who advanced to receive
the offering. The frame of Meta trembled violently,
and she placed a hand to her bosom. Drawing forth
a paper, she laid it simply before the monk, who
gazed at it in wonder.
What is this? he asked. It is the image of a
youth, rudely sketched!
It meaneth, Father, half whispered Ulrike,
that the heart which loved him, now belongs to
God!
The Abbot bowed, hastily signing to the inferior
to accept the offering; and he walked aside to
conceal
a tear that started to his eye. Meta at that
moment fell upon her mother's breast, and was borne
silently from the sacristy.
The men followed, and, with a single exception,
the two Abbots and the Treasurer were now left
alone.
Hast thou an offering, good woman? demanded
the latter of the female who remained.
Have I an offering, Father! Dost think I would
come thus far with an empty hand? I am Ilse, Frau
Frey's nurse, that Deurckheim hath sent on this
pilgrimage
,
as an offering in herself; and such it truly
is for frail bones, and threescore and past. We are
but poor town's-people of the Palatinate, but then
we know what is available at need! There are
many reasons why I should come, as thou shalt hear.
Firstly, I was in Limburg church, when the deed
was
How! did one of thy years go forth on such an
expedition?
Ay, and on many other expeditions. Firstly, I
was with the old Burgomaster, Frau Ulrike's father,
when there was succor sent to Mannheim; secondly,
I beheld, from our hills, the onset between the
Elector's
men, and the followers of
Dost thou serve the mother of yonder weeping
girl? demanded the Abbot, cutting short the history
of Ilse's campaigns.
And the weeping girl herself, reverend, and holy,
and princely Abbot, and, if thou wilt, the
Burgomaster
too; for, at times, in sooth, I serve the whole
family.
Canst thou repeat the history of her sorrow?
Naught easier, my lord and Abbot. Firstly, is
she youthful, and that is an age when we grieve or
are gladdened with little reason; then she is an only
child, which is apt to weaken the spirit by
indulgence
;
next, she is fair, which often tempts the
heart into various vanities, and, doubtless, into
sorrow
,
among the others; then is she foot-sore, a
bitter
grief of itself; and, finally, she hath much
repentance
for this nefarious sin, of which we are not
yet purged, and which, unless pardoned, may descend
to her, among other bequests from her father.
It is well. Deposit thy gift, and kneel that I may
bless thee.
Ilse did as ordered, after which she withdrew,
making many reverences in the act.
As the door closed on the crone, Bonifacius and
his brother Abbot quitted the place in company,
leaving the monk charged with that duty, to care
for the wealth that had been so liberally added to
the treasury of Einsiedlen.
CHAPTER XIII.
Israel, are these men
The mighty hearts you spoke of?
Byron.
There
was little resemblance in the characters
of the two prelates, beyond that which was the
certain
consequence of their common employment. If
Bonifacius was the most learned, of the strongest
intellectual gifts, and, in other particulars relating to
the mind, of the higher endowments, the princely
Abbot of Einsiedlen had more of those gentle and
winning qualities which best adorn the Christian
life. Perhaps neither was profoundly and meekly
pious, for this was not easy to men surrounded by
so many inducements to flatter their innate
weaknesses
:
but both habitually respected the outward
observances of their Church; and both, in degrees
proportioned to the boldness and sagacity of their
respective intellects, yielded faith to the virtue of its
offices.
On quitting the sacristy, they proceeded through
the cloisters, to the abode of the chief of the
community
.
Here, closeted together, there was a
consultation
concerning their further proceedings.
Thou wert of near neighborhood, said he of
our Lady of the Hermits, to this hardy baron,
Brother Bonifacius?
As thou mayest imagine by the late events.
There lay but a few arrow's flights between his
castle and our unhappy walls.
Had ye good understanding of old, or cometh
the present difficulty from long-standing grievances?
Thou art happy, pious Rudiger, to be locked, as
you are, among your frosts and mountains, beyond
the reach of noble's arm, and beyond the desires of
noble's ambition. Limburg and the craving Counts
Vol. II. P
have scarce known peace since our Abbey's
foundation
.
Your unquiet baron fills some such agency,
in respect to our religious communities, as that
which the unquiet spirit of the Father of Sin
occupies
in the moral world.
And yet, I doubt that the severest blow we are
to receive will come from one of ourselves! If all that
rumor and missives from the Bishops reveal, be true,
this schism of Luther promises us a lasting injury!
Bonifacius, whose mind penetrated the future
much farther than most of his brethren possessed
the means of doing, heard this remark gloomily;
and he sat brooding over the pictures which a keen
imagination presented, while his companion watched
the play of his massive features, with intuitive
interest.
Thou art right, princely Abbot, the former at
length replied. To us, both the future and the past
are filled with lessons of deep instruction, could we
but turn them to present advantage. All that we
know of earth shows that each physical thing
returns
to its elements, when the object of its creation
has been accomplished. The tree helps to pile the
earth which once nourished its roots; the rock
crumbles to the sand of which it was formed; and
even man turns to that dust which was animated
that he might live. Can we then expect that our
Abbeys, or that even the Church itself, in its present
temporal organization, will stand for ever?
Thou hast done well to qualify thy words by
saying temporal, good Bonifacius, for if the body
decays, the soul remains; and the essence of our
communion is in its spiritual character.
Hearken, right reverend and noble Rudiger
Go ask of Luther the niceties of his creed on this
point, and he will tell thee, that he is a believer in
the transmigration of soulsthat he keepeth this
spiritual character, but in a new dress; and that,
while he consigns the ancient body to the tomb, he
only lightens the imperishable part of a burthen that
has grown too heavy to be borne.
But this is rank rebellion to authority, and flat
refusal of doctrine!
Of the former, there can be no question; and,
as to our German regions, most seem prepared to
incur its risks. In respect to doctrine, learned
Rudiger
,
you now broach a thesis which resembles
the bells in your convent towerson which there
may be rung endless changes, from the simple chime
to a triple-bob-major.
Nay, reverend Bonifacius, thou treatest a grave
subject with irreverent levity. If we are to tolerate
these innovations, there is an end of discipline; and
I marvel that a dignified priest should so esteem
them!
Thou dost me injustice, Brother; for what I
urge is said in befitting seriousness. The ingenuity
of man is so subtle, and his doubts, once engaged,
so restless, that when the barrier of discipline is
raised, I know no conclusion for which a clever
head may not find a reason. Has it never struck
thee, reverend Rudiger, that a great error hath been
made from the commencement, in founding all our
ordinances to regulate society, whether they be of
religious or of mere temporal concerns?
Thou asketh this of one who hath been
accustomed
to think of his superiors with respect.
I touch not on our superiors, nor on their
personal
qualities. What I would say is, that our
theories
are too often faulty, inasmuch as they are
made to suit former practices; whereas, in a
well-ordered
world, methinks the theory should come
first, and the usage follow as a consequence of
suitable conclusions.
This might have done for him who possessed
Eden, but those who came after were compelled to
receive things as they were, and to turn them to
profit as they might.
Brother and princely Abbot, thou hast grappled
with the dilemma! Could we be placed in the
occupancy
of this goodly heritage, untrammelled by
previously endeared interests, seeing the truth,
naught would be easier than to make practice
conform
to theory; but, being that we are, priest and
noble, saint and sinner, philosopher and worldling,
why, look you, the theory is driven to conform to
the necessities of practice; and hence doctrine, at
the best, is but a convertible authority. As a
Benedictine
,
and a lover of Rome, I would that Luther
had been satisfied with mere changes in habits, for
these may be accommodated to climates and
prejudices
;
but when the flood-gates of discussion are
raised, no man can say to what extent, or in what
direction, the torrent will flow.
Thou hast little faith, seemingly, in the quality
of reason?
Bonifacius regarded his companion a moment
with an ill-concealed sneer.
Surely, holy Rudiger, he gravely replied, thou
hast not so long governed thy fellows to put this
question to me! Hadst thou said passion, we might
right quickly come to an understanding. The
corollaries
of our animal nature follow reasonably enough
from the proposition; but when we quit the visible
land-marks of the species, to launch upon the ocean
of speculation, we commit ourselves, like the
mariner
who trusts his magnet, to an unknown cause.
He that is a-hungered will eat, and he that is pained
will roar; he that hath need of gold will rob, in
some shape or other; and he that loveth his ease
may prefer quiet to trouble: all this may be
calculated
,
with other inferences that follow; but if thou
wilt tell me what course the Lammergeyer will take
when he hath soared beyond the Alps, I will tell
thee the direction in which the mind of man will
steer, when fairly afloat on the sea of speculation
and argument.
The greater the necessity that it should be held
in the wholesome limits of discipline and doctrine.
Were doctrine like our convent walls, all would
be well; but being what it is, men become what
they are.
How! Dost thou account faith for naught? I
have heard there were brothers of deep piety in
Limburg. Father Johan, who perished in defence
of thy altars, may go near to be canonizedto say
nothing of the excellent Prior, who is here among
us on this pilgrimage.
I count faith for much, excellent brother; and
happy is he who can satisfy uneasy scruples by so
pleasant an expedient. Brother Johan may be
canonized
,
if our Father of Rome shall see fit,
hereafter
,
and the fallen Limburg will have reason to
exult in its member. Still I do not see that the
unhappy
Johan proveth aught against the nature of
doctrine, for, had he been possessed of less
pertinacity
in certain of his opinions, he would have
escaped
the fate which befell him.
Is martyrdom a lot to displease a Christian?
Bethink thee of the Fathers, and of their ends!
Had Johan bethought him more of their fortunes,
his own might have been different. Reverend
Abbot
,
Johan hath long ceased to be a riddle to me;
though I deny not his utility with the peasant and
the fervent. But him thou hast last mentioned
here Bonifacius leaned a cheek on his hand, and
spoke like one that was seriously perplexedhim
thou namedst lastthe sincere, and wise, and
simple
Arnolph, have I never truly comprehended!
That man appeareth equally contented in his cell or
P 2
in his stall; honored equally in his office, and on this
weary pilgrimage; whether in prosperity or in
misfortune
,
he is ever at peace with himself and with
others. Here is truly a man that no reasoning of
mine hath been able to fathom. He is not ambitious,
for thrice hath he refused the mitre! He is
sustained
by no wild visions or deceitful fantasies, like the
unhappy Johan; nor yet is he indifferent to any of
the more severe practices of his profession, all of
which are observed quietly, and seemingly with
satisfaction. He is learned, without the desire of
discussion
;
meek, amid a firmness that would despise
the stake; and forgiving to a degree that might
lead us to call him easy, but for a consistency that
never seemeth to yield to any influence of season,
events, or hopes. Truly, this is a man that baffleth
all my knowledge!
Bonifacius, in despite of his acquirements, his
masculine intellect, and his acquaintance with men,
did not perceive how much he admitted against
himself, by expressing his own inability to fathom
the motives of the Prior. Nor did the enigma
appear
to be perfectly intelligible to his companion,
who listened curiously to the other's description of
their brother; much as we hearken to a history of
inexplicable or supernatural incidents.
I have heard much of Arnolph, observed the
latter, though never matter so strange as this;
and yet most seem to love him!
Therein is his power!though often most
opposed
to me, I cannot say that I myself am
indifferent
to the manBy our patron saint! I sometimes
fain believe I love him! He was among the last to
desert our altars, when pressed by this rapacious
noble, and his credulous and silly burghers; and yet
was he foremost to forgive the injury when
committed
.
But for him, and his high influence with the
Bishops, there might have been blows for blows,
spite of this schism that hath turned so many in
Germany from our support.
And since thou speakest of the schism, in what
manner dost thou account for an innovation so hardy,
in a region that is usually esteemed reasonable?
There must have been relaxation of authority; for
there is no expedient so certain to prevent heresies,
or errors of doctrine, as a Church well established,
and which is maintained by fitting authority.
Bonifacius smiled, for even in that early age, his
penetrating mind saw the fallacy to which the other
was a dupe.
This is well when there is right; but when there
is error, brother, your established authority does but
uphold it. The provisions that are made in thy
comfortable
abode to keep the cold air out, may be the
means of keeping foul air within.
In this manner of reasoning, truth can have no
existence!Thou dreadest doctrine, and thou wilt
naught of discipline!
Nay, holy Rudiger, in the latter thou greatly
misconceiveth me. Of discipline I would have all
that is possible; I merely deny that it is any pledge
of truth. We are apt to say that a well-ordained
and established Church is the buttress of truth, when
experience plainly showeth that this discipline doeth
more harm to truth, than it can ever serve it, and
that simply because there can be but one truth,
while there are many modes of discipline; many
establishments therefore uphold many errors, or truth
hath no identity with itself.
Thou surprisest me!Whatever may come of
this heresy, as yet, I know of but one assault on our
supremacy; and that cometh of error, as we come
of right.
This is well for Christendom, but what sayeth it
for your Moslemyour fire-worshipperyour
Hindoo
your
Pagan, and all the rest; any one of
whom is just as ready to keep out error by
discipline
,
as we of Rome? Until now, certainly among
Christians this evil hath not often happened, though
even we are not without our differences: but
looking
to this advance of the printing art, and of the
variety of opinions that are its fruits, I foresee that
we are to have many opposing expedients, all of
which will be equally well pondered and concocted
to keep in truth, and to exclude error. This
pretension
of high authority, and of close exactions to
maintain purity of doctrine, and what we deem
truth, is well, as the jurists say,
quoad hoc;
but
touching the general question, I do not see its virtue.
Now that men enlist with passion in these spiritual
discussions, we may look to see various
modifications
of the Church, all of which will be more or
less buttressed by human expedients, as so many
preservatives of truth; but when the time shall
come that countries and communities are divided
among themselves on these subtleties, look you,
excellent
Rudiger, we may expect to shut in as much
error by our laws and establishments, as we shall
shut out. I fear heaven is a goal that must be
reached by a general mediation, leaving each to
give faith to the minor points of doctrine, according
to his habits and abilities.
This savors more of the houseless Abbot than
of him who lately had an obedient and flourishing
brotherhood! Rudiger somewhat piquantly rejoined.
Bonifacius was unmoved by the evident allusion,
regarding his companion coolly, and like a man who
too well knew his own superiority easily to take
offence
.
His reply, however, would probably have
been a retort, notwithstanding this seeming
moderation
,
had not a door opened, and Arnolph quietly
entered the room.
The reception of the Prior, by his two mitred
brethren, proved the deep respect which had so
universally been won by his self-denying qualities.
In the great struggle of the conflicting egotism
which composes, in a great degree, the principle
of most of the actions of this uneasy world, no one
is so likely to command universal esteem, as he who
appears willing to bear the burthen of life, with as
little as possible of its visible benefits, by
withdrawing
himself from the arena of its contentions. In
the great mass, an occasional retreat from the
struggle
,
on the part of those who have few means of
success, creates but little feeling of any sort,
perhaps
;
but when he that hath undeniable pretensions
exhibits this forbearance, he may be certain of
obtaining
full credit for all that he possesses, and more,
even to the admission of qualifications that would
be vehemently denied had he taken a different
attitude
,
in respect to his rivals. Such was, in some
measure, the position of Father Arnolph; and
Bonifacius
himself never struggled to resist his natural
impulses towards the pious monk, having a secret
persuasion that none of his virtues, however publicly
proclaimed, were likely to militate against his own
interests.
Thou art much wearied, holy Prior, said the
Abbot of Einsiedlen, offering a seat to his visitor,
with assiduous and flattering attention.
I count it not, princely Rudiger; having
lightened
the way with much good discourse, and many
prayers: my pilgrims are faint, but, happily arrived,
they are now fairly committed to the convent's
hospitality.
Thou hast with thee, reverend Arnolph, a noble
of high esteem in thy German country?
Of ancient blood, and of great worldly credit,
returned the Prior, with reserve.
What thinkest thou, brother Bonifacius?It
may not be prudent to make any very public
manifestations
of a difference of treatment, between
those who seek our shrine; but do not hospitality,
and such courtesy as marketh our own breeding,
demand some private greetings. Is my opinion
suitable, worthy Arnolph?
God is no respecter of persons, Abbot of
Einsiedlen
.
Can any know this better than ourselves?
But we pretend not to perfection, nor can our
judgments
be set up as decisive of men's merits, farther
than belongs to our office. Ours is an hospitable
order, and we are privileged to earn esteem, and
therefore doth it appear to me not only becoming
but politic to show a noble of this repute, and at a
moment when heresy runs mad, that we do not
overlook the nature of his sacrifices. Thou art
silent, Brother Abbot!
The Abbot of Limburg listened with secret
satisfaction
,
for he had views of his own that the
proposal
favored. He was therefore about to give a
ready assent, when Arnolph interrupted him.
I have nobles among my followers, right
reverend
Abbots, sid the latter earnestly; and I have
those that deserve to be more than noble, if deep
Christian humility can claim to be so esteemed. I
did not come to speak of Emich of Hartenburg,
but of spirits sorely bruised, and to beg of thee, in
their behalf, a boon of churchly offices.
Name it, father, and make certain of its fair
reception. But it is now late, and no rites of the
morrow need defeat our intentions of honest
hospitality
.
They, in whose behalf I would speak, said
Arnolph, with apparent mortification, are already
without; if admitted, they may best explain their
own desires.
The Abbot signified a ready assent to receive
these visitors, and the Prior hastened to admit them,
anticipating a wholesome effect on the minds of his
superiors from the interview. When he reappeared,
he was followed by Ulrike, Lottchen, and Meta,
who came after him in the order named. Both the
Abbots seemed surprised, for it exceeded their
confidence
in themselves to admit visitors of that sex,
at an hour so equivocal, in the more retired parts of
the buildings, and they counted little on the boldness
of innocence.
This exceedeth usage! exclaimed the superior
of Einsiedlen. It is true, we have our privileges,
pious Arnolph, but they are resorted to with great
discretion.
Fear not, holy Abbot, Arnolph calmly answered;
this visit may at least claim to be as harmless as
that of those thou hast just named. Speak, virtuous
Ulrike, that thy wishes may be known.
Ulrike crossed herself, first casting a tearful eye
on the pallid and depressed countenances of her
daughter and of her friend.
We are come to your favored shrine, princely
and pious Abbot, she slowly commenced, like one
who feared the effects of her own words, penitents,
pilgrims, and acknowledging our sins, in order to
expiate a great wrong, and to implore Heaven's
pardon. The accomplishment of our wishes hath
been promised by the Church, and by one greater
than the Church, should we bring with us contrite
hearts. In this behalf, then, we have now little to
offer, since our pious guide, the beloved and
instructed
Arnolph, hath taught us to omit no observance;
nor hath he, in any particular, left us ignorant of the
state of mind that best befitteth our present
undertaking
.
But, right reverend Abbot
Proceed, daughter; thou wilt find all here ready
to listen, said Rudiger kindly, observing that her
words became choked, and that she continued to
cast uneasy looks at Lottchen and Meta. The voice
of the speaker sank, but her tones were still more
earnest, as she continued.
Holy Benedictine, aided by Heaven's kindness, I
will. In all that toucheth our pilgrimage and its
duties, we confide entirely to the pious counsel of
the learned and godly Arnolph, and he will tell you
that naught material hath by us been neglected. We
have prayed, and confessed, and fasted, and done
the needed expiations, in a meek mood, and with
contrite hearts. We come then to ask a service of
this favored community, which, we trust, may not
be refused to the Christian.
The Abbot looked surprised, but he awaited her
own time to continue.
It hath pleased Heaven to call away one dear
to us, at a short summons, proceeded Ulrike, not
without casting another fearful glance at her
companions
;
and we would ask the powerful prayers
of the community of our Lady of the Hermits, in
behalf of his soul.
Of what age was the deceased?
God summoned him, reverend Abbot, in early
youth.
By what means did he come to his end?
By a sudden display of Heaven's power.
Died he at peace with God and the Church?
Father, his end was sudden and calamitous.
None can know the temper of the mind at that
awful
moment.
But did he live in the practices of our faith?
Thou comest of a region in which there is much
heresy, and this is an hour in which the shepherd
cannot desert the fold.
Ulrike paused, for the breathing of her friend was
thick and audible.
Princely Abbot, he was a Christian. I held him
myself at the font. This humble penitent and
pilgrim
gave him birth, and to this holy Prior hath he
often confessed.
The Abbot greatly disliked the manner of the
answers
.
His brow drew over the eyes, and he turned
jealous glances from Arnolph to the females.
Canst thou vouch for thy penitent? he
demanded
abruptly of the Prior.
His soul hath need of masses.
Was he tainted with the heresy of the times?
Arnolph paused. His mind underwent a severe
struggle, for, while he distrusted the opinions of
Berchthold, he knew nothing that a scrupulous and
conscientious judge could fairly construe into
unequivocal
evidence of his dereliction from the
Church.
Thou dost not answer, Prior!
God hath not gifted me with knowledge to judge
the secret heart.
Ha! this grows plainer. Reverend Bonifacius,
canst thou say aught of this?
The dethroned Abbot of Limburg had, at first,
listened to the dialogue with indifference. There
had even been an ironical smile on his lips while
Ulrike
was speaking, but when Arnolph was
questioned
,
it disappeared in an active and a curious desire
to know in what manner a man so conscientious
would extricate himself from the dilemma. Thus
directly questioned, however, he found himself
obliged to become a party in the discourse.
I well know, princely and pious Rudiger, that
heresy is rife in our misguided Palatinate, he
answered
;
else would not the Abbot of Limburg be
a houseless guest in Einsiedlen.
Thou hearest, daughter! The youth is suspected
of having died an enemy of the Church.
Vol. II. Q
The greater the errors, if this be true, the greater
the need that prayers be offered for his soul.
This would be truly aiding Lucifer in his designs
to overturn our tabernacles, and a weakness not to
be indulged. I am grieved to be compelled to show
this discipline to one of thy seeming zeal, but our
altars cannot be defiled by sacrifices in behalf of
those who despise them. Was the youth connected
with the fall of Limburg?
Father, he died in the crush of its roofs, said
Ulrike, in nearly inaudible syllables; and we deem
the manner of his end another reason why
extraordinary
masses should be said in his behalf.
Thou askest an impossibility. Were we to yield
to our pity, in these cases of desperate heresies, it
would discourage the faithful, and embolden those
who are already too independent.
Father! said a tremulous and low, but eager
voice.
What wouldest thou, daughter? asked the
Abbot
,
turning to Lottchen.
Listen to a mother's prayer. The boy was
born and educated in the bosom of the Church. For
reasons at which I do not repine, Heaven early
showed its displeasure on his father and on me. We
were rich, and we became poor; we were
esteemed
of men, and we learned how much better is the
support of God. We submitted; and when we saw
those who had once looked up to us in respect,
looking down upon us in scorn, we kissed the child,
were grateful, and did not repine. Even this trial
was not sufficientthe father was taken from his
pains and mortifications, and my son put on the
livery of a baron. I will not sayI cannot say
my strength would have been equal to all this of
itself
.
An angel, in the form of this constant and
excellent
woman, was sent to sustain me. Until the
late wrong to Limburg, we had our hopes and our
hours of happinessbut that crime defeated all. My
boy hath perished by a just anger, and I remain to
implore Heaven in his behalf. Wilt thou refuse the
Church's succor to a childless mother, who, this
favor
obtained, will be ready to bless God and die?
Thou troublest me, daughter; but I beg thee to
remember I am but the guardian of a high and
sacred trust.
Father! said a second and still more thrilling
appeal.
Thou too, child! What wouldest thou of one
but too ready to yield, were it not for duty?
Meta had kneeled, and throwing back the hood
of her pilgrim's mantle, the change left her bloodless
face exposed to the Abbot's view. The girl seemed
severely struggling with herself; then, finding
encouragement
in her mother's eye, she was able to
continue.
I know, most holy and very reverend Abbot,
she commenced, with an evidently regulated
phraseology
,
like one who had been instructed how to
make the appeal, that the Church hath need of
much discipline; without which there would be
neither duration nor order in its existence. This
hath my mother taught me; and we both admit it,
and prize the truth. For this reason have we
submitted
ourselves to all its ordinances, never failing
to confess and worship, or to observe fasts and
saints' days. Even the mitred Bonifacius, there, will
not deny this, as respects either of us
Meta delayed, as if inviting the Abbot to gainsay
her words if he could; but Bonifacius was silent.
As for him that hath died, resumed Meta,
whose voice sounded like plaintive music, this is
the truth. He was born a Christian, and he never
said aught in my presence against the Church. Thou
canst not think, father, that he who sought my
esteem
,
would strive to gain it by means that no
Christian
girl could respect? That he was often at the
Abbey confessionals I know; and that he was in
favor with this holy Prior, thou hast but to ask, to
learn. In going against Limburg, he did but obey
his lord, as others have often done before; and
surely all that fall in battle are not to be hopelessly
condemned. If there is heresy in Germany, is it not
enough of itself to endure so great a danger in life,
that the dead must be abandoned to their past acts,
without succor from the Church, or thought from
their friends? Oh! thou wilt think better, holy but
cruel Rudiger, of thy hasty decision. Give us then
masses for poor Berchthold! I know not what
Bonifacius
may have said to thee in secret, concerning
the youth, but this much would I say in his favor, in
presence of the assembled earthmore pious son,
more faithful follower, a braver at need, a more
gentle in intercourse, a truer or kinder heart than
his, does not now beat in the Palatinate! I know not
but I exceed the limits of a maiden's speech, in what
I say, continued the girl ardently, a bright spot
shining on each cheek amid her tears, but the dead
are mute, and if those they loved are cold to their
wants, in what manner is Heaven to know their
cruel need?
Good daughter, interrupted the Abbot, who
began
to feel distressed, we will think of this. Go
thou to thy rest,and may God bless thee!
Nay, I cannot sleep while the soul of Berchthold
endures this jeopardy! Perhaps the Church will
demand
penance in his behalf. My mother Lottchen
is no longer young and strong, as formerly; but
thou seest, father, what I am! Name what thou wilt
pilgrimages, fasts, stripes, prayers, or vigils, are
alike to me. Nay, think not that I regard them!
Thou canst not bestow more happiness than to give
this task for poor Berchthold's sake. Oh! hadst thou
known him, holy Monk, so kind with the weak, so
gentle with us maidens, and so true, thou wouldest
not, nay, thou couldest not need another prayer to
grant the masses!
Bonifacius, is there no means of justifying the
concession?
I would speak with thee, brother, answered he
of Limburg, who, with a thoughtful countenance,
awaited his companion a little apart from the others.
The conference of the two prelates was short, but
it was decisive.
Take away the child, said the Abbot Rudiger,
to Ulrike; the weight of Heaven's displeasure
must be borne.
The Prior sighed heavily; but he signed for the
females to obey, like one who saw the uselessness
of further entreaties. Leading the way, he left the
Abbot's abode, his companions following; nor did a
murmur escape either, while giving this proof of
patient submission. It was only when Ulrike and
Lottchen had reached the open air, that they found
the helpless girl they supported was without
sensibility
.
As fits of fainting had been common of late,
her mother felt no great alarm, nor was it long
before
all the female pilgrims sought the pillows they
so much needed.
Q 2
CHAPTER XIV.
Fy, uncle Beaufort! I have heard you preach,
That malice was a great and grievous sin:
King Henry VI
.
The
social character of a Benedictine
community
has been mentioned in one of the earlier
chapters
.
That of Einsiedlen, though charged with the
worship of altars especially favored, formed no
exception
to the general rule. If any thing, the
number
of distinguished pilgrims that frequented its
shrine, rendered it liable to more than usual demands
on its hospitality; demands that were met by a
suitable
attention to the rules of the brotherhood. Even
Loretto has its palace for the entertainment of such
princes as can descend from their thrones to kneel
in the `santa casa;' for policy, not to speak of a
more generous motive, requires that the path should
be smoothed to those devotees who are
unaccustomed
to encounter difficulties. In conformity with the
rule of their order, then, though dwelling in the
secluded
and wild region already described, the
fraternity
of our Lady of the Hermits, had their
Abbot's
abode, their lodgings for the stranger, and their
stores of cheer, as well as their cells and their
religious
rites.
It was about three hours after the interview
related
in the last chaptera time that brings us near
the turn of the nightthat we shall return to the
narrative. The scene is a banqueting-hall, or, to
speak in more measured phrase, a private refectory,
in which the princely Abbot was wont to entertain
those in whose behalf he saw sufficient reasons to
exercise more than ordinary attention and favor.
There was no great show of luxury in the ordinary
decorations of the place, for a useless display of its
means formed no part of the system of a
community
that chiefly existed by the liberality of the pious.
Still the hall was as well arranged as comported
with the rude habits of the age, in that secluded
region
habits
that consulted the substantial portion
of human enjoyments far more than those elaborate
and effeminate inventions, which use has since
rendered
nearly indispensable to later generations. The
floor was of tile, not very nicely polished; the walls
were wainscoted in dark oak; and the ceiling had
a rude attempt to represent the supper given at the
marriage of Cana, and the miracle of the wine.
Notwithstanding it was midsummer, a cheerful fire
blazed in a chimney of huge dimensions; the size
of the apartment and the keen air of the mountains
rendering such an auxiliary not only agreeable, but
necessary. The board was spacious and well
covered
,
offering a generous display of those healthful
and warm liquors, which have so long given the
Rhine additional estimation with every traveller of
taste.
Around the table were placed the Abbot, and his
unhoused peer, Bonifacius; a favorite or two of the
community of Einsiedlen; with Emich, the Knight
of Rhodes, the Abb, Heinrich Frey, and the smith.
The former were in their usual conventual robes;
while the latter were confounded, so far as externals
were concerned, in their dresses of pilgrims.
Diet-rich
owed his present advantage altogether to the
fortuitous circumstance of being found in so good
company, divested of the usual distinguishing marks
of his rank. If Bonifacius was at all aware of his
character, indifference or policy prevented its
exposure
.
Had one been suddenly introduced to this
midnight
scene, he would scarce have recognized the
weary penitent and the reproving churchman, in the
jovial cheer and boon companionship of the hour.
The appetite was already more than satisfied, and
many a glass had been quaffed in honor of both
hosts and guests, ere the precise moment to which
we transfer the action of the tale.
The princely prelate occupied the seat of honor,
as became his high rank, while Bonifacius was
seated at one elbow, and the Count of Hartenburg
at the other. The great consideration due to the
first, as well as his personal character and mild
manners, had served to preserve all outward
appearances
of amity and courteous intercourse
between
his neighbors, neither of whom had as yet
suffered the slightest intimation of their former
knowledge of each other to escape him. This polite
duplicity, which we have reason to think is of very
ancient origin, and in which Albrecht of Viederbach
and Monsieur Latouche assisted with rare felicity,
aided in curbing the feelings of their inferiors, who,
being less trained in the seemliness of deception,
might otherwise have given vent to some of their
bodily pains, by allusions of an irritating and
questionable
nature.
Thou findest our liquors palatable?
courteously
observed the Abbot, as we shall,
par excellence,
now distinguish him of Einsiedlen. This of the
silver cup, cometh from the liberality of thy late
Elector, who had occasion to send votive offerings,
in behalf of the illness of one of his family, to our
Lady of the Hermits, and who had the grace to
accompany the memorial to the convent treasury
by this sign of private regard; and that thou
seemest
most to relish, is a neighborly boon from our
brother of Saint Gall, than whom more generous
churchman does not wear a cowl. Thou knowest,
son, that the matter of good wine hath long been
the subject of especial care with that thriving
brotherhood
.
Thou overratest my knowledge of history,
princely
Abbot, returned Emich, setting down the glass,
however, in a manner to show that his familiarity
with good liquors might safely be assumed. We
of the lower countries waste but little time on these
studies, trusting chiefly to those who dwell at the
universities for the truth of what we hear. If he
of Saint Gall dispenseth much of this goodly liquor,
certes it were well that our spiritual guardians
sent us, on occasions, to make our pilgrimages in
that region, which cannot be far from this, unless
my geography is greatly in fault.
Thou couldest not have better divined, hadst
thou been a doctor of Wittenberg, or of Rome
itself! Considering our mountain paths, and the
insufficiency of the bridges and other conveniences,
it may require two suns to urge a beast from our
convent gate to that of our brother of Saint Gall,
though, on emergencies, we have succeeded, by
means of faithful footmen, in getting tidings to their
ears within the day and night. Saint Gall is a
wealthy and well-bestowed Abbey, of very ancient
existence, and of much repute as the haven of
letters
,
during the darkest period, learned Bonifacius,
of our more modern times; though the late increase
of its town, and the growing turbulence of the times,
have not permitted it to escape, with impunity, from
the dangers that now beset all of Rome.
This was the first allusion which had been made
to the events that had so singularly brought the
present company together; and, but for the address
and self-command of Bonifacius, it might have
brought on a discussion that would not have proved
agreeable.
Saint Gall and its merits are unknown to none
who wear the frock of Saint Benedict, he said,
with admirable composure. Thou hast well said
that its walls were, for many ages, the sole
protectors
of learning in our Europe; for without the
diligence and fidelity of its Abbots and brotherhood,
much that is now preserved and prized would have
been irretrievably lost to posterity and to ourselves.
I doubt not, reverend Benedictine, observed
Emich, speaking courteously across the Abbot to
Bonifacius, much as a well-bred guest at board
addresses a convive to whom he is otherwise a
stranger, that this rare taste in liquors, of which
there has just been question, is the fruit of the
excellent
knowledge which you extol?
That is a point I shall not hastily decide,
returned
Bonifacius, smiling. It may be so, for we
have accounts of sore discord, between Saint Gall
and others even of the Church, touching the uses
and qualities of their wines.
That have we, and right faithfully recorded!
rejoined the Abbot. There was the war between
the Prince Bishop of Basle and our brethren of
Saint Gall, that led to sore contentions and heavy
losses.
How! did the desire to partake, urge our Rhenish
prelate to push adventure so far, as to come this
distance in quest of liquor?
Thou art in error, son pilgrim, concerning the
nature of Saint Gall's stores. We have vineyards,
it is true, among these mountains, as witness those
on the shores of the neighboring lake of Zurich, as
well as others that might be named; but our country
wines will warm the blood of peasant only. He
that hath tasted better, seldom fills his cup with
liquor that comes from any region this side the
farther border of Swabiayour vines of the
Rheingau
in specialty; whereas the territories of Saint
Gall lie still farther from those favored countries
than we ourselves.
You have need to explain, princely Abbot; for
that the Baslois should come in our direction, in
quest of good liquor, is clear enough, whereas the
war you have named, would have sent him farther
from his object.
Thou hast not come hither, son, without
marking
the course of the Rhine, on whose banks thou
hast so long journeyed. This great stream, though
so turbulent and dangerous among the mountains,
is of much use in procuring our supplies. By means
of the lake of Constance, and the lower river, heavy
burthens arrive at the very territory of our sister
Abbey; and the dispute to which there has been
allusion, came of the fact that the right reverend
prelate of Basle would fain have demanded toll on
the purchases of the Abbey. Thou mayest
remember
,
brother, looking towards Bonifacius, that
when both were tired of blows, the good Bishop
sent to demand `What the Virgin had done, that
the churchmen above should slay her people?' and
that he received for a merry answer the question
of, `What has Saint Gall done, that thou shouldest
stop his wines?'
The listeners laughed, in low simpers, like men
amused with this characteristic narrative; for such
incidents were yet too recent to excite much other
reflection, even among churchmen, than what was
connected with the vulgar temporal interests of the
incident.
By the Magi! holy and princely Abbot, thy
tale giveth additional flavor! said Emich, who
greatly enjoyed the quarrel; it moreover serveth
to shut out thoughts that come from aching bones
and weary feet.
Thy pilgrimage, son, will bring its rewards, as
well as its pains. Should it be a means of
removing
thee, for a time, from the heresies of Germany,
and of placing thee and thine in more friendly
communion
with the Church, the toil will not be lost.
As such do I esteem the duty, returned Emich,
tossing off his glass, after steadily regarding the
liquor a moment by the fire-light. Saint Gall had
the right of the matter; and he who would not
take up arms for this, did not deserve to wear them.
How now, Herr Frey! Thou art silent?
Not more so, I trust, nobly-born Emich, than
becometh one on a pilgrimage; and one who hath
need to bethink him of his duties, lest his town
should have cause to reproach him with negligence.
God's truth, Master Burgomaster! If any here
have reason to bethink them of Deurckheim, it is
the city's sovereign and lord. So cheer up, and
let us lighten the load we carry, always under the
favor and good graces of this hospitable and
well-endowed
brotherhood.
Thou art a servitor of the cross? demanded
the Abbot of Albrecht of
Viederback
, beckoning
the Knight to come nearer.
An indifferent one, princely and pious Rudiger,
and, I might say, one that hath yielded to the
seductions
of company and good fellowship, not to speak
of the force of blood; else would he have been
spared this expiation.
Nay, I name not thy pursuit with the intent to
reproach; interrupted the courteous prelate. Such
liberty does not become hospitality. We make a
difference within these walls between the
confessional
and the board.
The distinction is just, and promises perpetuity
and lasting respect to our faith, spite of all heresies.
The rock on which this Brother Luther and his
followers will split, holy Abbotat least, it so
seemeth
to an uninstructed capacityis the desire to
refine beyond men's means of endurance. Religion,
like chivalry, is good in its way; but neither the
priest nor the knight can bear his armor at all times
and seasons. Your schismatic hath the desire to
convert the layman into a monk, whereas the beauty
of creation is its order; and he that is charged with
the cure of souls, is sufficient for his object,
without
laying this constant burthen on the shoulders of
him that hath already more of temporal cares than
he can bear.
Were others more of thy mind, son, we should
have less trouble, and better discipline. Our altars
are not useless, and if they who frequent them, could
be content to think that we are sufficient for their
safety, the world would be saved much disputation,
and haply some shedding of blood. But with these
safe and creditable opinions, Sir Knight and
Pilgrim
,
continued the Abbot, dropping his voice to a
more confidential key, it may be permitted me to
express surprise, that I see thee one of a penitence
commanded for violence done a convent!
Albrecht of Viederbach shrugged his shoulders,
and glanced meaningly towards his cousin.
What will you, right noble and reverend
Prelate
!We
are but the creatures of accident. There
is respect due to fellowship and hospitality, to say
naught of the claims of blood and kindred. The evil
turn of the Rhodian warfare, some longings to look
again at our German fields, for the father-land keeps
its hold of us more particularly in adversity, with
the habits of an unsettled existence, served to lead
me to the castle of Hartenburg; and fairly entered,
it will excite no wonder that the guest was ready
to lend his sword, in a short foray, to the host. These
sallies, as thou well knowest, princely Rudiger, are
not so rare as to be deemed miracles.
What thou sayest is true, returned the Abbot,
always speaking as it were aside to the Knight, and
manifesting no great surprise at this avowal of
principles
,
that were common enough in that age, and
which have descended in a different form to our
own, since we daily see men, in the gravest affairs
of a nation, putting their morality at the disposal of
party, rather than incur the odium of being wanting
in this species of social faith. What thou sayest
is very true, and may well furnish thy plea with the
Vol. II. R
Grand Master. Thou mayest on many accounts,
too, find this pilgrimage wholesome.
Doubt it not, reverend Abbot. We had little
time during the siege, to pay due attention to the
rites; and the general looseness of our lives, since
driven from the island, has left long arrears to
settle; a fact that I endeavor to remember now.
And thy associatehe of gentle mien; hath he
not also connexion with the Church?
Albrecht turned to whisper the reply.
'Tis but one that circulates under the frock, holy
Benedictinea youth that hath been the dupe of
Lord Emich; for to speak thee fair, my cousin
wanteth not of the policy necessary to his condition,
and to the habits of a sage government.
The Abbot smiled in a way to show a good
intelligence
between him and his companion. After this,
they talked apart earnestly for a while, beckoning
Monsieur Latouche to make one of their party,
after sundry glances in his direction. In the mean
time, the general discourse proceeded among the
other guests.
I was sorrowed to hear, reverend Benedictine,
proceeded the Count, purposely avoiding the eye of
Bonifacius, by addressing himself to one of the
brotherhood
of Einsiedlen, that thy community hath
refused us masses, for the soul of one that fell in
that unhappy dispute which is the cause of our
present pleasure, in being in so goodly company. I
loved the youth, and would fain deal liberally by
those that remember his present necessities.
Hath the matter been fairly put to those having
the right to decide? demanded the monk, showing
by the direction of his eye, that he meant his superior.
They tell me it hath, and put touchingly; but
without success. I trust there has been no hostile
interference
,
in this affair, which concerneth no less
than a soul, and ought to be dealt by tenderly.
I know of but one, and that is the Father of
Evil himself, that hath an enmity to souls!
answered
the monk, with very honest surpriseAs for
us, it is our pleasure to be of use on all such
occasions
;
and that especially when the request is
preferred
by friends of the deceased, that are worthy
of so much higher favor.
Dost thou call those who overturn altars, said
Bonifacius, sternly, and with great firmness of voice,
who visit the temple with the armed hand, and
who defy the Church, worthy of her favors!
Reverend Abbot!
Nay, let him give his humor vent, said Emich,
proudlyThe cold air and a roofless head are
apt to move the temper. I would fain have met thee,
Bonifacius, in amity, as should have been the case,
after our solemn treaty, and all the reparations that
are made; but the desire to rule, it would seem, does
not abandon thee, even in banishment!
Thou art deceived in imagining that I shall
forget
myself, or my office, rude Emich;the question
put was to the Benedictine, and not to thee.
Then let the Benedictine answer. I ask thee,
Father, is it becoming or just, that the soul of a
youth of good repute, of moral life, and of
reasonable
earthly hopes, should be refused aid, on the
mere grudge of ancient hostility, or haply that there
were some passages at his death, that might have
been better avoided?
The Church must judge for itself, noble Pilgrim,
and decide on those rules which regulate its course!
By the sainted eleven thousand!Thou
forget-test
,
that all usages have been respected, and that
the masses are not asked as the beggar imploreth
alms, but that fairly counted gold is preffered in
behalf
of the youth. If enough has not been done in
this way, I swear to thee, Bonifacius, since it would
seem thy influence here is so strong, that on my
return
there shall be further offerings on his account.
Berchthold was very dear to me, and I would not
have it said that all memory of the boy is lost
beneath
the ashes of Limburg.
Though both in their several ways were irascible,
violent, and unaccustomed to control, neither Emich
nor Bonifacius was wanting in that species of
self-command
,
which is so necessary to men intrusted
with the care of important interests. They had
early learned to bring feeling more or less in
subjection
to their policy; and though not quite equal to a
cold and managed display of indifference on such
subjects as too closely crossed their views, it
required
a certain combination of excitement to induce
either, unnecessarily, to betray his true emotions.
Their personal intercourse had, in consequence of
this affected moderation, been less violent and
wrangling, than would otherwise have proved, for
it did not often happen that both found themselves
wrought up to the point of explosion, precisely at
the same instant; and he that happened to remain
the coolest, stood as a check on the passions of him
who had momentarily forgotten appearances. But
for this fact, the ill-timed and ill-worded question of
the Count might have produced an immediate
rupture
,
to the injury of the pilgrims' interests, and to
the great scandal of the brotherhood of Einsiedlen:
as it was, however, Bonifacius listened with outward
courtesy, and answered more like one that
remembered
his priestly office than his particular injuries.
Had it been my good fortune, Herr Pilgrim, he
said calmly, to have remained in charge of altars
so esteemed, as to be sought on such a behalf, thy
application in favor of the youth would have
received
meet attention; but thou now addresseth a
prelate, that, like thee, is indebted to the hospitality
of these excellent brothers, for a roof to cover his
head.
Nay, I know not, added the Count a little
confused
by this sudden humility, but rather than
desert
so young a soul in this strait, and soul of a
servitor
whom I so much loved, that I would not even
now endow some chapelof a size and decorations
suited to his station while living.
On Limburg hill, Herr Emich?
Nay, excellent Bonifacius, thou forgettest our
loving treaty, this pilgrimage, and other conditions
honorably fulfilled. Altars can never rise again on
Limburg hill, for that were to lose sight of our oaths
and promises, which would be a crying sin in both;
but altars and chapels may exist elsewhere. Give
us then this grace, and look to our gratitude and
justice for the reward.
Bonifacius smiled, for he felt his power, and he
enjoyed it like a man conscious of having so lately
been in the hands of the very baron, who now so
earnestly beseeched his favor. It may not be easy
for one educated in these later days, to understand
the singular contradiction, which led Emich of
Hartenburg
,
the destroyer of Limburg, thus to entreat
a monk; but he who would properly understand his
character, must remember the durability of
impressions
made in youth, the dread mystery that is
attached
to the unknown future, and, most of all, the
flagrant inconsistencies, that are always the fruits
of a struggle between principles and interests,
between
the force of reason and the desires of
selfishness
.
Thou accusest me unwarrantably, when thou
sayest that our oaths, or our loving treaty is
forgotten
,
pious Pilgrim, returned the Benedictine; both
are respected and well remembered, as thou wilt
see, in the end. But there is a feature in this request
of thine, that hath apparently escaped unwittingly
one of thy known justice and impartiality. Thy
forester is well known for having greatly affected
the heresy that is ripe in Germany
R 2
Nay, Bonifacius, here must be an error,
interrupted
the Count; thou hast his very mother in
our pilgrimage; and dost think a proselyte of Luther
would undertake so grievous pain to satisfy Rome?
We speak of the child, and not of the parent,
Herr Pilgrim. Had all that were trained in better
principles observed the opinions of their fathers, our
age would have been spared this heresy. Of the
boy's irreverence there can be little doubt, since
mine own ears have been my witnesses.
How, hast thou ever shrived the youth,
rever-end
Abbot? demanded Emich in surprise. I did
not think thee of so great condescension to one of his
hopes, norby the mass! did I think the youth so weak,
as to touch on disputed points at the confessional!
There are other acknowledgments made, Herr
Pilgrim, than those which are heard in the Church,
or under the cloak of her mysteries. There was
formerly a question between us, noble Count,
amicably
settled, and in a merry manner that need not
now be named.
Touching certain vineyards! rejoined Emich
laughing, The fact is not so distant as to be
forgotten
,
though neither my cousin nor this good Abb
proved as stanch in that matter as had been expected!
Thy forester did better service. Thou mayst
also remember there were certain discussions then
had, and that the bold boy ventured on a comparison
of the tree trimmed of its useless branches, and the
tree suffered to stand in its deformity.
Wilt thou abandon a soul to jeopardy for speech
light as this, Herr Bonifacius? God's justice! This
promiseth but little in mine own behalf, at some
future
day. Berchthold, heated and warm in the
interest
of his lord, threw out hints that might
otherwise
have been spared; moreover, the greater the
sinner, Father, the greater need of masses and
prayers.
This will not I gainsaymy objection goeth no
farther than to urge that those who are willing to
live by the counsels of Luther, should be also
willing
to seek salvation by his means.
Friends and pilgrims, said the Abbot of
Einsiedlen
approaching the table, from which he had
retired
a little, to converse more freely with the Abbot
and the Knight of Rhodesthe hour is at hand
which has been set to celebrate an early mass in
behalf of this pilgrimage. The bell is giving the
first summons, and it is meet that we retire to
prepare
ourselves for the duty.
At this interruption Bonifacius, who saw a storm
gathering, gladly arose, and instantly withdrew, the
rest dropped off, according to their several
conditions
;
Emich and his cousin retiring with the leisure
of men more accustomed to make others wait, than
of hastening their movements to the injury of their
own convenience.
After persuing this scene, we admonish the reader
to spare his remarks, until the subject has been well
pondered in his mind. In portraying what past in
the private refectory of the convent of our Lady of
the Hermits, we wish to convey no censure on any
particular persuasion, or sect, or order of Christians,
but simply to exhibit the habits and opinions of the
age in which the individuals of this legend existed.
Let those who are disposed to be hypercritical, or
censorious in their remarks, coolly look around them,
and, first making the necessary allowances for the
new aspects of society, put the question, whether
contradictions as apparent, inconsistencies nearly as
irreconcileable with truth, and selfishness almost as
gross and as unjust, is not now manifest equally
among the adherents of Rome, and the proselytes
of Luther, as any that have been here represented.
We may claim to have improved on the opinions and
practices of our predecessors, but we are still far
from being the consistent and equitable creatures
that, it is to be hoped, we are yet destined to become.
CHAPTER XV.
Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.'
King Henry VI
.
Among
the expiations prescribed to the pilgrims
of Deurckheim and Hartenburg, there had been
included
an especial and early morning service, the
one to which they were now summoned. Time had
been allowed the weaker portion of the party to rest,
while the stronger had been employed in the
manner
described in the preceding chapter. Certain
self-inflicted stripes it was taken for granted had
been duly bestowed, at different periods, during the
long journey from the Palatinate.
It was an hour after the separation of the abbey
guests that the procession of Benedictines swept out
of the cloisters into the body of the church. Though
far from being a community remarkable for the
austerity
of its practices, it was not unusual for monks
of all orders, to quit their pallets on extraordinary
occasions, and to break the stillness of night with
the music and service of the altar. When the spirit
comes thus fresh from repose, and in a disposition
suited to the object, into the immediate presence of
the Deity, incense and praise so free from the dross
of humanity, must come nearer to that high purity
which adorns the worship of angels than any other
that can ascend from man, since it is at such a
moment
that all least feel the burthen of their corporeal
adjunct.
Even in the daily parochial duty, the good
Catholics
still observe a uniformity and rigidity of
practice
that are unknown even in this land of Puritan
origin. The church-bell is heard in every village,
with the first dawn of light; at indicated hours, all
within hearing of its sound are admonished to recall
their thoughts from earth, by addressing a prayer to
God; and with the close of day, the flock is once
again summoned to the fold, at the service of
vespers
.
These are beautiful and touching memorials
of our duties, and when practised in sincerity,
cannot
fail to keep the mind in better subjection to the
great authority that directs all our destinies. In
countries where the husbandmen dwell together in
villages, the practice is easy, and we hold its loss to
be one of the greatest disadvantages of our own
diffuse distribution of rural population; a
distribution
which is also the reason why we must for ever
be wanting in several other features of social
inter-course
,
that give to life more or less of its poetical
charm. Happily there are, on the other hand,
accompanying
advantages that perhaps more than
serve as offsets to this, as to most other similar
anomalies in our usages.
The arrangements of a Benedictine chapel, and
the decorations of its altars, together with the
manner
in which the brotherhood occupy their stalls in
the choir, have been too often mentioned in these
pages, to require repetition. Long accustomed to
these exercises, the monks were early in their places,
though they for whom the mass was to be said were
not all as punctual.
Ulrike and Lottchen, with the rest of the females,
entered the church in a body, while the men, as is
usual in matters that touch the finer feelings, were
the last. Emich and the Burgomaster, however,
finally made their appearance, followed by their
companions, the whole betraying by their drowsy
air, that they had been endeavoring to sleep off the
late repast, and to recover from their fatigue.
During the mass, the companions of Lottchen
and Ulrike exhibited exemplary devotion, and a
close attention to the service; but the gaping of the
Count and his circle, the wandering eyes, and
finally the profound repose of several, sufficiently
showed that the ethereal part of their natures was
altogether unequal to the mastery of that which
was material.
There was a procession from the choir to the
shrine, and prayers were said, as on the previous
day, with the eyes of all riveted on the unearthly
countenance of Maria. As each was left to judge
for himself of the manner in which he discharged
his particular duties, there was a very sensible
difference
in the time occupied by the several devotees,
in the performance of the common vows. The
females appeared to be embodied with the stone,
and there were entire minutes during which their
motionless forms would have seemed to be as
inanimate
as the image on which they gazed, but for
the heaving of a breast, or an occasional tremor,
outward and visible signs of the workings of the
spirit within. Meta kneeled between her mother
and Lottchen, her whole soul apparently engrossed
in devotion. As she studied the bright eye that
gleamed upon her from the depths of that
mysteriour
chapel, illuminated as it was by gorgeous and
bright lamps, her fancy transformed the image into
a being sainted and blessed by the choice of God;
and her own gentle spirit clung to the delusion, as
one replete with a hope to cheer her own desolation.
She thought of the future, and of the grave; of the
rewards of the just, and of Heaven; of that endless
eternity and its fruition in which she confided,and
the ties of earth began sensibly to lessen. There
was a holy desire to be at rest. But,
notwithstanding
the spiritual nature of her employment, the
form of Berchthold, gay in the green garb of a
forester, with laughing eye, light step, and cheerful
voice, mingled in all the pictures of her imagination.
Now he appeared a saint, robed and bearded, as
she had been wont to see those holy men represented
in works of art, and yet, by a contradiction wrought
by her own heart, always bright and youthful;
and now she thought him gifted with wings, and
united to the beings of that heavenly choir, which
had so many representatives around her suspended
between the roof and the pavement of the edifice.
Singular as it may seem to some of our readers, so
busy and so alluring was the working of her
imagination
at this thrilling moment, that the mourning
and affectionate girl had rarely spent an hour of
more holy enjoyment, than this which she passed
before the shrine of our Lady of the Hermits.
Very different were the sensations of Lottchen.
Her griefs were those in which the fancy had no
share. She wept for the child to which she had
given birth; for the stay of her age, and for the
pride of her life. No fancy could betray the
imagination
of a mother, nor could any workings of the
mind convert the sad reality into aught but the
bitter
truth. Still Lottchen found consolation in her
prayers. Religious faith was active, though
imagination
slumbered; for nothing can be more different
than the delusions of the one, and the deep sustained
convictions of the other; and she was able to find
a solace for her sorrow, by looking with calm,
Christian
hope beyond the interests of life.
The sentiments and feelings of Ulrike differed
from those of her friend, only in the degree, and in
the peculiarity of those circumstances which
directed
her maternal solicitude to a still living object.
But Ulrike, kind, true, and warm of heart, had
tenderly
regarded the lost Berchthold. Had there been
no other motive than the fact of his being the
off-spring
of Lottchen, she could not have been
indifferent
to him; but, accustomed, as she had been for
years, to look forward to his union with Meta, she
felt his loss little less than she would have mourned
over that of a child of her own.
Not so with Heinrich. The bold and spirited
support he received from Berchthold during the
assault
,
had sensibly won upon his esteem, for the
affinities
between the brave are amongst the
strongest
;
but the Burgomaster had not passed a life in
the indulgence of a passion so engrossing, and so
incurable, as the love of gain, readily to cast aside
all his intentions and objects, at the impulse of a
purely generous feeling. He would freely have
given of his beloved stores to the youth; but to
bestow
Meta was, in his eyes, to bestow all, and,
under
his habits, it seemed to be giving gold without
an equivalent, to give his daughter's hand to a
penniless
husband. There are some who accumulate
for the advantages that are incidental to wealth;
others hoard under the goadings of an abstract and
nearly inexplicable passion; while another set heap
together their means, as boys roll up snow, with a
delight in witnessing how large a mass may be
collected
by their agency. Heinrich was of the latter
class, subject, however, to a relish for the general
results of wealth, and like all men who deem
money
as an end and not as a means, he was in the
practice of considering the last measure of his
policy
,
which was intended to double the stock by the
marriage of his daughter, as the happiest and the
greatest stroke of a fortunate and prosperous life.
And yet Heinrich Frey had his moments of strong
natural feeling, and the manner in which Meta
mourned for the death of Berchthold touched him,
to a degree that might have disposed him to say he
regretted the fate of his young lieutenant, as much
on her account as on his own. It is more than
probable
,
however, could Berchthold have been suddenly
restored to life, that the Burgomaster would have
returned to his former mode of thinking, and would
have thought the resuscitation of the young forester
sufficient, of itself, to assuage the grief of a whole
family.
Heinrich and the Count were among the first to
quit their suppliant attitudes before the shrine. They
had each said the required number of prayers, and,
brushing their knees, the two pilgrims strolled away,
deeper into the body of the Church, like men well
satisfied with themselves. But, while so ready to
give relief to his own bones, the Burgomaster kept
a vigilant eye on Dietrich, who, being a hired
penitent
,
was expected to give Deurckheim the full worth
of its money, in the way of mortifications and
aves
.
Most of the lights in the choir had been
extinguished
,
and the aisles of the edifice were dimly
visible, by means of a few scattered candles, that
burned almost without ceasing, before the altars of
different subordinate chapels. As they walked down
the great aisle, Emich slowly laid a hand on the
shoulder of his companion, seeming to invite his
close attention, by the grave and meaning manner
of the action.
I could wish that our poor Berchthold, after all,
had the virtue of masses from these servitors of our
Lady of the Hermits! said the Count. If there
be especial savor in any of this description of
prayers
,
methinks it must be among men who watch a
shrine of which they tell all these miracles!
Your wish, nobly-born-brother-pilgrim-and-friend,
is but the expression of mine own. To own the
truth, I have thought of little else, while going
through the
aves,
but to devise the means of
persuading
the holy Abbot, at a reasonable rate, to
change his mind, and honestly to let the youth's soul
benefit by his intercessions.
Thou hast not well bethought thee altogether,
friend Heinrich, of thine own errand here!
Sapperment! What would you, Herr Emich,
from a man of my years and education? One gets
to be so ready with the words by oft repeating, that
going through the beads is much like tapping with
Vol. II. S
a finger while the eye looks over an account. But
to speak of the boywere we to bid higher for
these masses, it might raise the present price, and
we be uselessly losers; for, as I understand the
question, the amount given in no manner changes
the true value of the intercession to the defunct.
Heinrich, returned the Count, musingly, they
say that Brother Luther denounces these
post
mortem
prayers, as vain and of none avail!
That would alter the case greatly, Lord
Count-and-brother-pilgrim
.
One could wish to be sure in
an affair of this delicacy, for if the monk of
Wittenburg
hath reason of his side, we lose our gold;
and if he hath wrong, the soul of Berchthold may
be none the better for our doubts!
We laymen are sorely pressed between the two
opinions, worthy Burgomaster, and I could fain wish
that these reformers would bring the question
speedily
to a conclusion. By the mass! there are
moments
when I am ready to throw away the rosary,
and to take Duke Friedrich of Saxony's side of the
question, as being the most reasonable and manly.
But, then again, should he prove wrong, thou know'st,
Heinrich, we lose the benefit of chapels built, of
aves
said, of gold often paid, and the high
protection
of Rome! Thou seest the strait of poor
Berchthold
,
and this only for some little freedom of
discourse
!
Heinrich sighed, for he felt the force of the
dilemma
,
and he appeared to ponder well before he
answered. Edging nearer to the Count, like a man
who felt he was about to utter dangerous sentiments
in a delicate situation, he whispered the reply.
Here Emich, he said, we are but dust, and
that of no very excellent quality. The potter's ware
hath its utility, if well baked and otherwise
prepared
;
but of what use is man when the breath
hath departed? They say the soul remains, and that
it must be cared for, neither of which will I
dispute
;
but is it reasonable to buy out a patent of
salvation
,
for an intangible thing, with current coin?
Look to that knave, the smith!Your pardon,
nobly-born
Countbut here hath our town engaged the
rogue to do penance in its behalf, and my eyes are
no sooner off him, than his lips become as stationary
as the wings of a mill in a calm. Duty to
Deurckheim
demands that I should give him a jog, after
which, with your gracious leave, we will look further
into the philosophy of that in which we were dealing.
Se saying, the zealous Heinrich hurried down the
aisle towards his religious mercenary, with a
laudable
and sensitive watchfulness over the interests of
his constituents. He found the smith perfectly
immovable
,
and it was only by repeated and vigorous
shakes, that he succeeded in arousing his auxiliary
from a profound slumber.
In the meanwhile, Emich walked on, still
occupied
by his reflections. On reaching the gate of the
choir, he was about to retrace his steps, when he
was privately beckoned, by one whose dusky form
appeared at a side door of the church, to draw
nearer. On approaching, Emich found that his old
rival, Bonifacius, awaited his coming.
The salutations of these ancient enemies were
courteous, but distant. After a short parley,
however
,
they withdrew in company; and it was past
the turn of the day, ere the Count of Hartenburg
reappeared among the pilgrims. The details of what
passed in this secret conference were never known
to the public, though subsequent events gave reason
to believe that they had reference to the final
settlement
of the long-contested existence of Limburg in
the Jaergerthal. It was known generally in the
Abbey
,
that the Abbot Rudiger made one of the
council
,
and that its termination was friendly. Those
who were disposed to be critical, intimated in after
days, that, in this dispute, as in most others in which
the weak and humble lend themselves to the views
of the great and the strong, they for whom the
battle
had been fought, and whose apparently
implacable
enmities had sown discord among their
followers
,
suddenly found means to appease their
resentments
,
and to still the tempest they had raised, in
such a manner as to suffer most of its consequences
to fall on the heads of their allies. This result, which
appears to be universal with those who have the
imprudence to connect themselves indissolubly with
friends who can irretrievably dispose of their
destinies
,
was perhaps to be looked for, since the man,
or the community, that is so weak as to confide too
implicitly in the faith of the powerful, whether
considered
individually or as nations, may at once
consider
itself a tool to favor views that have little
connexion
with its own interests. In cases of this
nature
,
men are wont to share the fate of the
orange-skin
,
which is thrown away after being sucked; and
communities themselves are apt to undergo some
such changes as those which mark the existence of
the courser, which is first pampered and caressed,
then driven upon the pole, and which commonly
ends its career at the plow.
During the time Bonifacius and Emich were
arranging
their secret treaty, in the best manner that
the former could hope for, in the actual state of
Germany, and to the entire satisfaction of the latter,
the ceremonies of the expiation proceeded. Aroused
from his sleep, Dietrich endeavored to compensate
for lost time by renewed diligence, and the
Burgomaster
himself, apprehensive that the negligence of
the hireling might bring a calamity on the town,
joined himself to the party, with as much zeal as if
he had as yet done nothing towards effecting the
object of their journey.
The sun had fallen far towards the west, when the
pilgrims finally took their departure for the
Palatinate
.
Father Arnolph was again at their head, and,
blessed by the Abbot and in favor with the Church,
the whole went their way, if not with lightened
hearts, at least with bodies much refreshed, with
hopes rekindled, and with packs materially
diminished
in size.
Ulrike and Lottchen paused when they reached
the boundary of the plain, where they could
command
a parting view of the Abbey. Here they, and
Meta, and indeed most of the party, prayed long
and fervently; or at least so seemed to pray. When
they arose from their knees, the Prior, whose whole
time while at the convent had been deeply occupied
by religious exercises, and whose spirit had been
refreshed
,
in a degree proportioned to his sincerity
and faith, came to the side of the principal group of
the females, his eye beaming with holy hope, and his
face displaying innate peace of mind.
Ye are now, daughters, about to take leave, for
ever, of the shrine of our Lady of the Hermits, he
said. If ye have seen aught to lessen the high
expectation
with which the pious are apt to draw near
this sacred altar, ascribe it to that frailty which is
inherent in the nature of man; and if ye have
reaped
consolation and encouragement, from your
offerings
and prayers, ye may, with all security, impute
it to the goodness of God. And thou, my child, he
added with paternal tenderness, addressing Meta
thou hast been sorely tried in thy young life,but
God is with thee, as he is in yon blue skyin that
sun of molten goldin yonder icy pile that props
the heavens, and in all his works, that are so
glorious
in our eyes! Turn with me to yonder mountain,
that from its form is called the Mitre. Regard it
wellDost see aught in particular?
'Tis an abrupt and dreary pile of rock, Father;
answered Meta.
Seest thou naught elseon its highest summit?
Meta looked intently, for in sooth there did appear,
S 2
on the uppermost pinnacle of the mass, an object so
small, and so like a line, that, at first, she passed a
hand across her eye to remove a floating hair from
before her sight.
Father! exclaimed the girl, clasping her hands
fervently, I behold a cross!
That rock is the type of God's durable justice;
That cross is the pledge of his grace and love. Go
thy way, daughter, and have hope.
The pilgrims turned and descended the mountain
in musing silence. That evening they crossed the
lake, and slept within the ancient walls of the
romantic
town of Rapperschwyl. On the following
day, the pilgrimage being now happily
accomplished
,
they proceeded toward their own distant
habitations
,
descending the Rhine in boats.
CHAPTER XVI.
But thou art clayand canst but comprehend
That which was clay, and such thou shalt behold.
Cain
.
The
return of the pilgrims was a happy moment
to all who dwelt in Deurckheim. Many prayers had
been offered in their behalf, during the long absence,
and divers vague reports of their progress and
success
,
had been eagerly swallowed by their friends
and townsmen. When, however, the Burgomaster
and his companions were actually seen entering
their gates, the good citizens ran to and fro, in
troubled delight, and the greetings, especially among
the gentler sex, were mingled with many tears.
Emich and his followers did not appear, having
taken a private path to the castle of Hartenburg.
The simple and still Catholic (though wavering)
burghers had felt many doubts, concerning the fruits
of their bold policy, while the expiatory penance
was pending. Their town was in the midst of a
region
that is perhaps more pregnant with wild
legends
,
even at this hour, than any other of equal
extent in Europe; and it can be easily conceived
that, under such circumstances, the imaginations of
a people who had been, as it were, nurtured in
superstition
,
would not be likely to slumber. In
effect
,
numberless startling rumors were rife, in the
town, the valley, and on the plain. Some spoke of
fiery crosses gleaming at night above the walls of
the fallen Abbey; others whispered of midnight
chants, and spectre-like processions, that had been
heard or seen among the ruined towers; while one
peasant, in particular, asseverated that he had held
discourse with the spirit of Father Johan. These
tales found credulous auditors or not, according to
the capacity of the listener; and to these may be
added another, that was accompanied by such
circumstances
of confirmation, as are apt momentarily
to affect the minds of those, even, who are little
wont to lend attention to any incidents of
miraculous
nature.
A peasant, in crossing the chase by a retired path,
was said to have encountered Berchthold, clad in
his dress of green, wearing the hunting-horn and
cap, and girded with the usual
couteau-de-chasse,
or,
in fine, much as he was first presented to the reader
in our early pages. The youth was described to
have been hot on the chase of a roebuck, and
flushed
with exercise. From time to time, he was said
to wind his horn. The hounds were near, obedient
as usual to his call, and indeed the vision was
described
as partaking of most of the usual
accompaniments
of the daily exercise of the forester.
Had the tale ended here, it might have passed off
among the thousand other similar wonderful sights,
that were then related in that wonder-loving
country
,
and been forgotten. But it was accompanied
with positive circumstances, that addressed
themselves
,
in a manner not to be disputed, to the senses.
The two favorite hounds of the forester had been
missing for some weeks, and, from time to time,
cries resembling theirs were unequivocally heard,
ringing among the arches of the forest, and filling
the echoes of the mountains.
This extraordinary confirmation of the tale of the
boor, occurred the week preceding the return of the
pilgrims. The latter found their townsmen under a
strong excitement from this cause, for that very day,
nearly half the population of Deurckheim had been
into the pass of the Haart which was described in
the opening chapter of this work, and with their
own ears had heard the deep baying of the hounds.
It was only after the first felicitations of the return
were over, and during the night which followed,
that the pilgrims learned this unusual circumstance.
It reached Emich himself, however, ere his foot
crossed the threshold of his castle.
On the following day, Deurckheim presented a
picture of pleased but troubled excitement. Its
population
was happy in the return of their chosen and
best, but troubled with the marvellous incident of
the dogs, and by the wild rumors that accompanied
it; rumors which thickened every hour by
corroborating
details from different sources. Early that
very morning a new occurrence helped to increase
the excitement.
From the moment that the Abbey was destroyed,
not an individual had dared to enter its tottering
walls. Two peasants of the Jaegerthal, incited by
cupidity, had indeed secretly made the attempt, but
they returned with the report of strange sights, and
of fearful groans existing within the consecrated
pile. The rumor of this failure, together with a
lingering
respect for altars that had been so long
reverenced
,
effectually secured the spot against all
similar expeditions. The alarm spread to the
Heidenmauer
,
for, by a confusion of incidents, that is far
from unusual in popular rumors, an account of Ilse,
concerning the passage of the armed band through
the cedars, on the night of the assault, coupled with
the general distrust that was attached to the place,
had been so perverted and embellished, as effectually
to leave the ancient camp to its solitude. Some said
that even the spirits of the Pagans had been aroused
by the sacrilege, from the sleep of centuries, and
others argued that, as the hermit was known to have
perished in the conflagration, it was a spot accursed.
The secret of the true name, and of the history of
the Anchorite, was now generally known, and men
so blended the late events with former offences, as
to create a theory to satisfy their own longings for
the marvellous; though, as is usual in most of these
cases of supernatural agency, it might not have
stood the test of a severe logical and philosophical
investigation.
During the night which succeeded the return of
the pilgrims, there had been a grave consultation
among the civic authorities, on the subject of all
these extraordinary tales and spectacles. The alarm
had reached an inconvenient point, and the best
manner of quieting it was now gravely debated.
There was not a burgher present at the discussion,
who felt himself free from the general uneasiness;
but men, and especially men in authority, ordinarily
choose to affect a confidence they are frequently far
from feeling. In this spirit, then, was the matter
discussed
and decided. We shall refer to the
succeeding
events for the explanation.
Just as the sun began to shed his warmth into the
valley, the people of Deurckheim, with few
exceptions
,
collected without that gate which the Count
of Hartenburg had so unceremoniously forced. Here
they were marshalled by citizens appointed to that
duty, in the usual order of a religious procession.
In front went the pilgrims, to whom an especial
virtue
was attached, in consequence of their recent
journey; then came the parochial clergy, with the
ordinary emblems of Catholic worship; the
burghers
succeeded, and last of all followed the women
and children, without much attention to order. When
all were duly arranged, the crowd proceeded,
accompanied
by a chant of the choristers, and taking
the direction of Limburg.
This is a short pilgrimage, brother Dietrich,
said the Burgomaster, who in his quality of a
Christian
of peculiar savor was still associated with the
smith, and little likely to weary the limbs; still
had the town been as active and true, as we who
have visited the mountains, this little affair of a few
barking hounds, and some midnight moans in the
Abbey ruins, would have been ready settled to our
hands. But a town without its head, is like a man
without his reason.
You count on an easy deliverance then,
honorable
Heinrich, from this outcry of devils and
unbidden
guests! For mine own particular exercises, I
will declare that, though sufficiently foot-sore with
what hath already been done, I could wish the
journey were longer, and the enemy more human.
Go to, smith; thou art not to believe above half
of what thou hast heard. The readiness to give
faith to idle rumors forms a chief distinction
between
the vagrant and the householderthe man of
weakness, and the man of wisdom. Were it decent,
between a magistrate and an artisan, I would hold
thee some hazard of coin, now, that this affair turns
out very different from what thou expectest; and I
do not account thee, Dietrich, an every-day
swallower
of lies.
If your worship would but hint what a
fair-dealing
man ought in truth to believe?
Why look you, smith, here is all that I expect
from the inquiry, though we hunt and exercise for a
month. It will be found that there is no pack of
hounds at all, loose or in leash, but at most a dog or
two, that may be beset or not, as the case shall
prove; next, thou wilt see that this tale of Father
Johan chasing young Berchthold, while the boy
hunts a roe-buck, is altogether an invention, since
the monk was the last man to give loose to such a
scampering, noisy device; as for the Forester, my
life on it, his appearance too will end in footmarks,
or perhaps some other modest sign that he desires
the masses refused by the Benedictines; for I know
not the youth that would be less likely needlessly to
disturb a neighborhood, with his own particular
concerns, than Berchthold Hintermayer, living or
dead.
A general start, and a common murmur among
his companions, caused Heinrich to terminate his
explanations. The head of the procession had
reached
the gorge, and, as it was about to turn into the
valley, the trampling of many hoofs became
audible
.
Feelings so highly wrought were easily excited
to a painful degree, and the common expectation,
for the moment, seemed to be some supernatural
exhibition. A whirlwind of dust swept round the
point of the hill, and Count Emich, with a train of
well-mounted followers, appeared from its cloud. It
was so common to meet religious processions of
this nature, that the Count would not have
manifested
surprise, had he been ignorant of the motive
which induced the population of Deurckheim to
quit its walls; but, already apprized of their
intentions
,
he hastily dismounted and approached the
Burgomaster, cap in hand.
Thou goest to exercise, worshipful Emich, he said,
and love for my town hath quickened our steps,
that no honor or attention should be wanting to those
I love,hast a place among thy pilgrims, for a poor
baron and his friends?
The offer was gladly accepted, courage being
quickened by every appearance of succor. Emich,
though equipped as a cavalier, was therefore
willingly
received among his fellow-travellers. The
delay caused by this interruption ended, the
procession
,
or rather the throng, for eagerness and anxiety
and curiosity had nearly broken all order, proceeded
towards the ascent of the mountain.
The ruins of Limburg, then recent and still
blackened
with smoke, were found in the deep silence
of utter desertion. To judge from appearances, not
a footstep had trodden them, since the moment when
the band of the assailants had last poured through the
gates, after a tumultuous triumph which had been
so chilled by the awful catastrophe of the falling
roofs. If that party had drawn near the Abbey in
expectation of a sudden and furious assault, this
slowly advanced with a troubled apprehension of
witnessing some fearful manifestation of superhuman
power. Both were disappointed. The unresisted
success of the assailants is known, and the
procession
now proceeded with the same impunity; though
many a voice faltered in the chant as they entered
the spoiled and desolate church. Nothing however
occurred to justify their alarm.
Encouraged by this pacific tranquillity, and
desirous
of giving proofs of their personal superiority to
vulgar terrors, the Count and Heinrich commanded
the throng to remain in the great aisle of the church,
while they proceeded together into the choir. They
found the usual evidences of a fierce conflagration
at every step, but nothing to create surprise, until
they arrived at the mouldering altar.
Himmel! exclaimed the Burgomaster, hastily
pulling back his noble friend by the cloak,Your
foot was about to do disreverence to the bones of a
Christian, my Lord Count!For Christian Father
Johan was, beyond all question, though one more
given to damnation than to charity.
Emich recoiled, for he saw in truth, that with
heedless step, he had been near crushing these
revolting
remnants of mortality.
Here died a wild enthusiast! he said, moving
the skeleton with the point of his sheathed sword.
And here he is still, nobly-born Graf!This
settles
the question of the monk chasing young
Berchthold
through the forest, and among the cedars of
the Heidenmauer, and it would be well to show these
remains to the people.
The hint was improved, and the throng was
summoned
to bear witness, that the bones of Johan still
lay on the precise spot, in which he had died. While
the curious and the timid were whispering their
opinions
of this discovery, the two leaders descended to
the crypt.
This portion of the edifice had suffered least by
the fire. Protected by the superior pavement, and
constructed altogether of stone, it had received no
very material injury, but that which had been
inflicted
by the sledges of the invaders. Fragments
of the tombs lay scattered on every side, and here
and there a wreath of smoke had left its mark upon
a wall; but Emich saw with regret, that he owed
the demolition of the altar, and of the other
memorials
of his race, entirely to his own precipitation.
I will cause the bones of my fathers to be
interred
elsewhere, he said, musingly;this is no
sepulchre for an honored stock!
Umph!They have long and creditably decayed
where they lie, Herr Emich, and it would have been
well had they been left beneath the cover of their
ancient marbles; but our artisans showed unusual
Vol. II. T
agility in this part of their toil, in honor, no doubt,
of an illustrious house.
None of my race shall sleep within walls
accursed
by Benedictines! Hark!what movement
is that above, good Heinrich?
The townsmen have doubtless fallen upon the
bones of the hermit, and of young Berchthold.
Shall we go up, Lord Count, and see that fitting
reverence be paid their remains? The Forester
has claims upon us all, and as for Odo Von
Ritterstein
,
his crime would be deemed all the lighter in
these days, moreover he was betrothed to Ulrike in
their youth.
Heinrich, thy wife was very fair;she had
many suitors!
I cry your mercy, noble Count; I never heard
but of poor Odo, and myself. The former was put
out of the question by his own madness, and as for the
latter, he is such as Heaven was pleased to make him;
an indifferent lover and husband if you will, but a
man of some credit and substance among his equals.
The Count did not care to dispute the possession
of these qualities with his friend, and they left the
crypt, with a common desire to pay proper respect
to the remains of poor Berchthold. To their mutual
surprise the church was found deserted. By the
clamor of voices without, however, it was easy to
perceive that some extraordinary incident had drawn
away the members of the procession, in a body.
Curious to have so violent an interruption of the
proceedings
explained, the two chiefs, for Heinrich was
still entitled to be so styled, hastened down the great
aisle, picking their way among fallen fragments,
towards
the great door. Near the latter, they were
again shocked by the spectacle of the charred
skeleton
of Johan, which seemingly had been dropped under
the impulse of some sudden and great confusion.
Himmel! muttered the Burgomaster, while he
hurried after his leader, they have deserted the
bones of the Benedictine!can it be, Lord Emich,
that some fiery miracle, after all our unbelief, hath
wrought this fear?
Emich made no reply, but issued into the court
with the air of an offended master. The first glimpse,
however, that he caught of the group, which now
thronged the ruined walls of the minor buildings,
whence there was a view of the surrounding
country
,
and particularly of parts of the adjacent hill of
the Heidenmauer, convinced him that the present
was no moment to exhibit displeasure. Climbing up
a piece of fallen stone-work, he found himself on a
fragment of wall, surrounded by fifty silent,
wondering
countenances, among whom he recognised
several
of his own most trusty followers.
What meaneth this disrespect of the service, and
so sudden an abandonment of the remains of the
monk? demanded the baron,vainly looking about
him, in the hope of finding some quicker explanation
by means of his own eyes.
Hath not my Lord the Count seen and heard?
muttered the nearest vassal.
Whatknave? I have seen nought, but pallid
and frightened fools, nor heard more than beating
hearts! Wilt thou explain this, varletfor, though
something of a rogue, thou, at least, art no coward?
Emich addressed himself to Gottlob.
It may not be so easy of explanation as is thought,
Lord Count, returned the cow-herd gravely: the
people have come hither with this speed, inasmuch
as the cries of the supernatural dogs have been heard,
and some say the person of poor Berchthold hath
been again seen!
The Count smiled contemptuously, though he knew
the speaker sufficiently well to be surprised at the
concern which was very unequivocally painted in
his face.
Thou wert attached to my Forester?
Lord Emich, we were friends, if one of so humble
station may use the word, when speaking of a youth
that served so near the person of our master. Like
his, my own family once knew better days, and we
often met in the chase, which I was wont to cross,
coming or going to the pastures. I loved poor
Berchthold, nobly-born Count, and still love his
memory.
I believe thou hast better stuff in thee, than some
idle and silly deeds would give reason to believe. I
have remembered thy good will on various occasions,
and especially thy cleverness in making the signals,
on the night these walls were overturned, and thou
wilt find thyself named to the employment left vacant
by my late Forester's unhappy end.
Gottlob endeavored to thank his master, but he
was too much troubled by real grief for the loss
of his friend, to find consolation in his own
preferment
.
My services are my Lord Count's, he answered,
but, though ready to do as commanded, I could
well wish that Berchthold were here to do that for
me, which
Listen!Hark!cried a hundred voices.
Emich started, and bent forward in fixed attention.
The day was clear and cloudless, and the air of the
hills pure as a genial breeze and a bright sun could
bestow. Favored by such circumstances, and amid
a silence that was breathing and eloquent, there were
borne across the valley the well known cries of
hounds on the scent. In that region and age, none
dared hunt, and indeed none possessed the means of
hunting, but the feudal Lord. Since the late events,
his chases had been unentered with this view, and
the death of Berchthold, who had especial privileges
in this respect, had left them without another who
might dare to imitate his habits.
This is at least bold! said Emich, when the
cries had passed away: hath any other near dogs
of that noble breed?
We never heard of other!
None would dare use them; were the answers.
I know those throatsthey are, of a certainty,
the favorite hounds of my poor Forester! Have not
the dogs escaped the leash, to play their gambols at
will among the deer?
In that case, Lord Count, would tried hounds
remain
abroad for weeks? answered Gottlob. It is
now a sennight since these cries have been first
heard, and yet no one has seen the dogs, from that
hour to this, unless as some one of our hinds says,
they have in sooth been seen running madly on the
scent.
'Tis said, mein Herr Graf, put in another, that
Berchthold, himself, hath been viewed in their
company
,
his garments floating in the wind, while he
flew along, keeping even pace with the dogs, an' he
had been swift of foot as they!
With Father Johan at his heels, cowl undone,
and robe streaming like a penon, by way of religious
amusement! added the Count, laughing. Dost
not see, dotard, that the crackling bones of thy monk
are still in the ruin?
The hind was daunted by his master's manner,
but nothing convinced. There then succeeded a
long and expecting silence, for this little by-play near
the Count had not in the least affected the solemn
attention of the mass. At length the throats of these
mysterious dogs again opened, and the cries indeed
appeared like those of hounds rushing from beneath
the cover of woods into the open air. In a few
moments
they were repeated, and beyond all dispute,
they were now upon the open heath that surrounded
the Teufelstein. The crisis grew alarming for the
local superstitions of such a place, in the
commencement
T 2
of the sixteenth century. Even Emich
wavered
.
Though he had a vague perception of the
inconsistency
of living dogs being hunted by a dead
Forester, still there were so many means of getting
over this immaterial difficulty, when the greater
point of the supernatural chase was admitted, that
he found little relief in the objection. Descending
from the wall, he was in the act of beckoning the
priests and Heinrich to his side, when a general shout
arose among the male spectators, while the women
rushed in a body around Ulrike, who was kneeling,
with Lottchen and Meta, before the great crucifix
of the ancient court of the convent. In the
twinkling
of an eye, Emich re-occupied his place on the
wall, which shook with the impetus of his heavy
rush.
What meaneth this disrespectful tumult?
angrily
demanded the baron.
The hounds!mein Herr Graf!the hounds!
answered fifty breathless peasants.
Explain this outcry, Gottlob,
My Lord Count, we have seen the dogs leaping
past yonder margin of the hill,here,just in a line
with the spot where the Teufelstein lies. I know
the dear animals well, Herr Emich, and believe me,
they are truly the old favourites of Berchthold.
And Berchthold! continued one or two of the
more decided lovers of the marvellous,we saw
the late Forester, great Emich, bounding after the
dogs an' he had wings!
The matter grew serious, and the Count slowly
descended to the court, determined to bring the
affair
to some speedy explanation.
CHAPTER XVII.
By the Apostle Paul, shadows to-night
Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard,
Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers
Richard III
.
The
consultation that now took place was
between
the principal laymen. The connection which
the Church had so long maintained with supernatural
agencies, determined Emich, who was jealous of its
again obtaining its lost ascendency in that country,
to exclude the officiating priests altogether from the
decision he was about to take. Were we to say that
the Count of Hartenburg gave full faith to the
rumors
concerning the spirit of his late Forester, having
been seen engaged in the chase, as when in the flesh,
we should probably not do entire credit to his
intelligence
and habits of thinking, but were we to say,
that he was altogether free from superstition and
alarm on this difficult point, we should attribute to
him a degree of philosophy and a mental
independence
,
which in that age was the property only of
the learned and reflecting, and not always even of
them. Astrology, in particular, had taken strong
hold of the imaginations of those who even pretended
to general science; and when the mind once admits
of theories of a character so little in accordance with
homely reason, it opens the avenues to a multitude
of collateral weaknesses of the same nature, which
seem to follow as the necessary corollaries of the
main proposition.
The necessity of a prompt solution of the question
was admitted by all of those whom the Count consulted.
Many had begun to whisper that the extraordinary
visitation was a consequence of the sacrilege, and that
it was hopeless to expect peace, or exemption from
supernatural plagues, until the Benedictines were
restored to their Abbey and their former rights.
Though Emich felt convinced that this idea came
originally from the monks, through some of their
secret and paid agents, he saw no manner of
defeating
it so effectually as that of demonstrating the
falsity
of the rumor. In our time, and in this land, a
weapon that was forged by a miracle, would be apt
to become useless of itself; but in the other
hemisphere
,
there still exist entire countries, that are yet
partially governed by agents of this description. At
the period of the tale, the public mind was so
uninstructed
and dependent, that the very men who were
most interested in defeating the popular delirium of
the hour, had great difficulty in overcoming their
own doubts. It has been seen that Emich, though
much disposed to throw off the dominion of the
Church, so far clung to his ancient prejudices, as
secretly
to distrust the very power he was about to
defy, and to entertain grave scruples not only of the
policy, but of the lawfulness of the step his ambition
had urged him to adopt. In this manner does man
become the instrument of the various passions and
motives that beset him, now yielding, or now
struggling
to resist, as a stronger inducement is presented
to his mind; always professing to be governed by
reason and constrained by principles, while in truth
he rarely consents to consult the one, or to respect the
other, until both are offered through the direct
medium
of some engrossing interest, that requires an
immediate and active attention. Then indeed his
faculties become suddenly enlightened, and he eagerly
presses into his service every argument that offers,
the plausible as well as the sound; and thus it
happens
that we frequently see whole communities
making a moral pirouette in a breath, adopting this
year a set of principles that are quite in opposition
to all they had ever before professed. Fortunately,
all that is thus gained on sound principles is apt to
continue, since whatever may be the waywardness of
those who profess them, principles themselves are
immutable
,
and when once fairly admitted, are not easily
dispossessed by the bastard doctrines of expediency
and error. These changes are gradual as respect
those avant-couriers of thought, who prepare the
way for the advance of nations, but who, in general,
so far precede their contemporaries, as to be utterly
out of view at the effectual moment of the
reformation
,
or revolution, or by whatever name these sudden
summersets are styled; but as respects the mass, they
often occur by a coup-de-main; an entire people
awakening
,
as it were, by magic, to the virtues of a new
set of maxims, much as the eye turns from the view
of one scenic representation to that of its successor.
Our object in this tale is, to represent society,
under its ordinary faces, in the act of passing from
the influence of one set of governing principles to
that of another. Had our efforts been confined to
the workings of a single and a master mind, the
picture
,
however true as regards the individual, would
have been false in reference to a community; since
such a study would have been no more than
following
out the deductions of philosophy and reason
something the worse, perhaps, for its connection
with humanity; whereas, he that would represent
the world, or any material portion of the world,
must draw the passions and the more vulgar
interests
in the boldest colors, and be content with
pourtraying
the intellectual part, in a very subdued
background. We know not that any will be disposed
to make the reflection that our labors are intended
to suggest, and without which they will scarcely
be useful; but, while we admit the imperfection of
what has been here done, we feel satisfied that he
who does consider it coolly and in candor, will be
disposed to allow, that our picture is sufficiently
true for its object.
We have written in vain, should it now be
necessary
to dwell on the nature of the misgivings that
harassed the minds of the Count and Heinrich, as
they descended the hill of Limburg, at the head of
the new procession. Policy, and the determination
to secure advantages that had been so dearly
obtained
,
urged them on; while doubt and all the
progeny
of ancient prejudices, contributed to their
distrust
.
The people advanced much in the same order as
that in which they had ascended to the ruins of the
Abbey. The pilgrims were in front, followed closely by
the parochial priests, and their choirs; while the rest
succeed in an eager, trembling, curious, and devout
crowd. Religious change existed, as yet, rather in
doctrine
,
and among the few, than in the practices of the
many; and all the rites, it will be remembered, were
those usually observed by the church of Rome on an
occasion of exorcism, or of an especial supplication
to be released from a mysterious display of Heaven's
displeasure. The Count and Heinrich, as became their
stations, walked boldly in advance; for, whatever
might have been the extent and nature of their
distrust
,
it was wisely and successfully concealed from
all but themselveseven the worthy Burgomaster
entertained a respectful opinion of the Noble's
firmness
,
and the latter much wondering at a man of
Heinrich's education and habits of life, being able
to show a resolution that he thought more properly
belonged to philosophy. They passed up towards the
plain of the Heidenmauer, by the hollow way that has
already been twice mentioned in these pagesonce
in the Introduction, and again, as the path by which
Ulrike descended on her way to the Abbey, on the
night of its destruction. Until near the summit,
nothing
occurred to create new uneasiness; and as the
choristers increased the depth of their chant, the
leaders began to feel a vague hope of escaping from
farther interruption. As the moments passed, the
Count breathed freer, and he already fancied that
he had proved the Heidenmauer to be a spot as
harmless as any other in the Palatinate.
You have often pricked courser over this wild
common of the Devil, noble and fearless Count,
said Heinrich, when they drew near the margin of
the superior plainOne so accustomed to its view,
is not easily troubled by the cries and vagaries of a
leash of uneasy dogs, though they might be kenneled
beneath the shade of the Teufelstein!
Thou mayest well say often, good Heinrich.
When but an urchin, my excellent father was wont
to train his chargers on this height, and it was often
my pleasure to be of the party. Then our hunts
frequently drove the deer from the cover of the
chases to this open ground
The Count paused, for a swift, pattering rush, like
that of the feet of hounds beating the ground, was
audible, just above their heads, though the edge of
the mountain still kept the face of the level ground
from being seen. Spite of their resolution, the two
leaders came to a dead halta delay which those in
the rear were compelled to imitate.
The common hath its tenants, Herr Frey, said
Emich, gravely, but in a tone of a man resolute to
struggle for his rights; it will soon be seen if they
are disposed to admit the sovereignty of their feudal
lord.
Without waiting for an answer, the Count spite
of himself muttered an
ave,
and mounted with sturdy
limbs to the summit. The first glance was rapid,
uneasy, and distrustful; but nothing rewarded the
look. The naked rock of the Teufelstein lay in
the ancient bedwhere it had probably been left,
by some revolution of the earth's crust, three
thousand
years beforegray, solitary, and weather-worn
as at this hour; the grassy common had not a hoof
or foot over the whole of its surface; and the cedars
of the deserted camp sighed in the breeze, as usual,
dark, melancholy, and suited to the traditions which
had given them interest.
Here is nothing! said the Count, drawing a
heavy breath, which he would fain ascribe to the
difficulty of the ascent.
Herr von Hartenburg, God is here, as he is among
the hills we have lately quittedon that fair and
wide plain belowand in thy hold!
Prithee, good Ulrike, we will of this another
time. We touch now on the destruction of a silly
legend, and of some recent alarms.
At a wave of his hand the procession proceeded,
taking the direction of the ancient gateway of the
camp, the choir renewing its chant, and the same
leaders always in advance.
It is not necessary to say that the Heidenmauer
was approached, on this solemn occasion, with
beating
hearts. No man of reflection and proper feeling
can ever visit a spot like this, without fancying a
picture that is fraught with pleasing melancholy.
The certainty that he has before his eyes the remains
of a work, raised by the hands of beings who existed
so many centuries before him in that great chain of
events which unites the past with the present, and
that his feet tread earth that has been trodden
equally by the Roman and the Hun, is sufficient of
itself to raise a train of thought allied to the
wonderful
and grand. But to these certain and natural
sensations was now added a dread of omnipotence
and the apprehension of instantly witnessing some
supernatural effect.
Not a word was uttered, until Emich and the
Burgomaster
turned to pass the pile of stones which
mark the position of the ancient wall, by means of
the gateway already named, when the former,
encouraged
by the tranquillity, again spoke.
The ear is often a treacherous companion, friend
Burgomaster, he said, and like the tongue, unless
duly watched, may lead to misunderstandings. No
doubt we both thought, at the moment, that we
heard the feet of hounds beating the earth, as on a
hunt; thou now seest, by means of one sense, that
the other hath served us false. But we approach
the end of our little pilgrimage, and we will halt,
while I speak the people in explanation of our
opinions
and intentions.
Heinrich gave the signal, and the choir ceased its
chant, while the crowd drew near to listen. The
Count both saw and felt that he touched the real
crisis, in the furtherance of his own views, as
opposed
to those of the brotherhood, and he determined,
by a severe effort, not only to overcome his enemies,
but himself. In this mood, he spoke.
Ye are here, my honest friends and vassals, he
commenced, both as the faithful who respect the
usefulness of the altar when rightly served, and as
men who are disposed to see and judge for themselves.
This camp, as ye witness by its remains, was once
occupied by armed bands of warriors who, in their
day, fought and fortified, suffered and were happy,
bled and died, conquered or were vanquished, much
as we see those who carry arms in our own time,
perform these several acts, or submit to these several
misfortunes. The report that their spirits frequent
the spot, is as little likely to be true, as that the spirits
of all who have fallen with arms in their hands remain
near the earth that hath swallowed their blood; a
belief that would leave no place in our fair
Palatinate
without its ghostly tenant. As for this late
alarm, concerning my Forester, poor Berchthold
Hintermayer
,
it is the less probable from the character
of the youth, who well knew when living the
disrelish
I have felt for all such tales, and my particular
desire to banish them altogether from the Jaegerthal,
Vol. II. U
as well as from his known modesty and dutiful
obedience
.
You see plainly that here are no dogs
Emich met with a startling contradiction. Just
as his tongue, which was getting fluent with the
impunity
that had so far attended his declarations,
uttered the latter word, the long drawn cries of
hounds were heard. Fifty strong German
exclamations
escaped the crowd, which waved like a troubled
sea. The sounds came from among the trees in the
very centre of the dreaded Heidenmauer, and seemed
only the more unearthly from rising beneath that
gloomy canopy of cedars.
Let us go on! cried the Count, excited nearly
to madness, and seizing the handle of his sword with
iron grasp. Tis but a hound! Some miscreant
hath loosened the dog from his leash, and he scents the
footsteps of his late master, who had the habit of
visiting the holy hermit that dwelt here of late
Hush! interrupted Lottchen, advancing
hurriedly
,
and with a wild eye, from the throng of
females
.
God is about to reveal his power, for some
great end? I knowI knowthat footstep
She was fearfully interrupted, for while speaking,
the hounds rushed out of the grove, in the swift, mad
manner common to the animal, and made a rapid
circuit around the form of the dazzled and giddy
woman. In the next moment, a tottering wall gave
way to the powerful leap of a human foot, and
Lottchen
lay senseless on the bosom of her son!
We draw a veil before the sudden fear, the
general
surprise, the tears, the delight, and the more
regulated
joy of the next hour.
At the end of that period, the scene had altogether
changed. The chant was ended, the order of the
procession was forgotten, and a burning curiosity
had taken place of all sensations of superstitious
dread. But the authority of Emich had driven the
crowd back upon the common of the Teufelstein,
where it was compelled to content itself, for the
moment
,
with conjectures, and with tales of similar
sudden changes from the incarnate to the carnate,
that were reputed to have taken place in the
eventful
history of the borders of the Rhine.
The principal group of actors had retired a little
within the cover of the cedars, where, favoured by
the walls and the trees, they remained unseen from
without. Young Berchthold was seated on a
fragment
of fallen wall, supporting his still half
incredulous
mother in his arms, a position which he had
received the Count's peremptory, but kind orders to
occupy. Meta was kneeling before Lottchen, whose
hand she held in her own, though the bright eye and
glowing face of the girl followed, with undisguised
and ingenuous interest, every glance and movement
of the countenance of the youth. The emotions
of that hour were too powerful for concealment, and
had there been any secret concerning her sentiments,
surprise and the sudden burst of feeling that was its
consequence, would have wrung it from her heart.
Ulrike kneeled too, supporting the head of her friend,
but smiling and happy. The Knight of Rhodes, the
Abbe, Heinrich and the smith paced back and forth,
as sentinels to keep the curious at a distance, though
occasionally stopping to catch sentences of the
discourse
.
Emich leaned on his sword, rejoicing that
his apprehensions were groundless, and we should
do injustice to his rude but not ungenerous feelings,
did we not say, glad to find that Berchthold was
still in the flesh. When we add, that the dogs
played their frisky gambols around the crowd on the
common, which could hardly yet believe in their
earthly character, our picture is finished.
The deserving of this world may be divided into
two great classes; the actively and the passively
good. Ulrike belonged to the former, for though she
felt as strongly as most others, an instinctive
rectitude
rarely failed to suggest some affirmative duty
for every crisis that arrived. It was she, then, (and
we here beg to tell the reader plainly, she is our
heroine,) that gave such a direction to the discourse
as was most likely to explain what was unknown,
without harassing anew feelings that had been so
long and so sorely tried.
And thou art now absolved from thy vow,
Berchthold? she asked, after one of those short
interruptions
,
in which the exquisite happiness of such
a meeting was best expressed by silent sympathy.
The Benedictines have no longer any claim to thy
silence?
They set the return of the pilgrims as their
own period, and, as I first learned the agreeable
tidings by seeing you all in the procession, I had
called in the hounds, who were scouring the chase,
and was about to hurry down to present myself,
when I met you all at the gateway of the camp.
Our meeting would have taken place in the valley,
but that duty required me first to visit the Herr Odo
Von Ritterstein
The Herr Von Ritterstein! exclaimed Ulrike,
turning pale.
What of my ancient comrade, the Herr Odo,
boy? demanded Emich. This is the first we have
heard of him since the night the abbey fell.
I have told my tale badly, returned Berchthold,
laughing and blushing, for he was neither too old
nor too practised to blush, since I have forgotten
to name the Herr Odo.
Thou told us of a companion, rejoined his
mother
,
glancing a look at Ulrike, and raising herself
from the support of her son, instinctively alive to
her friend's embarrassment, but thou called him
merely a religious.
I should have said the holy Hermit, whom all
now know to be the Baron Von Ritterstein. When
obliged to fly from the falling roof, I met the Herr
Odo kneeling before an altar, and recalling the form
of one who had shown me much favour, it was he
that I dragged with me to the crypt.I surely spoke
of our wounds and helplessness!
True; but without naming thy companion.
It was the Herr Odo, Heaven be praised!
When the monks found us, on the following day,
unable to resist, and weakened with hunger and loss
of blood, we were secretly removed together, as ye
have heard, and cared for in a manner to restore us
both, in good time, to our strength and to the use
of our limbs. Why the Benedictines chose to keep
us secret, I know not; but this silly tale of the
supernatural huntsman, and of dogs loosened from
their leash, would seem to prove that they had hopes
of still working on the superstition of the country.
Wilhelm of Venloo had nought to do with this!
exclaimed Emich, who had been musing deeply.
The underlings have continued the game after it
was abandoned by their betters.
This may be so, my good Lord; for I thought
Father Bonifacius more than disposed to let us
depart
.
But we were kept until the matters of the
compensation and of the pilgrimage were settled.
They found us easy abettors in their plot, if plot to
work upon the fears of Deurckheim was in their
policy; for when they pledged their faith that my
two mothers and dearest Meta had been let into the
secret of our safety, I felt no extraordinary haste to
quit leeches so skilful, and so likely to make a speedy
cure of our hurts.
And did Bonifacius affirm this lie?
I say not the Abbot, my Lord Count, but most
certainly the Brothers Cuno and Siegfried said all
this and morethe malediction of a wronged son,
and of a most foully treated mother
His mouth was stopped by the hand of Meta.
U 2
We will forgive past sorrow for the present joy;
murmured the weeping girl.
The angry and flushed brow of Berchthold grew
more calm, and the discourse continued in a gentler
strain.
Emich now walked away to join the Burgomaster,
and together they endeavoured to penetrate the
motives
which had led the monks to practise their
deception
.
In the possession of so effectual a key, the
solution of the problem was not difficult. The
meeting
of Bonifacius and the Count at Einsiedlen had
been maturely planned, and the uncertain state of
the public mind in the valley and town was
encouraged
,
as so much make-weight in the final settlement
of the Convent's claims; for in that age, the men of
the cloisters, knew well how to turn every weakness
of humanity to good purpose, so far as their own
interests were concerned.
CHAPTER XVIII.
'Tis over, and her lovely cheek is now
On her hard pillow
Rogers
.
On
the following morning the Count of Hartenburg
took horse at an early hour. His train, however,
showed that the journey was to be short. But
Monsieur Latouche, who mounted in company, wore
the attire and furniture of a traveller. It was in
truth the moment when Emich, having used this
quasi churchman for his own ends, was about to
dismiss him, with as much courtesy and grace as the
circumstances seemed to require. Perhaps no picture
of the different faces presented by a church that
had so long enjoyed an undisputed monopoly in
christendom, and which, as a consequence, betrayed
so strong a tendency to abuses, would have been
complete without some notice of such characters as
the Knight of the Cross and the Abb; and it was,
moreover, our duty, as faithful chroniclers, to speak
of things as they existed, although the accessories
might not have a very capital connection with the
interest of the principal subject. But here our
slight relations with the Abb are to cease altogether,
his host having treated him, as many politic rulers
treat others of his profession, purely as the
instrument
of his own views. Albrecht of Viederbach
was prepared to accompany his boon associate far
as Mannheim, but with the intention to return, the
unsettled state of his order, and his consanguinity
with the Count, rendering such a course both
expedient
and agreeable. Young Berchthold, too, was
in the saddle, his lord having, by especial favour,
commanded the Forester to keep at his crupper.
The cavalcade ambled slowly down the Jaegerthal,
the Count courteously endeavoring to show the
departing
Abb, by a species of misty logic that appears
to be the poetical atmosphere of diplomacy, that he
was fully justified by circumstances for affecting all
that had been done, and the latter acquiescing as
readily in his conclusions, as if he did not feel that
he had been an egregious dupe.
Thou wilt see this matter rightly represented
among thy friends, Master Latouche, concluded the
Baronshould there be question of it, at the court
of thy Francis:whom may Heaven quickly restore
to his longing peoplethe right valiant and loyal
Prince and gentleman!
I will take upon myself, high-born and ingenuous
Emich, to see thee fully justified, whenever there
shall be discussion of thy great warfare and exquisite
policy at the court of France. Nay,by the mass!
should our jurists, or our statesmen take upon
themselves
to prove to the world that thy house hath been
wrong in this immortal enterprise, I pledge thee my
faith to answer their reasons, both logically and
politically
,
to their eternal shame and confusion.
As Monsieur Latouche uttered this promise with
an unequivocal sneer, he thought himself fully
avenged
,
for the silly part he had been made to act in the
Count's intrigues. At a later day he often told the
tale, always concluding with a recital of this bold
and ironical allusion to the petty history of the
Jaegerthal
,
which not only he, but a certain portion of
his listeners, seemed to think gave him altogether
the best of the affair. Satisfied with his success, the
Abb pricked on, to repeat it to the knight, who
laughed in his sleeve at his friend while he most
extolled
his wit, the two riding ahead in a manner to
leave Emich an occasion to speak in confidence with
his Forester.
Hast treated of this affair with Heinrich, as I bid
thee, boy? demanded the Count, in a manner
between
authority and affection, that he was much
accustomed
to use with Berchthold.
I have, my Lord Count, and right pressingly, as
my heart urged, but with little hope of benefit.
How?Doth the silly burgher still count upon
his marks, after what hath passed! Didst tell him
of the interest I take in the marriage, and of my
intent
to name thee to higher duties, in my villages?
None of these favors were forgotten, or aught
else that a keen desire could suggest, or a willing
memory recall.
What answer had the burgher?
Berchthold colored, hesitating to reply. It was
only when Emich sternly repeated the question, that
the truth was extorted from him; for nought but
truth would one so loyal consent to use.
He said, Herr Count, that if it was your pleasure
to name a husband for his child, it should also be
your pleasure to see that he was not a beggar. I do
but give the words of the Herr Frey; for which
liberty, I beg my lord to hold me free of all
disrespect
.
The niggardly miser! These hounds of
Deurckheim
shall be made to know their masterBut be
of cheer, boy; our tears and pilgrimages shall not be
wasted, and thou shalt soon wive with a fairer and
better, as becometh him I love.
Nay, Herr Emich, I do beseech and implore
Ha! Yon is the drivelling Heinrich seated on a
rock of this ravine, like a vidette watching the
marauders
!
Prick forward, Berchthold, and desire my
noble friends to tarry at the Town-Hall making their
compliments;as for thee, thou mayest humour thy
folly, and greet the smiling face of the pretty Meta,
the while.
The Forester dashed ahead like an arrow: while
the Count reined his own courser aside, turning into
that ravine by which the path led to the
Heidenmauer
,
when the ascent was made from the side of
the valley. Emich was soon at the Burgomaster's
side, having thrown his bridle to a servitor that
followed
.
How is this, brother Heinrich! he cried,
displeasure
disappearing in habitual policy and well
practised managementart still bent on exorcism,
or hast neglected some offices, in yester's pilgrimage?
Praised be St. Benedict, or Brother Luther!
for I know not fairly to which the merit is most due
our Deurckheim is in a thrice happy disposition, as
touching all witchcraft, and devilry, or even churchly
miracles. This mystery of the hounds being so
happily
settled, the public mind seemeth to have taken
a sudden change, and from sweating in broad
daylight
at the nestling of a mouse, or the hop of a
cricket, our crones are ready to set demonology and
Lucifer himself at defiance.
The lucky clearing up of that difficulty will, in
sooth, do much to favour the late Saxon opinions,
and may go near to set the monk of Wittenburg
firmly upon his feet, in our country. Thou seest,
Heinrich, that a dilemma so unriddled is worth a
library of musty Latin maxims.
That is it, Herr Emich, and the more especially
as we are a reasoning town. Our minds once fairly
enlightened, it is no easy matter to throw them into
the shade again. It was seen how sorely the best
of us were troubled with a couple of vagrant dogs so
lately as yesterday, and now I much question if the
whole of the gallant pack would so much as raise a
doubt! We have had a lucky escape, Lord Count,
for another day of uncertainty would have gone nigh
to set up Limburg church again, and that without
the masonry of the devil. There is nought so potent
in an argument, as a little apprehension of losses or
of plagues thrown into the scale. Wisdom weighs
light against profit or fear.
It is well as it is, though Limburg roof will never
again cover Limburg wall, friend Heinrich, while an
Emich rules in Hartenburg and Deurckheim.The
Count saw the cloud on the Burgomaster's brow as
he uttered the latter word, and slapping him
familiarly
on a shoulder, he added so quickly as to
prevent
reflection:But how now, Herr Frey; why
art at watch in this solitary ravine?
Heinrich was flattered by the noble's
condescension
,
and not displeased to have a listener to his
tale. First looking about him to see that no one
could overhear their discourse, he answered on a
lower key, in the manner in which communications
that needs confidence are usually made.
You know, Herr Emich, this weakness of Ulrike,
concerning hermitages and monks, altars and saints'
days, with all those other practices of which we
may now reasonably expect to be quit, since late
rumors speak marvels of Luther's success. Well
the good woman would have a wish to come upon
the Heidenmauer this morning, and as there had been
some warm argument between us, and the poor wife
had wept much concerning marrying our child with
young Berchthold, a measure out of all prudence and
reason, as you must see, nobly-born Count, I was fain
willing to escort her thus far, that she might give
vent to her sorrow in godly discourse with the
hermit.
And Ulrike is above, in the cedars, with the
anchorite
?
As sure as I am here waiting her return, Lord
Count.
Thou art a gallant husband, Master Frey!
Wert wont of old to resort much with the Herr Odo
Von Rittersteinhe who playeth this masquerade of
penitence and seclusion?
Sapperment!I never could endure the
arrogant
!
But Ulrike fancieth he hath qualities that are
not so evil, and a woman's taste, like a child's
humors
,
is easiest altered by giving it scope.
Emich laid both hands on the shoulders of his
companion, looking him full and earnestly in the face.
The glances that were exchanged in this attitude,
were pregnant with meaning. That of the Count
expressed the distrust, the contempt, and the wonder
of a man of loose life, while that of the
Burgomaster
,
by appearing to reflect the character of the
woman who had so long been his wife, expressed
volumes
in her favor. No language could have said
more for Ulrike's principles and purity, than the
simple, hearty, and unalterable confidence of the
man who necessarily had so many opportunities of
knowing her. Neither spoke, until the Count,
releasing
his grasp, walked slowly up the mountain,
saying in a voice which proved how strongly he
felt
`I would thy consort had been noble,
Heinrich
!
Nay, my good lord, answered the Burgomaster,
the wish were scarcely kind to a friend! In that
case, I could not have wived the Frau.
Tell me, good Heinrichfor I never heard the
history of thy lovewert thou and thy proposal
well received, when first offered to the virgin heart
of Herr Hailtzinger's daughter?
The Burgomaster was not displeased with an
opportunity
of alluding to a success that had made him
the envy of his equals.
The end must speak for the means, Herr Count,
he answered chuckling. Ulrike is none of your
free and froward spirits to jump out of a window,
or to meet a youth more than half-way, but such
encouragement as becometh maiden diffidence was
not wanting, or mine own ill opinion of myself might
have kept me a bachelor to this hour.
Emich chafed to hear such language coming from
one he so little respected, and applied to one he had
really loved. The effort to swallow his spleen
produced
a short silence, of which we shall avail
ourselves
to transfer the scene to the hut of the hermit,
where there was an interview that proved decisive
of the future fortunes of several of the characters
of our tale.
The day which succeeded the restoration of
Berchthold
had been one of general joy and felicitation in
Deurckheim. There was an end to the doubts of
the timid and superstitious, concerning an especial
and an angry visitation from Heaven, as a merited
punishment for overturning the altars of the Abbey,
and few were so destitute of good feeling, not to
sympathize in the happiness of those who had so
bitterly mourned the fancied death of the Forester.
As is usual in cases of violent transitions, the
reaction
helped to lessen the influence of the monks, and
even those most inclined to doubt, were now
encouraged
to hope that the religious change, which was
so fast gaining ground, might not produce all the
horrors
that had been dreaded.
Heinrich has revealed the nature of the discussion
that took place between himself and his wife. The
latter had endeavored in vain to seize the
favorable
moment to work upon the feelings of the
Burgomaster
,
in the interests of the lovers; but, though
sincerely glad that a youth who had shown such
mettle in danger was not the victim of his courage,
Heinrich was not of a temperament to let any
admiration
of generous deeds affect the settled policy
of a whole life. It was at the close of this useless
and painful conference, that the mother suddenly
demanded permission of her husband to visit the
hermit, who had been left, as before the recent events,
in undisturbed possession of the dreaded
Heidenmauer
.
Any other than a man constituted like Heinrich
might, at such a moment, have heard this request
with distrust. But strong in his opinion of himself,
and accustomed to confide in his wife, the obstinate
Burgomaster hailed the application as a means of
relieving him from a discussion, in which, while he
scarce knew how plausibly to defend his opinion, he
was resolutely determined not to yield. The
manner
in which he volunteered to accompany his wife,
and in which he remained patiently awaiting her
return, and the commencement of his dialogue with
Emich are known. With this short explanation, we
shall shift the scene to the hut of the Anchorite.
Odo of Ritterstein was pale with loss of blood
from the wounds received from a fragment of the
falling roof, but paler still by the force of that inward
fire which consumed him. The features of his fair
and gentle companion were not bright, as usual,
though nought could rob Ulrike of that winning
beauty, which owed so much of its charm to
expression
.
Both appeared agitated with what had
Vol. II. V
already passed between them, and perhaps still more
by those feelings, which each had struggled to conceal.
Thou hast indeed had many moving passages in
thy life, Odo, said the gentle Ulrike, who was
seemingly
listening to some recital from the other's lips;
and this last miraculous escape from death is among
the most wonderful.
That I should have perished beneath the roof
of Limburg, on the anniversary of my crime, and
with the fall of those altars I violated, would have
been so just a manifestation of Heaven's displeasure,
Ulrike, that even now I can scarce believe I am
permitted
to live! Thou then thought in common with
others, that I had been released from this life of
wo?
Thou lookest with an unthankful eye at what
thou hast of hope and favor, or thou wouldst not
use a term so ungrateful in speaking of thy sorrows.
Remember, Odo, that our joys, in this being, are
tainted with mortality, and that thy unhappiness
does not surpass that of thousands who still struggle
with their duties.
This is the difference between the unquiet ocean
and tranquil watersbetween the oak and the reed!
The current of thy calm existence may be ruffled
by the casual interruption of some trifling obstacle,
but the gentle surface soon subsides, leaving the
element
limpid and without stain! Thy course is that
of the flowing and pure spring, while mine is the
torrent's mad and turbulent leaps. Thou hast indeed
well said, Ulrike, God did not form us for each
other!
Whatever nature may have done towards
suiting
our dispositions and desires, Odo, Providence and
the world's usages have interposed to defeat.
The hermit gazed at the mild speaker with eyes
so fixed and dazzling, that she bowed her own look
to the earth.
No, he murmured rapidly, Heaven and earth
have different destiniesthe lion and the lamb
different
instincts!
Nay, I will none of this disreputable
depreciation
of thyself, poor Odo. That thou hast been
erring
,
we shall not denyfor who is without
reproach
?but
that thou meritest these harsh epithets,
none but thyself would venture to affirm.
I have met with many enigmas, Ulrike, in an
eventful and busy lifeI have seen those who
worked
both good and evilencountered those who have
defeated their own ends by their own wayward
meansbut never have I known one so devoted to
the right, that seemed so disposed to extenuate the
sinner's faults!
Then hast thou never met the true lover of God,
or known a Christian. It matters not, Odo, whether
we admit of this or that form of faiththe fruit of
the right tree is charity and self-abasement, and
these teach us to think humbly of ourselves and
kindly of others.
Thou began early to practise these golden rules,
or surely thou never wouldst have forgotten thine
own excellence, or have been ready to sacrifice it to
the heedless impulses of one so reckless as him to
whom thou wast betrothed!
The eye of Ulrike grew brighter, but it was merely
because a tinge of color diffused itself on her features.
I know not for what good purpose, Herr Von
Ritterstein, she said, that these allusions are now
made. You know that I have come to make a last
effort to secure the peace of Meta. Berchthold spoke
to me of your intention to reward the service he did
your life, and I have now to say, that if in ought
you can do the youth favor, the moment when it
will be most acceptable, hath comefor Lottchen
has been too sorely stricken to bear up long against
further grief.
The Hermit was reproved. He turned slowly to
one of his receptacles of worldly stores, and drew
forth a packet. The rattling told his companion
that it was of parchment, and she waited the result
with curious interest.
I will scarce say, Ulrike, he replied, that this
deed is the price of a life that is scarce worth the gift.
Early in my acquaintance with young Berchthold
and Meta, I wrung their secret from them; and from
that moment it hath been my greatest pleasure to
devise means to secure the happiness of one so dear to
thee. I found in the child, the simple, ingenuous faith
which was so admirable in the mother, and shall I
say that reverence for the latter quickened the
desire
to serve her offspring?
I certainly owe thee thanks, Herr Von
Ritterstein
,
for the constancy of this good opinion,
returned
Ulrike, showing sensibility.
Thank me not, but rather deem the desire to
serve thy child a tribute that repentant error gladly
pays to virtue. Thou knowest that I am the last of
my race, and there remained nought but to endow
some religious house, to let my estate and gold pass
to the feudal prince, or to do this.
I could not have thought it easy to effect this
change, in opposition to the Elector's interests!
Those have been looked to; a present fine has
smoothed the way, and these parchments contain all
that is necessary to install young Berchthold as my
substitute and heir.
Friend!dear, generous friend! exclaimed the
mother, moved to tears, for, at that moment, Ulrike
saw nothing but the future happiness of her child
assured
,
and Berchthold restored to more than his
former hopesgenerous and noble Odo!
The hermit arose, and placed the parchment in
her hand, in the manner of one long prepared to
perform
the act.
And now, Ulrike, he said with a forced calm,
this solemn and imperative duty done, there
remaineth
but the last leave-taking.
Leave-taking!Thou wilt live with Meta and
Berchthold,the castle of Ritterstein will be thy
resting-place, after so much sorrow and suffering!
This may not bemy vowmy dutiesUlrike,
I fear, my prudence forbids.
Thy prudence!Thou art no longer young,
dear Odo,privations thou hast hitherto despised
will overload thy increasing years, and we shall not
be happy with the knowledge that thou art
suffering
for the very conveniences which thine own
liberality
hath conferred on others.
Habit hath taken nature's place, and the
hermitage
and the camp are no longer strangers to me.
If thou wouldst secure not only my peace, but my
salvation, Ulrike, let me depart. I have already
lingered
too long near a scene which is filled with
recollections
that prove dread enemies to the penitent.
Ulrike recoiled, and her cheek blanched to
paleness
.
Every limb trembled, for that quick sympathy,
which neither time nor duty had entirely
extinguished
,
silently admonished her of his meaning. There
was a fervor in his voice, too, that thrilled on her
ear like tones which, spite of all her care, the truant
imagination would sometimes recall; for, in no
subsequent
condition of life, can a woman entirely
forget
the long cherished sounds with which true love
first greets the maiden ear.
Odo, said a voice so gentle that it caused the
heart of the anchorite to beat, when dost thou think
to depart?
This daythis hourthis minute.
I believeyes,thou art right to go!
Ulrike, God will keep thee in mind. Pray often
for me.
Farewell, dear Odo.
God bless theemay he have mercy on me!
There was then a short pause. The hermit
approached
and lifted his hands in the attitude of
benediction
;
twice he seemed about to clasp the
unresisting
Ulrike to his bosom, but her meek, tearful
countenance repressed the act, and, muttering a
prayer, he rushed from the hut. Left to herself,
Ulrike sank on a stool, and remained like an image
of wo, tears flowing in streams down her cheeks.
Some minutes elapsed before the wife of
Heinrich
Frey was aroused from her forgetfulness. Then
the approach of footsteps told her that she was no
longer alone. For the first time in her life, Ulrike
endeavored to conceal her emotion with a sentiment
of shame: but ere this could be effected, the Count
and Heinrich entered.
What hast done with poor Odo Von Ritterstein,
good Frau; that man of sin and sorrow? demanded
the latter, in his hearty, unsuspecting manner.
He has left us, Heinrich.
For his castle!well, the man hath had his
share of sorrow, and ease may not yet come too
late. The life of Odo, Lord Count, hath not been,
like our own histories, of a nature to make him
content
.
Had that affair of the host, though at the
best but an irreverent and unwarrantable act,
happened
in these days, less might have been thought
of it; and then, (tapping his wife's cheek) to lose
Ulrike's favor was no slight calamity of itself.But
what have we here?
Tis a deed, by which the Herr Von Ritterstein
invests Berchthold with his worldly effects.
The Burgomaster hastily unfolded the ample
parchment. At a glance, though unable to
comprehend
the Latin of the instrument, his accustomed eye
saw that all the usual appliances were there.
Turning suddenly to Emich, for he was not slow to
comprehend the cause of the gift, he exclaimed
Here is manna in the wilderness! Our
differences
are all happily settled, nobly-born Count, and
next to according the hand of Meta to the owner of
the lands of Ritterstein, I hold it a pleasure to oblige
an illustrious friend and patron. Henceforth, Herr
Emich, let there be nought but fair words between
us.
Since entering the hut, the Count had not spoken.
His look had studied the tearful eyes, and colorless
cheeks of Ulrike, and he put his own constructions on
the scene. Still he did the fair wife of the burgher
justice, for, though less credulous than Heinrich on
the subject of his consort's affections, he too well
knew the spotless character of her mind, to change
the opinion her virtue had extorted from him, in
early youth. He accepted the conditions of his
friend, with as much apparent frankness as they
were offered, and, after a few short explanations, the
whole party left the Heidenmauer together.
Our task is ended. On the following day
Berchthold
and Meta were united. The Castle and the
Town vied with each other doing in honor to the
nuptials, and Ulrike and Lottchen endeavored to
forget their own permanent causes of sorrow in the
happiness of their children.
In due time Berchthold took possession of his lands,
removing with his bride and mother to the Castle of
Ritterstein, which he always affected to hold merely
as the trustee of its absent owner. Gottlob was
promoted
in his service, and having succeeded in
persuading
Gisela to forget the gay cavalier who had
frequented
Hartenburg, these two wayward spirits
settled down into a half-loving, half-wrangling couple,
for the rest of their lives.
Deurckheim, as is commonly the case with the
secondary actors in most great changes, shared the
fate of the frogs in the fable; it got rid of the
Benedictines
for a new master, and though the
Burgomaster
and Dietrich, in after life, had many wise
discourses concerning the nature of the revolution of
Limburg, as the first affected to call the destruction
of the Abbey, he never could very clearly explain to
the understanding of the latter, the great principles
of its merits. Still the smith was not the less an
admirer
of the Count, and to this day his descendants
show the figure of a marble cherub, as a trophy
brought away by their ancestor on that occasion.
Bonifacius and his monks found shelter in other
convents, each endeavoring to lessen the blow, by
such expedients as best suited his tastes and
character
.
The pious Arnolph persevered to the end, and,
believing charity to be the fairest attribute of the
Christian, he never ceased to pray for the enemies
of the church, or to toil that they might have the
benefit of his intercession.
As for Odo Von Ritterstein, the country was long
moved by different tales of his fate. One rumor
and it had much currencysaid he was serving in
company with Albrecht of Viderbach, who rejoined
his brother knights, and that he died on the sands of
Africa. But there is another tradition extant in the
Jaergethal
, touching his end. It it is said, that, thirty
years later, after Heinrich, and Emich of Leiningen,
and most of the other actors of this legend, had been
called to their great accounts, an aged wanderer
came to the gate of Ritterstein, demanding shelter
for the night. He is reported to have been well
received
by Meta, her husband and son being then
absent in the wars, and to have greatly interested
his hostess, by the histories he gave of customs and
events in distant regions. Pleased with her guest,
the Madame Von Ritterstein (for Berchthold had
purchased this appellation by his courage) urged
him to rest himself another day within her walls.
From communicating, the stranger began to inquire;
and he so knew how to put his questions, that he soon
obtained the history of the family. Ulrike was the
last he named; and the younger female inmates of
the castle fancied that his manner changed as he
listened to the account of the close of her life, and
of her peaceful and pious end. The stranger
departed
that very day, nor would his visit probably
have been remembered, had not his body been
shortly
after found in the hut of the Heidenmauer,
stiffened
by death. Those who love to throw a coloring
of romance over the affections, are fond of believing
this was the Hermit, who had found a secret
satisfaction
,
even at the close of so long a life, in
breathing
his last on the spot where he had finally
separated
from the woman he had so long and fruitlessly
loved.
To this traditiontrue or falsewe attach no
importance. Our object has been to show, by a
rapidly-traced picture of life, the reluctant manner
in which the mind of man abandons old, to receive
new, impressionsthe inconsistencies between
profession
and practicethe error in confounding the
good with the bad, in any sect or persuasionthe
common and governing principles that control the
selfish, under every shade and degree of existence
and the high and immutable qualities of the good,
the virtuous, and of the really noble.
THE END.