Vol. I. 2
LIONEL LINCOLN;
or,
THE LEAGUER OF BOSTON. VOL I.
CHAPTER I.
My weary soul they seem to soothe,
And, redolent of joy and youth,
To breathe a second spring.
Gray
.
No American can be ignorant of the principal
events that induced the parliament of Great
Britain, in 1774, to lay those impolitic restrictions
on the port of Boston, which so effectually
destroyed
the trade of the chief town in her western
colonies. Nor should it be unknown to any
American
,
how nobly, and with what devotedness to
the great principles of the controversy, the
inhabitants
of the adjacent town of Salem refused to
profit by the situation of their neighbours and
fellow-subjects
.
In consequence of these impolitic
measures of the English government, and of the
laudable unanimity among the capitalists of the
times, it became a rare sight to see the canvass of
any other vessels than such as wore the pennants
of the king, whitening the forsaken waters of
Massachusetts
bay.
Towards the decline of a day in April, 1775,
however, the eyes of hundreds had been fastened
on a distant sail, which was seen rising from the
bosom of the waves, making her way along the
forbidden track, and steering directly for the
mouth of the proscribed haven. With that deep
solicitude in passing events which marked the
period, a large group of spectators was collected
on Beacon-Hill, spreading from its conical summit,
far down the eastern declivity, all gazing intently
on the object of their common interest. In so
large an assemblage, however, there were those
who were excited by very different feelings, and
indulging in wishes directly opposite to each other.
While the decent, grave, but wary citizen was
endeavouring
to conceal the bitterness of the
sensations
which soured his mind, under the appearance
of a cold indifference, a few gay young men, who
mingled in the throng, bearing about their persons
the trappings of their martial profession, were
loud in their exultations, and hearty in their
congratulations
on the prospect of hearing from their
distant homes and absent friends. But the long,
loud rolls of the drums, ascending on the evening
air, from the adjacent common, soon called these
idle spectators, in a body, from the spot, when the
hill was left to the quiet possession of those who
claimed the strongest right to its enjoyment. It
was not, however, a period for open and
unreserved
communications. Long before the mists of
evening had succeeded the shadows thrown from
the setting sun, the hill was entirely deserted; the
remainder of the spectators having descended from
the eminence, and held their several courses, singly,
silent, and thoughtful, towards the rows of dusky
roofs that covered the lowland, along the eastern
side of the peninsula. Notwithstanding this
appearance
of apathy, rumour, which, in times of
great excitement, ever finds means to convey its
whisperings, when it dare not bruit its information
aloud, was busy in circulating the unwelcome
intelligence
,
that the stranger was the first of a fleet,
bringing stores and reinforcements to an army
already too numerous, and too confident of its
power, to respect the law. No tumult or noise
succeeded this unpleasant annunciation, but the
doors of the houses were sullenly closed, and the
windows darkened, as if the people intended to
express their dissatisfaction, alone, by these silent
testimonials of their disgust.
In the mean time the ship had gained the rocky
entrance to the harbour, where, deserted by the
breeze, and met by an adverse tide, she lay
inactive
,
as if conscious of the unwelcome reception
she must receive. The fears of the inhabitants of
Boston had, however, exaggerated the danger;
for the vessel, instead of exhibiting the confused
and disorderly throng of licentious soldiery which
would have crowded a transport, was but thinly
peopled, and her orderly decks were cleared of
every incumbrance that could interfere with the
comfort of those she did contain. There was an
appearance
,
in the arrangements of her external
accommodations
,
which would have indicated to an
observant eye, that she carried those who claimed
the rank, or possessed the means, of making others
contribute largely to their comforts. The few
seamen
who navigated the ship, lay extended on
different
portions of the vessel, watching the lazy sails
as they flapped against the masts, or indolently
bending their looks on the placid waters of the bay;
while several menials, in livery, crowded around a
young man who was putting his eager inquiries to
the pilot, that had just boarded the vessel off the
Graves. The dress of this youth was studiously
neat, and from the excessive pains bestowed on its
adjustment, it was obviously deemed, by its wearer,
to be in the height of the prevailing customs
From the place where this inquisitive party stood,
nigh the main-mast, a wide sweep of the
quarter-deck
was untenanted; but nearer to the spot where
the listless seaman hung idly over the tiller of the
ship, stood a being of altogether different mould and
fashion. He was a man who would have seemed
in the very extremity of age, had not his quick,
vigorous steps, and the glowing, rapid glances
from his eyes, as he occasionally paced the deck,
appeared to deny the usual indications of many
years. His form was bowed, and attenuated nearly
to emaciation. His hair, which fluttered a little
wildly around his temples, was thin, and silvered to
the whiteness of at least eighty winters. Deep
furrows
,
like the lines of great age and long endured
cares united, wrinkled his hollow cheeks, and
rendered
the bold haughty outline of his prominent
features
still more remarkable. He was clad in a
simple
and somewhat tarnished suit of modest gray,
which bore about it the ill-concealed marks of long
and neglected use. Whenever he turned his
piercing
look from the shores, he moved swiftly along
the deserted quarter deck, and seemed entirely
engrossed with the force of his own thoughts, his
lips moving rapidly, though no sounds were heard
to issue from a mouth that was habitually silent.
He was under the influence of one of those
sudden
impulses in which the body, apparently,
sympathized so keenly with the restless activity of
the mind, when a young man ascended from the
cabin, and took his stand among the interested and
excited gazers at the land, on the upper deck.
The age of this gentleman might have been five
and twenty. He wore a military cloak, thrown
carelessly across his form, which, in addition to
such parts of his dress as were visible through its
open folds, sufficiently announced that his
profession
was that of arms. There was an air of ease
2
and high fashion gleaming about his person, though
his speaking countenance, at times, seemed
melancholy
,
if not sad. On gaining the deck, this young
officer, encountering the eyes of the aged and
restless
being who trod its planks, bowed courteously
before he turned away to the view, and in his turn
became deeply absorbed in studying its fading
beauties.
The rounded heights of Dorchester were radiant
with the rays of the luminary that had just sunk
behind their crest, and streaks of paler light were
playing along the waters, and gilding the green
summits of the islands which clustered across the
mouth of the estuary. Far in the distance were
to be seen the tall spires of the churches, rising out
of the deep shadows of the town, with their vanes
glittering in the sun-beams, while a few rays of
strong light were dancing about the black beacon,
which reared itself high above the conical peak
that took its name from the circumstance of
supporting
this instrument of alarms. Several large
vessels were anchored among the islands and
before
the town, their dark hulls, at each moment,
becoming less distinct through the haze of
evening
,
while the summits of their long lines of
masts were yet glowing with the marks of day.
From each of these sullen ships, from the low
fortification
which rose above a small island deep in
the bay, and from various elevations in the town
itself, the broad, silky folds of the flag of England
were yet waving in the currents of the passing
air. The young man was suddenly aroused from
gazing at this scene, by the quick reports of the
evening guns, and while his eyes were yet tracing
the descent of the proud symbols of the British
power, from their respective places of display, he
felt his arm convulsively pressed by the hand of
his aged fellow-passenger.
Will the day ever arrive, said a low, hollow
voice at his elbow, when those flags shall be
lowered, never to rise again in this hemisphere!
The young soldier turned his quick eyes to the
countenance of the speaker, but bent them instantly
in embarrassment on the deck, to avoid the keen,
searching glance he encountered in the looks of
the other. A long, and on the part of the young
man, a painful silence succeeded this remark. At
length the youth, pointing to the land, said
Tell me, you, who are of Boston, and must
have known it so long, the names of all these
beautiful places I see.
And are you not of Boston, too? asked his
old companion.
Certainly by birth, but an Englishman by
habit and education.
Accursed be the habits, and neglected the
education, which would teach a child to forget its
parentage! muttered the old man, turning
suddenly
,
and walking away so rapidly as to be soon
lost in the forward parts of the ship.
For several minutes longer, the youth stood
absorbed
in his own musings, when, as if recollecting
his previous purposes, he called aloudMeriton.
At the sounds of his voice the curious group
around the pilot instantly separated, and the highly
ornamented youth, before mentioned, approached
the officer, with a manner in which pert
familiarity
and fearful respect were peculiarly blended.
Without regarding the air of the other, however,
or indeed without even favouring him with a
glance, the young soldier continued
I desired you to detain the boat which boarded
us, in order to convey me to the town, Mr.
Meriton
;
see if it be in readiness.
The valet flew to execute this commission, and in
an instant returned with a reply in the affirmative.
But, sir, he continued, you will never think
of going in that boat, I feel very much assured,
sir.
Your assurance, Mr. Meriton, is not the least
of your recommendations; why should I not?
That disagreeable old stranger has taken
possession
of it, with his mean, filthy bundle of rags;
and
And what? you must name a greater evil,
to detain me here, than mentioning the fact that
the only gentleman in the ship is to be my
companion
.
Lord, sir! said Meriton, glancing his eye
upward
in amazement; but, sir, surely you know
best as to gentility of behaviourbut as to
gentility
of dress
Enough of this, interrupted his master, a little
angrily; the company is such as I am content
with; if you find it unequal to your deserts, you
have my permission to remain in the ship until
the morningthe presence of a coxcomb is by no
means necessary to my comfort for one night.
Without regarding the mortification of his
disconcerted
valet, the young man passed along the
deck to the place where the boat was in waiting.
By the general movement among the indolent
menials
,
and the profound respect with which he was
attended by the master of the ship to the gangway,
it was sufficiently apparent, that notwithstanding
his youth, it was this gentleman whose presence had
exacted those arrangements in the ship, which have
been mentioned. While all around him, however,
were busy in facilitating the entrance of the officer
into the boat, the aged stranger occupied its
principal
seat, with an air of deep abstraction, if not of
cool indifference. A hint from the pliant Meriton,
who had ventured to follow his master, that it would
be more agreeable if he would relinquish his place,
was disregarded, and the youth took a seat by the
side of the old man, with a simplicity of manner
that his valet inwardly pronounced abundantly
degrading. As if this humiliation were not
sufficient
,
the young man perceiving that a general
pause had succeeded his own entrance, turned to
his companion, and courteously inquired if he were
ready to proceed. A silent wave of the hand was
the reply, when the boat shot away from the
vessel
,
leaving the ship steering for an anchorage in
Nantasket.
The measured dash of the oars was
uninterrupted
by any voice, while, stemming the tide, they
pulled
laboriously up among the islands; but by the
time they had reached the castle, the twilight had
melted into the softer beams from a young moon,
and the surrounding objects becoming more
distinct
,
the stranger commenced talking with that
quick and startling vehemence which seemed his
natural manner. He spoke of the localities, with the
vehemence and fondness of an enthusiast, and with
the familiarity of one who had long known their
beauties. His rapid utterance, however, ceased as
they approached the naked wharves, and he sunk
back gloomily in the boat, as if unwilling to trust
his voice on the subject of his country's wrongs.
Thus left to his own thoughts, the youth gazed,
with eager interest, at the long ranges of buildings,
which were now clearly visible to the eye, though
with softer colours and more gloomy shadows. A
few neglected and dismantled ships were lying at
different points; but the hum of business, the forests
of masts, and the rattling of wheels which at that
early hour should have distinguished the great mart
of the colonies, were wanting. In their places
were to be heard, at intervals, the sudden bursts of
distant, martial music, the riotous merriment of the
soldiery who frequented the taverns at the water's
edge, or the sullen challenges of the sentinels from
the vessels of war, as they vexed the progress of
the few boats which the inhabitants still used in
their ordinary pursuits.
Here indeed is a change! the young officer
exclaimed, as they glided swiftly along this
desolate
scene; even my recollections, young and
fading as they are, recall the difference!
The stranger made no reply, but a smile of
singular
meaning gleamed across his wan features,
imparting, by the moonlight, to their remarkable
expression. a character of additional wildness.
The officer was again silent, nor did either speak
until the boat, having shot by the end of the long
wharf, across whose naked boundaries a sentinel
was pacing his measured path, inclined more to
the shore, and soon reached the place of its
destination.
Whatever might have been the respective
feelings
of the two passengers at having thus reached in
safety the object of their tiresome and protracted
voyage, they were not expressed in language. The
old man bared his silver locks, and concealing his
face with his hat, stood as if in deep mental
thanks-giving
at the termination of his toil, while his
more youthful companion trod the wharf on which
they landed with the air of a man whose emotions
were too engrossing for the ordinary use of words.
Here we must part, sir, the officer at length
said; but I trust the acquaintance which has been
thus accidentally formed between us, is not to be
forgotten now there is an end to our common
privations
.
It is not in the power of a man whose days, like
mine, are numbered, returned the stranger, to
mock the liberality of his God, by any vain
promises
that must depend on time for their fulfilment.
I am one, young gentleman, who has returned from
a sad, sad pilgrimage in the other hemisphere, to
lay his bones in this, his native land; but should
many hours be granted me, you will hear further
of the man whom your courtesy and kindness have
so greatly obliged.
The officer was sensibly affected by the softened
but solemn manner of his companion, and pressed
his wasted hand fervently as he answered
Do; I ask it as a singular favour; I know
not why, but you have obtained a command of my
feelings that no other being ever yet possessed
and yet'tis a mystery, 'tis like a dream! I feel
that I not only venerate, but love you!
The old man stepped back, and held the youth at
the length of his arm for a moment, while he
fastened
on him a look of glowing interest, and then
raising his hand slowly, he pointed impressively
upward, and said
'Tis from heaven, and for God's own
purposes
smother
not the sentiment, boy, but cherish
it in your heart's core!
The reply of the youth was interrupted by
sudden and violent shrieks, that burst rudely on
the stillness of the place, chilling the very blood
of those who heard them, with their piteousness.
The quick and severe blows of a lash were blended
with the exclamations of the sufferer, and rude
oaths, with hoarse execrations, from various voices,
were united in the uproar, which appeared to be at
no great distance. By a common impulse, the
whole party broke away from the spot, and moved
rapidly up the wharf in the direction of the sounds.
As they approached the buildings, a group was
seen collected around the man who thus broke the
charm of evening by his cries, interrupting his
wailings with their ribaldry, and encouraging his
tormentors to proceed.
Mercy, mercy, for the sake of the blessed God,
have mercy, and don't kill Job! again shrieked
the sufferer; Job will run your a'r'nds! Job is
half-witted! Mercy on poor Job! Oh! you make
his flesh creep!
I'll cut the heart from the mutinous knave,
interrupted a hoarse, angry voice; to refuse to
drink the health of his majesty!
Job does wish him good healthJob loves the
king, only Job don't love rum.
The officer had approached so nigh as to
perceive
that the whole scene was one of disorder
and abuse, and pushing aside the crowd of excited
and deriding soldiers, who composed the throng,
he broke at once into the centre of the circle.
CHAPTER II.
They'll have me whipped for speaking true;
Thoul't have me whipped for lying;
And sometimes I'm whipped for holding my peace.
I had rather be any kind of a thing
Than a fool.
Lear
.
What
means this outcry? demanded the
young man, arresting the arm of an infuriated
soldier who was inflicting the blows; by what
authority is this man thus abused?
By what authority dare you to lay hands on a
British grenadier! cried the fellow, turning in
his fury, and raising his lash against the supposed
townsman. But when, as the officer stepped aside
to avoid the threatened indignity, the light of the
moon fell full upon his glittering dress, through
the opening folds of his cloak, the arm of the
brutal soldier was held suspended in air, with the
surprise of the discovery.
Answer, I bid you, continued the young
officer
,
his frame shaking with passion; why is this
man tormented, and of what regiment are ye?
We belong to the grenadiers of the brave
47th, your honour, returned one of the
bystanders
,
in a humble, deprecating tone, and we was
just polishing this 'ere natural, because as he
refuses
to drink the health of his majesty.
He's a scornful sinner, that don't fear his
Maker, cried the man in duresse, eagerly
bending
VOL. I. 3
his face, down which big tears were
rolling
,
towards his protector. Job loves the king,
but Job don't love rum!
The officer turned away from the cruel
spectacle
,
as he bid the men untie their prisoner.
Knives and fingers were instantly put in
requisition
,
and the man was liberated, and suffered to
resume his clothes. During this operation, the
tumult and bustle which had so recently
distinguished
the riotous scene, were succeeded by
a stillness that rendered the hard breathing of the
sufferer painfully audible.
Now sirs, you heroes of the 47th! said the
young man, when the victim of their rage was
again clad, know you this button? The
soldier
to whom this question was more particularly
addressed, gazed at the extended arm, and, to his
vast discomfiture, he beheld the magical number
of his own regiment reposing on the well-known
white facings that decorated the rich scarlet of the
vestment. No one presumed to answer this appeal,
and after an impressive silence of a few moments,
he continued
Ye are noble supporters of the well-earned fame
of `Wolfe's own!' fit successors to the gallant men
who conquered under the walls of Quebec! away
with ye; to-morrow it shall be looked to.
I hope your honour will remember he refused
his majesty's health. I'm sure, sir, that if colonel
Nesbitt was here himself
Dog! do you dare to hesitate! go, while
you have permission to depart.
The disconcerted soldiery, whose turbulence
had thus vanished, as if by enchantment, before
the frown of their superior, slunk away in a body,
a few of the older men whispering to their
comrades
the name of the officer who had thus
unexpectedly
appeared in the midst of them. The
angry eye of the young soldier followed their
retiring
forms, while a man of them was visible;
after which, turning to an elderly citizen, who,
supported
on a crutch, had been a spectator of the
scene, he asked
Know you the cause of the cruel treatment
this poor man has received? or what in any
manner has led to the violence?
The boy is weak, returned the cripple;
quite an innocent, who knows but little good, but
does no harm. The soldiers have been carousing
in yonder dram-shop, and they often get the poor
lad in with them, and sport with his infirmity. If
these sorts of doings an't checked, I fear much
trouble will grow out of them! Hard laws from
t'other side of the water, and tarring and feathering
on this, with gentlemen like colonel Nesbitt at their
head, will
It is wisest for us, my friend, to pursue this
subject no further, interrupted the officer; I
belong myself to `Wolfe's own,' and will
endeavour
to see justice done in the matter; as you
will credit, when I tell you that I am a Boston
boy. But though a native, a long absence has
obliterated the marks of the town from my
memory
;
and I am at a loss to thread these crooked
streets. Know you the dwelling of Mrs.
Lechmere
?
The house is well known to all in Boston,
returned the cripple, in a voice sensibly altered by
the information that he was speaking to a
townsman
.
Job, here, does but little else than run of
errands, and he will show you the way out of
gratitude; wont you Job?
The idiot, for the vacant eye and unmeaning,
boyish countenance of the young man who had
just been liberated, but too plainly indicated that
he was to be included in that miserable class of
human beings, answered with a caution and
reluctance
that were a little remarkable,
considering
the recent circumstances.
Ma'am Lechmere's! Oh! yes, Job knows
the way, and could go there blindfolded, ifif
If what, you simpleton! exclaimed the
zealous cripple.
Why, if 'twas daylight.
Blindfolded, and daylight! do but hear the
silly child! come, Job, you must take this
gentleman
to Tremont-street, without further words.
'Tis but just sundown, boy, and you can go there
and be home and in your bed before the Old
South strikes eight!
Yes; that all depends on which way you
go, returned the reluctant changeling. Now, I
know, neighbour Hopper, you couldn't go to
Ma'am Lechmere's in an hour, if you went along
Lynn-street, and so along Prince-street, and back
through Snow-Hill; and especially if you should
stop any time to look at the graves on Copps.
Pshaw! the fool is in one of his sulks now,
with his Copps-Hill, and the graves! interrupted
the cripple, whose heart had warmed to his
youthful
townsman, and who would have volunteered to
show the way himself, had his infirmities
permitted
the exertion. The gentleman must call the
grenadiers back, to bring the child to reason.
'Tis quite unnecessary to be harsh with the
unfortunate
lad, said the young soldier; my
recollections
will probably aid me as I advance; and
should they not, I can inquire of any passenger
I meet.
If Boston was what Boston has been, you
might ask such a question of a civil inhabitant, at
any corner, said the cripple; but it's rare to see
many of our people in the streets at this hour,
since the massacre. Besides, it is Saturday night,
you know; a fit time for these rioters to choose
for their revelries! For that matter, the soldiers
have grown more insolent than ever, since they have
met that disappointment about the cannon down
at Salem; but I needn't tell such as you what the
soldiers are when they get a little savage.
I know my comrades but indifferently well,
if their conduct to night be any specimen of their
ordinary demeanour, sir, returned the officer;
but follow, Meriton; I apprehend no great
difficulty
in our path.
The pliant valet lifted the cloak-bag he carried,
from the ground, and they were about to proceed,
when the natural edged himself in a sidelong,
slovenly
manner, nigher to the gentleman, and looked
earnestly up in his face for a moment, where he
seemed to be gathering confidence, to sayJob
will show the officer Ma'am Lechmere's. if the
officer
wont let the grannies catch Job afore he gets off
the North End ag'in.
Ah! said the young man, laughing, there
is something of the cunning of a fool in that
arrangement
.
Well, I accept the conditions; but
beware how you take me to contemplate the graves
by moonlight, or I shall deliver you not only to
the grannies, but to the light infantry, artillery,
and all.
With this good-natured threat, the officer
followed
his nimble conductor, after taking a
friendly
leave of the obliging cripple, who continued
his admonitions to the natural, not to wander from
the direct route, while the sounds of his voice
were audible to the retiring party. The progress
of his guide was so rapid as to require the young
officer to confine his survey of the narrow and
crooked streets through which they passed, to
extremely
hasty and imperfect glances. No very
minute observation, however, was necessary to
perceive that he was led along one of the most
filthy and inferior sections of the town; and where,
notwithstanding his efforts, he found it impossible
S*
to recall a single feature of his native place to his
remembrance. The complaints of Meriton, who
followed close at the heels of his master, were
loud and frequent, until the gentleman, a little
doubting the sincerity of his intractable conductor,
exclaimed
Have you nothing better than this to show a
townsman, who has been absent seventeen years,
on his return! Pray let us go through some better
streets than this, if any there are in Boston which
can be called better.
The lad stopped short, and looked up in the
face of the speaker, for an instant, with an air of
undisguised amazement, and then, without
replying
,
be changed the direction of his route, and
after one or two more deviations in his path,
suddenly
turning again, he glided up an alley, so
narrow
that the passenger might touch the buildings
on either side of him. The officer besitated an
instant to enter this dark and crooked passage,
but perceiving that his guide was already hid by a
bend in the houses, he quickened his steps, and
immediately regained the ground he had lost.
They soon emerged from the obscurity of the
place, and issued on a street of greater width.
There! said Job, triumphantly, when they
had effected this gloomy passage, does the king
live in so crooked and narrow a street as that!
His majesty must yield the point in your
favour, returned the officer.
Ma'am Lechmere is a grand lady! continued
the lad, seemingly following the current of his
own fanciful conceits, and she wouldn't live
in that alley for the world, though it is narrow,
like the road to heaven, as old Nab says; I suppose
they call it after the Methodies for that reason.
I have heard the road you mention termed
narrow, certainly, but it is also called
strait
,
returned
the officer, a little amused with the humour
of the lad; but forward, the time is slipping
away, and we loiter.
Again Job turned, and moving onward, he led
the way, with swift steps, along another narrow
and crooked path, which, however, better
deserved
the name of a street, under the projecting
stories
of the wooden buildings, which lined its sides.
After following the irregular windings of their
route for some distance, they entered a triangular
area, of a few rods in extent, where Job,
disregarding
the use of the narrow walk, advanced
directly
into the centre of the open space. Here he
stopped once more, and turning his vacant face
with an air of much seriousness, towards a building
which composed one side of the triangle, he said,
with a voice that expressed his own deep
admiration
Therethat's the `old North!' did you ever
see such a meetin'us' afore! does the king
worship
God in such a temple!
The officer did not chide the idle liberties of the
fool, for in the antiquated and quaint architecture
of the wooden edifice, he recognized one of those
early effort's of the simple, puritan builders, whose
rude tastes have been transmitted to their posterity
with so many deviations in the style of the same
school, but so little of improvement. Blended
with these considerations, were the dawnings of
revived recollections; and he smiled, as he
recalled
the time when he also used to look up at the
building with feelings somewhat allied to the
profound
admiration of the idiot. Job watched his
countenance narrowly, and easily mistaking its
expression, he extended his arm toward one of
the narrowest of the avenues that entered the
area, where stood a few houses of more than
common
pretension.
And there ag'in! he continued, there's
palaces for you! stingy Tommy lived in the one
with the pile-axters, and the flowers hanging to
their tops; and see the crowns on them too!
stingy
Tommy loved crowns, they say; but
Province'us'
wasn't good enough for him, and he lived
herenow they say he lives in one of the king's
cupboards!
And who was stingy Tommy, and what right
had he to dwell in Province-House, if he would?
What right has any governor to live in
Province'us'
!
because its the king's! though the
people paid for it.
Pray, sir, excuse me, said Meriton, from
behind, but do the Americans usually call all
their governors stingy Tommies?
The officer turned his head, at this vapid
question
,
from his valet, and perceived that he had
been accompanied thus far by the aged stranger,
who stood at his elbow, leaning on his staff,
studying with close attention the late dwelling of
Hutchinson, while the light of the moon fell,
unobstructed
,
on the deep lines of his haggard face.
During the first surprise of this discovery, he
forgot
to reply, and Job took the vindication of his
language into his own hands.
To be sure they dothey call people by their
right names, he said. Insygn Peck is called
Insygn Peck; and you call Deacon Winslow any
thing but Deacon Winslow, and see what a look
he'll give you! and I am Job Pray, so called; and
why shouldn't a governor be called stingy
Tommy
,
if he is a stingy Tommy?
Be careful how you speak lightly of the king's
representative, said the young officer, raising his
light cane with the affectation of correcting the
changeling.Forget you that I am a soldier?
The idiot shrunk back a little, timidly, and then
leering from under his sunken brow, he answered
I heard you say you were a Boston boy!
The gentleman was about to make a playful
reply, when the aged stranger passed swiftly
before
him, and took his stand at the side of the
lad, with a manner so remarkable for its
earnestness
,
that it entirely changed the current of his
thoughts.
The young man knows the ties of blood and
country, the stranger muttered, and I honour
him!
It might have been the sudden recollection of
the danger of those allusions, which the officer so
well understood, and to which his accidental
association
with the singular being who uttered them,
had begun to familiarize his ear, that induced the
youth to resume his walk, silently, and in deep
thought, along the street. By this movement, he
escaped observing the cordial grasp of the hand
which the old stranger bestowed on the idiot,
while he muttered a few more terms of
commendation
.
Job soon took his station in front, and the
whole party moved on, again, though with less
rapid strides. As the lad advanced deeper into
the town, he evidently wavered once or twice in
his choice of streets, and the officer began to
suspect
that the changeling contemplated one of his
wild circuits, to avoid the direct route to a house
that he manifestly approached with great
reluctance
.
Once or twice the young soldier looked
about him, intending to inquire the direction, of
the first passenger he might see; but the quiet of
deep night already pervaded the place, and not an
individual but those who accompanied him,
appeared
in the long ranges of streets they had passed.
The air of the guide was becoming so dogged,
and hesitating, that his follower had just
determined
to make an application at one of the
doors, when they emerged from a dark, dirty, and
gloomy street, on an open space, of much greater
extent than the one they had so recently left.
Passing
under the walls of a blackened dwelling, Job led
the way to the centre of a swinging bridge, which
was thrown across an inlet from the harbour, that
extended a short distance into the area, forming a
shallow dock. Here he took his stand, and
allowed
the view of the surrounding objects to work its
own effect on those he had conducted thither. The
square was composed of rows of low, gloomy, and
irregular houses, most of which had the appearance
of being but little used. Stretching from the end of
the basin, and a little on one side, a long, narrow
edifice, ornamented with pilasters, perforated with
arched windows, and surmounted by a humble
cupola, reared its walls of brick, under the light
of the moon. The story which held the rows of
silent, glistening windows, was supported on
abutments
and arches of the same material, through
the narrow vistas of which were to be seen the
shambles of the common market-place. Heavy
cornices of stone were laid above and beneath the
pilasters, and something more than the unskilful
architecture of the dwelling houses they had
passed
,
was affected throughout the whole structure.
While the officer gazed at this scene, the idiot
watched his countenance with a keenness
exceeding
his usual observation, until impatient at
hearing
no words of pleasure or of recognition, he
exclaimed
If you don't know Funnel-Hall, you are no
Boston boy!
But I do know Fanueil-Hall, and I am a
Boston
boy, returned the amused gentleman; the
place begins to freshen on my memory, and I now
recall the scenes of my childhood.
This, then, said the aged stranger, is the spot
where liberty has found so many bold advocates!
It would do the king's heart good to hear the
people talk in old Funnel, sometimes, said Job;
I was on the cornishes, and looked into the
winders
,
the last town-meetin'-da', and if there was
soldiers on the common, there was them in the hall
that did'nt care for them!
All this is very amusing, no doubt, said the
officer, gravely, but it does not advance me a
foot on my way to Mrs. Lechmere's.
It is also instructing, exclaimed the stranger;
go on, child; I love to hear his simple feelings
thus expressed; they indicate the state of the
public
mind.
Why, said Job, they were plain spoken,
that's all, and it would be better for the king to
come over, and hear themit would pull down
his pride, and make him pity the people, and then
he wouldn't think of shutting up Boston harbour.
Suppose he should stop the water from coming in
by the narrows, why we should get it by Broad
Sound! and if it didn't come by Broad Sound, it
would by Nantasket! He needn't think that the
Boston folks are so dumb as to be cheated out of
God's water by acts of Parliament, while old
Funnel
stands in the dock square!
Sirrah! exclaimed the officer, a little
angrily
,
we have already loitered until the clocks
are striking eight.
The idiot lost his animation, and lowered in
his looks again, as he answered
Well, I told neighbour Hopper there was
more ways to ma'am Lechmere's than straight
forward! but every body knows Job's business
better than Job himself! now you make me
forget
the road; let us go in and ask old Nab, she
knows the way too well!
Old Nab! you wilful dolt! who is Nab, and
what have I to do with any but yourself?
Every body in Boston knows Abigail Pray.
What of her? asked the startling voice
of the stranger; what of Abigail Pray, boy; is
she not honest?
Yes, as poverty can make her, returned the
natural, gloomily; now the king has said there
shall be no goods but tea sent to Boston, and the
people won't have the bohea, its easy living
rentfree
.Nab
keeps her huckster-stuff in the old
ware'us', and a good place it is tooJob and
his mother have each a room to sleep in, and they
say the king and queen haven't more!
While he was speaking, the eyes of his listeners
were drawn by his gestures toward the singular
edifice to which he alluded. Like most of the
others adjacent to the square, it was low, old,
dirty, and dark. Its shape was triangular, a
street bounding it on each side, and its extremities
were flanked by as many low hexagonal towers,
which terminated, like the main building itself, in
high pointed roofs, tiled, and capped with rude
ornaments
.
Long ranges of small windows were to
be seen in the dusky walls, through one of which
the light of a solitary candle was glimmering, the
only indication of the presence of life about the
silent and gloomy building.
Nab knows ma'am Lechmere better than
Job, continued the idiot, after a moment's pause,
and she will know whether ma'am Lechmere will
have Job whipped for bringing company on
Saturday-night
;
though they say she's so full of
scoffery
as to talk, drink tea, and laugh on that night,
just the same as any other time.
I will pledge myself to her courteous
treatment
,
the officer replied, beginning to be weary of
the fool's delay.
Let us see this Abigail Pray, cried the aged
stranger, suddenly seizing Job by the arm, and
leading
him, with a sort of irresistible power, toward
the walls of the building, through one of the low
doors of which they immediately disappeared.
Thus left on the bridge, with his valet, the young
officer hesitated a single instant how to act; but
yielding to the secret and powerful interest which
the stranger had succeeded in throwing around all
his movements and opinions, he bid Meriton await
his return, and followed his guide and the old
man into the cheerless habitation of the former.
On passing the outer door he found himself in a
spacious, but rude apartment, which, from its
appearance
,
as well as from the few articles of heavy
but valueless merchandise it now contained, would
seem to have been used once as a store-house.
The light drew his steps toward a room in one of
the towers, where, as he approached its open door,
he heard the loud, sharp tones of a woman's voice,
exclaiming
Where have you been, graceless, this
Saturday-night
!
tagging at the heels of the soldiers,
or gazing at the men-of-war, with their ungodly
fashions of music and revelry at such a time, I
dare to say! and you knew that a ship was in the
bay, and that madam Lechmere had desired me
to send her the first notice of its arrival. Here
have I been waiting for you to go up to
Tremont-street
since sun-down, with the news, and you are
out of callyou, that know so well who it is she
expects!
Don't be cross to Job, mother, for the grannies
have been cutting his back with cords, till the blood
runs! ma'am Lechmere! I do believe, mother, that
ma'am Lechmere has moved; for I've been trying
to find her house this hour, because there's a
gentleman
who landed from the ship wanted Job to
show him the way.
What means the ignorant boy! exclaimed
his mother.
He alludes to me, said the officer, entering
the apartment; I am the person, if any, expected
VOL. I. 4
by Mrs. Lechmere, and have just landed from the
Avon, of Bristol; but your son has led me a
circuitous
path, indeed; at one time he spoke of
visiting the graves on Copps-Hill.
Excuse the ignorant and witless child, sir,
exclaimed
the matron, eyeing the young man
keenly
through her spectacles; he knows the way as
well as to his own bed, but he is wilful at times.
This will be a joyful night in Tremont-street!
So handsome, and so stately too! excuse me,
young gentleman, she added, raising the candle
to his features with an evident unconsciousness of
the acthe has the sweet smile of the mother,
and the terrible eye of his father! God forgive us
all our sins, and make us happier in another world
than in this place of evil and wickedness! As
she muttered the latter words, the woman set aside
her candle with an air of singular agitation.
Each syllable, notwithstanding her secret
intention
,
was heard by the officer, across whose
countenance
there passed a sudden gloom that doubled
its sad expression. He, however, said
You know me, and my family, then.
I was at your birth, young gentleman, and
a joyful birth it was! but madam Lechmere
waits for the news, and my unfortunate child
shall speedily conduct you to her door; she will
tell you all that it is proper to know. Job, you
Job, where are you getting to, in that corner!
take your hat, and show the gentleman to
Tremont-street
directly; you know, my son, you
love to go to madam Lechmere's!
Job would never go, if Job could help it,
muttered the sullen boy; and if Nab had never
gone, 'twould have been better for her soul.
Do you dare, disrespectful viper!
exclaimed
the angry quean, seizing, in the violence of
her fury, the tongs, and threatening the head of
her stubborn child.
Woman, peace! said a voice behind.
The dangerous weapon fell from the nerveless
hand of the vixen, and the hues of her yellow
and withered countenance changed to the
whiteness
of death. She stood motionless, for near a
minute, as if riveted to the spot by a
superhuman
power, before she succeeded in
muttering
,
who speaks to me?
It is I, returned the stranger, advancing
from the shadow of the door into the dim light
of the candle; a man who has numbered ages,
and who knows, that as God loves him, so is
he bound to love the children of his loins.
The rigid limbs of the woman lost their
stability
,
in a tremour that shook every fibre in
her body; she sunk in her chair, and her eyes
rolled from the face of one visiter to that of
the other, while her unsuccessful efforts to utter.
denoted that she had temporarily lost the
command
of speech. Job stole to the side of the
stranger, in this short interval, and looking up
in his face piteously, he said
Don't hurt old Nabread that good saying
to her out of the Bible, and she'll never strike
Job with the tongs ag'in; will you, mother?
See her cup, where she hid it under the towel,
when you came in! ma'am Lechmere gives her
the p'ison tea to drink, and then Nab is never
so good to Job, as Job would be to mother, if
mother was half-witted, and Job was old Nab.
The stranger considered the moving
countenance
of the boy, while he pleaded thus
earnestly
in behalf of his mother, with marked
attention
,
and when he had done, he stroked the
head of the natural compassionately, and said
Poor, imbecile child! God has denied the
most precious of his gifts, and yet his spirit
hovers around thee; for thou canst distinguish
between
austerity and kindness, and thou hast learnt
to know good from evil. Young man, see you no
moral in this dispensation! Nothing, which says
that Providence bestows no gift in vain; while
it points to the difference between the duty that
is fostered by indulgence, and that which is
extorted
by power!
The officer avoided the ardent looks of the
stranger, and after an embarrassing pause of a
moment, he expressed his readiness, to the
reviving
woman, to depart on his way. The
matron
,
whose eye had never ceased to dwell on
the features of the old man, since her faculties
were restored, arose slowly, and in a feeble voice,
directed her son to show the road to
Tremont-street
.
She had acquired, by long practice, a
manner that never failed to control, when
necessary
,
the wayward humours of her child, and
on the present occasion, the unwonted solemnity
imparted to her voice, by deep agitation, aided
in effecting her object. Job quietly arose, and
prepared himself to comply. The manners of
the whole party wore a restraint which
implied
they had touched on feelings that it would
be wiser to smother, and the separation would
have been silent, though courteous, on the part
of the youth, had he not perceived the passage
still filled by the motionless form of the stranger.
You will precede me, sir, he said; the
hour grows late, and you, too, may need a
guide to find your dwelling.
To me, the streets of Boston have long been
familiar, returned the old man. I have noted
the increase of the town as a parent notes the
increasing stature of his child; nor is my love
for it less than paternal. It is enough that I am
within its limits, where liberty is prized as the
greatest good; and it matters not under what
roof I lay my headthis will do as well as
another
.
This! echoed the other, glancing his eyes
over the miserable furniture, and scanning the air
of poverty that pervaded the place; why this
house has even less of comfort than the ship we
have left!
It has enough for my wants, said the stranger,
seating himself with composure, and deliberately
placing his bundle by his side. Go you to your
palace, in Tremont-street: it shall be my care
that we meet again.
The officer understood the character of his
companion too well to hesitate, and bending low,
he quitted the apartment, leaving the other leaning
his head on his cane, in absent musing, while the
amazed matron was gazing at her unexpected
guest, with a wonder that was not unmingled
with dread.
4*
CHAPTER III.
From silver spouts the grateful liquors glide,
While China's earth receives the smoking tide.
At once they gratify their scent and taste,
And frequent cups prolong the rich repast.
Rape of the Lock
.
The
recollection of the repeated admonitions
of his mother, served to keep Job to his purpose.
The instant the officer appeared, he held his way
across the bridge, and after proceeding for a short
distance further, along the water's edge, they
entered a broad and well built avenue, which led
from the principal wharf into the upper parts of
the town. Turning up this street, the lad was
making his way, with great earnestness, when
sounds of high merriment and conviviality,
breaking
from an opposite building, caught his
attention
,
and induced him to pause.
Remember your mother's injunction, said the
officer; what see you in that tavern, to stare at?
'Tis the British Coffee-house! said Job,
shaking
his head; yes, any body might know that
by the noise they make in't on Saturday-night! see,
it's filled now, with Lord Boot's officers, flaring
afore the windows, just like so many red devils;
but to-morrow, when the Old South bell rings,
they'll forget their Lord and maker, every sinner
among them!
Fellow! exclaimed the officer, this is
trespassing
too farproceed to Tremont-street, or
leave me, that I may, at once, procure another
guide.
The changeling cast a look aside at the angry
eye of the other, and then turned and proceeded,
muttering so loud as to be overheard
Every body that's raised in Boston knows
how to keep Saturday-night; and if you're a
Boston
boy, you should love Boston ways.
The officer did not reply, and as they now
proceeded
with great diligence, they soon passed
through King and Queen-streets, and entered that
of Tremont. At a little distance from the turning,
Job stopped, and pointing to a building near them,
he said
There; that house with the court-yard afore
it, and the pile-axters, and the grand looking
door, that's ma'am Lechmere's; and every body
says she's a grand lady, but I say it is a pity she
isn't a better woman.
And who are you, that ventures thus boldly to
speak of a lady so much your superior?
I! said the idiot, looking up simply into the
face of his interrogator, I am Job Pray, so
called.
Well, Job Pray, here is a crown for you.
The next time you act as guide, keep more to
your business.I tell you lad, I offer a crown.
Job don't love crownsthey say the king
wears a crown, and it makes him flaunty and
proud like.
The disaffection must have spread itself wide
indeed, if such as he refuse silver, rather than
offend their principles! muttered the officer to
himself.Here then is half a guinea, if you like
gold better.
The natural continued kicking a stone about
with his toes, without taking his hands from the
pockets where he wore them ordinarily, with a
sort of idle air, as he peered from under his
slouched hat at this renewed offer, answering
You wouldn't let the grannies whip Job, and
Job won't take your money.
Well boy, there is more of gratitude in that
than a wiser man would always feel! Come,
Meriton
,
I shall meet the poor fellow again, and will
not forget this. I commission you to see the lad
better dressed, in the beginning of the week.
Lord, sir, said the valet, if it is your
pleasure
,
most certainly; but I declare I don't know in
what style I should dress such a figure and
countenance
,
to make any thing of them!
Sir, sir, cried the lad, running a few steps
after the officer, who had already proceeded, if
you won't let the grannies beat Job any more, Job
will always show you the way through Boston;
and run your a'r'nds too!
Poor fellow! well, I promise that you shall not
be again abused by any of the soldiery. Good night,
my honest friendlet me see you again.
The idiot appeared satisfied with this assurance,
for he immediately turned, and gliding along the
street with a sort of shuffling gait, he soon
disappeared
round the first corner. In the meantime the
young officer advanced to the entrance which led
into the court-yard of Mrs. Lechmere's dwelling.
The house was of bricks, and of an exterior
altogether more pretending than most of those
in the lower parts of the town. It was heavily
ornamented, in wood, according to the taste of a
somewhat earlier day, and presented a front of
seven windows in its two upper stories, those at
the extremes being much narrower than the
others-The
lower floor had the same arrangement, with
the exception of the principal door.
Strong lights were shining in many parts of the
house, which gave it, in comparison with the
gloomy and darkened edifices in its vicinity, an
air of peculiar gaiety and life. The rap of the
gentleman
was answered instantly by an old black,
dressed in a becoming, and what, for the colonies,
was, a rich livery. The inquiry for Mrs.
Lechmere
was successful, and the youth conducted
through a hall of some dimensions, into an
apartment
which opened from one of its sides. This
room would be considered, at the present day, as
much too small to contain the fashion of a country
town; but what importance it wanted in size, was
amply compensated for in the richness and labour
of its decorations. The walls were divided into
compartments, by raised panel-work, beautifully
painted with imaginary landscapes and ruins. The
glittering, varnished surfaces of these pictures were
burthened with armorial bearings, which were
intended to illustrate the alliances of the family.
Beneath the surbase were smaller divisions of
panels, painted with various architectural devices;
and above it rose, between the compartments,
fluted pilasters of wood, with gilded capitals.
A heavy wooden, and highly ornamented cornice,
stretched above the whole, furnishing an
appropriate
outline to the walls. The use of carpets was, at
that time, but little known in the colonies, though
the wealth and station of Mrs. Lechmere would
probably have introduced the luxury, had not
her age, and the nature of the building, tempted
her to adhere to ancient custom. The floor,
which shone equally with the furniture, was
tessellated
with small alternate squares of red-cedar and
pine, and in the centre were the `saliant Lions' of
Lechmere, attempted by the blazonry of the joiner.
On either side of the ponderous and laboured
mantel, were arched compartments, of plainer
work, denoting use, the sliding panels of one of
which, being raised, displayed a beaufet, groaning
with massive plate. The furniture was old, rich,
and heavy, but in perfect preservation. In the midst
of this scene of colonial splendour, which was
rendered
as impressive as possible by the presence of
numerous waxen lights, a lady, far in the decline
of life, sat, in formal propriety, on a small settee.
The officer had thrown his cloak into the hands
of Meriton, in the hall, and as he advanced up the
apartment, his form appeared in the gay dress of
a soldier, giving to its ease and fine proportions,
the additional charm of military garnish. The
hard, severe eye of the lady, sensibly softened with
pleased surprise, as it dwelt on his person for an
instant after she arose to receive her guest, but the
momentary silence was first broken by the youth,
who said
I have entered unannounced, for my
impatience
has exceeded my breeding, madam, while
each step I have taken in this house recalls the
days of my boyhood, and of my former freedom
within its walls.
My cousin Lincoln! interrupted the lady,
who was Mrs. Lechmere; that dark eye, that
smile, nay, your very step announces you! I must
have forgotten my poor brother, and one also
who is still so dear to us, not to have known you
a true Lincoln!
There was a distance in the manner of both, at
meeting, which might easily have been imparted
by the precise formula of the provincial school, of
which the lady was so distinguished a member, but
which was not sufficient to explain the sad
expression
that suddenly and powerfully blended with
the young man's smile, as she spoke. The change,
however, was but momentary, and he answered
courteously to her assurances of recognition
I have long been taught to expect a second
home in Tremont-street, and I find by your
flattering
remembrance of myself and parents, dear
madam, that my expectations are justified.
The lady was sensibly pleased at this remark,
and she suffered a smile to unbend her rigid brow,
as she answered
A home, certainly, though it be not such
a one as the heir of the wealthy house of
Lincoln
may have been accustomed to dwell in.
It would be strange, indeed, could any allied
to that honourable family, forget to entertain
its representative with due respect.
The youth seemed conscious that quite as much
had now been said as the occasion required, and
he raised his head from bowing respectfully on her
hand, with the intention of changing the subject
to one less personal, when his eye caught a glimpse
of the figure of another, and more youthful female,
who had been concealed, hitherto, by the drapery
of a window-curtain. Advancing to this young
lady, he said, with a quickness that rather
betrayed
his willingness to suspend further compliment
And here I see one also, to whom I have the
honor of being related; Miss Dynevor?
Though it be not my grand-child, said Mrs.
Lechmere, it is one who claims an equal affinity
to you, Major Lincoln; it is Agnes Danforth, the
daughter of my late niece.
'Twas my eye then, and not my feelings that
were mistaken, returned the young soldier; I
hope this lady will admit my claim to call her
cousin?
A simple inclination of the body was the only
answer he received, though she did not decline the
hand which he offered with his salutations. After
a few more of the usual expressions of pleasure,
and the ordinary inquiries that succeed such
meetings, the party became seated, and a more
regular discourse followed.
I am pleased to find you remember us then,
cousin Lionel, said Mrs. Lechmere; we have
so little in this remote province that will compare
with the mother country, I had feared no vestiges
of the place of your birth could remain on your
mind.
I find the town greatly altered, it is true, but
there are many places in it which I still
remember
,
though certainly their splendour is a little
diminished, in my eyes, by absence and a
familiarity
with other scenes.
Doubtless, an acquaintance with the British
court will have no tendency to exalt our humble
customs in your imagination; neither do we
possess
many buildings to attract the notice of a
travelled
stranger. There is a tradition in our family,
that your seat in Devonshire is as large as any
dozen edifices in Boston, public or private; nay,
we are proud of saying, that the king himself is
lodged as well as the head of the Lincoln family,
only when at his castle of Windsor!
Ravenscliffe is certainly a place of some
magnitude
,
returned the young man, carelessly,
though you will remember his majesty affects
but little state at Kew. I have, however, spent
so little of my time in the country, that I hardly
know its conveniences or its extent.
The old lady bowed with that sort of
complacency
which the dwellers in the colonies were apt
to betray, whenever an allusion was made to the
acknowledged importance of their connexions in
that country toward which they all looked as the
fountain of honour; and then, as quickly as if the
change in her ideas was but a natural transition in
the subject, she observed
Surely Cecil cannot know of the arrival of
our kinsman! she is not apt to be so remiss in
paying attention to our guests!
She does me the more honour, that she
considers
me a relative, and one who requires no
formality
in his reception.
You are but cousins twice removed,
returned
the old lady, a little gravely; and there is
surely no affinity in that degree which can justify
any forgetfulness of the usual courtesies. You see,
cousin Lionel, how much we value the
consanguinity
,
when it is a subject of pride to the most
remote branches of the family!
I am but little of a genealogist, madam; though,
if I retain a true impression of what I have heard,
Miss Dynevor is of too good blood, in the direct
line, to value the collateral drops of an
intermarriage
.
Pardon me, major Lincoln; her father, colonel
Dynevor, was certainly an Englishman of an
ancient
and honourable name, but no family in the
realm need scorn an alliance with our own. I say
our own, cousin Lionel, for I would never have you
forget that I am a Lincoln, and was the sister of
your grandfather.
A little surprised at the seeming contradiction
in the language of the good lady, the young man
bowed his head to the compliment, and cast his
eyes at his younger companion with a sort of
longing, to change the discourse, by addressing the
reserved young woman nigh him, that was very
excusable in one of his sex and years. He had not
time, however, to make more than one or two
common-place remarks, and receive their answers,
before Mrs. Lechmere said, with some exhibition
of staid displeasure against her grandchild
Go, Agnes, and acquaint your cousin of this
happy event. She has been sensibly alive to your
safety, during the whole time consumed by your
voyage. We have had the prayers of the church,
for a `person gone to sea,' read each Sunday, since
the receipt of your letters, announcing your
intention
to embark; and I have been exceedingly
pleased to observe the deep interest with which
Cecil joined in our petitions.
Lionel mumbled a few words of thanks, and
leaning back in his chair, threw his eyes upward,
VOL. I. 5
but whether in pious gratitude or not, we conceive
it is not our province to determine. During the
delivery of Mrs. Lechmere's last speech, and the
expressive pantomime that succeeded it, Agnes
Danforth rose and left the room. The door had
been some little time closed before the silence was
again broken; during which, Mrs. Lechmere
evidently
essayed in vain, once or twice, to speak.
Her colour, pale and immovable as usually
seemed
her withered look, changed in its shades,
and her lip trembled involuntarily. She,
however
,
soon found her utterance, though the first
tones of her voice were choked and husky.
I may have appeared remiss, cousin Lionel,
she said, but there are subjects that can be
discussed
with propriety, only between the nearest
relatives. Sir Lionelyou left him in as good a
state of bodily health, I hope, as his mental illness
will allow?
It is so represented to me.
You have seen him lately?
Not in fifteen years; my presence was said to
increase his disorder, and the physicians forbade
any more interviews. He continues at the private
establishment near town, and, as the lucid
intervals
are thought to increase, both in frequency and
duration, I often indulge in the pleasing hope of
being restored again to my father. The belief is
justified by his years, which, you know, are yet
under
fifty.
A long and apparently a painful silence
succeeded
this interesting communication; at length
the lady said, with a tremour in her voice, for
which the young man almost reverenced her, as
it so plainly bespoke her interest in her nephew,
as well as the goodness of her heart
I will thank you for a glass of that water in
the beaufet. Pardon me, cousin Lionel, but this
melancholy subject always overcomes me. I will
retire a few moments, with your indulgence, and
hasten the appearance of my grandchild. I pine
that you may meet.
Her absence just at that moment was too
agreeable
to the feelings of Lionel, for him to gainsay
her intention; though, instead of following Agnes
Danforth, who had preceded her on the same
duty, the tottering steps of Mrs. Lechmere
conducted
her to a door which communicated with her
own apartment. For several minutes the young
man trampled on the `salient lions' of
Lechmere
,
with a rapidity that seemed to emulate
their own mimic speed, as he paced to and fro
across the narrow apartment, his eye glancing
vacantly along the laboured wainscots, embracing
the argent, azure and purpure fields of the
different
escutcheons, as heedlessly, as if they were not
charged with the distinguishing symbols of so
many honourable names. This mental abstraction
was, however, shortly dissipated by the sudden
appearance of one who had glided into the room,
and advanced to its centre, before he became
conscious of her presence. A light, rounded,
and exquisitely proportioned female form,
accompanied
by a youthful and expressive
countenance
,
with an air in which womanly grace
blended so nicely with feminine delicacy as to
cause each motion and gesture to command
respect
,
at the same time that it was singularly
insinuating
,
was an object to suspend, even at a first
glance, provided that glance were by surprise, the
steps of a more absent and less courteous youth
than the one we have attempted to describe.
Major Lincoln knew that this young lady could
be no other than Cecil Dynevor, the daughter
of a British officer, long since deceased, by the
only child of Mrs. Lechmere, who was also in her
grave; and consequently that she was one to
whom he was so well known by character, and so
nearly allied by blood, as to render it an easy
task for a man accustomed to the world as he had
been, to remove any little embarrassments which
might have beset a less practised youth, by acting
as his own usher. This he certainly attempted,
and at first, with a freedom which his affinity, and
the circumstances, would seem to allow, though it
was chastened by easy politeness. But the restraint
visible in the manner of the lady was so marked, that
by the time his salutations were ended, and he had
handed her to a seat, the young man felt as much
embarrassment as if he had found himself alone,
for the first time, with the woman whom he had been
pining, for months, to favour with a very
particular
communication. Whether it is that nature
has provided the other sex with a tact for these
occasions, or that the young lady became
sensible
that her deportment was not altogether such
as was worthy either of herself, or the guest of
her grandmother, she was certainly the first to
relieve the slight awkwardness that was but too
apparent in the commencement of the interview.
My grandmother has long been expecting this
pleasure, major Lincoln, she said, and your
arrival
has been at a most auspicious moment. The
state of the country grows each day so very
alarming
,
that I have indeed long urged her to visit our
relatives in England, until the disputes shall have
terminated.
The tones of an extremely soft and melodious
voice, and a pronunciation quite as exact as if the
speaker had acquired the sounds in the English
court, and which was entirely free from the slight
vernacular peculiarity which had offended his ear,
in the few words that fell from Agnes Danforth,
certainly aided a native attraction of manner, which
it seemed impossible for the young lady to cast
entirely aside.
You, who are so much of an English woman,
would find great pleasure in the exchange, he
answered; and if half what I have heard from
a fellow passenger, of the state of the country be
true, I shall be foremost in seconding your
request
.
Both Ravenscliffe and the house in Soho,
would be greatly at the service of Mrs. Lechmere.
It was my wish that she would accept the
pressing invitations of my father's relative, Lord
Cardonnel, who has long urged me to pass a few
years in his own family. A separation would be
painful to us both, but should my grandmother, in
such an event, determine to take her residence in
the dwellings of her ancestors, I could not be
censured
for adopting a resolution to abide under
the roofs of mine.
The piercing eye of major Lincoln fell full
upon her own, as she delivered this intention, and
as it dropped on the floor, the slight smile that
played round his lip, was produced by the
passing
thought, that the provincial beauty had
inherited
so much of her grandmother's pride of
genealogy
,
as to be willing to impress on his mind that
the niece of a viscount was superior to the heir of a
baronetcy. But the quick, burning flush that
instantly
passed across the features of Cecil Dynevor,
might have taught him, that she was acting under
the impulse of much deeper feelings than such an
unworthy purpose would indicate. The effect,
however, was such as to make the young man
5*
glad to see Mrs. Lechmere re-enter the room,
leaning on the arm of her niece.
I perceive, my cousin Lionel, said the lady,
as she moved with a feeble step toward the settee,
that you and Cecil have found each other out,
without the necessity of any other introduction than
the affinity between you. I surely do not mean the
affinity of blood altogether, you know, for that
cannot
be said to amount to any thing; but I believe
there exist certain features of the mind that are
transmitted through families quite as distinctly as
any which belong to the countenance.
Could I flatter myself with possessing the
slightest resemblance to Miss Dynevor, in either
of those particulars, I should be doubly proud of
the connexion, returned Lionel, while he assisted
the good lady to a seat, with a coolness that
sufficiently
denoted how little he cared about the
matter.
But I am not disposed to have my right to
claim near kindred with cousin Lionel, at all
disputed
,
cried the young lady, with sudden
animation
.
It has pleased our fore-fathers to order
such
Nay, nay, my child, interrupted her
grandmother
,
you forget that the term of cousin can
only be used in cases of near consanguinity, and
where familiar situations will excuse it. But
major Lincoln knows, that we in the colonies are
apt to make the most of the language, and count
our cousins almost as far as if we were members of
the Scottish clans. Speaking of the clans, reminds
me of the rebellion of '45. It is not thought in
England
,
that our infatuated colonists will ever be so
fool-hardy as to assume their arms in earnest?
There are various opinions on that subject,
said Lionel. Most military men scout the idea;
though I find, occasionally, an officer that has
served on this continent, who thinks not only that
the appeal will be made, but that the struggle will
be bloody.
Why should they not! said Agnes Danforth,
abruptly; they are men, and the English are no
more!
Lionel turned his looks, in a little surprise, on
the speaker, to whose countenance an almost
imperceptible
cast in one eye, imparted a look of
arch good nature that her manner would seem
to contradict, and smiled as he repeated her
words
Why should they not, indeed! I know no
no other reasons than that it would be both
a mad and an unlawful act. I can assure you that
I am not one of those who affect to undervalue
my own countrymen; for you will remember that
I too am an American.
I have heard it said that such of our
volunteers
as wear uniforms at all, said Agnes,
appear
in blue, and not in scarlet.
'Tis his majesty's pleasure that his 47th foot
should wear this gaudy colour, returned the
young man, laughing; though, for myself, I am
quite willing to resign it to the use of you ladies,
and to adopt another, could it well be.
It might be done, sir.
In what manner?
By resigning your commission with it.
Mrs. Lechmere had evidently permitted her
niece to proceed thus far, without interruption, to
serve some purpose of her own; but perceiving
that her guest by no means exhibited that air of
pique which the British officers were so often
weak enough to betray, when the women took into
their hands the defence of their country's honour,
she rang the bell, as she observed
Bold language, major Lincoln! bold
language
for a young lady under twenty. But Miss
Danforth is privileged to speak her mind freely,
for some of her father's family are but too deeply
implicated in the unlawful proceedings of these
evil times. We have kept Cecil, however, more to
her allegiance.
And yet even Cecil has been known to refuse
the favour of her countenance to the entertainments
given by the British officers! said Agnes, a little
piquantly.
And would you have Cecil Dynevor frequent
balls and entertainments unaccompanied by a
proper
chaperon, returned Mrs. Lechmere; or is
it expected that, at seventy, I can venture in
public
to maintain the credit of our family. But we
keep major Lincoln from his refreshments with
our idle disputes. Cato, we wait your movements.
Mrs. Lechmere delivered her concluding
intimation
to the black, in attendance, with an air that
partook somewhat of mystery. The old
domestic
,
who, probably from long practice, understood,
more by the expression of her eye than by any
words she had uttered, the wishes of his mistress,
proceeded to close the outer shutters of the
windows
,
and to draw the curtains with the most
exact care. When this duty was performed, he
raised a small oval table from its regular
position
among the flowing folds of the drapery that
shrouded the deep apertures for light, and placed
it in front of Miss Dynevor. A salver of massive
silver, containing an equipage of the finest
Dresden
,
followed, and in a few minutes a hissing urn
of the same precious metal garnished the
polished
surface of the mahogany. During these
arrangements
,
Mrs. Lechmere and her guest had
maintained
a general discourse, touching chiefly on the
welfare and condition of certain individuals of their
alliance, in England. Notwithstanding the
demand
thus made on his attention, Lionel was able
to discover a certain appearance of mystery and
caution in each movement of the black as he
proceeded
leisurely in his duty. Miss Dynevor
permitted
the disposition of the tea-table to be made
before her, passively, and her cousin Agnes
Danforth
threw herself back on one of the settees,
with a look that indicated cool displeasure. When
the usual compound was made in two little fluted
cups, over whose pure white a few red and green
sprigs were sparingly scattered, the black
presentod
one containing the grateful beverage to his
mistress
,
and the other to the stranger.
Pardon me, Miss Danforth, said Lionel,
recollecting
himself after he had accepted the
offering
;
I have suffered my sea-breeding to obtain
the advantage.
Enjoy your error, sir, if you can find any
gratification
in the indulgence, returned the young
lady.
But I shall enjoy it the more, could I see you
participating in the luxury.
You have termed the idle indulgence well;
'tis nothing but a luxury, and such a one as can
be easily dispensed with: I thank you, sir, I do
not drink tea.
Surely no lady can forswear her Bohea! be
persuaded.
I know not how the subtle poison may operate
on your English ladies, major Lincoln, but it is no
difficult matter for an American girl to decline the
use of a detestable herb, which is one, among many
other, of the causes that is likely to involve her
country and kindred in danger and strife.
The young man, who had really intended no
more than the common civilities due from his sex
to the other, bowed in silence, though, as he turned
from her, he could not forbear looking toward the
table to see whether the principles of the other
young American were quite as rigid. Cecil sat
bending over the salver, playing idly with a
curiously
wrought spoon, made to represent a sprig of
the plant whose fragrance had been thus put in
requisition
to contribute to his indulgence, while the
steam from the china vessel before her was
wreathing
in a faint mist around her polished brow.
You at least, Miss Dynevor, said Lionel,
appear to have no dislike to the herb, you
breathe its vapour so freely.
Cecil cast a glance at him which changed the
demure and somewhat proud composure of her
countenance into a look of sudden, joyous humour,
that was infinitely more natural, as she answered
laughingly
I own a woman's weakness.I must believe it
was tea that tempted our common mother in
Paradise
!
It would show that the cunning of the serpent
has been transmitted to a later day, could that be
proved, said Agnes, though the instrument of
temptation has lost some of its virtue.
How know you that? said Lionel, anxious to
pursue the trifling, in order to remove the evident
distance which had existed between them; had
Eve shut her ears as rigidly as you close your
mouth against the offering, we might yet have
enjoyed
the first gift to our parents.
Oh, sir, 'tis no such stranger to me as you may
imagine from the indifference I have assumed on
the present occasion; as Job Pray says, Boston
harbour is nothing but a `big tea-pot!'
You know Job Pray, then, Miss Danforth!
said Lionel, not a little amused by her spirit.
Certainly; Boston is so small, and Job so
useful
,
that every body knows the simpleton.
He belongs to a distinguished family, then, for
I have his own assurance that every body knows
his perturbed mother, Abigail.
You! exclaimed Cecil, again, in that sweet,
natural voice that had before startled her auditor;
what can you know of poor Job, and his almost
equally unfortunate mother!
Now, young ladies, I have you in my snares!
cried Lionel; you may possibly resist the steams
of tea, but what woman can withstand the impulse
of her curiosity! not to be too cruel with my fair
kinswomen on so short an acquaintance, however,
I will go so far as to acknowledge that I have
already had an interview with Mrs. Pray.
The reply which Agnes was about to deliver
was interrupted by a slight crash, and on turning,
they beheld the fragments of a piece of the splendid
set of Dresden, lying at the feet of Mrs. Lechmere.
My dear grand-mama is ill! cried Cecil,
springing to the assistance of the old lady.
Hasten, Cato -major Lincoln, you are more
active
for
heaven's sake a glass of waterAgnes,
your salts.
The amiable anxiety of her grand-child was
not, however, so necessary as first appearances
would have indicated, and Mrs. Lechmere gently
put aside the salts, though she did not decline the
glass, which Lionel offered for the second time in
so short a period.
I fear you will mistake me for a sad invalid,
cousin Lionel, said the old lady, when she had
become a little composed; but I believe it is this
very tea, of which so much has been said, and
which I drink to excess, from pure loyalty, that
unsettles my nervesI must refrain, like the
girls, though from a very different motive. We
are a people of early hours, major Lincoln, but you
are at home here, and will pursue your pleasure;
I must, however, claim an indulgence for
threescore-and-ten
,
and be permitted to wish you a
good rest after your voyage. Cato has his orders
to contribute all he can to your comfort.
Leaning on her two assistants, the old lady
withdrew, leaving Lionel to the full possession of
the apartment. As the hour was getting late,
and from the compliments they had exchanged, he
did not expect the return of the younger ladies,
he called for a candle, and was shown to his own
room. As soon as the few indispensables, which
rendered a valet necessary to a gentleman of that
period, were observed, he dismissed Meriton, and
throwing himself in the bed, courted the sweets of
the pillow.
Many incidents, however, had occurred during
the day, that induced a train of thoughts, which
for a long time prevented his attaining the
natural
rest he sought. After indulging in long
and uneasy reflections on certain events, too
closely
connected with his personal feelings to be
lightly
remembered, the young man began to muse on
his reception, and on the individuals who had
been, as it were, for the first time, introduced to
him.
It was quite apparent that both Mrs. Lechmere,
and her grand-daughter were acting their several
parts, though whether in concert or not, remained
to be discovered. But in Agnes Danforth, with all
his subtlety, he could perceive nothing but the plain
and direct, though a little blunt, peculiarities of
her nature and education. Like most very young
men, who had just been made acquainted with two
youthful females, both of them much superior to the
generality of their sex in personal charms, he fell
asleep musing on their characters. Nor,
considering
the circumstances, will it be at all
surprising
when we add, that before morning, he was
dreaming of the Avon, of Bristol, on board which
stout vessel he even thought that he was
discussing
a chowder on the Banks of Newfoundland,
which had been unaccountably prepared by the
fair hands of Miss Danforth, and which was
strangely flavoured with tea; while the
Hebe-looking
countenance of Cecil Dynevor was
laughing
at his perplexities with undisguised
good-humour
,
and with all the vivacity of girlish
merriment
.
VOL. I. 6
CHAPTER IV.
A good portly man, i'falth, and a corpulent.
King Henry IV
.
The
sun was just stirring the heavy bank of
fog, which had rested on the waters during the
night, as Lionel toiled his way up the side of
Beacon-Hill, anxious to catch a glimpse of his
native scenery while it was yet glowing with the
first touch of day. The islands raised their green
heads above the mist, and the wide amphitheatre
of hills that encircled the bay was still visible,
though the vapour was creeping in places along
the valliesnow concealing the entrance to
some beautiful glen, and now wreathing itself
fantastically
around a tall spire that told the site of a
suburban village. Though the people of the town
were awake and up, yet the sacred character of
the day, and the state of the times, contributed to
suppress those sounds which usually distinguish
populous places. The cool nights and warm
days of April, had generated a fog more than
usually dense, which was deserting its watery
bed, and stealing insidiously along the land,
to unite with the vapours of the rivers and
brooks, spreading a wider curtain before the
placid view. As Lionel stood on the brow of the
platform that crowned the eminence, the glimpses
of houses and hills, of towers and ships, of places
known and places forgotten, passed before his
vision, through the openings in the mist, like
phantoms
of the imagination. The whole scene,
animated and in motion as it seemed by its
changes, appeared to his excited feelings like
a fanciful panorama, exhibited for his eye alone,
when his enjoyment was interrupted by a voice
apparently at no great distance. It was a man
singing to a common English air, fragments of
some ballad, with a peculiarly vile nasal cadency.
Through the frequent pauses, he was enabled to
comprehend a few words, which, by their
recurrence
,
were evidently intended for a chorus to
the rest of the production. The reader will
understand
the character of the whole from these
lines, which ran as follows:
And they that would be free,
Out they go;
While the slaves, as you may see,
Stay, to drink their p'ison tea,
Down below!
Lionel, after listening to this expressive ditty for
a moment, followed the direction of the sounds
until he encountered Job Pray, who was seated on
one of the flights of steps which aided the ascent
to the platform, cracking a few walnuts on the
boards, while he employed those intervals, when his
mouth could find no better employment, in
uttering
the above-mentioned strains.
How now, master Pray, do you come here to
sing your orisons to the goddess of liberty, on a
Sunday morning, cried Lionel; or are you the
town lark, and for want of wings take to this
height to obtain an altitude for your melody?
There's no harm in singing psalm tunes or
continental songs, any day in the week, said the
lad, without raising his eyes from his occupation:
Job don't know what a lark is, but if it belongs
to the town, the soldiers are so thick, they can't
keep it on the common.
And what objection can you have to the
soldiers
possessing a corner of your common.
They starve the cows, and then they wont
give milk; grass is sweet to beasts in the spring
of the year.
But my life for it, the soldiers don't eat the
grass; your brindles and your blacks, your reds
and your whites, may have the first offering of the
spring, as usual.
But Boston cows don't love grass that British
soldiers have trampled on, said the sullen lad.
This is, indeed, carrying notions of liberty to
refinement! exclaimed Lionel, laughing.
Job shook his head, threateningly, as he looked
up and said, Don't you let Ralph hear you say
any thing ag'in liberty!
Ralph! who is he, lad? your genius! where
do you keep the invisible, that there is danger of
his overhearing what I say?
He's up there in the fog, said Job, pointing
significantly toward the foot of the Beacon, which
a dense volume of vapor was enwrapping, probably
attracted up the tall post that supported the grate.
Lionel gazed at the smoky column for a
moment
,
when the mists began to dissolve, and, amid
their evolutions, he beheld the dim figure of his
aged fellow passenger. The old man was still clad
in his simple, tarnished vestments of gray, which
harmonized so singularly with the mists as to
impart
a look almost ethereal to his wasted form. As
the medium through which he was seen became
less cloudy, his features grew visible, and Lionel
could distinguish the uneasy, rapid glances of his
eyes, which seemed to roam over the distant
objects
with an earnestness that appeared to mock the
misty veil that was floating before so much of
the view. While Lionel stood fixed to the spot,
gazing at this irregular being with that secret
awe which the other had succeeded in inspiring,
the old man waved his hand impatiently, as if he
would cast aside his shroud. At that instant a
bright sun-beam darted into the vapour,
illuminating
his person, and melting the mist into thin air.
The anxious, haggard, and severe expression of his
countenance changed at the touch of the ray, and
he smiled with a softness and attraction that thrilled
the nerves of the other, as he called aloud to
the sensitive young soldier
Come hither, Lionel Lincoln, to the foot of
this beacon, where you may gather warnings,
which, if properly heeded, will guide you through
many and great dangers, unharmed.
I am glad you have spoken, said Lionel,
advancing to his side; you appeared like a
being of another world, wrapped in that mantle
of fog, and I felt tempted to kneel, and ask a
benediction.
And am I not a being of another world!
most of my interests are already in the grave,
and I tarry here only for a space, because there
is a great work to be done, which cannot be
performed
without me. My view of the world of
spirits, young man, is much clearer and more
distinct than yours of this variable scene at your
feet. There is no mist to obstruct the eye, nor
any doubts as to the colours it presents.
You are happy, sir, in the extremity of your
age to be so assured. But I fear your sudden
determination
last night subjected you to
inconvenience
in the tenement of this changeling.
The boy is a good boy, said the old man,
stroking the head of the natural complacently;
we understand each other, major Lincoln, and
6*
that shortens introductions, and renders
communion
easy.
That you feel alike on one subject, I have
already discovered; but there I should think the
resemblance and the intelligence must end.
The propensities of the mind in its infancy and
in its maturity are but a span apart, said the
stranger
;
the amount of human knowledge is but to
know how much we are under the dominion of
our passions; and he who has learned by
experience
how to smother the volcano, and he who
never felt its fires, are surely fit associates.
Lionel bowed in silence to an opinion so
humbling
to the other, and after a pause of a moment,
adverted to their situation.
The sun begins to make himself felt, and
when he has driven away these ragged remnants
of the fog, we shall see those places each of us have
frequented, in his day.
Shall we find them as we left them, think
you? or will you see the stranger in possession of
the haunts of your infancy?
Not the stranger, certainly, for we are the
subjects
of one king; children who own a common
parent.
I will not reply that he has proved himself an
unnatural father, said the old man, calmly; the
gentleman who now fills the British throne is
less to be censured than his advisers, for the
oppression
of his reign.
Sir, interrupted Lionel, if such allusions
are made to the person of my sovereign, we must
separate; for it ill becomes a British officer to hear
his master mentioned with levity.
Levity! repeated the other, slowly. It is
a fault indeed to accompany gray locks and
wasted
limbs! but your jealous watchfulness betrays
you into error. I have breathed in the
atmosphere
of kings, young man, and know how to
separate the individual and his purpose, from the
policy of his government. 'Tis the latter that
will sever this great empire, and deprive the
third George of what has so often and so well
been termed `the brightest jewel in his crown'.
I must leave you, sir, said Lionel; the
opinions you so freely expressed during our
passage
,
were on principles which I can hardly call
opposed to our own constitution, and might be
heard, not only without offence, but frequently
with admiration; but this language approaches
to treason!
Go then, returned the unmoved stranger,
descend to you degraded common, and bid
your mercenaries seize me'twill be only the
blood of an old man, but 'twill help to fatten
the land; or send your merciless grenadiers to
torment their victim before the axe shall do its
work; a man who has lived so long, can surely
spare a little of his time to the tormentors!
I could have thought, sir, that you might spare
such a reproach to me, said Lionel.
I do spare it, and I do more; I forget my
years, and solicit forgiveness. But had you known
slavery, as I have done, in it's worst of forms, you
would know how to prize the inestimable blessing
of freedom.
Have you ever known slavery, in your travels,
more closely than in what you deem the violations
of principle?
Have I not! said the stranger, smiling
bitterly
;
I have known it as man should never
know it; in act and will. I have lived days,
months, and even years, to hear others coldly
declare my wants; to see others dole out their
meager pittances to my necessities, and to hear
others assume the right, to express the sufferings,
and to control the enjoyments of sensibilities that
God had given to me only!
To endure such thraldom, you must have
fallen
into the power of the infidel barbarians!
Ay! boy, I thank you for the words; they
were indeed most worthy of the epithets! infidels
that denied the precepts of our blessed Redeemer;
and barbarians that treated one having a soul, and
possessing reason like themselves, as a beast of
the field.
Why didn't you come to Boston, Ralph, and
tell that to the people in Funnel-Hall?
exclaimed
Job; ther'd ha' been a stir about it!
Child, I did come to Boston, again and again,
in thought; and the appeals that I made to my
townsmen would have moved the very roof of
old Fanueil, could they have been uttered within
her walls. But 'twas in vain! they had the power,
and like demonsor rather like miserable men,
they abused it.
Lionel, sensibly touched, was about to reply in
a suitable manner, when he heard a voice calling
his own name aloud, as if the speaker were
ascending
the opposite acclivity of the hill. The
instant the sounds reached his ears, the old man
rose from his seat, on the foundation of the
beacon
,
and gliding over the brow of the platform,
followed by Job, they descended into a volume
of mist that was still clinging to the side of the
hill, with amazing swiftness.
Why, Leo! thou lion in name, and deer in
activity! exclaimed the intruder, as he
surmounted
the steep ascent, what can have brought you
up into the clouds so early! whewa man needs a
New-Market training to scale such a precipice.
But, Leo, my dear fellow, I rejoice to see you
we knew you were expected in the first ship, and
as I was coming from morning parade, I met a
couple of grooms in the `Lincoln green,' you
know, leading each a blooded chargerfaith,
one of them would have been quite convenient to
climb this accursed hill onwhew and whew-w,
againwell, I knew the liveries at a glance; as
to the horses, I hope to be better acquainted with
them hereafter. Pray, sir, said I, to one of the
liveried scoundrels, whom do you serve?
Major
Lincoln, of Ravenscliffe, sir, said he, with a
look as impudent as if he could have said, like
you and I, his sacred majesty the king. That's
the answer of the servants of your ten-thousand
a year men! Now, if my fool had been asked
such a question, his answer would have been,
eraven dog as he is, captain Polwarth, of the 47th;
leaving the inquirer, though it should even be some
curious maiden who had taken a fancy to the tout
ensemble of my outline, in utter ignorance that
there is such a place in the world as
Polwarth-Hall
!
During this voluble speech, which was
interrupted
by sundry efforts to regain the breath lost
in the ascent, Lionel shook his friend cordially by
the hand, and attempted to express his own
pleasure
at the meeting. The failure of wind,
however
,
which was a sort of besetting sin with
captain
Polwarth, had now compelled him to pause,
and gave time to Lionel for a reply.
This hill is the last place where I should have
expected to meet you, he said. I took it for
granted you would not be stirring until nine or
ten at least, when it was my intention to inquire
you out, and to give you a call before I paid my
respects to the commander-in-chief.
Ah! you may thank his excellency, the `Hon.
Thomas Gage, governor and commander-in-chief,
in and over the Province of Massachusetts-Bay,
and vice-admiral of the same,' as he styles himself
in his proclamations, for this especial favour;
though, between ourselves, Leo, he is about as
much governor
over
the Province, as he is owner
of those hunters you have just landed.
But why am I to thank him for this
interview
?
Why! look about you, and tell me what you
beholdnothing but fognay, I see
there
is a
steeple, and
yonder
is the smoking sea, and
here
are the chimneys of Hancock's house beneath us,
smoking too, as if their rebellious master were at
home, and preparing his feed! but every thing in
sight is essentially smoky, and there is a natural
aversion, in us epicures, to smoke. Nature dictates
that a man who has as much to do in a day, in
carrying himself about, as your humble servant,
should not cut his rest too abruptly in the morning.
But the honourable Thomas, governor, and
vice-admiral
,
&c. has ordered us under arms with the
sun; officers, as well as men!
Surely that is no great hardship to a soldier,
returned Lionel; and moreover, it seems to
agree with you marvellously! Now I look again,
Polwarth, I am amazed! Surely you are not in a
light-infantry jacket!
Certeswhat is there in that so wonderful,
returned the other, with great gravity; don't I
become the dress? or is it the dress which does not
adorn me, that you look ready to die with mirth?
Laugh it out Leo. I am used to it these three
daysbut what is there, after all, so remarkable
in Peter Polwarth's commanding a company of
light infantry. Am I not just five feet, six and
one eighth of an inchthe precise height!
You appear to have been so accurate in your
longitudinal admeasurement, that you must carry
one of Harrison's time-pieces in your pocket; did
it ever suggest itself to you to use the quadrant
also?
For my latitude! I understand you, Leo;
because I am shaped a little like mother earth,
does it argue that I cannot command a
light-infantry
company?
Ay, even as Joshua commanded the sun.
But the stopping of the planet itself, is not a
greater miracle in my eyes, than to see you in
that attire.
Well, then, the mystery shall be explained;
but first let us be seated on this beacon, said
captain
Polwarth, establishing himself with great
method in the place so lately occupied by the
attenuated form of the stranger; a true soldier
husbands his resources for a time of need; that
word, husbands, brings me at once to the point
I am in love.
That is surprising!
But what is much more so, I would fain be
married.
It must be a woman of no mean endowments
that could excite such desires in captain Polwarth,
of the 47th, and of Polwarth-Hall!
She is a woman of great qualifications, major
Lincoln, said the lover, with a sudden gravity
that indicated his gaiety of manner was not
entirely natural. In figure she may be said to
be done to a turn. When she is grave, she
walks with the stateliness of a show beef; when
she runs, 'tis with the activity of a turkey; and
when at rest, I can only compare her to a dish
of venison, savory, delicate, and what one can
never get enough of.
You have, to adopt your own metaphors, given
such a `rare' sketch of her person, I am, `burning'
to hear something of her mental qualifications.
My metaphors are not poetical, perhaps, but
they are the first that offer themselves to my mind,
and they are natural. Her accomplishments
exceed
her native gifts greatly. In the first place she
is witty; in the second, she is as impertinent as the
devil; and in the third, as inveterate a little traitor
to king George as there is in all Boston.
These are strange recommendations to your
favour!
The most infallible of all recommendations.
They are piquant, like savoury sauces, which
excite
the appetite, and season the dish. Now her
treason (for it amounts to that in fact) is like
olives, and gives a gusto to the generous port of
my loyalty. Her impertinence is oil to the cold
sallad of my modesty, and her acid wit mingles
with the sweetness of my temperament, in that sort
of pleasant combination with which sweet and
sour blend in sherbet.
It would be idle for me to gainsay the charms
of such a woman, returned Lionel, a good deal
amused with the droll mixture of seriousness and
humour in the other's manner; now for her
connexion with the light-infantryshe is not of
the light corps of her own sex, Polwarth?
Pardon me, major Lincoln, I cannot joke on
this subject. Miss Danforth is of one of the best
families in Boston.
Danforth! not Agnes, surely!
The very same! exclaimed Polwarth, in
surprise
;
what do you know of her?
Only that she is a sort of cousin of my own,
and that we are inmates of the same house. We
bear equal affinity to Mrs. Lechmere, and the
good lady has insisted that I shall make my home
in Tremont-street.
I rejoice to hear it! At all events, our
intimacy
may now be improved to some better purpose
than eating and drinking. But to the pointthere
were certain damnable innuendoes getting into
circulation, concerning my proportions, which I
considered it prudent to look down at once.
In order to do which, you had only to look
thinner.
And do I not, in this appropriate dress?
To be perfectly serious with you, Leo, for to
you I can freely unburthen myself, you know what
a set we are in the 47thlet them once fasten an
opprobrious term, or a nick name on you, and you
take it to the grave, be it ever so burthensome.
There is a way, certainly, to check
ungentleman-like
liberties, said Lionel, gravely.
Poh! poh! a man wouldn't wish to fight
about a pound more or a pound less of fat! still
the name is a great deal, and first impressions are
every thing. Now, whoever thinks of Grand
Cairo as a village; of the Grand-Turk and Great
Mogul, as little boys; or, who would believe, by
hearsay, that captain Polwarth, of the light
infantry
,
could weigh one hundred and eighty!
Add twenty to it.
Not a pound more, as I am a sinner. I was
weighed in the presence of the whole mess no
later than last week, since when I have rather lost
than gained an ounce, for this early rising is no
friend to a thriving condition. 'Twas in my
nightgown
,
you'll remember, Leo, for we, who tally so
often, can't afford to throw in boots, and buckles,
and all those sorts of things, like your
feather-weights
.
But I marvel how Nesbit was induced to
consent to the appointment, said Lionel; he
loves a little display.
I am your man for that, interrupted the
captain
;
we are embodied you know, and I make
more display, if that be what you require, than
any captain in the corps. But I will whisper a
secret in your ear. There has been a nasty
business
here lately, in which the 47th has gained
no new laurelsa matter of tarring and
feathering
,
about an old rusty musket.
VOL. I. 7
I have heard something of the affair
already
,
returned Lionel, and was grieved to find
the men justifying some of their own brutal
conduct
last night, by the example of their
commander
.
Mum'tis a delicate matterwell, that tar
has brought the Colonel into particularly bad
odour in Boston, especially among the women,
in whose good graces we are all of us lower than
I have ever known scarlet coats to stand before.
Why, Leo, the Mohairs are altogether the better
men, here! But there is not an officer in the whole
army who has made more friends in the place
than your humble servant. I have availed
myself
of my popularity, which just now is no trifling
thing, and partly by promises, and partly by secret
interest, I have the company; to which you know
my rank in the regiment gives me an undoubted
title.
A perfectly satisfactory explanation; a most
commendable ambition on your part, and a
certain
symptom that the peace is not to be
disturbed
;
for Gage would never permit such an
arrangement
,
had he any active operations in his eye.
Why, there I think you are more than half
right; these yankees have been talking, and
resolving
,
and approbating their resolves, as they
call it, these ten years past, and what does it all
amount to? To be sure, things grow worse and
worse every daybut Jonathan is an enigma to
me. Now you know when we were in the
cavalry
togetherGod forgive me the suicide I
committed
in exchanging into the foot, which I never
should have done, could I have found in all
England
such a thing as an easy goer, or a safe
leaper
but
then, if the commons took offence at a
new tax, or a stagnation in business, why they got
together in mobs, and burnt a house or two,
frightened
a magistrate, and perhaps hustled a
constable
;
then in we came at a hand gallop, you know,
flourished our swords, and scattered the ragged
devils to the four winds; when the courts did the
rest, leaving us a cheap victory at the expense of
a little wind, which was amply compensated by
an increased appetite for dinner. But here it is
altogether a different sort of thing.
And what are the most alarming symptoms,
just now, in the colonies? asked major Lincoln,
with a sensible interest in the subject.
They refuse their natural aliment to uphold
what they call their principles; the women
abjure
tea, and the men abandon their fisheries!
There has been hardly such a thing as even a
wild-duck
brought into the market this spring, in
consequence
of the Port-Bill, and yet they grow
more stubborn every day. If it should come to
blows, however, thank God we are strong enough
to open a passage for ourselves to any part of the
continent where provisions may be plentier; and
I hear more troops are already on the way.
If it should come to blows, which heaven
forbid
,
said major Lincoln, we shall be besieged
where we now are.
Besieged! exclaimed Polwarth, in evident
alarm; if I thought there was the least
prospect
of such a calamity I would sell out
to-morrow
.
It is bad enough now; our mess-table
is never decently covered, but if there should
come a siege 'twould be absolute starvation.No,
no, Leo, their minute men, and their long-tailed
rabble, would hardly think of besieging four
thousand
British soldiers with a fleet to back them.
Four thousand! If the regiments I hear named
are actually on the way, there will be eight
thousand
of usas good men as ever wore
Light-infantry jackets, interrupted Lionel.
But the regiments are certainly coming;
Clinton
,
Burgoyne, and Howe, had an audience to take
leave, on the same day with myself. The service
is exceedingly popular with the king, and our
reception
,
of course, was most gracious; though I
thought the eye of royalty looked on me as if it
remembered one or two of my juvenile votes in
the house, on the subject of these unhappy
dissensions
.
You voted against the Port-Bill, said
Polwarth
,
out of regard to me?
No, there I joined the ministry. The
conduct
of the people of Boston had provoked the
measure, and there were hardly two minds in
parliament
on that question.
Ah! major Lincoln, you are a happy man,
said the captain; a seat in Parliament at
five-and-twenty
!
I must think that I should prefer just
such an occupation to all othersthe very name is
taking; a seat! you have two members for your
borough: who fills the second now?
Say nothing on that subject, I entreat you,
whispered Lionel, pressing the arm of the other,
as he rose; 'tis not filled by him who should
occupy it, as you knowshall we descend to the
common? there are many friends that I could
wish to see before the bell calls us to church.
Yes, this is a church-going, or rather
meeting-going
place; for most of the good people forswear
the use of the word church as we abjure the
supremacy
of the Pope, returned Polwarth, following
in his companion's foot-steps; I never think of
attending
any of their schism-shops, for I would any
day rather stand sentinel over a baggage-wagon,
than stand up to hear one of their prayers. I can
do very well at the king's chapel, as they call it; for
when I am once comfortably fixed on my knees,
I make out as well as my lord archbishop of
Canterbury
;
though it has always been matter of
surprise
to me, how any man can find breath to go
through their work of a morning.
They descended the hill, as Lionel replied,
and their forms were soon blended with those of
twenty others who wore scarlet coats, on the
common.
7*
CHAPTER V.
For us, and for our tragedy,
Here stooping to your clemency,
We beg your hearing patiently.
Hamlet
.
We must, now, carry the reader back a
century
,
in order to clear our tale of every appearance
of ambiguity. Reginald Lincoln was a cadet of
an extremely ancient and wealthy family, whose
possessions were suffered to continue as
appendages
to a baronetcy, throughout all the changes
which marked the eventful periods of the
commonwealth
,
and the usurpation of Cromwell. He
had himself, however, inherited little more than
a morbid sensibility, which, even in that age,
appeared
to be a sort of heir-loom to his family.
While still a young man he had married a woman
to whom he was much attached, who died in
giving
birth to her first child. The grief of the
husband
took a direction towards religion; but
unhappily
,
instead of deriving from his researches
that healing consolation, with which our faith
abounds, his mind became soured by the
prevalent
but discordant views of the attributes of the
Deity; and the result of his conversion was to
leave him an ascetick puritan, and an obstinate
predestinarian. That such a man, finding but
litde
to connect him with his native country, should
revolt at the impure practices of the Court of
Charles, is not surprising; and accordingly,
though not at all implicated in the guilt of the
regicides, he departed for the religious province
of Massachusetts-Bay, in the first years of the
reign of that merry prince.
It was not difficult for a man of the rank and
reputed sanctity of Reginald Lincoln, to obtain
both honourable and lucrative employments in
the plantations; and after the first glow of his
awakened ardour in behalf of spiritual matters had
a little abated, he failed not to improve a due
portion
of his time by a commendable attention to
temporal things. To the day of his death,
however
,
he continued a gloomy, austere, and
bigoted
religionist, seemingly too regardless of the
vanities
of this world to permit his pure imagination to
mingle with its dross, even while he submitted to
discharge its visible duties. Notwithstanding this
elevation of mind, his son, at the decease of his
father, found himself in the possession of many
goodly effects; which were, questionless, the
accumulations
of a neglected use, during the days
of his sublimated progenitor.
Young Lionel so far followed in the steps of his
worthy parent, as to continue gathering honours
and riches into his lap; though, owing to an
early
disappointment, and the inheritance of the
`heir-loom' already mentioned, it was late in life
before he found a partner to share his happiness.
Contrary to all the usual calculations that are
made on the choice of a man of self-denial, he was
then united to a youthful and gay Episcopalian,
who had little, besides her exquisite beauty and
good blood, to recommend her. By this lady he
had four children, three sons and a daughter,
when he also was laid in the vault, by the side of
his deceased parent. The eldest of these sons
was yet a boy when he was called to the
mother-country
,
to inherit the estates and honours of his
family. The second, named Reginald, who was
bred to arms, married, had a son, and lost his life
in the wilds where he was required to serve,
before
he was five-and-twenty. The third was the
grandfather of Agnes Danforth; and the
daughter
was Mrs. Lechmere.
The family of Lincoln, considering the shortness
of their marriages, had been extremely prolific,
while in the colonies, according to that wise
allotment
of providence, which ever seems to regulate
the functions of our nature by our wants; but the
instant it was reconveyed to the populous island of
Britain, it entirely lost its reputation for
fruitfulness
.
Sir Lionel lived to a good age, married, but
died childless, notwithstanding when his body lay in
state, it was under a splendid roof, and in halls so
capacious that they would have afforded
comfortable
shelter to the whole family of Priam.
By this fatality it became necessary to cross the
Atlantic once more, to find an heir to the wide
domains
of Ravenscliffe, and to one of the oldest
baronetcies in the kingdom.
We have planted and reared this genealogical
tree, to but little purpose, if it be necessary to tell
the reader, that the individual who had now
become
the head of his race, was the orphan son of
the deceased officer. He was married, and the
father of one blooming boy, when this elevation,
which was not unlooked for, occurred. Leaving
his wife and child behind him, Sir Lionel
immediately
proceeded to England, to assert his rights
and secure his possessions. As he was the nephew,
and acknowledged heir of the late incumbent, he
met with no opposition to the more important parts
of his claims. Across the character and fortunes of
this gentleman, however, a dark cloud had early
passed, which prevented the common eye from
reading the events of his life, like those of other
men, in its open and intelligible movements.
After
his accession to fortune and rank, but little was
known of him, even by his earliest and most
intimate
associates. It was rumoured, it is true, that
he had been detained in England, for two years,
by a vexatious contention for a petty appendage
to his large estates, a controversy which was,
however
,
known to have been decided in his favour,
before he was recalled to Boston by the sudden
death of his wife. This calamity befell him during
the period when the war of '56 was raging in its
greatest violence: a time when the energies of the
colonies were directed to the assistance of the
mother-country
,
who, according to the language of
the day, was zealously endeavouring to defeat the
ambitious views of the French, in this hemisphere;
or, what amounted to the same thing in effect, in
struggling to advance her own.
It was an interesting period; when the mild and
peaceful colonists were seen to shake off their
habits of forbearance, and to enter into the
strife with an alacrity and spirit that soon
emulated
the utmost daring of their more practised
confederates. To the amazement of all who
knew his fortunes, Sir Lionel Lincoln was seen to
embark in many of the most desperate
adventures
that distinguished the war, with a hardihood
that rather sought death than courted honour.
He had been, like his father, trained to arms, but
the regiment in which he held the commission of
Lieutenant Colonel, was serving his master in the
most eastern of his dominions, while the uneasy
soldier was thus rushing from point to point,
hazarding
his life, and more than once shedding
his blood, in the enterprises that signalized the
war in his most western.
This dangerous career, however, was at length
suddenly and mysteriously checked. By the
influence
of some powerful agency, that was never
explained, the Baronet was induced to take his
son, and embark once more for the land of their
fathers, from which the former had never been
known to return. For many years, all those
inquiries
which the laudable curiosity of the
towns-men
and towns-women of Mrs. Lechmere,
prompted
them to make, concerning the fate of her
nephew
,
(and we leave each of our readers to
determine
their numbers,) were answered by that lady
with the most courteous reserve; and sometimes
with such exhibitions of emotion, as we have
already
attempted to describe in her first interview
with his son. But constand dropping will wear
away a stone. At first there were rumours that
the Baronet had committed treason, and had been
compelled to exchange Ravenscliffe for a less
comfortable dwelling in the Tower of London.
This report was succeeded by that of an
unfortunate
private marriage with one of the
Princesses
of the House of Brunswick; but a
reference
to the calendars of the day, showed that
there was no lady of a suitable age disengaged,
and this amour, so creditable to the provinces,
was necessarily abandoned. Finally, the
assertion
was made with much more of the confidence
of truth, that the unhappy Sir Lionel was the
tenant
of a private mad-house.
The instant this rumour was circulated, a film
fell from every eye, and none were so blind as not
to have seen indications of insanity in the
Baronet
long before; and not a few were enabled to
trace his legitimate right to lunacy through the
hereditary bias of his race. To account for its
sudden exhibition, was a more difficult task, and
exercised the ingenuity of an exceedingly
ingenious
people, for a long period.
The more sentimental part of the community,
such as the maidens and bachelors, and those
votaries of Hymen who had twice and thrice
proved the solacing power of the god, did not
fail to ascribe the misfortune of the Baronet to
the unhappy loss of his wife; a lady to whom he
was known to be most passionately attached. A
few, the relicts of the good old school, under
whose intellectual sway the incarnate persons of
so many godless dealers in necromancy had been
made to expiate for their abominations, pointed
to the calamity as a merited punishment on the
backslidings of a family that had once known the
true faith; while a third, and by no means a small
class, composed of those worthies who braved the
elements in King-street, in quest of filthy lucre,
did not hesitate to say, that the sudden acquisition
of vast wealth had driven many a better man
mad. But the time was approaching, when the
apparently irresistible propensity to speculate on
the fortunes of a fellow-creature was made to yield
to more important considerations. The hour soon
arrived when the merchant forgot his momentary
interests to look keenly into the distant effects
that were to succeed the movements of the day;
which taught the fanatic the wholesome lesson,
that providence smiled most beneficently on those
who most merited, by their own efforts, its favours;
and which even purged the breast of the
sentimentalist
of its sickly tenant, to be succeeded by
the healthy and ennobling passion of love of
country.
It was about this period that the contest for
principle between the parliament of Great
Britain
,
and the colonies of North America,
commenced
,
that in time led to those important
results
which have established a new era in political
liberty, as well as a mighty empire. A brief glance
at the nature of this controversy may assist in
rendering
many of the allusions in this legend more
intelligible to some of its readers.
The increasing wealth of the provinces had
attracted
the notice of the English ministry so early
as the year 1763. In that year the first effort
to raise a revenue which was to meet the
exigencies
of the empire, was attempted by the passage
of a law to impose a duty on certain stamped
paper
,
which was made necessary to give validity to
contracts. This method of raising a revenue was
not new in itself, nor was the imposition heavy in
amount. But the Americans, not less sagacious
than wary, perceived at a glance the importance
of the principles involved in the admission of a
right as belonging to any body to lay taxes, in
which they were not represented. The
question
was not without its difficulties, but the direct
and plain argument was clearly on the side of the
colonists. Aware of the force of their reasons,
and perhaps a little conscious of the strength of
their numbers, they approached the subject with
a spirit which betokened this consciousness, but
with a coolness that denoted the firmness of their
purpose. After a struggle of nearly two years,
during which the law was rendered completely
profitless by the unanimity among the people, as
well as by a species of good-humoured violence
that rendered it exceedingly inconvenient, and
perhaps a little dangerous, to the servants of the
crown to exercise their obnoxious functions, the
ministry abandoned the measure. But, at the
same time that the law was repealed, the
parliament
maintained its right to bind the colonies
in all cases whatsoever, by recording a resolution
to that effect in its journals.
That an empire, whose several parts were
separated
by oceans, and whose interests were so often
conflicting, should become unwieldy, and fall, in
time, by its own weight, was an event that all wise
men must have expected to arrive. But, that the
Americans did not contemplate such a division at
that early day, may be fairly inferred, if there were
no other testimony in the matter, by the quiet and
submission that pervaded the colonies the instant
that the repeal of the stamp act was known. Had
any desire for premature independence existed,
the parliament had unwisely furnished abundant
fuel to feed the flame, in the very resolution
already mentioned. But, satisfied with the solid
advantages they had secured, peaceful in their
habits, and loyal in their feelings, the colonists
laughed at the empty dignity of their
self-constituted
rulers, while they congratulated each other
on their own more substantial success. If the
besotted servants of the king had learned
wisdom
by the past, the storm would have blown
over, and another age would have witnessed the
events which we are about to relate. Things
were hardly suffered, however, to return to their
old channels again, before the ministry attempted
to revive their claims by new impositions. The
design to raise a revenue had been defeated in the
case of the stamp act, by the refusal of the
colonists
to use the paper; but in the present instance,
expedients were adopted, which, it was thought,
would be more effectiveas in the case of tea,
where the duty was paid by the East-India
Company
in the first instance, and the exaction was to be
made on the Americans, through their appetites.
These new innovations on their rights, were met by
the colonists with the same promptitude, but with
much more of seriousness than in the former
instances
.
All the provinces south of the Great Lakes,
acted in concert on this occasion; and preparations
were made to render not only their remonstrances
and petitions more impressive by a unity of action,
VOL. I. 8
but their more serious struggles also, should an
appeal to force become necessary. The tea was
stored or sent back to England, in most cases,
though in the town of Boston, a concurrence of
circumstances led to the violent measure, on the
part of the people, of throwing a large quantity of
the offensive article into the sea. To punish this
act, which took place in the early part of 1774, the
port of Boston was closed, and different laws were
enacted in parliament, which were intended to
bring the people back to a sense of their
dependence
on the British power.
Although the complaints of the colonists were
hushed during the short interval that had
succeeded
the suspension of the efforts of the ministry to
tax them, the feelings of alienation which were
engendered
by the attempt, had not time to be lost
before the obnoxious subject was revived in its
new shape. From 1763, to the period of our
tale, all the younger part of the population of the
provinces had grown into manhood, but they were
no longer imbued with that profound respect for
the mother country which had been transmitted
from their ancestors, or with that deep loyalty to
the crown that usually characterizes a people who
view the pageant of royalty through the medium
of distance. Still, those who guided the feelings,
and controlled the judgments of the Americans,
were averse to a dismemberment of the empire, a
measure which they continued to believe both
impolitic
and unnatural.
In the mean time, though equally reluctant to
shed blood, the adverse parties prepared for that
final struggle which seemed to be unavoidably
approaching
.
The situation of the colonies was now
so peculiar, that it may be doubted whether
history
furnishes a precise parallel. Their fealty to
the prince was everywhere acknowledged, while
the laws which emanated from his counsellors
were sullenly disregarded and set at naught.
Each province possessed its distinct government,
and in most of them the political influence of the
crown was direct and great; but the time had
arrived when it was superseded by a moral
feeling
that defied the machinations and intrigues of
the ministry. Such of the provincial legislatures
as possessed a majority of the Sons of Liberty,
as they who resisted the unconstitutional attempts
of the ministry were termed, elected delegates to
meet in a general congress to consult on the ways
and means of effecting the common objects. In one
or two provinces where the inequality of
representation
afforded a different result, the people
supplied
the deficiencies by acting in their original
capacity
.
This body, meeting, unlike conspirators, with
the fearless confidence of integrity, and acting
under
the excitement of a revolution in sentiment,
possessed
an influence, which, at a later day, has been
denied to their more legally constituted successors.
Their recommendations possessed all the validity
of laws, without incurring their odium. While, as
the organ of their fellow-subjects, they still
continued
to petition and remonstrate, they did not
forget to oppose, by such means as were then
thought expedient, the oppressive measures of the
ministry.
An association was recommended to the
people
,
for those purposes that are amply expressed
in the three divisions which were significantly
given to the subjects, in calling them by the
several names of `non-importation,' `
non-exportation
,'
and `non-consumption resolutions.' These
negative expedients were all that was
constitutionally
in their power, and throughout the whole
controversy, there had been a guarded care
not to exceed the limits which the laws had
affixed
to the rights of the subject. Though no overt
act of resistance was committed, they did not,
however, neglect such means as were
attainable
,
to be prepared for the last evil, whenever
it should arrive. In this manner a feeling of
resentment
and disaffection was daily increasing
throughout the provinces, while in Massachusetts
Bay, the more immediate scene of our story, the
disorder in the body politic seemed to be
inevitably
gathering to its head.
The great principles of the controversy had
been blended, in different places, with various
causes of local complaint, and in none more than
in the town of Boston. The inhabitants of this
place had been distinguished for an early, open,
and fearless resistance to the ministry. An armed
force had long been thought necessary to
intimidate
this spirit, to effect which the troops were
drawn from different parts of the provinces, and
concentrated in this devoted town. Early in 1774,
a military man was placed in the executive chair of
the province, and an attitude of more
determination
was assumed by the government. One of the
first acts of this gentleman, who held the high
station of Lieutenant-General, and who
commanded
all the forces of the king in America,
was to dissolve the colonial assembly. About the
same time a new charter was sent from England,
and a material change was contemplated in the
polity of the colonial government. From this
moment the power of the king, though it was not
denied, became suspended in the province. A
provincial
congress was elected, and assembled
within
seven leagues of the capital, where they
continued
,
from time to time, to adopt such measures
as the exigencies of the times were thought to
render necessary. Men were enrolled,
disciplined
,
and armed, as well as the imperfect means of
the colony would allow. These troops, who
were no more than the lite of the inhabitants,
had little else to recommend them besides their
spirit, and their manual dexterity with fire-arms.
From the expected nature of their service, they
were not unaptly termed minute-men. The
munitions of war were seized, and hoarded with a
care and diligence that showed the character of
the impending conflict.
On the other hand, General Gage adopted a
similar course of preparation and prevention, by
fortifying himself in the strong hold which he
possessed, and by anticipating the intentions of
the colonists, in their attempts to form magazines,
whenever it was in his power. He had an easy
task in the former, both from the natural situation
of the place he occupied, and the species of force
he commanded.
Surrounded by broad and chiefly by deep
waters, except at one extremely narrow point,
and possessing its triple hills, which are not
commanded by any adjacent eminences, the
peninsula of Boston could, with a competent
garrison, easily be made impregnable,
especially
when aided by a superior fleet. The works
erected by the English General were, however,
by no means of magnitude, for it was well known
that the whole park of the colonists could not
exceed
some half dozen pieces of field artillery,
with a small battering train that must be entirely
composed of old and cumbrous ship guns.
Consequently
,
when Lionel arrived in Boston, he found a
few batteries thrown up on the eminences, some of
which were intended as much to control the town,
as to repel an enemy from without, while lines
were drawn across the neck which communicated
with the main. The garrison consisted of
something
less than five thousand men, besides which,
there was a fluctuating force of seamen and
marines
,
as the vessels of war arrived and departed.
8*
All this time, there was no other interruption to
the intercourse between the town and the country,
than such as unavoidably succeeded the stagnation
of trade, and the distrust engendered by the aspect
of affairs. Though numberless families had
deserted
their homes, many known whigs continued
to dwell in their habitations, where their ears were
deafened by the sounds of the British drums, and
where their spirits were but too often galled by
the sneers of the officers, on the uncouth military
preparations of their countrymen. Indeed an
impression
had spread further than among the idle
and thoughtless youths of the army, that the
colonists
were but little gifted with martial qualities;
and many of their best friends in Europe were in
dread lest an appeal to force should put the
contested
points forever at rest, by proving the
incompetency
of the Americans to maintain them
to the last extremity.
In this manner both parties stood at bay; the
people living in perfect order and quiet, without
the administration of law, sullen, vigilant, and,
through their leaders, secretly alert; and the
army
,
gay, haughty, and careless of the
consequences
,
though far from being oppressive or
insolent
,
until after the defeat of one or two abortive
excursions into the country in quest of arms.
Each hour, however, was rapidly adding to the
disaffection on one side, and to the contempt and
resentment on the other, through numberless
public
and private causes, that belong rather to
history
than to a legend like this. All extraordinary
occupations were suspended, and men awaited
the course of things in anxious expectation. It was
known that the parliament, instead of retracing
their political errors, had imposed new restraints,
and, as has been mentioned, it was also rumoured
that regiments and fleets were on their way to
enforce
them.
How long a country could exist in such a
primeval
condition, remained to be seen, though it
was difficult to say when or how it was to
terminate
.
The people of the land appeared to
slumber
,
but, like vigilant and wary soldiers, they might
be said to sleep on their arms; while the troops
assumed each day, more of that fearful
preparation
,
which gives, even to the trained warrior, a
more martial aspectthough both parties still
continued to manifest a becoming reluctance to
shed blood.
CHAPTER VI.
Would he were fatter:but I fear him not:
Seldom he smiles; and smiles in such a sort,
As if he mocked himself, and scorned his spirit
That could be moved to smile at any thing.
Julius Caesar
.
In
the course of the succeeding week Lionel
acquired a knowledge of many minor
circumstances
relating to the condition of the colonies,
which may be easily imagined as incidental to
the times, but which would greatly exceed our
limits to relate. He was received by his brethren
in arms with that sort of cordiality that a rich,
high-spirited, and free, if not a jovial comrade, was
certain of meeting among men who lived chiefly
for pleasure and appearance. Certain indications
of more than usually important movements were
discovered among the troops, the first day of the
week, and his own condition in the army was in
some measure affected by the changes. Instead
of joining his particular regiment, he was
ordered
to hold himself in readiness to take a
command
in the light corps which had begun its
drill for the service that was peculiar to such
troops. As it was well known that Boston was
Major Lincoln's place of nativity, the
commander-in-chief
,
with the indulgence and
kindness
of his character, granted to him,
however
,
a short respite from duty, in order that
he might indulge in the feelings natural to his
situation. It was soon generally understood, that
major Lincoln, though intending to serve with the
army in America, should the sad alternative of an
appeal to arms become necessary, had
permission
to amuse himself in such a manner as he
saw fit, for two months from the date of his
arrival
.
Those who affected to be more wise than
common, saw, or thought they saw, in this
arrangement
,
a deep laid plan on the part of Gage,
to use the influence and address of the young
provincial
among his connexions and natural friends,
to draw them back to those sentiments of loyalty
which it was feared so many among them had
forgotten
to entertain. But it was the characteristic
of the times to attach importance to trifling
incidents
,
and to suspect a concealed policy in
movements
which emanated only in inclination.
There was nothing, however, in the
deportment
,
or manner of life adopted by Lionel, to
justify any of these conjectures. He continued
to dwell in the house of Mrs. Lechmere, in
person
,
though, unwilling to burthen the hospitality
of his aunt too heavily, he had taken lodgings
in a dwelling at no great distance, where his
servants
resided, and where, it was generally
understood
,
that his visits of ceremony and friendship
were to be received. Captain Polwarth did not
fail to complain loudly of this arrangement, as
paralyzing at once all the advantages he had
anticipated from enjoying the entr to the
dwelling
of his mistress, in the right of his friend. But
as the establishment of Lionel was supported with
much of that liberality which was becoming in a
youth of his large fortune, the exuberant
light-infantry
officer found many sources of
consolation
in the change, which could not have existed,
had the staid Mrs. Lechmere presided over the
domestic department. Lionel and Polwarth had
been boys together at the same school, members of
the same college at Oxford, and subsequently for
many years, comrades in the same corps. Though,
perhaps, no two men in their regiment were more
essentially different, in mental as well as physical
constitution, yet, by that unaccountable caprice
which causes us to like our opposites, it is certain
that no two gentlemen in the service were known
to be on better terms, or to maintain a more close
and unreserved intimacy. It is unnecessary to
dilate here on this singular friendship; it occurs
every day, between men still more discordant,
the result of accident and habit, and is often,
as in the present instance, cemented by
unconquerable
good nature in one of the parties. For
this latter qualification, captain Polwarth was
eminent, if for no other. It contributed quite as
much as his science in the art of living, to the
thriving condition of the corporeal moiety of the
man, and it rendered a communion with the less
material part at all times inoffensive, if not
agreeable
.
On the present occasion, the captain took
charge of the internal economy of Lionel's
lodgings
,
with a zeal which he did not even pretend
was disinterested. By the rules of the regiment he
was compelled to live nominally with the mess,
where he found his talents and his wishes
fettered
by divers indispensable regulations, and
economical
practices, that could not be easily
over-leaped
;
but with Lionel, just such an
opportunity
offered for establishing rules of his own,
and disregarding expenditure, as he had been
long pining for in secret. Though the poor of
the town were, in the absence of employment,
necessarily
supported by large contributions of
money
,
clothing, and food, which were transmitted to
their aid from the furthermost parts of the
colonies
,
the markets were not yet wanting in all the
necessaries of life, to those who enjoyed the means
of purchasing. With this disposition of things,
therefore, he became well content, and within the
first fortnight after the arrival of Lionel, it
became
known to the mess, that captain Polwarth
took his dinners regularly with his old friend,
major
Lincoln; though in truth the latter was
enjoying
,
more than half the time, the hospitality of the
respective tables of the officers of the staff.
In the mean time Lionel cultivated his
acquaintance
in Tremont-street, where he still slept,
with an interest and assiduity that the awkwardness
of his first interview would not have taught us to
expect. With Mrs. Lechmere, it is true, he made
but little progress in intimacy; for, equally
formal
,
though polite, she was at all times enshrouded
in a cloud of artificial, but cold management,
that gave him little opportunity, had he
possessed
the desire, to break through the reserve of her
calculating temperament. With his more
youthful
kinswomen, the case was, however, in a very
few days, entirely reversed. Agnes Danforth, who
had nothing to conceal, began insensibly to yield
to the manliness and grace of his manner, and
before
the end of the first week, she maintained the
rights of the colonists, laughed at the follies of the
officers, and then acknowledged her own
prejudices
,
with a familiarity and good-humour that soon
made her, in her turn, a favourite with her
English
cousin, as she termed Lionel. But he found
the demeanor of Cecil Dynevor much more
embarrassing
,
if not inexplicable. For days she
would be distant, silent, and haughty, and then
again, as it were by sudden impulses, she
became
easy and natural; her whole soul
beaming
in her speaking eyes, or her innocent and
merry humour breaking through the bounds of
her restraint, and rendering not only herself, but
all around her, happy and delighted. Full many
an hour did Lionel ponder on this
unaccountable
difference in the manner of this young lady,
at different moments. There was a secret
excitement
in the very caprices of her humours, that
had a piquant interest in his eyes, and which,
aided by her exquisite form and intelligent face,
gradually induced him to become a more close
observer of their waywardness, and consequently
a more assiduous attendant on her movements.
In consequence of this assiduity, the manner of
Cecil grew, almost imperceptibly, less variable,
and more uniformly fascinating, while Lionel, by
some unaccountable oversight, soon forgot to note
its changes, or even to miss the excitement.
In a mixed society, where pleasure, company,
and a multitude of objects conspired to distract
the attention, such alterations would be the
result
of an intercourse for months, if they ever
occurred; but in a town like Boston, from which
most of those with whom Cecil had once mingled
were already fled, and where, consequently, those
who remained behind, lived chiefly for themselves
and by themselves, it was no more than the
obvious
effect of very apparent causes. In this
manner
something like good-will, if not a deeper
interest in each other, was happily effected
within
that memorable fortnight, which was teeming
with events vastly more important in their results
than any that can appertain to the fortunes of
a single family.
The winter of 1774-5 had been as remarkable
for its mildness, as the spring was cold and
lingering
.
Like every season in our changeable climate,
however, the chilling days of March and April
were intermingled with some, when a genial sun
recalled the ideas of summer, which, in their
turn, were succeeded by others, when the torrents
of cold rain that drove before the easterly gales,
would seem to repel every advance toward a
milder temperature. Many of those stormy days
occurred in the middle of April, and during their
continuance Lionel was necessarily compelled to
keep himself housed.
He had retired from the parlour of Mrs.
Lechmere
,
one evening, when the rain was beating
against the windows of the house, in nearly
horizontal
lines, to complete some letters which,
before dining, he had commenced to the agent
of his family, in England. On entering his
own apartment, he was startled to find the
room which he had left vacant, and which he
expected to find in the same state, occupied in a
manner that he could not anticipate. The light
of a strong wood fire was blazing on the hearth,
and throwing about, in playful changes, the
flickering
shadows of the furniture, and magnifying
each object into some strange and fantastical figure.
As he stepped within the door his eye fell upon one
of these shadows, which extended along the wall,
and bending against the cieling, exhibited the
gigantic
but certain outlines of the human form.
Recollecting
that he had left his letters open, and a
little distrusting the discretion of Meriton, Lionel
advanced lightly, for a few feet, so far as to be
able to look round the drapery of his bed, and to
his amazement, perceived that the intruder was
not his valet, but the aged stranger. The old man
sat holding in his hand the open letter which
Lionel had been writing, and continued so deeply
absorbed in its contents, that the footsteps of the
other were still disregarded. A large, coarse
over-coat, dripping with water, concealed most of
his person, though the white hairs that strayed
VOL. I. 9
about his face, and the deep lines of his
remarkable
countenance could not be mistaken.
I was ignorant of this unexpected visit, said
Lionel, advancing quickly into the centre of the
room, or I should not have been so tardy in
returning
to my apartment, where, sir, I fear you
must have found your time irksome, with
nothing
but that scrawl to amuse you.
The old man dropped the paper from before
his features, and betrayed, by the action, the large
drops that followed each other down his hollow
cheeks, until they fell even to the floor. The
haughty and displeased look disappeared from
the countenance of Lionel at this sight, and he
was on the point of speaking in a more
conciliating
manner, when the stranger, whose eye
had not quailed before the angry frown it
encountered
,
anticipated his intention.
I comprehend you, major Lincoln, he said,
calmly; but there can exist justifiable reasons
for a greater breach of faith than this, of which
you accuse me. Accident, and not intention,
has put me in possession, here, of your most
secret thoughts on a subject that has deep
interest
for me. You have urged me often, during
our voyage, to make you acquainted with all
that you most desire to know, to which request,
as you may remember I have ever been silent.
You have said, sir, that you were master of a
secret in which my feelings, I will acknowledge,
are deeply interested, and I have urged you to
remove
my doubts by declaring the truth; but I do
not perceive
How a desire to possess my secret, gives
me a claim to inquire into yours, you would
say, interrupted the stranger; nor does it. But
an interest in your affairs, that you cannot yet
understand, and which is vouched for by these
scalding tears, the first that have fallen in years
from a fountain that I had thought dried, should,
and must satisfy you.
It does, said Lionel, deeply affected by the
melancholy tones of his voice, it does, it does,
and I will listen to no further explanation on the
unpleasant subject. You see nothing there, I am
sure, of which a son can have reason to be
ashamed.
I see much here, Lionel Lincoln, of which a
father would have reason to be proud, returned
the old man. It was the filial love which you have
displayed in this paper which has drawn these
drops from my eyes; for he who has lived as
I have done, beyond the age of man, without
knowing the love that the parent feels for its
offspring, or which the child bears to the
author
of its being, must have outlived his
natural
sympathies, not to be conscious of his
misfortune
,
when chance makes him sensible of
affections like these.
You have never been a father, then? said
Lionel, drawing a chair nigh to his aged
companion
,
and seating himself with an air of
powerful
interest that he could not control.
Have I not told you that I am alone?
returned
the old man, with a solemn manner.
After
an impressive pause, he continued, though his
tones were husky and lowI have been both
husband and parent, in my day, but 'tis so long
since, that no selfish tie remains to bind me to
earth. Old age is the neighbour of death, and the
chill of the grave is to be found in its warmest
breathings.
Say not so, interrupted Lionel, for you do
injustice to your own warm natureyou forget
your zeal in behalf of what you deem these
oppressed colonies.
'Tis no more than the flickering of the
dying
lamp, which flares and dazzles most, when
its source of heat is nighest to extinction. But
though I may not infuse into your bosom a
warmth that I do not possess myself, I can point
out the dangers with which life abounds, and
serve as a beacon, when no longer useful as a
pilot. It is for such a purpose, Major Lincoln,
that I have braved the tempest of to-night.
Has any thing occurred, which, by rendering
danger pressing, can make such an exposure
necessary
?
Look at me, said the old man earnestly
I have seen most of this flourishing country a
wilderness; my recollection goes back into those
periods when the savage, and the beast of the
forst, contended with our fathers for much of that
soil which now supports its hundreds of
thousands
in plenty; and my time is to be numbered,
not by years, but by ages. For such a being,
think you there can yet be many months, or
weeks, or even days in store?
Lionel dropped his eyes, in embarrassment, to
the floor, as he answered
You cannot have very many years, surely, to
hope for; but with the activity and temperance
you possess, days and months confine you, I trust,
in limits much too small.
What! exclaimed the other, stretching forth
a colourless hand, in which even the prominent
veins partook in the appearance of a general
decay
of nature; with these wasted limbs, these
gray hairs, and this sunken and sepulchral cheek,
would you talk to me of years! to me, who have
not the effrontery to petition for even minutes,
were they worth the prayerso long already has
been my probation!
It is certainly time to think of the change,
when it approaches so very near.
Well, then, Lionel Lincoln, old, feeble, and
on the threshold of eternity as I stand, yet am I
not nearer to my grave than that country to
which you have pledged your blood is to a
mighty convulsion, which will shake her
institutions
to their foundations.
I cannot admit the signs of the times to be quite
so portentous as your fears would make them,
said Lionel, smiling a little proudly. Though the
worst that is apprehended should arrive, England
will feel the shock but as the earth bears an
eruption of one of its volcanoes! But we talk in
idle figures, Sir; know you any thing to justify
the apprehension of immediate danger?
The face of the stranger lighted with a sudden
and startling gleam of intelligence, and a
sarcastic
smile passed across his wan features, as he
answered
slowly
They only have cause to fear who will be the
losers by the change! A youth who casts off the
trammels of his guardians is not apt to doubt his
ability to govern himself. England has held these
colonies so long in leading-strings, that she forgets
her offspring is able to go alone.
Now, Sir, you exceed even the wild projects
of the most daring among those who call
themselves
the `Sons of Liberty'as if liberty existed
in any place more favoured or more nurtured than
under the blessed constitution of England! The
utmost required is what they term a redress
of grievances, many of which, I must think, exist
only in imagination.
Was a stone ever known to roll upward! Let
there be but one drop of American blood spilt
in anger, and its stain will become indelible.
9*
Unhappily, the experiment has been already
tried; and yet years have rolled by, while
England
keeps her footing and authority good.
Her authority! repeated the old man; see
you not, Major Lincoln, in the forbearance of this
people, when they felt themselves in the wrong,
the existence of the very principles that will
render
them invincible and unyielding when right?
But we waste our timeI came to conduct you
to a place where, with your own ears, and with
your own eyes, you may hear and see a little of
that spirit which pervades the landYou will
follow?
Not surely in such a tempest!
This tempest is but a trifle to that which is
about to break upon you, unless you retrace your
steps; but follow, I repeat; if a man of my years
disregards the night, ought an English soldier to
hesitate!
The pride of Lionel was touched; and
remembering
an engagement he had previously made
with his aged friend to accompany him to a scene
like this, he made such changes in his dress
as would serve to conceal his profession, threw
on a large cloak to protect his person, and
was about to lead the way himself, when he was
aroused by the voice of the other.
You mistake the route, he said; this is to
be a secret, and I hope a profitable visitnone
must know of your presence; and if you are a
worthy son of your honourable father, I need
hardly add that my faith is pledged for your
discretion
.
The pledge will be respected, Sir, said
Lionel
,
haughtily; but in order to see what you
wish, we are not to remain here?
Follow, then, and be silent, said the old
man, turning and opening the doors which led
into
a little apartment lighted by one of those
smaller
windows, already mentioned in describing the
exterior of the building. The passage was dark
and narrow, but, observing the warnings of his
companion, Lionel succeeded in descending, in
safety, a flight of steps which formed a private
communication between the offices of the dwelling
and its upper apartments. They paused an
instant
at the bottom of the stairs, where the youth
expressed his amazement that a stranger should
be so much more familiar with the building than
he who had for so many days made it his home.
Have I not often told you, returned the old
man, with a severity in his voice which was even
apparent in its suppressed tones, that I have
known Boston for near an hundred years! how
many edifices like this does it contain, that I
should not have noted its erection! But follow in
silence, and be prudent.
He now opened a door which conducted them
through one end of the building, into the
courtyard
in which it was situated. As they emerged
into the open air, Lionel perceived the figure of a
man, crouching under the walls, as if seeking a
shelter from the driving rain. The moment they
appeared, this person arose, and followed as they
moved towards the street.
Are we not watched? said Lionel, stopping
to face the unknown; whom have we skulking in
our footsteps?
'Tis the boy, said the old man, for whom we
must adopt the name of Ralph, which it would
appear was the usual term used by Job when
addressing
his mother's guest'tis the boy, and
he can do us no harm. God has granted to him
a knowledge between much of what is good and
that which is evil, though the mind of the child
is, at times, sadly weakened by his bodily ailings.
His heart, however, is with his country, at a
moment when she needs all hearts to maintain
her rights.
The young British officer bowed his head to
meet the tempest, and smiled scornfully within the
folds of his cloak, which he drew more closely
around his form, as they met the gale in the
open streets of the town. They had passed
swiftly through many narrow and crooked ways,
before another word was uttered between the
adventurers
.
Lionel mused on the singular and
indefinable
interest that he took in the movements
of his companion, which could draw him at a time
like this from the shelter of Mrs. Lechmere's
roof, to wander he knew not whither, and on an
errand which might even be dangerous to his
person
.
Still he followed, unhesitatingly, for with
these passing thoughts were blended the
recollection
of the many recent and interesting
communications
he had held with the old man during
their long and close association in the ship; nor
was he wanting in a natural interest for all that
involved the safety and happiness of the place of
his birth. He kept the form of his aged guide in
his eye, as the other moved before him, careless
of the tempest which beat on his withered frame,
and he heard the heavy footsteps of Job in his
rear who had closed so near his own person as to
share, in some measure, in the shelter of his
ample
cloak. But no other living being seemed to
have ventured abroad; and even the few sentinels
they passed, instead of pacing in front of those
doors which it was their duty to guard, were
concealed
behind the angles of walls, or sought
shelter
under the projections of some favouring roof.
At moments the wind rushed into the narrow
avenues of the streets, along which it swept, with
a noise not unlike the hollow roaring of the sea,
and with a violence which was nearly irresistible.
At such times Lionel was compelled to pause, and
even frequently to recede a little from his path,
while his guide, supported by his high purpose,
and but little obstructed by his garments, seemed,
to the bewildered imagination of his follower, to
glide through the night with a facility that was
supernatural. At length the old man, who had
got some distance ahead of his followers,
suddenly
paused, and allowed Lionel to approach to his
side. The latter observed with surprise, that
he had stopped before the root and stump of
a tree which had once grown on the borders of
the street, and which appeared to have been
recently
felled.
Do you see this remnant of the Elm? said
Ralph, when the others had stopped also; their
axes have succeeded in destroying the
mother-plant
,
but her scions are flourishing throughout a
continent!
I do not comprehend you! returned Lionel;
I see here nothing but the stump of some tree;
surely the ministers of the king are not
answerable
that it stands no longer?
The ministers of the king are answerable to
their master that it has ever become what it
isbut speak to the boy at your side, he will
tell you of its virtues.
Lionel turned to wards Job, and perceived, by
the obscure light of the moon, to his surprise,
that the changeling stood with his head bared
to the storm, regarding the root with an
extraordinary
degree of reverence.
This is all a mystery to me! he said; what
do you know about this stump to stand in awe of,
boy?
'Tis the root of `Liberty-tree,' said Job,
and 'tis wicked to pass it without making your
manners!
And what has this tree done for liberty, that it
has merited so much respect?
What! why did you ever see a tree afore this
that could write and give notices of town
meetinda's
,
or that could tell the people what the king
meant to do with the tea and his stamps!
And could this marvellous tree work such
miracles?
To be sure it could, and it did tooyou let
stingy Tommy think to get above the people
with any of his cunning over night, and you might
come here next morning and read a warning on
the bark of this tree, that would tell all about it,
and how to put down his deviltries, written out
fair, in a hand as good as master Lowell himself
could put on paper, the best day of his grand
scholarship.
And who put the paper there?
Who! exclaimed Job, a little positively;
why Liberty came in the night, and pasted it
up herself. When Nab couldn't get a house to
live in, Job used to sleep under the tree,
sometimes
,
and many a night has he seen Liberty with
his own eyes come and put up the paper.
And was it a woman?
Do you think Liberty was such a fool as to
come every time in woman's clothes, to be
followed
by the rake-helly soldiers about the streets!
said Job, with great contempt in his manner.
Sometimes she did, though, and sometimes she
didn't; just as it happened. And Job was in the
tree when old Noll had to give up his ungodly
stamps; though he didn't do it till the `Sons of
Liberty' had chucked his stamp-shop in the dock,
and hung him and Lord Boot together, on the
branches of the old Elm!
Hung! said Lionel, unconsciously drawing
back from the spot; was it ever a gallows!
Yes, for iffigies, said Job, laughing; I
wish you could have been here to see how the
old boot, with Satan sticking out on't, whirled
about when they swung it off! they give the old
boy a big shoe to put his cloven huff in!
Lionel, who was familiar with the peculiar
sound that his townsmen gave to the letter
u
, now comprehended the allusion to the Earl
of Bute, and beginning to understand more
clearly
the nature of the transactions, and the uses to
which that memorable tree had been applied, he
expressed his desire to proceed.
The old man had suffered Job to make his
own explanations, though not without a curious
interest in the effect they would produce on
Lionel
;
but the instant the request was made to
advance
,
he turned, and once more led the way.
Their course was now directed more towards the
wharves; nor was it long before their conductor
turned into a narrow court, and entered a house
of rather mean appearance, without even
observing
the formality of announcing his visit by the
ordinary summons of rapping at its door. A long,
narrow, and dimly-lighted passage, conducted
them to a spacious apartment far in the court,
which appeared to have been fitted as a place for
the reception of large assemblages of people. In
this room were collected at least a hundred men,
seemingly intent on some object of more than usual
interest, by the gravity and seriousness of
demeanor
apparent in every countenance.
As it was Sunday, the first impression of Lionel,
on entering the room, was that his old friend, who
often betrayed a keen sensibility on subjects of
religion, had brought him there with a design to
listen to some favourite exhorter of his own
peculiar
tenets, and as a tacit reproach for a neglect of
the usual ordinances of that holy day, of which
the conscience of the young man suddenly
accused
him, on finding himself unexpectedly mingled
in such a throng. But after he had forced his
person among a dense body of men, who stood at
the lower end of the apartment, and became a
silent
observer of the scene, he was soon made to
perceive his error. The weather had induced all
present to appear in such garments as were best
adapted to protect them from its fury; and their
exteriors were rough, and perhaps a little
forbidding
;
but there was a composure and decency in
the air common to the whole assembly, which
denoted
that they were men who possessed in a high
degree the commanding quality of self-respect.
A very few minutes sufficed to teach Lionel that
he was in the midst of a meeting collected to
discuss
questions connected with the political
movements
of the times, though he felt himself a little
at a loss to discover the precise results it was
intended
to produce. To every question, there were
one or two speakers, men who expressed their
ideas in a familiar manner, and with the peculiar
tones and pronunciation of the province, that
left no room to believe them to be orators of a
higher character than the mechanics and
tradesmen
of the town. Most, if not all of them, wore
an air of deliberation and coldness that would
have rendered their sincerity in the cause they
had apparently espoused, a little equivocal, but
for occasional expressions of coarse, and
sometimes
biting invective that they expended on
the ministers of the crown, and for the
perfect
and firm unanimity that was manifested, as
each expression of the common feeling was taken
after the manner of deliberative bodies. Certain
resolutions, in which the most respectful
remonstrances
were singularly blended with the boldest
assertions of constitutional principles, were read,
and passed without a dissenting voice, though
with a calmness that indicated no very strong
excitement
.
Lionel was peculiarly struck with the
language of these written opinions, which were
expressed
with a purity, and sometimes with an
elegance
of style, which plainly showed that the
acquaintance
of the sober artisan with the
instrument
through whose periods he was blundering,
was quite recent, and far from being very
intimate
.
The eyes of the young soldier wandered
from face to face, with a strong desire to
detect
the secret movers of the scene he was
witnessing
;
nor was he long without selecting one
individual as an object peculiarly deserving of his
suspicions. It was a man apparently but just
entering into middle age, of an appearance, both
in person, and in such parts of his dress as
escaped
from beneath his over-coat, that denoted him
to be of a class altogether superior to the mass of
the assembly. A deep but manly respect was
evidently
paid to this gentleman, by those who stood
nearest to his person; and once or twice there
were close and earnest communications passing
between him and the more ostensible leaders of
the meeting, which roused the suspicions of
Lionel
in the manner related. Notwithstanding the
secret dislike that the English officer suddenly
conceived
against a man that he fancied was thus
abusing
his powers, by urging others to acts of
insubordination
,
he could not conceal from himself the
favourable impression made by the open, fearless,
and engaging countenance of the stranger. Lionel
was so situated as to be able to keep his person,
which was partly concealed by the taller forms
that surrounded him, in constant view; nor was
it long before his earnest and curious gaze caught
VOL. I. 10
the attention of the other. Glances of marked
meaning were exchanged between them during
the remainder of the evening, until the chairman
announced that the objects of the convocation
were accomplished, and dissolved the meeting.
Lionel raised himself from his reclining
attitude
against the wall, and submitted to be carried
by the current of human bodies into the dark
passage through which he had entered the room.
Here he lingered a moment, with a view to
recover
his lost companion, and with a secret wish
to scan more narrowly the proceedings of the
man whose air and manner had so long chained
his attention. The crowd had sensibly
diminished
before he was aware that few remained
beside
himself, nor would he then have
discovered
that he was likely to become an object of
suspicion
to those few, had not a voice at his elbow
recalled his recollection.
Does Major Lincoln meet his countrymen
tonight
as one who sympathizes in their wrongs, or
as the favoured and prosperous officer of the
crown? asked the very man for whose person he
had so long been looking in vain.
Is sympathy with the oppressed incompatible
with loyalty to my Prince? demanded Lionel.
That it
is
not, said the stranger, in a
friendly accent, is apparent from the
conduct
of many gallant Englishmen among us, who
espouse our causebut we claim Major Lincoln
as a countryman.
Perhaps, sir, it would be indiscreet just now
to disavow that title, let my dispositions be as
they may, returned Lionel, smiling a little
haughtily; this may not be as secure a spot in
which to avow one's sentiments, as the
town-common
,
or the palace of St. James.
Had the king been present to-night, Major
Lincoln, would he have heard a single
sentence
opposed to that constitution which has
declared
him a member too sacred to be offended?
Whatever may have been the legality of your
sentiments, sir, they surely have not been
expressed
in language altogether fit for a royal ear.
It may not have been adulation, or even
flattery
,
but it is trutha quality no less sacred than the
rights of kings.
This is neither a place nor an occasion, sir,
said the young soldier, quickly, to discuss the
rights of our common master; but if, as from
your manner and your language, I think not
improbable
,
we should meet hereafter in a higher
sphere, you will not find me at a loss to
vindicate
his claims.
The stranger smiled with meaning, and as he
bowed before he fell back and was lost in the
darkness of the passage, he replied
Our fathers have often met in such society,
I believe; God forbid that their sons should ever
encounter in a less friendly manner.
Lionel now finding himself alone, groped his
way into the street, where he perceived Ralph
and the changeling in waiting for his appearance.
Without demanding the cause of the other's
delay
,
the old man proceeded by the side of his
companions, with the same indifference to the
tempest as before, towards the residence of Mrs.
Lechmere.
You have now had some evidence of the spirit
that pervades this people, said Ralph, after a
few moments of silence; think you still there is
no danger that the volcano will explode?
Surely every thing I have heard and seen
tonight
,
confirms such an opinion, returned
Lionel
.
Men on the threshold of rebellion
seldom
reason so closely, and with such moderation.
Why, the very fuel for the combustion, the rabble
themselves, discuss their constitutional principles,
and keep under the mantle of law, as though they
were a club of learned Templars.
Think you that the fire will burn less steadily,
because what you call the fuel has been prepared
by the seasoning of time, returned Ralph. But
this comes from sending a youth into a foreign
land for his education! The boy rates his sober
and earnest countrymen on a level with the
peasants
of Europe.
So much Lionel was able to comprehend, but
notwithstanding the old man muttered vehemently
to himself for some time longer, it was in a tone too
indistinct for his ear to understand his meaning.
When they arrived in a part of the town with
which Lionel was familiar, his aged guide pointed
out his way, and took his leave, saying
I see that nothing but the last, and dreadful
argument of force, will convince you of the
purpose of the Americans to resist their
oppressors
.
God avert the evil hour! but when it shall
come, as come it must, you will learn your error,
young man, and, I trust, will not disregard the
natural ties of country and kindred.
Lionel would have spoken in reply, but the
rapid
steps of Ralph rendered his wishes vain, for
before he had time to utter, his emaciated form
was seen gliding, like an immaterial being,
through the sheets of driving rain, and was soon
lost to the eye, as it vanished in the dim shades
of night, followed by the more substantial frame
of the ideot.
CHAPTER VII.
Sergeant, you shall. Thus are poor servitors,
When others sleep upon their quiet beds,
Constrained to watch in darkness, rain, and cold.
King Henry VI
Two or three days of fine, balmy, spring
weather
succeeded to the storm, during which Lionel
saw no more of his aged fellow-voyager. Job,
however, attached himself to the British soldier
with a confiding helplessness that touched the
heart of his young protector, who gathered from
the circumstance a just opinion of the nature
of the abuses that the unfortunate changeling
was frequently compelled to endure from the
brutal
soldiery. Meriton performed the functions
of master of the wardrobe to the lad, by
Lionel's
express commands, with evident disgust, but
with manifest advantage to the external
appearance
,
if with no very sensible evidence of
additional comfort to his charge. During this
short period, the slight impression made on
Lionel
by the scene related in the preceding
chapter
,
faded before the cheerful changes of the
season, and the increasing interest which he
felt in the society of his youthful kinswomen.
Polwarth relieved him from all cares of a
domestic
nature, and the peculiar shade of sadness,
which at times had been so very perceptible in
10*
his countenance, was changed to a look of a more
brightening and cheerful character. Polwarth
and Lionel had found an officer, who had
formerly
served in the same regiment with them in the
British Islands, in command of a company of
grenadiers, which formed part of the garrison of
Boston. This gentleman, an Irishman of the
name of M'Fuse, was qualified to do great
honour to the culinary skill of the officer of
light-infantry
,
by virtue of a keen natural gusto for
whatever possessed the inherent properties of a
savoury taste, though utterly destitute of any of
that remarkable scientific knowledge which might
be said to distinguish the other in the art. He
was, in consequence of this double claim on the
notice of Lionel, a frequent guest at the nightly
banquets prepared by Polwarth. Accordingly
we find him, on the evening of the third day in
the week, seated with his two friends, around a
board plentifully garnished by the care of that
gentleman, on the preparations for which, more
than usual skill had been exerted, if the repeated
declarations of the disciple of Heliogabulus, to
that effect, were entitled to any ordinary credit.
In short, Major Lincoln, said Polwarth, in
continuance of his favourite theme, while seated
before the table, a man may live any where,
provided he possesses foodin England, or out
of England, it matters not. Raiment may be
necessary to appearance, but food is the only
indispensable that nature has imposed on the
animal
world; and in my opinion there is a sort of
obligation on every man to be satisfied, who has
wherewithal to appease the cravings of his
appetite
Captain
M`Fuse, I will thank you to cut that
surloin with the grain.
What matters it Pollysaid the captain of
grenadiers, with a slight Irish accent, and with
the humour of his countrymen strongly depicted
in his fine, open, manly features, which way a
bit of meat is divided, so there be enough to
allay
the cravings of the appetite, you will
remember
!
It is a collateral assistance to nature that
should never be neglected, returned Polwarth,
whose gravity and seriousness at his banquets
were not easily disturbed; it facilitates
mastication
and aids digestion, two considerations of
great importance to military men, sir, who have
frequently such little time for the former, and no
rest after their meals to complete the latter.
He reasons like an army contractor, who
wishes to make one ration do the work of two,
when transportation is high, said M`Fuse,
winking
to Lionel. According to your principles,
then, Polly, a potato is your true campaigner,
for that is a cr'ature you may cut any way
without
disturbing the grain, provided the article be a
little m'aly.
Pardon me, captain M`Fuse, said Polwarth,
a potato should be broken, and not cut at all
there is no vegetable more used, and less
understood
than the potato.
And is it you, Pater Polwarth, of Nesbitt's
light-infantry, interrupted the grenadier, laying
down his knife and fork with an air of infinite
humour, that will tell Dennis M`Fuse how to
carve a potato! I will yield to the right of an
Englishman over the chivalry of an ox, your
sirloins
,
and your lady-rumps, if you please, but in
my own country, one end of every farm is a
bog, and the other a potato-field'tis an
Irishman's
patrimony that you are making so free with,
sir!
The possession of a thing, and the
knowledge
how to use it, are two very different
properties
Give me the property of possession, then,
again interrupted the ardent grenadier,
especially
when a morsel of the green island is in
dispute
;
and trust an old soldier of the Royal Irish to
carve his own enjoyments. Now, I'll wager a
month's pay, and that to me is as much as if the
Major should say, done for a thousand, that you
can't tell how many dishes can be made, and are
made every day in Ireland, out of so simple a
thing as a potato.
You roast and boil; and use them in stuffing
tame birds, sometimes, and
All old woman's cookery! interrupted
M`Fuse, with an affectation of great contempt
in his mannernow, sir, we have them with
butter, and without butter, that counts two;
then we have the fruit p'aled; and
Impaled, said Lionel, laughing. I believe
this nice controversy must be referred to Job,
who is amusing himself in the corner there, I
see, with the very subject of the dispute transfixed
on his fork, in the latter condition.
Or suppose, rather, said M`Fuse, as it is a
matter to exercise the judgment of Solomon, we
make a potato umpire of master Seth Sage,
yonder
,
who should have some of the wisdom of the
royal Jew, by the sagacity of his countenance, as
well as of his name.
Don't you call Seth r'yal, said Job,
suspending
his occupation on the vegetable. The
king is r'yal and fla'nty, but neighbour Sage lets
Job come in and eat, like a christian.
That lad there, is not altogether without
reason
,
Major Lincoln, said Polwarth; on the
contrary, he discovers an instinctive knowledge of
good from evil, by favouring us with his company
at the hour of meals.
The poor fellow finds but little at home to
tempt him to remain there, I fear, said Lionel;
and as he was one of the first acquaintances I
made on returning to my native land, I have
desired
Mr. Sage to admit him at all proper hours;
and especially, Polwarth, at those times when he
can have an opportunity of doing homage to your
skill.
I am glad to see him, said Polwarth, for
I love an uninstructed palate, as much as I admire
naivet in a woman.Be so good as to favour me
with a cut from the breast of that wild-goose,
M`Fusenot quite so far forward, if you please;
your migratory birds are apt to be tough about the
wingbut simplicity in eating is, after all, the
great secret of life; that and a sufficiency of food.
You may be right this time, replied the
grenadier
,
laughing, for this fellow made one of
the flankers of the flock, and did double duty in
wheeling, I believe, or I have got him against
the grain too! But, Polly, you have not told us
how you improve in your light-infantry exercises
of late.
By this time Polwarth had made such progress
in the essential part of his meal, as to have
recovered
in some measure his usual tone of
good-nature
,
and he answered with less gravity
If Gage does not work a reformation in our
habits, he will fag us all to death. I suppose you
know, Leo, that all the flank companies are
relieved
from the guards to learn a new species of
exercise. They call it relieving us, but the only
relief I find in the matter, is when we lie down to
firethere is a luxurious moment or two then, I
must confess!
I have known the fact, any time these ten
days, by your moanings, returned Lionel; but
what do you argue from this particular exercise,
captain M`Fuse? does Gage contemplate more
than the customary drills?
You question me now, sir, on a matter in
which I am uninstructed, said the grenadier;
I am a soldier, and obey my orders, without
pretending to inquire into their objects or merits;
all I know is, that both grenadiers and
light-infantry
are taken from the guards; and that we
travel over a good deal of solid earth each day,
in the way of marching and counter-marching, to
the manifest discomfiture and reduction of Polly
there, who loses flesh as fast as he gains ground.
Do you think so, Mac? cried the delighted
captain of light-infantry; then I have not all the
detestable motion in vain. They have given us
little Harry Skip as a drill officer, who I believe
has the most restless foot of any man in his
majesty's
service. Do you join with me in opinion,
master
Sage? you seem to meditate on the subject as
if it had some secret charm.
The individual to whom Polwarth addressed
this question, and who has been already named,
was standing with a plate in his band, in an attitude
that bespoke close attention, with a sudden and
deep interest in the discourse, though his eyes
were bent on the floor, and his face was averted
as if, while listening earnestly, he had a
particular
desire to be unnoticed. He was the owner of
the house in which Lionel had taken his quarters.
His family had been some time before removed
into the country, under the pretence of his
inability
to maintain them in a place destitute of
business
and resources like Boston; but he
remained
himself, for the double purpose of protecting
his property and serving his guests. This man
partook, in no small degree, of the qualities, both
of person and mind, which distinguish a large class
among his countrymen. In the former he was
rather over than under the middle stature; was
thin, angular, and awkward, but possessing an
unusual
proportion of sinew and bone. His eyes
were small, black, scintillating, and it was not
easy to fancy that the intelligence they manifested
was unmingled with a large proportion of shrewd
cunning. The rest of his countenance was
meager
,
sallow, and rigidly demure. Thus called
upon, on a sudden, by Polwarth for an opinion,
Seth answered, with the cautious reserve with
which he invariably delivered himself
The adjutant is an uneasy man, but that, I
suppose, is so much the better for a
light-infantry
officer. Captain Polwarth must find it
considerable
jading to keep the step, now the General
has ordered these new doings with the soldiers.
And what may be your opinion of these
doings
,
as you call them, Mr Sage, asked M`Fuse;
you who are a man of observation, should
understand
your countrymen; will they fight?
A rat will fight if the cats pen him, said Seth,
without raising his eyes from his occupation.
But do the Americans conceive themselves
to be penned?
Why, that is pretty much as people think,
captain; the country was in a great toss about
the stamps and the tea, but I always said such
folks as didn't give their notes-of-hand, and had
no great relish for any thing more than country
food, wouldn't find themselves cramped by the
laws, after all.
Then you see no great oppression in being
asked to pay your bit of a tax, master Sage,
cried the grenadier, to maintain such a worthy
fellow as myself in a dacent equipage to fight
your battles.
Why, as to that captain, I suppose we can
do pretty much the whole of our own
fighting
,
when occasion calls; though I don't think
there is much stomach for such doings among the
people, without need.
But what do you think the Committee of
Safety, and your `Sons of Liberty,' as they call
themselves, really mean, by their parades of `
minute-men
,'
their gathering of provisions,
carrying
off the cannon, and such other formidable
and appalling preparationsha! honest Seth, do
they think to frighten British soldiers with the roll
of a drum, or are they amusing themselves, like
boys in the holy days, with playing war.
I should conclude, said Seth, with
undisturbed
gravity and caution, that the people are
pretty much engaged, and in earnest.
To do what? demanded the Irishman; to
forge their own chains, that we may fetter them
in truth?
Why, seeing that they have burnt the stamps,
and thrown the tea into the harbour, returned
Seth, and since that have taken the
management
into their own hands, I should rather
conclude
that they have pretty much determined to
do what they think best.
Lionel and Polwarth laughed aloud, and the
former observed
You appear not to come to conclusions with
our host, captain M`Fuse, notwithstanding so
much is determined. Is it well understood, Mr.
Sage, that large reinforcements are coming to
the colonies, and to Boston in particular?
Why yes, returned Seth, it seems to be
pretty generally contemplated on.
And what is the result of these
contemplations
?
Seth paused a moment, as if uncertain whether
he was master of the other's meaning, before he
replied
Why, as the country is considerably engaged
in the business, there are some who think if the
ministers don't open the Port, that it will be
done without much further words by the people.
Do you know, said Lionel, gravely, that
such an attempt would lead directly to a civil
war?
I suppose it is safe to calculate that such
doings
would bring on disturbances, returned his
phlegmatic host.
And you speak of it, sir, as a thing not to be
deprecated, or averted by every possible means
in the power of the nation!
If the Port is opened and the right to tax
given up, said Seth, calmly, I can find a man
in Boston who'll engage to let them draw all the
blood that will be spilt, from his own veins, for
nothing.
And who may that redoubtable individual
be, master Sage? cried M`Fuse; your own
plethoric
person?How now, Doyle, to what am I
indebted for the honour of this visit?
This sudden question was put by the captain
of grenadiers to the orderly of his own company,
who at that instant filled the door of the
apartment
with his huge frame, in the attitude of
military respect, as if about to address his officer.
Orders have come down, sir, to parade the
men at half an hour after tattoo, and to be in
readiness for active service.
The three gentlemen rose together from their
chairs at this intelligence, while M`Fuse,
exclaimed
A
night march! Pooh! We are to be sent
back to garrison-duty I suppose; the companies
in the line grow sleepy, and wish a reliefGage
might have taken a more suitable time, than to put
gentlemen on their march so soon after such a
feast as this of yours, Polly.
There is some deeper meaning to so
extraordinary
an order, interrupted Lionel; there
VOL. I. 11
goes the tap of the tattoo, this instant! Are
no other troops but your company ordered to
parade?
The whole battalion is under the same
orders
,
your honour, and so is the battalion of
Light Infantry; I was commanded to report it
so to Capt. Polwarth, if I saw him.
This bears some meaning, gentlemen, said
Lionel, and it is necessary to be looked toif
either corps leaves the town to-night, I will
march with it as a volunteer, for it is my
business
,
just now, to examine into the state of the
country.
That we shall march to-night, is sure, your
honour, added the sergeant, with the confidence
of an old soldier; but how far, or on what road,
is known only to the officers of the Staff; though
the men think we are to go out by the colleges.
And what has put so learned an opinion in
their silly heads? demanded his captain.
One of the men who has been on leave, has
just got in, and reports that a squad of gentlemen
from the army dined near them, your honour,
and that as night set in they mounted and began
to patrole the roads in that direction. He was
met and questioned by four of them as he crossed
the flats.
All this confirms my conjectures, cried
Lionel
there
is a man who might now prove of
important serviceJobwhere is the simpleton,
Meriton?
He was called out, sir, a minute since, and
has left the house.
Then send in Mr. Sage, continued the young
man, musing as he spoke. A moment after it
was reported to him that Seth had strangely
disappeared
also.
Curiosity has led him to the barracks, said
Lionel, where duty calls you, gentlemen. I will
despatch a little business, and join you there in
an hour; you cannot march short of that time.
The bustle of a general departure succeeded;
Lionel threw his cloak into the arms of Meriton,
to whom he delivered his orders, took his arms,
and making his apologies to his guests, he left the
house with the manner of one who saw a pressing
necessity to be prompt. M`Fuse proceeded to
equip himself with the deliberation of a soldier
who was too much practised to be easily
disconcerted
.
Notwithstanding his great deliberation,
the delay of Polwarth, however, eventually
vanquished
the patience of the grenadier, who
exclaimed
,
on hearing the other repeat, for the
fourth time, an order concerning the preservation
of certain viands, to which he appeared to cling
in spirit, after a carnal separation was directed by
fortune.
Poh! poh! man, exclaimed the Irishman,
why will you bother yourself on the eve of a
march, with such epicurean propensities. It's the
soldier who should show your hermits and
anchorites
an example of mortification; besides, Polly,
this affectation of care and provision is the less
excusable
in yourself, you who have been well aware
that we were to march on a secret expedition this
very night on which you seem so much troubled.
I! exclaimed Polwarth; as I hope to eat
another meal, I am as ignorant as the meanest
corporal in the army of the whole transaction
why do you suspect otherwise?
Trifles tell the old campaigner when and
where the blow is to be struck, returned M`Fuse,
coolly drawing his military over-coat tighter to
his large frame; have I not, with my own eyes,
seen you within the hour, provision a certain
captain
of light-infantry after a very heavy fashion!
Damn it, man, do you think I have served these
five-and-twenty years, and do not know that when
a garrison begins to fill its granaries, it expects a
siege?
I have paid no more than a suitable
compliment
to the entertainment of Major Lincoln,
returned Polwarth; but so far from having had
any very extraordinary appetite, I have not found
myself in a condition to do all the justice I could
wish to several of the dishes.Mr. Meriton, I
will thank you to have the remainder of that bird
sent down to the barracks, where my man will
receive
it; and as it may be a long march, and
a hungry one, add the tongue, and a fowl, and
some of the ragout; we can warm it up at any
farm-housewe'll take the piece of beef, Mac
Leo has a particular taste for a cold cut; and you
might put up the ham, also; it will keep better
than any thing else, if we should be out longand
andI believe that will do, Meriton.
I am as much rejoiced to hear it as I should
be to hear a proclamation of war read at
Charing-Cross
,
cried M`Fuseyou should have been a
commissary, Pollynature meant you for an
army
suttler!
Laugh as you will, Mac, returned the
good-humoured
Polwarth, I shall hear your thanks
when we halt for breakfast; but I attend you now.
As they left the house, he continued, I hope
Gage means no more than to push us a little in
advance, with a view to protect the foragers and
the supplies of the armysuch a situation would
have very pretty advantages; for a system might
be established that would give the mess of the
light corps the choice of the whole market.
'Tis a mighty preparation about some old iron
gun, which would cost a man his life to put a match
to, returned M`Fuse, cavalierly; for my part,
captain Polwarth, if we are to fight these
colonists
at all, I would do the thing like a man, and
allow the lads to gather together a suitable arsenal,
that when we come to blows it may be a military
affairas it now stands, I should be ashamed, as
I am a soldier and an Irishman, to bid my fellows
pull a trigger, or make a charge, on a set of
peasants
whose fire-arms look more like rusty
waterpipes
than muskets, and who have half a dozen
cannon with touch-holes that a man may put his
head in, with muzzles just large enough to throw
marbles.
I don't know, Mac, said Polwarth, while
they diligently pursued their way towards the
quarters of their men; even a marble may
destroy
a man's appetite for his dinner; and the
countrymen possess a great advantage over us in
commanding the suppliesthe difference in
equipments
would not more than balance the odds.
I wish to disturb no gentleman's opinion on
matters of military discretion, captain Polwarth,
said the grenadier with an air of high martial
pride; but I take it there exists a material
difference
between a soldier and a butcher, though
killing be a business common to bothI repeat,
sir, I hope that this secret expedition is for a more
worthy object than to deprive those poor devils,
with whom we are about to fight, of the means of
making a good battle, and I add, sir, that such is
sound military doctrine, without regarding who
may choose to controvert it.
Your sentiments are generous and manly,
Mac; but, after all, there is both a physical and
moral obligation on every man to eat; and if
starvation
be the consequence of permitting your
enemies
to bear arms, it becomes a solemn duty to
deprive them of their weaponsnonoI will
support Gage in such a measure, at present, as
highly military.
And he is much obliged to you, sir, for your
11*
support, returned the otherI apprehend,
captain
Polwarth, whenever the
Lieutenant-General
Gage finds it necessary to lean on any
one for extraordinary assistance, he will
remember
that there is a regiment called the Royal Irish
in the country, and that he is not entirely
ignorant
of the qualities of the people of his own
nation
.You
have done well, captain Polwarth, to
choose the light-infantry servicethey are a set
of foragers, and can help themselves; but the
grenadiers
,
thank God, love to encounter men, and
not cattle in the field.
How long the good-nature of Polwarth would
have endured the increasing taunts of the
Irishman
,
who was exasperating himself, gradually, by
his own arguments, there is no possibility of
determining
,
for their arrival at the barracks put
an end to the controversy and to the feelings it
was beginning to engender.
CHAPTER VIII.
Preserve thy sighs, unthrifty girl!
To purify the air;
Thy tears, to thread, instead of pearl,
On bracelets of thy hair.
Devenent
Lionel
might have blushed to acknowledge the
secret and inexplicable influence which his
unknown
and mysterious friend, Ralph, had
obtained
over his feelings, but which induced him, on
leaving his own quarters thus hastily, to take his
way into the lower parts of the town, in quest of
the residence of Abigail Pray. He had not visited
the sombre tenement of this woman since the night
of his arrival, but its proximity to the well-known
town-hall, as well as the quaint architecture of the
building itself, had frequently brought its exterior
under his observation, in the course of his rambles
through the place of his nativity. A guide
being
,
consequently, unnecessary, he took the
most direct and frequented route to the
docksquare
.
When Lionel issued into the street, he
found a deep darkness already enveloping the
peninsula of Boston, as if nature had lent herself
to the secret designs of the British commandant.
The fine strain of a shrill fife was playing among
the naked hills of the place, accompanied by the
occasional and measured taps of the sullen drum;
and, at moments, the full, rich notes of the horns
would rise from the common, and borne on the
night-air, sweep along the narrow streets, causing
the nerves of the excited young soldier to thrill
with a stern pleasure, as he stepped proudly along.
The practised ear, however, detected no other
sounds in the music than the usual nightly signal of
rest; and when the last melting strains of the horns
seemed to be lost in the clouds, a stillness fell upon
the town, like the deep and slumbering quiet
of midnight. He paused a moment before the
gates of Province-house, and, after examining,
with an attentive eye, the windows of the
building
,
he spoke to the grenadier, who had stopped
in his short walk, to note the curious stranger.
You should have company within, sentinel,
he said, by the brilliant light from those
windows
.
The rattling of Lionel's side-arms as he pointed
with his hand in the direction of the illuminated
apartment, taught the soldier that he was
addressed
by his superior, and he answered respectfully
It does not become one such as I, to pretend
to know much of what his betters do, your honour,
but I stood before the quarters of General Wolfe
the very night we went up to the Plains of Abram;
and I think an old soldier can tell when a
movement
is at hand, without asking his superiors any
impertinent questions.
I suppose, from your remark, the General
holds a council to-night? said Lionel.
No one has gone in, sir, since I have been
posted, returned the sentinel, but the
Lieutenant-Colonel
of the 10th, that great
Northumbrian
Lord, and the old Major of marines; a great
war-dog is that old man, your honour, and it is
not often he comes to Province-house for
nothing
.
A good-night to you, my old comrade, said
Lionel, walking away; 'tis probably some
consultation
concerning the new exercises that you
practise.
The grenadier shook his head, as if
unconvinced
,
and resumed his march with his customary
steadiness. A very few minutes now brought
Lionel before the low door of Abigail Pray,
where he again stopped, struck with the contrast
between the gloomy, dark, and unguarded
threshold
over which he was about to pass, and the gay
portal he had just left. Urged, however, by his
feelings, the young man paused but a moment
before he tapped lightly for admission. After
repeating
his summons, and hearing no reply, he
lifted the latch, and entered the building without
further ceremony. The large and vacant
apartment
in which he found himself, was silent
and dreary as the still streets he had quitted.
Groping his way towards the little room in the
tower, where he had met the mother of Job, as
before related, Lionel found that apartment also
tenantless, and dark. He was turning in
disappointment
,
to quit the place, when a feeble
ray fell from the loft of the building, and
settled
on the foot of a rude ladder which formed the
means of communication with its upper
apartments
.
Hesitating a single moment how to
decide
,
he then yielded to his anxiety, and
ascended
to the floor above, with steps as light as
extreme
caution could render them. Like the
basement
,
the building was subdivided here, into a
large, open ware-room, and a small,
rudely-finished
apartment in each of its towers. Following the
rays from a candle, he stood on the threshold
of one of these little rooms, in which he found the
individual of whom he was in quest. The old man
was seated on the only broken chair which the
loft contained, and before him, on the simple
bundle
of straw which would seem, by the garments
thrown loosely over the pile, to be intended as his
place of rest, lay a large map, spread for
inspection
,
which his glazed and sunken eyes appeared
to be intently engaged in making. Lionel
hesitated
again, while he regarded the white hairs which
fell across the temples of the stranger, as he
bowed
his head in his employment, imparting a wild
and melancholy expression to his remarkable
countenance, and seeming to hallow their
possessor
by the air of great age and attendant
care that they imparted.
I have come to seek you, the young man
at length said, since you no longer deem me
worthy of your care.
You come too late, returned Ralph, without
betraying the least emotion at the suddenness of
the interruption, or even raising his eyes from the
map he studied so intently; too late at least to
avert calamity, if not to learn wisdom from its
lessons.
You know, then, of the secret movements of
the night?
Old age, like mine, seldom sleeps, returned
Ralph, looking for the first time at his visiter,
for the eternal night of death promises a speedy
repose. I too served an apprenticeship in my
youth to your trade of blood.
Your watchfulness and experience have then
detected the signs of preparation in the garrison?
Have they also discovered the objects, and
probable
consequences of the enterprise?
Both; Gage weakly thinks to crush the
germ of liberty which has already quickened in
the land, by lopping its feeble branches, when it
is rooted in the hearts of the people. He thinks
that bold thoughts can be humbled by the
destruction
of magazines.
It is then only a measure of precaution that
he is about to take?
The old man shook his head mournfully as he
answered
It will prove a measure of blood.
I intend to accompany the detachment into the
country, said Lionelit will probably take
post at some little distance in the interior, and it
will afford me a fitting opportunity to make those
inquiries which you know are so near my heart,
and in which you have promised to assistit is to
consult on the means that I have now sought you.
The countenance of the stranger seemed to lose
its character of melancholy reflection, as Lionel
spoke, and his eyes moved, vacant and
unmeaning
,
over the naked rafters above him, passing in
their wanderings across the surface of the
unheeded
map again, until they fell full upon the face of
the astonished youth, where they remained
settled
for more than a minute, fixed in the glazed,
rivetted look of death. The lips of Lionel had
already
opened in anxious inquiry, when the
expression
of life shot again into the features of
Ralph, with the suddenness, and with an
appearance
of the physical reality with which light flashes
from the sun when emerging from a cloud.
You are ill! Lionel exclaimed.
Leave me, said the old man, leave me.
Surely not at such a moment, and alone.
I bid you leave mewe shall meet as you
desire
,
in the country.
You would then have me accompany the
troops, and expect your coming?
Both.
Pardon me, said Lionel, dropping his eyes
in embarrassment, and speaking with hesitation,
but your present abode, and the appearance of
your attire, is an evidence that old age has come
upon you when you are not altogether prepared
to meet its sufferings.
You would offer me money?
By accepting it, I shall become the obliged
party.
When my wants exceed my means, young
man, your offer shall be remembered. Go, now;
there is no time for delay.
But I would not leave you alone; the woman,
the termagant is better than none?
She is absent.
And the boythe changeling has the feelings
of humanity, and would aid you in extremity.
He is better employed than in propping the
steps of a useless old man.Go then, I entreat
I command, sir, that you leave me.
The firm, if not haughty, manner in which the
other repeated his desire, taught Lionel that he
had nothing more to expect at present, and he
obeyed reluctantly, by slowly leaving the
apartment
,
and as soon as he had descended the ladder
he began to retrace his steps towards his own
quarters
.
In crossing the light draw-bridge thrown over
the narrow dock, already mentioned, his
contemplations
were first disturbed by the sounds
of voices, at no great distance, apparently
conversing
in tones that were not intended to be heard
by every ear. It was a moment when each
unusual
incident was likely to induce inquiry, and
Lionel stopped to examine two men, who, at
a little distance, held their secret and suppressed
communications. He had, however, paused but an
instant, when the whisperers separated, one
walking
leisurely up the centre of the square, entering
under one of the arches of the market-place, and
the other coming directly across the bridge on
which he himself was standing.
What, Job, do I find you here, whispering
and plotting in the dock-square! exclaimed
Lionel
;
what secrets can you have, that require
the cover of night?
Job lives there, in the old ware'us', said the
lad sullenlyNab has plenty of house room,
now the king wont let the people bring in their
goods.
But whither are you going into the water!
surely the road to your bed cannot be through
the town dock.
Nab wants fish to eat, as well as a ruff to keep
off the rain, said Job, dropping lightly from the
bridge into a small canoe, which was fastened to
one of its posts, and now the king has closed
the harbour the fish have to come up in the dark;
for come they will; Boston fish an't to be shut
out by acts of Parliament!
Poor lad! exclaimed Lionel, return to
your home and your bed; here is money to buy
food for your mother if she suffersyou will
draw a shot from some of the sentinels by going
about the harbour thus at night.
Job can see a ship farther than a ship can see
Job, returned the other; and if they should
kill Job, they need'n't think to shoot a Boston
boy without some stir.
Further dialogue was precluded; the canoe
gliding along the outer dock into the harbour,
with a stillness and swiftness that showed the idiot
was not ignorant of the business which he had
undertaken
.
Lionel resumed his walk, and was
passing
the head of the square when he encountered,
face to face, under the light of a lamp, the man
whose figure he had seen but a minute before to
VOL. I. 12
issue from beneath the town-hall. A mutual
desire
to ascertain the identity of each other drew
them together.
We meet again, Major Lincoln, said the
interesting
stranger Lionel remembered to have
seen at the political meeting. Our interviews
appear ordained to occur in secret places.
And Job Pray would seem to be the presiding
spirit, returned the young soldier. You
parted
from him but now?
I trust, sir, said the stranger gravely, that
this is not a land, nor have we fallen on times when
and where an honest man dare not say that he
has spoken to whom he pleases.
Certainly, sir, it is not for me to prohibit the
intercourse, returned Lionel. You spoke of
our fathers; mine is well known to you, it would
seem, though to me you are a stranger.
And may be so yet a little longer, said the
other, though I think the time is at hand when
men will be known in their true characters; until
then, Major Lincoln, I bid you adieu.
Without waiting for any reply, the stranger
took a different direction from that which Lionel
was pursuing, and walked away with the swiftness
of one who was pressed with urgent business.
Lionel soon ascended into the upper part of the
town, with the intention of going into
Tremont-street
,
to communicate his design to accompany
the expedition. It was now apparent to the young
man, that a rumour of the contemplated
movement
of the troops was spreading secretly, but
swiftly, among the people. He passed several
groups of earnest and excited townsmen,
conferring
together at the corners of the streets, from
some of whom he overheard the startling
intelligence
that the neck, the only approach to the
place by land, was closed by a line of sentinels;
and that guard-boats from the vessels of war, were
encircling the peninsula in a manner to intercept
the communication with the adjacent country.
Still no indications of a military alarm could be
discovered, though, at times, a stifled hum, like the
notes of busy preparation, was borne along by the
damp breezes of the night, and mingled with
those sounds of a Spring evening, which increased
as he approached the skirts of the dwellings. In
Tremont-street Lionel found no appearance of
that excitement which was spreading so rapidly in
the old and lower parts of the town. He passed
into
his own room without meeting any of the
family
,
and having completed his brief arrangements,
he was descending to inquire for his kinswomen,
when the voice of Mrs. Lechmere, proceeding
from a small apartment, appropriated to her own
use, arrested his steps. Anxious to take leave in
person, he approached the half-open door, and
would have asked permission to enter, had not his
eye rested on the person of Abigail Pray, who was
in earnest conference with the mistress of the
mansion.
A man aged, and poor, say you? observed
Mrs. Lechmere, at that instant.
And one that seems to know all, interrupted
Abigail, glancing her eyes about with an
expression
of superstitious terror.
All! echoed Mrs. Lechmere, her lip
trembling
more with apprehension than age; and
he arrived with Major Lincoln, say you?
In the same ship; and it seems that heaven
has ordained that he shall dwell with me in my
poverty, as a punishment for my great sins!
But why do you tolerate his presence, if it be
irksome, said Mrs. Lechmere; you are at least
the mistress of your own dwelling.
It has pleased God that my home shall be the
home of any who are so miserable as to need one.
He has the same right to live in the warehouse
that I have.
You have the rights of a woman, and of first
possession, said Mrs. Lechmere, with that
unyielding
severity of manner that Lionel had often
observed before; I would turn him into the
street, like a dog.
Into the street! repeated Abigail, again
looking about her in secret terror; speak lower,
madam Lechmere, for the love of heavenI dare
not even look at himhe reminds me of all I have
ever known, and of all the evil I have ever done, by
his scorching eyeand yet I cannot tell whyand
then Job worships him as a god, and if I should
offend him, he could easily worm from the child
all that you and I wish so much
How! exclaimed Mrs. Lechmere, in a voice
husky with horror, have you been so base as to
make a confident of that fool!
That fool is the child of my bosom, said
Abigail, raising her hands, as if imploring
pardon
for the indiscretion.Ah! madam
Lechmere
,
you who are rich, and great, and happy, and
have such a sweet and sensible grandchild,
cannot
know how to love one like Job; but when
the heart is loaded and heavy, it throws its
burden
on any that will bear it; and Job is my child,
though he is but little better than an ideot!
It was by no trifling exertion of his breeding
that Lionel was enabled to profit by the inability
of Mrs. Lechmere to reply, and to turn away
from the spot, and cease to listen to a
conversation
that was not intended for his ear. He
reached the parlour, and threw himself on one
of its settees before he was conscious that he was
no longer alone or unobserved.
What! Major Lincoln returned from his
revels thus early, and armed like a bandit, to
his teeth! exclaimed the playful voice of Cecil
Dynevor, who, unheeded, was in possession of the
opposite seat, when he entered the room.
Lionel started, and rubbed his forehead, like a
man awaking from a dream, as he answered
Yes, a bandit, or any other opprobrious name
you please; I deserve them all.
Surely, said Cecil, turning pale, none
other dare use such language of Major Lincoln,
and he does it unjustly!
What foolish nonsense have I uttered, Miss
Dynevor? cried Lionel, recovering his
recollection
;
I was lost in thought, and heard your
language without comprehending its meaning.
Still you are armed; a sword is not a usual
instrument at your side, and now you bear even
pistols!
Yes, returned the young soldier, laying aside
his dangerous implements; yes, I am about to
march as a volunteer, with a party that go into
the country to-night, and I take these because I
would affect something very warlike, though you
well know how peaceably I am disposed.
March into the countryand in the dead of
night! said Cecil, catching her breath, and
turning
paleAnd does Lionel Lincoln volunteer
on such a duty?
I volunteer to perform no other duty than to
be a witness of whatever may occuryou are not
more ignorant yourself of the nature of the
expedition
than I am at this moment.
Then remain where you are, said Cecil,
firmly, and enlist not in an enterprise that may
be unholy in its purposes, and disgraceful in its
results.
Of the former I am innocent, whatever they
may be, nor will they be affected by my presence
12*
or absence. There is little danger of disgrace in
accompanying the grenadiers and light-infantry
of this army, Miss Dynevor, though it should be
against treble their numbers of chosen troops.
Then it would seem, said Agnes Danforth,
speaking as she entered the room, that our
friend Mercury, that feather of a man, captain
Polwarth
,
is to be one of these night depredators!
heaven shield the hen-roosts!
You have then heard the intelligence, Agnes?
I have heard that men are arming, and that
boats are rowing round the town in all directions,
and that it is forbidden to enter or quit Boston,
as we were wont to do, Cecil, at such hours and
in such fashion as suited us plain Americans,
said Agnes, endeavouring to conceal her deep
vexation in affected ironyGod only can tell
in what all these oppressive measures will end.
If you go only as a curious spectator of the
depredations of the troops, continued Cecil,
are you not wrong to lend them even the
sanction
of your name?
I have yet to learn that there will be
depredations
.
You forget, Cecil, interrupted Agnes
Danforth
,
scornfully, that Major Lincoln did not
arrive
until after the renowned march from
Roxbury
to Dorchester! Then the troops gathered
their laurels under the face of the sun; but it
is easy to conceive how much more glorious
their achievements will become when darkness
shall conceal their blushes!
The blood rushed across the fine features of
Lionel, but he laughed as he arose to depart,
saying
You compel me to beat the retreat, my
spirited
coz. If I have my usual fortune in this
forage, your larder, however, shall be the better
for it. I kiss my hand to you, for it would be
necessary
to lay aside the scarlet to dare to approach
with a more peaceable offering. But here I may
make an approach to something like amity.
He took the hand of Cecil, who frankly met
his offer, and insensibly suffered herself to be led
to the door of the building while he continued
speaking.
I would, Lincoln, that you were not to go,
she said, when they stopped on the threshold
it is not required of you as a soldier; and as a
man your own feelings should teach you to be
tender of your countrymen.
It is as a man that I go, Cecil, he answered;
I have motives that you cannot suspect.
And is your absence to be long?
If not for days, my object will be
unaccomplished
;
but he added, pressing her hand gently,
you cannot doubt my willingness to return when
occasion may offer.
Go, then, said Cecil, hastily, and perhaps
unconsciously extricating herselfgo, if you
have secret reasons for your conduct; but
remember
that the acts of every officer of your rank are
keenly noted.
Do you then distrust me, Cecil!
NonoI distrust no one, Major Lincoln
gogoandandwe shall see you, Lionel,
the instant you return.
He had not time to reply, for she glided into
the building so rapidly as to give the young man
an opportunity only to observe, that instead of
rejoining her cousin, her light form passed up the
great stairs with the swiftness and grace of a fairy.
CHAPTER IX.
Hang out our banners on the outward walls;
The cry is still,
They come
.
Macbeth
.
Lionel
had walked from the dwelling of Mrs.
Lechmere to the foot of Beacon-Hill, and had
even toiled up some part of the steep ascent,
before
he recollected why he was thus wandering
by himself at that unusual hour. Hearing,
however
,
no sounds that denoted an immediate
movement
of the troops, he then yielded, unconsciously,
to the nature of his sensations, which just at that
moment rendered his feelings jealous of
communication
with others, and continued to ascend
until
he gained the summit of the eminence. From
this elevated stand he paused to contemplate the
scene which lay in the obscurity of night at his
feet, while his thoughts returned from the flattering
anticipations in which he had been indulging, to
consider the more pressing business of the hour.
There arose from the town itself a distant
buzzing, like the hum of suppressed agitation, and
lights were seen to glide along the streets, or flit
across the windows, in a manner which denoted
that a knowledge of the expedition had become
general within its dwellings. Lionel turned his
head toward the common, and listened long and
anxiously, but in vain, to detect a single sound
that could betray any unusual stir among the
soldiery
.
Towards the interior, the darkness of night
had fallen heavily, dimming the amphitheatre of
hills that encircled the place, and enshrouding
the vales and lowlands between them and the
water
with an impenetrable veil of gloom. There
were moments, indeed, when he imagined he
overheard
some indications among the people of the
opposite shore that they were apprised of the
impending
descent, but on listening more attentively,
the utmost of which his ear could assure him,
was the faint lowing of cattle from the meadows,
or the plash of oars from a line of boats, which, by
stretching far along the shores, told both the
nature
and the extent of the watchfulness that was
deemed necessary for the occasion.
While Lionel stood thus, on the margin of the
little platform of earth that had been formed by
levelling the apex of the natural cone, musing on
the probable results of the measure his superiors
had been resolving to undertake, a dim light shed
itself along the grass, and glancing upward, danced
upon the beacon with strong and playful rays.
Scoundrel! exclaimed a man, springing from
his place of concealment, at the foot of the post,
and encountering him face to face, do you dare
to fire the beacon?
I would answer by asking how you dare to
apply so rude an epithet to me, did I not see the
cause of your error, said Lionel. The light is
from yonder moon, which is just emerging from
the ocean.
Ah! I see my error, returned his rough
assailant
by
heavens, I would have sworn at first,
'twas the beacon.
You must then believe in the traditional
witchcraft of this country, for nothing short of
necromancy
could have enabled me to light those
combustibles at this distance.
I don't know; 'tis a strange people we have
got amongstthey stole the cannon from the
gunhouse
here, a short time since, when I would have
said the thing was impossible. It was before your
arrival, sir; for I now believe I address myself to
Major Lincoln, of the 27th.
You are nearer the truth, this time, than in
your first conjecture as to my character, said
Lionel; but have I met one of the gentlemen of
our mess?
The stranger now explained that he was a
subaltern
in a different regiment, but that he well
knew the person of the other. He added that he
had been ordered to watch on the hill to prevent
any of the inhabitants lighting the beacon, or
making any other signal which might convey into
the country a knowledge of the contemplated
inroad
.
This matter wears a more serious aspect than
I had supposed, returned Lionel, when the young
man had ended his apologies and explanation;
the commander-in-chief must intend more than
we are aware of, by employing officers in this
manner, to do the duties of privates.
We poor subs know but little, and care less
what he means, cried the ensign; though I will
acknowledge that I can see no sufficient reason
why British troops should put on coats of darkness
to march against a parcel of guessing, canting,
countrymen, who would run at the sight of their
uniforms under a bright sun. Had I my will,
the tar above us, there, should blaze a mile high,
to bring down the heroes from Connecticut river;
the dogs would cow before two full companies of
grenadiersha! listen, sir; there they go, now,
the pride of our army! I know them by their
heavy tread.
Lionel did listen attentively, and plainly
distinguished
the measured step of a body of disciplined
men, moving rapidly across the common, as if
marching towards the water-side. Hastily bidding
his companion good-night, he threw himself over
the brow of the hill, and taking the direction of
the sounds, he arrived at the shore at the same
instant
with the troops. Two dark masses of
human
bodies were halted in order, and as Lionel
skirted the columns, his experienced eye judged
that the force collected before him, could be but
little short of a thousand men. A group of officers
was clustered on the beach, and he approached
it, rightly supposing that it was gathered about
the leader of the party. This officer proved to
be the Lieutenant-Colonel of the 10th, who was
in close conversation with the old Major of
Marines
,
alluded to by the sentinel who stood before
the gates of Province-house. To the former of
these the young soldier addressed himself,
demanding
leave to accompany the detachment as a
volunteer. After a few words of explanation, his
request was granted, though each forbore to touch
in the slightest manner on the secret objects of the
expedition.
Lionel now found his groom, who had followed
the troops with his master's horses, and after
giving
his orders to the man, he proceeded in quest
of his friend Polwarth, who he soon discovered,
posted in all the stiffness of military exactness, at
the head of the leading platoon of the column of
light-infantry. As it was apparent, both from the
position they occupied, as well as by the boats that
had been collected at the point, that the
detachment
was not to leave the peninsula by its ordinary
channel of communication with the country, there
remained no alternative but to await patiently the
order to embark. The delay was but short, and,
as the most perfect order was observed, the troops
were soon seated, and the boats pulled heavily
from the land, just as the rays of the moon, which
had been sometime playing among the hills, and
gilding the spires of the town, diffused
themselves
softly over the bay, and lighted the busy
scene, with an effect not unlike the sudden rising
of the curtain at the opening of some interesting
drama. Polwarth had established himself by the
side of Lionel, much to the ease of his limbs, and
as they moved slowly into the light, all those
misgivings
which had so naturally accompanied his
musings on the difficulties of a partisan irruption,
vanished before the loveliness of the time, and
possibly before the quietude of the action.
There are moments when I could fancy the
life of a sailor, he said, leaning indolently back,
and playing with one hand in the waterthis
pulling about in boats is easy work, and must be
capital assistance for a heavy digestion, inasmuch
as it furnishes air with as little violent exercise as
may-beyour marine should lead a merry life
of it!
They are said to murmur at the clashing of
their duties with those of the sea-officers, said
Lionel; and I have often heard them complain of
a want of room to make use of their legs.
Humph! ejaculated Polwarth; the leg is
a part of a man for which I see less actual
necessity
than for any other portion of his frame. I
often think there has been a sad mistake in the
formation of the animal; as, for instance, one
can be a very good waterman, as you see,
without
legsa good fiddler, a first-rate tailor, a
lawyer
,
a doctor, a parson, a very tolerable cook, and
in short, any thing but a dancing master. I see
no use in a leg unless it be to have the goutat
any rate, a leg of twelve inches is as good as one
a mile long, and the saving might be appropriated
to the nobler parts of the animal; such as the brain
and the stomach.
You forget the officer of light-infantry, said
Lionel, laughing.
You might give him a couple of inches more;
though, as every thing in this wicked world, is
excellent
only by comparison, it would amount to the
same thing, and on my system a man would be
just as fit for the light-infantry without, as with
legs; and he would get rid of a good deal of
troublesome
manuvring, especially of this new
exercise
.
It would then become a delightful
service
,
Leo; for it may be said to monopolize all the
poetry of military life, as you may see. Neither
the imagination nor the body can require more
than we enjoy at this moment, and of what use, I
would ask, are our legs? if any thing, they are
incumbrances
in this boat. Here we have a soft
moon, and softer seatssmooth water, and a
stimulating
airon one side a fine country, which,
though but faintly seen, is known to be fertile,
and rich to abundance; and on the other a
picturesque
town, stored with the condiments of
every climateeven those rascally privates look
mellowed by the moon-beams, with their scarlet
coats and glittering arms! Did you meet Miss
Danforth in your visit to Tremont-street, Major
Lincoln?
That pleasure was not denied me.
Knew she of these martial proceedings?
There was something exceedingly belligerent
in her humour.
Spoke she of the light-infantry, or of any who
serve in the light corps?
Your name was certainly mentioned,
returned
VOL. I. 13
Lionel, a little drylyshe intimated that the
hen-roosts were in danger.
Ah! she is a girl of a million! her very
acids are sweet! the spices were not forgotten
when the dough of her composition was mixed;
would that she were herefive minutes of
moon-shine
to a man in love is worth a whole summer
of a broiling sun'twould be a master-stroke to
entice her into one of our picturesque marches;
your partisan is the man to take every thing by
surprisewomen and fortifications! Where now
are your companies of the line; your artillery
and dragoons; your engineers and staff!
night-capped
and snoring to a man, while we enjoy here
the very dessert of existenceI wish I could hear
a nightingale!
You have a solitary whip-poor-will whistling
his notes, as if in lamentation at our approach.
Too dolorous, and by far too monotonous;
'tis like eating pig for a month. But why are our
fifes asleep?
The precautions of a whole day should
hardly
be defeated by the tell-tale notes of our music,
said Lionel; your spirits get the better of your
discretion. I should think the prospect of a
fatiguing
march would have lowered your vein.
A fico for fatigue! exclaimed Polwarth
we only go out to take a position at the colleges
to cover our supplieswe are for school, Leo
only fancy the knapsacks of the men to be satchels,
humour my folly, and you may believe yourself
once more a boy.
The spirits of Polwarth had indeed undergone
a sudden change, when he found the sad
anticipations
which crossed his mind on first hearing of a
night inroad, so agreeably disappointed by the
comfortable situation he occupied; and he
continued
conversing in the manner described, until
the boats reached an unfrequented point that
projected a little way into that part of the Bay
which washed the western side of the peninsula of
Boston. Here the troops landed, and were again
formed with all possible despatch. The company
of Polwarth was posted, as before, at the head of
the column of light-infantry, and an officer of the
staff riding a short distance in front, it was
directed
to follow his movements. Lionel ordered his
groom to take the route of the troops with the
horses, and placing himself once more by the side
of the captain, they proceeded at the appointed
signal.
Now for the shades of old Harvard! said
Polwarth, pointing towards the humble buildings
of the university; you shall feast this night on
reason, while I will make a more subha! what
can that blind quarter-master mean by taking this
direction! Does he not see that the meadows are
half covered with water!
Move on, move on with the light-infantry,
cried the stern voice of the old major of marines,
who rode but a short distance in their rear. Do
you falter at the sight of water!
We are not wharf-rats, said Polwarth.
Lionel seized him by the arm, and before the
disconcerted captain had time to recollect
himself
,
he was borne through a wide pool of
stagnant
water, mid-leg deep.
Do not let your romance cost your
commission
,
said the major, as Polwarth floundered
out of his difficulties; here is an incident at
once for your private narrative of the campaign.
Ah! Leo, said the captain, with a sort of
comical sorrow, I fear we are not to court the
muses by this hallowed moon to-night!
You can assure yourself of that, by observing
that we leave the academical roofs on our left
our leaders take the high-way.
They had by this time extricated themselves
from the meadows, and were moving on a road
which led into the interior.
You had better order up your groom, and
mount, Major Lincoln, said Polwarth, sullenly;
a man need husband his strength, I see.
'Twould be folly now; I am wet, and must
walk for safety.
With the departure of Polwarth's spirits the
conversation began to flag, and the gentlemen
continued their march with only such occasional
communications as arose from the passing
incidents
of their situation. It very soon became
apparent
,
both by the direction given to the columns,
as well as by the hurried steps of their guide, that
the march was to be forced, as well as of some
length. But as the air was getting cool, even
Polwarth
was not reluctant to warm his chilled blood
by more than ordinary exertion. The columns
opened for the sake of ease, and each man was
permitted to consult his own convenience,
provided
he preserved his appointed situation, and kept
even pace with his comrades. In this manner the
detachment advanced swiftly, a general silence
pervading the whole, as the spirits of the men
settled into that deep sobriety which denotes
much earnestness of purpose. At first the whole
country appeared buried in a general sleep, but
as they proceeded, the barking of the dogs, and
the tread of the soldiery, drew the inhabitants of
the farm-houses to their windows, who gazed in
mute wonder at the passing spectacle, across
which the mellow light of the moon cast a glow
of brilliancy. Lionel had turned his head from
studying the surprise depicted in the faces of
the members of one of these disturbed families,
when the deep tones of a distant church-bell
came sweeping down the valley in which they
marched, ringing peel on peel, in the quick,
spirit-stirring
sounds of an alarm. The men raised
their heads in wondering attention, as they
advanced
;
but it was not long before the reports of
fire-arms were heard echoing among the hills, and
bell began to answer bell in every direction, until
the sounds blended with the murmurs of the
night-air
,
or were lost in distance. The whole country
was now filled with every organ of sound that the
means of the people furnished, or their ingenuity
could devise, to call the population to arms. Fires
blazed along the heights, the bellowing of the
conchs and horns, mingled with the rattling of the
muskets and the varied tones of the bells, while
the swift clattering of horses' hoofs began to be
heard, as if their riders were dashing furiously
along the flanks of the party.
Push on, gentlemen, push on, shouted the
old veteran of marines, amid the din. The
Yankees have awoke, and are stirringwe have
yet a long road to journeypush on,
light-infantry
,
the grenadiers are on your heels!
The advance quickened their steps, and the
whole body pushed for their unknown object with
as much rapidity as the steadiness of military
array would admit. In this manner the
detachment
continued to proceed for some hours,
without
halting, and Lionel imagined that they had
advanced several leagues into the country. The
sounds of the alarm had now passed away, having
swept far inland, until the faintest evidence of its
existence was lost to the ear, though the noise of
horsemen, riding furiously along the by-ways,
yet denoted that men were still hurrying past
them, to the scene of the expected strife. As the
deceitful light of the moon was blending with
the truer colours of day, the welcome sound
of `halt!' was passed from the rear up to the
head of the column of light-infantry.
15*
Halt! repeated Polwarth, with instinctive
readiness, and with a voice that sent the order
through the whole length of their extended line;
halt, and let the rear close; if my judgment in
walking be worth so much as an anchovy, they
are some miles behind us, by this time! a man
needs to have crossed his race with the blood of
Flying Childers for this sort of work! The next
command should be to break our fastsTom,
you brought the trifles I sent you from Major
Lincoln's quarters?
Yes, Sir, returned his man; they are on
the Major's horses, in the rear, as
The Major's horses in the rear, you ass, when
food is in such request in the front! I wonder,
Leo, if a mouthful couldn't be picked up in yon
farm-house?
Pick yourself off that stone, and make the
men dress; here is Pitcairn closing to the front
with the whole battalion.
Lionel had hardly spoken before an order was
passed to the light-infantry to look to their arms,
and for the grenadiers to prime and load. The
presence of the veteran who rode in front of
the column, and the hurry of the moment,
suppressed
the complaints of Polwarth, who was in
truth an excellent officer as it respected what he
himself termed the `quiescent details of service.'
Three or four companies of the light-corps were
detached from the main body, and formed in
the open marching order of their exercise, when
the old marine, placing himself at their head, gave
forth the order to advance again at a quick step.
The road now led into a vale, and at some
distance
a small hamlet of houses was dimly seen
through the morning haze, clustered around one
of the humble, but decent temples, so common
in Massachusetts. The halt, and the brief
preparations
that succeeded, had excited a
powerful
interest in the whole of the detachment, who
pushed earnestly forward, keeping on the heels
of the charger of their veteran leader, as he
passed
over the ground at a small trot. The air
partook of the scent of morning, and the eye
was enabled to dwell distinctly on surrounding
objects, quickening, aided by the excitement of
the action, the blood of the men who had been
toiling throughout the night in uncertain
obscurity
along an unknown, and, apparently,
interminable
road. Their object now seemed before them
and attainable, and they pressed forward to
achieve it in animated but silent earnestness.
The plain architecture of the church and of its
humble companions had just become distinct,
when three or four armed horsemen were seen
attempting to anticipate their arrival, by crossing
the head of the column, from a by-path.
Come in, cried an officer of the staff in front,
come in, or quit the place.
The men turned, and rode briskly off, one of
their party flashing his piece in a vain attempt to
give the alarm. A low mandate was now passed
through the ranks to push on, and in a few
moments
they entered on a full view of the hamlet,
the church, and the little green on which it stood.
The forms of men were seen moving swiftly across
the latter, as a roll of a drum broke from the spot;
and there were glimpses of a small body of
countrymen
,
drawn up in the affectation of military
parade.
Push on, light-infantry! cried their leader,
spurring his horse, and advancing with the staff
at so brisk a trot, as to disappear round an angle
of the church.
Lionel pressed forward with a beating heart
for a crowd of horrors rushed across his
imagination
at the moment, when the stern voice of the
major of marines was again heard, shouting
Disperse, ye rebels, disperse!throw down
your arms, and disperse!
These memorable words were instantly
followed
by the reports of pistols, and the fatal
mandate
of `fire!' when a loud shout arose from the
whole body of the soldiery, who rushed upon the
open green, and threw in a close discharge on all
before them.
Great God! exclaimed Lionel, what is it
you do? ye fire at unoffending men! is there no
law but force! beat up their pieces, Polwarth
stop their fire.
Halt! cried Polwarth, brandishing his sword
fiercely among his men; come to an order, or
I'll fell ye to the earth.
But the excitement which had been gathering
to a head for so many hours, and the animosity
which had so long been growing between the
troops and the people, were not to be repressed at
a word. It was only when Pitcairn himself rode
in among the soldiers, and, aided by his officers,
beat down their arms, that the uproar was
gradually
quelled, and something like order was
again restored. Before this was effected,
however
,
a few scattering shot were thrown back
from their flying adversaries, though without
material
injury to the British.
When the firing had ceased, officers and men
stood gazing at each other for a few moments, as
if even they could foresee some of the mighty
events which were to follow the deeds of that hour.
The smoke slowly arose, like a lifted veil from
the green, and mingling with the fogs of morning,
drove heavily across the country, as if to
communicate
the fatal intelligence that the final appeal
to arms had been made. Every eye was bent
inquiringly on the fatal green, and Lionel beheld,
with a feeling allied to anguish, a few men at a
distance
,
writhing and struggling in their wounds,
while some five or six bodies lay stretched upon
the grass, in the appalling quiet of death.
Sickening
at the sight, he turned, and walked away by
himself, while the remainder of the troops,
alarmed
by the reports of the arms, were eagerly
pressing
up from the rear to join their comrades.
Unwittingly
he approached the church, nor did he
awake from the deep abstraction into which he
had fallen, until he was aroused by the
extraordinary
spectacle of Job Pray, issuing from the
edifice
with an air in which menace was
singularly
blended with resentment and fear. The
changeling pointed earnestly to the body of a man,
who, having been wounded, had crept for refuge
near to the door of the temple in which he had so
often worshipped that being to whom he had been
thus hurriedly sent to render his last and great
account, and said solemnly
You have killed one of God's creatures; and
he'll remember it!
I would it were one only, said Lionel;
but they are many, and none can tell where the
carnage is to cease.
Do you think, said Job, looking furtively
around to assure himself that no other
overheard
him, that the king can kill men in the
Bay-colony as he can in London? They'll take
this up in old Funnel, and 'twill ring again, from
the north-end to the Neck.
What can they do, boy, after all, said
Lionel
,
forgetting at the moment that he whom he
addressed
had been denied the reason of his kind
the power of Britain is too mighty for these
scattered and unprepared colonies to cope with
and prudence would tell the people to desist from
resistance while yet they may.
Does the king believe there is more prudence
in London than there is in Boston? returned
the simpleton; he needn't think, because the
people were quiet at the massacre, there'll be no
stir about thisyou have killed one of God's
creatures, added the lad, and he'll
remember
it!
How came you here, sirrah? demanded
Lionel
,
suddenly recollecting himself; did you not
tell me that you were going out to fish for your
mother.
And if I did, returned the other, sullenly,
an't there fish in the ponds as well as in the
bay, and can't Nab have a fresh taste?Job don't
know there is any act of Parliament ag'in taking
brook trout.
Fellow, you are attempting to deceive me!
Some one is practising on your ignorance, and
knowing you to be a fool, is employing you on
errands that may one day cost your life.
The king can't send Job on a'r'nds, said
the lad proudly; for there is no law for it, and
Job wont go.
Your knowledge will undo you, simpleton
who should teach you these niceties of the law?
Why, do you think the Boston people so
dumb as not to know the law! asked Job, with
unfeigned astonishmentand Ralph, toohe
knows as much law as the kinghe told me
it was ag'in all law to shoot at the minute-men,
unless they fired first, because the colony has
a right to train whenever it pleases.
Ralph! said Lionel, eagerlycan Ralph
be with you, then! 'tis impossible; I left him ill,
and at homeneither would he mingle in such
a business as this, at his years.
I expect Ralph has seen bigger armies than
the light-infantry, and grannies, and all the
soldiers
left in town put together, said Job,
evasively
.
Lionel was far too generous to practise on the
simplicity of his companion, with a view to extract
any secret which might endanger his liberty, but
he felt a deep concern in the welfare of a young
man who had been thrown in his way in the
manner
already related. He therefore pursued the
subject, with the double design to advise Job
against any dangerous connexions, and to relieve
his own anxiety on the subject of the aged
stranger
.
But to all his interrogatories the lad
answered
guardedly, and with a discretion which
denoted
that he possessed no small share of cunning,
though a higher order of intellect had been
denied
him.
I repeat to you, said Lionel, losing his
patience, that it is important for me to meet
the man you call Ralph in the country, and I
wish to know if he is to be seen near here.
Ralph scorns a lie, returned Jobgo
where he promised to meet you, and see if he
don't come.
But no place was namedand this unhappy
event may embarrass him, or frighten him
Frighten him! repeated Job, shaking his
head with solemn earnestness; you can't frighten
Ralph!
His daring may prove his misfortune. Boy,
I ask you for the last time whether the old
man
Perceiving Job to shrink back timidly, and
lower in his looks, Lionel paused, and casting a
glance behind him, beheld the captain of
grenadiers
standing with folded arms, silently
contemplating
the body of the American.
Will you have the goodness to explain to me,
Major Lincoln, said the captain, when he
perceived
himself observed, why this man lies here
dead?
You see the wound in his breast?
It is a palpable and baistly truth that he has
been shotbut why, or with what design?
I must leave that question to be answered by
our superiors, captain M`Fuse, returned Lionel.
It is, however, rumoured that the expedition is
out to seize certain magazines of provisions and
arms, which the colonists have been collecting, it
is feared, with hostile intentions.
I had my own sagacious thoughts that we
were bent on some such glorious errand! said
M`Fuse, with strong contempt expressed in his
hard features. Tell me, Major Lincolnyou
are certainly but a young soldier, though, being of
the staff, you should knowdoes Gage think we
can have a war with the arms and ammunition
all on one side? We have had a long p'ace,
Major
Lincoln, and now when there is a small
prospect
of some of the peculiarities of our profession
arising, we are commanded to do the very thing
which is most likely to def'ate the object of war.
I do not know that I rightly understand you,
sir, said Lionel; there can be but little glory
gained by such troops as we possess, in a contest
with the unarmed and undisciplined inhabitants of
any country.
Exactly my maining, sir; it is quite obvious
that we understand each other thoroughly,
without
a world of circumlocution. The lads are
doing
very well at present, and if left to themselves
a few months longer, it may become a creditable
affair. You know, as well as I do, Major
Lincoln
,
that time is necessary to make a soldier,
and if they are hurried into the business, you
might as well be chasing a mob up Ludgate hill,
for the honour you will gain. A discrate officer
would nurse this little matter, instead of resorting
to such precipitation. To my id'a'a's, sir, the
man before us has been butchered, and not slain
in honourable battle!
There is much reason to fear that others may
use the same term in speaking of the affair,
returned
Lionel; God knows how much cause
we may have to lament the death of the poor
man!
On that topic, the man may be said to have
gone through a business that was to be done, and is
not to be done over again, said the captain very
coolly, and therefore his death can be no very
great calamity to himself, whatever it may be to
us. If these minute-men, and as they stand but
minute they 'arn their name like worthy fellows
if these minute-men, sir, stood in your way,
you should have whipped them from the green
with your ramrods.
Here is one who may tell you that they are
not to be treated like children either, said
Lionel
,
turning to the place which had been so
recently
occupied by Job Pray, but which, to his
surprise, he now found vacant. While he was
yet looking around him, wondering whither the
lad could so suddenly have withdrawn, the drums
beat the signal to form, and a general bustle
among the soldiery, showed them to be on the
eve of further movements. The two gentlemen
instantly rejoined their companions, walking
thoughtfully towards the troops, though
influenced
by such totally different views of the recent
transactions.
During the short halt of the advance, the whole
detachment was again united, and a hasty meal
had been taken. The astonishment which
succeeded
VOL. I. 14
the rencontre, had given place, among
the officers, to a military pride, capable of
sustaining
them in much more arduous
circumstances
.
Even the ardent looks of professional
excitement
were to be seen in most of their countenances,
as with glittering arms, waving banners, and
timing their march to the enlivening music of their
band, they wheeled from the fatal spot, and
advanced
again, with proud and measured steps, along
the highway. If such was the result of the first
encounter on the lofty and tempered spirits of the
gentlemen of the detachment, its effect on the
common hirelings in the ranks, was still more
palpable
and revolting. Their coarse jests, and
taunting
looks, as they moved by the despised victims
of their disciplined skill, together with the fierce
and boastful expression of brutal triumph, which
so many among them betrayed, exhibited the
infallible
evidence, that having tasted of blood, they
were now ready, like tigers, to feed on it till they
were glutted.
CHAPTER X.
There was mounting 'mong Grmes of the Netherby clan;
Fosters, Fenwicks, and Musgraves, they rode and they ran;
There was racing, and chasing, on Cannobie Lea.
Marmion
.
The
pomp of military parade with which the
troops marched from the village of Lexington,
as the little hamlet was called, where the
foregoing
events occurred, soon settled again into the
sober and business-like air of men earnestly bent
on the achievement of their object. It was no
longer a secret that they were to proceed two
leagues further into the interior, to destroy the
stores already mentioned, and which were now
known to be collected at Concord, the town where
the Congress of Provincial Delegates, who were
substituted by the colonists for the ancient
legislatures
of the Province, held their meetings. As the
march could not now be concealed, it became
necessary
to resort to expedition, in order to ensure
its successful termination. The veteran officer of
marines, so often mentioned, resumed his post in
front, and at the head of the same companies of
the light corps which he had before led, pushed
in advance of the heavier column of the grenadiers.
Polwarth, by this arrangement, perceived himself
again included among those on whose swiftness of
foot so much depended. When Lionel rejoined
his friend he found him at the head of his men,
marching with so grave an air, as at once induced
the Major to give him credit for regrets much
more commendable than such as were connected
with his physical distress. The files were once
more opened for room, as well as for air, which
was becoming necessary, as a hot sun began to
dissipate the mists of the morning, and shed that
enervating influence on the men so peculiar to the
first warmth of an American Spring.
This has been a hasty business altogether,
Major Lincoln, said Polwarth, as Lionel took
his wonted station at the side of the other, and
dropped mechanically into the regular step of
the partyI know not that it is quite as lawful
to knock a man in the head as a bullock.
You then agree with me in thinking our
attack
hasty, if not cruel?
Hasty! most unequivocally. Haste may be
called the distinctive property of the expedition;
and whatever destroys the appetite of an honest
man, may be set down as cruel. I have not been
able to swallow a mouthful of breakfast, Leo. A
man must have the cravings of a hyena, and the
stomach of an ostrich, to eat and digest with such
work as this of ours before his eyes.
And yet the men regard their acts with
triumph!
The dogs are drilled into it. But you saw
how sober the Provincials looked in the matter;
we must endeavour to sooth their feelings in the
best manner we can.
Will they not despise our consolation and
apologies
,
and look rather to themselves for redress
and vengeance?
Polwarth smiled contemptuously, and there was
an air of pride about him that gave an appearance
of elasticity even to his heavy tread, as he
answered
The thing is a bad thing, Major Lincoln, and,
if you will, a wicked thingbut take the assurance
of a man who knows the country well, there will
be no attempts at vengeance; and as for redress,
in a military way, the thing is impossible.
You speak with a confidence, sir, that should
find its warranty in an intimate acquaintance with
the weakness of the people.
I have dwelt two years, Major Lincoln, in
the very heart of the country, said Polwarth,
without turning his eyes from the steady gaze he
maintained on the long road which lay before
him, even three hundred miles beyond the
inhabited
districts; and I should know the
character
of the nation, as well as its resources. In
respect
to the latter, there is no esculent thing
within its borders, from a humming-bird to a
buffalo, or from an artichoke to a
water-melon
,
that I have not, on some occasion or other,
had tossed up, in a certain waytherefore, I can
speak with confidence, and do not hesitate to say,
that the colonists will never fight; nor, if they
had the disposition, do they possess the means to
maintain a war.
Perhaps, sir, returned Lionel sharply, you
have consulted the animals of the country too
closely to be acquainted with its spirits?
The relation between them is intimatetell
me what food a man diets on, and I will furnish
you with his character. 'Tis morally impossible
that a people who eat their pudding before the
meats, after the fashion of these colonists, can
ever make good soldiers, because the appetite is
14*
appeased before the introduction of the succulent
nutriment of the flesh, into
Enough! spare me the remainder,
interrupted
Lioneltoo much has been said already to
prove the inferiority of the American to the
European
animal, and your reasoning is conclusive.
Parliament must do something for the
families
of the sufferers.
Parliament! echoed Lionel, with bitter
emphasis
;
yes, we shall be called on to pass
resolutions
to commend the decision of the General,
and the courage of the troops; and then, after
we have added every possible insult to the injury,
under the conviction of our imaginary supremacy,
we may hear of some paltry sum to the widows and
orphans, cited as an evidence of the unbounded
generosity of the nation!
The feeding of six or seven broods of young
Yankees is no such trifle, Major Lincoln,
returned
Polwarth; and there I trust the
unhappy
affair will end. We are now marching on
Concord, a place with a most auspicious name,
where we shall find repose under its shadow, as
well as the food of this home-made parliament,
which they have gotten together. These
considerations
alone support me under the fatigue of
this direful trot with which old Pitcairn goes
over the grounddoes the man think he is
hunting
with a pack of beagles at his heels!
The opinion expressed by his companion,
concerning
the martial propensities of the Americans,
was one too common among the troops to excite
any surprise in Lionel, but disgusted with the
illiberality
of the sentiment, and secretly offended at
the supercilious manner with which the other
expressed
these injurious opinions of his countrymen,
he continued his route in silence, while Polwarth
speedily lost his loquacious propensity, in a sense
of the fatigue that assailed every muscle and
joint in his body.
That severe training of the corps, concerning
which the captain vented such frequent
complaints
,
now stood the advance in good service.
It was apparent that the whole country was in a
state of high alarm, and small bodies of armed
men were occasionally seen on the heights that
flanked their route, though no attempts were
made to revenge the deaths of those who fell at
Lexington. The march of the troops was
accelerated
rather with a belief that the colonists
might remove, or otherwise secrete the stores,
than from any apprehension that they would
dare to oppose the progress of the chosen troops
of the army. The slight resistance of the
Americans
in the rencontre of that morning, was
already
a jest among the soldiers, who
sneeringly
remarked, that the term of minute-men, was
deservedly applied to warriors who had proved
themselves so dexterous at flight. In short, every
opprobrious and disrespectful epithet that
contempt
and ignorance could invent, were freely
lavished on the forbearing mildness of the
suffering
colonists. In this temper the troops reached
a point whence the modest spire and roofs of
Concord became visible. A small body of the
colonists retired through the place as the English
advanced, and the detachment entered the town
without the least resistance, and with the
appearance
of conquerors. Lionel was not long in
discovering
from such of the inhabitants as
remained
,
that, notwithstanding their approach had been
known for some time, the events of that
morning
were yet a secret from the people of the
village
.
Detachments from the light corps were
immediately sent in various directions; some to
search for the ammunition and provisions, and
some to guard the approaches to the place. One,
in particular, followed the retreating footsteps
of the Americans, and took post at a bridge,
at some little distance, which cut off the
communication
with the country to the northward.
In the meantime, the work of destruction was
commenced in the town, chiefly under the
superintendance
of the veteran officer of the
marines
.
The few male inhabitants who remained
in their dwellings, were of necessity peaceable,
though Lionel could read in their flushed cheeks
and gleaming eyes, the secret indignation of men,
who, accustomed to the protection of the law,
now found themselves subjected to the insults and
wanton abuses of a military inroad. Every door
was flung open, and no place was held sacred
from the rude scrutiny of the licentious soldiery.
Taunts and execrations soon mingled with the
seeming moderation with which the search had
commenced, and loud exultation was betrayed,
even among the officers, as the scanty provisions
of the colonists were gradually brought to light.
It was not a moment to respect private rights,
and the freedom and ribaldry of the men were on
the point of becoming something more serious,
when the report of fire-arms was heard suddenly
to issue from the post held by the
light-infantry
,
at the bridge. A few scattering shot were
succeeded by a volley, which was answered by
another, with the quickness of lightning, and then
the air became filled with the incessant rattling of
a sharp conflict. Every arm was suspended, and
each tongue became mute with astonishment,
and the men abandoned their occupations as these
unexpected sounds of war broke on their ears.
The chiefs of the party were seen in consultation,
and horsemen rode furiously into the place, to
communicate the nature of this new conflict. The
rank of Major Lincoln soon obtained for him a
knowledge that it was thought impolitic to
communicate
to the whole detachment. Notwithstanding
it was apparent that they who brought the
intelligence
were anxious to give it the most
favourable
aspect, he soon discovered that the
same body of Americans which had retired at
their approach, having attempted to return to
their homes in the town, had been fired on at the
bridge, and in the skirmish which succeeded, the
troops had been compelled to give way with
loss. The effect of this prompt and spirited
conduct on the part of the provincials produced
a sudden alteration, not only in the aspect, but
also in the proceedings of the troops. The
detachments
were recalled, the drums beat to arms,
and, for the first time, both officers and men
seemed to recollect that they had six leagues
to march through a country that hardly
contained
a friend. Still few or no enemies were
visible
,
with the exception of those men of Concord,
who had already drawn blood freely from the
invaders of their domestic sanctuaries. The dead,
and all the common wounded, were left where
they had fallen, and it was thought an
unfavourable
omen among the observant of the detachment,
that a wounded young subaltern, of rank and
fortune, was also abandoned to the mercy of the
exasperated Americans. The privates caught the
infection from their officers, and Lionel saw, that
in place of the high and insulting confidence
with which the troops had wheeled into the
streets of Concord, that they left them, when
the order was given to march, with faces bent
anxiously on the surrounding heights, and with
looks that bespoke a consciousness of the
dangers
that were likely to beset the long road which
lay before them.
Their apprehensions were not groundless. The
troops had hardly commenced their march
before
a volley was fired upon them from the
protection
of a barn, and as they advanced, volley
succeeded volley, and musket answered musket
from behind every cover that offered to their
assailants. At first these desultory and feeble
attacks were but little regarded; a brisk charge,
and a smart fire of a few moments never
failing
to disperse their enemies, when the troops
again proceeded for a short distance unmolested.
But the alarm of the preceding night had
gathered
the people over an immense extent of country;
and, having waited for information, those nearest
to the scene of action were already pressing
forward to the assistance of their friends. There
was but little order, and no concert among the
Americans; but each party, as it arrived, pushed
into the fray, hanging on the skirts of their
enemies
,
or making spirited though ineffectual efforts
to stop their progress. While the men from the
towns behind them, pressed upon their rear, the
population in their front accumulated in bodies,
like a rolling ball of snow, and before half the
distance between Concord and Lexington was
accomplished, Lionel perceived that the safety
of their boasted power was in extreme jeopardy.
During the first hour of these attacks, while they
were yet distant, desultory, and feeble, the young
soldier had marched by the side of M`Fuse,
who shook his head disdainfully whenever a shot
whistled near him, and did not fail to comment
freely on the folly of commencing a war thus
prematurely
,
which, if properly nursed, might, to use
his own words, be in time brought to
something
pretty and interesting.
You perceive, Major Lincoln, he added,
that these Provincials have got the first
elements
of the art, for the rascals fire with
exceeding
accuracy, when the distance is considered;
and six months or a year of close drilling would
make them good for something in a regular
charge. They have got a smart crack to their
p'aces, and a pretty whiz to their lead already;
if they could but learn to deliver their fire in
platoons
,
the lads might make some impression on
the light-infantry even now; and in a year or two,
sir, they would not be unworthy of the favours of
the grenadiers.
Lionel listened to this, and much other similar
discourse, with a vacant ear; but as the combat
thickened, the blood of the young man began
to course more swiftly through his veins; and
at length, excited by the noise and the danger
which was pressing more closely around them,
he mounted, and riding to the commander of
the detachment, tendered his assistance as a
volunteer
aid, having lost every other sensation in
youthful blood, and the pride of arms. He
was immediately charged with orders for the
advance, and driving his spurs into his steed,
he dashed through the scattered line of fighting
and jaded troops, and galloped to its head.
Here he found several companies, diligently
employed in clearing the way for their
comrades
,
as new foes appeared at every few rods
that they advanced. Even as Lionel
approached
,
a heavy sheet of fire flashed from a close
barn-yard, full in the faces of the leading files,
sending the swift engines of death into the very
centre of the party.
Wheel a company of the light-infantry,
captain
Polwarth, cried the old major of marines,
who battled stoutly in the van, and drive the
skulking scoundrels from their ambush.
Oh! by the sweets of ease, and the hopes of
a halt! but here is another tribe of these white
savages! responded the unfortunate captain
Look out, my brave men! blaze away over the
walls on your leftgive no quarter to the
annoying
rascalsget the first shotgive them a
foot of your steel.
While venting such terrible denunciations and
commands, which were drawn from the peaceable
captain by the force of circumstances, Lionel
beheld his friend disappear amid the buildings
of the farm-yard in a cloud of smoke, followed
by his troops. In a few minutes afterwards, as
the line toiled its way up the hill on which this
scene occurred, Polwarth re-appeared, issuing
from the fray with his face blackened and grimed
with powder, while a sheet of flame arose from
the spot which soon laid the devoted buildings of
the unfortunate husbandman in ruins.
Ha! Major Lincoln, he cried, as he
approached
the other, do you call these
light-infantry
movements! to me they are the torments
of the damned!Go, you who have influence,
and what is better, a horse, go to Smith, and tell
him if he will call a halt, I will engage, with
my single company, to seat ourselves in any field
he may select, and keep these blood-suckers at
bay for an hour, while the detachment can rest
and satisfy their hungertrusting that he will
then allow time for his defenders to perform the
same necessary operations. A night-march, no
breakfasta burning sunmile after mileno
halt, and nothing but firefire'tis opposed to
every principle in physics, and even to the
anatomy
of man to think he can endure it!
Lionel endeavoured to encourage his friend to
new exertions, and turning away from their
leader, spoke cheeringly, and with a martial tone,
to his troops. The men cheered as they passed,
and dashed forward to new encounters; the
Americans
yielding sullenly, but necessarily, to the
constant charges of the bayonet, to which the
regulars
resorted to dislodge them. As the advance
moved on again, Lionel turned to contemplate
the scene in the rear. They had now been
marching
and fighting for two hours, with little or no
cessation, and it was but too evident that the
force of the assailants was increasing, both in
numbers
and in daring, at each step they took. On
either side of the highway, along the skirts of
every
wood or orchard, in the open fields, and from
every house, barn, or cover in sight, the flash of
fire-arms
was to be seen, while the shouts of the
English
grew, at each instant, feebler and less
inspiriting
.
Heavy clouds of smoke rose above the
valley
,
into which he looked, and mingled with the
dust of the march, drawing an impenetrable
veil before the view; but as the wind, at moments,
shoved it aside, he caught glimpses of the
worried
and faltering platoons of the party,
sometimes
breasting and repulsing an attack with
spirit
,
and at others shrinking from the contest, with
an ill-concealed desire to urge their retreat to the
verge of an absolute flight. Young as he was,
Major Lincoln knew enough of his profession
to understand that nothing but the want of
concert
,
and of a unity of command among the
Americans, saved the detachment from total
destruction. The attacks were growing
extremely
spirited, and not unfrequently close and bloody,
though the discipline of the troops enabled them
still to bear up against this desultory and divided
warfare, when Lionel heard, with a pleasure he
could not conceal, the loud shouts that arose from
the van, as the cheering intelligence was
proclaimed
VOL. I. 15
through the ranks, that the cloud of dust in
their front was raised by a chosen brigade of
their comrades, which had come most timely to
their succour, with the Heir of Northumberland
at its head. The Americans gave way as the
two detachments joined, and the artillery of the
succours opened upon their flying parties, giving
a few minutes of stolen rest to those who needed
it so much. Polwarth threw himself flat on the
earth, as Lionel dismounted at his side, and his
example was followed by the whole party, who
lay panting, under the heat and fatigue, like
worried
deer, that had succeeded in throwing the
hounds from their scent.
As I am a gentleman of simple habits, and a
man innocent of all this bloodshed, Major
Lincoln
,
said the captain, I pronounce this march to
be a most unjust draft on the resources of human
nature. I have journeyed at least five leagues
between this spot and that place of discord that
they falsely call Concord, within two hours,
amidst dust, smoke, groans, and other infernal
cries, that would cause the best trained racer in
England to bolt; and breathing an air, all the
time, that would boil an egg in two minutes and
a quarter, if fairly exposed to it.
You overrate the distance'tis but two
leagues by the stones
Stones! interrupted PolwarthI scorn
their liesI have a leg here that is a better
index
for miles, feet, or even inches, than was ever
chiseled in stone.
We must not contest this idle point,
returned
Lionel, for I see the troops are about to dine;
and we have need of every moment to reach
Boston
before the night closes around us.
Eat! Boston! night! slowly repeated
Polwarth
,
raising himself on one arm, and staring
wildly about him. Surely no man among us
is so mad as to talk of moving from this spot
short of a weekit would take half that time
to receive the internal refreshment necessary to
our systems, and the remainder to restore us
healthy
appetites.
Such, however, are the orders of the Earl
Percy, from whom I learn that the whole
country
is rising in our front.
Ay, but they are fellows who slept
peacefully
in their beds the past night; and I dare
say that every dog among them ate his half-pound
of pork, together with additions suitable for a
breakfast, before he crossed his threshold this
morning. But with us the case is different.
It is incumbent on two thousand British troops
to move with deliberation, if it should be only
for the credit of his majesty's arms. No, no
the gallant Percy too highly respects his princely
lineage and name to assume the appearance of
flight before a mob of base-born hinds!
The intelligence of Lionel was nevertheless
true; for after a short halt, allowing barely time
enough to the troops to eat a hasty meal, the
drums again beat the signal to march, and
Polwarth
,
as well as many hundred others, was
reluctantly
compelled to resume his feet, under the
penalty of being abandoned to the fury of the
exasperated Americans. While the troops were
in a state of rest, the field-pieces of the
reinforcement
kept their foes at a distance, but the
instant
the guns were limbered, and the files had
once more opened for room, the attacks were
renewed from every quarter, with redoubled fury.
The excesses of the troops, who had begun to
vent their anger by plundering and firing the
dwellings that they passed, added to the
bitterness
of the attacks, and the march had not
been renewed many minutes, before a fiercer
conflict raged along its skirts than had been
before
witnessed on that day.
Would to God that the great Northumbrian
would form us in order of battle, and make a fair
field with the Yankees, groaned Polwarth, as
he toiled his way once more with the advance
half an hour would settle the matter, and a
man would then possess the gratification of
seeing
himself a victor, or at least of knowing that
he was comfortably and quietly dead.
Few of us would ever arrive in the
morning
,
if we left the Americans a night to gather
in; and a halt of an hour would lose us the
advantages
of the whole march, returned Lionel
Cheer up, my old comrade, and you will
establish
your reputation for activity for everhere
comes a party of the Provincials over the crest
of the hill to keep you in employment.
Polwarth cast a look of despair at Lionel, as
he muttered in reply
Employment! God knows that there has not
been a single muscle, sinew, or joint in my body
in a state of wholesome rest for four-and-twenty
hours! Then turning to his men, he cried, with
tones so cheerful and animated, that they seemed
to proceed from a final and closing exertion, as
he led them gallantly into the approaching fray
Scatter the dogs, my brave friendsaway with
them like gnats, like moschettos, like leeches, as
they aregive it themlead and steel by
handsful
Onpush on with the advance! shouted the
old major of marines, who observed the leading
platoons to stagger.
The voice of Polwarth was once more heard in
the din, and their irregular assailants sullenly
yielded before the charge.
Onon with the advance! cried fifty voices
out of a cloud of smoke and dust that was moving
up the hill, on whose side this encounter occurred.
In this manner the war continued to roll
slowly
onward, following the weary and heavy
foot-steps
of the soldiery, who had now toiled for
many miles, surrounded by the din of battle, and
leaving in their path the bloody impressions of
their footsteps. Lionel was enabled to trace their
route, far towards the north, by the bright red
spots, which lay scattered in alarming numbers
along the highway, and in the fields through
which the troops occasionally moved. He even
found time, in the intervals of rest, to note the
difference in the characters of the combatants.
Whenever the ground or the circumstances
admitted
of a regular attack, the dying confidence
of the troops would seem restored, and they
moved up to the charge with the bold carriage
which high discipline inspires, rending the air
with shouts, while their enemies melted before
their power in sullen silence, never ceasing to
use their weapons however, with an expertness
that rendered them doubly dangerous. The
direction
of the columns frequently brought the
troops over ground that had been sharply
contested
in front, and the victims of these short struggles
came under the eyes of the detachment. It was
necessary to turn a deaf ear to the cries and
prayers of many wounded soldiers, who, with
horror
and abject fear written on every feature of
their countenances, were the helpless witnesses
of the retreating files of their comrades. On the
other hand, the American lay in his blood,
regarding
the passing detachment with a stern and
indignant eye, that appeared to look far beyond
his individual suffering. Over one body, Lionel
pulled the reins of his horse, and he paused a
15*
moment to consider the spectacle. It was the
lifeless form of a man, whose white locks, hollow
cheeks, and emaciated frame, denoted that the
bullet which had stricken him to the earth had
anticipated the irresistible decrees of time but
a very few days. He had fallen on his back,
and his glazed eye expressed, even in death, the
honest resentment he had felt while living; and
his palsied hand continued to grasp the fire-lock,
old and time-worn, like its owner, with which he
had taken the field in behalf of his country.
Where can a contest end which calls such
champions to its aid! exclaimed Lionel,
observing
that the shadow of another spectator fell
across the wan features of the deadwho can
tell where this torrent of blood can be stayed, or
how many are to be its victims!
Receiving no answer, he raised his eyes, and
discovered
that he had unwittingly put this
searching
question to the very man whose rashness had
precipitated the war. It was the major of marines,
who sat looking at the sight, for a minute, with an
eye as vacant as the one that seemed to throw
back his wild gaze, and then rousing from his
trance, he buried his rowels in the flanks of his
horse, and disappeared in the smoke that
enveloped
a body of the grenadiers, waving his sword
on high, and shouting
Onpush on with the advance!
Major Lincoln slowly followed, musing on the
scene he had witnessed, when, to his surprise, he
encountered Polwarth, seated on a rock by the
roadside, looking with a listless and dull eye at
the retreating columns. Checking his charger,
he inquired of his friend if he were hurt.
Only melted, returned the captain; I have
outdone the speed of man this day, Major
Lincoln
,
and can do no more. If you see any of
my friends in dear England, tell them that I met
my fate as a soldier should, stationary; though I
am actually melting away in rivulets, like the
snows of April.
Good God! you will not remain here to be
slain by the Provincials, by whom you see we are
completely enveloped?
I am preparing a speech for the first Yankee
who may approach. If he be a true man he will
melt into tears at my sufferings this dayif a
savage, my heirs will be spared the charges of
my funeral.
Lionel would have continued his remonstrances,
but a fierce encounter between a flanking party of
the troops and a body of Americans, drove the
former close upon him, and leaping the wall he
rallied his comrades, and turned the tide of battle
in their favour. He was drawn far from the spot
by the vicissitudes of the combat, and there was
a moment, while passing from one body of the
troops to another, that he found himself
unexpectedly
alone, in a most dangerous vicinity to a small
wood. The hurried call of pick off that officer,
first aroused him to his extreme danger, and he
had mechanically bowed himself on the neck of
his charger, in expectation of the fatal
messengers
,
when a voice was heard among the
Americans
,
crying, in tones that caused every nerve in
his body to thrill
Spare him! for the love of that God you
worship, spare him!
The overwhelming sensations of the moment
prevented flight, and the young man beheld Ralph,
running with frantic gestures, along the skirts of
the cover, beating up the fire-arms of twenty
Americans, and repeating his cries in a voice
that did not seem to belong to a human being
then, in the confusion which whirled through his
brain, Lionel thought himself a prisoner, as a
man, armed with a long rifle, glided from the
wood, and laid his hand on the rein of his
bridle, saying earnestly
'Tis a bloody day, and God will remember
it; but if Major Lincoln will ride straight down
the hill, the people wont fire for fear of hitting
Joband when Job fires, he'll shoot that granny
who's getting over the wall, and there'll never be
a stir about it in Funnel-Hall.
Lionel wheeled away quicker than thought,
and as his charger took long and desperate leaps
down the slight declivity, he heard the shouts of
the Americans behind him, the crack of Job's
rifle, and the whizzing of the bullet which the
changeling sent, as he had promised, in a
direction
to do him no harm. On gaining a place
of comparative safety, he found Pitcairn in the
act of abandoning his bleeding horse, the close
and bitter attacks of the Provincials rendering it
no longer safe for an officer to be seen riding on
the flanks of the detachment. Lionel, though he
valued his steed highly, had also received so many
intimations of the dangerous notice he had
attracted
,
that he was soon obliged to follow this
example, and he saw, with deep regret, the noble
animal scouring across the fields with a loose rein,
snorting and snuffing the tainted air. He now
joined a party of the combatants on foot, and
continued to animate them to new exertions
during
the remainder of the tedious way.
From the moment the spires of Boston met
the view of the troops, the struggle became
intensely
interesting. New vigour was imparted to
their weary frames by the cheering sight, and
assuming once more the air of high martial
training, they bore up against the assaults of
their enemies with renewed spirit. On the other
hand, the Americans seemed aware that the
moments
of vengeance were passing swiftly away,
and boys, and grey-headed men, the wounded and
the active, crowded around their invaders, as if
eager to obtain a parting blow. Even the
peaceful
ministers of God were known to take the field
on that memorable occasion, and, mingling with
their parishioners, to brave every danger in a
cause which they believed in consonance with
their holy calling. The sun was sinking over the
land, and the situation of the detachment had
become
nearly desperate, when Percy abandoned
the idea of reaching the Neck, across which he
had proudly marched that morning from Boston,
and strained every nerve to get the remainder of
his command within the peninsula of Charlestown.
THe crests and the sides of the heights were alive
with men, and as the shades of evening closed
about the combatants, the bosoms of the
Americans
beat high with hope, while they
witnessed
the faltering steps and slackened fire of the
troops. But high discipline, finally so far
prevailed
as to snatch the English from the very
grasp of destruction, and enabled them to gain
the narrow entrance to the desired shelter, just as
night had come apparently to seal their doom.
Lionel stood leaning against a fence, as this
fine body of men, which a few hours before had
thought themselves equal to a march through the
colonies, defiled slowly and heavily by him,
dragging their weary and exhausted limbs up the
toilsome ascent of Bunker-Hill. The haughty
eyes of most of the officers were bent to the
earth in shame; and the common herd, even
in that place of security, cast many an anxious
glance behind them, to assure themselves that the
despised inhabitants of the Province were no
longer pressing on their footsteps. Platoon after
platoon passed, each man compelled to depend on
his own wearied limbs for support, until Lionel at
last saw a solitary horseman slowly ascending
among the crowd. To his utter amazement
and great joy, as this officer approached, he
beheld Polwarth, mounted on his own steed,
riding towards him, with a face of the utmost
complacency and composure. The dress of the
captain was torn in many places, and the
housings
of the saddle were cut into ribands, while
here and there a spot of clotted blood, on
the sides of the beast, served to announce the
particular notice the rider had received from the
Americans. The truth was soon extorted from
the honest soldier. The love of life had returned
with the sight of the abandoned charger. He
acknowledged
it had cost him his watch to have the
beast caught; but once established in the saddle,
no danger, nor any remonstrances, could induce
him to relinquish a seat which he found so
consoling
after all the fatigue and motion of that evil
day, in which he had been compelled to share in
the calamities of those who fought on the side of
the crown, in the memorable battle of Lexington.
CHAPTER XI.
Fluel
.Is it not lawful, an' please your majesty,
To tell how many is killed.
King Henry V
.
While
a strong party of the royal troops
took post on the height which commanded the
approach to their position, the remainder
penetrated
deeper into the peninsula, or were
transported
by the boats of the fleet to the town of
Boston. Lionel and Polwarth passed the strait
with the first division of the wounded, the former
having no duty to detain him any longer with
the detachment, and the latter stoutly
maintaining
that his corporeal sufferings gave him
an undoubted claim to include his case among
the casualties of the day. Perhaps no officer
in the army of the king felt less chagrin at the
result of this inroad than Major Lincoln; for
notwithstanding his attachment to his Prince,
and adopted country, he was keenly sensitive on
the subject of the reputation of his real
countrymen
;
a sentiment that is honourable to our nature,
and which never deserts any that do not become
disloyal to its purest and noblest impulses. Even
while he regretted the price at which his
comrades
had been taught to appreciate the
characters
of those whose long and mild forbearance
had been misconstrued into pusillanimity, he
rejoiced
that the eyes of the more aged would
now be opened to the truth, and that the mouths
of the young and thoughtless were to be for ever
closed in shame. Although the actual losses of the
two detachments were probably concealed from
motives of policy, it was early acknowledged to
amount to about one-sixth of the whole number
employed.
On the wharf, Lionel and Polwarth separated;
the latter agreeing to repair speedily to the
private
quarters of his friend, where he promised
himself a solace for the compulsory abstinence
and privations of his long march, and the
former
taking his way towards Tremont-street, with
a view to allay the uneasiness which the secret and
flattering whisperings of hope taught him to believe
his fair young kinswomen would feel in his behalf.
At every corner he encountered groups of earnest
townsmen, listening with greedy ears to the
particulars
of the contest, a few walking away
dejected
at the spirit exhibited by that country they
had villified to its oppressors, but most of them
regarding the passing form of one whose
disordered
dress announced his participation in the
affair, with glances of stern satisfaction. As
Lionel
tapped at the door of Mrs. Lechmere, he
forgot
his fatigue; and when it opened, and he
beheld
Cecil standing in the hall, with every
lineament
of her fine countenance expressing the
power of her emotions, he no longer remembered
those trying dangers he had so lately escaped.
Lionel! exclaimed the young lady, clasping
her hands with joyhimself, and unhurt! The
blood rushed from her heart across her face to
her forehead, and burying her shame in her hands,
she burst into a flood of tears, and fled his
presence
.
Agnes Danforth received him with undisguised
pleasure, nor would she indulge in a single question
to appease her burning curiosity, until
thoroughly
assured of his perfect safety. Then, indeed,
she remarked, with a smile of triumph seated on
her arch features
Your march has been well attended, Major
Lincoln; from the upper windows I have seen
some of the honours which the good people of
the Massachusetts have paid to their visiters.
On my soul, if it were not for the dreadful
consequences which must follow, I rejoice as
well as yourself, in the events of the day, said
Lincoln; for a people are never certain of their
rights, until they are respected.
Tell me then all, cousin Lincoln, that I may
know how to boast of my parentage.
The young man gave her a short, but distinct
and impartial account of all that had occurred,
to which his fair listener attended with
undisguised
interest.
Now, then, she exclaimed, as he ended, there
is an end for ever of those biting taunts that have
so long insulted our ears! But you know, she
added, with a slight blush, and a smile most
comically
arch, I had a double stake in the
fortunes
of the daymy country and my true love!
Oh! be at ease; your worshipper has
returned
,
whole in body, and suffering in mind only
through your crueltyhe performed the route
with wonderful address, and really showed
himself
a soldier in danger.
Nay, Major Lincoln, returned Agnes, still
blushing, though she laughed, you do not mean
to insinuate that Peter Polwarth has walked forty
miles between the rising and setting of the sun.
Between two sun-sets he has done the deed,
if you except a trifling
promenade  cheval
, on
my own steed, whom Jonathan compelled me to
VOL. I. 16
abandon, and of whom he took, and maintained
the possession, too, in spite of dangers of every
kind.
Really, exclaimed the wilful girl, clasping
her hands in affected astonishment, though
Lionel
thought he could read inward satisfaction at
his intelligencethe prodigies of the man
exceed
belief! one wants the faith of father
Abraham
to credit such marvels! though, after the
repulse
of two thousand British soldiers by a body
of husbandmen, I am prepared for an exceeding
use of my credulity.
The moment is then auspicious for my friend,
whispered Lionel, rising to follow the flitting
form of Cecil Dynevor, which he saw gliding
into the opposite room, as Polwarth himself
entered
the apartmentcredulity is said to be the
great weakness of your sex, and I must leave you
a moment exposed to the failing, and that, too,
in the dangerous company of the subject of our
discourse.
Now would you give half your hopes of
promotion
,
and all your hopes of a war, captain
Polwarth
,
to know in what manner your character
has been treated in your absence, cried Agnes,
blushing slightly. I shall not, however, satisfy
the cravings of your curiosity, but let it serve
as a stimulant to better deeds than have
employed
you since we met last.
I trust Lincoln has done justice to my
service
,
returned the good-humoured captain, and
that he has not neglected to mention the
manner
in which I rescued his steed from the rebels.
The what, sir, interrupted Agnes, with a
frownhow did you style the good people of
Massachusetts-Bay?
I should have said the excited dwellers in the
land, I believe. Ah! Miss Agnes, I have
suffered
this day as man never suffered before, and all
on your behalf
On my behalf! your words require
explanation
,
captain Polwarth.
'Tis impossible, returned the captain
there are feelings and actions connected with
the heart that will admit of no explanation. All
I know is, that I have suffered unutterably on
your account, to-day; and what is unutterable is
in a great degree inexplicable.
I shall set this down for what I understand
occurs regularly in a certain description of
tte--ttes
the expression of an unutterable thing!
Surely, Major Lincoln had some reason to
believe
he left me at the mercy of my credulity!
You slander your own character, fair Agnes,
said Polwarth, endeavouring to look piteously;
you are neither merciful nor credulous, or you
would long since have believed my tale, and
taken pity on my misery.
Is not sympathy a sorta kindin short,
is not sympathy a dreadful symptom in a certain
disease? asked Agnes, resting her eyes on the
floor, and affecting a girlish embarrassment.
Who can gainsay it! cried the captain;
'tis the infallible way for a young lady to
discover
the bent of her inclinations. Thousands have
lived in ignorance of their own affections until
their sympathies have been awakened. But what
means the question, my fair tormentor? May I
dare to flatter myself that you at length feel
for my pains!
I am sadly afraid 'tis but too true, Polwarth,
returned Agnes, shaking her head, and continuing
to look exceedingly grave.
Polwarth moved, with something like
animation
again, nigher to the amused girl; and
attempted
to take her hand, as he said
You restore me to life with your sweet
acknowledgments
I
have lived for six months like
a dog under your frowns, but one kind word acts
like a healing balm, and restores me to myself
again!
Then my sympathy is evaporated! returned
Agnes. Throughout this long and anxious
day have I fancied myself older than my good,
staid, great-aunt; and whenever certain thoughts
have crossed my mind, I have even imagined a
thousand of the ailings of age had encircled me
rheumatisms, gouts, asthmas, and numberless
other aches and pains, exceedingly unbecoming to
a young lady of nineteen. But you have
enlightened
me, and given vast relief to my
apprehensions
,
by explaining it to be no more than
sympathy
.
You see, Polwarth, what a wife you will
obtain, should I ever, in a weak moment, accept
you, for I have already sustained one-half your
burthens!
A man is not made to be in constant motion,
like the pendulum of that clock, Miss Danforth,
and yet feel no fatigue, said Polwarth, more
vexed than he would permit himself to betray;
yet I flatter myself there is no officer in the
light-infantryyou understand me to say the
light-infantrywho has passed over more ground
within four-and-twenty hours, than the man who
hastens, notwithstanding his exploits, to throw
himself at your feet, even before he thinks of his
ordinary rest.
Captain Polwarth, said Agnes, rising, for
the compliment, if compliment it be, I thank you;
but, she added, losing her affected gravity in a
strong natural feeling that shone in her dark eye,
and illuminated the whole of her fine countenance,
as she laid her hand impressively on her heart
the man who will supplant the feelings which
nature has impressed here, must not come to
my feet, as you call it, from a field of battle,
where he has been contending with my kinsmen,
and helping to enslave my country. You will
excuse me, sir, but as Major Lincoln is at home
here, permit me, for a few minutes, to leave you
to his hospitality.
She withdrew as Lionel re-entered, passing
him on the threshold.
I would rather be a leader in a stage-coach,
or a running footman, than in love! cried
Polwarth
'tis
a dog's life, Leo, and this girl treats
me like a cart-horse! But what an eye she has!
I could have lighted my segar by itmy heart is
a heap of cinders. Why, Leo, what aileth thee!
throughout the whole of this damnable day, I
have not before seen thee bear such a troubled
look!
Let us withdraw to my private quarters,
muttered the young man, whose aspect and air
expressed
the marks of extreme disturbance'tis
time to repair the disasters of our march.
All that has been already looked to, said
Polwarth, rising and limping, with sundry
grimaces
,
in the best manner he was able, in a vain
effort to equal the rapid strides of his companion.
My first business on leaving you was to borrow
a conveyance of a friend, in which I rode to your
place; and my next was to write to little Jimmy
Craig, to offer an exchange of my company for
hisfor from this hour henceforth I denounce all
light-infantry movements, and shall take the first
opportunity to get back again into the dragoons,
as soon as I have effected which, major Lincoln,
I propose to treat with you for the purchase of
that horseafter that duty was performed, for, if
self-preservation be commendable, it became a
16*
duty, I made out a bill of fare for Meriton, in
order that nothing might be forgotten; after
which, like yourself Lionel, I hastened to the
feet of my mistressAh! Major Lincoln, you are
a happy man; for you, there is no reception but
smilesand charms so
Talk not to me sir, of smiles, interrupted
Lionel, impatiently, nor of the charms of
woman
.
They are all alike, capricious and
unaccountable
.
Bless me! exclaimed Polwarth, staring
about him in wonder; there is then favour for
none, in this place, who battle for the King!
There is a strange connexion between Cupid and
Mars, love and war; for here did I, after fighting
all day like a Saracen, a Turk, Jenghis Khan, or, in
short, any thing but a good Christian, come with
full intent to make a serious offer of my hand,
commission, and of Polwarth-Hall, to that
treasonable
vixen, when she repulses me with a frown
and a sarcasm as biting as the salutation of a
hungry
man. But what an eye the girl has, and
what a bloom, when she is a little more seasoned
than common! Then you, too, Lionel, have been
treated like a dog!
Like a fool, as I am, said Lionel, pacing
haughtily over the ground at a rate that soon
threw his companion too far in the rear to
admit
of further discourse until they reached the
place of their destination. Here, to the no small
surprise of both gentlemen, they found a
company
collected that neither was prepared to
meet. At a side-table, sat M'Fuse, discussing,
with singular relish, some of the cold viands
of the previous night's repast, and washing
down his morsels with deep potations of the best
wine of his host. In one corner of the room,
Seth Sage was posted, with the appearance of
a man in duresse, his hands being tied before him,
from which depended a long cord that might,
on emergency, be made to serve the purpose of a
halter. Opposite to the prisoner, for such in truth
he was, stood Job, imitating the example of the
Captain of Grenadiers, who now and then tossed
some fragment of his meal into the hat of the
simpleton. Meriton and several of the menials
of the establishment were in waiting.
What have we here! cried Lionel, regarding
the scene with a curious eye; of what offence has
Mr. Sage been guilty, that he bears those bonds?
Of the small crimes of tr'ason and
homicide
,
returned M'Fuse, if shooting at a man,
with a hearty mind to kill him, can make a
murder.
It can't, said Seth, raising his eyes from the
floor, where he had hitherto kept them in
demure
silence; a man must kill with wicked
intent
to commit murder
Hear to the blackguard, datailing the law as
if he were my Lord Chief Justice of the King's
Bench! interrupted the grenadier; and what
was your own wicked intention, ye skulking
vagabond
,
but to kill me! I'll have you tried and
hung for the same act.
It's ag'in reason to believe that any jury will
convict one man for the murder of another that
a'nt dead, said Seththere's no jury to be
found in the Bay-colony, to do it.
Bay-colony! ye murdering thief and rebel!
cried the Captain; I'll have ye transported to
England; ye shall be both transported and hung.
By the Lord, I'll carry ye back to Ireland with
me, and I'll hang ye up in the green Island itself,
and bury ye, in the heart of winter, in a bog
But what is the offence, demanded Lionel,
that calls forth these severe threats?
The scoundrel has been out
Out!
Ay, outdamn it, sir, has not the
whole country been like so many bees in search
of a hive! Is your memory so short that ye
forget, already, Major Lincoln, the tramp the
blackguards have given you over hill and dale,
through thick and thin?
And was Mr. Sage, then, found among our
enemies to day?
Didn't I see him pull trigger on my own
stature, three times within as many minutes!
returned the angry captain; and didn't he break
the handle of my sword? and have not I a bit of
lead he calls a buck-shot in my shoulder as a
present
from the thief?
It's ag'in all law to call a man a thief, said
Job, unless you can prove it upon him; but it
an't ag'in law to go in and out of Boston as often
as you choose.
Do you hear the rascals! They know every
angle of the law as well, or better than I do
myself
,
who am the son of a Cork counsellor. I
dare to say, you were among them too, and
that ye deserve the gallows as well as your
commendable
companion, there.
How is this! said Lionel, turning quickly
away from Job, with a view to prevent a reply
that might endanger the safety of the changeling;
did you not only mingle in this rebellion, Mr.
Sage, but also attempt the life of a gentleman
who may be said, almost, to be an inmate of
your own house?
I conclude, returned Seth, it's best not
to talk too much, seeing that no one can foretell
what may happen.
Hear to the cunning reprobate! he has not
the grace to acknowledge his own sins, like an
honest man, interrupted M`Fase; but I can
save him that small troubleI got tired, you
must know Major Lincoln, of being shot at like
noxious vermin, from morning till night, without
making some return to the compliments of those
gentlemen who are out on the hills; and I took
advantage of a turn, ye see, to double on a party
of the uncivilized demons; this lad, here, got
three good pulls at me, before we closed and
made an end of them with the steel, all but this
fellow, who having a becoming look for a
gallows
,
I brought him in, as you see, for an
exchange
,
intending to hang him the first
favourable
opportunity.
If this be true we must give him into the
hands of the proper authorities, said Lionel,
smiling at the confused account of the angry
captain
for
it remains to be seen yet what course
will be adopted with the prisoners in this singular
contest.
I should think nothing of the matter,
returned
M`Fuse, if the reprobate had not tr'ated
me like a beast of the field, with his buck-shot,
and taking his aim each time, as though I had
been a mad-dog. Ye villain, do you call
yourself
a man, and aim at a fellow-creature as
you would at a brute?
Why, said Seth, sullenly, when a man has
pretty much made up his mind to fight, I
conclude
it's best to take aim, in order to save
ammunition
and time.
You acknowledge the charge, then!
demanded
Lionel.
As the major is a moderate man, and will
hear to reason, I will talk the matter over with
him rationally, said Seth, disposing himself to
speak more to the purpose. You see I had a
small call to Concurd early this morning
Concord! exclaimed Lionel
Yes, Concurd, returned Seth, laying great
stress on the first syllable, and speaking with an
air of extreme innocenceit lies here-away,
say twenty or one-and-twenty miles
Damn your Concords and your miles too,
cried Polwarth; is there a man in the army
who can forget the deceitful place! Go on with
your defence, without talking to us of the distance,
who have measured the road by inches.
The captain is hasty and rash! said the
deliberate
prisonerbut being there, I went out
of the town with some company that I happened
in with; and after a time we concluded to return
and so, as we came to a bridge about a mile
beyond
the place, we received considerable rough
treatment from some of the king's troops, who
were standing there
What did they?
They fired at us, and killed two of our
company
,
besides other threatening doings. There
were some among us that took the matter up in
considerable earnest, and there was a sharp toss
about it for a few minutes; though finally the law
prevailed.
The law!
Certain'tis ag'in all law, I believe the major
will own, to shoot peaceable men on the public
highway!
Proceed with your tale in your own way.
That is pretty much the whole of it, said
Seth, warily. The people rather took that,
and some other things that happened at
Lexington
,
to heart, and I suppose the major knows the
rest.
But what has all this to do with your
attempt
to murder me, you hypocrite? demanded
M`Fuseconfess the whole, ye thief, that I
may hang you with an aisy conscience.
Enough, said Lionel; the man has
acknowledge
sufficient already to justify us in
transferring
him to the custody of otherslet him be
taken to the main guard, and delivered as a
prisoner
of this day.
I hope the major will look to the things, said
Seth, who instantly prepared to depart, but
stopped
on the threshold to speakI shall hold
him accountable for all.
Your property shall be protected, and I hope
your life may not be in jeopardy, returned
Lionel
,
waving his hand for those who guarded him
to proceed. Seth turned, and left his own
dwelling
with the same quiet air which had
distinguished
him throughout the day; though there were
occasional flashes from his quick, dark eyes,
that looked like the glimmerings of a fading
fire. Notwithstanding the threatening
denunciation
he had encountered, he left the house
with a perfect conviction, that if his case were
to be tried by those principles of justice which
every man in the Colony so well understood, it
would be found that both he and his fellows had
kept thoroughly on the windy side of the law.
During this singular and characteristic
discourse
,
Polwarth, with the solitary exception we
have recorded, had employed his time in
forwarding
the preparations for the banquet.
As Seth and his train disappeared, Lionel
cast a furtive look at Job, who was a quiet
and apparently an undisturbed spectator of the
scene, and then turned his attention suddenly
to his guests, as if fearful the folly of the
changeling
might betray his agency also in the deeds
of the day. The simplicity of the lad, however,
defeated the kind intentions of the major, for he
immediately observed, without the least
indication
of fear
The king can't hang Seth Sage for firing
back, when the rake-helly soldiers began first.
Perhaps you were out too, master Solomon,
cried M`Fuse, amusing yourself at Concord,
with a small party of select friends!
Job didn't go any further than Lexington,
returned the lad, and he hasn't got any friend,
except old Nab.
The devil has possessed the minds of the
people! continued the grenadierlawyers and
doctorspraists and sinnersold and young
big and little, beset us in our march, and here is
a fool to be added to the number! I dare say
that fellow, now, has attempted murder in his
day too.
Job scorns such wickedness, returned the
unmoved simpleton; he only shot one
granny
,
and hit an officer in the arm.
D'ye hear that, Major Lincoln! cried
M'Fuse, jumping from the seat, which,
notwithstanding
the bitterness of his language, he had
hitherto perseveringly maintained; d'ye hear
that shell of a man, that effigy, boasting of
having
killed a grenadier!
Holdinterrupted Lionel, arresting his
excited
companion by the armremember, we
are soldiers, and that the boy is not a responsible
being. No tribunal would ever sentence such an
unfortunate creature to a gibbet; and in general
he is as harmless as a babe
The devil burn such babesa pretty fellow
is he to kill a man of six feet! and with a ducking
gun I'll engage. I'll not hang the rascal, Major
Lincoln, since it is your particular wishI'll only
have him buried alive.
Job continued perfectly unmoved in his chair,
and the captain, ashamed of his resentment
against such unconscious imbecility, was soon
persuaded to abandon his intentions of revenge,
though he continued muttering his threats against
the provincials, and his denunciations against
such an unmanly spacies of warfare, until the
much-needed repast was ended.
Polwarth having restored the equilibrium of
his system by a hearty meal, hobbled to his
bed, and M`Fuse, without any ceremony, took
possession of another of the apartments in the
tenement of Mr. Sage. The servants withdrew
to their own entertainment, and Lionel, who had
been sitting for the last half hour in melancholy
silence, now unexpectedly found himself alone
with the changeling. Job had waited for this
moment with exceeding patience, but when the
door closed on Meriton, who was the last to
retire, he made a movement that indicated some
communication of more than usual importance,
and succeeded in attracting the attention of his
companion.
Foolish boy! exclaimed Lionel, as he met
the unmeaning eye of the other, did I not warn
you that wicked men might endanger your life!
how was it that I saw you in arms to-day, against
the troops?
How came the troops in arms ag'in Job?
returned the changelingthey needn't think to
wheel about the Bay-Province, clashing their
godless drums and trumpets, burning housen, and
shooting people, and find no stir about it!
Do you know that your life has been twice
forfeited within twelve hours, by your own
confession
;
once for murder, and again for treason
against your king? You have acknowledged
killing
a man!
Yes, said the lad, with undisturbed
simplicity
,
Job shot the granny; but he didn't let the
people kill Major Lincoln.
True, true, said Lionel, hastilyI owe my
life to you, and that debt shall be cancelled at
every hazard. But why have you put yourself
VOL. I. 17
into the hands of your enemies so thoughtlessly
what brings you here to-night?
Ralph told me to come; and if Ralph told
Job to go into the king's parlour, he would go.
Ralph! exclaimed Lionel, stopping in his
hurried walk across the room, and where is he?
In the old ware-'us', and he has sent me to
tell you to come to himand what Ralph says
must be done.
He here too! is the man crazedwould not
his fears teach him
Fears! interrupted Job, with singular
disdain
you
can't frighten Ralph! The
grannies
couldn't frighten him, nor the light-infantry
couldn't hit him, though he eat nothing but
their smoke the whole dayRalph's a proper
warrior!
And he waits me, you say, in the tenement
of your mother?
Job don't know what tenement means, but
he's in the old ware-'us'.
Come, then, said Lionel, taking his hat,
let us go to himI must save him from the
effects of his own rashness, though it cost my
commission!
He left the room while speaking, and the
simpleton
followed close at his heels, well content
with having executed his mission without
encountering
any greater difficulties.
CHAPTER XII.
This play is the image of a murder done in Vienna:
Gonzago is the Duke's name; his wife, Baptista:
You shall see, anon; 'tis a knavish piece of work.
Hamlet
.
The
agitation and deep excitement produced
by the events of the day, had not yet subsided
in the town, when Lionel found himself again
in its narrow streets. Men passed swiftly by him,
as if bent on some unusual and earnest business;
and more than once the young soldier detected
the triumphant smiles of the women, as they
looked curiously out on the scene, from their
half-open
windows, and their eyes detected the
professional
trappings of his dress. Strong bodies of
the troops were marching in different directions,
and in a manner which denoted that the guards
were strengthening, while the few solitary officers
he met watched his approaching figure with
cautious jealousy, as if they apprehended a
dangerous
enemy in every form they encountered.
The gates of Province-house were open, and,
as usual, guarded by armed men. As Lionel
passed leisurely along, he perceived that the
grenadier
to whom he had spoken on the preceding
evening, again held his watch before the portal
of the governors.
Your experience did not deceive you, my
old comrade, said Lionel, lingering a moment
to address himwe have had a warm day.
So it is reported in the barracks, your
honour, returned the soldierour company
was not ordered out, and we are to stand double
duty. I hope to God the next time there is
any thing to do, the grenadiers of theth may
not be left behindit would have been for the
credit of the army had they been in the field
to-day.
Why do you think so, my veteran? The
men who were out are thought to have behaved
well; but it was impossible to make head against
a multitude in arms.
It is not my place, your honour, to say this
man did well, and that man behaved amiss,
returned
the proud old soldier; but when I hear
of two thousand British troops turning their backs,
or quickening their march before all the rabble
this country can muster, I want the flank
companies
of theth to be at hand, if it should be
only that I may say I have witnessed the
disgraceful
sight with my own eyes.
There is no disgrace where there is no
misconduct
,
said Lionel.
There must have been misconduct
somewhere
,
your honour, or such a thing could not
have happenedconsider, your honour, the very
flower of the army! Something must have been
wrong, and although I could see the latter part of
the business from the hills, I can hardly believe it
to be true. As he concluded, he shook his head,
and continued his steady pace along his allotted
ground, as if unwilling to pursue the humiliating
subject any further. Lionel passed slowly on,
musing on that deep-rooted prejudice, which had
even taught this humble menial of the crown to
regard with contempt a whole nation, because
they were believed to be dependants.
The dock-square was stiller than usual, and
the sounds of revelry, which it was usual to hear at
that hour from the adjacent drinking-houses,
were no longer audible. The moon had not yet
risen, and Lionel passed under the dark arches of
the market with a quick step, as he now
remembered
that one in whom he felt so deep an interest
awaited his appearance. Job, who had followed
in silence, glided by him on the drawbridge, and
stood holding the door of the old building in his
hand, when he reached its threshold. Lionel
found the large space in the centre of the
warehouse
,
as usual, dark and empty, though the dim
light of a candle glimmered through the fissures in
a partition which separated an apartment in one of
the little towers that was occupied by Abigail
Pray, from the ruder parts of the edifice. Low
voices were also heard issuing from this room, and
Major Lincoln, supposing he should find the old
man and the mother of Job in conference
together
,
turned to request the lad would precede
him, and announce his name. But the
changeling
had also detected the whispering sounds, and
it would seem with a more cunning ear, for he
turned and darted through the door of the
building
with a velocity that did not abate until
Lionel
,
who watched his movements with amazement,
saw his shuffling figure disappear among the
shambles of the market-place. Thus deserted by
his guide, Lionel groped his way towards the
place where he believed he should find the door
which led into the tower. The light deceived
him, for as he approached it, his eye glanced
through one of the crevices of the wall, and he
17*
again became an unintentional witness of
another
of those interviews which evinced the
singular
and mysterious affinity between the fortunes
of the affluent and respected Mrs. Lechmere and
the miserable tenant of the warehouse. Until
that moment, the hurry of events, and the crowd
of reflections which had rushed over the mind of
the young man throughout the busy time of the
last twenty-four hours, had prevented his recalling
the hidden meaning of the singular discourse of
which he had already been an auditor. But now,
when he found his aunt led into these haunts of
beggary, by a feeling he was not weak enough to
attribute to her charity, he stood rooted to the
spot by a curiosity, which, at the same time that he
found it irresistible, he was willing to excuse,
under
a strong impression that these private
communications
were in some way connected with
himself.
Mrs. Lechmere had evidently muffled her
person
in a manner that was intended to conceal
this mysterious visit from any casual observer of
her movements; but the hoops of her large calash
were now so far raised as to admit a distinct view
of her withered features, and of the hard eye which
shot forth its selfish, worldly glances, from amid
the surrounding decay of nature. She was
seated
,
both in indulgence to her infirmities, and
from that assumption of superiority she never
neglected
in the presence of her inferiors, while her
companion stood before her, in an attitude that
partook more of restraint than of respect.
Your weakness, foolish woman, said Mrs.
Lechmere, in those stern, repulsive tones she so
well knew how to use when she wished to
intimidate
,
will yet prove your ruin. You owe it to
respect for yourself, to your character, and even
to your safety, that you should exhibit more
firmness
,
and show yourself above this weak and
idle supersition.
My ruin! and my character! returned
Abigail
,
looking about her with a haggard eye and a
trembling lip; what is ruin, Madam Lechmere,
if this poverty be not called so! or what loss of
character can bring upon me more biting scorn
than I am now ordained to suffer for my sins!
Perhaps, said Mrs. Lechmere, endeavouring
to affect a kinder tone, though dislike was still too
evident in her manner, in the hurry of my
grandnephew's
reception, I have forgotten my usual
liberality.
The woman took the piece of silver which
Mrs. Lechmere slowly placed in her hand, and
held it in her open palm for several moments,
regarding
it with a vacant look, which the other
mistook for dissatisfaction.
The troubles, and the decreasing value of
property, have sensibly affected my income,
continued
the richly clad and luxurious Mrs.
Lechmere
;
but if that should be too little for your
immediate wants, I will add to it another crown.
'Twill do'twill do, said Abigail, cleaching
her hand over the money, with a grasp that was
convulsiveyes, yes, 'twill do. Oh! Madam
Lechmere, humbling and sinful as that wicked
passion is, would to God that no motive worse
than avarice had proved my ruin!
Lionel thought his aunt cast an uneasy and
embarrassed glance at her companion, which he
construed into an expression that betrayed there
were secrets even between these strange
confidants
;
but the momentary surprise exhibited in
her features, soon gave place to her habitual look
of guarded and severe formality; and she replied,
with an air of coldness, as if she would repulse
any approach to an acknowledgment of their
common transgression
The woman talks like one who is beside
herself
!
of what crime has she been guilty, but such
as those to which our nature is liable!
True, true, said Abigail Pray, with a
half-stifled
,
hysterical laugh'tis our guilty, guilty
nature, as you say. But I grow nervous, I believe,
as I grow old and feeble, Madam Lechmere; and
I often forget myself. The sight of the grave so
very near, is apt to bring thoughts of repentance
to such as are more hardened even than I.
Foolish girl! said Mrs. Lechmere,
endeavouring
to skreen her pallid features, by drawing
down her calash, with a hand that trembled
more with terror than with age, why should you
speak thus freely of death, who are but a child!
Lionel heard the faltering, husky tones of his
aunt, as they appeared to die in her throat, but
nothing more was distinctly audible, until, after a
long pause, she raised her face, and looked about
her again with her severe, unbending eye, and
continued
Enough of this folly, Abigail PrayI have
come to learn more of your strange inmate
Oh! 'tis not enough, Madam Lechmere,
interrupted
the conscience-stricken woman; we
have so little time left us for penitence and prayer,
that there never can be enough, I fear, to
answer
our mighty transgressions. Let us speak of
the grave, Madam Lechmere, while we can yet
do it on this side of eternity.
Ay! speak of the grave, while out of its
damp cloisters; 'tis the home of the aged, said
a third voice, whose hollow tones might well
have issued from some tomb, and I am here
to join in the wholesome theme.
Whowhoin the name of God, who art
thou! exclaimed Mrs. Lechmere, forgetting her
infirmities, and her secret compunctions, in new
emotions, and rising involuntarily from her seat;
tell me, I conjure thee, who art thou?
One, aged like thyself, Priscilla Lechmere,
and standing on the threshold of that final home
of which you would discourse. Speak on, then,
ye widowed women; for if ever ye have done
aught that calls for forgiveness, 'tis in the grave ye
shall find the heavenly gift of mercy offered to your
unworthiness.
By changing the position of his body a little,
Lionel was now enabled to command a view of
the whole apartment. In the door-way stood
Ralph, immovable in his attitude, with one
hand raised high towards heaven, and the other
pointing impressively downward, as if about to
lay bare the secrets of that tomb of which his
wasted limbs, and faded lineaments marked him
as a fit tenant, while his searching eye-balls
glared about him, from the face of one to the
other, with that look of quickness and
penetration
,
that Abigail Pray had so well described as
`scorching.' Within a few feet of the old man,
Mrs. Lechmere remained standing, rigid and
motionless as marble, her calash fallen back,
and her death-like features exposed, with
horror
and astonishment rooted in every muscle,
as with open mouth, and eyes riveted on the
intruder, she gazed as steadily as if placed in
that posture by the chisel of the statuary.
Abigail
shaded her eyes with her hand, and buried
her face in the folds of her garments, while
strong convulsive shudderings ran through her
frame, and betrayed the extent of the emotions
she endeavoured to conceal. Amazed at what
he had witnessed, and concerned for the
apparent
insensibility of his aunt, whose great age
rendered such scenes dangerous, Lionel was about
to rush into the apartment, when Mrs.
Lechmere
so far recovered her faculties as to speak,
and the young man lost every consideration in a
burning curiosity, which was powerfully justified
by his situation.
Who is it that calls me by the name of
Priscilla
?
said Mrs. Lechmere; none now live who
can claim to be so familiar.
PriscillaPriscilla, repeated the old man,
looking about him, as if he would require the
presence of another; it is a soft and pleasant
sound to my ears, and there is one that owns it
besides thee, as thou knowest.
She is dead; years have gone by since I saw
her in her coffin; and I would forget her, and all
like her, who have proved unworthy of my blood.
She is
not
dead!shouted the old man, in
a voice that rung through the naked rafters of
the edifice like the unearthly tones of some spirit
of the air; she livesshe livesay! she yet
lives!
Lives! repeated Mrs. Lechmere, recoiling
a step before the forward movement of the other;
why am I so weak as to listen! 'tis impossible.
Lives! exclaimed Abigail Pray, clasping
her hands with agony; Oh! would to God she
did live! but did I not see her a bloated,
disfigured
corpse! did I not with these very hands
place the grave-clothes about her once lovely
frame! Oh! noshe is deaddeadand I am
a
'Tis. some madman that asserts these idle
tales, exclaimed Mrs. Lechmere, with a
quickness
that interrupted the criminal epithet the other
was about to apply to herself. The unfortunate
girl is long since dead, as we know; why should
we reason with a maniac?
Maniac! repeated Ralph, with an
expression
of the most taunting irony; nonono
such an one there is, as you and I well know,
but 'tis not I who am madthou art rather
crazed thyself, woman; thou hast made one
maniac already, wouldst thou make another?
I! said Mrs. Lechmere, without quailing
before the ardent look she encounteredthat
God who bestows reason, recalls his gift at will;
'tis not I who exercise such power.
How say'st thou, Priscilla Lechmere? cried
Ralph, stepping with an inaudible tread so nigh
as to grasp, unperceived, her motionless arm with
his own wasted fingers; yesI will call thee
Priscilla, little as thou deservest such a holy name
dost thou deny the power to crazewhere,
then, is the head of thy boasted race? the proud
Baronet of Devonshire, the wealthy, and
respected
,
and once happy companion of Princesthy
nephew Lionel Lincoln? Is he in the halls of his
fathers? leading the armies of his king?ruling
and protecting his household?or is he the
tenant
of a gloomy cell?thou knowest he is
thou knowest he isand, woman, thy vile
machinations
have placed him there!
Who is it that dare thus speak to me!
demanded
Mrs. Lechmere, rallying her faculties
with a mighty effort, to look down this charge
if my unhappy nephew is indeed known to thee,
thy own knowledge will refute this base
accusation
Known to me! I would ask what is hid from
me? I have looked at thee, and observed thy
conduct, woman, for the life of man, and nothing
that thou hast done is bid from meI tell thee,
I know all. Of this sinful woman here also, I know
allhave I not told thee, Abigail Pray, of thy
most secret transgressions?
Oh! yesyes; he is indeed acquainted
with what I had thought was now concealed
from every eye but that of Godcried Abigail,
with superstitious terror
Nor of thee am I ignorant, thou miserable
widow of John Lechmere; and of Priscilla, too,
do I not know all?
All! again exclaimed Abigail
All! repeated Mrs. Lechmere in a voice
barely audible, when she sunk back in her chair,
in a state of total insensibility. The breathless
interest
he felt in all that had passed, could detain
Lionel no longer from rushing to the assistance of
his aunt. Abigail Pray, who, it would seem, had
been in some measure accustomed to such scenes
with her lodger, retained, however, sufficient
self-command
to anticipate his motions, and when he
had gained the door he found her already
supporting
,
and making the usual applications to Mrs.
Lechmere. It became necessary to divest the
sufferer
of part of her attire, and Abigail assuring
Lionel of her perfect competency to act by herself,
requested him to withdraw, not only on that
account
,
but because she felt assured that nothing
could prove more dangerous to her reviving
patient
,
than his unexpected presence. After
lingering
a moment, until he witnessed the signs of
returning life, Lionel complied with the earnest
entreaties of the woman; and leaving the room,
he groped his way to the foot of the ladder, with
a determination to ascend to the apartment of
Ralph, in order to demand at once an
explanation
of what he had just seen and heard. He
found the old man seated in his little tower, his
hand shading his eyes from the feeble light of
the miserable candle, and his head drooping upon
his bosom, like one in pensive musing. Lionel
approached him, without appearing to attract
his attention, and was compelled to speak, in
order
to announce his presence.
I have received your summons, by Job,
he said, and have obeyed it.
'Tis well, returned Ralph.
Perhaps I should add that I have been an
astonished
witness of your interview with Mrs.
Lechmere, and have heard the bold and
unaccountable
language you have seen proper to use
to that lady.
The old man now raised his head, and Lionel
saw the bright rays from his eyes quicken, as
he answered
You then heard the truth, and witnessed its
effects on a guilty conscience.
I also heard what you call the truth, in
connexion
,
as you know, with the names most dear
to me.
Art certain of it, boy? returned Ralph,
looking the other steadily in the face; has
no other become dearer to you, of late, than
the authors of your being speak, and remember
that you answer one of no common knowledge.
What mean you, sir! is it in nature to love
any as we do a parent?
Away with this childish simplicity, continued
the other sternly; the grandchild of that
wretched woman belowdo you not love her,
and can I put trust in thee!
What trust is there incompatible with
affection
for a being so pure as Cecil Dynevor?
Ay, murmured the old man in an under
tone, her mother
was
pure, and why may not the
child be worthy of its parentage? He paused,
and a long, and on the part of Lionel, a painful
and embarrassed silence succeeded, which was at
length broken by Ralph, who said, abruptly
you were in the field to-day, Major Lincoln!
VOL. I. 13
Of that you must be certain, as I owe my life
to your kind interposition. But why have you
braved the danger of an arrest, by trusting your
person in the power of the troops? Your presence
and activity among the Americans must be
known to many in the army besides myself.
And would they think of searching for their
enemies within the streets of Boston, when the hills
without are filling with armed men! My residence
in this building is known only to the woman below,
who dare not betray me, her worthy son, and to
you. My movements are secret and sudden
when men least expect them. Danger cannot
touch such as I.
But, said Lionel, hesitating with
embarrassment
,
ought I to conceal the presence of
one whom I know to be inimical to my king?
Lionel Lincoln, you overrate your courage,
interrupted Ralph, smiling in scornyou
dare not shed the blood of him who has spared
your own;but enough of thiswe understand
each other, and one old as I should be a stranger
to fear?
No, no, said a low, solemn voice, from a
dark corner of the apartment, where Job had
stolen unseen, and was now nestled in security
you can't frighten Ralph!
The boy is a worthy boy, and he knows good
from evil; what more is necessary to man in this
wicked world! muttered Ralph, in those quick
and indistinct tones that characterized his manner.
Whence came you, fellow, and why did you
abandon me so abruptly? demanded Lionel.
Job has just been into the market to see if he
couldn't find something that might be good for
Nab, returned the lad.
Think not to impose on me with this
nonsense
!
Is food to be purchased at any hour of
the night, though you had the means!
Now that is convincing the king's officers
don't know every thing, said the simpleton,
laughing within himselfhere's as good a
pound bill, old tenor, as was ever granted by
the Bay-Colony, and meat's no such rarity,
that a man, who has a pound-bill, old tenor, in
his pocket, can't go under old Funnel when he
pleases, for all their acts of parliament.
You have plundered the dead! cried
Lionel
,
observing that Job exhibited in his hand
several pieces of silver, besides the note he had
mentioned.
Don't call Job a thief! said the lad, with
a threatening air; there's law in the Bay
yet, though the people don't use it; and right
will be done to all, when the time comes. Job
shot a granny, but he's no thief.
You were then paid for your secret errand,
last night, foolish boy; and have been tempted
to run into danger by money. Let it be the
last timein future, when you want, come to me
for assistance.
Job won't go of a'r'nds for the king if he'd
give him his golden crown, with all its di'monds
and flauntiness, unless Job pleases, for there's no
law for it.
Lionel, with a view to appease the irritated
lad, now made a few kind and conciliating
remarks, but the changeling did not deign to
reply
,
falling back in his corner in a sullen manner,
as if he would repair the fatigue of the day by a
few moments of sleep. In the mean time, Ralph
had sunk into a profound reverie, when the young
soldier remembered that the hour was late,
and he had yet obtained no explanation of the
mysterious charges. He therefore alluded to
the subject, in a manner which he thought
best adapted to obtain the desired intelligence.
The instant Lionel mentioned the agitation of his
aunt, his companion raised his head again, and a
smile like that of fierce exultation lighted the
wan face of the old man, who answered, pointing
with an emphatic gesture to his own bosom
'Twas here, boy, 'twas herenothing short
of the power of conscience, and a knowledge
like that of mine, could strike that woman
speechless
in the presence of any thing human.
But what is this extraordinary knowledge?
I am in some degree the natural protector of
Mrs. Lechmere, and independent of my
individual
interest in your secret, have a right, in her
behalf, to require an explanation of such serious
allegations.
In her behalf! repeated Ralph. Wait,
impetuous
young man, until she bids you push the
inquiryit shall then be answered, in a voice
of thunder.
If not in justice to my aged aunt, at least
remember
your repeated promises to unfold that
sad tale of my own domestic sorrows, of which
you claim to be the master.
Ay, of that, and much more, am I in
possession
,
returned the old man, smiling, as if
conscious
of his knowledge and power; if you
doubt it, descend and ask the miserable tenant
of this warehouseor the guilty widow of John
Lechmere.
Nay, I doubt nothing but my own patience;
the moments fly swiftly, and I have yet to learn
all I wish to know.
This is neither the time, nor is it the place,
where you are to hear the tale, returned Ralph;
I have already said that we shall meet
beyond
the colleges for that purpose.
But after the events of this day, who can tell
when it will be in the power of an officer of the
crown to visit the colleges in safety?
What! cried the old man, laughing aloud,
in the bitterness of his scorn has the boy found
the strength and the will of the despised colonists
so soon! But I pledge to thee my word, that
thou shalt yet see the place, and in safety.Yes,
yes, Priscilla Lechmere, thy hour is at hand, and
thy doom is sealed for ever!
Lionel again mentioned his aunt, and alluded
to the necessity of his soon rejoining her, as
he already heard footsteps below, which indicated
that preparations were making for her departure.
But his petitions and remonstrances were now
totally unheeded, his aged companion was pacing
swiftly up and down his small apartment,
muttering
incoherent sentences, in which the name of
Priscilla was alone audible, and his countenance
betraying the inward workings of absorbing and
fierce passions. In a few moments more, the
shrill voice of Abigail was heard calling upon her
son, in a manner which plainly denoted her
knowledge
that the changeling was concealed
somewhere
about the building. Job heard her calls
repeated
,
until the tones of her voice became angry
and threatening, when he stole slowly from his
corner, and moved towards the ladder, with a
sunken brow and lingering steps. Lionel now
knew not how to act. His aunt was still ignorant
of his presence, and he thought if Abigail Pray
had wished him to appear, he would in some
manner be soon included in the summons. He had
also his own secret reasons for wishing his visits
to Ralph unknown; accordingly, he determined
to watch the movements below, under the favour
of the darkness, and to be governed entirely by
18*
circumstances. He took no leave of his
companion
on departing, for long use had so far
accustomed
him to the eccentric manner of the old
man, that he well knew any attempt to divert
his attention from his burning thoughts, would be
futile at a moment of such intense excitement.
From the head of the ladder where Lionel
took his stand, he saw Mrs. Lechmere,
preceded
by Job with a lantern, walking with a firmer
step than he could have hoped for, towards the
door, and he overheard Abigail cautioning her
wilful son to light her visiter to a neighbouring
corner, where it appeared a conveyance was in
waiting. On the threshold, his aunt turned, and
the light from the candle of Abigail falling on her
features, Lionel caught a full view of her cold,
hard eye, which had regained all its worldly
expression
,
though softened a little by a deeper
shade of thought than usual.
Let the scene of to-night be forgotten, my
good Abigail, she said. Your lodger is a
nameless being, who has gleaned some idle tale,
and wishes to practise on our credulity to
enrich
himself. I will consider more of it; but
on no account do you hold any further
communion
with himI must remove you, my trusty
woman; this habitation is unworthy of you, and
of your dutiful son, tooI must see you better
lodged, my good Abigail, indeed I must.
Lionel could distinguish the slight shudder that
passed through the frame of her companion, as
she alluded to the doubtful character of Ralph;
but without answering, Abigail held the door open
for the departure of her guest. The instant Mrs.
Lechmere disappeared, Lionel glided down the
ladder, and stood before the astonished woman.
When I tell you I have heard all that passed
to-night, he abruptly said, you will see the folly
of any further attempt at concealmentI now
demand so much of your secret as affects the
happiness
of me or mine.
Nononot of me, Major Lincoln, said
the terrified femalenot of me, for the love of
God, not of meI have sworn to keep it, and
one oath her emotions choked her, and her
voice became indistinct.
Lionel regretted his vehemence, and ashamed
to extort a confession from a woman, he
attempted
to pacify her feelings, promising to require no
further communication at that time.
Gogoshe said, motioning him to depart,
and I shall be well againleave me, and then
I shall be alone with that terrible old man, and
my God!
Perceiving her earnestness, he reluctantly
complied
,
and meeting Job on the threshold, he
ceased
to feel any further uneasiness for her safety.
During his rapid walk to Tremont-street, Major
Lincoln thought intently on all he had heard and
witnessed. He remembered the communications
by which Ralph had attained such a powerful
interest in his feelings, and he fancied he could
discover a pledge of the truth of the old man's
knowledge in the guilt betrayed by the manner
of his aunt. From Mrs. Lechmere his thoughts
recurred to her lovely grandchild, and for a
moment
he was perplexed, by endeavouring to
explain
her contradictory deportment towards
himself
;at
one time she was warm, frank, and
even affectionate; and at another, as in the short
and private interview of that very evening,
cold, constrained, and repulsive. Then, again,
he recollected the object which had chiefly
induced
him to follow his regiment to his native
country, and the recollection was attended
by that shade of dejection which such reflections
never failed to cast across his intelligent
features
.
On reaching the house, he ascertained
the safe return of Mrs. Lechmere, who had
already retired to her room, attended by her
lovely relatives. Lionel immediately followed
their example, and as the excitement of that
memorable and busy day subsided, it was
succeeded
by a deep sleep, that fell on his senses
like the forgetfulness of the dead.
CHAPTER XIII.
Now let it work: Mischief thou art afoot,
Take thou what course thou wilt!
Shakspeare
.
The
alarm of the inroad passed swiftly by
the low shores of the Atlantic, and was heard
echoing among the rugged mountains west of
the rivers, as if borne along on a whirlwind. The
male population, between the rolling waters of
Massachusetts-Bay and the limpid stream of the
Connecticut, rose as one man; and as the cry
of blood was sounded far inland, the hills and
valleys, the highways and footpaths, were seen
covered
with bands of armed husbandmen, pressing
eagerly toward the scene of the war. Within
eight-and-forty hours after the fatal meeting at
Lexington, it was calculated that more than a
hundred thousand men were in arms; and near
one-fourth of that number was gathered before
the Peninsulas of Boston and Charlestown.
They who were precluded by distance, and a
want of military provisions to support such a
concourse, from participating in the more
immediate
contest, lay by in expectation of the
arrival
of that moment when their zeal might also
be put to severer trials. In short, the sullen
quietude in which the colonies had been
slumbering
for a year, was suddenly and rudely broken
by the events of that day; and the patriotic among
the people rose with such a cry of indignation
on their lips, that the disaffected, who were no
insignificant class in the more southern
provinces
,
were compelled to silence, until the first
burst of revolutionary excitement had an
opportunity
to subside, under the never-failing
influence
of time and suffering.
Gage, secure in his positions, and supported
by a constantly increasing power, as well as the
presence of a formidable fleet, looked on the
gathering storm with a steady eye, and with that
calmness which distinguished the mild
benevolence
of his private character. Though the
attitude
and the intentions of the Americans could
no longer be mistaken, he listened with reluctant
ears to the revengeful advice of his counsellors,
and rather strove to appease the tumult, than to
attempt crushing it by a force, which, though a
month before, it had been thought equal to the
united power of the peaceful colonists, he now
prudently deemed no more than competent to
protect itself within its watery boundaries.
Proclamations
were, however, fulminated against the
rebels; and such other measures as were thought
indispensable to assert the dignity and authority
of the crown, were promptly adopted. Of course,
these harmless denunciations were disregarded,
and all his exhortations to return to an allegiance
which the people still denied had ever been
impaired
,
were lost amid the din of arms, and the
popular cries of the time. These appeals of the
British General, as well as sundry others, made
by the royal governors who yet held their rule
throughout all the provinces, except the one in
which the scene of our tale is laid, were answered
by the people in humble, but manly petitions to
the throne for justice; and in loud remonstrances
to the Parliament, requiring to be restored to the
possession of those rights and immunities which
should be secured to all who enjoyed the
protection
of their common constitution. Still the power
and prerogatives of the Prince were deeply
respected
,
and were alluded to, in all public
documents
,
with the veneration which was thought due
to the sacredness of his character and station.
But that biting, though grave sarcasm which the
colonists knew so well how to use, was freely
expended on his ministers, who were accused of
devising the measures so destructive to the peace
of the empire. In this manner passed some weeks
after the series of skirmishes which were called
the battle of Lexington, from the circumstance
of commencing at the hamlet of that name,
both parties continuing to prepare for a mightier
exhibition of their power and daring.
Lionel had by no means been an
unconcerned
spectator of these preparations. The
morning
after the return of the detachment, he applied
for a command, equal to his just expectations.
But while he was complimented on the spirit
and loyalty he had manifested on the late
occasion
,
it was intimated to the young man that
he might be of more service to the cause of his
Prince, by devoting his time to the cultivation of
his interest among those powerful colonists with
whom his family was allied by blood, or
connected
by long and close intimacies. It was
even submitted to his own judgment whether it
would not be well, at some auspicious moment,
to trust his person without the defences of the
army, in the prosecution of this commendable
design. There was so much that was
flattering
to the self-love, and soothing to the pride
of the young soldier, artfully mingled with these
ambiguous proposals, that he became content
to await the course of events, having,
however
,
secured a promise of obtaining a suitable
military command in the case of further
hostilities
.
That such an event was at hand, could not
well be concealed from one much less observing
than Major Lincoln.
Gage had already abandoned his temporary
position in Charlestown, for the sake of
procuring
additional security by concentrating his
force. From the hills of the Peninsula of
Boston
,
it was apparent that the colonists were
fast assuming the front of men who were
resolved
to beleaguer the army of the King.
Many of the opposite heights were already
crowned with hastily-formed works of earth, and
a formidable body of these unpractised warriors
had set themselves boldly down before the
entrance
to the isthmus, cutting off all
communication
with the adjacent country, and occupying
the little village of Roxbury, directly before the
muzzles of the British guns, with a hardiness that
would not have disgraced men much longer tried
in the field, and more inured to its dangers.
The surprise created in the army by these
appearances
of skill and spirit among the hitherto
despised Americans, in some measure ceased
when the rumour spread itself in their camp, that
many gentlemen of the Provinces, who had served
with credit in the forces of the crown, at former
periods, were mingled with the people in
stations
of responsibility and command. Among
others, Lionel heard the names of Ward and
Thomas; men of liberal attainments, and of some
experience in arms. Both were regularly
commissioned
by the Congress of the colony as
leaders of their forces; and under their orders
were numerous regiments duly organized;
possessing
all the necessary qualifications of
soldiers
,
excepting the two indispensible requisites
of discipline and arms. Lionel heard the name
of Warren mentioned oftener than any other
in the circles of Province-house, and with
that sort of bitterness, which, even while it
bespoke their animosity, betrayed the respect of
his enemies. This gentleman, who, until the last
moment had braved the presence of the royal
troops, and fearlessly advocated his principles,
while encircled with their bayonets, was now
known to have suddenly disappeared from
among them, abandoning home, property, and a
lucrative profession; and by sharing in the
closing scenes of the day of Lexington, to have
fairly cast his fortunes on the struggle. But
the name which in secret possessed the greatest
charm for the ear of the young British soldier,
was that of Putnam, a yeoman of the
neighbouring
colony of Connecticut, who, as the uproar
of the alarm whirled by him, literally deserted
his plough, and mounting a beast from its team,
made an early halt, after a forced march of a
hundred miles, in the foremost ranks of his
countrymen
.
While the name of this sturdy American
was passing in whispers among the veterans who
crowded the levees of Gage, a flood of
melancholy
and tender recollections flashed through
the brain of the young man. He remembered
the frequent and interesting communications
which in his boyhood, he had held with his own
father, before the dark shade had passed across
the reason of Sir Lionel, and, in every tale of
murderous combats with the savage tenants of
the wilds, in each scene of danger and of
daring
that had distinguished the romantic warfare
of the wilderness, and even in strange and fearful
VOL. I, 19
encounters with the beasts of the forest, the name
of this man was blended with a species of
chivalrous
fame that is seldom obtained in an
enlightened
age, and never undeservedly. The great
wealth of the family of Lincoln, and the high
expectations of its heir, had obtained for the latter
a military rank which at that period was rarely
enjoyed by any but such as had bought the
distinction
by long and arduous services.
Consequently
,
many of his equals had shared in those
trials of his father, in which the `Lion heart' of
America had been so conspicuous for his deeds.
By these grave veterans, who should know him
best, the name of Putnam was always mentioned
with strong and romantic affection; and when the
notable scheme of detaching him, by the
promise
of office and wealth, from the cause of the
colonists was proposed by the cringing
counsellors
who surrounded the commander-in-chief,
it was listened to with a contemptuous
incredulity
by the former associates of the old
partisan
,
that the result of the plan fully justified.
Similar inducements were offered to others among
the Americans, whose talents were thought
worthy
of purchase; but so deep root had the
principles
of the day taken, that not a man of any note
was found to listen to the proposition.
While these subtle experiments were adopted
in the room of more energetic measures, troops
continued to arrive from England, and, before
the end of May, many leaders of renown
appeared
in the councils of Gage, who now
possessed
a disposable force of not less than eight
thousand bayonets. With the appearance of these
reinforcements, the fallen pride of the army
began
to revive, and the spirits of the haughty
young men who had so recently left the gay
parades of their boasted island, were chafed by
the reflection that such an army should be
cooped
within the narrow limits of the peninsula
by a band of half-armed husbandmen, destitute
alike of the knowledge of war and of most of
its munitions. This feeling was increased by
the taunts of the Americans themselves, who
now turned the tables on their adversaries,
applying
,
among other sneers, the term of
elbowroom
freely to Burgoyne, one of those
chieftains
of the royal army, who had boasted
unwittingly
of the intention of himself and his
compeers, to widen the limits of the army
immediately
on their arrival at the scene of the
contest. The aspect of things within the
Briish
camp began to indicate, however, that their
leaders were serious in the intention to extend
their possessions, and all eyes were again turned
to the heights of Charlestown, the spot most
likely
to be first occupied.
No military positions could be more happily
situated, as respects locality, to support each
other, and to extend and weaken the lines of
their enemies, than the two opposite peninsulas
so often mentioned. The distance between them
was but six hundred yards, and the deep and
navigable waters by which they were nearly
surrounded, rendered it easy for the royal
general
to command, at any time, the assistance of
the heaviest vessels of the fleet, in defending
either place. With these advantages before them,
the army gladly heard those orders issued,
which, it was well understood, indicated an
approaching
movement to the opposite shores.
It was now eight weeks since the
commencement
of hostilities, and the war had been confined
to the preparations detailed, with the exception
of one or two sharp skirmishes on the islands of
the harbour, between the foragers of the army,
and small parties of the Americans, in which
the latter well maintained their newly acquired
reputation for spirit.
With the arrival of the regiments from
England
,
gaiety had once more visited the town,
though such of the inhabitants as were
compelled
to remain against their inclinations,
continued
to maintain that cold reserve, in their
deportment, which effectually repelled all the
efforts of the officers to include them in the
wanton
festivities of the time. There were a few,
however, among the colonists, who had been
bribed, by offices and emoluments, to desert the
good cause of the land; and as some of these had
already been rewarded by offices which gave
them access to the ear of the royal governor,
who was thought to be unduly and unhappily
influenced
by the pernicious councils with which
they poisoned his mind and prepared him for
acts of injustice and harshness, that both his
unbiassed feelings and ordinary opinions would
have condemned. A few days succeeding the
affair of Lexington, a meeting of the inhabitants
had been convened, and a solemn compact was
made between them and the governor, that such
as chose to deliver up their arms, might leave
the place, while the remainder were promised a
suitable protection in their own dwellings. The
arms were delivered, but that part of the
conditions
which related to the removal of the
inhabitants
was violated, under slight and insufficient
pretexts. This, and various other causes
incidental
to military rule, imbittered the feelings of the
people, and furnished new causes of complaint;
while, on the other hand, hatred was rapidly
usurping the place of contempt, in the breasts
of those who had been compelled to change
their sentiments with respect to a people that
they could never love. In this manner,
resentment
and distrust existed, with all the
violence
of personality, within the place itself,
affording an additional reason to the troops for
wishing to extend their limits.
Notwithstanding
these inauspicious omens of the character
of the contest, the native kindness of Gage, and
perhaps a desire to rescue a few of his own
men from the hands of the colonists, induced
him to consent to an exchange of the prisoners
made in the inroad; thus establishing, in the
onset, a precedent to distinguish the controversy
from an ordinary rebellion against the loyal
authority
of the sovereign. A meeting was held,
for this purpose, in the village of Charlestown, at
that time unoccupied by either army. At the
head of the American deputation appeared
Warren, and the old partisan of the wilderness,
already mentioned, who, by a happy, though not
uncommon constitution of temperament, was as
forward in deeds of charity as in those of daring.
At this interview, several of the veterans of the
royal army were present, having passed the
strait to hold a last, friendly converse with their
ancient comrade, who received them with the
frankness of a soldier, while he rejected their
subtle
endeavours to entice him from the banners
under which he had enlisted, with a sturdiness
as unpretending as it was inflexible.
While these events were occurring at the great
scene of the contest, the hum of preparation was
to be heard throughout the whole of the wide
extent
of the colonies. In various places slight acts
of hostility were committed, the Americans no
longer waiting for the British to be the
aggressors
,
and everywhere such military stores as
could be reached, were seized, peaceably or by
violence, as the case required. The concentration
of most of the troops in Boston, had, however,
19*
left the other colonies comparatively but little to
achieve, though, while they still rested,
nominally
,
under the dominion of the crown, they
neglected
no means within their power to assert
their rights in the last extremity.
At Philadelphia the Congress of the Delegates
from the United Colonies, the body that
controlled
the great movements of a people who now first
began to act as a distinct nation, issued their
manifestos
,
supporting, in a masterly manner, their
principles, and proceeded to organize an army
that should be as competent to maintain them as
circumstances would allow. Gentlemen who had
been trained to arms in the service of the king,
were invited to resort to their banners, and the
remainder
of the vacancies were filled by the names
of the youthful, the bold, and adventurous, who
were willing to risk their lives in a cause where
even success promised so little personal advantage.
At the head of this list of untrained warriors, the
Congress placed one of their own body, a man
already distinguished for his services in the field,
and who has since bequeathed to his country the
glory of an untarnished name.
CHAP. XIV.
Thou shalt meet me at Philippi.
Julius Caesar
During
this period of feverish excitement,
while the appearance and privations of war
existed
with so little of its danger or its action,
Lionel
had not altogether forgotten his personal
feelings
,
in the powerful interest created by the state
of public affairs. Early on the morning
succeeding
the night of the scene between Mrs.
Lechmere
and the inmates of the warehouse, he had
repaired again to the spot, to relieve the intense
anxiety of his mind, by seeking a complete
explanation
of all those mysteries which had been the
principal ligament that bound him to a man,
little known, except for his singularities.
The effects of the preceding day's battle
were already visible in the market-place, where,
as Lionel passed, he saw few, or none of the
countrymen who usually crowded the square at
that hour. In fact, the windows of the shops
were opened with caution, and men looked out
upon the face of the sun, as if doubting of its
appearance and warmth, as in seasons of
ordinary
quiet; jealousy, and distrust, having
completely
usurped the place of security within the
streets of the town. Notwithstanding the hour,
few were in their beds, and those who appeared
betrayed by their looks that they had passed the
night in watchfulness. Among this number was
Abigail Pray, who received her guest in her
little
tower, surrounded by every thing as he
had seen it on the past evening, nothing
altered
,
except her own dark eye, which at times
looked like a gem of price sat in her squalid
features, but which now appeared haggard and
sunken, participating more markedly than
common
,
in the general air of misery that pervaded
the woman.
I have intruded at a somewhat unusual hour,
Mrs. Pray, said Lionel, as he entered; but
business of the last moment requires that I should
see your lodgerI suppose he is above; it will
be well to announce my visit.
Abigail shook her head with an air of solemn
meaning, as she answered in a subdued voice,
he is gone!
Gone! exclaimed Lionelwhither, and
when?
The people seem visited by the wrath of
God, sir, returned the womanold and young,
the sick and well, are crazy about the shedding
of blood; and it's beyond the might of man to
say where the torrent will be stayed!
But what has this to do with Ralph! where is
he? Woman, you are not playing me false!
I! heaven forbid that I should ever be false
again! and to you least of all God's creatures!
No, no, Major Lincoln; the wonderful man, who
seems to have lived so long that he can even read
our secret thoughts, as I had supposed man could
never read them, has left me, and I know not
whether he will ever return.
Ever! you have not driven him by violence
from under your miserable roof?
My roof is like that of the fowls of the air
'tis the roof of any who are so unfortunate as to
need it.There is no spot on earth, Major
Lincoln
,
that I can call minebut one day there
will be oneyes, yesthere will be a narrow
house provided for us all; and God grant that
mine may be as quiet as the coffin is said to be!
I lie not, Major Lincolnno, this time I am
innocent of deceitRalph and Job have gone
together, but whither, I know not, unless it be to
join the people without the townthey left me
as the moon rose, and he gave me a parting and
a warning voice, that will ring in my ears until
they are deafended by the damps of the grave!
Gone to join the Americans, and with Job!
returned Lionel, musing, and without attending
to the closing words of Abigail.Your boy will
purchase peril with this madness, Mrs. Pray, and
should be looked to.
Job is not one of God's accountables, nor
is he to be treated like other children, returned
the woman. Ah! Major Lincoln, a healthier,
and a stouter, and a finer boy was not to be
seen in the Bay-Province, till the child had
reached
his fifth year! then, then it was that the
judgment
of heaven fell on mother and son
sickness
made him what you see, a being with the
form, but without the reason of man, and I have
grown the wretch I am. But it has all been
foretold
,
and warnings enough have I had of it all!
for is it not said, that
he
will visit the sins of
the fathers upon the children until the third and
fourth generation! Thank God, my sorrows and
sins will end with Job, for there never can be a
third to suffer!
If, said Lionel, there be any sin which
lies heavy at your heart, every consideration,
whether of justice or repentance, should induce
you to confess your errors to those whose
happiness
may be affected by the knowledge, if any
such there be?
The anxious eye of the woman raised itself
to meet the look of the young man; but
quailing
before the piercing gaze it encountered, she
quickly turned it upon the litter and confusion
of her disordered apartment. Lionel waited
some time for a reply, but finding that she
remained
obstinately silent, he continued
From what has already passed, you must be
eonscious that I have good reason to believe
that my feelings are deeply concerned in your
secret; make, then, your confession of the guilt
which seems to bear you down so heavily; and
in return for the confidence, I promise you my
forgiveness and protection.
As Lionel pressed thus directly the point so
near his heart, the woman shrunk away from her
situation near him, and her countenance lost, as
he proceeded, its remarkable expression of
compunction
,
in a forced look of deep surprise, that
showed she was no novice in dissimulation,
whatever
might be the occasional warnings of her
conscience.
Guilt! she repeated, in a slow and
tremulous
voice; we are all guilty, and would be
lost creatures, but for the blood of the
Mediator
.
Most true; but you have spoken of crimes
that infringe the laws of man, as well as those
of God.
I! Major LincolnI, a disorderly
law-breaker
!
exclaimed Abigail, affecting to busy
herself in arranging her apartmentit is not
such as I, that have leisure or courage to
break the laws! Major Lincoln is trying a
poor lone woman, to make his jokes with the
gentlemen of his mess this evening'tis certain,
we all of us have our burthens of guilt to
answer
forsurely Major Lincoln couldn't have
heard minister Hunt preach his sermon, the last
Sabbath, on the sins of the town!
Lionel coloured highly at the artful
imputation
of the woman, that he was practising on
her sex and unprotected situation; and greatly
provoked, in secret, at her duplicity, he became
more guarded in his language, endeavouring to
lead her on, by kindness and soothing, to the
desired
communications. But all his ingenuity was
met by more than equal abilities on the part of
Abigail, from whom he only obtained expressions
of surprise that he could have mistaken her
language for more than the usual
acknowledgment
of errors, that are admitted to be common
to our lost nature. In this particular the woman
was in no respect singular; the greater number
of those who are loudest in their confessions and
denunciations on the abandoned nature of our
hearts, commonly resenting, in the deepest
manner
,
the imputation of individual offences. The
more earnest and pressing his inquiries became,
the more wary she grew, until disgusted with her
pertinacity, and secretly suspecting her of foul
play with her lodger, he left the house in anger,
determining to keep a close eye on her
movements
,
and, at a suitable moment, to strike such
a blow as should bring her not only to confession,
but to shame.
Under the influence of this momentary
resentment
,
and unable to avoid harboring the most
unpleasant suspicions of his aunt, the young
man determined, that very morning, to
withdraw
himself entirely, as a guest, from her
dwelling. Mrs. Lechmere, who, if she knew at all
that Lionel had been a witness of her
intercourse
with Ralph, must have received the
intelligence
from Abigail, received him, at
breakfast
,
with a manner that betrayed no such
consciousness
.
She listened to his excuses for
removing
,
with evident concern; and more than
once, as Lionel spoke of the probable nature of
his future life, now that hostilities had
commenced
the
additional trouble his presence
would occasion to her habits and yearsof his
great concern in her behalfand, in short, of all
that he could devise in the way of apology for
the step, he saw her eyes turned anxiously on
Cecil, with an expression which, at another time,
might have led him to distrust the motives of her
hospitality. The young lady herself, however,
evidently heard the proposal with great
satisfaction
,
and when her grandmother appealed to her
opinion, whether he had urged a single good
reason
for the measure, she answered with a vivacity
that had been a stranger to her manner of late
Certainly, my dear grandmamathe best of
all reasonshis inclinations. Major Lincoln tires
of us, and of our hum-drum habits, and, in my
eyes, true politeness requires that we should
suffer
him to leave us for his barracks, without a word
of remonstrance.
My motive must be greatly mistaken, if a
desire to leave you
Oh! sir, the explanation is not required.
You have urged so many reasons, cousin Lionel.
that the true and moving motive is yet kept
behind
the curtain. It must, and can be no other
than
ennui
.
Then I will remain, said Lionel; for any
thing is better than to be suspected of
insensibility
.
Cecil looked both gratified and disappointed
she played with her spoon a moment in
embarrassment
,
bit her beautiful lip with vexation, and
then said, in a more friendly tone
I must then exonerate you from the
imputation
go
to your own quarters, if it be
agreeable
,
and we will believe your incomprehensible
reasons for the changebesides, as a kinsman,
we shall see you every day, you know.
Lionel had now no longer any excuse for not
abiding by his avowed determination; and
notwithstanding
Mrs. Lechmere parted from her
interesting nephew with an exhibition of
reluctance
that was in singular contrast with her usually
cold and formal manner, the desired removal
was made in the course of that very morning.
When this change was accomplished, week after
week slipped by, in the manner related in the
preceding chapter, during which the
reinforcements
continued to arrive, and general after
general
appeared in the place to support the
unenterprizing
Gage in the conduct of the war. The
timid amongst the colonists were appalled as they
heard the long list of proud and boasted names
recounted
.
There was Howe, a man sprung from a
noble race, long known for their deeds in arms,
and whose chief had already shed his blood on
the soil of America. Clinton, another cadet of
an illustrious house, better known for his personal
intrepidity and domestic kindness, than for the
rough qualities of the warrior. And the elegant
and accomplished Burgoyne, who had already
purchased a name in the fields of Portugal and
the benefit of the late exchange, and curious to
know what all the suppressed roguery he could
detect in the demure countenances of his friends
might signify, Lionel dropped his pen, and
listened
to the succeeding dialogue.
Now answer to your offences, thou silly
fellow
,
with a wise name, M`Fuse commenced, in
a voice that did not fail, by its harsh cadences,
to create some of that awe, which, by the
expression
of hte speaker's eye, it would seem he
laboured to producespeak out with the
freedom
of a man, and the compunctions of a
Christian
,
if you have them. Why should I not send
you at once to Ireland, that ye may get your
deserts
on three pieces of timber, the one being laid
cross-wise for the sake of convenience. If you
have a contrary reason, bestow it without delay,
for the love you bear your own angular
daiformities
.
The wags did not altogether fail in their
object
,
Seth betraying a good deal more uneasiness
than it was usual for the man to exhibit even in
situations of uncommon peril. After clearing his
throat, and looking about him, to gather from the
eyes of the spectators which way their
sympathies
inclined, he answered with a very
commendable
fortitude
Because it's ag'in all law.
Have done with your interminable
perplexities
of the law, cried M`Fuse, and do not
bother honest gentlemen with its knavery, as if
they were no more than so many proctors in big
wigs! 'tis the gospel you should he thinking of,
you godless reprobate, on account of that final
end you will yet make, one day, in a most
indecent
hurry.
To your purpose, Mac, interrupted
Polwarth
,
who perceived that the erratic feelings of
his friend were beginning already to lead him
from the desired point; or I will propound
the matter myself, in a style that would do
credit
to a mandamus counsellor.
The mandamuses are all ag'in the charter,
and the law too, continued Seth, whose courage
increased as the dialogue bore more directly upon
his political principlesand to my mind it's
quite convincing that if ministers calculate largely
on upholding them, there will be great
disturbances
,
if not a proper fight in the land; for the
whole country is in a blaze!
Disturbances, thou immoveable iniquity!
thou quiet assassin! roared M`Fuse; do ye
not call a fight of a day a disturbance, or do ye
tar'm skulking behind fences, and laying the
muzzle of a musket on the head of Job Pray,
and the breech on a mullen-stalk, while ye draw
upon a fellow-creature, a commendable method
of fighting! Now answer me to the truth, and
disdain all lying, as ye would 'ating any thing
but cod on a Saturday, who were the two men
that fired into my very countenance, from the
unfortunate situation among the mullens that I
have datailed to you?
Pardon me, captain M`Fuse, said Polwarth,
if I say that your zeal and indignation run
ahead of your discretion. If we alarm the
prisoner
in this manner, we may defeat the ends of
justice. Besides, sir, there is a reflection
contained
in your language, to which I must dissent.
A real
dumb
is not to be despised, especially when
served up in wrapper, and between two coarser
fish to preserve the steamI have had my private
meditations on the subject of getting up a
Saturday's
club, in order to enjoy the bounty
of the Bay, and for improving the cookery of
the cod!
Note
.It may be a fit matter of inquiry for the
anti-quarian
,
to learn whether the captain ever put his project in
execution; and if so, whether he has not the merit of founding
that famous association, which, to this hour, maintains the
Catholic
custom of the East, by feasting on the last day of the
week on the staple of New-England; and which is said to
assemble
regularly, with much good-fellowship, around more good
wine than is ever encountered at any other board in the known
world.
And let me tell you, captain Polwarth,
returned
the grenadier, cocking his eye fiercely at
the other, that your epicurean propensities lead
you to the verge of cannibalism; for sure it may
be called
that
, when you speak of 'ating while the
life of a fellow cr'ature is under a discussion for
its termination
I conclude, interrupted Seth, who was
greatly
averse to all quarreling, and who thought he
saw the symptoms of a breach between his
judges, the captain wishes to know who the
two men were that fired on him a short time
before
he got the hit in the shoulder?
A short time, ye marvellous hypocrite!
'twas as quick as pop and slap could make it.
Perhaps there might be some mistake, for a
great many of the troops were much disguised
Do ye insinuate that I got drunk before the
enemies of my king! roared the grenadier
Harkye, Mister Sage, I ask you in a genteel way,
who the two men were that fired on me, in the
manner datailed, and remember that a man may
tire of putting questions which are never
answered
?
Why, returned Seth, who, however expert
at prevarication, eschewed with religious
horror
,
a direct lieI pretty much conclude that
theythe captain is sure the place he means was
just beyond Menotomy?
20*
As sure as men can be, said Polwarth, who
possess the use of their eyes.
Then captain Polwarth can give testimony
to the fact?
I believe Major Lincoln's horse carries a small
bit of your lead to this moment, Master Sage.
Seth yielded to this accumulation of evidence
against him, and knowing, moreover, that the
grenadier had literally made him a prisoner in the
fact of renewing his fire, he sagaciously
determined
to make a merit of necessity, and
candidly
to acknowledge his agency in inflicting the
wounds. The utmost, however, that his cautious
habits would permit him to say, was
Seeing there can't well be any mistake, I seem
to think, the two men were chiefly Job and I.
Chaifly, you lath of uncertainty! exclaimed
M`Fuse; if there was any chaif in that
cowardly
assassination of wounding a Christian, and of
also hurting a horse, which, though nothing but
a dumb baste, has better blood than runs in your
own beggarly veins, 'twas your own ugly
proportions
.
But I rejoice that you have come to the
confessional!I can now see you hung with
felicity
if
you have any thing to say, urge it
at once, why I should not embark you for
Ireland
by the first vessel, in a letter to my
Lord-Lieutenant
,
with a request that he'll give you an
early procession, and a dacent funeral.
Seth belonged to a class of his countrymen,
amongst whom, while there was a
superabundance
of ingenuity, there was literally no joke.
Dceived by the appearance of anger which had
in reality blended with the assumed manner of the
grenadier, as he dwelt upon the irritating subject
of his own injuries, the belief of the prisoner in the
sacred protection of the laws became much
shaken
,
and he began to reflect very seriously on the
insecurity of the times, as well as on the despotic
nature of the military power. The little humour
he had inherited from his puritan ancestors, was,
though exceedingly quaint, altogether after a
different
fashion from the off-hand, blundering wit of
the Irishman; and that manner which he did not
possess, he could not entirely comprehend, so that
as far as a very visible alarm furthered the views
of the two conspirators, they were quite successful.
Polwarth now took pity on his evident
embarrassment
,
and observed, with a careless manner
Perhaps I can make a proposal by which
Mr. Sage may redeem his neck from the halter,
and at the same time essentially serve an old
friend.
Hear ye that, thou confounder of men and
bastes! cried M`Fusedown on your knees,
and thank Mr. Paiter Polwarth for the charity of
his insinuation.
Seth was not displeased to hear such amicable
intentions announced; but habitually cautious in
all bargaining, he suppressed the exhibition of his
satisfaction, and said, with an air of deliberation
that would have done credit to the keenest trader
in King-streetthat he should like to hear the
terms of the agreement, before he gave his
conclusion
.
They are simply these, returned Polwarth
you shall receive your passports and freedom
to-night, on condition that you sign this bond,
whereby you will become obliged to supply our
mess, as usual, during the time the place is
invested
,
with certain articles of food and
nourishment
,
as herein set forth, and according to the
prices mentioned, which the veriest Jew in
Duke's-place would pronounce to be liberal.
Here; take the instrument, and `read, and mark,'
in order that we may `inwardly digest.'
Seth took the paper, and gave it that
manner
of investigation that he was wont to
bestow
on every thing which affected his
pecuniary
interests. He objected to the price of every
article, all of which were altered in compliance
with his obstinate resistance, and he moreover
insisted that a clause should be inserted to
exonerate
him from the penalty, provided the
intercourse
should be prohibited by the authorities of
the colony; after which, he continued
If the captain will agree to take charge of
the things, and become liable, I will conclude
to make the trade.
Here is a fellow who wants boot in a bargain
for his life! cried the grenadier; but we will
humour his covetous inelinations, Polly, and take
charge of the chattels. Captain Polwarth and
myself, pledge our words to their safe-keeping.
Let me run my eyes over the articles,
continued
the grenadier, looking very gravely at the
several covenants of the bondfaith, Paiter,
you have bargained for a goodly larder! Baif,
mutton, pigs, turnips, potatos, melons, and other
fruitsthere's a blunder, now, that would keep
an English mess on a grin for a month, if an
Irishman had made it! as if a melon was a fruit,
and a potato was not! The devil a word do I see
that you have said about a mouthful, except
aitables either! Here, fellow, clap your learning
to it, and I'll warrant you we yet get a meal out
of it, in some manner or other.
Wouldn't it be as well to put the last
agreement
in the writings, too, said Seth, in case
of accidents?
Hear how a knave halters himself! cried
M'Fuse; he has the individual honour of two
captains of foot, and is willing to exchange it for
their joint bond! The request is too raisonable to
be denied, Polly, and we should be guilty of
pecuniary
suicide to reject it; so place a small
article
at the bottom, explanatory of the mistake the
gentleman has fallen into.
Polwarth did not hesitate to comply, and in a
very few minutes every thing was arranged to
the perfect satisfaction of the parties, the two
soldiers
felicitating themselves on the success of a
scheme which seemed to avert the principal evils
of the leaguer from their own mess; and Seth,
finding no difficulty in complying with an
agreement
which was likely to prove so profitable,
however much he doubted its validity in a court
of justice. The prisoner was now declared at
liberty
,
and was advised to make his way out of
the place, with as little noise as possible, and
under
favour of the pass he held. Seth gave the bond
a last and most attentive perusal, and then
departed
,
well contented to abide by its conditions, and
not a little pleased to escape from the grenadier,
the expression of whose half-comic, half-serious
eye, occasioned him more perplexity than any other
subject which had ever before occupied his
astuteness
.
After the disappearance of the
prisoner
,
the two worthies repaired to their nightly
banquet
,
laughing heartily at the success of their
notable
invention.
Lionel suffered Seth to pass from the room,
without speaking, but as the man left his own
abode with a lingering and doubtful step, the
young soldier followed him into the street,
without
communicating to any one that he had
witnessed
what had passed, with the laudable
intention
of adding his own personal pledge for the
security
of the household goods in question. He,
however, found it no easy achievement to equal
the speed of a man who had just escaped from
a long confinement, and who now appeared
inclined to indulge his limbs freely in the pleasure
of an unlimited exercise. The velocity of Seth
continued unabated, until he had conducted
Lionel
far into the lower parts of the town, where the
latter perceived him to encounter a man with
whom he turned suddenly under an arch which
led into a dark and narrow court. Lionel
instantly
increased his speed, and as he entered beneath
the passage, he caught a glimpse of the lank figure
of the object of his pursuit, gliding through the
opposite entrance to the court, and, at the same
moment, he encountered the man who had
apparently
induced the deviation in his route. As
Lionel stepped a little on one side, the light of a
lamp fell full on the form of the other, and he
recognised
the person of the active leader of the
caucus, (as the political meeting he had attended
was called,) though so disguised and muffled, that,
but for the accidental opening of the folds of his
cloak, the unknown might have passed his
nearest
friend without discovery.
We meet again! exclaimed Lionel, in the
quickness of surprise; though it would seem
that the sun is never to shine on our interviews.
The stranger started, and betrayed an evident
wish to continue his walk, as though the other
had mistaken his person; then, as if
suddenly
recollecting himself, he turned and
approached
Lionel, with easy dignity, and answered
The third time is said to contain the charm!
I am happy to find that I meet Major Lincoln,
unharmed, after the dangers he so lately
encountered
.
The dangers have probably been
exaggerated
by those who wish ill to the cause of our
master, returned Lionel, coldly.
There was a calm, but proud smile on the face
of the stranger, as he replied
I shall not dispute the information of one who
bore so conspicuous a part in the deeds of that
daystill you will remember, though the march
to Lexington was, like our own accidental
rencontres
,
in the dark, that a bright sun shone upon
the retreat, and nothing has been hid.
Nothing need be concealed, replied Lionel,
nettled by the proud composure of the other
unless, indeed, the man I address is afraid to
walk the streets of Boston in open day.
The man you address, Major Lincoln, said
the stranger, advancing in his warmth a step
nearer
to Lionel, has dared to walk the streets of
Boston
both by day and by night, when the bullies of
him you call your master, have strutted their
hour in the security of peace; and now a nation
is up to humble their pretensions, shall he shrink
from treading his native soil when he will!
This is bold language for an enemy within a
British camp! Ask yourself what course my duty
requires of me?
That is a question which lies between Major
Lincoln and his conscience, returned the
stranger
though,
he added, after a momentary
pause, and in a milder tone, as if he
recollected
the danger of his situationthe
gentlemen
of his name and lineage were not apt to be
informers, when they dwelt in the land of their
birth.
Neither is their descendant. But let this be
the last of our interviews, until we can meet as
friends, or as enemies should, where we may
discuss
these topics at the points of our weapons.
Amen, said the stranger, seizing the hand of
the young man, and pressing it with the warmth
of a generous emulationthat hour may not be
far distant, and may God smile only on the just
cause.
Without uttering more, he drew the folds of his
dress more closely around his form, and walked
so swiftly away that Lionel, had he possessed
the inclination, could not have found an
opportunity
to arrest his progress. As all expectation
of overtaking Seth was now lost, the young
soldier returned slowly and thoughtfully towards
his quarters.
The two or three succeeding days were
distinguished
by an appearance of more than usual
preparation
among the troops, and it became known
that officers of rank had closely reconnoitred
the grounds of the opposite peninsula. Lionel
patiently awaited the progress of events; but as
the probability of active service increased, his
wishes to make another effort to probe the
secret
of the tenant of the warehouse revived, and
he took his way towards the dock-square, with
that object, on the night of the fourth day from
the preceding interview with the stranger. It
was long after the tattoo had laid the town in that
deep quiet which follows the bustle of a garrison;
and as he passed along he saw none but the
sentinels pacing their short limits, or an
occasional
officer, returning at that late hour from his
revels or his duty. The windows of the
warehouse
were dark, and its inhabitants, if any it
had, were wrapped in deep sleep. Restless,
and excited, Lionel pursued his walk through the
narrow and gloomy streets of the North-end,
until he unexpectedly found himself issuing upon
the open space that is tenanted by the dead, on
Copp's-hill. On this eminence the English
general
had caused a battery of heavy cannon to be
raised, and Lionel, unwilling to encounter the
challenge of the sentinels, inclining a little to one
side, proceeded to the brow of the hill, and
seating
himself on a stone, began to muse deeply on
his own fortunes, and the situation of the country.
The night was obscure, but the thin vapours
which appeared to overhang the place opened
at times, when a faint star-light fell from the
heavens
,
and rendered the black hulls of the vessels
of war that lay moored before the town, and the
faint outlines of the opposite shores, dimly
visible
.
The stillness of midnight rested on the
scene, and when the loud calls of all's-well
ascended from the ships and batteries, the
momentary
cry was succeeded by a quiet as deep as
if the universe slumbered under this assurance
of safety. At such an instant, when even the
light breathings of the night air were audible,
the sound of rippling waters, like that occasioned
by raising a paddle with extreme caution, was
borne to the ear of the young soldier. He
listened
intently, and then bending his eyes in the
direction
of the faint sounds, he saw a small canoe
gliding
along on the surface of the water, and soon
shoot upon the gravelly shore, at the foot of the
hill, with a motion so easy and uniform as
scarcely
to curl a wave on the land. Curious to know who
could be moving about the harbour at this hour, in
such a secret manner, Lionel was in the act of
rising to descend, when he saw the dim figure of a
man land from the boat, and climb the hill,
directly
in a line with his own position. Suppressing
even the sounds of his breath, and drawing his
body
back within the deep shadow cast from a point
of the hill, a little above him, Lionel waited until
the figure had approached within ten feet of him,
when it stopped, and appeared, like himself, to
be endeavouring to suppress all other sounds and
feelings in the absorbing act of deep attention.
The young soldier loosened his sword in its
sheath, before he said
VOL. I. 21
We have chosen a private spot, and a secret
hour, sir, for our meditations!
Had the figure possessed the impalpable nature
of an immaterial being, it could not have received
this remark, so startling from its suddenness, with
greater apathy than did the man to whom it was
addressed. He turned slowly towards the speaker,
and seemed to look at him earnestly, before he
answered, in a low, menacing voice
There's a granny on the hill, with a gun and
baggonet, walking among the cannon, and if he
hears people talking down here, he'll make them
prisoners, though one of them should be Major
Lincoln.
Ha! Job, said Lioneland is it you I meet
prowling about like a thief at night!on what
errand of mischief have you been sent this time?
If Job's a thief for coming to see the graves
on Copp's, returned the lad sullenly, there's
two of them.
Well answered boy! said Lionel, with a
smile; but I repeat, on what errand have you
returned to the town at this unseasonable and
suspicious hour?
Job loves to come up among the graves,
before
the cocks grow; they say the dead walk
when living men sleep.
And would you hold communion with the
dead, then?
'Tis sinful to ask them many questions, and
such as you do put should be made in the Holy
name, returned the lad, in a tone so solemn, that,
connected with the place and the scene, it caused
the blood of Lionel to thrillbut Job loves
to be near them, to use him to the damps,
ag'in the time he shall be called to walk himself
in a sheet at midnight.
Hush! said Lionelwhat noise is that?
Job stood a moment, listening as intently as his
companion, before he answered
There's no noise but the moaning of the wind
in the bay, or the sea tumbling on the beaches of
the islands?
'Tis neither, said Lionel; I heard the
low hum of a hundred voices, or my ears have
played me falsely.
May be the spirits speak to each other, said
the ladthey say their voices are like the
rushing
winds.
Lionel passed his hand across his brow, and
endeavoured to recover the tone of his mind,
which had been strangely disordered by the
solemn
manner of his companion, and walked
slowly
from the spot, closely attended by the silent
changeling. He did not stop until he had
reached
the inner angle of the wall that enclosed the
field of the dead, when he paused, and leaning on
the fence, again listened intently.
Boy, I know not how your silly conversation
may have warped my brain, he said, but there
are surely strange and unearthly sounds lingering
about this place, to-night! By heavens! there is
another rush of voices, as if the air above the
water
were filled with living beings; and then again,
I think I hear a noise as if heavy weights were
falling to the earth!
Ay, said Job, 'tis the clods on the coffins;
the dead are going into their graves ag'in, and
'tis time that we should leave them their own
grounds.
Lionel hesitated no longer, but he rather run
than walked from the spot, with a secret horror
that, at another moment, he would have blushed to
acknowledge, nor did he perceive that he was still
attended by Job, until he had descended some
distance
down Lynn-street. Here he was
addressed
by his companion, in his usually quiet and
unmeaning
tones
There's the house that the governor built
who went down into the sea for money! he
saidhe was a poor boy once, like Job, and
now they say his grandson is a great lord, and
the king knighted the grand'ther too. It's
pretty much the same thing whether a man
gets his money out of the sea or out of the
earth; the king will make him a lord for it.
You hold the favours of royalty cheap,
fellow
,
returned Lionel, glancing his eye carelessly
at the `Phipp's house, as he passedyou
forget
that I am to be some day one of your despised
knights!
I know it, said Job; and you come from
America tooit seems to me that all the poor
boys go from America to the king to be great
lords, and all the sons of the great lords come to
America to be made poor boysNab says Job
is the son of a great lord too!
Then Nab is as great a fool as her child,
said Lionel; but boy, I would see your mother
in the morning, and I expect you to let me know
at what hour I may visit her.
Job did not answer, and Lionel, on turning
his head, perceived that he was suddenly deserted
by the changeling, who was already gliding back
towards his favourite haunt among the graves.
Vexed at the wild humours of the lad, Lionel
hastened to his quarters, and threw himself in
his bed, though he heard the loud cries of all's
well, again and again, before the strange
phantasies
which continued to cross his mind would
permit him to obtain the rest he sought.
CHAPTER XV.
We are finer gentlemen, no doubt, than the plain farmers
we are about to encounter. Our hats carry a smarter cock,
our swords hang more gracefully by our sides, and we make
an easier figure in a ball-room; but let it be remembered,
that the most finished maccaroni amongst us, would pass for
an arrant clown at Pekin.
Letter from a Veteran Officer, &c
.
When
the heavy sleep of morning fell upon his
senses, visions of the past and future mingled with
wild confusion in the dreams of the youthful
soldier
.
The form of his father stood before him, as
he had known it in his childhood, fair in the
proportions and vigour of manhood, regarding
him with those eyes of benignant, but
melancholy
affection, which characterized their expression
after he had become the sole joy of his widowed
parent. While his heart was warming at the sight,
the figure melted away, and was succeeded by
fantastic phantoms, which appeared to dance
among the graves on Copp's, led along in those
gambols, which partook of the ghastly horrors of
the dead, by Job Pray, who glided among the
tombs like a being of another world. Sudden and
loud thunder then burst upon them, and the
shadows
fled into their secret places, from whence
he could see, ever and anon, some glassy eyes
21*
and spectral faces, peering out upon him, as if
conscious of the power they possessed to chill the
blood of the living. His visions now became
painfully distinct, and his sleep was oppressed
with their vividness, when his senses burst their
unnatural bonds, and he awoke. The air of
morning
was breathing through his open curtains, and
the light of day had already shed itself upon the
dusky roofs of the town. Lionel arose from his
bed, and had paced his chamber several times, in
a vain effort to shake off the images that had
haunted his slumbers, when the sounds which
broke upon the stillness of the air, became too
plain to be longer mistaken by a practised ear.
Ha! he muttered to himself, I have been
dreaming but by halvesthese are the sounds of
no fancied tempest, but cannon, speaking most
plainly to the soldier!
He opened his window, and looked out upon
the surrounding scene. The roar of artillery
was now quick and heavy, and Lionel bent his
eyes about him to discover the cause of this
unusual
occurrence. It had been the policy of Gage
to await the arrival of his reinforcements, before
he struck a blow which was intended to be
decisive
;
and the Americans were well known to
be too scantily supplied with the munitions of
war, to waste a single charge of powder in any of
the vain attacks of modern sieges. A knowledge
of these facts gave an additional interest to the
curiosity with which Major Lincoln endeavoured
to penetrate the mystery of so singular a
disturbance
.
Window after window in the adjacent
buildings soon exhibited, like his own, its
wondering
and alarmed spectator. Here and there a
half-dressed soldier, or a busy townsman, was seen
hurrying along the silent streets, with steps that
denoted the eagerness of his curiosity. Women
began to rush wildly from their dwellings, and
then, as the sounds broke on their ears with
ten-fold heaviness in the open air, they shrunk
back into their habitations in pallid dismay.
Lionel
called to three or four of the men as they
hurried by, but turning their eyes wildly
towards
his window, they passed on without
answering
,
as if the emergency were too pressing
to admit of speech. Finding his repeated
inquiries
fruitless, he hastily dressed himself, and
descended
to the street. As he left his own door,
a half-clad artillerist hurried past him, adjusting
his garments with one hand, and bearing in the
other some of the lesser implements of the
particular
corps in which he served.
What means the firing, sergeant, demanded
Lionel, and whither do you hasten with those
fuses?
The rebels, your honour, the rebels!
returned
the soldier, looking back to speak, without
ceasing his speed; and I go to my guns!
The rebels! repeated Lionelwhat can
we have to fear, from a mob of countrymen, in
such a positionthat fellow has slept from his
post, and apprehensions for himself mingle with
this zeal for his king!
The towns-people now began to pour from
their dwellings in scores; and Lionel imitated
their example, and took his course towards the
adjacent height of Beacon-hill. He toiled his
way up the steep ascent, in company with
twenty
more, without exchanging a syllable with men
who appeared as much astonished as himself at
this early interruption of their slumbers, and in
a few minutes he stood on the little grassy
platform
,
surrounded by a hundred interested gazers.
The sun had just lifted the thin veil of mist from
the bosom of the waters, and the eye was
permitted
to range over a wide field beneath the light
vapour. Several vessels were moored in the
channels of the Charles and Mystick, to cover the
northern approaches to the place; and as he
beheld
the column of white smoke that was
wreathing
about the masts of a frigate among them,
Lionel
was no longer at a loss to comprehend whence
the firing proceeded. While he was yet gazing,
uncertain of the reasons which demanded this
show of war, immense fields of smoke burst from
the side of a ship of the line, who also opened
her deep-mouthed cannon, and presently her
example
was followed by several floating batteries,
and lighter vessels, until the wide amphitheatre
of hills that encircled Boston were filled with the
echoes of a hundred pieces of artillery.
What can it mean, sir! exclaimed a young
officer of his own regiment, addressing Major
Lincolnthe sailors are in downright earnest,
and they scale their guns with shot, I know, by
the rattling of the reports!
I can boast of a vision no better than your
own, returned Lionel; for no enemy can I
see. As the guns seem pointed at the opposite
peninsula, it is probable a party of the Americans
are attempting to destroy the grass which lies
newly mown in the meadows.
The young officer was in the act of assenting
to this conjecture, when a voice was heard above
their heads, shouting
There goes a gun from Copp's! They
needn't think to frighten the people with their
rake-helly noises; let them blaze away till the
dead get out of their gravesthe Bay-men will
keep the hill!
Every eye was immediately turned upward,
and the wondering and amused spectators
discovered
Job Pray, seated in the grate of the
Beacon
,
his countenance, usually so vacant,
gleaming
with exultation, while he continued waving
his hat high in air, as gun after gun was added to
the uproar of the cannonade.
How now, fellow! exclaimed Lionel; what
see you? and where are the Bay-men of whom
you speak?
Where, returned the simpleton, clapping his
hands with childish delightwhy, where they
came at dark midnight, and where theyll stand
at open noon-day! The Bay-men can look
into the windows of old Funnel at last, and now
let the reg'lars come on, and they'll teach the
godless murderers the law!
Lionel, a little irritated with the bold language
of Job, called to him in an angry voice
Come down from that perch, fellow, and
explain
yourself, or this grenadier shall lift you
from your seat, and transfer you to the post for
a little of that wholesome correction which you
need.
You promised that the grannies should never
flog Job ag'in, said the changeling, crouching
down in the grate, whence he looked out at his
threatened chastiser with a lowering and sullen
eyeand Job agreed to run your a'r'nds,
and not take any of the king's crowns in pay.
Come down, then, this instant, and I will
remember
the compact.
Comforted by this assurance, which was made
in a more friendly tone, Job threw himself
carelessly
from his iron seat, and clinging to the post,
he slid swiftly to the earth, where Major Lincoln
immediately arrested him by the arm, and
demanded
Where are those Bay-men, I once more
ask?
There! repeated Job, pointing over the
low roofs of the town, in the direction of the
opposite
peninsula. They dug their cellar on
Breeds, and now they are fixing the underpinnin',
and next you'll see what a raising they'll invite
the people to!
The instant the spot was named, all those eyes
which had hitherto gazed at the vessels
themselves
,
instead of searching for the object of
their hostility, were turned on the green eminence
which rose a little to the right of the village of
Charlestown, and every doubt was at once
removed
by the discovery. The high, conical summit
of Bunker-hill lay naked, and unoccupied, as on
the preceding day; but on the extremity of a more
humble ridge, which extended within a short
distance of the water, a low bank of earth had
been thrown up, for purposes which no military
eye could mistake. This redoubt, small and
inartificial
as it was, commanded by its position
the whole of the inner harbour of Boston, and
even endangered, in some measure, the occupants
of the town itself. It was the sudden appearance
of this magical mound, as the mists of the
morning
had dispersed, which roused the slumbering
seamen; and it had already become the target
of all the guns of the shipping in the bay.
Amazement
at the temerity of their countrymen, held
the townsmen silent, while Major Lincoln,
and the few officers who stood nigh him, saw at a
glance, that this step on the part of their
adversaries
would bring the affairs of the leaguer to an
instant crisis. In vain they turned their
wondering
looks on the neighbouring eminence, and
around the different points of the peninsula, in
quest of those places of support with which
soldiers
generally entrench their defences. The
husbandmen opposed to them, had seized upon
the point best calculated to annoy their foes,
without regard to the consequences; and in a few
short hours, favoured by the mantle of night, had
thrown up their work with a dexterity that was
only exceeded by their boldness. The truth
flashed across the brain of Major Lincoln with his
first glance, and he felt his cheeks glow as he
remembered
the low and indistinct murmurs which
the night air had wafted to his ears, and those
inexplicable
fancies, which had even continued to
haunt him till dispersed by truth and the light
of day. Motioning to Job to follow, he left
the hill with a hurried step, and when they
gained
the common, he turned, and said, sternly, to
his companion
Fellow, you have been privy to this midnight
work!
Job has enough to do in the day, without
labouring in the night, when none but the dead
are out of their places of rest, returned the lad,
with a look of mental imbecility, which
immediately
disarmed the resentment of the other.
Lionel smiled as he again remembered his own
weakness, and repeated to himself
The dead! ay, these are the works of the
living, and bold men are they who have dared to
do the deed. But tell me, Job, for 'tis in vain
to attempt deceiving me any longer, what
number
of Americans did you leave on the hill when
you crossed the Charles to visit the graves on
Copp's, the past night?
Both hills were crowded, returned the
otherBreeds with the people, and Copp's with
the ghostsJob believes the dead rose to see
their children digging so nigh them!
'Tis probable, said Lionel, who believed it
wisest to humour the wild conceits of the lad, in
order to disarm his cunning; but though the
dead are invisible, the living may be counted.
Job did count five hundred men, marching
over the nose of Bunker, by star-light, with their
picks and spades; and then he stopped, for he
forgot whether seven or eight hundred came
next.
And after you ceased to count, did many
others pass?
The Bay-colony isn't so poorly off for men,
that it can't muster a thousand at a raising.
But you had a master workman on the
occasion
;
was it the wolf-hunter of Connecticut?
There is no occasion to go from the
province
to find a workman to lay out a cellar!
Dicky Gridley is a Boston boy!
Ah! he is the chief! we can have nothing to
fear then, since the Connecticut woodsman is not
at their head?
Do you think old Prescott, of Pepperel, will
quit the hill while he has a kernel of powder to
burn!no, no, Major Lincoln, Ralph himself
an't a stouter warrior; and you can't frighten
Ralph!
But if they fire their cannon often, their
small stock of ammunition will be soon
consumed
,
and then they must unavoidably run.
Job laughed tauntingly, and with an
appearance
of high scorn, before he answered
Yes, if the Bay-men were as dumb as the
king's troops, and used such big guns! but the
cannon of the colony want but little brimstone,
and there's but few of themlet the
rake-hellies
go up to Breeds; the people will teach
them the law!
Lionel had now obtained all he expected to
learn from the simpleton concerning the force
and condition of the Americans; and as the
moments
were too precious to be wasted in vain
discourse
,
he bid the lad repair to his quarters that
night, and left him. On entering his own
lodgings
,
Major Lincoln shut himself up in his private
apartment, and passed several hours in writing,
and examining important papers. One letter, in
particular, was written, read, torn, and rewritten
five or six times, until at length he placed his
seal, and directed the important paper with a sort
of carelessness that denoted his patience was
exhausted
by repeated trials. These documents
were entrusted to Meriton, with orders to deliver
them to their several addresses, unless
countermanded
before the following day, and the young
man hastily swallowed a late and light breakfast.
While shut up in his closet, Lionel had several
times thrown aside his pen to listen, as the hum of
the place penetrated to his retirement, and
announced
the excitement and bustle which
pervaded
the streets of the town. Having at length
completed the task he had assigned himself, he
caught up his hat, and took his way, with hasty
steps, into the centre of the place.
Cannon were rattling over the rough
pavements
,
followed by ammunition wagons, and
officers
and men of the artillery were seen in swift
pursuit of their pieces. Aide-de-camps were
riding furiously through the streets, charged with
important messages; and here and there an officer
might be seen issuing from his quarters, with a
countenance in which manly pride struggled
powerfully with inward dejection, as he caught
the last glance of anguish which followed his
retiring form, from eyes that had been used to
meet his own with looks of confidence and love.
There was, however, but little time to dwell on
these flitting glimpses of domestic wo, amid the
general bustle and glitter of the scene. Now and
then the strains of martial broke up through
VOL. I. 22
the windings of the crooked avenues, and
detachments
of the troops wheeled by on their way to
the appointed place of embarkation. While
Lionel
stood a moment at the corner of a street,
admiring
the firm movement of a body of
grenadiers
,
his eye fell on the powerful frame and
rigid features of M Fuse, marching at the head of
his company with that gravity which regarded
the accuracy of the step amongst the important
incidents of life. At a short distance from him
was Job Pray, timing his paces to the tread of
the soldiers, and regarding the gallant show with
stupid admiration, while his ear unconsciously
drank the inspiriting music of their band. As
this fine body of men passed on, it was
immediately
succeeded by a battalion in which Lionel
instantly recognised the facings of his own
regiment
.
The warm-hearted Polwarth led its
forward
files, and waving his hand, he cried
God bless you, Leo, God bless youwe shall
make a fair stand up fight of this; there is an end
of all stag-hunting.
The notes of the horns rose above his voice,
and Lionel could do no more than return his
cordial salute; when, recalled to his purpose by
the sight of his comrades, he turned, and
pursued
his way to the quarters of the
commander-in-chief
.
The gate of Province-house was thronged with
military men; some waiting for admittance, and
others entering and departing with the air of
those who were charged with the execution of
matters of the deepest moment. The name of
Major Lincoln was hardly announced before an
aid appeared to conduct him into the presence
of the governor, with a politeness and haste that
several gentlemen, who had been in waiting for
hours, deemed in a trifling degree unjust.
Lionel, however, having little to do with
murmurs which he did not hear, followed his
conductor
,
and was immediately ushered into the
apartment, where a council of war had just closed
its deliberations. On the threshold of its door
he was compelled to give way to an officer who
was departing in haste, and whose powerful frame
seemed bent a little in the intensity of thought,
as his dark, military countenance lighted for an
instant with the salutation he returned to the low
bow of the young soldier. Around this chief
a group of younger men immediately clustered,
and as they departed in company, Lionel was
enabled
to gather from their conversation that they
took their way for the field of battle. The room
was filled with officers of high rank, though here
and there was to be seen a man in civil attire,
whose disappointed and bitter looks announced
him to be one of those mandamus counsellors,
whose evil advice had hastened the mischief their
wisdom could never repair. From out a small
circle
of these mortified civilians, the unpretending
person of Gage advanced to meet Lionel,
forming
a marked contrast by the simplicity of its
dress, to the military splendour that was glittering
around him.
In what can I oblige Major Lincoln? he
said, taking the young man by the hand
cordially
,
as if glad to be rid of the troublesome
counsellors
he had so unceremoniously quitted.
`Wolfe's own' has just passed me on its way
to the boats, and I have ventured to intrude on
your excellency to inquire if it were not time its
Major had resumed his duty?
A shade of thought was seated for a moment on
the placid features of the general, and he then
answered
with a friendly smile
'Twill be no more than an affair of out-posts,
and must be quickly ended. But should I grant
the request of every brave young man whose
spirit is up to-day, it might cost his majesty's
service
the life of some officer that would make the
purchase of the pile of earth too dear.
But may I not be permitted to say, that the
family of Lincoln is of the Province, and its
example should not be lost on such an occasion?
The loyalty of the colonies is too well
represented
here to need the sacrifice, said Gage,
glancing his eyes carelessly at the expecting group
behind him.My council have decided on the
officers to be employed, and I regret that Major
Lincoln's name was omitted, since I know it will
give him pain; but valuable lives are not to be
lightly and unnecessarily exposed.
Lionel bowed in submission, and after
communicating
the little he had gatltered from Job Pray,
he turned away, and found himself near another
officer of high rank, who smiled as he observed his
disappointed countenance, and taking him by the
arm, led him from the room, with a freedom
suited
to his fine figure and easy air.
Then, like myself, Lincoln, you are not to
battle for the king to-day, he said, on gaining
the anti-chamber. Howe has the luck of the
occasion, if there can be luck in so vulgar an
affair. But
allons;
accompany me to Copp's, as
a spectator, since they deny us parts in the drama;
and perhaps we may pick up materials for a
pasquinade
,
though not for an epic.
Pardon me, General Burgoyne, said
Lionel
,
if I view the matter with more serious eyes
than yourself.
Ah! I had forgot that you were a follower
of Percy in the hunt of Lexington! interrupted
the other; we will call it a tragedy, then, if
it better suits your humour. For myself, Lincoln,
I weary of these crooked streets and gloomy
houses, and having some taste for the poetry of
nature, would have long since looked out upon
the deserted fields of these husbandmen, had the
authority, as well as the inclination, rested with
me. But Clinton is joining us: he, too, is for
Copp's, where we can all take a lesson in arms, by
studying the manner in which Howe wields his
battalions.
A soldier of middle age now joined them, whose
stout frame, while it wanted the grace and ease
of the gentleman who still held Lionel by the arm,
bore a martial character to which the look of the
quiet and domestic Gage was a stranger; and
followed
by their several attendants, the whole party
immediately left the government-house to take
their destined position on the eminence so often
mentioned.
As they entered the street, Burgoyne
relinquished
the arm of his companion, and moved
with becoming dignity by the side of his brother
General. Lionel gladly availed himself of this
alteration to withdraw a little from the group,
whose steps he followed at such a distance as
permitted
him to observe those exhibitions of feeling
on the part of the inhabitants, which the pride of
the others induced them to overlook. Pallid and
anxious female faces were gleaming out upon
them from every window, while the roofs of the
houses, and the steeples of the churches, were
beginning
to throng with more daring, and equally
interested spectators. The drums no longer
rolled
along the narrow streets, though, occasionally,
the shrill strain of a fife was heard from the
water
,
announcing the movements of the troops to
the opposite peninsula. Over all was heard the
incessant roaring of the artillery, which, untired,
had not ceased to rumble in the air since the
appearance
22*
of light, until the ear, accustomed to its
presence, had learnt to distinguish the lesser
sounds we have recorded.
As the party descended into the lower passages
of the town, it appeared deserted by every thing
having life, the open windows and neglected doors
betraying the urgency of the feelings which had
called the population to situations more
favourable
for observing the approaching contest. This
appearance of intense curiosity excited the
sympathies
of even the old and practised soldiers;
and quickening their paces, the whole soon
rose from among the gloomy edifices to the open
and unobstructed view from the hill.
The whole scene now lay before them. Nearly
in their front was the village of Charlestown,
with its deserted streets, and silent roofs, looking
like a place of the dead; or, if the signs of life
were visible within its open avenues, 'twas
merely
some figure moving swiftly in the solitude, like
one who hastened to quit the devoted spot. On
the opposite point of the south-eastern face of
the peninsula, and at the distance of a thousand
yards, the ground was already covered by masses
of human beings, in scarlet, with their arms
glittering
in a noon-day sun. Between the two, though
in the more immediate vicinity of the silent town,
the rounded ridge already described, rose
abruptly
from a flat that was bounded by the water,
until, having attained an elevation of some fifty or
sixty feet, it swelled gradually to the little crest,
where was planted the humble object that had
occasioned all this commotion. The meadows, on
the right, were still peaceful and smiling as in the
most quiet days of the province, though the
excited
fancy of Lionel imagined that a sullen
stillness
lingered about the neglected kilns in their
front, and over the whole landscape, that was in
gloomy consonance with the approaching scene.
Far on the left, across the waters of the Charles,
the American camp had poured forth its
thousands
to the hills; and the whole population of the
country for many miles inland, had gathered to a
point, to witness a struggle charged with the fate
of their nation. Beacon-hill rose from out the
appalling
silence of the town of Boston, like a
pyramid
of living faces, with every eye fixed on the
fatal point, and men hung along the yards of the
shipping, or were suspended on cornices, cupolas,
and steeples, in thoughtless security, while every
other sense was lost in the absorbing interest of
the sight. The vessels of war had hauled deep
into the rivers, or more properly, those narrow
arms of the sea which formed the peninsula, and
sent their iron missiles with unwearied industry
across the low passage which alone opened the
means of communication between the self-devoted
yeomen on the hill, and their distant country men.
While battalion landed after battalion on the
point, cannon-balls from the battery of Copp's,
and the vessels of war, were glancing up the
natural
glacis that surrounded the redoubt, burying
themselves in its earthen parapet, or plunging
with violence into the deserted sides of the loftier
height which lay a few hundred yards in its rear;
and the black and smoking bombs appeared to
hover above the spot, as if pausing to select the
places in which to plant their deadly
combustibles
.
Notwithstanding these appalling preparations,
and ceaseless annoyances, throughout that long
and anxious morning, the stout husbandmen
on the hill had never ceased their steady efforts
to maintain, to the uttermost extremity, the post
they had so daringly assumed. In vain the
English
exhausted every means to disturb their
stubborn foes; the pick, the shovel, and the spade
continued to perform their offices, and mound rose
after mound, amidst the din and danger of the
cannonade, steadily, and as well as if the fanciful
conceits of Job Pray embraced their real objects,
and the labourers were employed in the peaceful
pursuits of their ordinary lives. This firmness,
however, was not like the proud front which high
training can impart to the most common mind;
for ignorant of the glare of military show; in the
simple and rude vestments of their calling;
armed
with such weapons as they had seized from the
hooks above their own mantels; and without
even a banner to wave its cheering folds above
their heads, they stood, sustained only by the
righteousness of their cause, and those deep
moral principles which they had received from
their fathers, and which they intended this day
should show, were to be transmitted
untarnished
to their children. It was afterwards known
that they endured their labours and their dangers
even in want of that sustenance which is so
essential
to support animal spirits in moments of
calmness and ease; while their enemies, on the
point, awaiting the arrival of their latest bands,
were securely devouring a meal, which to
hundreds
amongst them proved to be their last. The
fatal instant now seemed approaching. A
general
movement was seen among the battalions
of the British, who began to spread along the
shore, under cover of the brow of the hill
the lingering boats having arrived with the rear
of their detachmentsand officers hurried from
regiment to regiment with the final mandates
of their chief. At this moment a body of
Americans
appeared on the crown of Bunker-hill,
and descending swiftly by the road,
disappeared
in the meadows to the left of their own
redoubt. This band was followed by others,
who, like themselves, had broken through the
dangers of the narrow pass, by braving the
fire of the shipping, and who also hurried to
join their comrades on the low land. The
British
General determined at once to anticipate the
arrival of further reinforcements, and gave forth
the long-expected order to prepare for the attack.
CHAP. XVI.
Th'imperious Briton, on the well-fought ground,
No cause for joy, or wanton triumph found,
But saw, with grief, their dreams of conquest vain,
Felt the deep wounds, and mourn'd their vet'rans slain.
Humphreys
.
The
Americans had made a show, in the
course of that fearful morning, of returning the
fire of their enemies, by throwing a few shot from
their light field-pieces, as if in mockery of the
tremendous cannonade which they sustained.
But as the moment of severest trial approached,
the same awful stillness which had settled upon
the deserted streets of Charlestown, hovered
around the redoubt. On the meadows, to its
left, the recently arrived bands hastily threw
the rails of two fences into one, and covering
the whole with the mown grass that surrounded
them, they posted themselves along the frail
defence, which answered no better purpose than
to conceal their weakness from their adversaries.
Behind this characteristic rampart, several bodies
of husbandmen from the neighbouring provinces
of New-Hampshire and Connecticut, lay on their
arms, in sullen expectation. Their line extended
from the shore to the base of the ridge, where it
terminated several hundred feet behind the
works; leaving a wide opening in a diagonal
direction
,
between the fence and an earthen
breast-work
,
which ran a short distance down the
declivity
of the hill, from the north-eastern angle
of the redoubt. A few hundred yards in the
rear of this rude disposition, the naked crest
of Bunker-hill rose unoccupied and undefended,
and the streams of the Charles and Mystick
sweeping around its base, approached so near
each other as to blend the sounds of their
rippling
.
It was across this low and narrow isthmus,
that the royal frigates poured a stream of fire,
that never ceased, while around it hovered the
numerous parties of the undisciplined Americans,
hesitating to attempt the dangerous passage.
In this manner Gage had, in a great degree,
surrounded the devoted peninsula with his power;
and the bold men who had so daringly planted
themselves under the muzzles of his cannon,
were left, as already stated, unsupported, without
nourishment, and with weapons from their own
gun-hooks, singly to maintain the honour of their
nation. Including men of all ages and conditions,
there might have been two thousand of them;
but as the day advanced, small bodies of their
countrymen, taking counsel of their feelings, and
animated by the example of the old Partisan of
the Woods, who crossed and recrossed the neck,
loudly scoffing at the danger, broke through the
fire of the shipping in time to join in the closing
and bloody business of the hour.
On the other hand, Howe led more than an
equal number of the chosen troops of his Prince;
and as boats continued to ply between the two
peninsulas throughout the afternoon, the relative
disparity continued undiminished to the end of
the struggle. It was at this point in our narrative
that, deeming himself sufficiently strong to force
the defences of his despised foes, the
arrangements
immediately preparatory to such an
undertaking
were made in full view of the
excited
spectators. Notwithstanding the security
with which the English General marshalled his
warriors, he felt that the approaching contest
would be a battle of no common incidents. The
eyes of teus of thousands were fastened on his
movements, and the occasion demanded the
richest
display of the pageantry of war.
The troops formed with beautiful accuracy,
and the columns moved steadily along the shore,
and took their assigned stations under cover of
the brow of the eminence. Their force was in
some measure divided; one moiety attempting
the toilsome ascent of the hill, and the other
moving
along the beach, or in the orchards of the
more level ground, towards the husbandmen on
the meadows. The latter soon disappeared
behind
some fruit-trees and the brick-kilns just
mentioned. The advance of the royal columns
up the ascent was slow and measured, giving
time to their field-guns to add their efforts to
the uproar of the cannonade, which broke out
with new fury as the battalions prepared to
march. When each column arrived at the allotted
point, it spread the gallant array of its glittering
warriors under a bright sun.
It is a glorious spectacle, murmured the
graceful chieftain by the side of Lionel, keenly
alive to all the poetry of his alluring profession;
how exceeding soldier-like! and with what
accuracy his `first-arm ascends the hill,' towards
his enemy!
The intensity of his feelings prevented Major
Lincoln from replying, and the other soon forgot
that he had spoken, in the overwhelming anxiety
of the moment. The advance of the British
line, so beautiful and slow, resembled rather
the ordered steadiness of a drill than an approach
to a deadly struggle. Their standards fluttered
proudly above them, and there were moments
when the wild music of their bands was heard
rising on the air, and tempering the ruder sounds
of the artillery. The young and thoughtless in their
ranks turned their faces backward, and smiled
exultingly, as they beheld steeples, roofs, masts,
and heights, teeming with their thousands of eyes,
bent on the show of their bright array. As the
British
lines moved in open view of the little redoubt,
and began slowly to gather around its different
faces, gun after gun became silent, and the
curious artillerist, or tired seaman, lay extended
on his heated piece, gazing in mute wonder at
the spectacle. There was just then a minute
when the roar of the cannonade seemed passing
away like the rumbling of distant thunder.
They will not fight, Lincoln, said the
animated
leader at the side of Lionelthe military
front of Howe has chilled the hearts of the knaves,
and our victory will be bloodless!
We shall see, sirwe shall see!
These words were barely uttered, when platoon
after platoon, among the British, delivered its
fire, the blaze of musketry flashing swiftly around
the brow of the hill, and was immediately
followed
by heavy volleys that ascended from the
orchard. Still no answering sound was heard
from the Americans, and the royal troops were
soon lost to the eye as they slowly marched into
the white cloud which their own fire had alone
created.
They are cowed, by heavensthe dogs are
cowed! once more cried the gay companion of
VOL. I. 23
Lionel, and Howe is within two hundred feet of
them, unharmed!
At that instant a sheet of flame glanced through
the smoke, like lightning playing in a cloud,
while at one report a thousand muskets were
added to the uproar. It was not altogether
fancy
which led Lionel to imagine that he saw the
smoky canopy of the hill to wave as if the trained
warriors it enveloped faltered before this close
and appalling discharge; but in another instant,
the stimulating war-cry, and the loud shouts of
the combatants were borne across the strait to
his ears, even amid the horrid din of the combat.
Ten breathless minutes flew by like a moment of
time, and the bewildered spectators on Copp's
were still gazing intently on the scene, when a
voice was raised among them, shouting
Hurrah! let the rake-hellies go up to Breed's;
the people will teach'em the law!
Throw the rebel scoundrel from the hill!
Blow him from the muzzle of a gun! cried
twenty soldiers in a breath.
Hold! exclaimed Lionel'tis a
simpleton
,
an idiot, a fool!
But the angry and savage murmurs as quickly
subsided, and were lost in other feelings, as the
bright red lines of the royal troops were seen
issuing from the smoke, waving and recoiling
before the still vivid fire of their enemies.
Ha! said Burgoyne'tis some feint to
draw the rebels from their hold!
'Tis a palpable and disgraceful retreat!
muttered the stern warrior nigh him, whose truer
eye detected at a glance the discomfiture of the
assailants'Tis another base retreat before the
rebels!
Hurrah! shouted the reckless changeling
again; there come the reg'lars out of the
orchard too!see the grannies skulking behind
the kilns! Let them go on to Breed's, the
people
will teach'em the law!
No cry of vengeance preceded the act this
time, but fifty of the soldiery rushed, as by a
common
impulse, on their prey. Lionel had not time
to utter a word of remonstrance, before Job
appeared
in the air, borne on the uplifted arms of
a dozen men, and at the next instant he was
seen rolling down the steep declivity, with a
velocity
that carried him to the water's edge.
Springing to his feet, the undaunted changeling
once more waved his hat in triumph, and
shouted
forth again his offensive challenge. Then
turning, he launched his canoe from its hiding
place among the adjacent lumber, amid a shower
of stones, and glided across the strait; his little
bark escaping unnoticed in the crowd of boats
that were rowing in all directions. But his
progress
was watched by the uneasy eye of Lionel,
who saw him land and disappear, with hasty steps,
in the silent streets of the town.
While this trifling by-play was enacted, the
great drama of the day was not at a stand. The
smoky veil which clung around the brow of the
eminence, was lifted by the air, and sailed
heavily
away to the south-west, leaving the scene of
the bloody struggle again open to the view.
Lionel
witnessed the grave and meaning glances
which the two lieutenants of the king exchanged
as they simultaneously turned their glasses from
the fatal spot, and taking the one proffered by
Burgoyne, he read their explanation in the
numbers
of the dead that lay profusely scattered in
front of the redoubt. At this instant, an officer
from the field held an earnest communication
with the two leaders, when, having delivered his
orders, he hastened back to his boat, like one
who felt himself employed in matters of life and
death.
It shall be done, sir, repeated Clinton, as
the other departed, his own honest brow sternly
knit under high martial excitement.The
artillery
have their orders, and the work will be
accomplished
without delay.
This, Major Lincoln! cried his more
sophisticated
companion, this is one of the trying
duties of the soldier! To fight, to bleed, or
even to die, for his prince, is his happy privilege;
but it is sometimes his unfortunate lot to become
the instrument of vengeance.
Lionel waited but a moment for an
explanation
the
flaming balls were soon seen taking
their wide circuit in the air, and carrying their
desolation among the close and inflammable
roofs of the opposite town. In a very few minutes
a dense, black smoke arose from the deserted
buildings, and forked flames played actively along
the heated shingles, as though rioting in their
unmolested possession of the place. He
regarded
the gathering destruction in painful silence;
and on bending his looks towards his companions,
he fancied, notwithstanding the language of the
other, that he read the deepest regret in the
averted
eye of him who had so unhesitatingly uttered
the fatal mandate to destroy.
In scenes like these we are attempting to
describe
,
hours appear to be minutes, and time flies
as imperceptibly as life slides from beneath the
feet of age. The disordered ranks of the British
had been arrested at the base of the hill, and
were again forming under the eyes of their
leaders
,
with admirable discipline, and extraordinary
care. Fresh battalions, from Boston, marched
with high military pride into the line, and every
thing betokened that a second assault was at hand.
When the moment of stupid amazement which
succeeded the retreat of the royal troops had
passed, the troops and batteries poured out their
wrath with tenfold fury on their enemies. Shot
were incessantly glancing up the gentle acclivity,
madly ploughing across its grassy surface, while
black and threatening shells appeared to hover
above the work like the monsters of the air, about
to stoop upon their prey.
Still all lay quiet and immoveable within the
low mounds of earth, as if none there had a stake
in the issue of the bloody day. For a few
moments
only, the tall figure of an aged man was
seen slowly moving along the summit of the
rampart, calmly regarding the dispositions of the
English general in the more distant part of his
line, and after exchanging a few words with a
gentleman who joined him in his dangerous
lookout
,
they disappeared together behind the grassy
banks. Lionel soon detected the name of
Prescott
of Pepperell, passing through the crowd in
low murmurs, and his glass did not deceive him
when he thought, in the smaller of the two, he
had himself descried the graceful person of the
unknown leader of the `caucus.'
All eyes were now watching the advance of the
battalions, which once more drew'nigh the point of
contest. The heads of the columns were already
in view of their enemies, when a man was seen
swiftly ascending the hill from the burning town:
he paused amid the peril, on the natural glacis,
and swung his hat triumphantly, and Lionel even
fancied he heard the exulting cry, as he
recognised
the ungainly form of the simpleton, before
it plunged into the work.
The right of the British once more
disappeared
in the orchard, and the columns in front of the
redoubt again opened with all the imposing
exactness
23*
of their high discipline. Their arms were
already glittering in a line with the green faces of
the mound, and Lionel heard the experienced
warrior at his side, murmuring to himself
Let him hold his fire, and he will go in at
the point of the bayonet!
But the trial was too great for even the
practised
courage of the royal troops. Volley
succeeded
volley, and in a few moments they had
again curtained their ranks behind the misty
skreen produced by their own fire. Then came the
terrible flash from the redoubt, and the eddying
volumes from the adverse hosts rolled into one
cloud, enveloping the combatants in its folds,
as if to conceal their bloody work from the
spectators
.
Twenty times in the short space of as
many minutes, Major Lincoln fancied he heard
the incessant roll of the American musketry die
away before the heavy and regular volleys of the
troops, and then he thought the sounds of the
latter
grew more faint, and were given at longer
intervals.
The result, however, was soon known. The
heavy bank of smoke which now even clung along
the ground, was broken in fifty places, and the
disordered
masses of the British were seen driven
before their deliberate foes, in wild confusion.
The flashing swords of the officers in vain
attempted
to arrest the torrent, nor did the flight
cease with many of the regiments until they had
even reached their boats. At this moment a hum
was heard in Boston like the sudden rush of wind,
and men gazed in each other's faces with
undisguised
amazement. Here and there a low sound
of exultation escaped some unguarded lip, and
many an eye gleamed with a triumph that could
no longer be suppressed. Until this moment the
feelings of Lionel had vacillated between the
pride of country and his military spirit, but
Iosing all other feelings in the latter sensation,
he now looked fiercely about him, as if he would
seek the man who dare exult in the repulse of
his comrades. The poetic chieftain was still at
his side, biting his nether lip in vexation; but his
more tried companion had suddenly disappeared.
Another quick glance fell upon his missing form
in the act of entering a boat at the foot of the hill.
Quicker than thought, Lionel was on the shore,
crying as he flew to the water's edge
Hold! for God's sake, hold! remember the
47th is in the field, and that I am its Major!
Receive him, said Clinton, with that grim
satisfaction with which men acknowledge a
valued
friend in moments of great trial; and then
row for your lives, or what is of more value, for
the honour of the British name.
The brain of Lionel whirled as the boat shot
along its watery bed, but before it had gained the
middle of the stream he had time to consider the
whole of the appalling scene. The fire had spread
from house to house, and the whole village of
Charlestown, with its four hundred buildings,
was just bursting into flames. The air seemed
filled with whistling balls, as they hurtled above
his head, and the black sides of the vessels of war
were vomiting their sheets of flame with
unwearied
industry. Amid this tumult the
English
General and his companions sprung to land.
The former rushed into the disordered ranks, and
by his presence and voice recalled the men of one
regiment to their duty. But long and loud
appeals
to their spirit and their ancient fame were
necessary to restore a moiety of their former
confidence
to men who had been thus rudely
repulsed
,
and who now looked along their thinned and
exhausted ranks, missing in many instances more
than half the well-known countenances of their
fellows. In the midst of the faltering troops
stood their stern and unbending chief; but of all
those gay and gallant youths who followed in his
train as he had departed from Province-house
that morning, not one remained, but in his blood.
He alone seemed undisturbed in that disordered
crowd; and his mandates went forth as usual,
calm and determined. At length the panic, in
some degree, subsided, and order was once more
restored as the high-spirited and mortified
gentlemen
of the detachment regained their lost
authority
.
The leaders consulted together, apart, and the
dispositions were immediately renewed for the
assault. Military show was no longer affected,
but the soldiers laid down all the useless
implements
of their trade, and many even cast aside
their outer garments, under the warmth of a
broiling
sun, added to the heat of the conflagration
which began to diffuse itself along the extremity
of the peninsula. Fresh companies were placed
in the columns, and most of the troops were
withdrawn
from the meadows, leaving merely a few
skirmishers to amuse the Americans who lay
behind
the fence. When each disposition was
completed
,
the final signal was given to advance.
Lionel had taken post in his regiment, but
marching on the skirt of the column, he
commanded
a view of most of the scene of battle.
In his front moved a battalion, reduced to a
handful of men in the previous assaults. Behind
these came a party of the marine guards, from
the shipping, led by their own veteran Major;
and next followed the dejected Nesbitt and his
corps, amongst whom Lionel looked in vain for
the features of the good-natured Polwarth.
Similar
columns marched on their right and left,
encircling
three sides of the redoubt by their battalions.
A few minutes brought him in full view of that
humble and unfinished mound of earth, for the
possession of which so much blood had that day
been spilt in vain. It lay, as before, still as if none
breathed within its bosom, though a terrific row
of dark tubes were arrayed along its top,
following
the movements of the approaching columns,
as the eyes of the imaginary charmers of our own
wilderness are said to watch their victims. As
the uproar of the artillery again grew fainter, the
crash of falling streets, and the appalling sounds
of the conflagration, on their left, became more
audible. Immense volumes of black smoke issued
from the smouldering ruins, and bellying outward,
fold beyond fold, it overhung the work in a
hideous
cloud, casting its gloomy shadow across the
place of blood.
A strong column was now seen ascending, as if
from out the burning town, and the advance of the
whole became quick and spirited. A low call ran
through the platoons, to note the naked weapons
of their adversaries, and it was followed by the
cry of to the bayonet! to the bayonet!
Hurrah! for the Royal Irish! shouted
M'Fuse, at the head of the dark column from the
conflagration.
Hurrah! echoed a well-known voice from
the silent mound; let them come on to Breed's;
the people will teach'em the law!
Men think at such moments with the rapidity
of lightning, and Lionel had even fancied his
comrades in possession of the work, when the
terrible
stream of fire flashed in the faces of the men
in front.
Push on with the th, cried the veteran
Major of Marinespush on, or the 18th will get
the honour of the day!
We cannot, murmured the soldiers of the
th; their fire is too heavy!
Then break, and let the marines pass through
you!
The feeble battalion melted away, and the
warriors of the deep, trained to conflicts of hand
to hand, sprang forward, with a loud shout, in
their places. The Americans, exhausted of their
ammunition, now sunk sullenly back, a few
hurling
stones at their foes, in desperate indignation.
The cannon of the British had been brought to
enfilade their short breast-work, which was no
longer tenable; and as the columns approached
closer to the low rampart, it became a mutual
protection to the adverse parties.
Hurrah! for the Royal Irish! again
shouted
M`Fuse, rushing up the trifling ascent, which
was but of little more than his own height.
Hurrah! repeated Pitcairn, waving his
sword on another angle of the workthe day's
our own!
One more sheet of flame issued out of the
bosom
of the work, and all those brave men, who
had emulated the examples of their officers, were
swept away, as though a whirlwind had passed
along. The grenadier gave his war-cry once more
before he pitched headlong among his enemies;
while Pitcairn fell back into the arms of his own
child. The cry of `forward, 47th,' rung through
their ranks, and in their turn this veteran
battalion
gallantly mounted the ramparts. In the
shallow
ditch Lionel passed the dying marine, and
caught the dying and despairing look from his
eyes, and in another instant he found himself in
the presence of his foes. As company followed
company into the defenceless redoubt, the
Americans
sullenly retired by its rear, keeping the
bayonets of the soldiers at bay with clubbed
muskets
and sinewy arms. When the whole issued
upon the open ground, the husbandmen received
a close and fatal fire from the battalions which
were now gathering around them on three sides.
A scene of wild and savage confusion then
succeeded
to the order of the fight, and many fatal
blows were given and taken, the mle rendering
the use of fire-arms nearly impossible for several
minutes.
Lionel continued in advance, pressing on the
footsteps of the retiring foe, stepping over many
a lifeless body in his difficult progress.
Notwithstanding
the hurry, and vast disorder of the
fray, his eye fell on the form of the graceful
stranger
,
stretched lifeless on the parched grass, which
had greedily drank his blood. Amid the
ferocious
cries, and fiercer passions of the moment,
the young man paused, and glanced his eyes
around him with an expression that said, he
thought the work of death should cease. At this
instant the trappings of his attire caught the
glaring
eye-balls of a dying yeoman, who exerted his
wasting strength to sacrifice one more worthy
victim to the manes of his countrymen. The
whole of the tumultuous scene vanished from the
senses of Lionel at the flash of the musket of this
man, and he sunk beneath the feet of the
combatants
,
insensible of further triumph, and of every
danger.
The fall of  single officer, in such a contest,
was a circumstance not to be regarded, and
regiments
passed over him, without a single man
stooping to inquire into his fate. When the
Americans
had disengaged themselves from the troops,
they descended into the little hollow between the
two hills, swiftly, and like a disordered crowd,
bearing off most of their wounded, and leaving
but few prisoners in the hands of their foes. The
formation of the ground favoured their retreat, as
hundreds of bullets whistled harmlessly above
their heads; and by the time they gained the
acclivity of Bunker's, distance was added to their
security. Finding the field lost, the men at the
fence broke away in a body from their position,
and abandoned the meadows; the whole moving
in confused masses behind the crest of the
adjacent
height. The shouting soldiery followed in
their footsteps, pouring in fruitless and distant
volleys; but on the summit of Bunker their tired
platoons were halted, and they beheld the throng
move fearlessly through the tremendous fire that
enfiladed the low pass, as little injured as though
most of them bore charmed lives.
The day was now drawing to a close. With the
disappearance of their enemies, the ships and
batteries ceased their cannonade, and presently
not a musket was heard in that place where so
fierce a contest had so long raged. The troops
commenced fortifying the outward eminence on
which they rested, in order to maintain their
barren
conquest, and nothing further remained for
the achievement of the royal lieutenants but to
go and mourn over their victory.
END OF VOL. 1.