FORT BRADDOCK LETTERS.
LETTER I.
Fort Braddock,
April
3, 1821.
Dear Jim,
IT is now springthe buds are bursting
through all the wilderness about me; but the cold
rains which are constantly descending, make my
condition so cheerless, that I write to you merely
to pass the time. Why I was doomed to spend my
winter here so solitary, or when I shall have the
good luck to shift my quarters, for any other spot,
is past my skill to divine. Any other spotthe
Arkansas, the Rio Colorada, the Council Bluffs,
the Yellow Stone, any place but this. Was I
dangerous
to government, that they should have
contrived
for one poor subaltern, this Siberian
banishment
,
where I am ingeniously confined, not by
a guard placed over me, but by having the
command
of about five and twenty men, that the spring
discovers in a uniform of rags.
I
did
suppose that I was more profitably
employed
in another part of the state of New-York, on
that noble boundary of lake, and river, and
cataract
,
where I thought that my services had not
only
insured me a continuance in the army list, but
entitled me to promotion.
I came here five months ago, with a dashy suit
of new regimentals, a bright epaulette, and as tall
a white feather as there was between the straits of
Mackinaw and the heights of Abraham. With
this dear-bought equipage, I meant to have figured,
if not in the vicinity of New-York or Boston, at
least in some neighbourhood of gentilty, where I
might have gone to balls, lived at a tavern, figured
in full panoply before the ladies, and passed my
winter like a military man. But you know not
why I complain, or even where I am, for the map
is a blind guide to this part of the country.
You have seen the flourishing condition of this
and the neighbouring states. The towns, the
villages
,
the cultivated farms, the roads, the wealth,
and the spread of an industrious population, that
has converted, so suddenly, what was termed this
western wilderness, into a delightful and animated
landscape. It should seem like the changing
scenes in a theatre, or the operation of magic. No
tide like this, however, has set in to vary the
prospect
within many a pathless mile of Fort
Braddock
.
I verily believe that the whole western
world, to the Pacific itself, will be filled up with
turnpike gates every three miles, and set out into
school districts, before any serious encroachment
will be made on this forbidden region. It will
remain
as it was when Lord Amherst found it, and
he found it as it was a thousand years before, when
it must have been a sort of city of refuge for the
Indians, where the avenger of blood could not
pursue
,
or where he could not find them if he did.
And yet, Jim, when I first came here, my head was
so full of romance from reading the Scotch novels
and poetry, that I admired it for its wild and
rugged
scenery, and complimented myself with having
a taste for the sublime. From the top of a rock
1*
as high as St. Helena, I can see the waters of
Champlain, and the course of the Sorelle, till it
loses itself at a distance among the northern hills.
The borders of Vermont are covered with
evergreen
,
except where they glitter with snow, and
the view to the westward is intercepted by
mountains
still higher than the precipice on which I
stand. The hill sides are covered with gigantic
trees, which seem intended to give shade to the
mammoth. And yet the fowl fly beneath me, and
I sometimes conceit that the noise of the thunder
comes from below. The road, difficult at all times,
was so impassible in winter, that I should be
agreeably
surprised, even by the enemy; and the
conversation
of a Dutch teamster savors to me much
of literature, as it would of humanity to Robinson
Crusoe. How do you think I pass my time? I
have the reveille and tattoo beat till the rocks echo.
I drill and discipline my twenty-five men, and
march them
in echelon,
as if they were the army
of the Rhine, and make them cry all's well, as
loud as if they mounted guard on the rock of
Gibraltar
.
I draw my rations in kind, but Uncle
Sam's alcohol is rather too much for me. The
Postmaster-General has no knowledge of this part
of the country; and I strongly suspect that the
Adjutant-General himself has forgotten it. Indeed,
this seems the place that Cowper wished fora
lodge in some vast wilderness, where, to say
nothing
of the rumors of oppression and deceit, I
seriously believe, though a soldier, that the noise
Of unsuccessful or successful war
Will never reach me more.
I should have deserted long since, but for a
source of amusement, to me perfectly accidental.
You must know that this fort is ancient, and has
been garrisoned at a time when its solitude did not
form so strong a contrast to the rest of the
country
;
the graves of the soldiers of those who were
for the time connected with the garrison, are often
found; and the instruments of civilized and savage
warfare are frequently dug up together. The
remains
of larger works and temporary barracks,
excite curiosity and give rise to conjectural
disjointed
stories among the scattered inhabitants,
and anecdotes are told, in which times, places, and
persons, are strangely confounded.
From these tales, sometimes marvellous, and
generally
inconsistent, as they are differently related
by the Dutch and the Yankees, the Negroes and
the Indians, I should have neither patience nor
curiosity
to extract an intelligible narrative, had not
chance furnished me with the means, at a time
when I had no other amusement.
It happened that in clearing out one of the
ditches where the parapet was lowest, serjeant Gap
struck with his spade something that sounded
hollow
.
It was a trunk, which contained a few
articles
of little value, and a collection of papers,
letters
,
&c. several from men of whom I had heard
and read; and among others, a pretty connected
account of events in which I felt an interest,
because
they related to persons, many of whom had
been, in other circumstances, on the spot where I
now am. As I have leisure, I think of writing it
off, with the addition of some hints contained in
the letters, and some alteration in the order of the
narrative,
though not in the
events
. You can then
read it to your mess at the cantonment, and pay
me by sending the National Intelligencer that has
the army list. Direct to the nearest Post Office,
at Mumblety-peg, near. Rattlesnake Falls, and I
will see that it reaches your old friend,
PUTNAM BUNKER, Jr.
Lt. comd'g. at Fort Braddock
.
LETTER II.
I received
your letter, marred and soiled from
the distance and difficulty of the way; but it
contained
,
safe and sound, the printed enclosure that
I sent for, by which I learn my prospect of
promoion
,
and the chance of shifting my quarters. Oh!
if my good luck should send me, a military
traveller
,
among the unexplored regions west of the
Mississippi! what a book! and in military style
too!
will
I make! What a chance to make a
fortune
did Lewis and Clark let slip; and what a
chance for immortality did Commodore Porter
lose, when he suffered his attention to be
withdrawn
from his book by so slight a matter as an
action from the Phbe and Cherub. In
expectation
of such a chance, I have already prepared my
travels in part, as I presume is often the case with
travellers of zeal and industry; for all the figures
of speech, poetic quotations, and descriptions of
the sky and weather, (whereof we have here a fac
simile of all sorts,) may as well be done in
preparatorio
,
as any other wayso that I shall find
little
else remaining than to fill up the blanks, as a
lawyer does a writ.
You claim the slight attention of a little
incident
here in digging up some mutilated papers, as
a promise from me to send you a connected
summary
of the
Braddock Manuscript
. Alas! these
documents are so sadly rubbed and worn, that it is
with difficulty I can join them. The dates of
months and years, as is common in most old letters
and papers, were worn out, and without books, as
I am here, what a figure I should make in
supplying
the chronology. The mess at Sacket's
Harbour
,
you know, used to laugh at me, because I
could never remember the year when America was
discovered; and I cannot tell to this day, without
cyphering, the year when I was bornand yet I
must attempt an order in the connexion, and of
course to supply dates. I do not mean to compare
my efforts to any thing great; but you remember
laughing when we were at Philadelphia, at the ribs
and bones of good new white oak, that were
supplied
in the skeleton of the mammoth. My
materials
are in the style of Mather's Magnaliawhat
think ye of such new wine as mine in such old
bottles
?
But to the matter in handyou are pleased
to express curiosity, which I write only to gratify.
The course of the mail, and the state of the
roads, postage, distance, &c. must excuse any want
of punctuality in my communications, But I
think I may say, you shall in time have what little
there is of it. The conclusion of this fragment I
ean hardly make out myself, and some spots, as
you will notice, are a little obscure. An
antiquary
would be assisted, no doubt, by an old muster
roll, which I found among the papers, many of the
names on which are marked D'd; and his
conjectures
might be aided by an examination of the
skeletons dug up about here, in the very bones of
which are the heads of Indian arrows.
Among other things in the old box, was a sword
belt, worked in crewel, with the name of Miles
Standish, which I mean to send to Squantum, at
the next celebration of the landing at Plymouth
or perhaps wear it myself at a meeting of the
Tammany
Society, in the face and eyes of the Sachems
and Sagamores, of whom this great Indian-hunter
killed so many. To give the thing somewhat an
air, I shall now and then quote a line or so of
modern
poetrynot to show my learning, for the
subalterns
of those days were as much more learned
than the same grade in Uncle Sam's late army, as
the clergy of those days surpassed, in the same
particular, their worthy successors in these
degenerate
and money-saving times.
I shall now make out the story as near as I can,
and send it from time to time, as the best
opportunities
offer. Please to give me your undivided
attention
.
THE BRADDOCK MANUSCRIPT.
And what is Friendship but a name.
More than a century ago, in the evening of a
day in September, three students in the college
which was then at Saybrook, and which is now
known at New-Haven by the name of Yale
College
,
were seated in a room in the only building
which that institution had then to boast of.
Something
like a commencement was at hand, and these
young men had parts to perform at the
approaching
public exhibition, when they were to receive
the honours of that infant seminary. The Rev.
Mr. Devonport, with his cap and band had already
arrived in town; the rector, Williams, was
expected
from Wethersfield, in the first boat down the
Connecticut river; the Rev. Mr. Saltonstall, the
Clergyman at New-London, afterwards the
Ambassador
to the Dutch settlement at Manhattan,
now New-York, and shortly after the Governor of
this colony, was expected to accompany his
Excellency
Governor Winthrop, from New-London;
and most of the clergy from the churches then
gathered, it was thought would attend. The word
splendid
is a relative termit was used by our
ancestors
,
and was good English as long ago as the
time of Richard the lion-hearted. They expected
a
splendid
commencement at Saybrook. The
native
stock of female beauty for which that town,
even to the present day, is famous, was to be
increased
on the occasion by the great-grandmothers
of the present generation, then in the bloom of
youth, who came, some on foot and some in canoes,
from the shores of the river. The more highborn
and wealthy came on horseback, and generally
rode double; they were dressed in cloth of their
own manufacture, made up by themselves in the
fashion of the day, with long waists, short sleeves,
&c. their stockings were blue, and their shoes were
not morocco. Yet the manuscript speaks of bright
eyes, rosy cheeks, smiling lips, pearly teeth, and
all the witchery of female charms. This sad taste
on the part of the writer, considering the
unimproved
state of the female costume, can only be
accounted
for by the fact, that these classic beaux
themselves wore, (except on public days,) checked
shirts and butternut-coloured coats, with long
backs, full skirts, and large pewter buttons. It is
even said that in those days of simplicity, one of
the lay members of the corporation rode with beetle
rings in the place of stirrups.
At the meeting I have mentioned, this display
was in expectancy. The conversation of these
young men related in part to their approaching
separation, and the course of life they would
pursue
.
They read to each other several
compositions
.
One of them by the name of Dudley, from
the vicinity of Boston, whom his parents had
always
intended for a military man, and who was
soon to enter into the small but active naval
service
of the times, had prepared an oration in Greek
upon civilizing the Indians.
Another, whose name was Van Tromp, whose
Dutch parents had owned the very spot where Fort
Braddock now stands, and had lived in its
vicinity
,
had written a piece of pastoral poetry on the
pleasures of retirement, which, as he was quite
homesick for this charming retreat, was said to be
very feeling. His parents were dead, and he was
to return with a considerable property and much
family influence to his large but wild estate, which
was then known by the Dutch name of
Hardzscoggin
.
At the early age of twenty he was to be
master
of his own conductand with ample means
for the times, was to be the head man among
servants
and dependants, and the new settlers in his
neighbourhood.
The remaining member of the trio, was a
reserved
youth, who had formed no intimacy during his
stay at the college, but with these two companions.
He had never, until now, spoke of his origin or his
prospects; his name was Du Quesne. He made,
upon this occasion, rather a melancholy disclosure
to his companions, that he knew little or nothing of
his parentage; that he had been constantly
supplied
by a gentleman in New-York, with a
quarterly
payment of money, which was remitted from
France by some unknown hand, accompanied by
letters not signed, which directed the plan of his
education. He was to return to New-York and
attempt the study of law. He had always been
better dressed than the other students, and wore,
by express direction, one of the most rare and
extravagant
ornaments of the daya large gold
watch of curious and expensive workmanship.
Great care had been taken to supply him with
additional
books and private instructions upon
several
branches of science not professedly taught in
the college. A turn of mind rather melancholy,
inclined him to study, and made him a scholar.
He not only learned the dead languages, which
were then better understood than at present, but he
spoke French, and had a good acquaintance with
polite literature. He read, in his turn a little
essay
,
which he proposed to speak, on the
uncertainty
of fortune, and the vicissitudes of human life,
some of which, it afterwards appeared, he was
doomed to experience. The unsettled state of this
new country, and their approaching separation for
a distance of time and space which they could not
determine, was then the topic of conversation;
they spoke of their pilgrimage as lonely, and
dwelt with the enthusiasm of young men upon the
great benefits that might result from union and
mutual
assistance. They seemed each to feel the want
of support, and expressed their confidence; this
ended, before their separation for the night, in
solemn
pledges for future friendship, which they
engaged
should be of so serious and practical a kind
that if any one of them should at any time in their
lives be involved in difficulty, or need assistance,
the others should immediately, on notice, be bound
to render it, at the expense of every hazard,
whether
of person or of property. Upon the strength
of this compact, they parted in better spirits.
It is said that the commencement was celebrated
with more parade than was expectedfor, in
addition
to the dignities of church and state, whose
attendance
was as punctual as usual, the celebrated
Captain Mason, on his return from an Indian
victory
,
on his way to Stonington, stopped at the
town and honoured the company with his presence.
It is of this very occasion he speaks in a
manuscript
account of his campaign, which is still
extant
,
in which he commends the good conduct of
Lt. Gardiner, who then commanded the garrison
on the platform, where, to use his own language,
he was formally received and nobly entertained
with many great guns.
2
LETTER III.
Ah! who can tell how hard it is to climb
The steep where Fame's proud temple shines afar?
The scholars were dismissed from Saybrook, and
each betook himself to his home, and entered
upon
the course of life which his friends or his
fortune
had prescribed for him. Du Quesne, with
whom we must at present continue, repaired to
New-York, where, upon his being admitted to the
bar, as in due time he was, his mysterious supply
of money was withheld, and he was left without
relatives or connexions, to make the usual slow and
uncertain progress in the business of his profession.
He was of a temperament much too sensitive for
his own comfort, in a calling which, at that time
at any rate, however it may be at present, exposed
him to personal altercation, contradiction, and that
sharp and harsh collision which tries and
strengthens
the passions of the heart, at least as much as
it does the faculties of the mind.
He had a natural and easy eloquence, and more
taste and learning than most of his associates.
His attention to his business was strict, but it was
forced, and his occasional success embittered his
enemies more than it conciliated his friends. He
even conceited at times, that the courts before
which he practiced had their favourites, and that
he was not in the number. Sometimes neglected,
always opposed, and often mortified, he yet
patiently
perseveredthough he soon found himself
the object of personal enmity, and was convinced
of attempts to defeat his progress. He resolved to
exert his industry to acquire the means of support
in some place in the new settlements, as remote as
was consistent with personal security, where land
was cheap, and where independence might be
easily
purchased. This vision of comfort he
cherished
in secret, and resorted to it in his day dreams
as his standing consolation. But his enemies were
too active, and shortened the period which was
necessary
to his success. Some bills and papers
relating
to claims in a suit to a large amount, and
which were entrusted to him, were missing, as he
found when he was preparing his cases. He
searched in vainhis anxiety amounted to distress
he feared to ask for any accommodation, for it
was attended with the risk of disclosure. Those
who had artfully accomplished their object, by
involving
him in this embarrassment, were little
likely
to show him favour. There was no alternative
after weeks of agony the term beganthe suits
were defeatedthe was personally liable for the
loss, and industriously exposed to censure. His
employers were advised to their remedy against
him, and the least of his troubles was the constant
expectation of being arrested.
One morning very early, with an agitated mind,
he crossed the river to the Jersey shore, for the
sake of relieving or indulging his melancholy, and
having to himself a few moments of solitude and
security. There was a retired spot at no great
distance from the shore, sheltered by trees, and
surrounded with rural beauty, which seemed to
invite
the solitary, and offer its quiet scenery to
soothe the angry passions, and imperceptibly
substitute
feelings of a softer kind. And yet, this is
the very spot, which from that day to this, has
been the battle-ground of wounded honour. How
often has it witnessed the worst of passions, and
how rich has been the blood that has at times been
shed there! To this spot he was unconsciously
approaching, when he was roused by the near
report
of fire arms. He quickened his pace in the
direction of the noise, and on coming to a natural
lawn among the trees, discovered a man upon the
ground, apparently wounded, and just fallen.
Three others were hastening through the thicket,
and evidently bent on a hasty escape. The nature
of this transaction was evident. He called upon
the fugitives in vainhe followed them some
distance
,
till they were out of his sight, and returned,
when he found there was no hope of assistance,
towards
the wounded man. He stopped in his way
only to take up a pistol which lay on the ground
about ten paces distant from the object of his
attention
.
On reaching the wounded man, what
was his astonishment to find his own most bitter
enemy and rival lay speechless and dying. He
looked up with an expression unutterable, when he
saw who it was that came to his assistance, made
a violent attempt to speak, gasped and died. At
this moment Du Quesne was stooping to raise the
body, already lifeless, when several men who had
been alarmed by the same noise which drew him to
the place, rushed hastily upon him, and, as he
began
artlessly to ask them for help, secured him as
their prisoner, and charged him with the murder.
His surprise made his answers incoherent, and
his agitation, to their eyes, was evidence of his
guilt. In this state of mind he was re-conveyed
to the city, taken before a magistrate, and charged
with the fact. On the examination it appeared
that the pistol found in his possession had been
recently
discharged; the lock was sprung, and the
smell and marks of newly burnt powder were strong
about it. A surgeon had extracted a ball from the
dead man, which exactly corresponded to the
calibre
of the pistol. It was likewise in proof, that
there had been a bitter enmity between the
deceased
and the accused.
You are a lawyer, Mr. Du Quesne, said the
magistrate, and know that you can answer or not
to the charge. What say you, is there any reason
why you should not be fully committed for trial?
The offence is not bailable you know.
And if it was, said Du Quesne, I have no
bail.
Do you choose, continued to magistrate, to
attempt any defence or explanation? It will be
evidence against you, you know, and not in your
favour. But you are agitatedtake a moment's
time.
This moment's time helped to compose the
prisoner's
spirits. He cast his eye round a room
filled
with boys and men, black and white, ragged,
dirty and vulgar. It occurred to him how absurd
it was, in the presence of such an audience, to say
to a Dutch Justice, that his morning walk was one
of sentiment, and that the scenery and silence
operated
upon his mind to cross the river.
He contented himself with a simple declaration
of his innocence, which he knew the Justiee did
not believe, and mustering his self-possession, said,
that he was without evidence and without friends.
He uttered this last word with a voice and in a
manner
that would have outdone the best of actors. A
tear slid upon his long and drooping eye-lash, and
fell upon the floorit was succeeded by another
his face was fixed, and the last word, friends, had
recalled to his mind some strong recollections.
The Justice was looking fully at him, and felt
for his distress. He had no great opinion of the
deceased, and as far as morals were concerned,
could excuse the man who met his adversary in an
honourable way. He went up to him and led him
to the further corner of the room
My worthy friend, said he, confess the
2*
whole; I'll help you, if I canhe was a
good-for-nothing
fellow, and I have no doubt was fairly
killed
come,
tell me what you have got to say.
Mr. Van Erp, said the prisoner, upon my
soul's safety, I am not guilty.
Oh, I know that, said the Justice, it is no
great crime in a fair way to dispose of such a
fellow
,
especially in such a casebut don't deny the
fact; you may confide.
Yes I do confide, when I tell you I did not
do it.
What! not shoot him?
No, I did not.
Be it so, said the Justice, incredulously
shaking
his head, you are a lawyer, and have heard
the evidence, and you know I must commit you
delay is useless.
The Squire, as he was termed, made out the
mittimus himself, (for in this country the
magistrates
have no clerks,) and Du Quesne was
followed
to the gaol by the rabble that had attended his
trial. The gaol then stood on the East River, near
the centre of that busy spot, where there are so
many slips and grocerswhere the streets are so
dirty and the passing so difficult. The building
itself was made partly of stone and partly of logs;
and the gaoler's house, in which the keeper and
family lived, was a part of the building. The
gaoler too was a man of some distinction, and by
virtue of his office was a member of the city
corporation
.
In one of the cells of this
establishment
was our high-minded and aspiring friend
locked up, and left to his meditations. It was some
time before he could regain his self-possession, and
his busy thoughts then suggested to him the
certainty
of his fate, the shortness of the interval, and
the agonizing reflections with which that interval
must be marked. The gallows would be the last
object before his closing eyes at night, and the first
thought which the mild beam of morning would
bring along with it. His very slumbers were
disturbed
with dreamsdreams of the throng of faces
which would surround the place of his execution,
vacant, vulgar and unfeelingdreams of the cart,
the hangman, and the coffin on which he should
sit, and of the awful dialogue with his ghostly
confessor
about his future statethe dread memento
of the sheriff, you have half an hour to live,
and the grave ready dug at the foot of the scaffold.
The dreams would awake him only to the
consciousness
that all was true. When awake, he
meditated
on his hopes of acquittal. The law on
duelling
was very severe, and the common law
called
it murder. The statute, however, in those sad
times, unlike those of modern and more impartial
days, was unequally administered. Some who had
friends could transgress with impunity, while
others
were left to the rigoar of the law. It was easy
for the judge to show that the law was plain, and
that conviction was inevitable. It was equally
satisfactory
to hear him put analogous cases, and
show that the man, who on sudden provocation
would be guilty only of manslaughter, if he should
exercise a noble forbcarance, and give his
adversary
a chance for his life, would commit a crime still
less, when he killed his man in a fair and
honourable
duel.
But our friendless prisoner knew very well that
very little ingenuity from the bench would be
exercised
in his favour. The most impartial
direction
would be that the law should take its course.
Nearly five years had elapsed since his residence
at Saybrook. To this last peaceful period of his
life his thoughts naturally recurred, and dwelt on
the only friendship with which his days had been
sweetened. Dudley was probably on the ocean;
and would hear of his misfortunes only to bewail
his death.
He knew well where Van Tromp lived, but
could not see how he could assist. Yet his
presence
,
his influence, and perhaps his council, if not
to avert, might relieve his sufferings. There was at
that time a regular communication kept up between
the Dutch settlement at New-Amsterdam, and the
French Posts on the Canada line, by the way of
the North River and Lake Champlain. To be
sure, as the residence of Van Tromp was out of
the way, and the country wild, the arrival of a
letter
was uncertain. Yet as he had nothing else to
do, he determined, if only to feed his hopes, to
write letter after letter, by every return of the
carrier
,
and by every opportunity of sending to that
vicinity.
His letters were nearly of the same tenor, all
conversant about the same thing. The only one
preserved is the following:
Gaol at New-Amsterdam,
.
My dear and only friendI am here confined as
a criminal, on a capital charge, and am to be tried
in about ten months, with no hope of being
acquitted
.
To you it is not necessary that I should go
into detail; I know your confidence in me to be
such, that you will believe me when I say, that I
am perfectly innocent; for I would not call you to
the rescue of the guilty. My only solace now is,
that I can repose upon your friendship with
perfect
security, and rely on your exertions as fully
as on my own. My thoughts are too distracted to
devise any mode of assistance; I leave that to you.
Yet use your influence, and though it may all be
in vain, let me, if possible, see you once more.
CARLOS DU QUESNE.
LETTER IV.
Speed, Malise, speed! the dun deer's hide,
On fleete foot was never tried.
A war between the French and English settlers;
on their respective frontiers, was at this time on the
out-break, as it was termed. Several log houses
of remote adventurers had been burned. The
Indian
tribes had been enlisted upon the one side and
the other, and news was constantly coming in to
the Blasted Tree, (as Van Tromp's proprietary
or land patent was termed,) of Indian scalps and
massacres.
One evening as he sat alone, thinking of the
approaching
troubles, and devising plans of security,
a Negro domestic came into the room, and
presented
to him the letter of Du Quesne. He read it
over with the utmost interest. Troubled as he was
to provide for the security of his numerous
dependents
,
and exposed as he was to sudden inroads of
the hostile Indians, he remembered his promise of
support, and resolved to redeem his pledge. At any
other time he would have gone himself; but to be
absent at present would be desertion, and might
be followed by the ruin of the settlement. Those
who had settled in the neighbourhood, had families
which they could not leave, and were of a capacity
not adequate to the undertaking. The members
of his household were of a motly character, and
yet those only could he employ. Of them, there
was but one on whose desperate spirit of enterprise
and perfect fidelity he could rely; but he doubted
his prudence, and most of all his means. There
seemed no alternative. Shadrach, said he
calling
to the Negro, who soon made his appearance,
look for Weshop, and ask him here.
Van Tromp resumed his meditations, and tried
and rejected a thousand contrivances for his
friend's escape, when the door again opened, and
the Indian warrior made his appearance. His hair
was cut close, except a tuft of jetty black, which
stood upright on the top of his head. The skin
of a rattlesnake was twisted round his neck, his
feet were guarded with mocasins, ornamented with
beads, and a wampum belt was over his
shoulders
.
He wore round his waist an Indian
cincture
,
and had his bow in his hand, and his
tomahawk
in his girdle. He was what they termed a
friendly Indian, and lived occasionally in this
family
,
not as a domestic, much less a slave, for to
a state of servitude, it is doubtful whether a
genuine
North American Indian was ever reduced, or
is indeed capable of being reduced. The motions
of this being were more free than those of the
master of the mansion. He went and came at any
hour, and consulted his own wishes as to the
frequency
of his visits, or the length of his absence.
He had been rescued from his enemies, on one
occasion
,
by Mr. Van Tromp and the men of his
plantation, and ever afterwards displayed, in its
full force, the principle of Indian gratitude. His
fixed features seldom betrayed the working of his
passions, or any vicissitudes of feeling. Upon
this occasion he continued standing, because it
suited his convenience, and listened with his
characteristic
silence and indifference, to the nature of
his commission.
Van Tromp wrote some letters to gentlemen of
influence, requesting their interference in
postponing
a trial, till every means could be used in
discovering
the truth, and assured his friend that he
would soon come to his assistance.
The Indian took time thoroughly to comprehend
his employment. Whether he there devised any
better plan than the one proposed, is not certain;
but it is certain he never delivered the letters, not
even the one for Du Quesne. A stranger even
might think loud in Weshop's presence, without
the least dauger that his confidence would be
betrayed
;
and might talk to him a week without
obtaining
an exchange of privacy. This trait was
not peculiar to him; the red man never whistles
and sings in the wood; his steps are noiseless, and
his presence unexpected; indeed, to the first
settlers
of the country, alarming.
The messenger now made immediate preparation
for his journey. He had just eaten, yet he set
himself to despatch another enormous meal, to
which he was urged, not by appetite, but by
calculation
,
and loading himself with provisions,
departed
so sluggish and dull, that he seemed little
likely to reach the end of his journey, much less
to return. No one questioned him, and no one
missed him.
What were his adventures through the
wilderness
was never known, and his route was
conjectured
only from his subsequent conduct. It was
about twelve days afterwards, he presented himself
sudden in one of the streets of New-Amsterdam
near the government house, just before the hour
when a meeting was to be held of the governor and
his council. His entrance into the town had not
been observed, and he had the advantage of
claim-to
have come from any quarter or any tribe. The
Indians, partly civilized, who lived in the
neighbourhood
,
were seen daily, but a genuine
inhabitant
of the wilderness is always, in a populous
place, an interesting spectacle, particularly (as
upon
the present occasion) to the boys and the
rabble
.
Weshop stood with his bow in his hand, and his
bundle of arrows at his back, stowed in a long
basket or quiver made of splinters; his face gave
no expression of wonder or curiosity. Hundreds
were gazing at him, as he leaned against the
railing
that led to the door of the State House, and
were surprised that he took no notice of the
spectacle
which to him must be so new. He preserved
his impenetrable stupidity, and was the only one of
the multitude who appeared indifferent, even at the
idle gaze of which he was the object. They
tempted
him to show his skill with his bow, but an owl
in the day time could not be duller at taking a hint.
The Council at length convened; the Governor
made his appearance, and was followed by Weshop
into the house. He knew the Governor by the
respect
that was shown him as he passed. The
door-keeper
would have stopped the intruder, but it
happened
that the subject of the present meeting
involved
some Indian difficulties, and the Governor's
Dutch fancy had already converted Weshop into
an Indian Ambassador, the rather on account of
his silence and gravity, which the whole Dutch
Council greatly admired. The governor took
some merit to himself for the discrimination with
which he could detect the diplomatic character.
The wary Indian made a few signs, which the
Council, after the Governor's hint, could at once
interpret, and which they agreed were full as
intelligible
as any language which a foreign
Ambassador
should venture to use. They complimented
the natural sagacity of the Indian character, which
had directed them to choose an envoy not likely
to commit himself by talking, or betray himself by
passion. The Secretary of the Council, who was
a learned man, took occasion to remark, that in
regard
to the establishment of a boundary with the
Indians, it would probably end in a question
between
the
status ante bellum
and the
usi possidetus
.
Enough seemed done for the first interview.
Weshop
was recommended to the jailor, not as a
prisoner
,
but as a guest; for none of the council
thought of inviting his
sansculotte
excellency to
dinner; and there was no eating house at the
public
expense, but the jail. It is bardly proper to
say that the deportment of Weshop won upon the
jailor, so as to gain his confidence, but it certainly
checked every hint at precaution. He was
accommodated
in the chimney corner, where he eat by
himself, and smoked a Dutch pipe that
Governor
had given him. He went out but once or
twice during the afternoon, and wandered then no
further than the jail door, where he stood smoking
when the jailor locked up the rooms, after
furnishing
the prisoners with their evening meal.
The jailor and his family were in the habit of
retiring early. They gave Weshop a blanket, and
left him in the kitchen to repose before the fire.
LETTER V.
Du Quesne was awakened in the night by the
slow and careful unlocking and opening of his
dungeon, and in the light of the setting moon,
which shone through the grates, an Indian stood
before him with his bow in his hand and his
tomahawk
in his girdle. He had been dreaming of
3
being
executed, and his first waking thought was,
that he had fallen into the hands of a new
tormenter
of another world.
He was on the point of crying out; when the
Indian took him by the shoulder and pointed to
the door. He was wide awake in an instant. There
was a sense of honor which urged him to await a
public vindication of his innocence, but the
conviction
that his own honesty would be no security
against the attempts of his enemies, and the strong
circumstances against him decided his resolution.
He arose and followed his deliverer. The moon
had gone down, the night was dark, and the streets
quiet. After they had gained a little distance from
the prison, the Indian directed him to stand by the
side of building, while he went himself, as it
afterwards
appeared, to drop the gaol keys in a
direction
different from their route and to set adrift
on the East River, one of the small boats, which,
as the tide was coming in, would float towards the
Narrows, and mislead pursuit. He then returned,
and led the way up the island in silence, at a rate
so rapid, that elate with liberty and buoyant with
hope as Du Quesne was, he could hardly keep pace
with him. The Indian travelled with the certainty
of a man familiar with every street and turn, til
he arrived at a marshy piece of ground on the North
River, at some distance from the city, where a bark
canoe lay floating among the rushes. The wind
was strong from the south, but though it was fair
for their purpose, the size and frailty of the boat,
with what he knew of the danger of the
navigation
,
would have made him hesitate had there been
any alternative. He was directed to lay himself
down in the boat while the Indian pushed it from
the shore, and raised a small pine mast on which
was spread a blanket in the from of a sail. He
put his skiff before the wind, and urged its
motion
with a rude oar or paddle, with which, at the
same time, he directed its course. The waters
were very rough, and though his pilot was evidently
a bold one, the job in hand required skill as well as
courage. The motion of the boat through the
water was so varying as to furnish no means of
judging what progress they made. He was
insensible
of his danger, but more sensible to the joy of
his recent escape.Morning discovered them in
that part of the river which forms the entrance into
the Tappan Sound. The shores were covered with
wood to the very edge, and the land on either side
rose into mountains, which grew dim in the
distance
,
till they mingled with the clouds.
Accustomed
as Du Quesne had been for weeks, to no
other prospect than what was to be seen from the
loop-holes of his dungeon, so many natural beauties
gradually displaying by the rising sun, till they
were shown in perfection, filled him with joy.He
worshipped in silence and with thanksgiving, and
the thoughtful look of his new friend, seemed to
pronounce an impressive Amen.
This noble river, for a great part of its length,
discovered at that time, no appearance of art or
improvement
,
except, that now and then, a heavy
built Dutch vessel, moved slowly on its surface,
keeping up the only intercourse between the few
spare settlements on the banks. Still the features
of the scenery were interesting and grand. The
savage put into a solitary bay, where his canoe
was concealed by the jutting rock, but where,
without
being perceived, he could observe for some
distance
,
those who sailed up and down the river. It
was impossible for Du Quesne to conjecture the
motives which would be so powerful with his
deliverer
,
as to induce all this labor, nor could he
well imagine whither he was going, or where his
journey was likely to end. The Indian seemed to
understand the turn of his thoughts, and quickly
produced a scrap of paper, on which was written,
in his proper hand, the name of
Derick Van Tromp
.
This satisfied his anxious inquiries, and he saw, at
once, not merely the name, but the conduct of a
friend.His guide began smoking his pipe; they
spent the whole day without food or sleep,
watching
every movement on the river, till evening
returned
,
when they again set forward. Their
progress
was now more slow and laborious, for want
of a favorable wind. The Indian was anxious to
arrive at a particular point, for a reason that
appeared
when they reached it. This was one of the
several places, where, on his way down the river,
he had deposited a part of his load of provision,
and this unlooked for repast was the more grateful
to Du Quesne, from his long fast, to which he was
not used. It was thus that they continued their
voyage till they came to a part of the river near
Sandy Hill, from which they were to proceed by
land. Here at one of his depots, Weshop rested a
day and night; both which he spent in eating and
sleeping, as preparatory to the fatigues that
remained
.
On the morning of the 2d day they
abandoned
the canoe. and set forward on foot through
the woods. The activity and vigilance of the
guide, were now constant; he examined the ground
for what he called the signs to detect footsteps in
the grass, altered his course at the slightest noise,
and every now and then examined the bark of the
tree, which seemed to serve him as a compass. The
Indian is artful and patient, when he lays in wait,
and cautious and observing, when he fears an
ambush
.
Weshop obtained from a friendly Indian,
seasonable intelligence that those tribes under the
influence of the French themselves, had already
begun their attack on the frontier; and he knew
that an Indian war to those in the immediate
vicinity
of it, is a state of constant exposure to the
greatest perils and sufferings without a single
moment
of security. The war cry is usually
unexpected
;
and fire, murder, and robbery, steal
without
warning, upon their victim. Weshop directed
his course to the south bay of Lake George, where
they at length arrived. A canoe was in readiness
as before, and the two travellers after many
hardships
,
reached a point on the western shore of
Champlain, then known by the name of
Sunkettypaug
.
During this long journey, they bad given
one another some occasional uneasiness without
intending
it; owing to the strong contrast of their
characters. One had been educated to speak, the
other to be silent; one was made for display, the
other for concealment.
One bright November morning, when our
travellers
were pursuing their way among the
highlands
west of Champlain, which seem in some
degree
to connect the Green Mountains in Vermont
with the northern part of the first range of the
Alleghanies
,
they arrived at a high opening between
the mountains, which goes by the name of Wind
Gap. The prospect to the north was
commanding
,
and rich with various coloursthe uniform
green of the pine and hemlock, was mixed with the
blood red of the maple, and the yellow birch to
which the frost had changed their natural hue.
They both paused at the same time. One
seemed
admiring the coloured beauty of the
landscape
,
which blended the distance with the rich
tints of the sky, whose gold, and red, and purple,
it seemed to vie with, or rather to reflect, as the
moon and the inverted trees are seen in a sheet of
3*
water. The other gazed anxiously in one
direction
,
till a slight but unusual joy gladdened his
features. He pointed the way he was looking, and
asked do you see that smoke? It was some
time before his companion, assisted by his guide,
could answer yes. There (replied he) our
journey ends. I have prayed the Great Spirit for
many days that when I should come to this spot, I
might see a smoke and not a blaze.
It was near sundown when they arrived at the
residence of Van Tromp, which seemed for the
time to be the rendezvous of the surrounding
country
.
Every thing betokened confusion, and
sudden
alarm. The first object that caught attention,
was the numerous group of men, women, and
children
,
of all colours, of many nations, dressed in
every variety of garb and fashion; Indians,
Negroes
and whites, speaking as many tongues as are
taught in a German University. Their horses and
cattle, too, had been driven to the place for safety;
and they had brought such moveables as they could
manage to transport. They seemed to have been
newly assembled, and were variously employed;
some in cooking their evening meal, some in
fixing
their fire-arms, some in tending cattle, and some
in building additional barracks and huts for their
present accommodation. They were generally
cheerful, and seemed glad to have reached a spot
of comparative security. For this purpose, the
place itself seemed well selected. It was elevated,
and of a triangular form; one side made by the
right side of the Chazy, another by a steep and
continued ledge which commanded the valley or
bottom land to a great distance, and the remaining
side defended artificially by a high breast work,
flanked with bastions, and protected in front by a
ditch, faced with a rude abbatis.Within, were
several low buildings; made of logs and stone, in
separate square blocks, and sometimes connected
by a continued roof. Most of the rooms were tight
and comfortable, and some of them were decently
furnished. There were several rows of barracks
in the fort, and others on the outside, near the foot
of the walls, which answered only a present
purpose
,
and were to be left in case of invasion. The
garrison was made up of men well armed, and
whose habits of life rendered them the best
marksmen
in the world.
LETTER VI.
Through the assemblage of armed men at the
garrison, Weshop held his way, without stopping
to make inquiries: for his eye conjectured the
meaning of all that he saw. He went directly to
Van Tromp's room, and found him alone. With
a motion of the hand, which native feeling
rendered
graceful, he introduced to one another, these
long separated friends, who fairly rushed into each
other's arms, and shed tears of joy at so
unexpected
a meeting. Du Quesne who felt at the moment
happier, perhaps, than he had ever been before,
pointed in silence to the Indian as his deliverer;
and Van Tromp, was astonished at the success of
his achievement, and additionally grateful on this
emergency, because he should have the assistance
of his friend. He clasped the hand of Weshop
strongly, and looking full upon his quiet features,
while his own were agitated with different
emotions
,
spoke to him a few words in Indian, to which
Weshop replied, for he loved to hear the sound of
his native tongue, particularly from Van Tromp.
The Patroon, for so was Van Tromp commonly
called, relaxed his grasp, and left the Indian to
supply
his wants, and consult his pleasure: adding
only, You will not go? No, said the
warrior
,
not now, perhaps never. The two friends,
left to themselves, commenced that sort of
conversation
which was natural on the occasion, in the
course of which they explained, each to the other,
whatever was the subject of mutual inquiry, till Du
Quesne declared that as it was the first undisturbed
moment that he had enjoyed for long and long
before
,
he would retire. What a luxury, said he
once more to sleep in safety after all my troubles.
But you will wait for the evening service,
said the Patroon, the drum beats in a few
moments
.
What, do you muster your men for
exercise
?
Noour people shoot best without a
manual, but we meet, men, women, and children,
when the drum beats, for prayers. What, and
the Indians too? I should think they would be
disorderly. They are full as quiet as the rest.
We have with us a young clergyman by the name
of Elliot, from Massachusetts, who performs part of
his service in their language; and there is no doubt
they are benefitted by his instruction. They only
require attention.
The Indians, said Du Quesne, seem a
mysterious
people, about whom little can be known,
though they swarm about us in such numbers.
They are savage, bloodthirsty, and implacable. I
don't think they can ever be civilized. What
think you of that specimen which came to you in
prison? said Van Tromp. Ah! that indeed
think of him? he is a wonder any whereI owe
him my life. That man could redeem his tribe if
they were all murderers. He has been
cultivated
some, said Van Tromp, but you may one
day see him use his tomahawk, and bow, and not
wait your bidding, or ask your advice; and use
the rifle too, with as little remorse as any of his
countrymen. One reason why so little has ever
been known about the Indians, is, that they will
not communicate. They have a religion, it is
certain
;
and I suspect they observe their articles of
faith, though they seldom tell what they are, not
for want of language, for if you understand their
language you will find it sufficiently copious; and
if you listen to their conversation, you will be
convinced
that the sounds are softer than those of any
other tongue that is spoken. When the English
undertake to write them in words, they fairly
exhaust
their liquids and vowels, and the reader who
is acquainted with the spoken language, is as much
at a loss to utter it, as if he stood at a desk of
printers'
types; I have heard a better speech from an
Indian
chief, than that Greek oration of Dudley's
Peri
ton Indianon,
but I forget my Greek, and I could
not think of the word for civilized, if it was to
civilize
the whole tribe. Hark, the drum beats, you
will know more of these in timelet us go.
The religious service of the evening was
performed
,
and the friends retired; Du Quesne to a
repose, which after his fatigue, was as sweet as the
sleep of infancy, and Van Tromp, to visit his new
inmates and to go the rounds of his dutyafter
which, at the winding of a horn, the garrison was
silent.
Meanwhile Weshop, after eating and drinking
among the people, and learning the particulars of
the gathering, was retiring to the kitchen where he
meant to spend the night. One Jonathan
Hodges
,
a Yankee man, had taken up his quarters with
Shadrach, and the black was just saying to him,
I wonder what's become of our runaway Indian,
as the door opened. Ah here he comes,
continued
the speaker, glad to see you old friend,
help yourself, as Weshop unasked was taking up
their mug of cider, the remains of which he drank
without stopping for breath. Well, Weshop,
said Jonathan, what's the news; you must have
been somewhere, by the strange gentleman I saw
tagging at your heelswho was he, Weshop; I
say, Weshop, who was he? Why don't you tell
him, dumbhead, said the black, (can't get
nothing
out of him;) or here, help clear away these
things, never was so poor a tool in a house as
an Indian.
Come, Bearskin, said Jonathan, clear your
clam with some more cider, and give us the news.
Did you see any thing of my brindle cow that I
lost last June? I always thought Jim Staines shot
that cow for a grudge he owed me, or I owed him.
My name an't Bearskin, it's Weshop, I hav'nt
seen your cow. Nobody cares for your name;
was the replyBlueskin, Redbird, Yellowlegs:
any thing is name enough for an Indianthe
name of an Indian! and he uttered it very much
as Dr. Doubty does the form of a hat!
Weshop motioned towards an unfinished
hoe-handle
that stood in the corner.
What, going to strike! said Jonathan, they
talk about civilizing the Indians! bless my soul
I'd rather tame that wild cat that I shot night
before
last. One thing I'll say for Weshop, said
the black, he an't a talking man. No, said
Jonathan, but to hear 'em yell in the woods, as
I have done, a body would think they
could
talk.
There is an oddity among people of different colors.
Talk to Shadrach about colors, said the Indian.
Different colors is nothing, said the black. O
noits owing to heat, and cold, and shade, and
the sun, and moon, and the seven stars; but there
is
a difference among nations, said Jonathan,
though, by the way, I was never out of this.
Pray Jonathan, said Shadrach how many
nations
are there? Ten thousand; but what is that
to you? brush your master's boots, and have the
guns in order for the hunting that is to be on
Thursday; but put out the candle nowdon't you
hear the horn blowing for nine o'clock? Weshop
has turned in I see, and I'll follow his example.
So saying, Jonathan walked towards his bunk on
one side of the kitchen, muttering something about
Shadrach, Mesheck, and Abednego.
All was still, when Weshop, who awoke at the
slightest noise, heard the howling of a dog the
door. Get up, Shadrach, and let in Dash. The
Negro delayed some time, till the loudness of the
dog's cries urged him to open the door. Lay
down, Dash, said he, as the dog bounced into the
room; but he was not to be quieted. He
overturned
stools and benches, howled, returned to the door,
and then back, till the astonished Negro exclaimed
the dog is mad. Something is the matter,
said the Indian, where is your master?
Shadrach
lighted a candle, and the Indian springing on
his feet, opened the inner door, and followed by
the dog, went directly to the bedroom of Van
Tromp. It was empty, and the bed had not been
occupied during the night. He roused Du Quesne,
and told his conjectures. The newly arrived guest,
with the advice of his late guide, led the way, and
kept close to the dog, set out upon a search
without
disturbing the garrison: attended by Shadrach
and Jonathan.
A few who had been detained for the duty of a
night watch, waited to prepare lanterns and horses,
and soon overtook the party in advance, but as
they found themselves at a loss in the dark, it was
agreed to take the dog for a guide. Weshop tied
a string to his collar, and hastened along at as
round a trot as the horsemen dared to venture.
After passing through woods and underbrush,
they came to something like a path, which led
along the brow of a steep declivity, whose sides
were covered with bushes, and too dark to be seen.
The turf was broken at the edge of the bank, and
there were some deep prints of a horse's hoofs.
Weshop let slip the dog, and followed him down
the descent, supporting by the way with shrubs
and stones. The result of the search was soon
known. Van Tromp's horse lay dead from the
fall, and he was almost senseless. He was
carefully
conveyed to the garrison, without
unnecessary
disturbance; and as Jonathan and Shadrach
were again betaking themselves to rest, they
wondered
what he could have been doing there at that
time of night.
Van Tromp had rode out of the garrison, soon
after sunset, for the purpose, as those who saw him
supposed, of reconnoitering the country. His
departure
was noticed only by a few, who might be
elsewhere at his return; and the constant hurrying
and shifting from place to place among the new
comers, left every one to suppose, when the horn
blew, that
all was well,
as the sentinel on his duty
declared. A large black dog, was the only
attendant
that followed his master.
The manuscript, which is unusually brief in this
spot, makes mention of a family in the
neighborhood
,
where an elderly lady resided, and a young
lady lived, too, of uncommon beauty and
accomplishments
;
and adds, that, in peaceful times, Van
Tromp, for want of more edifying company,
occasionally
rode that way. How that may have
been, is rather to be conjectured from the residue
of the story. The immediate result of the night's
adventure was, that he was so badly bruised as to
be scarcely able to turn himself in bed; and it was
certain he could not attend the hunting, which was
to take place three days after.
This hunting was not the common sporting chase
after a fox, or a tame deer, nor did the skill which
it required, depend on leaping fences, or clearing
ditches. It was not a search after a partridge
among the mountains;provision, until more
quiet times, was to be made for nearly ninety souls,
including women and children; an extent of
dangerous
country was to be scoured, embracing what
was called the Iroquois hunting ground, and the still
rougher tract beyond; and a fortnight might be
consumed in the enterprise. Meanwhile the
garrison
would be stripped of its men, except a few
for immediate service, and left to the family
discipline
of old and young women.
I shall not be able to hunt with you, Du
Quesne
,
said Van Tromp, and you'll find it a bad
job for a beginner. I hope you'll find your hurt
not serious, said he. I shall not be able to
endure
it, was the reply; but, after all, my mind
torments me most. I have a dreadful
apprehension
,
Du Quesne. This accident warus me that I
may meet with others, and for fear of what may
happen, must make you my confidant. What think
you I took this ride for? I'll tell you. About five
miles off, at a place near the lake which the Indians
call Manhaddock, and in the French, Point au Fer
but no matter for the nameis a family, which,
except servants and laborers, consists of a lady, and
girl by the name of Dubourg. She was the
daughter
of a French officer, who commanded a post on
the lines, I believe.
4
He married somewhere on the Hudson, and lost
his wife, and was then ordered abroadbut pshaw!
what care you for that? Any thing that
interests
you, I care for, said Du Quesne. O! it's
no interest of minethat is, it would be very
neglectful
in me to leave such a family, so helpless, at
such a time; so I meant to have brought the old
lady and her people here. But Du Quesne,
added
he, lowering his voice, the house and
buildings
are burnt to the ground; and what can have
become of the girlso beautiful, I wish you could
have seen her. A horrid suspicion came across
my mind, as I wept over the spot. I raked the
ashes, not knowing but I might find human bones.
Van Tromp made a pause of some moments,
which Du Quesne did not interrupt. He
proceeded
.
There is one chance; the New-England
troops were to assemble on the other side of the
lake; and it may be, that they are there already.
If so, these people may have gone down the water,
to their protection. But what I mean to sayif
any thing befals me, remember to find them out,
and take care of them if they are living.
LETTER VII.
A famous hunting once there did
In Chevy Chase befal.
The two succeeding days were employed by the
Garrison at the Blasted Tree in busy preparations
for their hunting expedition.Provisions, blankets,
runlets and knapsacks, were got readyseveral
horses were loaded, guns and ammunition, bows,
arrows, axes, &c. were put in order, with a view
to as much comfort, as was consistent with
spending
their nights in the woods. They arranged
themselves in three bodies, which were to keep the
same general direction, at no greater distance from
one another, if practicable, than would admit of
their meeting at night. Indeed, for the two first
nights, they appointed their rendezvous, and as
they did so, they talked of Buffal paths and
prairies
,
and beaver ponds, and wolf dens, and Indian
names which are no where to be found on the map.
It was expressly forbidden to blow a horn or a
bugle except in case of imminent danger. Du
Quesne and Weshop, were to head one party,
Jonathan
and Shadrach another, and the third was
to be directed by some of their sturdy neighbours.
Thus equipped, our adventurers sallied forth at
daybreak
on their perilous and fatiguing duty.
The incidents of this hunt made a lasting
impression
on the memories of all who survived it;
and Shadrach in after days, charmed many a
breathless
listener, as he smoked his pipe in the chimney
corner, and told this hunting story. The
manuscript
is less minute. It seems that the game was
abundant, consisting principally of the moose and
common deer, the bear and the buffaloe
sometimes
the wolf or the wild cat would fall in the way
of the hunters.
During this time, the parties sometimes met and
were sometimes separated. Weshop and Du
Quesne were apart from the rest, but kept near one
another, from a sense of duty on the part of the
Indian
,
and of dependance on the part of Du Quesne,
who missed his way, when he missed his guide, and was
in constant danger of losing him self in the woods.
The attention of Weshop, was suddenly arrested
by the actions of a small spaniel dog that kept at
his heelsand then by a slight rustling noise in
the thicket. He made a sign to Du Quesne not to
stir, and crept softly among the bushes, where he
saw several of the hostile Indians, and had
convincing
proof that there were many of them in the
neighbourhood.
He perceived the nature of his danger, and
guessed the extent of it. Without being
discovered
,
he made good his retreat to Du Quesne, and
with his finger on his lip, led his noiseless way to a
place where the heavy timbered upland joins the
edge of a large natural meadow that extended
farther than the eye could reach, and was covered
with a coarse jointed grass, which grew thick, and
in most places, taller than a man's head.Weshop
explained the danger, and said they must take
means to notify and assemble their party, and
instantly
retreat for the garrison. But tell them,
added he, to avoid the direct course, for between
the Lion's Tail (which was the name given to the
extremity of a long ridge of hills,) and the beaver
ponds, that pass will be guarded. I would rather
risque the
run
than the
ambush
.
It is proper to observe, that when a party of the
settlers and a party of the Indians discovered each
other in the woods, the weaker was pursued by the
stronger, without any hope of mercy if they were
overtaken, and with little chance that the pursuers
would relinquish their object until the flying enemy
should gain a place of safety. Day after day
sometimes, would the hurried and fearful march be
kept up, usually in Indian file, from the difficulty
of the way, and the necessary caution of leaving as
few signs as possible, by which the pursuers could
discover their course. This was termed
running
the Indians,
or being run by the Indians, depending
as a lawyer would say, on who was the party
Plaintiff
,
and who was the party Defendant.
Our two wary hunters moved with extreme
caution
through the high grass, lest the waving
motion
of the top should detect them as with all their
caution, it probably did. It was not till they came
to the buffalo path, that Weshop directed his friend
to blow his bugle, and himself set up the Indian
cry of alarm, which he continued as he went, to
give a hint of the direction he was taking. The
hunters began to fall in from different quarters,
and the horns and bugles were heard in several
directions
.
It was determined that they should
attempt
their flight in three divisions, and by
different
routes, so as to divide, and perhaps confuse
their pursuers. Du Quesne and his party were
under
the guidance of Weshop, who set off again at
a brisk trot for the head of the lake. Quick,
quick, said the Indian, the woods will soon be on
fire, and this day the grass will flash like
gunpowder
.
See the smoke there and there; we must get
out of the grass; don't wait for it to kindle. He
kept near the eastern border that he might have it
in his power to escape being burnt alive; but all
his speed and caution were nearly in vain. The
fire was now seen darting its streams to the top of
the pines and hemlock, and leaping with the
activity
that belongs to that element, from one dry tree
to another, till the woods were in a blazeseizing
the tallest trees that crowned the little head-lands,
and breaking them, as if by manual force. It caught
the grass in several places at once. Without
stopping
to consume the fuel before them, the long
pointed flames, darted and kindled as they touched.
The wind rose with the fire, and the wild animals
who seek in these spots their food and shelter, were
seen and heard with cries and bellowings, to fly
before
it.
4*
It often happens, that the deer are overtaken at
full speed, and consumed by the flames before they
reach the upland, while the waves of this fiery
deluge
pass over them.
The hunting party had already turned to the east
short of reaching the place of their destination:
and had scarcely gained a dry ridge, when the
whole plain was one continued sea of fire. A strong
current of air was raised by the heat, which
occasioned
a roar much resembling heavy thunder.
The senses of Du Quesne were confounded. He
dared hardly turn his eyes to this dreadful
conflagration
,
which threatened to consume the spot on
which he stood. He trod close to the steps of
Weshop, who was now certain that the hostile
Indians
were on his track, and whose only hope
rested
on gaining the lake. Every nerve was
strained
;
partly from the heat, and partly from exertion,
Du Quesne was ready to fall, when he sprained his
ancle and dropped.
Leave me, Weshop, said he, as the sweat
poured from his body, escape if you can, but lay
me in the bushes, and depart, perhaps they may
pass me by. Weshop cast on him one look of
agony, as he said a man who falls in the run is
never heard from again. He took him by the
arm, and sometimes carried him on his shoulders,
till they found themselves cut off from their party,
and surprised and taken by a party of the
pursuing
Indians.
As Du Quesne moved with difficulty, his fate was
for a moment uncertain; but the encampment of
the enemy happened to be near, and Weshop was
compelled to assist his companion in keeping up
with the party.
They arrived about nightfall, at a spot near the
left bank of the Saranac, where that stream which
is full of falls and rapids, passes between high hills,
and is bounded by a country which corresponds
with the troubled motion of its waters. Several
wigwams were disposed under the shelter of a rocky
height, the face of which was nearly perpendicular,
and whose top was thinly covered with savin bushes
that seemed looking down as they bent over the
brink. The warriors immediately betook
themselves
to eating and sleeping; some in the
wigwams
,
and some round loose fires which were
already
kindled, where the squaws, and
shantops
and
pappooses
(as the larger and smaller children are
called,) stood ready to welcome their friends.
Weshop and Du Quesne were secured in one of
those natural caverns or openings in the rock,
which are common in this vicinity, and which the
Indians with a little labour often convert into places
of residencethey generally resort to them in
times of danger as affording shelter and safety.
The narrow entrance was strongly secured and
they were left to conjecture their approaching fate.
Du Quesne bewailed the continual misfortunes in
which he seemed to have involved himself, and
those with whom he had been and was connected,
and compared his present misery with his more
tolerable imprisonment at New Amsterdam, from
which his fellow sufferer had released him.
What, said he, will these wretches do with
us? shall we be tortured and murdered, Weshop?
I have heard they roast their prisonersI have
heard even worse than that! Weshop slowly
replied
,
they can get pay for a white man, if they
carry him to the next French town, but me, said
he firmly, they will burn.
Oh! said Du Quesne in horror, God forbid
tell them,
I beg of you,
if they carry me as a
prisoner among civilized men to wait till I can send
your ransom. You shall be ransomed if it takes
all the property at Blasted Tree, if it costs the
evacuation
of the whole country, if it costs my life;
certainly they can ask no more,and he groaned
with anguish.
'Twill do no good, was the answer. I once
escaped before; may be they won't save
you
. He
paused, and then continued. Do not the white
men say, that the good are happy as soon as they
die?
Yes.
We
believe it takes seven days, to go to the
country of good spirits, after that I expect to see
you and know you, if you should be alive, but I
can't make you see me, nor know me.
Du Quesne was unable to reply.
Weshop seemed more inclined to talk than
usual
.
His notions were wild and fanciful, but his
manner was calm and serious: and particularly
was it affecting, to one who was likewise
endeavoring
to prepare himself for the same awful trial.
In the course of the next day, Du Quesne was
surprised
to see him produce his tomahawk, which he
had artfully contrived to secure to his arm, by a
fold of his blanket, so that it escaped the notice of
his enemies.
The Indians who held them prisoners, were only
a detachment of those who had surprised the
hunting
party. Most of them, as it afterwards
appeared
,
had made directly for the garrison, where this
division was soon to join them. It was led by a
warrior named Tantidock, whose business it was
to execute or otherwise dispose of such as were
made captive, according to the sentence of the
sagamores
,
or elders. This Indian came into the cave
towards the evening of the second day. His
appearance
showed he had been preparing for some
unusual occasion. The expression of triumph in
his features was made more ferocious, by stains
and streaks of different coloured paints with which
his face was disfigured or adorned according to
the taste of the beholder. His head was decked
with feathers, and his nose, ears, ancles, and wrists
with rings and shells, and strings of beads. He
told Weshop, with an appearance of great
satisfaction
,
that at midnight he would lead him out to
his tormentors. The warrior heard his sentence
with seeming indifference, and even reproached his
enemy with weakness and cowardice. Every
sensation
of anguish was now felt by Du Quesne, in
the extreme. He had no consolation to bestow,
for he felt that he needed much, and he watched
over Weshop in bewildered silence. The stoic
of the woods lay stretched upon the straw, where
he slept till awakened by the approach of his
midnight
visitor. Tantinock had a tomahawk in one
hand, and a pine knot burning in the other. He
stood over his prisoner as he rose, and making signs
for him to follow, led the way from the cavern.
The small cavity in the rock where they were,
communicated outward by a very narrow passage,
or cleft in the ledge, with room for but one person
to walk at once. Du Quesne cast a look upon the
departing hero, but it was not answered, and he
was about to turn his eyes, when just as Weshop
entered the passage, the broad glare of the torch
light showed the tomahawk in his hand. He struck
with his whole force a single blow, which needed
not repeating. The weapon sunk into the head of
the foremost Indian who fell instantly dead.
Weshop
put his finger to his lip, as he returned to Du
Quesne, with a look that showed him to be, at that
instant, perfectly happy. Turn to the right,
said he, as soon as we get out; don't be afraid,
but jump down the rocks to the gap in the bank
where the canoes are. I must move a little towards
the fires with the torch. Du Quesne instantly
obeyed. His ancle was now strong, and his agony
of mind for the last two nights had prepared him
to welcome any danger, and defy any hazard. He
turned round the corner of the ledge, jumped, and
sprang, and fell several times, rose, and exerted all
his might, reckless of danger, to reach the narrow
landing place, where he knew such was Weshop's
activity, that his friend, unless taken, would be
found.
Some of the ridges of the rock which fell
towards
the river in different tiers, or
strata,
were so
high and difficult that he appeared to have fallen,
with occasional intermission, the whole way.
Weshop
reached the spot nearly at the same moment.
The snow was falling very thick and fast, so that
an object could not be distinctly seen but a small
distance off. Weshop had left his torch in the cleft
of a tree burning, and now contrived himself to get
off with a canoe, and stave holes with his tomahawk
through the bottom of several others. Du Quesne
remembered his old posture, and dropped in the
bottom of the boat, which his active pilot soon
conducted
to the middle of the stream. The river
was little less than a succession of rapids and falls,
which made their progress as dangerous as it was
speedy. The little barge of birch and splinters
held its onward way, like the charmed egg-shell of
the Lapland witches. The noise was now heard
of the Indians, now gathered on the bank of the
river, firing the few fire-arms that they had, and
raising their cries above the roar of the waters and
the storm; but the motion of the boat could not
be perceived, and the rushing of a frigate through
the waves would have been drowned by the
violence
of the storm, and the dash of the torrent;
and the boat shot over the rapids with the
boundless
velocity of an arrow from the string. There
was a desperate plunge soon to be taken over a
fall below. Du Quesne was directed to make
himself
fast to the boat with a cord, that in any event
they might not be separated from their only hope.
The precaution was not in vain. The boat in the
dark plunged over the fall, and fell so swift as to
rob him of his breath. He fell down-right without
knowing where the descent would stop, till he found
himself plunged in the river and covered nearly
to drowning, by water, under which he felt
himself
drawn by the rope. The boat had turned
sideways
and had filledso that the slightest weight
would have sunk it but for the current that pressed
it forward. Weshop told him to hold on, and both
clung to the canoe till they came to the edge of a
shelving shore where the water eddied round a point,
and the Indian touched the bottom with his feet.
Their united efforts drew the skiff on shore,
emptied
it, and launched it again buoyant upon the
stream. The Indian kept it steady while Du
Quesne got in, and then sprung lightly over the stern,
and continued his course till he reached the
peaceful
bosom of lake Champlain. They were now
far southward of the Chazy, and made no doubt
the garrison was so beleaguered that any attempt to
join it, would expose them to certain capture. Du
Quesne knew so as to describe to Weshop, nearly
the place where the New-England troops were to
rendezvous.
We must cross the lake and find 'em, said the
Indian, as he stood balancing in the stern.
Van Tromp wants 'em. The enemy is around
him so that there's no coming out or going in. The
Oneidas and Mohawks will burn and murder every
living soul: without help, they will leave nothing
but ashes, so let us push for the New-England
troops.
Our adventurers accordingly continued their
course across the lake, where for the present we
must leave them; for the connexion of events
require
that we should now shift our scenery to
another
,
and distant part of the country, and leave for
a space our northern friends, that we may bring
up to the same period, the fortunes of Dudley;
who it will be remembered was in the league of
friendship at Saybrook college.
LETTER VIII.
My name was Robert Kidd,
And God's laws I did forbid,
And thus wickedly I didas I sail'd.
The appearance of the sky indicated one of those
autumnal storms which render navigation
dangerous
on the coast of New-England, when a ship of
a size and appearance more large and imposing
than was usually seen in those waters, was crossing
Long-Island Sound, and making for Gardiner's
Bay. She came round the point, and anchored
under the land, as near the shore as was safe, in a
place so sheltered by the woods and the projection
of land towards the sand-bar, as not to be readily
seen from the Sound. Two boats put off from the
vessel, one of which steered towards the southern
part of the bay, and the other directly for the shore.
This last was filled with men who repaired to a
rude cabin, which stood in the edge of the wood,
not far from the water. Here they made
preparations
for spending the night, by kindling a fire, and
bringing into the hut refreshments, and several
other articles from the boat.
The night which had now set in, soon became
pitchy dark, and the storm, which had been
foreseen
,
began with violence. The hut was dry, and
derived an air of comfort from the tempest that
raged without, and the fire that blazed within. A
light was kept burning at a small window, to
direct
the return of the other boat through the
darkness
,
and a guard placed at the door; while the
rest of the men reposed themselves around the
sides of the room, except onewho appeared to
exercise unlimited authority. He sometimes seated
himselfsometimes stood alone by the fire, and
sometimes walked back and forth in the room. He
was a muscular and strong built man, of a morose
lood and foreign air.
His dress was rich with lace, and somewhat
resembled
a British naval uniform. He had a pair
of large silver mounted pistols, and a heavy
eastern
sabre at his side. He listened now and then
till he could distinguish the dash of oars in the
pauses of the storm.
Douse the glim there, Dardy Mullins! Off
with these cutter's men to the ship, and back by
daylight. Tell Watson to keep his eye on the
prisoner
,
for we are close on shore; look out, for if
any body deserts, you shall walk the plank.
At this moment the door opened, and a man
entered
,
armed like the other, except that instead of
pistols, he wore a carbine or araquebuss, with a
spring bayonet. The water was pouring from the
spout of his three cornered hat, and his black beard
grew so high on his face, and so near the fell of
uncombed
hair above, that his eyes looked like those
of a Newfoundland dog, though far less
prepossessing
.
5
He was followed by six or seven of a
very motly, or weather-beaten appearance.
Bolton, continued the first speaker, what
does he say? Can I have provision enough for
another cruise?
Wait till I get the water out of my eyes, and
I'll tell you.
So saying, he poured a liberal allowance of
brandy
into a tumbler, and drank it undiluted. The
commander seconded the motion, as he called it;
and then handed it to the sailors, who drank
extempore
from the neck of the bottle. Their
conversation
,
though it throws some light on after
circumstances
,
was not such as should be published
in the Fort Braddock MS. We learnt from it
however, that Lord Bellamont was about entering
on the duties of governor, both of Massachusetts
and New-Yorkthat Gardiner's Bay was the
commander's
only place of safetythat he had a
commission
from the board of admiralty, and sailing
orders from Lord Bellamont himself.
Strain every nerve to get to sea again, said
Kidd, and immediately, with provision for a long
voyage. Kill Gardiner's cattle and pay himone
day, rain or shine, is all I askthe earl of
Bellamont
is himself suspected of assisting us, and his
enemies have urged the colonies to prove their
suspected
loyalty by bringing my head.There is a
provincial sloop of war under one Dudley, that
may suspect our haunt, and seek, in this very storm,
this infernal tempting harbour.
Why, then, sad Bolton, did you come here?
Did you never know why I
often
come here?
This island belongs to the state or province, and
is embraced in no patent, but is holden directly
from king William, like the Isle of Wight; and it
belongs to the family of the Gardiners, in which it
is entailed, with no law or responsibility but to the
king, who dosn't know whether it is the East Indies
or West. There is on it but a single family and
its laborers, and we have them always under our
controul. They can send for no militia, and claim
no assistance; the dead peace of the spot is
disturbed
only by us. Here are woods, water and
provisions, at our own price, and more security
in these regions than is to be found elsewhere.
Then why not stay, said Bolton, the very
expense of pursuit, will sicken the plantations; and
they have Indians enough to look out for on shore,
without chasing pirates at sea.
Do you not notice, (said the captain) among
the prisoners we took in the
Quedah,
a
Frenchman
that seemed a passenger from the East Indies?
I seldom see a man but I remember him again.
'Tis more than twenty years ago that I knew that
man in New-York, as they call it now. He was
an officer in the French service, when I traded from
that port with the Buccaneers. He had a wife with
him, I think; any how, he was much respected;
his connexions are every where, and if he should
escape, then Robert Kidd sails no more. Depend
on't there's danger. Fifty of my men deserted at
St. Mary's when we purnt the Adventurer, and
went on board the Mocha Pirate. Do you see,
Bolton?
Bolton looked him full in the face, and laying
his hand on the steel hilt of his Turkish scymetar,
said, Moore lies quietly on Black Point, and
though his money is within reach of his arm he
can't mutter where it is.
I know, (was the reply;) but this man can pay
a ransom; he shall neither die here, nor escape.
Then (said Bolton) I agree that we must put to
sea. Hark! how the wind blows! how the arms
of these old oak trees swing and break! Blow
high or low, we'll be ready to-morrow night. Its
now W. N. W.; it will clear off in the S. W. in a
day or two; let's see, the moon changes to-morrow.
What's become of that bottle? The eastern
nations
understand weather better than we do; no
wonder with their monsoons and tornadoes.
Thunder
and lightning! here an't a half a drink!
Molucca
,
(said he to a short brown coloured fellow,)
Arrack! (The boy looked for another bottle.)
And put some straw near the firethere, that will
donot so close; if I burn up, I'll torment you
forever.
So saying he took his laudanum, as he called it
unbelted his sword which he drew and placed at
his headand then threw himself on the straw.
Thank heaven, I am tir'd, (said he, looking at
Captain Kidd, more in earnest than in jest,) how
much hard labor it takes to supply the little place
of a quiet conscience. I shall sleep, though,
whatever
I may dream
.
There is not in the whole compass of nature's
music, a sound more soothing than the rushing of
a heavy rain upon a tight roof just over one's
drowsy head.
It seems to force upon the mind a strong
conviction
of comfort, and to excite feelings of
gratitude
for the shelter we enjoy, mixed with a slight
and painful touch of pity, for the unknown but
possible exposures of others. When this lullaby
is joined by the chorus of waters lashed by the
wind and dashed at intervals on the shore, the
sense of personal danger, and the contrasted images
of peril by sea, serve only to heighten this pensive
pleasure. But to enjoy the beauties or the music
of nature,
innocence
is necessary. Eden faded
from the eyes of our first parents, and though the
spot be left, it will never be found again by their
short-sighted and sinful posterity.
The next morning the storm continued, as was
expected; the boats put off from the ship to the
shore, and the captain set out in his barge for the
south part of the island, where the mansion house
has always stood. He landed, notwithstanding
the rain, in a sort of naval style; left a trusty man
with the boat, and sent another forward to
announce
his approach. The rest followed him
towards
the house at a respectful distance, fully armed
and with military precision. They paraded before
the door, till they had leave to retire to the kitchen,
and Kidd himself entered the house.
This was by no means his first visit. Mr.
Gardiner
,
commonly called Lord Gardiner, from his
being an immediate tenant of the crown, and
having
a separate charter or patent, which granted
him certain royal privileges on his own territory,
received him with civility, though with
embarrassment
.
He knew that he sailed at first with a
commission
from the British Admiralty, and more
than suspected the use he made of it. Kidd knew
all this, but acted as if he wore king William's
commissionand would resent any suspicion to
the contrary. He mentioned the urgency of the
service on which he was sent;and spoke of
recent
orders from the admiralty. He brought some
presents for Mrs. Gardiner and children, and
politely
requested her to retire, that he might have a
moment's conversation with her husband.
In this interview he made a memorandum of the
provisions he wanted, which he carried out at his
own prices; and after footing it up, paid the
money
down and added, that it must be delivered by
sunrise the next morning at the fisher's hut, for he
dared not trust his men on the island, for fear of
5*
desertion. He regretted that the weather was such
that he could not entertain his friends on board
dropped a word or two about his men and guns,
and politely took his leave. No military
contribution
was ever levied with more particularity. The
Quedah was watered and supplied with provision
and vegetables for a cruise; the plan of which
Kidd had contrived, but the success of which he
could not foresee.
LETTER IX.
The weather on the third day was fair, and the
wind favorable. The ship was under weigh, and
the spars were whitened with canvass at a single
order. The proprietor of the Island saw her with
pleasure, when she doubled the point to get out of
the bay, and put before the wind in the direction
of Montaug.
The infant trade of the colonies, and indeed all
the navigation of the coast, had been endangered
by other pirates besides this noted freebooter.
Barbarous
cruelties, and some
shocking and
unprovoked
murders upon the neighboring seas, had been
committed, and the colonies, particularly
Massachusetts
,
had fitted out a few vessels to protect their
trade, and if possible, capture the pirates. Dudley,
who was considered an officer of much promise,
had been lately promoted to the command of the
Martyr sloop of war, and sent on this service He
had obtained an accurate description of the Quedah,
and overhauled every sail he saw, in hopes of
falling
in with this noted pirate. Kidd was still in
sight of land, when he made out the Martyr, and
bore down for her, in expectation of finding a
merchant
vessel. He was soon undeceived by her
size and appearance, and most of all, by her
standing
directly for him, though the wind was in the
wrong quarter. He called to BoltonWhat say
shall we fight for the fun of it, when there's
nothing
to get? There's nothing but Spartan coin,
by the looksthere's no glory to be got. That
fellow, pointing to the vessel, would be afraid
to run. Damn it, Bolton, I dare do any thing,
fight or run;what say?
Just as your stomach is, said Bolton, shipping
a large quid of pigtail aboard his mouth, but in
three hours sailing, you'll be overhauled.
Quarters, then,beat to quarters; but pack
all sail, put her before the wind. Helm a-port
steady there, hold her at that. A few gratuitous
curses, by way of emphasis, garnished the order.
Discipline was Kidd's creed, and he supposed it
was brought about only in one method. The cat
o'nine tails had been freely used that very morning;
the yard arm was handy, and the plank lay in the
gangway, ready at a word to be run out from the
vessel's side. At every springing of this dreadful
trap, a living corpse was heard to plunge, and cries
for help, to come with the wind, till the speed of
the ship left them behind.
Kidd now put his crew to every various and
rapid
service, which is suddenly required in
preparing
for flight and battle at the same time.
Different
orders were given in the same breath. which
were sometimes misunderstood, and sometimes, to
his critical eye, too slightly and negligently
executed
.
His orders had at first some few words of
intelligible English, mixed here and there among
his oaths; but he soon confined himself to his
vocabulary
of profanity, which he fairly exhausted
more than once in French, Dutch and English.
He soon saw that a battle was inevitable; for the
Quedah from a long voyage, was not in so good
sailing order as the vessel in pursuit, which was fast
coming up.
I did not care enough whether I fought or run,
to make up my mind about it, said he to Bolton,
as he suddenly assumed an air of perfect
composure
,
but I think we shall be saved the trouble of
a council of war on that point. We must take in
sail and clear for action, after the men have had
their fighting rations. Let the Quarter Master
bring some this way, that I may have a word over
a social glass with you Mr. Bolton. I like this
chance of a battle, if it was only as an apology
for drinking; though you may say I'm not difficult
about excuses. But, Bolton, to be serious, we must
be prepared, you know, for the worst; and be the
chance of our being taken what it may, there shall
be none of our being betrayed.
A conversation succeeded in a tone low, but
earnest in which nothing could be distinguished,
except at intervals, such wordsthe prisonerthe
plankhe knows all and it can't be helpeddead
men tell no tales, &c.
The result was soon known. Without
ceremony
,
or even a public declaration of the design, a
few men were despatched for the unhappy object
of Kidd's suspicions, who brought the victim upon
deck, struggling and reluctant, with his eyes bound,
though his hands were free. He was led along the
plank, which projected over the sides of the
gangway
,
and which was cut from its slight lashing, so
that he dropped in the water, and was left in the
wake of the vessel.
There was carelessly seated on the deck of the
Martyr, a young, and what ladies would call a
handsome looking man, with a spy glass in his
hand, which he happened at this moment to apply
to his eye. I cannot stop, as the manner of some
is, to tell how he looked, how his hat had fallen
from his head, and left it with no other covering
than thick dark curls of chesnut hair, which the
wind stirred from his high fair forehead, nor of the
form that graced the rude ground-work of the
quater
deck. I must be, if possible, as rapid in my
narration, as he was in his action, when his
accidental
glance, assisted by the spy glass, rested on
that sight of horror which I have just described.
The fair readers of this time-worn manuscript must
pardon me, if I leave them to conjecture how he
looked, when he sprang on his feet and with a
freedom
of language which in those pure days, even
the profession of a seaman did not allow,
exclaimed
,
Good God! they've murdered a manaway,
there, to his help!
The hoarse voice of the boatswain was heard
above the busy hum of the ship's crew
away,
thereyou first cutters, away!
and the hint was
taken by the boat's crew, who, headed by an
officer, were over the vessel's side, and seated at
their own oars with the activity of a flock of
Mother
Cary's chickens.
The speed of manual exertion is no where shown
to more advantage, than on board a vessel of war.
Pull, pull, said the officer, as he stood in the
stern with the tiller in his hand. A shot from the
Quedah went so near his head, that he could tell
from the scream that there was a flaw in the bullet.
Ah we shall engage in a minutepull, pull
away.
The men sprang to their oars for the floating
victim. The long ridges of the ocean wave were
dashing over him, and in his drowning ears, deep
answered unto deep. He had pulled the baudage
from his eyes, and it now hung loose about his neck,
so that he saw the effort for his relief, and was
struggling
with the exertion of a spent swimmer to
whom hope had given preternatural power, when
the barge was sweeping by him, and the man in
the bow caught the handkerchief round his neck
with a boat hook. The oars stopped, and the boat,
with the body along side, drove through the water
with the headway already acquired. The man was
exhausted and lifeless to all appearance, when they
took him on board and put about for the ship. By
this time, the vessels were so near, that some shots
had already been exchanged, and an engagement
was certain.
It is said that the silent moment, before the grim
ridges of war join in the conflict, is dreadful; and
occasion has been taken, by the great captains of
antiquity, to address their armies in speeches
On the rough edge of battle ere it joined;
and this practice, as to the length of the speeches,
has been improved upon in modern times, as
indeed
all sorts of speech-making has been.
Upon this occasion, the prefatory words were
few and unpremeditated.
Bolton. said Kidd, we must fight, but he'll be
sorry, for damn him, if he had been worth taking,
I'd have done it an hour ago. Haul up the courses
and bring her to. My boys, we must sink her
directly
.
We can't be takenthat's out of the
question
.
Those of you, who'd rather die like heroes
than be hung for pirates at Execution Dock, let's
know by three cheers. Three cheers were given,
and the ship was ready for action.
The Martyr, now certain of bringing her
adversary
to action, was holding on under full sail. The
commander had directed a shot or two to ascertain
the distance, till he saw the move of the Quedah
for action, when he gave the order, to call all hands.
At the shrill whistle of the boatswain, the deck was
filled with men, who came, some from aloft, and
some from below. The officer stepped forward
and inclined his head,every hat was off, and every
eye on him.
My lads, said he, I shall keep you but a
moment from your duty. See that inhuman wretch
'tis Robert Kidd, the devil has deserted him at
last, and Providence has delivered him into our
handsthe victory is our's. Now to your
quarters
and wait the word.
Where shall I lay her, said the sailing-master.
Oh! Mr. Cochlin, said Dudley, I forgot
that; lay her along side, at pistol shot. Mr.
Endicott
,
be ready to lead away the boarders.
The sides of the Quedah had smoked and blazed
with repeated discharges of her guns, which did
some damage before Dudley neared his distance,
and gave the word to fire. Both ships were
instantly
involved in smoke. The distance was so
small, that musketry was used from the tops, and
the decks of both vessels. Few battles have been
more desperately fought. Dudley was resolved to
capture, and Kidd, not to be taken. The Martyr was
constantly nearing the Quedah; the fluke of her
anchor caught in one of the Quedah's port-holes,
and Dudley sprang forward, calling on the
boarders
,
and heading them himself. To gain the
Quedah's deck would have been no easy matter;
but it happened that Kidd had been stunned by a
splinter, and Bolton was killed out-right.
The boarders cleared the decks of the pirate.
They were found slippery with blood, and strewed
with the dead and the dying. The men ceased to
fight when Kidd fell, for they apprehended little
danger from capture, as many of them had been
compelled into the pirate's service, and wished an
opportunity to leave it. This was understood, and
they experienced as kind treatment as they hoped
for. The Martyr was dreadfully injured, and lost
many of her men; but the Quedah was sinking.
The prisoners, with every thing valuable which
could be removed, were immediately conveyed to
the other ship, which lay along side. Dudley gave
orders to fall off, leaving a boat's crew to set fire
to the prize, and leave her. Kidd, who had been
brought to, was conveyed, with the survivors of his
crew, on board the Martyr; strict attention was
paid to the wounded of both parties; the sloop of
war repaired as well as possible for immediate
sailing
;
and the sad service of burying the dead, at
which the captain is always present, Dudley
deferred
to the next day, in hope that he might
possibly
arrive in port before that mournful office would
be necessary.
LETTER X.
By skeleton shapes the sails are furl'd,
And the hand that steers is not of this world.
We resume that part of the tale which relates to
Dudley and Kidd.
The last boat had now left the Quedah in haste,
after setting her on fire and leaving none on board
but the dead. They had scarcely joined the
Martyr
,
when a fresh breeze sprung up from the
southward
,
and drove the Quedah before the wind,
wrapped
in deep red flames, in the same direction with
the victor ship, and apparently in pursuit. A
current
of air was raised by the heat which made her
gain in this singular chase. Her sails and rigging
which had not been shot away, were all set and
standing, and the quick flames all fed by tar and
pitch, ran along her cordage and leaped to the
very top-gallant head, while the ship was yet above
water and under full way; as though the dead men
which were on board of her had awakened with
new life, and sprung to their duty.
This appearance, as she held onward wrapped
in smoke and blaze, added to her character as a
pirate, was a spectacle to the crowded deck of the
Martyr, where some viewed it as sublime, and some
as portentous and supernatural.
The spectacle was long after recorded among
the marvels, and gave rise to the tale of the Ghost
Ship or Flying Dutchman, which was manned
with spectres, and with all her canvass spread,
sailed rapidly in a gale against the wind. It was
necessary for the Martyr to bear away for fear of
being run down by this dreadful fire-ship.
The prisoner of Kidd who had been so
providentially
saved from drowning, excited very
strongly
the sympathy of Captain Dudley.
Were it not for the war with France, (said he,
addressing the stranger) you should on our arrival
at Boston be set immediately at liberty; but under
existing circumstances, though the rescued prisoner
of a pirate, you are still in my hands a prisoner of
war, and your parole of honour is the only
indulgence
I can give you.
Dubourg, for that was his name, thanked his
deliverer with a deep feeling of gratitude, and
expressed
a desire to continue under his protection.
I fear (said Dudley) we shall find it
impossible
.
My services on the water after the capture of
6
Kidd, will no longer be required. My character
in this new settlement (said he with a smile) is
rather amphibious; and I shall, soon after my
arrival
,
be despatched on a long and fatiguing land
service to the borders of Lake Champlain, where
the French and Indians on the frontier, threaten to
disturb and destroy the New-England settlements.
If that be your destination, (said the stranger)
I will gladly follow you; strange as it may seem,
my business is to visit that very spot. There, in
younger life, on the western shore of that lake, was
I stationed as an officer in Le Gendre's regiment,
before I was ordered on other service. There I
lost my wife, and left my only daughter. She was
then an infant, and now, if living, a woman. I
know where and with whom I left her. I have
regularly
heard from her, and I can find the very
spot of her abode, after an absence of twenty years.
I am (added he) a man of property, and if I find my
daughter, shall become a citizen of that country
where I spent my happiest days.
Dudley made the proposal that Dubourg should
be his company across the country, and march
with the troops which were to be in readiness at
Tantiusque, near the northern line of the colony,
to which place Dudley would repair with him, after
representing his case to the Governor of the
Massachusetts
colony, discharging his crew, and settling
his concerns as commander of the Martyr.
On their arrival at Boston, the news of the
capture
of the pirate was soon spread; witnesses were
summoned, Dudley among the restand even the
peaceful inhabitants of Gardiner's Island, to attend
the public examination of Kidd, who was on this
preliminary proof, sent home to England for trial;
where, after an examination by the House of
Commons
he terminated his voyages as recorded in the
Newgate calender, and in the ballad of which he
was the hero,
At Execution Dock, as he sail'd.
Meanwhile the provincial troops, in this instance
principally from Massachusetts, though aided by
Connecticut and Rhode-Island, had taken up their
line of march, and with their military `
furnishments
,'
accomplished a journey of difficulty, thro'
a country unsettled and but little known, and
encamped
in safety on the eastern shore of
Champlain
.
They were strongly posted to defend the
country against an unexpected inroad from the
French and hostile Indians.
Dubourg was anxious for the safety of his
daughter
,
and obtained from Dudley permission to cross
the lake with a party of men, to convey her and
the family in which she lived, out of the immediate
neighbourhood of Indian hostilities, which were at
this time more rife on the New-York side. As soon
as he discovered their residence, he spent little time
even in expressing his joy, but hurried their
departure
from a place of peril. He had reason to be
thankful for his expeditious course; for on the
night following, a detachment from the Iroquois
came upon the plantation and finding it deserted,
laid the whole in ashes.
The New-England troops were disposed in
barracks
and huts of their own construction, and as
they had chosen a commanding place, which they
meant to fortify strongly, they erected some small
log houses, in one of which Dudley lived with
Dubourg and the inmates of the removed family.
The troops were well disciplined, and inured to this
sort of peril and warfare. They kept by night
and day the strictest watch against their northern
enemies of every character, by land or water.
It was after the regular arrangement of military
duty, that a centinel at his post near the shore of
the lake, where it indented the land with a little
shady bay, indistinctly discerned the figures of two
men He stood waiting their approach to a short
distance before he should hail. One he saw was
an Indianthe other was dressed in tattered clothes,
and doubtless was a spyand how many more
might be in the woods behind them he could only
imagine. He edged towards the side of a large
tree, and cocked his gun as he cried, Who goes
there.
Friends.
Friends, stand, don't advance, said the
centinel
in alarm; then straining his voice to the
utmost
,
he called Duthan, dwelling on the last
syllable like a village matron calling her suckling
children, or a militia colonel on a regimental day,
calls atten
tion
the whole.
Corporal Jeduthan Banks, of Marblehead, had
just incurred the severities of the martial law, by
stretching his martial length and reposing his
weary virtue at the foot of an oak tree, and had
just mentally joined in Sancho's benison upon the
man who first invented this selfsame thing called
sleep, when he was roused by the unwelcome cry
of his companion in arms.
As when men wont to watch
On duty, found sleeping by whom they dread,
Rouse and bestir themselves ere well awake,
He was instantly on the ground, where his paltoon
men were directly paraded, and received the new
comers at the point of the bayonet.
Du Quesne, (for he and Weshop were the
intruders
,)
requested that they might be shown to the
quarters of the chief in command.
They found him alone in a small log hut,
without
a fire, and with no appearance of comfort or
convenience about it. A light was burning upon
a large log of wood, sawed at one end, so as to
resemble
a horse block more than a table, though it
was meant for the latter. The person who was
seated at it, requires a more particular description.
Miles Standish had the only pride of birth which
is pardonable in this country. He was directly
descended from one of those men who ate their
meal of clams near Plymouth Rock, and listened
to the grace which Parson Robinson said over
them. Even the puritans, who fled from the stake,
called him obstinate, and considered him in matters
of faith, as rather intolerant. He hated all
separates
,
as he called them; but his greatest dislike
was towards the Church of Rome, and for reasons
which he pretended to be able to explain, he was not
very cordial to the Church of England. The men
who stoned the first Martyrs, he would say, were
no worse than they who stood and held their
garments
.
Nay, in the zeal of some of his
controversial
conversations, he ventured to call them worse
they were more cowardly and less sincere.
Godfrey of Bolonge, never put on his harness
against the enemies of the Cross in the Holy Land,
with more zeal than Miles Standish buckled on his
sword against the French and Indians in this Land
of Promise. He referred to the scriptural account
of the march of the Israelites from the land of
Egypt, and the house of bondage, and applied it
literally, as did many others, to the emigration of
the Puritans; and he derived his authority for much
of his own conduct, from the fighting part of the
character of Joshua. The Onondagas, the
Tuscaroras
,
6*
the Wampagoes, and the Potawatamies, were
with him; but the other names for the Hittites,
Perezites, Jebuzites, and Gergushites, all whom
were to be exterminated. Indeed, if Father Raal,
in his way from Penobscot to his Catholic friends,
had fallen into the hands of Miles Standish, he
would have considered the fate of Agag as his
sufficient
warrant. He possessed vigorous strength,
was patient of fatigue, and fixed in his purpose.
A man as Southey says,
Firm to resolve, and stubborn to endure.
He sat reading Pilgrim's Progress, which he
allegorized
beyond the spirit of Bunyan himself.
LETTER XI.
After hearing Du Quesne without interruption,
Are you (said he) true men and no spies?
Is it not to spy out the nakedness of the land ye
are come? You, sir, must be a Frenchman, and
surely, if ever I saw one, this is an Indian. Know
you not that it is against such that I have come to
fight? I have the authority of scripture history.
It is in vain for the Keemites to attempt deceiving
me, with their old shoes, and clouted, tattered
garments
,
and moldy bread, and broken bottles.
The dialogue between them lasted some time.
The engaging manners and conversation of Du
Quesne interested the chieftain, though it was
apparent
he doubted the truth of the story, and
looked
on the disinterested heroism of Weshop
particularly
as
apocryphal
.
But aside from his incredulity, and some strong
suspicions of design, he resolved not to cross the
jake, but to keep his provincials within the
boundary
of New-England. He cared as little for the
Dutch as for the French.
Let them, (said he to himself,) fight it out
between
themselves, and if the Indians take sides, so
much the better.
Great was the joy of Du Quesne when he heard
that Dudley, his long lost, and as he supposed, far
distant friend, was on the spot, and the second in
command. He hastened to his quarters, where he
found Dubourg and his daughter. Standish was
present at this cordial interview, and listened once
more, but with greater confidence and interest, to
the story and request. The anxiety of Dudley
was extreme. He saw the emaciated form of Du
Quesne, worn down by famine, fatigue and
suffering
represented
to himself the exposure of Van
Tromp to a fate from which it might even now be
too late to save him, and made up his mind.
I will go, and that immediately, if I go alone.
Major Standish, (said he) this is no matter of
political
or provincial interestit is my private
business
,
and of great emergency. Providence gives
me this opportunityperhaps the only one, of
redeeming
a sacred pledge; my sworn, my bosom
friend is in peril. See (said he pointing to Weshop)
what an example even this man has set me.
Ah, he's a Keenite, (said Standish, wringing
Weshop's hand,) worthy to be ranked with
Squantum
himself. In a case like this, I will not be
outdone
by the best heathen that ever lived. Weshop!
but come, there's no time to losebeat to arms.
I wish (added he in a lower tone to Dudley) that
Weshop was a christianhe would make a better
one than some white men I know of---but now have
the boats readyI'll show you how to deal with
Indians, when you catch them on fair ground, in a
body. Weshop, you must lead us. Captain
Dudley
,
we march Indian file, without music. Three
ferriages will carry over as many as we want. Let
the ladies stay with those who keep guard at the
camp. If I don't return, I'll send for them.
During the bustle of a slight and rapid
preparation
,
the young lady found means to set her large
dark eyes on Du Quesne, and beckon him towards
her.
This, sir, (said she) is no time for ceremony,
or affected delicacy. I feel interested for the safety
of your friend. I shall wait hereoh! with how
much anxiety!to hear of your arrival in time to
save him, and beg that as soon as it is safe, I may
be immediately sent for, to join you and Mr.
Dudley
at the Blasted Tree. I know from your zeal
you will save himI know you will. But you
have eaten nothing: these hasty men have forgotten
to ask you, and you have forgotten to call. HereI
will set a table for you, and wait upon you myself.
I must not eat without my friend.
Who?
The Indian warrior that brought me here.
Oh! Weshop. I know him, let me call him
myself.
Weshop came back; but the honest fellow could
not stay for a regular meal; he took a quantity of
provision in his hand to eat as he went onward to
the place of embarkation, saying as he left the shore
Make haste!-make haste!
The party, in fine order, and under strict
discipline
,
were soon paraded, marched and wheeled to
the landing.
The lake, at a narrow place, was ferried over
again and again, till all but a guard for the
defence
of the women and the few effects that were
left behind, had quit the shore. Miles Standish
directed
the embarkation himself, and brought up
the rear in the last boat, with his drummer,
trumpeter
and bugleman; and as he had an ear for
music, and a strong taste for sublime scenery, he
directed them to play
Old Hundred
and
accompanied
them with his voice, in these noble words
When Israel, freed from Pharaoh's hand,
Left the proud tyrant and his land
The tribes with joyful homage own
Their King, and Judah was his throne.
This psalm he sung to the end, as he sat in the
stern of the boat, and the bugleman swelled his
cheeks in vain to overpower the loud bold tones of
this vocal accompaniment.
They landed, and took up their line of march
in the dark, till the moon, just past the full, shone
on the rocks and woods west of Champlain.
Who is there to mourn for Logan?
Van Tromp and his small garrison had evidence
of the misfortune that had befallen his friends, when
they saw, the second day after their departure, the
straggling remnants of the hunters, returning in
haste and disorder. His anxiety for Du Quesne
and Weshop was succeeded by a horrid conviction,
when he saw his savage enemies assembling in
formidable
numbers near the edge of the wood on the
south side, at a little more than gunshot distance.
There they seemed deliberating whether to
commence
an immediate attack, or wait for some less
hazardous mode of gaining their purpose. The
latter course was adopted principally because they
expected by the next night to be joined by another
body. In the mean time the best preparations were
made in the garrison against an Indian massacre.
The night and the next day were spent watching,
and the ensuing evening witnessed the expected
addition to the Indian force. An assault was now
certain, and indiscriminate murder would be the
probable consequence of their success. Twenty
times a day had Jonathan's head, as he raised it
above the breastwork, been a mark for musket balls
and Indian arrows, and twice as often, through the
loopholes and crevices, had he returned this mark
of attention with his rifle.
What think's become of Weshop? (said
Shadrach
,)
I never missed him so much afore in my
life.
Poor fellow, (said Jonathan Hodges,) I guess
that bag of hair is off his head by this time'twas
a mighty handy thing to catch him by.
It makes me crawl to the heart, Jonathanbut
I expect we shall be killed to-night. They may
kill my masterI most hope it'll be my turn first.
There's him, poor soul, hobbling about when he
ought to be abed.
Ah, Shadrach, we shall have a field bed
tonight
,
and a bloody one too, I'm thinking.
Shadrach, in obedience to an order from Van
Tromp, posted himself on the top of the house to
look out. It was now night, and the full moon had
been some time risen. The Indians from without
commenced storming the place, and rushed towards
the abattis with yells and war whoops. They
attempted
to cut them down and to set them on fire;
but as they had been newly made of green trees
drawn close together, with their roots inwards, they
found themselves stopped and exposed to the sure
aim of the marksmen who shot from the bastions.
They then attacked the gate, hand to hand, and
the fight became furiousbut the besiegers had the
advantage of numbers, and it was pretty certain
that they would soon make good their entrance.
The assailants were animated with the hope of
success
,
and the defenders made desperate at the fate
which impended over them and theirs.
LETTER XII.
Most of the fighting men in the garrison had
now drawn round this place of combat. The
besiegers
had foreseen this, and had placed a body of
men in ambush, who were to attempt gaining the
place, by scaling the steep ledge of rocks which
formed the northern angle of the enclosure. This
party had already risen from the bushes, and was
running to that part which was defended only by
the natural steepness of the ascent, when Shadrach,
who was the only one that saw this manuvre, gave
the alarm; but in the confusion and horror of the
moment, he had no chance of being understood.
In the agony of despair, he ran to the spot alone.
They were already climbing the face of the rock,
and pulling themselves up by the bushes that grew
out of its clefts. The large trunk of an oak tree
had been placed along the top of the ledge, where
it served as a sort of breast work for about twenty
feet. The thoughts that he might instantly be
dispatched
,
gave him new strength and quickened his
ingenuity. He seized a stake, which he applied as
a lever to the middle of the log. It moved
tottered
a moment on the edge of the precipicehe plied
all his strengthit felland Shadrach darted back
with all his speed. Never, even in ancient days,
was a more dreadful
missile
put in motion. The
face of the rock was covered with assailants, and
the base was crowded with others waiting to
ascend
.
The ruin swept and crushed all before it.
Those who escaped, retired and paused for a
moment
,
but observing no one above, ventured the
attempt, and a few gained the top.
Meanwhile those who defended the gate were on
the point of being overpowered, when the troops
under Standish and Dudley emerged from the woods.
They saw how critical the moment was, and
rushed
to their aid. A full fire of musketry and arrows
was poured in upon the savages, and bayonets,
swords, and tomahawks, were immediately in
contact
.
Weshop and Du Quesne alarmed at the
dangerous
situation of their friends, and personally
exasperated
at the enemy, were directly merged in
the middle of the combat.
A conflict like this could not last long. The
savages were amazed at an attack so unexpected;
they fled hastily in every direction, and were
followed
by Standish to the woods, where he ordered the
grass and bushes to be set on fire. It was instantly
done, in a hundred different places. He then blew
his horn to call in the men, (who might be in
danger
of an ambush) and entered the garrison.
The women and children had been shut up in a
sort of block house, and escaped unhurt. Few
who belonged to the garrison, but were wounded
or killed. Van Tromp was much hurt, and
Jonathan
would never have found his way from the gate,
had not Shadrach lifted him in his arms.
Du Quesne, in almost breathless eagerness, met
him as he was staggering under his burden.
Where is Weshop? said he.
The African's heart was undergoing such mixed
emotions of joy and sorrow, as almost choaked his
utterance. He could only sayDead.
Du Quesne stopped, and for a moment, friends,
country, all were forgot, but poor Weshop.
Almost all the garrison were by this time
assembled
at the gate. Weshop lay covered with his
wounds, in the midst of his foes; his bow was near
him, and his bloody tomahawk was clenched in his
hand. He was bitterly lamented by more than one.
Du Quesne's grief could not be silent. He lifted
up his voice and wept.
Weshop was buried with military honors; his
grave is still marked by a pile of large stones, on
one of which there seems to have been an
inscription
,
but it cannot now be read.
The newly arrived troops took up their quarters
for the present in the garrison, for several of them
were unable to march, and the new settlers had
been so reduced in number, and were so many of
them wounded, that they could not well be left in
their present condition.
One chilly evening in November, most of the
personages
mentioned in the MS. were sitting in the
best room of the garrison round a cheerful fire,
ruminating, some on the past and some on the
future
,
but saying little to disturb one another's
thoughts. Van Tromp was still an invalid,
Dubourg
now and then smiled to see the attentions of
his new found daughter to one whose first wounds
were received in her service, and whose modest eye,
when he felt an occasional twinge of pain from
wounds more recent, seemed to look to her for
relief
.
Standish was saying to Dudley, (who was
thinking of something else) that the Winnebagoes
and the Potawatomies would never join on the
other side of the river after this, and that the
French would soon be obliged to confine themselves
to the Canada line; and Du Quesne was thinking,
almost to tears, of the virtues, the services, and the
end of Weshop, when Shadrach entered the room
with Du Quesne's watch in his hand.
Massa Du Quesne, (said he) here's your watch
you left it when you went a huntingI buried it
7
the night of the battle, so it don't go. I have been
trying to put it to rights, but I can't make out.
Thank ye, Weshop, I mean Shadrach, said
Du Quesne.
Du Bourg's eye was on the watch.
Let me see it, (said he to Du Quesne) it's a
very elegant one.
He took it, opened and examined it with surprise.
Where did you get it?pardon my inquiry.
Du Quesne told him all he knew about it or
about himself.
You see, sir, (said he) our stories are
intimately
connected.
My young friend, (said Du Bourg) tell me
when and where you was born.
Du Quesne told him.
But you are unwell, sir, said he, as he took
back the watch.
Slightly, (said he)Captain Dudley, I wish
to speak with you.
Me, sir? said Dudley, who had been
twirling
his sword with the
becket,
as sailors call it, that
was fastened to the hilt, and whose mind had been
so absent that he had heard only the last request,
as it was particularly addressed to him. Me,
sir? I'll wait on you, sir.
There's a good fire in t'other room, said
Shadrach
,
as he showed the way.
Captain Dudley, (said Du Bourg) that young
man is my lost son!he is!he is! Captain
Dudley.
A worthier or a nobler one (said Dudley) you
could not claim. The probability of such a thing
occurred to me when you told me, on board the
Martyr, why you wanted to visit the banks of this
lake, that you had two children in this country,
though you expected to find but one left. This
gentleman was my classmateand more, he was
my bosom friend. I know all his story.
Sit down then, sir, I will tell you mine without
being tedious. I came to this country as a captain
in the 33d regiment of Royal Infantry. The
regiment
was never assembled that I know of. I
was employed as an inspecting officerwent from
port to portwas occasionally at New-York, and
often at different places on the lake, and on the
Hudson.
I was married at Sandy-Hill, to a lady of the
most respectable connections, but whose friends
were averse to the match, owing to my commission
in a marching regiment, and my liability to be
ordered away. I lived in New-York with my wife
until my eldest child was two years old, when I
was required to join a battalion of our regiment
assembled near Jake Champlain, from which it was
soon to remove to Detroit, or the upper lakes.
The little boy could not be at once removed
to so great a distance, considering the hazards and
difficulties of such a journey; and I provided for
his immediate support at New-York, in the family
where I had lived, intending to send for him when
I should find my family permanently settled. This
time never arrived, and I was afterwards assured
of his death. I lost my wife after the birth of a
daughter. I was soon obliged to go to Montreal
thence to Quebec: and instead of being ordered
to Detroit, as was expected, I was embarked with
a part of the regiment, and sent to the French
settlements
in the East Indies, where a war had
unexpectedly
broken out, and where troops were
immediately
wanted. I had only time to make
provision
for my infant daughter, by entrusting her to
the care of the lady with whom she had always
lived, the widow of an officer of my acquaintance,
with whom, as you know, I found her.
Upon the birth of my first child, I had written
to my brother younger than myself, whom I left in
France to manage my paternal estate, that I
intended
to call him Du Quesne, after a distinguished
soldier of that country. His own name is Carlos
Du Bourg. The ship in which I sailed was
wrecked on the coast of Mysore; a few of us
gained
the shore in the boat; but the news in Europe
(as I afterwards learned) was, that she was lost
with all her crew. My brother succeeded to my
property in France, which this son should have
inherited on my death. The
salique law
of France,
you know, would exclude the daughter. But in
the management of this boy, I fear I see the hand
of my brother. That watch is mine; I left it with
Voorhies, my host in New-York, with an earnest
request that the child might be enjoined to keep it
till I should see him again.
Dudley felt assured that Du Bourg had found
his son, and took upon himself to break the tidings
to his friend. Nothing more (added he) can be
wanting, than the letters from France, which can
be procured through New-York.
The hour was now late, and the garrison was
silent. Shadrach, who had remained a wondering
listener to this strange recital, declared his
resolution
to awake his master, and tell him all about
it.
The first light of the morning discovered the
garrison in different groups. Dudley and Du
QuesneDu Bourg and his daughterShadrach
and his master, with Miles Standish, who said it
fairly put him in mind of the story of Joseph.
When these groups collected, Du Quesne
presented
himself to his father and sister. His feelings
had been of late too much agitated to admit of
any stronger sensations than calm satisfaction, at
the discovery of a family connection of so
respectable
a character.
The answer to Dudley's inquiries brought the
letters, which Du Bourg knew to be in the hand
writing of his brother; and they were
accompanied
with the intelligence that the gentleman who
was engaged in the duel, and who had been absent
from New-York ever since, had sent from the
southern plantations an account of that affair,
which completely exculpated Du Quesne.
LETTER XIII.
The last boat lingers on the shore.
The mystery which had hitherto involved the
life of Du Quesne was now satisfactorily cleared
up. It appeared that on the reported death of Du
Bourg, his brother in France, to whom the
inheritance
descended on failure of male heirs in the
elder branch of the family, had taken effectual
means to keep Du Quesne from any knowledge of
his right, or even of his parentage. Though his
temptation proved too strong for his resistance, yet
a remaining sense of duty urged him to supply the
means of education, and to present the chance of
future support.
Du Quesne never changed his name. He
adopted
the profession of arms, and served in several
campaigns with Dudley, till peaceful times restored
him to his friends.
The success of Van Tromp's courtship had been
promoted by every recent occurrence. He served
to unite the members of a long separated family,
with one between whom and themselves there had
been an interchange of kind offices and mutual
obligations
A general meeting of the settlers was called, at
which they took into consideration the losses they
had met with, the unsettled state of the country,
which was growing daily more dangerous, and
their increased exposure after the New-England
troops should be withdrawn; and resolved to
retire
in a body to the southern part of Lake George.
Miles Standish crossed the lake to the remnant of
of his former camp, with a view of marching down
the eastern side, and joining the main body near
Ticonderoga Point. The vow of friendship was
solemnly renewed, and on a day appointed,
Dudley
,
at the head of his troops, took up his line of
march, and escorted the whole of the wandering
settlement, as in patriarchal times, with their wives
and their little ones, their flocks and their herds
leaving Fort Braddock to its original solitude,
which from that time to this has met with few
interruptions
.
Ft. Braddock,
.
Dear Jim,
I have taxed your purse with some postage,
and your patience with a long story. If you have
discovered many imperfections in it, you must, at
the same time, have considered the nature of my
dutiesthat I have to look over the serjeant's
muster
rollwrite despatchesenlist recruitsand
keep a regular account of every thing going on in
the garrison.
By great good luck the tale happens to have a
moral, and such an one as from your uniform
friendship for me, you will not be slow to perceive,
I hereby own its application, and feel sure of that
sort of regard from you, which from different
characters
in this story, seems to have been so truly
expressed in many ways. I insist the more on
this, as I am on the eve of departing a still greater
distance from you. I hardly thought that I should
feel so dull at the moment when the wild wishes of
my first letter are so unexpectedly gratified. My
baggage is now on board the boat, and my
destination
is for the country west of the Mississippi.
Where I may go is uncertain. Perhaps to the
Columbia
,
or Nootka Soundor I may cross
Bhering's
Straits, where men and animals once
crossed
to this great continent. It may be long ere we
meet againfor I go perhaps like Ajut, never to
return. The whole garrison moves with me. On
my way to New-York I shall recruit my wasting
enthusiasm at the places where Burgoyne
surrendered
,
and where Lake Champlain was
immortalized
by the victory of M`Donough. I have fired
my parting salute, and the guns were answered by
the echoes around me. They seemed in reply to
one who had long admired the solitary beauties of
the place, to listen for a moment to the roar which
disturbed their repose, and then feelingly to say,
as I now say to you
Farewell
.