THE
HAWKS OF HAWK-HOLLOW.
CHAPTER I.
I will discover such a horrid treason,
As, when you hear't, and understand how long
You've been abused, will run you mad with fury.
Beaumont and Fletcher
The Prophetess
.
It
has been seen how the rejoicings at the
promontory were interrupted in their very
beginning
,
by the sudden discovery of the refugee, so
Drad for his derring-doe and bloody deed,
that his mere name had thrown all present into
confusion. The crowning climax was put to the
general panic, when some of the late pursuers were
seen returning, early in the afternoon, whipping
and spurring with all the zeal of fear, and
scattering
such intelligence along the way as put to flight
the last resolution of the jubilants. The news
immediately
spread, that Oran Gilbert had burst into
existence, not alone, but with a countless host of
armed men at his heels; that he had attacked and
routed the pursuers, hanging all whom he took
alive, especially the soldiers; and that he was now,
in the frenzy of triumph, marching against the
devoted Hillborough, with the resolution of
burning
it to the ground. Such dreadful intelligence
was enough to complete the terror of the revellers;
they fled amainand long before night, the flag
waved, and the little piece of ordnance frowned in
utter solitude on the top of the deserted head-land.
It is true that there came, by and by, couriers with
happier news, but too late to arrest the fugitives;
and as these riders made their way towards the
village, expressing some anxiety lest it should be
attacked, they rather confirmed than dispelled the
fears of the few inhabitants of the valley. From
one of the coolest and boldest, Captain Loring, who
fastened on him at the park-gate, learned that there
had been no action indeed, and that the fugitive
had made his escape; but, on the other hand, it
appeared that there
were
refugees in the land,
that they had hanged a soldier named Parker, and
made good their retreat from the place of
execution
that
the greatest doubt existed among the
pursuers in relation to the route they had taken
and the objects they had in view, some believing,
on the evidence of a certain quaker, who had been
their prisoner, that they were marching by secret
paths against the village, while others insisted that
this was a feint designed only to throw the hunters
off the scent, and to secure their escape,that, in
consequence, the party had divided, pursuing the
search in all directions, in the hope of discovering
their route,and, finally, that it was now certain,
the band, whose number was supposed to be very
considerable, was really commanded by the
notorious
Oran Gilbert. From this man also, Captain
Loring learned a few vague particulars in relation
to the two greatest objects of his interest, namely
Henry Falconer and the young painter, who had
fallen into a quarrel in consequence of some
misunderstanding
about their horses, the officer
having
used harsh language not only in regard to the
unceremonious seizure by Herman of his own
steed, but in reference to a similar liberty the
refugee
had previously taken with the painter's,
which, Falconer averred, was an evidence of
intimacy
and intercourse betwixt Mr. Hunter and the
outlaw it behooved the former to explain, before
thrusting himself into the company of honest men
and gentlemen. This quarrel, it seemed, had been
allayed by the interference of Falconer's brother
officers; and the informant had heard something
said of a proposal to drown the feud in a bowl.
As for the man of peace, Ephraim, it appeared,
that his spirited assistance during the chase, and
especially his success in exposing the secret haunt
of the tories in the Terrapin Hole, the scene of
Parker's execution, had not only removed all
suspicion
in relation to his character, but had highly
recommended him to the favour of his late
captors.
With such news, the Captain strode back to his
mansion, and awaited, with his daughter and
kinswoman
,
the return of the officers to the Hollow,
and their appearance at the hall, which he doubted
not, they would instantly make, after returning.
He waited, however, for a long time, in vain; and
by falling sound asleep, as he watched the sun
creeping beneath the western hills, escaped the
intelligence
,
which was soon after brought to the
house, that the officers had returned to the Hollow,
and instead of reporting themselves forthwith
under his hospitable roof, had made their way to
the widow's inn, where they were carousing with
a zeal commensurate with the spirit they had
exhibited
during the troubles of the day.
This unexpected termination of a day of
heroism
a
termination that surprised and irritated
Miss Falconer as much as it perhaps secretly
pleased the Captain's daughterwas a
consequence
of the late quarrel, or rather a mode of
burying it in oblivion, devised by captain Caliver,
who had contracted an esteem for the painter, and
preferred `his ease in his inn' to all the delights
and blandishments that might be expected in the
society of Gilbert's Folly. As the superior officer,
he had taken the command into his own hands,
and besides arranging his forces so as to watch
all the approaches to the valley, and despatching
lieutenant Brooks to the village, to communicate
with the authorities there, he declared his
resolution
to erect his head-quarters in the Hollow, at a
place like the Traveller's Rest, where, while still
commanding the road, he would be near enough
to protect the females and non-combatants in the
Captain's house. And besides, he added
facetiously
,
while riding up to the little inn, as we
men of the sword are protectors of widows as well
as orphans, we will thus protect a forlorn old
woman
from mischief, and put a penny into her
pocket, and drink our wine at our easefor you
remember, Falconer, my young brother, you swore
by all the gods you would have some of the
wherewithal
smuggled up to this identical old woman's
whiskey-house!
I swore it `by the eternal Jupiter,' said
Falconer
,
with a grin; and, by the eternal Jupiter, I
am as ready for a blow-up now as another time;
only that we must blow fast, so as to run up to
Hal, to be scolded before bed-time, as soon as
Brooks comes: and as for Mr. Hunter here, why
he and I can blow out one another's brains in the
morning.
If thee talks in this evil-minded, blood-thirsty
manner, said Ephraim Patch, indignantly, I give
thee warning, I will have nothing to do with thy
wholesome wines and thy goodly brandies, whereof
thee has spoken, and whereof much good may be
said, in regard of them that are faint and weary.
If thee will eat, drink, and be merry, all in a civil,
Christian way, without drawing any weapons more
dreadful than corks, pulling only at the bottle
instead
of the pistol, and neither swearing profanely
nor drinking foolish irreligious healths, thee shall
have me in company to give thee good counsel,
whereof thee has considerable much need, as well
as thy long-nosed friend here, (not meaning any
offence,) which thee calls captain, and the youth
also, friend Hunter. Verily, I am both hungry
and thirsty, and will sooner enjoy the creature
comforts in this quiet hovel, than even the
satisfaction
of bringing the breaker of laws into the hands
of justice. Verily, the thought of these goodly
wines doth make my mouth water; and I shall
rejoice, even to the bottom of my spirit, if they
have already reached the house of the widow.
We do not design to relate the joys of the
banquet
shared by the four worthies, and some two or
three young men of the county, who had shown
themselves men of spirit, and remained bravely by
the side of the officers, resolved, as they said, to
contribute their aid to the defence of the Hollow. It
is only worthy of remark, first, that the ill blood
between young Falconer and the painter
gradually
wore away, and was succeeded, on the part of
the former, by a sudden friendship, which bade
fair to ripen into fondness, and on that of Hyland,
by what was at least a show of reciprocity;
secondly
,
that honest Ephraim, gradually displayed
as much spirit in the feast as he had before
manifested
in the fray, and became, to the surprise of
all, the soul of mirth and drollery, so that young
Falconer, clapping him on the back, swore, with
the favourite oath of his friend Caliver, he `had
never seen a jollier old broad-brim;' and thirdly,
that this capricious young gentleman grew so
enamoured
of his company, that he ceased to talk, as
he did at first, of the necessity he was under of
paying his sister and friends a visit at the Folly,
until he was roused to recollection by the sudden
retreat of his new friend from the cottage. The
painter was detected in the very act of stealing, or
as they chose to call it, sneaking from the
apartment
;
and Mr. Falconer, uttering a loud `Hillo!
halt, deserter!' volunteered to bring him back to
the punishment immediately ordered by the
captain
of cavalry, of a glass of salt and water. He
rushed from the room, and plainly beheld the youth,
in the light that flashed from the window, spring
from the porch, and dive into the midnight shadows
of the oak treesfor it was now completely dark
As he retreated, he stumbled over some
obstruction
in the path; but instantly recovering himself,
he leaped over the little brook, and was soon out
of sight.
Hillo, Hunter, my boy! cried the lieutenant.
Why zounds! there he goes up the road like a
light-horseman! Why, gad, here the fool has
dropped his handkerchief;no, gad's my life, 'tis
a paper. Hillo, painter! you've dropped
something
!
A letter, as I'm alive!Ehemhiccup!
a very handsome constellation that Great Bear!
never saw the Pointers shine so brightly in my life.
Gad's my life, and adzooks, as Captain Loring
says, 'tis the lights in the Folly, after all! and here
am I, carousing like an ass, instead of playing off
the Romeo to Catherine by starlight. Now Hal
will scold like twenty housekeepers, Catherine will
look sulky, and as for the Captain, why I suppose
he will fall into one of his patriarchal rages. Gad,
but I feel rather warmish and particular; but this
cool night air is a good thing for settling one's
nerves. I warrant me, that rascal Hunter has gone
VOL. II.B
up there before me. A very handsome, well
behaved
dog, and I like him immensely!
With such expressions as these, the young man,
whose brain, never one of the strongest, was at
present whirling in confusion, began to make his
way towards the Folly, without troubling himself
to think what amazement or affliction his absence
might cause his friends. Indeed, he was fast
verging
towards that happy state in which man shows
his loftiest contempt of the world and the world's
ways, and his disregard of all those restraints and
encumbrances which society has imposed upon the
free-born lord of creation. He had left the hovel
without his hat; but what cared he for such a
superfluity
,
of a fine summer night, even although
beginning a walk over hill and hollow, of full a
mile in extent? Had he left it even without his
boots, it is questionable whether he would have
noticed the deficiency, until recalled to his senses
by the roughness of the road. In a word, the wine
he had already swallowed, had made serious
inroads
upon a brain that was always `very poor
and unhappy for drinking;' and, as it frequently
happens in such cases, the exercise of walking
more than counteracted the effects of the cooling
air; so that, by the time he had trudged half the
distance towards the paddock, the young
gentleman
was in the happiest spirits imaginable, wholly
insensible of his condition, and almost unconscious
of the purpose that had drawn him so far. He
even began to sing along the road, and by the time
he had reached the gate, was trolling a song, of a
character ludicrous enough to come from his lips,
but which, perhaps caught originally from those of
some wag or philosopher of the camp, was now
suggested by the spirit of happy indifference it
breathed to all sublunary concerns, and was
therefore
in excellent harmony with his own feelings.
It was the song of
Poor Joe,
and was sung with
wondrous emphasis and gusto.
I.
Poor Joe! I've no wealth but content at command,
I am otherwise poor as a rat;
But while the world covets one's houses and land,
I'm sure 'twill not rob me of that,
Poor Joe!
I'm sure 'twill not rob me of that.
II.
I've no money, no money to squander in wine,
To aid me in soft'ning my lot:
But then, if the shame of a poor man be mine,
The shame of a scoundrel shall not,
Poor Joe!
The shame of a scoundrel shall not.
III.
No sweetheart to flatter, no wife to applaud,
Poor Joe! he may house him or roam;
But, sure, if he meets with no angel abroad,
He'll hap on no devil at home,
Poor Joe!
He'll hap on no devil at home.
IV.
Poor Joe! I've no friends, as, if richer, I might,
But for that I'll not bitterly grieve;
If there's none, with the gabble of love, to delight,
Why then there are none to deceive,
Poor Joe!
Why then there are none to deceive.
V.
Poor Joe! I am ragged, my hat is grown old,
My elbows peep out to the storm;
But why should I fear for the wet and the cold,
When content and a blanket can warm,
Poor Joe!
When content and a blanket can warm!
Apparently, he found the madrigal just one
stanza too short, at least for his present mood;
for which reason, so soon as he had finished the
last of all, he began to repeat it, with even more
expression than before, and had just reached the
second line,
My elbows peep out to the storm,
when one of his own elbows was suddenly seized
upon, and a voice, bitterly reproachful, muttered
in his ear,
Are you mad? Are you mad, brother? are
you mad?
What! Hal? sister? is that you? Gad's my
life, I knew you would scold me; but if you would
only considerBut, now I think of it, egad,
what brings you out here of a dark night, singing
Poor Joe, like an old soldier? Adzooks, as the
Captain says, I am quite astonished!
Brother, you areOh, that you should be
so insensible to interest, if not to shame! cried
Miss Falconer, with deep feeling. Brother,
brother
,
you
If I have, may I be shot! cried the young
officer, hastily, as if the instinct of long habit had
taught him what his sister intended to say; that
is, Harry, my dear, nothing to speak of; and it is
all on account of Caliver, who, betwixt you and
me, is so deuced soft-headed,he is, egad,one
must always sit by, to take care of him. As for
me, Hal, why I can drink a hogshead of any such
wishwashy stuff as these French wines; I can, by
the eternal Jupiter, as Caliver says; and at the
present moment I am
Ruined, irretrievably ruined! cried his sister;
and by your own follyby your own miserable,
infatuated dissipation. You have lost Catherine
Loring.
Lost Catherine Loring?
my
Catherine Loring?
cried the young man, in alarm. Have the Hawks
carried her off?
What if I say
yes?
replied Harriet; and then
added, with a tone that brought the youth still
farther
to his senses, and I must add, that even a
base and renegade Gilbert is worthier of her than
you,
my brother,the son of Richard Falconer!
Oh, shame upon you, brother! shame upon you!
Harry, you are joking with me! cried
Falconer
,
with a voice somewhat quavering and
querulous
.
We've driven the dogs the lord knows
whither; and as for that story of the village, why
that's all a fib: so as to carrying Catherine off, I
don't believe a word of it.
And yet you have lost her,lost her, perhaps,
beyond all redemption. Oh Harry, brother Harry,
were you but enough in your senses to understand
me!
I am, sister, I am, cried Falconer; and
indeed
the devil, drunkenness, was fast giving place
to the devil, fear: I
have
been drinking; but I
swear to heaven.
Swear no more: you have done so a dozen
times already.
I have done so, sister; but I swear again, and
I call heaven to witness, that if you have spoken
the truth, and Catherine be really lost, I will never
drink more till I have recovered or revenged her.
But for pity's sake, speak; what is the matter?
I am sober now. What has brought you out
here in the dark? Where is Catherine? What
is
the matter?
You shall hear, cried Miss Falconer,
hurriedly
:
perhaps it is not yet too late. You have
a rival, brother, a dangerous rival!
Oh, gad now, sister! lord, is that all?
exclaimed
the young man, bursting into a laugh:
B 2
why, you don't think I shall go jealous, because
I have a rival? Gad, Harry, you're the most
absurd sister in the world.I wonder what the
deuce has become of my hat?A rival, Hal? One
of these village clotpolls! A dozen of 'em, if you
like: the more the merrier. I'll invite 'em all to
my wedding.
You are mad! cried Harriet. Wedding,
indeed! Perhaps you will never be married.
What think you of a rival that has her heart?
Her heart? Catherine's heart? exclaimed
the gay-brained soldier; why, it has been mine
these two years!
And now, said Harriet, it is another's.
Brother! rouse from your dream of confidence
and security. It is as true as that the stars are
above us: Catherine Loring loves another.
Harriet!
It is trueshe confessed it with her own
lips.
Confessed it, sister! said the young man; and
then added, with a spirit that surprised her, If
that be so, why then good luck to her: she shall
have her freedom. I don't think I shall break my
heart; and, certainly, I shan't force her to marry
me. But, Hal,look you, sister Hal,I did not
think she would cozen me. She confessed it, did
she? Why, that's enough. I'm an honourable
man; but after being cheated and jilted, I don't
care muchBut if I don't kill the scoundrel,
Hal!I say if I don't kill him, you may have
leave to call me a fool and chicken twice over!
Confess it!
If this display of spirit surprised Miss Falconer,
the manifest distress with which her brother spoke,
incredible as it may seem, greatly gratified her.
His greatest fault in her eyes,that is, aside from
his dissipated habits,was that easy indifference
of disposition, or indolence of feeling, which
kept him reckless and passive when she would
have had him ardent and energetic. She knew
him to be insensible of the full value of that prize
it was her ambition to secure him; and had he
been any but her brother, she would have hated
him for what seemed the feebleness of his
affection
,
as indicated by the little pains he took to
secure
that of Catherine. It was obvious, from this
homely burst, in which magnanimity, pride,
indignation
,
anger, and distress, were all so
characteristically
jumbled together, that the young gentleman
had really feeling enough at bottom, and that, in
a great measure, of the right kind; and the
discovery
brought a ray of hope into her mind.
Brother, said she, if you really love
Catherine
,
you may yet save her.
What! after confessing she loves another?
cried he, sulkily. Now, Hal, for all your
wisdom
,
you don't know meI won't have her.
Confess
,
indeed!
Noshe did not confessI will explain.
Perhaps
'twas only a dream;it was in her sleep.
In her sleep! cried Falconer, and then burst
again into a roar of laughter. In her sleep! he
ejaculated, giving way to a second peal. Well!
you have scared me with a vengeance!But I
forgive youyou have brought me to. Of all the
cunning doctors in the world, give me yourself,
Harry; you are infallible. And so she confessed
in her sleep, poor soul, did she? Oh, Hal! Hal!
Hal! And here the capricious youth gave full
swing to his merriment.
Thus it is, said his sister, impatiently; one
extreme or the other, ever. Listen, brother; for
I am serious. Your wild habits have greatly
weakened Catherine's affections. Another comes,
in the meanwhile, with attractions, I will not say
superior to your own, but perhaps every way
equal, who ceases not, neither by day nor by night,
to influence her imagination and engage her heart.
Judge of his success, when you know that she has
admitted him to intimacy, nay, to confidence; judge,
when I tell you that she trembles at the sound of
his voice, turns pale at the echo of his footsteps,
blushes when he speaks, looks glad when he is by
her, and weeps when he is absent,and, finally,
who hides the secret from her own waking
thoughts, yet babbles his name over in her dreams,
and sheds tears, and smiles with her tears, when
she murmurs it. Is not such a man,the object
of such emotions, himself so passionately
enamoured
,
that his visage betrays the thought of his
bosom
,
even when he knows he is suspected and
watched,is not such a man a dangerous rival?
Sister, you know better than myself, said
Falconer, uneasily; if
you
think so
I do, brother; I believe, that, this moment,
without knowing it herself, Catherine's mind is
dwelling upon your rival; and if he be not driven
away, you will lose her.
Point him out to me, sister Harriet, and then,
by
No fighting! no fighting, brother! cried
Harriet
,
in some alarm, and speaking with eagerness.
Not a hair of the young man's head must be
harmed; we have done him injury enough among
us, perhaps, already. We must frighten him
away: if I know him, we can legally expel him
from the valley. Arrest, imprison him, banish
him;do any thing; but harm him notthat is, do
him no harm with your own hands. If he have
forfeited his life to the law, let the law take it.
Now, brother, know your rivalit is the youngest
brother of this dreadful Oran Gilbert.
Saints and devils! cried Falconer, with
vivacity
,
a Hawk of the Hollow! and dare to love
Catherine Loring?
I could be sworn to it, said Harriet. The
circumstances that pointed out the assassin of my
father, were but clews of thistle-down to the chains
of evidence that led me to the knowledge of this
skulking raven's character. The first
circumstance
was as strong as the last; an idle,
thoughtless
,
nay, an accidental, pencil mark on a drawing
opened my eyes in an instant; and heaven's light
immediately streamed through them. But think
him not the coarse cut-throat his name would
indicate
;
he has had a gentleman's breeding, and such
is his bearing. I doubt not that he is a confederate
of his brother, perhaps even a spy; and, I am
persuaded
,
it was he who counteracted our scheme
of seizing the reprobates, and brought the poor
soldier, Parker, to the gibbet. He must be
arrested
and examined. He knows he is suspectedhe
knows that I suspect him; but will, in his audacity,
remain, in the assurance that no real proof can be
brought against him.That man, that painter,
brother,that Hunter? where did you leave him?
Leave him? cried Falconer: why, is he
not here? Sure, he led the way hither; and sure I
followed after him. A rare fellow, sister! I was
going to blow his brains out; but, egad, I know
him better, and, gad, I am coming on fast to
adore him. Adzooks, as the Captain says, I picked
up his letter, and
His letter? cried Harriet, eagerly; where
is it?
Here, said the lieutenant, drawing it from
his pocket, wherein he had safely bestowed it.
To the light! to the light! cried the maiden,
snatching it out of his hands, and running with the
speed of a frighted deer towards the mansion,
followed
by her bewildered brother. A candle blazed
in one of the windows that opened on the porch,
and in the chamber it lighted, had she been
disposed
to look, Miss Falconer might have seen the
gallant Captain Loring sitting upright in his
armchair
,
but fast asleep, and filling half the house
with the melody of his nostrils. To this window
ran Miss Falconer, and hither she was followed
by her brother; who, to his amazement and
indignation
,
found her devouring the contents of the
paper with the avidity of a malefactor poring
over his own respite from a death of ignominy.
Gad's my life, sister Hal! cried the incensed
soldier, you have disgraced me for ever! What,
reading the young fellow's letter?
Reading
my
letter! cried Harriet, turning
upon him a look inexpressibly fierce and
triumphant
.
Was not this suspicion as prophetic
as the other? The dead Parker speaks to me, and
from his grave affords me proof even stronger
than I sought. Oh, villain! villain! audacious,
inconceivably
audacious, villain! Their lieutenant?
His intimacy with, his designs upon Catherine
Loring
,
revealed even to his ribald companions? and
made their theme of speech! their jest! Oh, what
a rival have you suffered to approach your
betrothed
wife, Harry Falconer!
This
convicts,
doubly convicts him.What ho, uncle! Captain
Loring, awake! Where is Catherine? Uncle!
uncle!
Devils! cried Falconer, do you mean to
say that Hunter is the man? Why he's a
gentleman
!
Adzooks, and adsbobs, what's the matter?
Send out scouts to beat the bushes: tree 'em, my
boys, tree 'em; never show an inch of Adam's
leather to an Indian.Adzooks, is that you, Harry
my dear? were the words of Captain Loring,
roused as suddenly from his slumbers as he had
often been in his early woodland campaigns.
What's the matter? Have you caught that
scoundrel Oran, or any of his gang?
The answer to this question astounded the old
soldier; and while Miss Falconer poured into his
ears the story of the transformation of his beloved
Herman the painter into Hyland Gilbert, a brother
and leader among the Hawks of Hawk-Hollow,
he seemed for a moment, like the devotee, rapt in
a holier passion, to have
Forgot himself to marble.
In the meanwhile the unlucky author of this
commotion had brought his destinies to a crisis in
another quarter, and with another individual.
CHAPTER II.
Not all the wealth of Eastern kings; said she,
Has power to part my plighted love and me.
Dryden.
The
painter had long since made his way to
Gilbert's Folly. As he hurried through the park,
he discerned the figure of Miss Falconer; and
notwithstanding
the obscurity of the hour, he knew
her at once, and avoided her. There was a moon
in the sky, but new, and low in the west; and,
besides
,
it was struggling with clouds that robbed it
of half its lustre; yet it cast ever and anon light
enough to enable a good eye to distinguish objects
on the more open portions of the lawn.
Not a little pleased at the prospect, thus offered,
of enjoying a
tte  tte
with the Captain's
daughter
,
though it might be only for a moment, he
entered
the house and the little saloon in which he
had spent so many happy moments. It was
empty
,
but the door leading to the garden was open;
and the broad gravel-walk, fringed with low shrubs
and roses, was lighted by the taper in the
apartment
.
As he stepped out, his eye fell upon
Catherine
Loring, who was that moment approaching
from the garden, her step hurried, and her
countenance
displaying agitation, which was increased
the moment she beheld him.
Oh, Mr. Hunter! she cried, running eagerly
towards him, I am very glad to see you, and I
am glad we are alone. We are all going mad
here at the Folly, and it is right you should know
it. You haveI am ashamed to say it, for I know
you have not deserved her dislikemade an
enemy
of my cousin Harriet; the strangest suspicions
have entered her head; and she may offend you,
unless you are put on your guard. You must
forgive
her: by and by, you will laugh at her folly,
and so will she; but at present she seems
half-distracted
by the events of the day, the disasters of
her father, and her fears for the future. Did you
not meet her? Alas, she will be here in a
moment
!
Fear not, said the young man, in hurried and
altered tones, but with an effort to be jocose; she
is down by the park-gate, studying the stars, and
reading my own foolish history among them. Miss
Catherine,Miss Loring,I am aware of your
friend's dislike. I am not surprisedshe will
tolerate
your having no friend less interested than
herself
.
You must not speak thus, Mr. Hunter, cried
Catherine, but in too much hurry of spirits to
rebuke
.
I did wrong to show you her letter:
that,
I fear, is the chief cause of her anger; and your
being a stranger, and so great a favourite with my
fatheroh, and a thousand reasons more she has
found, or fancied, for supposing you arethat is,
that you have deceived us, and that
That I aman impostor, said Hyland,
hesitating
an instant at the word, but pronouncing it
at last firmly.
Such is indeed her strange aberration, cried
Catherine, apparently overjoyed that the idea so
repugnant to herself, had been conceived by the
suspected person, and without distress or anger;
and,andbut this is the maddest and most
insulting
suspicion of all, (yet you must not be
offended
:)
she thinks, youreally, I could laugh,
but that she has frightened me half out of my wits
VOL. II.c
she thinks, you are even a tory in disguise!a
refugee,(ah, now I have said it!)a comrade
of these wild and lawless men, come to spy upon
us, and murder us(is it not too ludicrous?)a
spy, an enemy, a traitornay, even a Gilberta
Hawk of the Hollow! I
can
laugh, now that I
have said it. And now, too, I am sure you will
not be offended, the suspicion is so very
ridiculous
:
yes, I am sure you will forgive her.
I do, said the young man, sadly and
falteringly
,
for her suspicion is just,at least, it is just
in partI
am
an impostor.
Heavens! cried Catherine, what do you tell
me?
That I have deceived and imposed upon you
at least in name. I am neither spy nor refugee,
indeed, neither cut-throat nor betrayer,but I am
Hyland Gilbert, a son of him who built this house,
and a brother of those whose name fills it with
horror. Miss Loring, Miss Loring! he cried,
impetuously, seeing that Catherine recoiled from
him with terror, is the name so dreadful even to
you? In nothing else am I criminaldo you think
I would do you a hurt?
Surely not, surely not, cried Catherine,
gasping
almost for breath, and speaking she scarce
knew what: I do not think you would hurt me.
No, oh no! I have done you no harm, and my
father
has been good to you.
For God's sake, Miss LoringCatherine
compose yourself, cried the young man, both
amazed and shocked at the impression his words
had produced on a mind almost unhinged by long
and brooding sorrow. What,
I
harm you? I
would die to protect you from the least evil.
And you are a Gilbert, then? a foe to the land
of your birth, a disguised enemy, an associate of
thieves and murderers? cried the maiden, with
sudden energy, and in a passion of tears' oh, Mr.
Hunter, I thought better of you!
Think better of me yet, he exclaimed,
catching
her by the hand, for as there is a heaven
above us, I have done nothing to deserve your
hatred. All that I have doneand it is nothing
but concealmentwas to do you service, and to
obtain your friendship.
Gostay no longer hereyou must come no
more, cried Catherine, weeping bitterly; and
would you had never come, for I thought you were
my friendmy friend, and my poor father's. I
don't believe you are a bad man, or that you will
do a wrong to any one; but you must go. Yes,
go, she added, wildly, for you are in danger.
They will arrest you; and then what will become
of you? It was Harriet's talking of this,of
arresting
you,that made me tell you, that you might
show her how much she was deceived. Go, go!
and never return more. A moment, and the
officers
will be here: Harriet has sent for them. Go,
Mr. Hunter, go!
I will not, Catherine, cried the youth, giving
way to the most vehement emotion: I know that
they are sacrificing you; and I will remain till you
are rescued, come what will. You hate this young
Falconer; you do, Catherine,you cannot
conceal
it: he is unworthy of youhe shall never
marry you.
You will drive me mad! For heaven's sake,
Mr. Hunteris this the way to show your
friendship
?
My love, Catherine, call it my love. I love
you, Catherine Loring, and I will save you, even
against your will. Say that you hate Henry
Falconer
,
the wretched son of a still more wretched
fathersay thatnay, place but your hand on
mine, and you shall
Never! cried Catherine, wildly; I love you
notI hate you! Release me. Is this the way
you repay my father's good deeds? Go, Mr.
Hunter: you have made me more unhappy than
before.
I will make you happy, Catherine. I have
wealthnay, and reputation, Gilbert though I be.
I will go to your father, I will demand you at his
hands
Kill me, firstkill me, rather than speak to me
thus! cried the unhappy maiden, in unspeakable
agitation. Is this the way to talk to me? You
should know better, for I am to be given to
another
.
Oh, that you had never come to our house!
GoI forgive youI will tell nobody. If they
find you, they will kill you: Harriet has shown
me they can take your life. Hark! they are
coming! I hear their voices! I hear my father's!
I forgive you, Mr. Hunter; yes, I forgive you
but I will never see you more! no, never!
Catherine!
Never! I swear itnever, never! I am vowed
and betrothed. If you stay longer, I shall die!
Oh, have pity on me, and go: have pity on me,
for my father's sake,pity, pity!
These wild and hysterical expressions were
concluded
by a shriek; for at that moment the ill-fated
girl, who had been all the while struggling, though
feebly, to make her way into the little saloon,
beheld
Miss Falconer, followed by her father and
the young lieutenant, rush into it. As she
screamed
,
she burst from the grasp of the impassioned
lover, and, running forwards, threw herself into
the Captain's arms.
Oh, the hound! the villain! cried the veteran;
he has been killing her! Shoot him down, run
him through, knock him on the head! Here, you
Aunt Rachel! Phbe! Daphne! Dick! Soph! and the
squad of you! Oh lord, Harry, my dear, the dog
has murdered her!
No, father, no, no, no! cried the maiden,
clinging, almost in convulsions, to his neck; I
am very well, father,a bat flew in my face,a
snake came into the garden, and I don't know
what! But it is very foolish, father,I am always
very foolish! And with these incoherent
expressions
,
in which even the whirl and tumult of a
suffering
heart could not repress an instinctive effort
to distract notice from the young man in the
garden
,
she fell into a state of pitiable prostration,
which engaged the whole attention of her father
and kinswoman.
c2
CHAPTER III.
Will you walk out, sir?
And if I do not beat thee presently
Into as sound belief as sense can give thee,
Brick me into the wall there for a chimney-piece,
And say,I was one o' th' Csars, done by a seal-cutter.
Rule a Wife and have a Wife
.
In the meanwhile, Herman,or Hyland Gilbert,
as he must now be called,(so soon as he beheld
the maiden, wooed so wildly and vainly, fly to her
parent for refuge,) turned from the illuminated
path, and taking advantage of his previous
knowledge
of the garden, soon succeeded in making his
way out of it, and, as he thought, without being
observed. He hurried through the park, torn by
a tempest of passions, and had almost reached the
gate, when he was suddenly roused by a tap on
the shoulder, which brought him to a stand. The
moon had set, and the light of the stars, breaking
through ragged clouds, was not sufficient to make
him acquainted with the visage of the intruder;
but the first word of the salutation that
accompanied
the touch, told him he was now confronted
with his rival.
An excellent good night to you, my fine
hail-fellow-well-met
!
cried Harry Falconer; you'll
be jogging, will you? A word in your ear: there's
star-light enough to be civil by, soft moist grass
for sleeping on, and, gad's my life, as good barren
clay at your feet as ever gentleman rotted under.
Now you may be surprised to hear it, but I have
the prettiest pair of pistols in my pocket that were
ever made for a lady's finger; somewhat dwarfish,
to be surebut, egad, as good, at six paces, for
blowing one's brains out, as a battering piece at
point-blank distance. So douse kit, as the cobbler
says, and let's begin.Harkee, sir, no skulking!
Don't put me to the painful necessity of calling
hard names. No sneaking!
You are a fool, said Hyland, sternly. If
you will renew your quarrel, come to me in the
morning.
By your leave, no, said the lieutenant, laying
hand on his collar. As to being a fool, adzooks,
as the Captain says, I am, or
was,
for supposing
you an honest, respectable sort of a vagabond
young man; whereas, on the contrary
Remove your hand, orWell, sir, cried
the young Gilbert, what will you have? Must
I cut your throat? Trust me, my fingers have
been itching to do it all day; and, at this moment,
they are hotter than ever. Begone, therefore,
while you may, and while the devil is yet behind
me. This is no time nor place for quarrelling.
The best in the world, said the officer; and
to end your scruples at once, know that I give you
choice only of two alternatives. Being a cursed
Hawk-Hollow Gilbert
Hah!
You have a certain claim to the gallows; but
being also an exceedingly well-behaved, genteel,
handsome young dog, who have done me the
honour
to court my sweetheart, you have an equal
claim to die in a gentlemanly way. So take your
choicea pistol, six paces, and a shot at
one-two-three
;
or yield yourself a prisoner, and die by a
drum-head court-martial.
What if I say,Neither? replied Gilbert.
Away, molest me not. And he turned again to
depart, but was again arrested by the hot soldier.
Oh, gad, cried this worthy, one thing you
must
say.
Look you, Mr. Henry Falconer, said Hyland,
with a trembling voice, I have never yet harmed
a human creature, and I would not willingly hurt
even you, though I have a double cause to wish
you ill. Provoke me no farther. You have been
drinking, and are now beside yourself.
Never think it, said the lieutenant,
dropping
his tone of bagatelle, but speaking with
characteristic
impetuosity. You have presumed to
be impertinent to a certain lady, who shall be
nameless; for which reason I will forget that you
are a low and contemptible scoundrel, worthy
only
Give me the pistol, said Hyland, and your
blood be on your own head. I will abide no more
from the son of your father.
Spoken like a man, cried Falconer, instantly
stepping off six paces on the grass, and counting
them aloud as he stepped. Then turning, he
added
,
with a furious voice, as if giving way to his
passions, Now, you rascal, prepare to fire as
soon as you hear me count three; and if I don't
teach you manners, you gallows dog, may I never
more smell gunpowder. Ready, you rogue! fire!
One,two,three!
The instant the last word escaped his lips,
he fired his own pistol, and Hyland staggered
backwards, as if the shot had taken effect.
Immediately
recovering himself, however, he cried, with
an agitated voice, Let that satisfy youI will not
hurt you, and threw his own undischarged
weapon
away. The act of generosity was not
appreciated
by his rival, who, inflamed by a rage to
which he seemed now to have given himself up,
uttered an oath, and whipping out the sword he
always carried at his side, rushed upon him,
crying, Villain, you don't escape me so easily!
Thus attacked, and with a fury that seemed to
aim at nothing short of his life, Hyland, who was
entirely without arms, avoided the lunge aimed at
his heart, and immediately closing with his
adversary
,
they fell together to the ground.
In the meanwhile, the pistol-shot had reached
the ears of the captain of cavalry, and one or two
of the late banqueters, who were, at that moment,
making their way to Gilbert's Folly, in obedience
to a summons from Miss Falconer, which, although
meant only for her brother, the domestic entrusted
with it, had communicated, in his absence, to
captain
Caliver. It found that worthy gentleman, as
well as all others present, somewhat incapable of
understanding it; but as it related to the Hawks of
the Hollow, and seemed to require the presence of
the lieutenant or his friends at the mansion, it was
obeyed by all, not even excepting the gallant
Ephraim; although, as it afterwards appeared,
this mysterious individual had, after setting out,
separated from the party, which was now but three
in number.
By the eternal Jupiter! cried Caliver, toiling
and stumbling up an ascent that led to the
parkgate
,
as the sudden explosion, followed
immediately
after by angry voices, broke the solemn silence
of the night,by the eternal Jupiter, halt!
there's the tories! They're beating up the old
cock's quarters!
Let us retreat, cried one of his attendants,
and get our horses.
Halthark! exclaimed the solider, there's
Harry Falconer's voice! the dogs are murdering
him! Prepare to charge, and hold your tongues.
Now follow me, and I'll have a whole regiment
on them.Halloo! he cried at the top of his
voice, as if really calling upon a competent force
of both horse and foot; Make bayonet work of
it, you light-infantry dogs! Horsemen, over the
fence, and surround the vagabonds!No quarter!
Double quick-step, march! Charge the villains!
And with this valiant stratagem, the officer ran
boldly up the hill, followed by his two companions,
though not until they had heard behind them, or
fancied they heard, the clatter as of a party of
horsemen descending the hill they had already
left.
As Caliver rushed into the park, he again heard
the voice of his friend, and rushing up, beheld, to
his great amazement, the band of tories dwindled
into a single individual, lying across Falconer's
breast, and in the very act of transfixing him with
his own weapon.
By the eternal Jupiter! what means all this?
he cried, dragging Hyland off his prey. What!
my jolly gentleman-volunteer, hah! What means
this, you absurd young cut-throats?
It means, cried Falconer, rising and darting
at his foe with unexampled fury, that I've
nabbed
a tory lieutenant, and I'll have his blood!
He took his adversary at a disadvantage, for
Hyland was still held by the captain; and before
this bewildered peace-maker could interfere, the
combatants were again rolling together upon the
ground, only that their positions were reversed,
for Falconer was now uppermost, and armed with
Caliver's sword, which he had snatched out of the
captain's hand, not knowing, nor indeed caring,
what had become of his own.
At this juncture, a new feature was given to the
battle-field. Enemies! cried Caliver's two
attendants
;
and the cry was echoed by a fierce yell,
like the war-whoop of a savage, coming from the
gate, through which galloped they knew not how
many dusky figures, looking to the eyes of the
revellers like the fiends of darkness themselves.
The astounded captain, deserted in a moment by
his attendants, looked up, and beheld with still
greater amazement, the apparition, as it seemed,
of Ephraim Patch astride his gallant gray; only
that this impression was put to flight by the spectre
urging the steed right upon him, crying at the same
time in a voice of thunder, Down with the rebel
dogs! trample them to death! and the next
moment
,
the unlucky officer was struck to the ground
by the blow of a hoof, and there lay insensible.
Victory! cried the valiant rider, springing
from his steed, and cheering his companion (for he
had but one,) who was at that moment dashing
after the two volunteers. Victory! he
exclaimed
,
rushing towards the original combatants, and
immediately proceeding to knock young Falconer
on the head with the butt of a pistol, crying at the
same time to Hyland, whom he assisted to rise,
Up, brother actor and Hawk of the Hollow,
'my name is Harry Percy!' `The trumpet sounds
retreat, the day is ours!'
Good God! cried young Gilbert, bending over
his adversary, you have killed him!
Quarter! murmured the lieutenant, faintly,
quarter, if you be Christian men!
Hell and furies! cried Ephraim, thrusting the
pistol into his face, you die, were you the king's
son! and he would have killed the unlucky youth
on the spot, had it not been for Hyland, who
dashed
the weapon out of his hand, exclaiming, Touch
him not, on your peril!What! can you stand?
he added, addressing Falconer: Awayyou are
safe. You would have taken my lifeI give you
yours. But, remember, Henry Falconer, he
whispered
in his ear, as he led him a little way,
remember
this:
you are seeking Catherine Loring
against her will. If you persist, it were better for
you had you never been born. Away with you,
ere those come who will not be so merciful.
The young officer, confused by the blow he had
received, and perhaps terrified by the appearance
of enemies so unexpected and of a character so
incomprehensible, stole away and concealed
himself
among some neighbouring bushes. He heard
the crash of hoofs over the avenue, as if he who
had chased away the volunteers, were now
returning
to his unknown companions, then a
murmur
of voices, and finally a renewed sound of
horses' feet, whereby he perceived that the
midnight
assailants had left the paddock. He then
crept from his concealment, and made his way
towards the mansion, to which, as was evident
from the flashing of lights in the windows and on
the porch, the alarm had been already
communicated
.
CHAPTER IV.
And I remember the chief, said the king of woody Morven:
I met him, one day, on the hill; his cheek was pale; his eye
was dark; the sigh was frequent in his breast; his steps were
towards the desert.
Carric-Thura.
A month
swept over the valley, and found it
restored
to its pristine quiet and loneliness. The
confusion
resulting from the developments of the
eventful 4th had subsided, and men began to
remember
the occurrences of that day almost as a
dream. Had the refugees really been in the
Hollow
?
The discovery of Parker's body,the
recovery
of his last letter, which had remained in
Hyland's hands in the hurry of separation from
his brother, to be, by a natural fatality, converted
into testimony against himself,the nocturnal
scuffle in the park, from which captain Caliver
and the junior officer had come off with injuries,
though not serious ones,and, finally, the sudden
disappearance of the painter and the eccentric
Ephraim,were the only evidence to establish
the truth of such a visitation. No outrage had
been perpetrated either upon life or property; nor
could the keenest search of the county volunteers,
assisted by several detachments from the lines,
sent to scour the whole country, detect a single
vestige of the audacious outlaws. That they had
fled was manifest enough, but how and whither no
man could tell. It appeared from the letters of
Parker, that the chief object of Gilbert's return to
his native valley was the rescue of young captain
VOL. II.D
Asgill, of whom we have before spoken, out of the
hands of his jailers; and it is now well known,
that, among the devices to secure the life of this
unfortunate captive, `a plan was, in case of the
worst, arranged for his escape,' and secretly
persisted
in, until it became evident that the
humanity
of the American Commander-in-chief was his
truest safeguard. There remained, therefore, no
longer occasion for the services of Oran Gilbert,
to whom an exploit of this nature, requiring a man
of crafty and daring spirit, had been so properly
entrusted; and it was at first hoped, and then
confidently
believed, that he had withdrawn entirely
from the neighbourhood, and, after disbanding his
followers, returned, in spite of the vigilance of his
foes, to New York; and, indeed, certain secret
intelligence
was received from that city, that he had
been long since ordered to return, the project of
rescue being now as unnecessary as it was
hopeless
of success. That he had committed no
outrage
upon the unprotected inhabitants of the county
was supposed to be owing not more to the
necessity
of avoiding all acts that might give the alarm,
and so draw attention towards him, than the
positive
commands of the British Commander, whose
course in the present conjuncture of affairs, was to
the full as forbearing as that of his enemy.
These considerations restored confidence to the
county; and nothing remained for the good
citizens
but to weave the chain of mysterious
circumstances
attending the visitation into a web of
wonderful
history, and to speculate upon the character
and fate of the painter and honest Ephraim. As
for the latter, ingenuity was for a long time at
fault, until the story of Mr. Leonidas Sterling
became
generally known; when an opinion, hazarded
at first almost in jest, grew into a settled belief,
namely, that these twain were one and the same
person, and that he who had deceived so well as
the ranting preacher, had deceived still better in
the semblance of the zealous quaker. The
successful
fourberies
of this modern Scapin obtained
for him a higher degree of credit than he had ever
won, while contracting his genius into the
representation
of the kings of fiction; and he was
remembered
and spoken of with a degree of good
humour, that perhaps explained the unwillingness
of his city friends to proceed rigorously against
him, when his treasonable practices were
discovered
.
As for the young Hunter, or Gilbert, as he was
now universally called, he was remembered with
no such favour. To be a scion of the tory family,
was enough to condemn him, even although (as
had been the case) he might have passed his days
afar from the contamination of his brothers'
example
,
and shared neither in their acts nor their
hostile spirit. But to be an associate,an officer
of the very gang commanded by Oran,was a
sin of inexpiable die, to which a double blackness
was given by his dissimulation and audacity. He
had resided among them as a friend and brother,
and yet was all the time playing the part of a spy
and betrayer; and he had capped the climax of
effrontery by taking part in the jubilee of liberty,
and even profaning with hypocritical lips the
sacred
manifesto of Independence,or so, at least,
he would have done, but for the interruption caused
by Oran's appearance. This seemed to them little
short of impiety, a sacrilegious mockery,
indicative
as much of his contemptuous disregard of the
holy instrument as of his daring character. In
this spirit of indignation they proceeded to
canvass
his whole history, raking up every little act
that could be remembered, and perverting each
into a manifestation of villany; the worst of which
was his attempt to carry off Captain Loring's
daughter,for so much they made of his parting
interview with the young lady,and then, being
baffled in the base attempt, waylaying and
attempting
to murder her affianced husband. In a word, he
was proved to be a monster of treason, perfidy,
and ingratitude; and few had the courage, fewer
still the disposition, to say a word in his defence.
It must be confessed that Dr. Merribody once, in
a fit of unusual generosity, declared to a whole
throng of raging villagers, `that the scoundrel
was an honest man and a gentleman after all, for
he had faithfully paid his bill, and even asked for
it, before it was presented;' but this impulse of
magnanimous friendship vanished when he came
to remember how much he had been imposed upon
in relation to the youth's true character, by some
deception Elsie Bell thought fit to play upon him,
under colour of admitting him to the secret. The
poet also, who, in the loss of Hyland, wept that of
his warmest admirer, contended `that he sang
better, and had a more refined literary taste, than
any body he ever knew.' Nay, even Captain
Loring
,
who had begun to esteem him as the apple
of his eye, was converted into a furious foe, which
was owing, in a great measure, to the discovery
of the young man's political inclinings, though his
anger was sharpened and augmented by Miss
Falconer
,
who took occasion, for a purpose of her
own, to reveal what the Captain had never
dreamed
of himself. She gave him to understand, what
was indeed nothing more than true, that his
ungrateful
proteg had endeavoured to detach
Catherine's
affections from her brother, and divert them
upon himself,an assurance that infuriated the
old soldier, whose wrath was not much mollified
when Miss Falconer succeeded in making him
aware how much his own extravagant patronage
of the impostor might have been construed into
almost positive encouragement of his presumption.
But bitter as was the worthy veteran's anger, it
was as capricious as his love had been.
Whenever
he laid his eyes upon the unfinished painting,
which he commonly did a dozen times a day, he
would begin to bewail and admire together, and
swear `that his young Haman
What-did-ye-call-it
,
for all of his roguery, was the finest painter
that was ever known; and, adzooks, he thought
there must be some mistake about his being a tory
and a Gilbert.'
The occurrence of these incidents had naturally
made the poor widow an object of suspicion, as
having connived at the presence, and aided in the
concealment and flight, of the outlaws; and she
was even threatened with the vengeance of the
law, until Harry Falconer, to the surprise of every
body, stepped forward as her champion, and made
such interest for her as left her again in her lonely
and quiet desolation. Whether this display of
generosity
was prompted by his own erratic feelings,
or was derived from the secret influence of the
Captain's daughter, Elsie knew not. Catherine
visited her no more; and within a week after the
explosion of the 4th, she left Hawk-Hollow with
her friend Harriet, and was absent for a
considerable
period. Elsie saw her, as the carriage rolled
by; her face was very pale and haggard, as if
she had been suffering from sickness. When she
returned, young Falconer and a brother officer,
both mounted, pranced along at her side. She
looked from the carriage as she passed, and kissed
her hand to the widow, while her eye sparkled as
with its former fire. But Elsie beheld her not; as
she looked up, her eye caught the outlines of a
dark and stern countenance behind that of
Catherine
,
D 2
on which were the traces of age and broken
health.
She started from her seat, and gazed eagerly
after the rolling vehicle, but it was soon swept out
of sight. She remained upon her feet, until she
had seen it enter the park, and draw up before
Captain Loring's door, when she again sunk upon
her chair, muttering to herself:
I saw him last a black-eyed boy, with a cheek
like the rose-leaf, and hair like the wing of a crow;
and now he comes with a cheek as withered even
as mine, and locks frosted still whiter. So let it
be with the villain; honour may fall on the snowy
head, but what lies in the bosom? And can he
walk over the knolls where Jessie walked, and
smile on those around him? There is thunder yet
in heaven, and a long reckoning yet to settle. Ah
well, ah well, we shall see what we shall see, and
I shall live to see it; for she cursed him in her
death-gasp; and I cursed too, and I prayed God I
might live to see the two curses light upon him
together
;
and together they will light, and I alive to
see it! And muttering thus in one of those
occasional
moods of darkness which had, perhaps more
than any thing else, served to fix the stigma of the
sibyl upon her, Elsie gathered up her wheel and
spindle, and retreated from her favourite seat on
the porch, to which she returned no more during
the day.
The person upon whom she invoked this
malediction
was the father of Miss Falconer, who, with
Catherine and himself, made up the contents of the
carriage. As he stepped upon the porch of
Gilbert's
Folly, from the vehicle, and received the
rough welcome of Captain Loring, it was with a
firmer bearing than would have been expected
from his apparent age and infirm health. He was
of tall stature, and, although greatly wasted,
preserved
an erect military bearing. His
countenance
,
though hollow, withered, and of the
sallowest
hue, was, even yet, strikingly handsome, and
his eye was of remarkable brilliancy, though of a
stern and saturnine expression. His brow was
very lofty, though not ample, and his mouth
singularly
well sculptured, and indicative of decision.
On the whole, his appearance was at once
commanding
and venerable; and even those who were
freest to whisper the tale of early profligacy and
maturer corruption, could not deny him the
deference
due to his gentlemanly air and deportment.
A close inspection of his countenance would have
revealed no traces of the workings of an unquiet
spirit. The first glance showed him to be of
a temper thoughtful, reservednay, severe and
moody; but the second could discover no more.
A perfect self-command, a mastery not merely of
his countenance, but of his spirit, lifted him above
the ken of petty scrutiny; and if he wore a mask
in his commerce with men, it was like that iron
one of the Bastile, which when put on, was put on
for life, and was, at the same time, of iron. He
was a man upon whom even his children looked
with fear,not that fear indeed which lives in
constant expectation of the outbreaking of a
violent
spirit, but the awe that is begotten by a
consciousness
of the inflexible resolution of the spirit
that rules us. This inflexibility is power, and power
is ever an object of secret dread, even with those
who love its possessor.
The austerity of his mind was not accompanied
by rigid manners, nor even coldness of feeling.
No one could be more courteous, and, at times,
even agreeable, than Colonel Falconer. He
received
the welcomes of his kinsman with much
apparent pleasure, and himself assisted Catherine
from the carriage, and conducted her into the
mansion, congratulating her, with gentleness and
kindness, upon her return. Yet you must grant,
he added, that even the smoke of a city can
sometimes renew the health, when the air of the
country fails. I would I might profit by these
mountain breezes, as I know you will, when you
have once recovered from your fatigue. But
let me see you but happy with my graceless Harry,
I shall not complain of my own infirmities.
On the third day after the arrival of Colonel
Falconer, the solitude of Hawk-Hollow began to
be broken by the appearance of divers carriages,
filled with gay and well dressed people, the
destination
of all whom appeared to be Gilbert's Folly.
A few individuals, the more favoured of the
villagers
,
were seen mingling their equipages
occasionally
with the others; but it was plain that the
majority of visiters were strangers, and had come
from a distance.
The object of such an unusual convocation of
guests at Gilbert's Folly, could not long remain a
mystery; and indeed it was known, several days
before, that it was to do honour to the nuptials of
Henry Falconer with the daughter of Captain
Loring. The wealth and standing of the
bridegroom's
father were sufficient to secure him the
means of giving eclat to the ceremony, at a day
when that ceremony was always one of festivity;
and accordingly there appeared guests enough,
and of sufficient figure, long before night, at the
mansion, to convince those who took note of such
circumstances, that it would be such a wedding
as had never before been known in all that
county
.And
such indeed it proved; though not even
the most imaginative could have foreseen from
what unusual circumstances it was to owe its
claim to be remembered.
Upon that day, while all others were laughing
and smiling, a deep and moody dejection seized
upon the spirits of the bridegroom's father; and
although he displayed his wonted courtesy in
receiving
his guests, (they should be considered
his,
for the bride was without kinsfolk, and her father
had invited none to partake of his joy, save a few
villagers,) the task of continuing to trifle with them
during the entire day became intolerably irksome,
and perhaps the more so that his habits had for so
many years accustomed him to solitude and
privacy
.
Worn out at last, he exchanged the noisy
apartments of the mansion for the shaded
garden-walks
;
until, finally, driven from these by an
increase
of his melancholy and the presence of a
bevy of maidens, seeking flowers to decorate their
fair persons, or perhaps that of the bride, he fled
from them to the more unfrequented walks in the
park.
Why should
I
mingle with this mockery? he
muttered to himself, and on this unhappy spot?
Let me look upon those scenes I have not beheld
for twenty-four years, and see if they have yet
power to move me.There are none here to miss
me; and they will feel the freer and gayer, when
frightened no more by my death's-head
countenance
.I
would the silly Captain had spared the
poplar-row: and yet I know not,the old
white-oak
,
whereFaugh! that should be forgotten.
There is something
new
at least in the forest. The
shrubs have become maple-trees and beeches, the
old oaks and sycamores have rotted in their places,
and nothing is the same save the rocks and the
water.Why should I fear, then, to revisit scenes
that have changed like myself? I shall never look
on them again, after this day.
He composed his countenance into its ordinary
expression of severe and frowning calm, and
directing
his steps through the grounds, as one
familiarly
acquainted with their most hidden retreats,
made his way towards the Run, until he had
reached
the path along its rocky borders, previously
trodden by Catherine and his daughter. He even
sat down under the sycamore, where Catherine
had begun the story of the wild Gilberts, and his
own early adventures; and here, as if there were
something in the spot to conjure up such
memories
,
he mused long and painfully on the same
dark subjects. Perhaps, also, as he looked upon
the turbulent water rushing at his feet, he pictured
to himself the resemblance it bore to the course of
his own life,a current, which, although now sunk
into the composure of a river just losing itself in
the vast ocean, had dashed so long in a channel
full of rocks and caverns.
`Are not thy waters sweeping, dark, and strong?
Such as my feelings were, and are, thou art;
And such as thou art were my passions long.'
The current of his early life had been indeed as
wild, as tortuous, as tumultuous, as that before
him; and as he looked backwards upon its broken
course, he saw that the freshes of passion had left
as many ruins around it as now deformed the
margin of the streamlet.
When he rose from his meditations, it was with
a brow indicative of a deeply suffering mind; and
as he strode onwards, still pursuing the course of
the brook, a spectator looking at him from a
concealment
,
might have detected on his visage the
workings even of an agonized spirit, though it was
observable, that, even in this solitude, where there
seemed to be so little fear of observation, he still
struggled to preserve an air of serenity. The roar
of the waterfall fell upon his ear, and perhaps as
the voice of an old acquaintance; it did not rouse
him from his dream of pain, but seemed, although
he essayed to approach it, to plunge him deeper in
gloom; and he would perhaps have crossed the
rustic bridge without being conscious of the act,
had not his footsteps been suddenly arrested by a
figure that started suddenly in the path, and
recalled
him to his senses. He looked up, and beheld a
young man, in a hunting suit and leather hat, with
the rifle and other equipments of a woodman,
standing before him. The texture of his garments
was coarse, and there was nothing in them to
indicate
any superiority in the wearer above the
young rustics of the country; but he wore them
with an air of ease, a
savoir s'habiller,
by no means
common to the class. His figure was light and
handsome, and so was his face, though the latter
was miserably pale and thin, and marked with the
traces of grief, and the former considerably
emaciated
.
As he stepped into the path, he dropped
the butt of his rifle upon the earth, as if for the
purpose of arousing the abstracted comer by the
clash; and when the Colonel looked up it was not
without some alarm at opposition so unexpected.
Fear not, said the young man, eyeing him
with a mournful, yet steadfast gaze, I design you
no hurt.
And why should you? cried Colonel
Falconer
,
returning his gaze, with one that seemed
meant to rend him through. As he looked,
however
,
he faltered, turned pale, and thrust his hand
into his bosom, as if to grasp at a concealed pistol.
The act was observed by the stranger, and he
instantly
;
repeated his words,
Fear nothing,at least fear nothing from
me:
I desire to serve you, not injure.Accident, or
Providence, has given me the means. You are
Colonel Falconer?
And you? cried the gentleman, with an
agitated
voice.
Iwhat matters it what
I
am? said the youth;
I am neither footpad nor assassin,let that
satisfy
you. What do you in this place? Cannot
even conscience make you wiser? Methinks, there
is not a rock or a bush in this dark den,there
should not be a rustle of the leaf or a clash of the
waters, but should tell you what you should expect,
when treading the soil of a Gilbert.
If you meditate violence, young man, cried
Falconer, whose agitation visibly increased, the
more he regarded the figure before him, and who
now spoke with an emotion amounting almost to
terror, heaven forgive you. But heaven will
not
there is no pardon in store for the young man
who assails the gray hairs of the old.
False, Colonel, false! cried the youth, with a
laugh of singular bitterness, or surely you had
never lived to tell me so. There was a man of
gray hairs, Colonel Falconer, who once lived
among these woods, and very happily, too; but a
young man struck him, and struck him to the
heart, Colonel; and the young man lived to have
a head as white and reverend as he whom he
slew! Yet fear not; again I say, fear not: I came
to save, not to kill. Hear me, and then away.
Begone from this place, and begone with such
speed as becomes a man flying from a loosed
panther
.
Mount your horse and away,away
instantly
and in return for the good deed of one
who has perhaps saved your life, speak not a word
to any human being of what you have heard and
seen in this place.
Stay, cried Colonel Falconer, recovering
from his terror, yet speaking with a choking voice,
I owe this caution to a
To an enemy, cried the other, turning from
him.
Stay, I charge you,I command you,and
as the Colonel spoke, in a sudden revulsion of
feeling
,
he grasped the arm of the youth, who had
already placed his foot upon the fallen sycamore,
for the purpose of crossing the stream. To the
surprise of Colonel Falconer, he discovered that
even the strength of his aged arm was superior to
that of the young man, who seemed to have been
enfeebled by long sickness. He struggled to
release
himself, but not succeeding, he turned upon
his captor, and shedding tears, said,
If you will seize me, I have no strength to
resist, nor any means of defence but thisand I
will not use it. As he spoke, he cast his rifle to
the earth. You have but to will it, to complete
the ruin you have begun.
Alas, young man, unhappy young man, said
Colonel Falconer, I know you, and would
recompense
your humanity, if such it really be.
You
should not, at least, perish like the rest of your mad
and infatuated brothers, and yet you are rushing
upon the same destruction; you have not been
gently nurtured, to live the life of a bravo and
outcast
.
I have heard of you, of your generous acts
of at least one,nay, two; for Henry Falconer
confessed you had both spared and saved his life.
I can save you, young man,I can and will;
and,think of me as you please,I will do it for
your father's sake. You were not meant for this
dreadful life, on which you are embarking.
Such as it is, said Hyland Gilbert, picking up
his rifle, for the Colonel had withdrawn his hand,
I am driven to it by you and yours. Now,
Colonel
Falconer, he added, leaping on the tree,
mock me no more with a sympathy I despise as
much as I hate him who offers it. I am not your
VOL. II.E
prisoner, and I will not be. I am weak and almost
helplessthank your son for that, and the skill
that was exercised at the expense of one who had
scarce ever fired a pistol in his lifeI am weak,
but I am armed and desperate. Follow me no
further, for I trust you not. Follow me not, or be
it at your peril.
He made his way across the bridge, but slowly
and painfully; and Colonel Falconer observed
more clearly than he had done before, that all his
motions were laborious and feeble, and that,
notwithstanding
the arms he carried, he was entirely
at the mercy of any one who chose to assail him.
A thousand different feelings took possession of his
breast, and among them pity for the unhappy
condition
of one, who, if he had inherited a deep
hatred for himself, was not without a claim upon
his feelings, and feelings deeper even than
gratitude
.
He had been, of course, made acquainted
with the extraordinary developments effected by
the cunning, or perhaps the good fortune, of his
daughter; and he was especially interested in the
account of the discovery of the youngest Gilbert
in the person of a young man, who, until that
discovery
was made, had so recommended himself
even to strangers by the gentleness of his
manners
,
and the apparent blamelessness of his life.
Partaking little in the suspiciousness of his
daughter
,
he judged the actions and character of the
youth with more leniency and justice than others,
though he kept his inferences locked up in his own
breast; and, happily perhaps for Hyland, Miss
Falconer had not thought fit to apprize him of
what she deemed the presumption of the youth in
becoming the rival of her brother. He saw in him,
therefore, a young man in no wise resembling his
fierce brothers, from whom he had been separated
in early infancy, and one whom perhaps a mere
desire to revisit the scenes of his childhood had
drawn to Hawk-Hollow; and he thought, with
justice, that nothing but the revealment of a name
universally detested, by exposing him to sudden
danger, had driven the young man to seek refuge
among men of blood, whom he would otherwise
have avoided. The confession of Henry Falconer,
(whose jealousy was rather wrath at the
presumption
of his rival than any unworthy suspicion of
his mistress,) that he had fought a duel with the
`confounded tory lieutenant,' as he always called
him,that his antagonist had endured his fire, and
although hurt, as he believed, had refused to
return
it,and, finally, that he had very generously
interfered to save him from one of the gang, who
was on the point of blowing his brains out,was
additional proof to Colonel Falconer that this
orphan son of a man he had deeply injured was
not by choice among the refugees, but forced
among them by the ill will and violence of his own
children. The wrong he had done to one member
of Gilbert's family had, indirectly at least,
produced
the destruction of all but this one; and
he
was now on the point of sinking into the abyss
which had swallowed the rest, though worthy of
a better destiny, unless a hand were stretched
forth to save him.
These considerations,a memory of the wrongs
he had done and the reparation he should make,
together with the present prospect of the poor
youth in a state that might make him the prey of
any enemy who might meet him, and some sense
of the generosity of the warning he had just
givenexcited Colonel Falconer's feelings, and
moved him with an impulse, which caused him at
once to cross the brook, pursuing the fugitive, and
intreating him to stay. Whether it was that his
motive was misunderstood, and that the young man,
in the agitation of his spirits, supposed that he was
followed merely for the purpose of being arrested,
or whether it was because he found himself in a
spot peculiarly calculated to arouse his most
vengeful feelings, it is certain that he became
excited
to anger by a pursuit designed only in
kindness
.
He clambered up to the little enclosure of
the grave, and was about making his way through
the narrow passage betwixt the two rocks; when,
hearing the pursuer close at his heels, he turned
round, displaying a countenance so fierce and
intimidating
,
that it instantly brought the Colonel to
a stand.
Villain! he cried, throwing aside his rifle, and
drawing his knife, God has sent you to your
fateyou are treading on Jessie Gilbert's grave!
If the words had been thunder-bolts, they could
not have sooner unmanned his pursuer. He
started
,
shivering from head to foot, and looking down,
beheld the dreary hollow, from which some pious
hand, perhaps that of Hyland himself, had plucked
away the weeds, leaving the stalk of the rose-bush
flourishing alone at its head.
Oh, holy Heaven! cried Colonel Falconer,
dropping upon his knees, and wringing his hands,
while he gazed with an eye of horror upon the
couch of his victim, the grave of Jessie Gilbert!
Of the mother and the babe! cried the young
man, advancing towards him, with looks of
vindictive
fury; and here, gray-headed though you
be, you deserve to die. To this place of shame,
man of ingratitude! you consigned the victim of
your villany; and here it is fitting she should have
her revenge.
But if Hyland Gilbert was a moment disposed
to play the part of the avenger, it was only for a
moment. His wrath was instantly disarmed by a
burst of grief from the wronger, so
overpowering
,
so agonizing, that he at once forgot his
dreadful
purpose, and felt himself melting with
commiseration
.
She has hadshe has had her revenge, cried
the wretched man; death had been too cheap a
retribution, and therefore it has been ordained in
a life of misery,and
such
misety, oh heaven!
Would to God I had died in her place, though it
had been with a world hooting me to the scaffold.
Yes, Jessie, I
am
a villain, and thou knowest, how
much greater and viler than ever was thought,
even by thee. But thou shalt have justice, he
added, beating his breast, yes, thou and thy
murdered
babe, though I give up my children to be
sacrificed to thy memory.
My father was right, muttered Hyland, as
the foe of his family poured forth the wild
expressions
of a remorseful spirit; he charged me to
leave the destroyer of his peace to God and his
fate; and God has made his fate an existence of
retribution.Arise, Colonel Falconer, he added,
sternly; profane this holy resting-place no longer
with the mockery of repentance. Fly, and secure
your wretched life for further remorse; for here it
is in a danger of which you do not dream. Begone,
and remember what I charged youHah! do
you hear? he cried, as a whistle as of a bird came
from the forest behind and below the rocks. Up
for God's sake! he cried, seizing the penitent by
the arm, as if fear had supplied him with new
strength, and hurrying him across the brook.
Begone
,
or you are a dead man. To the bushes,
quickto your horse, too, or your carriage. Dally
not a moment, but begone. Say nothing of what
you have seen or heard; and fear not for your
children
or friendsno harm is designed any of them.
Awaysave your own life, for no other is in
danger
.
2
With these charges, pronounced in the greatest
haste, he took his leave, recrossing the brook, while
Colonel Falconer, torn now as much by fear as he
had been a moment before by anguish, fled through
the wood, and over the hill, until he had reached
the mansion. Here calling for his servant, and
ordering a horse to be saddled instantly for
himself
,
and another for the attendant, he prepared to
leave the house, which he did in a few moments,
and almost without being observed, the
wedding-guests
having retreated to the garden and the
pleasant walks behind it.
CHAPTER V.
The bridegroom's doors are open'd wide,
And I am next of kin;
The guests are met, the feast is set,
May'st hear the merry din!
Coleridge
Ancient Mariner
.
The
Colonel galloped through the park and down
the hill, until he had approached nigh enough to
Elsie's cottage to see that its porch was darkened
by the bodies of several men, moving about in what
seemed to him extraordinary commotion. He grew
pale, and finally, drawing up his horse, beckoned
to his servant, a young and active mulatto, with
an exceedingly bold and free visage, to approach:
Give me the larger pistols, Reuben, he cried,
and do you take the smaller holsters'Pshaw,
they are fiddling and dancing! It is nothing.
Follow.
He resumed his course, and drawing nigher to
the little inn, saw that the group, which he at first
eyed with trepidation, consisted of his own son,
and two or three young gentlemen of the bridal
party, with a man of strange and even ludicrous
appearance, from whom they appeared to be
extracting
no little diversion. He was a tall man,
with a French military coat of white cloth, faced
with green, and on his head a chapeau-de-bras,
which was, at that time, though the common cap
of the Gallic auxiliaries, esteemed quite a curiosity
in the confederacy. Instead of a white underdress,
however, he had on breeches of broad blue and
white stripes, which, being very tight, gave a pair
of legs more remarkable for brawn than beauty,
an appearance quite comical, and the more
especially
that they were decked off at the extremities
with rose-coloured shoes, and were kept moving
about as briskly as those of a house-fly or a
monkey
.
In the particular of shoes, as well his
silver-fringed
rich waistcoat, and a cane with a head
half as big as his own, he bore no little
resemblance
to the valet-messenger of a French
field-officer
,
a sort of humble aid, whose business was
to fetch and carry written orders in a review, but
who was sometimes mistaken by our
simple-minded
ancestors for a general-in-chief, in consequence
of the splendour and gravity of his appearance; and
such a menial Colonel Falconer supposed him to
be, discarded by his late master, or driven from
service by that sudden spirit of independence so
apt to appear in foreign servants, when brought to
the land of liberty. Besides his cane, he had a
fiddle and bow in his hand; and from these, as
well as the prodigious grace, restlessness, and
activity
of his motions, it was judged that he had
betaken
himself, in his distresses, to that honourable
profession, to which three-fourths of the wanderers
of the Grande Nation seem to have been born,in
other words, to that of the dancing-master. It did
not seem, however, that he had yet profited much
by the change of profession, for his attire was in
somewhat a dilapidated condition, and his cheeks
pinched and hollow. Such as he was, however,
he seemed to be the happiest creature in existence;
and as Colonel Falconer drew nigh, he saw that he
was one while engaged flourishing his bow, the
next his leg, and ever and anon his tongue,the
last with intense volubility,as if in spirits
irrepressibly
buoyant and exuberant. The unruly
member was hard at work, as the Colonel
approached
,
and had it not been for the clatter of his
horse's feet, he might have heard him deliver the
following highly flattering account of himself:
Yes, Missare Ou-at-you-call-it, and jentlemans,
I am a man of figure in mine own land; and you
laughs, par de deb'l! I come invite myself to de
marriage,
nanmoins,
juste like Mnlas in l'Iliade
d'Homre,
mort de diable, parce qu'il etait
jentleman
.
You are soldiare!
Et moi,
by mine
honneur,
and so am I; for
autre fois, jadis,
(ou-at de deb'l
you call him?) I use de sword for de violon, ride
de horse, charg
sur mon ennemi,
in ou-at you'
Shakaspeare call de `war glorieuse.'
'Ah! cruel souvenir de ma gloire passe!
uvre de tant de jours en un jour efface!'
Yes, missares, I am jentleman-soldiare, ou-id fiddle.
How de deb'l you make mariage wi'sout de fiddle,
Paimable violon, Pinstrument des amours? Ecoutez!
you s'all hear. How de ladies and jentlemans s'all
dance when dey hears,
`Qu'elle est grande, qu'elle
est belle!'
And, in a rapture, he forthwith began
sawing his instrument, and singing, with a voice
exceedingly cracked and enthusiastic, the words of
the old chorus of shepherds,
`Ah! qu'elle douce nouvelle!
Qu'elle est grande! qu'elle est belle!
Que de plaisirs! que de ris! que de jeux!'
nor did he cease, even when the merriment of
his auditors became as uproarious as his own
harmony.
In the midst of the chorus and the laughter,
young Falconer looked up, and beheld his father,
who had suddenly checked his horse at the
entrance
of the little oak-yard, and was looking
towards
him. He was struck with the unusual
agitation
of his parent's countenance, and ran towards
him; but before he could speak, the Colonel
demanded
quickly, as if with an effort to change the
current of his own thoughts,
What do you here, Henry! Is this a place, is
this a sport for a bridegroom?
'Pon my soul, pa, said the hopeful son, I
find it more agreeable than up among the tabbies.
This fellow, this Monsieur Tiqueraque, as he calls
himself, is decidedly the most agreeable person I
have seen to-day,a gentleman fiddler, who swears
by all the gods of a Frenchman, he has trudged
twenty miles on foot, to have the honour of dancing
at my funeralthat is, my wedding; but the lord
knows, pa, you look as solemn as if to-day was to
be the end of me. Pray, sir, what is the matter?
I hope you are not offended? Egad, sir, I am
acting
under orders,under Harry's, who has taken
as much command of me as if she were my wife,
instead of my sister. She ordered me away, to be
out of Catherine's sight,the lord knows why, but
women are all mad, and I think Catherine is
growing
as whimsical and absurd as the rest.
Get you back to her, notwithstanding, said
the father; a maiden is privileged to be
capricious
on her wedding-day. Get you back; your
absence is improper. And hark you, Henry, my
sondelay not the ceremony on my account: the
clergyman must be now on the way, and will soon
arrive. Wait not a moment for me. A sudden
affair, not to be deferred even to the nuptial rite,
calls me to Hillborough:Say thus much to
Captain
Loring and the rest; say that I will be back
within a few hours; and add, that I charge them
not to delay the ceremony a moment for me. God
bless you, my sonI must away.
So saying, he put spurs to his horse, and
followed
by Reuben, was soon out of sight.
Well done, dad! cried the young soldier,
staring after him; I wonder what's in the wind
now? He has seen one of his spectres, I warrant
me.Adzooks, as the Captain says, if one were to
believe that Reuben and black Joe, they are thicker
in our house, about two in the morning, than is
comfortable,especially in dad's chamber. Won't
stay to the wedding? why that's comical, egad!
But that's his way. Well, now for that mad fool,
Tiqueraque: he shall have his will, were it only on
account of his striped breeches; he shall go among
the fiddlers, though, gad's my life, he saws like a
knife-grinder. I never saw two such legs before:
egad, I beg my pardon, I
did!
`List, list, oh list!'
Such legs in Hamlet! Well God bless us, and by
the eternal Jupiter, as Caliver says, I had no idea
it was so stupid a thing to be married.
Eh bien,
monsieur,
he added, turning to M. Tiqueraque, I
have no doubt you are a gentleman born and
bred; so, gad's my life, you shall fiddle at the
wedding
,
and get drunk into the bargain; but, by the
eternal Jupiter, you must not be in a hurry!
Si fait, monsieur,
cried the wanderer,
drawing
a note of indignation from his instrument;
Mort de ma vie,
dronk! I s'all do no such sing.
But I s'all see de leddees? he added, in a
transport
that quite dispelled his temporary wrath.
Ah, Missare Ou-at-you-call-him, I s'all be very
happy now! I love de leddees,
particulirement
de
leddees of figure, and not the contree
pauvrettes,
wis big feet and te'es like de old horse.
Ah
a, I
s'all be very happy, and I s'all sharge only two
dollare.
Bring him along Tom, fiddle and all, cried
the bridegroom,and, you Ned Cascable-nose,
if you love me, gad, steal somebody's horse, ride
down the road, and see what the deuce has
become
of the parson. We can get married very
well without dad; but, adzooks, as the Captain
says, a parson is quite essential. I swear, gad's
my life, 'tis a very ludicrous thing, one's
wedding-day
.
And thus, as the party bent their steps towards
the mansion, rattled the bridegroom, a youth of
the lightest heart and emptiest head in all
Pennsylvania
,
of a mind entirely too contracted for
eccentricity, yet full of those foibles of character
which commonly pass for such,incapable of any
stretch of sentiment or elevated emotion, and
indeed
rude, boisterous, and unreasonable of
manners
,
yet with a certain native good-humour and
spirit prevailing through all his acts and
conversation
,
that recommended him to the favour of such
as were not choice in their friendships, and
preserved
him the affection of those whom the ties of
relationship compelled to love. Such was the man
whom Colonel Falconer, or rather his daughter,
(for she was the guiding and ruling spirit
throughout
the whole attempt to unite such adverse
elements
together,) had chosen as the husband of
Catherine Loring; and the inhumanity of the
choice was rendered excusable only by the natural
desire she had to contribute to his happiness, and
the undue importance she attached to those good
qualities he really possessed. Still the attempt was
cruel, for it set at naught the disinclination of one
whom feebleness of character, a sense of
destitution
,
operating, however, only through the person
of a bereaved parent, a knowledge of
his
desires,
and a consciousness perhaps that it was too late
for escape, had put into her power. It is not to be
supposed that Miss Falconer saw, that in effecting
her brother's happiness she was destroying that of
her friend; or that seeing it, she would have
persisted
in her object. On the contrary she was
sincerely
attached to Catherine, and fully believed she
was consulting her welfare, though at the price of
some temporary pain. It was her peculiar
disposition
to pursue every object with an avidity and
resolution that became the stronger for every
interposing
obstacle; and she willingly blinded her
eyes to such difficulties as she was not forced to see.
She turned her looks, therefore, from her friend's
distresses, and soon ceased to believe that they
existed
.
But the match was one not made in heaven,
nor destined to be accomplished; and fate, in
frustrating
the whole ill-advised scheme, was
preparing
a heavy retribution for all who had laboured to
promote it.
VOL. II.F
CHAPTER VI.
I come not for your welcome, I expect none;
I bring no joys to bless the bed withal,
Nor songs, nor masques, to glorify the nuptials.
Beaumont
AND
Fletcher
The Elder Brother
.
It
was late in the afternoon when Colonel
Falconer
rode by the Traveller's Rest; and his
disappearance
,
though accounted for in the apology
he had commissioned his son to deliver, was
considered
the more remarkable, as within an hour's
time the presence of the clergyman was expected,
for whom captain Caliver and lieutenant Brooks,
as two of the principal attendants on the
bride-groom
,
had gone in great state. There were many
conjectures secretly hazarded as to the true cause
of the Colonel's desertion, when the delay of an
hour might have enabled him to discharge his
duties
to his son and destined daughter; and had
Captain Loring been favoured with any jealous
kinsmen, alive to the honour of his family, or been
himself of a suspicious and cavilling mood, it is
quite possible a defection so extraordinary might
have caused some unpleasant feelings, and even
an interruption of the ceremonies in hand. But
such was not the case, and the matter was left to
be canvassed by the friends and connexions of the
bridegroom alone; who, after satisfying themselves
that the Colonel had been summoned away by no
sudden messenger, and that, if a necessity had
really existed for his departure, it must have
existed
long enough previously to allow him time to
make his own explanations in person, agreed to
attribute the proceeding to one of those fits of
moody eccentricity, by which, it appeared, he was
often affected.
By the time this subject of wonder was exhausted
there arose another, which produced, in the end,
still greater surprise and discussion than the other.
This was the non-appearance of the clergyman at
the appointed hour; and indeed the sun set, before
any tidings were had either of him or of the
officers
,
and then not until messengers had been sent
off with led horses, on the vague presumption that
some accident might have happened to the
carriage
on the way.
Another subject of discussion was the conduct
of the youthful bride, who, although during the
greater part of the day exhibiting uncommon
spirits
,
and running over the grounds with other
frolicsome
maidens, herself the most frolicsome of
all, yet displayed, on one or two occasions, a
disposition
to wander by herself, and even stray into
the woods; and once, when she had strayed
further
than usual, and was pursued and arrested,
she shed tears, though none could tell for what
reason. As the time drew nigh when the
clergyman
was expected, she manifested a great
unwillingness
to be withdrawn by her bridemaids,
according
to custom, but insisted she would walk in
the garden, and that so obstinately, that it required
all the influence Miss Falconer had over her to
induce her to retire to her chamber; and here she
wept so bitterly as to amaze and even alarm her
youthful attendants. Her parent, however, being
summoned to the chamber, she embraced him,
dried her eyes, smiled, laughed, suffered a garland
of snowy rose-bays, the latest of the season, to
be fastened in her hair, and, so long as he
remained
in her sight, betrayed no other symptom of
distress
or agitation; for which reason her late tears
were remembered without surprise, as being
natural
to the occasion.
It was not until after nightfall that the
clergyman
made his appearance, with the officers.
Accidents
of a common nature, but unusual in
number
and fatality, had detained them on the way.
First, they had broken down, before reaching the
village, in consequence of the loss of a linchpin,
or some other essential atom in the economy of
the coach; then, after attempting to return, it was
discovered that a horse had lost a shoe, and that
some portion of the harness had given way. In
short, their difficulties were of such a nature, that
they were on the point of abandoning the carriage
altogether, to seek some other conveyance among
the neighbouring farms, when `a very excellent,
contriving blockhead,' as lieutenant Brooks called
him, came to their assistance, and inspired them
with new hopes of accomplishing their journey.
This was no less a personage than honest Dancy,
of the Traveller's Rest, who chanced to be
returning
from the village on foot, and was glad to offer
his services, on condition of being allowed to ride
home on the box with the venerable Richard.
Nay, not content with again setting the vehicle in
motion, he even volunteered, in the warmth of his
gratitude, to divide with Richard the labour of
driving,a proposal highly acceptable to the latter,
who had much of his master's affection for an
afternoon
nap, and could take it as well upon a coach
box as in the chimney corner. The only ill
consequence
of this exchange was, that, before they
had proceeded a mile further, the zealous Jehu
interrupted
an exceedingly interesting account
captain
Caliver was giving the clergyman of his
midnight
encounter with the Hawks of the Hollow,
by suddenly overturning the coach into a gully,
whence all thought themselves fortunate in
escaping
without broken bones. But now arose a
greater difficulty, or rather a series of difficulties,
than before; for, first, it was questionable whether
their force was sufficient to raise the unlucky
vehicle
,
or whether, being raised, it was in a condition
to carry them further; and, secondly, the
reverend
functionary, frightened and resolved to trust
his neck no longer to a structure so ill-fated,
declared
,
that, whatever might be the event, he
would enter it no more, but would rather finish
the remaining four or five miles on foot. In a
word, they were reduced to the necessity of
applying
at a neighbouring farm-house for assistance;
and getting horses and saddles as they could, they
continued, and at last concluded, the journey, but
in such plight as caused no little surprise and
merriment
among the expectant guests.
In the meanwhile, the tedium that might have
been produced by these unforeseen circumstances,
was put to flight by the appearance and activity
of the French dancing-master, who, although
carried
to the house only for a whim, was soon found
to be the most efficient adversary of ennui that
could have been found. He was no sooner in the
house than he snuffed his way, with the unerring
accuracy of a setter-dog, to the kitchen, where he
fell upon the ruins of the dinner table with the zeal
of the hungriest of that species; and then, having
succeeded in first gaining possession of a flagon of
wine, or some stronger liquor, he threw aside his
cane, clapped his hat under his arm, and seizing
upon his fiddle, bounded with a hop and a skip
first into one apartment, then another, and finally
into the porch, in all of which were gathered
some of the guests, and in all, as he entered,
drawing a savage note from his instrument, and
exclaiming,
F 2
Attendez,
jentlemans and leddees! now we s'all
dance; ou-y for no we no dance? Now for de
Contre-danse and de Menuet!Each jentlemans
and his leddeeMon Dieu! de jentlemans and
leddees will be very well content.
Attendez;
I am
de
matre de bal,
and I know ou-at is de
matires
de mode,
begar, ou-at you calls fashionable.
The appearance of the man was itself diverting,
but was rendered still more so by his sudden
assumption
of the character and authority of master of
ceremonies
,
to which he seemed to consider he had the
best right in the world, and which he was, in the end,
suffered to exercise, for no better reason than that
there was no other person appointed to such an
honour
.
He evidently held, that the chief ceremony
and pleasure of a wedding lay in the practice of his
own art; and he addressed himself to the task of
marshalling and animating the dancers with such
zeal and enthusiasm, that several forgot they were
beginning the ball at the wrong end, seized upon
partners as forgetful, or as waggish, as themselves,
and set Monsieur Tiqueraque's heart in a blaze
of rapture, by dancing outright. What was
begun
in jest, came at last to be practised in earnest;
and when the clergyman with the military
groomsmen
rode up to the door, they had some reason to
fear lest their ill fate had deprived them of the
most impressive portion of the ceremony.
Their appearance was hailed with the greatest
joy, and the more especially when they declared
they had met Colonel Falconer, and received from
him the same charges he had delivered to his son,
namely, that the rites and rejoicings should not
be delayed on his account, even for a minute.
They retired for a little space to refit their
disordered
attire, and a few moments afterwards
reappeared
,
conducting, with the other attendants, the
youthful pair whose destinies were now to be
united. The bride was very pale, her eyes red
with weeping, and her brows contracted into that
expression of imploring distress so frequent on her
countenance; her lips quivered incessantly; and
ever and anon her frame was agitated by that
shuddering
sob which remains as the last convulsion of
tears. Yet she walked into the room without
faltering
,
and suffered herself to be placed beside the
lover, and surrounded by the guests, without
betraying
any agitation sufficient to excite remark.
All that was observed was, that she kept rolling
her eyes about her a little wildly, as if in part be
wildered by the sudden transition from her quiet
chamber to an apartment full of lights and
human
beings. At last, her eyes fell upon the
clergyman
,
and she surveyed him with a gaze so
fixed, so peculiar, so strongly indicative, as he
thought, of a troubled and unhappy spirit, that his
own feelings became disturbed, and he began the
rites with an agitated voice.
In the meanwhile, the wedding guests pressed
closer around, and the domestics, thronging at the
doors of the apartment, began to steal reverentially
in; and among them, it was noticed that there
were several strange faces not before observed.
One of these, however, was recognised by Captain
Loring as belonging to a young farmer residing
near the valley, and he did not doubt that the other
intruders were people of the same class, who had
stolen softly into his house, attracted by the
opportunity
of witnessing a ceremony so much more
splendid than any ever before seen in the
neighbourhood
of Hawk-Hollow. Such intrusions are
indeed not unusual in certain sequestered parts of
the country.
With her eyes still fastened upon the clergyman,
Catherine listened to the words of the ceremony,
until the usual demand was made, Dost thou take
this man to be thy husband? She opened her lips to
reply, but, though they moved as if in speech, and
every sound was hushed as in the silence of death,
not a word, not even the whisper of an accent,
came from them. The demand was repeated, and
with as little effect; she spoke not a word, but she
rolled her eyes around the circle with double
wildness
;
and Miss Falconer, throwing an arm around
her waist, murmured, in hurried tones,
She is illthe ceremony cannot go on.
Kate, my dear, adzooks! cried Captain
Loring
,
what's the matter? Are you ill, my girl?
What, can't you speak? can't you say
Yes
to the
parson? Ah, adzooks, that's a girl! that's my
Kate Loring! You hear her, parson? She says,
yes!
Patience, sir, said the clergyman, surveying
the bride, who at the sound of her father's voice,
seemed to recall her powers, and opened her lips,
as if to speak. Be not precipitate, young lady,
he added, directing his discourse to Catherine, and
speaking with a kindly voice: this is a question
too solemn to be answered lightly,a profession
embracing too much of the sacrament of an oath
to be made except with deliberation. Take,
therefore
,
your own time, and answered according to your
heart and your reason`Dost thou take this man
to be thy husband?'
The words of reply were almost upon
Catherine's
lip, when a whistle, sounding loudly from an
open window, and startling the whole company,
was echoed by a sudden cry from the room itself;
and at the same moment, the bridemaids starting
away in affright, a young man, pallid in visage,
and roughly clad, rushed into the circle, and
displayed
to the eyes of the bride the features of the
younger Gilbert. She uttered a scream, and to the
confusion of every body present, flung herself
immediately
into his arms, crying with tones as wild
and imploring as his own, Oh, Herman, save me!
and fell into a swoon.
Death and furies! cried the bridegroom,
recognising
his rival at a glance, and springing at
him like a tiger.
Kill the villain! exclaimed his sister, in a
transport of indignation, endeavouring to tear her
friend from the embraces of the intruder. But the
efforts of the brother and sister were counteracted
by a new and unexpected enemy. The French
dancing-master, who, notwithstanding the violent
enthusiasm with which he entered into his proper
duties of fiddling and animating the guests, had
yet wisdom enough to conduct himself with proper
decorum, the moment his reverend colleague
appeared
,
and had been for the last few moments
entirely
lost sight of, now darted with a hop and a
pirouette to the bridegroom's side, and roaring
with a voice loud enough to add to the terror,
Sacre!
ou-at! marry a leddie against her ou-ill!
he struck his violin over young Falconer's head
with an energy of application that brought him to
the floor, and dashed his instrument into a
thousand
pieces.
Sacre!
he continued,
triumphantly
,
I s'all help myself to the most beaut'ful
leddee
here! And, as he spoke, he snatched up the
astounded Harriet, and vanished from the
apartment
.
In the meanwhile, the outrage, of a character so
extraordinary, had not been confined to the
persons
of the wedding pair and the bridegroom's
sister
.
At the very moment when Hyland Gilbert
darted into the circle, many of the guests, hearing
the whistle that seemed to have conjured up the
spectre, turned to the window, and beheld three or
four savage-looking men spring through it into the
room, while as many others, remaining in the
open air, thrust long carbines and rifles among the
guests, as if upon the point of firing on them. At
the same time, others made their appearance at
the door, armed in the same way; and, to crown
all, the little six-pounder, which had remained in
the Hollow ever since the eventful 4th of July, and
stood upon the lawn near the house, charged by
Captain Loring's own hand, and ready to be fired
the moment the ceremony was over, was suddenly
let off by some unknown hand, rattling the glass in
the windows, and shaking the house to its
foundation
.
These circumstances were enough to inspire
all with dread; which was still further increased
when the assailants, singling out the few military
officers present, rushed upon them before they
could betake themselves to their arms, and beat
them all to the floor, with the exception of the
captain of cavalry, who sprang from a window on
the opposite side of the apartment, uttering a
single
ejaculation of surprise,that is to say, `By the
eternal Jupiter!'and was seen no more until the
assault was over, and the actors in the outrage had
vanished. The whole scene, though one of
unexampled
confusion and terror, was over in a few
moments; and such was the panic, that scarce a
being present remembered, or indeed conceived,
the true nature, or had noted all the circumstances
attending the assault. That wild men with arms
in their hands, had been among them,had struck
down several persons present, then rushed over the
whole house, as if in search of some object of prey
whom they expected, but found not, among the
guests below, and then had betaken themselves to
flight, without doing further mischiefwas all that
was at first known; and it was not until a distant
yell at the park-gate, followed by the faint sound
of hoofs, proclaimed the departure of the enemy,
that the gentlemen present were able to tear
themselves
from the grasp of the frighted women, and
examine into the effects of such a visitation. It
was soon found that the officers, who had endured
the brunt of the attack, had owed this distinction
less to the animosity than the fears of the
assailants
,
who, seeming to apprehend resistance from
no others, had made it a point to seize them, before
adventuring upon the main objects of the outrage.
They were but little hurt, the assailants having
studiously avoided all bloodshed; and even the
bridegroom, thought stunned and a little disfigured
by the blow so heartily bestowed upon him by
Monsieur Tiqueraque, soon recovered his wits,
and joined the rest in eager search after the bride.
She had vanished, as well as his sister; and by and
by, when the distraction caused by such a
discovery
,
and the ravings and lamentations of Captain
Loring; had a little subsided, it was found that the
girl Phoebe had also disappeared.
CHAPTER VII.
She is won! we are gone, over bank, bush, and scaur;
They'll have fleet steeds that follow, quoth young Lochinvar.
Marmion.
In
the meanwhile, and almost before her
disappearance
had been noticed by a single person, so
great was the confusion at the moment the outlaws
burst into the room, Hyland Gilbert had borne
the insensible Catherine into the porch, and strove
to carry her from the house. His strength was
scarce fitted to sustain such an exertion; for, in
truth, although none of the dwellers of
Hawk-Hollow
were apprised of his mishap, until he
revealed
the secret to Colonel Falconer a few hours
before, the bullet of his rival, in their encounter on
the night of the fourth, had taken effect, and he
was yet labouring under the effects of an unhealed
wound. He was now, however, animated by a
new feeling; for as he clasped the burthen to his
heart, he remembered that the outrage had been
sanctioned not merely by passive acquiescence on
Catherine's part, but had been preceded by a direct
appeal, as it seemed, to his affection, though wrung
almost by frenzy from the unhappy girl, in the
moment
of her greatest need. Heaven be thanked!
he muttered to himselfI am not a villain; and
this deed of violence has preserved her happiness,
as well as my own miserable life.
What! brother? cried a harsh voice in his
ear, as he attempted to stagger forward, and found
himself arrested by the hand of Oran: What,
man, am I not both doctor and brother?a good
doctor, too? You shall look up now, and be healed
in a dayheart-whole, body-whole! I knew what
it was was killing you.
Fierce and abrupt were the accents of the
refugee
;
but there was mingled with them a tone
singularly
expressive of affection.And were you
not a fool to doubt, he added, when you had
the love of the maiden? But come, Hyland; this
duty is not for yougive her here to Staples
Never, Oran, never!
Foolish boy, you are sinking under her weight.
You must ride unburthened, or be captured. When
the fresh air opens her eyes, and she can sit a
horse herself, you shall ride at her side. Quick!
and get you after her to the horses.
With these words, and without regarding the
opposition of the feeble lover, he drew the lady
from his arms, and putting her into charge of
another
,
bade him `see to her, and the rest,' and then
immediately darted back to the house.
Perhaps it is better, muttered Hyland,
conscious
of his inability much longer to support his
precious freight, yet resolved she should not be
long sustained in the arms of another. I have
saved her,I have saved myself; ay, and I have
prevented murder, too. Go, Oran; the victim is
beyond your reach. Ah! Catherine, thou hadst
been dearly purchased, had it been with blood,
even with the blood of a Falconer!
He was still pursuing after his mistress, and had
nearly reached the park-gate, when his ear was
saluted by a piercing scream from behind, and the
voice of Miss Falconer, which he instantly
recognised
,
calling for help. He ran back, and
discovered
her struggling in the arms of Monsieur
Tiqueraque, who was bearing her along at a great
VOL. II.G
pace, and all the time uttering, with a volubility
not a little inflamed by his frequent visits to the
bottle, in which he had quite distinguished himself,
a thousand exhortations to the lady to be pacified,
with as many eccentric commendations of her
beauty and his own good qualities.
Tuchou! taisez vous,
ou-at de deb'l!
mon ange,
ma petite, ma matresse, avec les yeux noirs d'un
diablotin!
he heard him cry, ou-y for you fear?
comment diantre,
ou-y for you squeak? You are
the mos' fine leddee of all, and I am the mos'
excellent
jentlemans, and I s'all love you, begar, mos'
extremely.
Fi donc!
you mus' know, I am
jentlemans
in disguise, and have you love 'is sis mon's,
and s'all make you very good lovare. O ciel,
begar
,
I do so sink you ver' beautiful, and I s'all give
you on' douzaine kiss extreme fine,
mon dieu,
if
you s'all no squeak no more.
What, Sterling, are you mad! cried Hyland,
seizing this incorrigible adventurer and exemplary
wooer by the arm. Release the lady instantly
you have made a mistake.
Diablezot!
none in the world, said the man of
many coats, changing character with the facility
of an `old stager.'The sudden transformation
operated even more effectually than the voice of
the detested Gilbert, in frightening Miss Falconer
into silence. And harkee, Mr. Lieutenant Hawk,
he went on, with great equanimity, stick to your
own prizes,follow your own Blowselinda.
Rogue, do you resist me?Come, sir, you
have been drinking!
Drinking in your teeth! said Sterling, in whom
`the good familiar creature' had the effect of
rather
sharpening than changing any of his
characteristics
.
`Back and syde, go bare, go bare,' as
old Gummer Gurton says:
`Now let them drynke till they nod and winke,
Even as good felowes shoulde doe;
They shall not mysse to have the blisse
Good ale doth bringe men to.'
But `this is my right hand, and this is my left'
what more would you have? Do you think I am
to be kept on your cursed Adam's ale of the
mountains
for ever? `Dost thou think, because thou art
virtuous, there shall be no more cakes and ale?'
And finally, Mr. Lieutenant Chicken-hawk, dost
thou opine thou shalt have thy bottle and thy
wench, and I
In a word, scoundrel, said Hyland, clapping
a pistol to his head, and thus bringing the
madman
to his senses, unhand the lady, or I will
blow your brains out.
Zounds, sir,
No words, sir. Get you to the horses; and
thank your stars I do not report your villanous
conduct to the Captain.
The volunteer, who had indeed made freer with
one item of the bridal cheer than became a man,
who, as he had hinted, had been confined to a
beverage of the mountain brook, since his
association
with the band, grumbled a drunken oath or
two betwixt his teeth, and immediately slunk away,
leaving his captive to be disposed of by the
subaltern
.
You are free, Miss Falconer, said the young
man, speaking with a smothered voice. The
evil you have done me I forgive you; the cruelty
you meditated and practised against another, I
leave to be judged by heaven and your own
conscience
.False
friend! treacherous kinswoman!
your victim is beyond the reach of your
inhumanity
.
You are a villain, sir! cried Harriet,
exasperated
out of her fear,the worst of villains,an
ungrateful one!
What more she might have said and done, on
the impulse which restored her all her native
energy, it is impossible to say; but just at that
moment
her ears were struck by the wailing of a
female voice; and looking round, she saw,
obscurely
,
for the night was very dark with clouds,
though a new moon was in the sky, a horseman
ride by, bearing a woman across his saddle-bow,
and apparently greatly embarrassed by her
struggles
.
Her first idea was that she beheld her
un-unlucky
friend, not yet snatched beyond her reach;
and accordingly she darted forward, and with
extraordinary
intrepidity, seized the bridle-rein with
one hand, while with the other she grasped at the
captive's garments, bidding her leap down, and
crying out loudly for help.
You are insane, Miss Falconer! said Hyland,
endeavouring to draw her aside; Catherine is
safe, and this is but Phbe, who follows her.
Oh! Miss Harriet! cried the serving-maid,
with a piteous voice, don't let 'em murder me;
and oh! Mr. Hunter Gilbert! sure you won't be so
barbarous! and sure I never did you any harm in
my life, and sure
But her words were cut short by her ravisher
suddenly spurring his horse, as Harriet, in surprise
and disappointment, let go her hold, and
immediately
darting out of the park.
By this time there was a great flashing of lights
on the porch, as if the wedding-guests were
recovering
from their confusion, and preparing to
avenge the outrage, before it was yet too late.
This Harriet saw, and she observed besides that
the dusky figures which had, ever and anon, for
the last few moments, been flitting by, towards the
road, one or two of them being on horseback, and
who, she doubted not, belonged to the refugee
band, had ceased passing, as if the last had already
left the park. It was at this moment that she felt
the touch of Hyland Gilbert's hand on her arm, as
he endeavoured to draw her from Phbe; and as
she jerked away, she became sensible how feeble
was the grasp of this detested foe. An idea,
worthy of an Amazon, entered her mind; and
forgetting
the act of generosity which had but an
instant before relieved her own person from the
clutches of a drunken and lawless desperado, she
laid hands upon her deliverer, thinking only on
vengeance. As she seized him, she screamed
loudly for assistance, calling upon her brother, Mr.
Brooks, and others, by name; and had they made
their appearance, or any one of them, it is certain
she would have secured her prisoner. He was
confounded by an exhibition of spirit so
unexpected
;
and not knowing how to release himself, unless
by such an exertion of his remaining strength as
he could scarce think of exercising at the expense
of a woman, he was reduced to extremity; when
a horseman, coming from the house, suddenly
galloped
up, stretched out his hand, and with a
single
effort, jerked her from the ground to his
saddle-bow
.
Quick, he cried to Hyland; why do you
tarry? To your horse, and away.
So saying he spurred onwards himself. The
voice, breathing out the harsh accents of the
trader
,the
refugee, the man to capture whom she
had launched so boldly among the billows of
stratagem
,
and almost of war,froze the blood of the
maiden, and the sight of his grim features, revealed
in the glare of distant lamps, completed the
overthrow
of a courage which had supported her in a
struggle with one so little to be feared as Hyland.
Her brain whirled, her senses became bewildered,
G 2
as she felt the steed bounding beneath her, and
knew that every leap, while it separated her still
further from her friends, placed her yet more
completely
in the power of the refugee. But it formed
no part of his schemes to add her to the number of
his captives. He checked his steed at the
park-gate
,
dropped her gently on the grass, and
uttering
a yell, to draw the attention of another
horse-man
,
approaching from the house, galloped
through the gate and was soon buried in the
darkness
.
The second horseman, who was no other
than the captain of cavalry, rode up to the spot,
dismounted, and uttering many ejaculations of
surprise
,
took the lady in his arms, and with her
returned to the mansion. He found its inmates
still in extreme agitation, the women weeping and
screaming, the men swearing, and bustling, and
vociferating for arms and horses, with which they
designed to do they knew not what, and Captain
Loring roaring like a bedlamite.
Mount horses, gentlemen, he cried, and by
the eternal Jupiter, we'll recover the prisoners. A
rum one, that Mr. Gentleman-volunteer! Come,
mount, mount, and keep the chase warm, till a
better
force can follow us. There's a regiment of
foot billeted in the village belowlet some one
gallop down for a reinforcement; the rest follow
me. If we can't fight the vagabonds, why, by the
eternal Jupiter, we can dog them.
The proposal of captain Caliver was responded
to by such as could think without alarm of
following
the fierce marauders, by midnight, into their
native forests; and in a surprisingly short space of
time, they set out, six in number, to pursue on
the course of the fugitives, and keep them within
striking distance, until assistance should arrive. A
messenger was immediately despatched to the
village
,
and some two or three of those gaping
supernumeraries
,
whose intrusion into the house has
been already mentioned, volunteered to carry the
alarm among the neighbouring settlements, and
thus rouse the whole country to pursuit and
vengeance
.
The little party of six, headed by young
Falconer
and Caliver, issuing from the park, began the
chase by galloping up the road, already made
familiar
to the leaders by the memorable adventure
of the 4th. Assistance was nearer at hand than
they thought; and almost before the trampling of
their horses had died on the ear, a large party of
mounted men, with Colonel Falconer at their head,
halted at the gate. In obeying the counsel of the
young refugee to leave Hawk-Hollow without
delay
,
this individual had not been governed alone by
fears for his personal safety. The appearance of
Hyland Gilbert so near to the scene of festivity,
convinced him, as strongly as did his urgent
exhortations
to fly, that the ferocious band of Hawks,
though supposed long since to have effected its
escape, was yet lying concealed in the
neighbourhood
,
meditating some deed of violence, though
what that was, unless to burn Gilbert's Folly to the
earth, as the only way of wreaking vengeance
upon him, he could not pretend to divine. It was
enough, however, that such an enemy was at
hand; and, accordingly, when he rode to the
village
,
it was with the purpose of summoning such
a force to the valley as should protect its
inhabitants
,
if it did not effect the still better object of
ridding it from such visitants for ever. He sought
the commander of the regiment already spoken of;
and his representations, added to the weight of his
character, were enough to cause that officer to
take instant measures for the protection of
Hawk-Hollow
.
A party of sixty picked men, mounted
for the occasion, was put under his disposal; while
several other companies were ordered to follow on
foot. While on the road, he was met by the
messenger
sent by the captain of cavalry, with the
stunning intelligence of the outrage, as it has been
already related. Inflamed by the news, the party
put spurs to their horses, and were soon in the
Hollow. They paused at the park-gate, just long
enough to communicate with the house, and
ascertain
that the pursuit was already begun by the
bridegroom; and then resuming their route, they
were in a few moments beyond the swelling ridge
that shut in the Hollow to the north.
CHAPTER VIII.
Thought he, `This is the lucky hour;
Wine works, when vines are in the flower
This crisis, then, I'll set my rest on,
And put her boldly to the question.'
Butler
.
You saw the mistress, I beheld the maid:
You loved, I loved.
Merchant of Venice
.
The
outlaws were, in the meanwhile,
proceeding
on their course with a celerity that left them
little to dread from pursuit; and, indeed, all their
measures indicated that their plan had been laid
with as much forethought as audacity. The
captive
maidens, after being borne for the space of a
mile or more, in the arms of their captors, were
placed upon horses previously in waiting; and
then, supported by an athletic attendant on each
hand, were hurried forward with even greater
rapidity
than before. Before this arrangement was
effected, and while they were yet in the
neighbourhood
of Hawk-Hollow, a change came over the
spirit of one of the prizes, not more advantageous
to herself than it was agreeable to the wild band
who were somewhat weary of her lamentations.
This was Phobe, whose terrors, instead of abating,
grew more clamorous, with every bound of the
steed that bore her; and which, having begun
with sobs and piteous ejaculations, increased to
something like positive outcries; until, at last, the
man who carried her, losing all patience, and
unlocking
lips that seemed previously made of stone,
muttered, or rather whispered in her ear, but in no
very amiable accents,
Consarn the woman! what are you squalling
a'ter? Hold your foolish tongue, Phbe Jones, or
But the sound of a threatening voice was by no
means fitted to allay the damsel's fear, or
paralyze
the member it had set so vigorously in
motion
.
She interrupted the menace with a still louder
shriek, adding, Oh lord, good gentleman, pray
don't murder me!
Gentleman! cried the other with a kind of
snort, evidently designed for a laugh; Well, I
reckon, I am a sort of, as well as another. But
what's the contraction? Who's talking of
murdering
?
I'm an honest feller, Phbe Jones, and you
know it; and these here refugees are all honest
fellers, too, as ever you'd wish to see. Now,
Phbe, just scratch your nose, and be quiet; for
you know I won't hurt you.
Lord! said Phbe, in surprise, don't I know
that voice?
Why, I reckon, replied the other, with a more
strongly marked chuckle than before; but, mind
you, no talking above breath; for that's agin orders,
and captain Gilbert's a screamer.
Captain Gilbert! said Phbe, in mortal terror.
Oh Dancy Parkins, don't let him kill me, and I'll
never abuse you no more!
As he spoke, she banished so much of her fear
as to fling an arm around the horseman's neck, as
if to insure the protection she entreated; and the
action, as well as the appeal, went so effectually to
his heart, that he answered forthwith, Well I
won't,I won't let him hurt you, I won't, consarn
me!You see, Phbe Jones, he added, with the
same giggle which had marked the manly
assurance
of protection, I'm the man for you, a'ter all:
I told you, you'd be coming round, some day or
other, for all your saying you despised me.
But an't I to be murdered, Dancy? demanded
the wench, dolefully: Oh! that ever I should be
among the bloody Hawks! They say, they scalp
women and children, as if they were no more than
great Indians!
They're not half such fellers as people say,
replied Dancy: the only murdering I ever
knowed
of among them, was that of Andy Parker; and
that I uphold to be salt for gruel,fair grist for
cheating the miller. He chalked me down like a
fool, me and Tom Staples, being all old friends, or
sort of; and so hanging was good for him. But I
tell you what, Phbegive us a buss, and
we'
ll be
married, as well as our betters.
I won't do no such thing, said the damsel,
stoutly. I don't like you no better than I ever
did; for I don't see you're any better-to-do in the
world than you was; and, besides, I won't have no
tory.
I reckon, said Dancy Parkins, I'm no more
a tory than the lieutenantthat's him you used to
suppose was Mr. Hunter, and a poor painter; and
there's your betters, the Captain's daughter, jumps
at him.
She don't! said Phbe, with indignation;
and don't you go to say, Miss Kitty Loring will
have any such vagabondy, poor fellow.
Poor! cried Dancy; why he's as rich as a
king, and a mighty fine gentleman, too, for all he's
consorting just now with these here refugees. He's
got a grand plantation, as big as all Hawk-Hollow,
with a thousand niggurs, where he raises sugar by
the ship-load, and molasses beyond all reckoning,
and, as I hear, good Jamaiky spirits. He's to
make me a sort of I-dunna-what-you-call-it; but
I'm to manage the niggurs, and make a fortun'.
They say, no man ever sets foot on a sugar
plantation
,
without making a fortun' out of it,that is,
excepting the niggurs. So, Phbe Jones, there's
no great use in despising me. It's a fine country,
that island of Jamaiky; and consarn the bit of a
hard winter they ever hear of there. So now,
Phbe, don't be a fool and refuse me no more;
for I'm mighty well-to-do in the world.
And thus the enamoured Dancy pursued his
claims to the love of his prisoner, who had been
hard-hearted enough to frown upon him of old,
while a labourer on Captain Loring's estate, and
before the Captain's daughter had, by rewards and
promises of further favour, prevailed upon him to
take charge of the meaner fields of the widow.
There was some presumption, at least Phbe
thought so, in his daring to raise eyes to
her;
for besides being without any personal attractions
whatever, he was, to all intents, a gawky and
stupid
clod-hopper, with but little prospect of ever
rising beyond the condition of a mere hireling, or,
at best, a peasant of the lowest class; and
accordingly
,
the damsel repelled him with extreme scorn,
as a person unworthy to brush the dust from her
shoes.
But the case was now altered, or seemed to be.
In the first place, the scornful beauty was in his
hands, and had wit enough, though by no means
overcharged with that brilliant commodity, to
perceive
that his friendship was better than his enmity;
and, in the second, his appointment ot the
important
and lucrative office of
He-did-not-know-what-to-call-it
,
on a sugar plantation, where they raised
molasses by the ship-load, and good Jamaica
spirits
,
was a circumstance to elevate him vastly in
her consideration; for her affections not being of
a romantic or sentimental turn, she ever held
herself
ready to bestow them upon any body who, in
her own favourite phrase, `was well enough to-do
in the world to make a lady of her.' She listened,
therefore, with complacency to his arguments,
which he pressed with as much ardour as he was
capable of; and by the time they reached the place
where she was to exchange a litter in his arms for
a seat on a side-saddle, she had so far recovered
from her fears, that she might have told him in the
words, and with more than the sincerity, of Juliet,
Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
In the course of his communications, for he
became
wondrous frank and confiding, as he
perceived
her grow more favourable to his suit, he
made her acquainted with some of the mysterious
causes that led to the outrage, and the extent of his
own agency in it.
When the young Gilbert fled from Hawk-Hollow,
it was with a sorrowing spirit and a bleeding frame.
The wound was, it is true, neither dangerous, nor,
in fact, very severe; but he was left to endure it
among woods and rocks, afar from assistance,
except
such as could be rendered by his wild
associates
,
who were themselves reduced to
extremities
,
so keen and fierce was the spirit with which
they were hunted, though unsuccessfully, during
the first week after their flight.
The sufferings of the young man were, in
consequence
,
neither light nor few; and they were
aggravated by anguish of spirit, which became a
withering despair, when Dancy Parkins, the only
individual with whom he could communicate in
the valley, brought him intelligence that Catherine
had been taken away, and, as was currently
believed
,
for the purpose of being united to her
affianced
lover, afar from the reach of danger or
opposition
.
VOL. II.H
His condition became such that it was no
longer possible to remove him from the
concealment
where he lay, even when the abatement of
all pursuit opened a path of escape to his
companions
,
and when they looked daily for orders to
proceed, or disband,the removal of the chief
object
for which they were sent to the district, and
the commands imposed upon them to commit no
outrages, leaving no argument for remaining
longer.
While he lay in this dangerous condition, the
fierce Oran, whose bosom yearned over him as
the youngest, and, after himself, the last of his
father's
children, read the secrets of his spirit; and,
seeing no other means of saving his life, he
formed
,
so soon as the sudden return of Catherine to
the valley appeared to render the scheme feasible,
the bold resolution of carrying her off, and thus
defeating the only scruples in the way of Hyland's
happiness. His own heart was a rock, and he
smiled grimly as he thought of the affection of
woman; but he had learned to love his brother,
and knew that the passion he derided was
consuming
his spirit within him. I will give him his
gew-gaw puppet, he muttered, as he sat one night
watching by Hyland's couch(it was a bed of
fern spread on a rock, on the naked hills, with
only a thatch of hemlock boughs to shelter him
from winds and dews, and a fire in the open air
to light the wretched den:) I will give him his
wish.He mutters her name in his sleep, and he
sobs as he speaks it. Poor fool! he said truehe
is unfit for this life of the desert, and his heart is
warm to all God's creatures. Why should I seek
to make it as fierce and bitter as my own? Let
him to the island again, and the girl with himit
will be better: he was made to be happy.
When he first announced his scheme to Hyland,
the youth, to his surprise, strongly and vehemently
opposed it, as being a violence and wrong not only
to Catherine, but to himself: but when the news
was brought him that the wedding-day was fixed
and nigh at hand, and he saw that he must act
now or never, his resolution and feelings
experienced
a sudden change. He thought over again
and again all the evidences he had traced of
Catherine's
aversion to the union, and he added the
few and precious revealments of her regard for
himself: he remembered her wild and broken
expressions at that hour of parting which had made
her acquainted with the depth of his love, and
perhaps
taught her more than she had dreamed before
of the condition of her own: he pictured her in his
imagination, the fair, the beautiful and the good,
driven into the arms of one as incapable of
appreciating
her worth as he was undeserving her love:
he thought of his peaceful island-home, and the
paradise it would become, when she whom he
adored should sit with him under its arbours of
palms, or walk over its shelly beaches: he thought
these things, and persuaded himself that fate called
for, and heaven would sanction, the violence,
that he acted not so much for himself as for her,
and that she would forgive the friendly audacity
that brought her release and happiness together.
He rose from his leafy couch, and in secret and
by night crept back to the valley. The presence
of Colonel Falconer filled him with affright and
horror; for that had been concealed from him,
and he knew by the devil of malice that glittered
in Oran's eye, that his father's hall was designed
to be stained with the blood of his father's foe.
Accident gave him the means of preventing this
dreadful catastrophe, while wandering over those
scenes which reminded him of Catherine, and
debating
in fear and anguish of mind, whether even
she was worthy to be purchased at the price of
murder. This obstacle removed, there still
remained
another. Fear and disaffection, resulting
in a measure from inactivity, had thinned his
brother's
band; and they refused to strike a blow so
bold and dangerous by daylight, when the
smallness
of their number could be seen at a glance,
and their retreat as easily intercepted as followed.
An effort was made to delay the ceremony until
night, by throwing difficulties in the path of the
clergyman; and this duty had been committed to
Dancy, who succeeded beyond the expectations
and even the hopes of his employers; while men
were stationed in different parts of the grounds, to
take advantage of any accident which might carry
the bride afar from her attendants. At the very
moment when Catherine wandered farther than
usual from her friends, and wept at being hindered
and recalled, she had approached the concealment
of one of the party, and would have been seized
on the spot, had not the man's heart failed him.
It seemed as if destiny were driving her towards
a path of escape, of which she had an instinctive
perception, just at the moment when it was closed
against her footsteps.
These particulars,or at least the leading
outlines
,Dancy
communicated to the object of his
own fervent but unromantic affections; and
Phbe was astounded with the discovery of her
mistress's private attachment, if such it was, and
still more so when Dancy, taking
that
for granted,
assured her of his belief that Catherine was privy
to the whole design. However, she did not trouble
herself to pursue Catherine's story much farther.
She heard enough to satisfy her that Mr. Hunter
Hiram Gilbert, as she called him, `who painted
such lovely fine pictures, and had a thousand
niggurs
to raise sugar, and molasses, and Jamaica
spirits, was as good a husband as one might meet
of a summer's day; and for her part, she did not
know, she could not say, she would not pretend to
be certain,but she was quite sure she never meant
to say, that Dancy Parkins was altogether
despisable
.'
H 2
CHAPTER IX.
Beshrew me but I love her heartily;
For she is wise, if I can judge of her;
And fair she is, if that mine eyes be true;
And true she is, as she has proved herself;
And therefore, like herself, wise, fair and true,
Shall she be placed in my constant soul.
Merchant of Venice
.
When
Catherine recovered her consciousness,
or rather woke from utter insensibility, (for it was
long before her mind regained its full tone,) she
was mounted upon a horse on which she was
supported
by two men, one riding on each side, who
sustained her on the saddle, and directed the steps
of her palfrey. She began to speak, but her words
were wails, low and faint, and half lost amid the
sough of the breeze, and the crash of pebbles under
the horses' feet; and, indeed, it was soon apparent
that she had exchanged a state of dreamless
lethargy
only for one of partial delirium. To this condition
she had been fast verging for several days, during
all which time, both asleep and awake, her mind
had been in a state of constant tension, enduring jar
after jar, and blow after blow, until its fraying
fibres were one by one giving way, and a few
narrow threads alone were all that kept it from
the snap that ends in madness. Sleeplessness is a
disease, which sometimes is prolonged, until
insanity
or death puts a close to the scene. The mind
does not always slumber with the body: and in
such instances, the spirit consumes amid the
visions
and dreams of night, as fast as amid the
torments
of day, until it lapses into the oblivion of
dissolution or mental derangement. Such had been
the case with the Captain's daughter: even
slumber
had brought no release to her spirit; and the
last shock, combining in effect with a long train of
benumbing influences, had reduced it to a
condition
in which it hovered between imbecility and
distraction.
Though retaining an impression of the scene in
which she had lately played so chief a part, it was
faint, vague, and broken by other recollections of
other scenes; and though some of her accents
betrayed
a childish joy at feeling herself in motion
through the open air, she was apparently
incapable
of forming any but the most imperfect and
bewildered
conception of where she was, whither
going, and for what purpose. Occasionally, she
murmured words that seemed those of grief and
entreaty; and, at such times, her father's name
was on her lips, as if she implored those riding at
her side to carry her to him. By and by,
however
,
her words became fainter and fewer; then
she uttered sobs, and those only at intervals; and
at last, these ceasing also, she sank again into
unconsciousness
,
and was maintained on her seat
only with the greatest difficulty.
In consequence of this unexpected impediment,
the speed of the fugitives became gradually less
and less; but as they were already at a
considerable
distance from the valley, and had no reason
to apprehend immediate pursuit, this circumstance
created no alarm, and was, in fact, a cause of no
little private satisfaction to many, the road being
exceedingly rugged, and the night waxing darker
and darker as the moon sunk lower in the west.
Suddenly, however, as the headmost of the party
toiled slowly over the crest of a hill, the wind
swept from the rear a sound of voices, followed
almost instantly by the explosion of fire-arms, and
these again by loud shouts.
`Sessa! let the world slide!'  cried the voice
of Sterling, whose cow's dead now? So much
for not killing the men, and carrying off the
women
!
Peace, parrot! said Oran Gilbert, lifting
Catherine
from her horse, (for he was one of those
who supported her,) and flinging her into the
volunteer's
arms. Bear her to the top of the hill,
nay, gallop on till you strike the river, and
Figs and furies! cried Sterling, with drunken
astonishment; do you make me a chamber-maid?
Away, fool! follow the other,follow Dancy.
And with that, the refugee, turning his horse,
galloped down the hill towards the scene of
conflict
,
leaving Sterling, not yet completely
sobered
,
to make his way after Dancy Parkins and
Phbe, who were in full flight, as well as he could,
cumbered by the weight of Catherine, and
perplexed
by certain indications which White Surrey gave
of misliking the additional burthen imposed upon
him.
`Sessa, let the world slide!'  he exclaimed,
here's a coil with a wench, dead or half-witted!
Ha! she stirs!
`Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Who is already sick and pale with grief.'
Shame on thee, White Surrey! hast thou no more
respect for the ladies? Now were not this the
lieutenant's white-faced RosalindOons! they
are at it! Well, the better part of valour shall
prevail; and so, fair soul, we'll be jogging. But
where's that bottle of brown Sherry I clapped into
Tiqueraque's pocket?
Paucas palabras!
I will
have mercy upon thee'thou shall taste of my
bottle; if thou hast never drunk wine afore, it
will go near to remove thy fit.' 'Slife, I will be
merciful, and medicinate thy lips a little. Marry,
I am `a brave god, and bear celestial liquor.' Now,
White Surrey, my brother, handle thy legs
peaceably
,
or I will knock thee over the mazzard.
Fight, Hawks! and sing, Leonidas!
The worthy volunteer, with these words, after
having taken a bountiful draught from a flagon
which was the first thing he laid hands on in the
moment of assault, and sprinkling, doubtless with
a humane and generous motive, some of its
contents
upon the face and lips of the maiden, gave
spurs to his horse, and was soon beyond the reach
of bullets and the sound of shouts.
The commotion, such as it was, was soon over.
The party of Caliver and Falconer, urging their
horses to the utmost, had suddenly, and
unexpectedly
to themselves, found themselves in contact
with the stragglers of the tory band; and as these
fled the moment they observed the pursuers, the
gallant officers fired their pistols and rushed
forward
with renewed ardour, until checked by the
opposition of the main body. They were met with
fury, and, being overpowered, were almost
instantly
put to flight; after which the retreat of the
outlaws
was resumed.
In the meanwhile, the shots and yells with which
the contest began, the change of position, or
perhaps
the wine which had been sprinkled on her
lips, woke Catherine from her torpor; and slowly
collecting her senses, she became at last sensible
of her situation. Her recollection of the events of
the evening was still confused; but she
remembered
enough of the bridal, and its violent
termination
,
to know that she was afar from her father's
roof, and that each moment saw her carried still
further. She felt, too, that she was grasped in the
arms of some powerful horseman, whose character
might be imagined from the heartless, or drunken,
nonchalance with which, while supporting a
fainting
and almost lifeless female, and hearing the
uproar of mortal conflict just behind him, he yet
trolled to the night-air some further stanzas of that
quaint, joyous, and uproarious old ballad, of which
he had given a specimen before in the paddock.
`Back and side go bare, go bare,'
he sang,
`Both foot and hand go cold;
But, belly, God send thee good ale enough,
Whether it be new or old.
I cannot eat but little meat,
My stomach is not good;
But sure I think that I can drink
With him that wears a hood.
Though I go bare, take ye no care,
I am nothing a-cold,
I stuff my skin so full within
Of jolly good ale and old.
Back and side go bare,' &c.
`Now let them drink till they nod and wink,
Even as good fellows should do;
They shall not miss to have the bliss
Good ale doth bring men to:
And all poor souls that have scoured bowls,
Or have them lustily troll'd,
God save the lives of them and their wives,
Whether they be young or old!
Back and side go bare,' &c.
Oh my father, my father! cried Catherine, in
sudden terror, for what dreadful fate have I given
up thy love and protection?
Her accents, feeble as they were, reached the
ears of Sterling; and ceasing his song, he looked
down upon her face, saying, with a ludicrous
assumption
of gravity,
How now, fair Titania, queen of moonshine,
do you speak? `Oh, speak again, bright angel!'
So much for twenty drops of brown Sherry! these
asses did nothing but talk about cold water.
What are you, sir? and whywhy do you,
thus hold me?
Egad, for no very good reason I know, seeing
that I could not hold my own prisoner, and am but
a milk-livered loon to hold the game of young
Sparrow-Hawk. Thousand devils! knew I but
where to turn White Surrey's snout, I should
exit
by side door, and so vanish, wench and all, were
it only to give him a Roland for his Oliver.
I know not what you mean, said Catherine,
her terror restoring her to full consciousnessI
know not what you mean, she repeated, with
increasing
alarm, as the moon, peeping side-long
through a rent in the clouds, threw a level and
ghastly ray on the countenance of her supporter,
revealing features which her fears converted into
those of an evil being;--but, oh sir! I conjure
you to free me. Do me no harm,suffer me to
escape,let me dismount, though it should be but
to die on the way-side.
Unfortunately,not for her prayer, for no idea
of granting that could have ever entered the
volunteer's
brain,but unfortunately for the maiden
herself, the same ray which revealed his visage to
her gaze fell brightly upon her own, which, although
pallid as death, yet displayed a pair of eyes to
which the excitement of terror gave unusual lustre,
and which instantly converted the drunken
indifference
of Sterling into admiration. He stared at
her for a moment, and then burst out, in the words
of Romeo, and with an emphasis that preserved,
along with his usual dramatic extravagance of
fervour, some little touch of natural
approbation
,
`Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
To twinkle in their spheres, till they return!'
Oho, Master Brook, sweet young Hawk! never
trust me if I do not take thy minion in fair exchange
for my own:
`Follow your function, go!
And batten on cold bits.'
Sweet and beautiful, and thrice beautiful and as
many times angelical, fair soul! he added,
addressing
himself to Catherine, that I have so long
remained insensible to thy charms, trust me, it was
in part owing to the stupidity which I find growing
upon me among the `ruthless, vast and gloomy
woods,' and in part also to the great grief of mind
with which I have been mourning the loss of
another
very tenderly beloved damsel; but chiefly
because thine eyes refused their light, and yonder
moon in like manner. But now, `by yonder
blessed
moon I swear,' I perceive you are ten times
handsomer than the other, ass that I was to
suppose
the contrary; but, however, I was then
thinking
of the lieutenant and sour grapes.Sweet,
angelical soul, you said something about escaping,
and doing you harm, and so on? Now, as to the
harm, rest easy; but look as frightened as you
please,for what's so pretty in a maid as pretty
fear? But as to escaping,you would escape,
then? go free from these villanous, green-coated,
axe-handed, ox-headed, timber-tongued Hawks of
the Hollow, eh? You would give them the slip,
eh?
Assist me but to escape,nay, only permit me
to fly; heaven will bless you for ever, and my
father
oh,
my father!he will never think he has
sufficiently rewarded you.
Such were Catherine's eager expressions,for
although frighted at the strange, and, to her,
inexplicable
apologies and commendations of the man,
she caught at his closing words as at those of a
friend. What, therefore, was her terror, when the
drunken ruffian, exclaiming, Why then, `
Sessa,
let the world slide!' we will give Monsieur the
Hawk Junior the go-by, and roam the world
together
,
added other words to make yet more
plain the sudden design he had formed of carrying
her off for his own exclusive benefit, and
concluded
by attempting to draw his arms more
closely around her.
Yes, thou adorable, delectable creature! he
cried, overflowing with affection, I am tired of
these rude vagabonds, who give one nothing to
drink but brook-water, with which trout, eels,
sunfish
,
terrapins, and other vermin, have been making
free the lord knows how long; and beds of leaves
on a rock, where one may feel snakes creeping
under him all night long. Wherefore I will
decamp
,
and thou shalt decamp with me, and be my
love; and I will love thee to thy heart's content;
and we shall lead the merriest, drollest moonlight
life of it under a bush, that was ever dreamed of
in romance or enacted in tragedy. We will laugh
and play, and drink and dance
`Nor will we miss to have the bliss
Good ale doth bring men to'
and will be the most loving turtles that ever cooed
in a greenwood.
As he spoke, he again attempted (for White
Surrey, charmed with the melody of his master's
tongue, and knowing well, when it was running,
he might take such a liberty, had changed a
jogtrot
VOL. II.I
into a contemplative walk,) to cast his arms
round the maid, who, now awake to the
wretchedness
of her situation, uttered a shriek, and making
a sudden effort, succeeded in throwing herself to
the ground; after which, she fled away with all
her speed. The object of her terror was not slow
to follow; he uttered an oath and a laugh, and
leaping
down, pursued her with such vigour that he
was soon at her side; for the ground was rough
with rocks and bushes, and her strength almost
immediately failed her.
It is not certain that the wretch mediatated any
purpose beyond the mere recovery of his prize;
for, however rude and familiar his new-born
admiration
,
he had hitherto betrayed no inclination
to carry it to the point of absolute rudeness. On
the contrary, he seemed rather to be enacting a
part, according to his constant custom, only that
the wine he had drunk rendered him in all things
more extravagant than usual.
But harmless or not as his intentions might have
been, it is certain that the fear of them drove the
unhappy Catherine to desperation, and filled
another
,
now fast approaching, with the most
dreadful
alarm. This was Hyland Gilbert, who,
hearing
her cries from afar, came rushing up in time
to see her, in the dull light of the moon, drop on
her knees before the volunteer, beseeching him, in
tones that might have melted a heart of stone, to
have pity on her.
Villain! you die! cried Hyland; and leaping
from his horse, and rushing forward, he clapped
a pistol to his ear, and drew the trigger. It flashed
in the pan; but before Sterling could take
advantage
of the failure, the young man dashed it in his
face, and drew another.
Hell and darkness! cried Sterling, furiously,
young malapert, I will twist your neck. And
seizing him by the throat, he cast him violently to
the earth. Of a joyous, and even good-humoured
temperament, there was yet a spice of devilish
vindictiveness in the man's breast; and while
boiling
under the indignity of the blow, and smarting
with rage at such high-handed interference in his
humours by a pragmatic boy, he did not fail to
remember that this was not the first time he had
been baffled by him during the night. Besides, he
was inflamed with liquor, which was enough of
itself to goad him into any act of vengeance.
But he was not destined, that night, to shed the
blood of Hyland Gilbert. The shrieks of
Catherine
had been heard by others as well as her
unhappy
lover, and the flash of the pistol hastened
them to the spot, where he lay struggling in the
grasp of Sterling. A hand more mighty than his
own was soon laid upon Sterling's neck, and as he
was lifted aloft, and then tossed among the flints,
like some mean but vicious breast, which the
hunter
disdains to kill with a weapon, he heard the
voice of the tory captain exclaim,
What, you dog! touch your officer, and a sick
man!What means all this, Hyland? What!
has he harmed the girl? If he have but touched
her with a fingerPaugh!Away with you,
men! why stand you here gaping? On, and
quickly.
The party rode on, leaving, however, besides
the group already in front, one man who led the
horse on which Catherine had been mounted
before
.
The refugee cast a look to the maiden,
she was sobbing in the arms of his brother. He
strode to Sterling and assisted him to rise, not
however without saying, with the sternest accents
of a voice always savage,
But that heaven, or some other power, has
made me to-night cold to blood, I should strike
you, villain, where you stand!
You may do it, said the other, with great
tranquillity. Take your fill to-night; we will run
up the reckoning at another time.
How, drunken fool! do you threaten me!
Faith, not I. Henceforth, I am a man of peace
that is, when we have played the play out.
You're a hard managerbut, now I remember,
we are not on the boards! We will forget and
forgive.
Forgive, rogue! you struck him that was
feebler
than a child; and youBy heaven! if you
have touched that girl but rudely, you were
better
fling you into the river; than await the thanks
in store for you.
A pest upon girls, and the devil take the whole
sex! said Sterling, devoutly.
Peace! and get you to your horse.
Ay, presently, replied Sterling; and as Oran
leaped on his own black steed, Catherine having
been already lifted to the saddle, he pulled a pistol
from his bosom, and aimed it at the unsuspecting
outlaw. Oran Gilbert bounded forward, and
Sterling
lowered his hand.
A miss were certain death, he muttered,
and the shadow was on the moon. `
Sessa,
let
the world slide'to-morrow comes after to-day,
and the longer we fast the richer the feast.
`Nor shall we miss to have the bliss
Good ale'
Good ale? good devils!
`Nor shall we miss to have the bliss
Good blood doth bring men to!'
Now were White Surrey but visible, I should
know what to do: but the beast lifted up his heels,
and was gone a-larking the moment I dismounted.
And these dogs have left me to shift for
myself
,
without even a horse to help me! Wisdom
is at as low an ebb among them as gratitude.
Necessity and vengeance harp on the same string.
Fare thee well, Oran the Hawk; but fly as high
and as wildly as thou wilt, I see the little bee-bird
that shall bring thee to the ground, bleeding.
With these words, he sat down upon a stone,
and there remained until the tramp of the
retreating
horsemen was no longer brought to his ear.
I 2
CHAPTER X.
If you have ears that will be pierced; or eyes
That can be open'd; a heart that may be touch'd;
Or any part that yet sounds man about you;
If you have touch of holy saints or heaven;
Do me the grace to let me 'scape: if not,
Be bountiful, and kill me. You do know,
I am a creature hither ill betray'd
By one whose shame I would forget it were.
Ben Jonson
Volpone, or the Fox.
Catherine
was now so far recovered as to be
able to comprehend her situation in full; and
although
Hyland Gilbert rode at her side, thus
assuring
her of protection from all further rudeness,
her terrors increased, and were mingled with the
most insupportable anguish of spirit. It was in
vain that he conjured her to be composed, and
vainer yet when he sought to pacify her by
expressions
indicative of affection and tenderness.
Take me to my father, Herman, she cried,
clasping her hands, and even endeavouring to
grasp his own. Oh, take me but back, and I
will forgive youI will forgive all!
Be composed, Catherine, I entreat you
But her only answer was, My father! my poor
father!
You shall see him, Catherine. I take you not
from him, but from Henry Falconer.
I will never marry him, cried the unhappy
girl: take me but back and I will tell them all,
and it shall go no further. Take me but back,
and I will forget all,I will forgive all. Take me
but back, and let me die.
In this manner, her mind overcome by but one
thought and one feeling, she murmured prayer
after prayer, and adjuration after adjuration, until
her entreaties became almost frenzied, and Hyland,
alarmed and shocked, half repented the act which
had brought her to such a pass. Her agitation
was not diminished, when Oran, who rode at the
other side, and had for a long time maintained a
stern silence, and apparent disregard of what passed
between them, at last uttered an interjection of
impatience, and bade Hyland ride away, and leave
her to him.
The folly but grows upon her in your
presence
,
he said: it must be checked.
Leave me not, Herman! she cried, starting
so wildly from the rude Oran, that, had he not
arrested
the effort, she would have leaped from the
horse, in the effort to reach him whom she felt to
be her truest protector: leave me not, Herman,
for the sake of the mother who bore you!leave
me not in the hands of any of these rude men!
Fear not, said Hyland, and he conjured Oran
himself to depart. Let the girl come to her,
he added; perhaps Phbe's appearance may
relieve
her.
But even the presence of Phbe, now quite
content
with captivity, (so successful had been the
arguments of her wooer,) failed to banish her
agitation
;
and at last, bewildered and in despair,
incapable
of devising any other means to give her
comfort, Hyland checked his horse and hers, and
assisted her to dismount.
Do with me what you will, Catherine Loring,
he said:I am a fool, a wretch, perhaps a
villain
.
Oh no, no! said the maiden; only take me
back, and all will again be wellall will be
forgotten
.
Nothing again will be well with me, said the
young man, and nothing, I fear me, with you.
Catherine, there is but a moment to decide. In
snatching you from the altar, I did the only thing
in my power to secure happiness to both,or at
least, to secure us from the misery that was falling
on us like a mountain. You hated Henry
Falconer
I didNo, no! not
hate;
it was not hate,
murmured the Captain's daughter.
You hated him, Catherine, andwhy should
I fear to speak it?you loved anotheryou loved
me,
CatherineBy heaven, it is true! I felt it, and
I knew it; else how could I have done this thing?
It is trueand hide it not from yourself, since your
own weal, as well as mine, depends upon your
resolution this moment.
Speak not to me so, oh, for heaven's sake do
not, cried Catherine, weepingI never gave
you cause. Take me only to my father.
To wed with Henry Falconer, and pronounce
a vow your heart forswears?
I will never marry himnever, never! said
Catherine, with vehemence: I would have told
him so, only that my father stood by, and I knew
it would kill him.
Catherine, hear meI am neither traitor nor
outlaw, and though associated with such for a
moment, it is for your sake only.I have wealth,
Catherine,substance enough and a fair name.
Share these with me.
No, no! oh speak not so, said Catherine;
speak to me only of my father, and take me to
him. He loved you well, Mr. Hunter, and you
have not well repaid him.
Choose, Catherine, said Hyland, gloomily;
if you will return to him, it shall be so:I am not
the ruffian to force you a step further against your
will.
Heaven for ever bless you! cried the maiden.
Oh be quick, lest it be too lateTake me back,
take me back!
Yes, take us back, take us back! cried
Phbe, whose weak mind, yielding with facility to
the contagion of Catherine's example, was now as
full of terror as before.
Think once more, Catherine, said the young
Gilbert, with a faltering voiceOf myself I
speak notI will not think what your return may
cause me; but think of what wretchedness it must
inevitably bring to you.Catherine, there is
sunshine
for us in the island.Say but the wordyou
will fly with me!
Never!--Oh my father! take me, Herman, to
my father!
It is well, said the youth, sullenly; but
motioning
as if to assist her to the saddle, you shall
return to him.
What fool's play is this? and why do you
loiter
?
cried Oran Gilbert, riding back to the group,
who had been left by their sudden pause far
behind
:
To horse and to the river!
It cannot be, said Hyland: we have erred,
we have done a great wrong, and must repair
it. Brother, this maiden must be returned to her
friends.
Madman! what do you say? Have her silly,
girlish whimsies to frightened you? Away with
you to the front, and I will fetch her!
I have said it, Oran, rejoined Hyland, in a
firm, though deeply dejected voice. I have
agreed to take her back, and I will do so. If you
will allow me a guard, I will not delay the band a
moment; and will answer for the lives of those
entrusted to me.
Fool and madman! exclaimed the brother, in
a fury, must I force you to your senses? What
ho, there, Hawks! two of you return; and Dancy
Parkins, lift that girl to the saddle, and bear her
off.
Fear not, said Hyland to Catherine, who,
with woman's inconsistency, threw herself into
his arms, the moment she heard the dreaded order.
You but frighten her, brother!Make me not
more wretched than I am, by forcing me to shed the
blood of any of your people.I will shoot any one
who touches her.
Myself, boy? cried his savage brother,
leaping
from his horse. Then pausing, for at his
approach
,
Hyland lowered the weapon he had raised
to make good his words, he said sternly,
Choose for yourself.Bear her along, and be
rewarded by smiles in the morning; take her back
and die, like a mad wolf, in the trap that has
before
maimed you. Mount horse, Dancy Parkins,
and begone; and you, Hyland Gilbert, mount and
follow, or stay where you are and perish.Will
you on? he added, with inexpressible fierceness.
When I have put this lady in safety, but not
before, replied Hyland.
Die then for a fool, or help yourself as you
may, said the elder brother; and mounting his
horse, he instantly galloped out of sight.
None now remained with Hyland save the two
maidens; for even Dancy, awed by the voice of
the refugee, had deserted the once-willing Phbe.
He turned his eyes towards the retreating figures,
as if doubting whether they could wholly desert
him; but he heard the tramp of the steeds ring
farther and fainter each moment, and it was
plain that the incensed Oran had abandoned him
to his fate. He assisted Catherine to mount, and
Phbe likewise; then taking Catherine's bridle in
his hand, he turned the horse's head, and began to
retrace his steps without uttering a word. A
moody silence possessed him, and even Catherine's
voice, now sobbing out her broken gratitude,
failed
to draw from him more than a few sullen
monosyllables
.
It shall be as you will, he said; but let us
speak no more.What matters it now to utter
vain words?
The dejection, nay the despair, of spirit conveyed
by every tone, smote Catherine to the heart; and
had he possessed the art, or the will, to take
advantage
of the feeling which his evident desolation
produced in her bosom, he might yet have won her
to his purpose, and borne her afar from parent and
friend. But he had neither; he heard her
trembling
attempts at kindly utterance, (for it was now
her part to play the soother,) with apparent
indifference
;
and even when she turned her weeping
face towards him, and, in the impulse of real
affection, laid her hand upon his, he drew away as
with scorn or anger.
Their flight had carried them almost to the base
of the mountain; and, obscure as was the night, it
was plainly distinguishable at that spot where the
convulsions of chaotic ages have riven it from the
summit to the base, thus hollowing a pathway for
a broad river under the shade of its majestic crags.
As they turned from it, a pale light glistened among
the pines and oaks of the eastern hill, but so faint
and dim that one could scarce pronounce it the
peep of day-spring. Such, however, it was; fast as
had been the flight, it had been over a road where
absolute rapidity is, even at this day, rather to be
desired than expected; and, had she continued
with the wild band, Catherine would have seen
the sun steal into the sky, ere they had buried her
in the savage recesses where they found their own
cities of refuge.
As the day dawned, however, and long before
the sun was yet seen, wreaths of mist began to
curl along the mountain top, and even to creep
over the river; and before they had ridden much
more than a mile, it was seen rolling along these
lesser uplands that give such beauty to the whole
district, and settling upon the moist woodlands.
This was a circumstance which one in Hyland's
situation might have deemed providential, if
desirous
of avoiding observation. But it is
questionable
whether, while brooding over his melancholy
thoughts, he gave much reflection to the peril that
might attend his return to the haunts of men.
Peril should, at least, have been anticipated; for
whatever had been the check given by the band of
outlaws to the first pursuers, it was not a moment
to be doubted, from the audacity of the pursuit, as
well as the greatness of the outrage, that the chase
would be resumed the moment the pursuers could
add to their numbers. But dejected as was his spirit,
he was not yet reduced to such a state of stupor as
to be wholly unmindful of his safety; and of this he
gave proof by suddenly halting upon a naked hill,
strown over with rocks, and wholly desolate,
though breathing into the mist a world of rich
odour. It was, in fact, covered with a growth
of sweet-fern,a shrub around which the early
thoughts of affection had shed an interest not to
be attached even to the rose or violet, though
henceforth that interest was to be of a melancholy
and painful character. It was the hill on whose
summit he had, scarce an hour before, preserved
her from the grasp of a villain; though this she
knew not, for the mists concealed objects from the
eye, and it was not yet sunrise.
As he paused, he bent forward to listen, and drew
a pistol from his saddle-bow, but instantly returned
it, muttering, It is no matterif they take me,
let it be without bloodshed.
Herman,Mr. Hunter, what is it? cried
Catherine
.
You will not pause now?
Now I must, or never, he said. You are
safe,your friends are at the bottom of the hill;
and unless you would have them murder me in
your sight, I must begone. Farewell, Catherine
Loring: if you can be happy, God grant that you
may be so. I have done you a great wrong; but
I bear that in my bosom which will avenge you.
Farewell, Catherine,farewell, and for ever.
Herman, Herman! murmured the maiden,
turning upon him a countenance of death, and
gasping for utterance.
Farewell, Catherine, he said, wringing her
hand; they are upon us. God bless you
farewell
.
He rode awayit was but a step: the trample
of a body of horse was now plainly heardhe
looked back upon herhis countenance was
bathed
in tears. She stretched forth her arms, and
murmuring, in a broken voice, I will go with
youtake me, Herman, take me!was in a
moment
locked in his own embrace. He snatched her
from the saddle, and, as she clung to his neck,
dashed the spurs into his good roan steed. Had
the words been pronounced a moment earlier,
nay, but an instant, he might have made his
escape
,
and borne her off in safety. But the decision
was as late as it proved to be fatal. Phbe had
already heard the trampling of the approaching
horsemen, and Hyland had called them friends.
She could scarce repress a cry of delight; but
when, catching Catherine's last words, she looked
round and beheld her, as she thought, in the act of
VOL. II.K
being again snatched away, she raised her voice
in a scream that was heard by the most distant of
the approaching party, and was echoed by a shout
coming from fifty voices.
Again Hyland struck the spurs into his horse,
and the fire sparkled from his hoofs as he dashed
down the hill; but fire flashed immediately after
from the hoofs of twenty others, fresher and
perhaps
fleeter.
Shoot not, or you will kill the lady! roared
a voice in his ear.
Surrender, dog, or die! shouted another, who
was indeed no other than Henry Falconer; and
almost in the same instant, as three or four closed
upon the unfortunate fugitive, a strong arm
snatched
the fainting Catherine from his grasp, and a
pistol, held by Falconer, was thrust into his face.
The young Gilbert was weak with wounds and
sickness, and worn out with toil, watching, and
grief; his native spirit was thus in a manner
crushed
and prostrated; and he would perhaps have
yielded himself passively up, if not too bitterly
goaded by the taunts and violence of his captors.
Such was the opinion of two of them, who,
supposing
he had already yielded, withdrew their
hands, that they might give assistance to the
fainting
Catherine, whom captain Caliver had so
fortunately
redeemed from the midst of the fray. But
Gilbert had not yet rendered himself. The sight
of his rival, exulting in his capture, and menacing
him with voice and weapon, inflamed his dying
passions. He turned with sudden fierceness,
checked
and spurred his steed at the same time, and thus
caused him to vault into the air with a violence
which would have speedily released him from
Falconer's
grasp, had not his purpose been rather to
attack than fly. As he executed this feat, he
presented
his own pistol, and drew the trigger. The
explosion of two pistols at once was followed by
the rush of a dozen men to separate the
combatants
;
and the next moment both were seen rolling
upon the ground, Falconer lying clear of the mele,
and Hyland in the hands of the vengeful Sterling,
whose horse, White Surrey, had overthrown the
youth, together with his roan steed.
`Sessa! let the world slide!'  cried the
renegade
,
with a voice of thunder, but a countenance
ashy pale. Here's work for the hangmanI
have him fast enough.
Victoria!
But at this moment, a sudden alarm was
sounded
,
and all who could starting up, they heard a
wild yell sound from the base of the hill to the
north, and the words, pronounced by a voice
strong and clear as a trumpet, Royal Refugees!
charge! and bear them to the ground!
Huzza! shouted the captain of cavalry, here's
the rat running at the lion! Now open your mouths
and swallow 'em! By the eternal Jupiter, we are
five to their one; and more fools they for not
knowing
it. Sweep them from the earth! charge them!
on!
The refugee had relented; the sound of the
pistols
had quickened his steps; but he dreamed not
of the force now arrayed betwixt him and his
abandoned brother. A sheet of fire from twenty
pistols blazed through the mist, as twice as many
enemies rushed against his little band. They
broke at the first fire, and the sounds of pursuit,
both hot and fierce, were soon lost in the distance.
It was not until many hours had elapsed that the
result of the contest, although it could be easily
imagined, was fully known. Two of the refugees
had been killed, and one was taken prisoner; while
the others, abandoning their horses, which were
worn out, and hence easily captured, succeeded in
making their escape to the woods.
In the meanwhile, those who remained upon the
hill busied themselves in securing the unfortunate
Hyland, who was unhurt save by the fall of his
horse, aiding the maidens, and raising young
Falconer
from the earth. This unlucky youth
muttered
a few words as they lifted him, but, to their
horror, almost instantly expired. A pistol bullet
had penetrated his throat, dividing the great
jugular
,
and even shattering the spine. His battles
were fought, and his dream of folly over.
In the recovery of Catherine and the
serving-maid
,
the company of pursuers had effected the
chief object of the expedition; but it was still felt
to be a matter of great importance to destroy the
relics of the refugee band which had haunted the
county so long. The greater number of the
pursuers
,
accordingly, devoted themselves to this
object
,
while enough remained on the hill to take
charge of the rescued females, the prisoners, and
the dead.
The life of Hyland Gilbert, whom his captors,
exasperated by the murder, as they called it, of
Falconer, were at one time on the point of tearing
to pieces, was saved through the firmness of
lieutenant
Brooks; but he was treated with much
indignity
,
and even cruelty, being straightway bound
both hand and foot to his horse, and thus carried
away like the meanest and most desperate of
felons. A pair of rude litters were hastily
constructed
,
in one of which was carried the Captain's
daughter, while the other supported the clayey
corpse of the bridegroom.
These things effected, and the honest Mr.
Sterling
assuming the station assigned him in the centre
of the party, where, although enjoying all
appearance
of liberty, he was yet esteemed a kind of
honourableor, as the phrase should be,
dishonourable
prisoner,
the melancholy cavalcade pursued
its way back to Hawk-Hollow, within a few miles
of which, its leaders stumbled upon Captain Loring
and a party of footmen, over whom he had assumed
the command. It consisted of no less, indeed, than
that identical company of volunteers who had won
such immortal distinction on the fourth of July, by
their valiant attack, with empty muskets, upon the
flying Oran. The reappearance of their enemy
was enough to recall them to the field of battle,
though they came somewhat of the latest; and
uniting themselves with a party of countrymen
and domestics whom Captain Loring had
previously
assembled, and whom he was now gallantly
leading to the field of honour, they yielded to his
energy the obedience he seemed to consider a
matter of right, and thus constituted him
commander-in-chief
,
without much regard to the claims
of their own elected officers.
The morning was still misty, so that lieutenant
Brooks and his party stumbled upon this
formidable
detachment without seeing it, or suspecting
its existence; and had it not been for the
sharpness
of his ears in detecting the tones of Captain
Loring's voice upon a hill he was just ascending,
it is highly probable the magnanimous volunteers
would have wiped out the disgrace of their flight
before a single enemy, by pouring a warm and
well-directed fire into a superior body of friends.
He paused a little,for he rode at some distance
in front of his party,and distinctly heard
Captain
Loring's voice giving the following orders to
his volunteers:
Hark! said the veteran; adzooks, you may
hear their horse now as plain as the cocking of a
sentinel's musket at midnight. Halt, ye vagabonds,
and prepare for action. When I say
prepare,
I
mean, adzooks, be ready to swinge 'em. You,
Dan Potts, John Small, and Peter Dobbs, detach
K 2
yourselves to the right, six rods from the road,
and lay by to flank 'em: Dick Sturgem, Sam King,
and Absalom Short, wheel to the left, and do the
same thingand mind you, you scoundrels, don't
any of you be frightened; for, adzooks, I despise
a coward above all created things. And harkee,
you scoundrels, no gabbling; hold your tongues
like soldiers, and talk with your muskets: that's
what old general Spitfire used to tell us`Sons,'
said he, `a soldier should always keep his tongue
in his musket.' So be off, and stand fast, flanks;
and bang away as soon as you see any thing to
bang at. Centre, attend: as soon as you hear the
flanks at it, you are to crack away, and give no
quarterno quarter, you scoundrels, do you
hear!
At any other moment, the young lieutenant
would have been amused at the enthusiasm and
tactics of the veteran of the Indian wars; but this
was not a moment for jest. He rode forward,
hailing the Captain by name; and the old soldier
soon forgot his rage and his followers together, to
weep in the arms of his recovered child.
CHAPTER XI.
2d Clown.
But is this law?
1st Clown.
Ay, marry is't; crowner's-quest law.
Hamlet.
We
draw a curtain over the scene of distress
displayed in Gilbert's Folly, when the body of
Henry Falconer, late the gayest of its inmates,
was laid at the feet of his father and sister; and
pass to that which followed, when a justice of the
peace, acting in the place of a coroner, assembled
a jury of inquest around the bloody couch, to
determine
from the melancholy story of the dead,
the fatal responsibility of the living. The official
was a personage who exercised, along with the
duties
of a magistrate, the equally dignified functions
of mine host of the Green Tree Tavern; and was,
indeed, no less a man than that rival of Elsie Bell,
whose formidable opposition, many years before,
had completed the downfall of the Traveller's Rest.
He was now a man of substance, portly in person,
and inflated by the dignity of office into a certain
dignity of manner; his step was like the roll of a
ship, and when he breathed, it was with a forcible
and majestic expiration of breath, like the snort of
a war-horse. He had been noticed, as he advanced
in the world, for the independence,or, to speak
more strictly, the tyranny with which he
conducted
himself among his guests; not, indeed, that he
ever beat, or even committed them, as, in virtue
of his office, he might have done; but because, as
he said, he heartily `despised peing pottered mit
'em.' He was not austere or quarrelsome of
disposition
,
but he was a lover of his ease in his inn;
and his despotism was shown less in violent
opposition
than in contemptuous indifference of all
humours save his own. He abhorred all
faultfinding
,
but as he equally detested the trouble of
reprehending it, he devised a scheme by which
discontent was either nipped in the bud, or severely
reproved as soon as made manifest, and all
without
any labour on his own part. He caused to be
painted on his sign-board, having daubed off the
green tree to make room for it, the following
cabalistic
legend,
Der ist glcklich, welcher zufrieden ist.
which he was accustomed to translate,
viva voce,
to all incapable of understanding it, in a
quaternion
as remarkable for its expressive simplicity as
for its philosophic comprehensiveness:
He vich is vise
Neffer grumples nor cries;
He vich is neither vise nor ciffil
May go to the diffil.
This,that is to say, the original morceau,as
he justly conceived, contained a standing answer
for all grumblers, and by being in such a
conspicuous
situation, served as a warning to them
beforehand
;
while, at the same time, if a guest
chanced to forget its existence, it only needed the
philosophic Schlachtenschlager (for that was the
dignitary's name,) to point to it with his finger, and
demand, `Fat does that mean?' to bring him to
reason. At all events, his translation was always
at hand, in case of extremity, and was of such
supreme
efficacy in laying all evil spirits by the heels,
that he used to declare with triumph, `It fas neffer
needs to say it twice.'
Such was the functionary who now introduced
his assistants into the chamber of death, exulting
in his own importance and his success in
completing
the number against all the difficulties
resulting
from the confusion into which the county
had been thrown by the second appearance of the
refugees.
I do afer, on my faith, gentlemen, he said;
wiping his brows, as he entered, I had more
trouple making you up than is goodt for nothing.
As for that Jake Sheeps fat run afay, I fill commit
him, the fillain.
Ay, Squire, when you catch him, said one of
the party, who, although as coarse in appearance
as the others, (all being, save himself, ordinary
farmers and ignoramuses, such as could be picked
up in a hurry,) but who soon proved himself
possessed
of more brain than all the others together,
when you catch him, Squire. But harkee,
Schlachtenschlager; concerning this forcing
me
on
a jury of inquest,'tis a sort of a breach of
privilege
.
As an attorney at law, I should be
considered
exempt; for if there's no statute for
exemption
,
why there's custom, my old boy, and I'll
mulct you in damages. Botheration, Squire, you
should know enough law to steer clear of a
lawyer
.
T'at for your law! said the magistrate, and
your lawyer too: I knows my pusiness. And if
you grumples and calls me `old poy,' it vill pe
vorse for you; for old poy means the tyfel, and if
you calls me tyfel, mine friend Affidafy
Tush, said the lawyer, it means no such thing.
But as you have nabbed me, why make haste with
this stupid business, and be done. Look at the body,
guess your guess out, and let me be gone.
`He vich is vise,'
muttered the justice; but was interrupted by Mr.
Affidavy crying, bluffly,
The devil take your verses. Come, let's to
business
.
Now, Squire, you `know your business,'
you never, I reckon, held an inquest before in
your life;how do you begin?
How do I pegin? said the official, scratching
his head; fy, I reckons, ve must have a talk
apout it, and then say, the man vas murdtered.
The deuce you must? Why that's prejudging
the case altogether. How do you know the man
was murdered? where's your witnesses?
Vitnesses! said Schlachtenschlager; fy, I
reckons the case is clear enough mitout 'em.
Ah, I thought you'd say so, cried the other;
but that won't do. Where's the murderer?
Vy, I committed him.
Where's the prisoner, Dancy Parkins?
Vy, I committed him along mit the other.
Where's the informant, that vagabond(I
reckon, he'll be a witness for the Commonwealth)
that stripe-coat fellow, StirkStick,no,
Sterling's
his name?
Vy, I committed him, too.
The devil you did? Well, where are the
officers
,
the soldiers, the volunteers, and all the rest
that were present?
Vy, chasing the refugees, to pe sure.
Well, so I thought. Now, I'll tell you what you'll
have to do: just send off as fast as you can for that
fellow Sterling, and Dancy, and half a dozen others,
and adjourn till they come; which will give me time
to run down to the Traveller's Rest, and
administer
on old Elsie Bell's estate, or see what there is
to administer on.
Administer on old Elsie? fat the tyfel! is the
old fitch teadt?
As dead as a herring, said Affidavy; and
there's another job for you. They say, some one
told her, the defunct here, Colonel Falconer's son,
was shot by young Gilbert; and the harridan
screeched, and fell dead with fright.
Mine soul! said the justice, they're all typing.
There's the Captain's daughter here,they say
she's tying too. I vant to take her teposition; but
Dr. Muller says she can n'ither speak nor hear.
Well, said the attorney, you see there's
nothing
to be done here at present. So, adjourn's
the word, and down to hold an inquest on old
Elsie. She has been looking up in the world
lately
,
and they say she'll leave something. I intend
therefore to administer, or see about itand by
the way, Squire, we may discover something there
in relation to the murderer. He lived in her house;
and, there's no doubt, the tories made it a place of
rendezvous. We can come up here and finish
afterwards
.
Fell, I don't know, said Schlachtenschlager;
it's all vone, except for the trouple of going and
coming. But fere's Jake Musser? he added, in
sudden alarm; I declare ve're not all here!
Fy, Jake, fere have you peen? he continued, as
the individual, whose absence he had just
discovered
,
entered the apartment.
Vy, at Elsie Pell's;I stopped a moment to
get a trink; but old Elsie vas sick, and the plack
girl vas in a fear, and
Sick! cried Affidavy, a'n't the old goose
dead? 'Pshaw! why then we'll go on with the
inquest, and say no more about it. I thought there
was a job there for somebody; but, it seems, it is
only for the doctor. Well, Squire, are you
ready
?
Yes, said the official; but now, Mr.
Affidafy
,
fat shall we do for witnesses?
Tush, said the man of law, that's neither here
nor there.
Fy, you said, it wouldn't do mitout 'em!
Oh, that's according to circumstances, and
here we have circumstances enough to hang the
whole county.
Fell, then, said the magistrate, we'll pring
it in a case of murder. Are you all agreedt? Fat
says you, Peter Pork?
Why, I dunna, said Peter, but I reckon so.
Fat says you, Thomas Pork?
Why, I dunna; but I go with Peter.
Fat says you, Jacob Musser?
Fy, the same: but I reckon the Captain mought
send us up something to dtrink.It's a very pretty
pody.
Never mind the pody, Jacob. Fat says you,
Jack Darpy?
Why, I'm no so clear in the matter;I'm
ag'in' all hanging.
Fy, that's none on your pusiness, said the
magistrate, assuming an air of dignity; for you
see, John, the coroner's jury is not the hanging
jury.
Well, Squire, said the nonconformist, I reckon
I know that as well as any body. But, you see, I've
had a talk with the quakers on this matter, and I'm
coming to think it's ag'in' the law of scriptur' to
bring a man to the gallows. And you see, the
matter all rests on our shoulders; for if we say
murder for our 'quest, why then the grand jury
sings the same song for their indictment, and the
petty jury just follows suit. It's just like sticking
three bricks on an end; if you kick one, why down
goes the second, and clack goes t'other. And
more-somover
,
what Squire Affidavy says I stick to: I
don't know the man's murdered, not an iota,
without
some one to swear on black and white.
Fy, take a look at him, John, said the Squire
in a heat; he's deadt, a'n't he? and he has a pig
hole in his neck, ha'n't he? and fat more fould you
haff? You're always preeding trouble, John
Darpy
!
Well, I dunna, said John; the man mought
ha' shot himself; for they say he was a peeler at
the bottle, for such a young un; and when folks
drinks, there's no saying what'll come of it: it's
just as much as saying, `Clear the course, here
goes for the devil!'Squire Affidavy, what do you
say to that?
Hemreplied the man of law, looking at his
elbows, which were somewhat of the whitest, with
an attempt at humour, that faded in a moment
before
a look of sullenness and anger, I say, that
you're a fool, though you stumble upon wisdom
now and then by accident. But none of your sly
winks and blinks: we all know you have not brain
enough for drinking. But stop; we've carried this
joke far enough, and the fun is over. Send down
stairs for the girl Phoebe Jones: she was on the
ground when the shot was fired, and we must
take her testimony.
Fy, now I remember, so she fas, muttered the
magistrate; but added, with a sigh like the sough
of a north-wester, Put it is a great trouple to
swear a voman.
The testimony of Phbe was, however, by no
means so satisfactory as was expected. It is true,
she professed herself able to swear that Mr.
Hunter
Hiram Gilbert shot Mr. Falconer; but it soon
appeared she was as ready to swear he had shot
herself, and some dozen other unfortunate persons
into the bargain. In truth, the dreadful conclusion
of an adventure which she had been brought, at
VOL. II.L
one moment, almost to consider an innocent and
agreeable frolic,the condition of her mistress,
from whose bed-side she had been summoned,
and the spectacle of the ghastly corse of the
bridegroom
before her eyes, more than half turned her
brain. She answered therefore by yea and nay,
and just as the question indicated the reply; until
Mr. Affidavy, a man of some little tact in his
profession
,
although low and debauched habits had
ruined his prospects and reputation together,
thought fit to interfere, and by a little
management
,
made it obvious, even to the dull brain of
Schlachtenschlager, that the girl, although an
actor
in the tragedy, knew no more of its details
from her own observation, than they themselves.
They were relieved from their dilemma,
however
,
by the sudden appearance of lieutenant
Brooks, who delivered a brief and clear account
of the catastrophe, as far as he had witnessed it
himself; and his testimony left it no longer to be
doubted that the unfortunate defunct had fallen in
consequence of a pistol-shot fired from a weapon
in the hands of Hyland Gilbert. He produced the
instrument, which, as well as the pistol discharged
by the deceased, he had picked from the ground,
and now delivered, along with their fellows, and a
pair taken from Sterling, to the magistrate,
averring
that they were in the condition in which he
had found them.
A very pretty pistol, said the official; but
how is this Mr. Lieutenant? did the young fellow
fire them all?
The soldier stared his honour in the face, and
smiled; but his eye fell on the body of his friend,
and the flash of humour faded into clouds.
This weapon, said he, touching one, I
presume
to be that by which Mr. Falconer was slain.
It was picked from the ground by Mr. Gilbert's
side; the fellow to it, was found in the holsters
attached to Gilbert's saddle. This, he added,
pointing to another, belonged to my
unfortunate
friend, and was that with which he shot at the
prisoner.
Fat! cried the official, did
he
shoot, too?
Undoubtedly: I plainly distinguished two
explosions
,
the one immediately after the other.
Fy then, mine Gott! said Schlachtenschlager,
looking round upon his assistants with an air of
unutterable sagacity, this, mine friends, does
ferry
much alter the case. It vas not murder, but a
fight. Who fires the pistol first?
Sir, that is impossible to say. But allow me
to suggest a doubt whether that is necessary to be
inquired into. With deference, I should suppose
the object of this inquest would be simply to
determine
who shot the pistol that killed the
deceased
;
leaving all other questions to be determined
by other tribunals.
'Pshaw! said Affidavy, who seemed to derive
no little private amusement from the ignorance of
the magistrate, when suffered to run its own
course; you have spoiled the sport. The young
gentleman is, however, right, Squire, and
Holdt your tongue, Mr. Affidafy, and let me
mindt mine own pusiness, said the magistrate, in
some wrath; sure I know fat I am about! And
hark ye, Mr. Witness, you are a very goodt young
man, and an officer, and a gentleman; put you
must not tell me fat I am to do, nor fat I am not to
do.
Surely not, replied the witness; I will not be
so presumptuous.
Right; you are a very goodt young man, and
an officer, and a gentleman; and you have very
goodt sense.Fat do you think I must say in this
case? for, mine Gott, it puzzles me! Mine own
opinion is, that somepody shot this young man.
It cannot be doubted, sir.
And that that somepody fas him fat shot the
pistol fat fas
not
shot by the young man fat fas
shot.
Very true, sir.
Ferry fell, sir, continued the official, with
dignity; now show me the man, and you shall
hear fat I have to say for mine inquest in no
time.
The man you speak of is by this time lodged
in the county prison under a warrant issued by
yourself. There were two pistols discharged, one
by the deceased, the other, as I can swear to the
best of my belief, by the prisoner; and I can bear
witness in like manner, that my unfortunate friend
owes his death to the pistol discharged by the
prisoner
.
Fy then, the case is clear enough, and I
vonder
you couldn't say so much before. Do you
swear to all this?
I do.
Fell now, come;fat fas the reason of all this
running afay, and murdering?
That, I beg leave to suggest, is a question
entirely
irrelevant.
Is it? Fell then, fy don't you answer it?
Pshaw! mumbled Affidavy, who was perhaps
wearying of a sport he did not himself direct.
Squire, you may discharge the witness: we have
laid our heads together and agreed upon a
finding
.
Fat! mitout me?
Certainly. You don't think
you
are to make
the verdict?The witness will be pleased to
retire
,
he added, and the lieutenant, looking once
more on the dead, immediately withdrew.
We find, Squire, the attorney went on, that
the deceased came to his death in consequence of
a pistol-bullet shot into his neck by Hyland Gilbert,
otherwise called Herman Hunter. If you want to
be learned about jugulars, carotids, parotids, and
so on, we will call in Dr. Muller, and have him
examine the wound.
Fy, I don't know any thing about them things;
put I don't see that you say any thing apout
murder
?
Not a word: as you said yourself to Jack
Darby here, the coroner's jury is not the hanging
jury.
Fell now, the matter's finished, and I am ferry
glad. I suppose it is all right?
Entirelythe young Hawk is as dead as a
chicken.
It is a clear case then, Mr. Affidafy, said
the dignitary, with a long and tempestuous breath,
indicating the satisfaction he felt at being released
from labours so overpowering, they fill hang the
young fillain?
Why that depends upon circumstances, Squire.
Oh the tyfel! it is all `upon circumstances' mit
a lawyer?
It is a good case on either side, said Affidavy;
and not so bad on the prisoner's as might be
supposed
,that
is, if he had but money to make it an
object to take up his cause.
Mine Gott, he has money! There fas his fatch;
'twas goldt, and worth forty pound.
Eh! indeed? has he a gold watch?
And there fas a purse of guineas
Of guineas!
And there fas afat you call it?a pill of
exchange
on New York, and a letter of credit,
mine Gott, it fas mitout limit, except time; put I
toubt me, it fas not goodt.
L 2
Botheration! cried the man of law, in a
fervour
,
who'll lend me a horse to ride to town? I
remember now, there was a story that the
youngest
son of the Gilberts had a rich aunt in Jamaica.
Fell, if he had?
Why then, I'll certainly volunteer him the aid
of my professional skill; and, murder or no
murder
,
I'll bring him off.
You don't say so, Mr. Affidavy?
Botheration, I do. A letter of credit without
limit? Who has it? did you save it?
No; I gave it pack to him; put I took an
inventory
of all in his pockets.
Well, Squire, you're an honour to the
profession
.
Lend me a horse.
Fy, if I had you put down to the Creen Tree,
and you fould promise to keep soper
Tush, I will. But let's be off, and in a hurry.
You are a merciful man, Squire
Schlachtenschlager
It
is a pity this poor friendless young fellow
should be hanged for nothing.
That is, mitout paying nothing to the lawyer?
Ho, ho!Put it toesn't do to laugh by a teadt
pody, fen his fader, and moder, and all his friends
is feeping and crying. Fat is to pe done mit these
Hawks? Can't nopody catch pig Oran? I fill
give one pound of mine own money for refard;
for, I do afer, he toes give me much trouple. Fell,
gentlemen, all is right. Now fill ve all go to the
Creen Tree, and ve shall have some prandy to
dtrink. Fere is some pody to light mine pipe? A
fery padt piece of pusiness, and fery pottersome.
I vonder fere they fill pury the young man? Fell,
gentlemen, let us pegone.
CHAPTER XII.
Your mountain Sack, your Frontignac,
Tokay, and twenty more, sir,
Your Sherry and Perry, that make men merry,
Are deities I adore, sir;
And well may Port
Our praise extort,
When from his palace forth he comes,
And glucks and gurgles, fumes and foams.
Gluck, gluck,
Hickup, gurgle and gluck.
Old Song
.
If
one were to judge the traits of the vulgar
from the indulgence they exhibit towards certain
vices, or certain instances of their occurrence, it
would be easy to show that man is, at bottom, a
good-natured animal. It is certain that he betrays
an extraordinary leniency in the case of a vice
which all unite, in the abstract, to condemn; and
that many men derive an importance from the
sacrifice of reputation and mind to the Imp of the
Bottle, which they might have failed to purchase
by a life of wisdom and sobriety. It is not
uncommon
to find, in some rural districts, men of
gross and degraded habits, whom a rational
creature
would spurn from him with contempt, and
who are indeed the butts of ridicule or objects of
commiseration, even among their own immediate
neighbours; but who, strange to say, are regarded
with a species of admiration, growing directly out
of their profligacy. Such, we are sorry to say,
are some of the rustic professors of law and
physic
,
who, possessing a little talent, but no industry,
prefer whiling the period of probationary idleness
at the door, or in the bar-room, of the village
tavern, to devoting it in the closet to that labour
which is the only stepping-stone to distinction and
fortune; and thus contracting a love for something
more than idleness, and slipping, little by little,
towards
the bottom of the hill, are seen at last,
downdraughts, with swollen visages and seedy
garments, mingling among the coarse and base,
themselves perhaps the coarsest and basest. You
will see such a man gibed and laughed at by the
lowest of his companions, as something that even
they can despise; for whatever may be the hatred
with which the humble regard the more lofty, they
are the first to appreciate the degradation of a
downfall; but the next moment you will hear
them talk of him with praise. Is it `the poor
doctor
at the Cross-Roads?' `Oh, he is a ruined man,
to be sure, and a sot; but he cures, when another
man fails; somewhat dangerous now and then,
when too `far in for it,' but a marvellous hand at
`rheumatisms and the fever.' Is it `crusty Ned
Jones, the lawyer?' `Drinks like a fish, but with
more sharp stuff in his brain than all the bar
beside
;
a devil of a fellow to corner a witness, break
a will, pick a flaw in an indictment, and set a jury
a-sobbing: great pity he drinks,but he's a
tremendous
orator, and all the better for a glass or
two, in a hard case.' We have heard of a lawyer,
a lover of his glass, who reformed his habits, and
lost his practice.
The worthy Affidavy, who played so prominent
a part in the jury of inquest, was one of this
unfortunate
class of beings, although he had
commenced
the world with as fair prospects as could
be derived from a moderate share of talent, and
some native energy of character, and was yet in
the prime of his years. He had sunk into poverty
and neglect, was any man's fellow, and every
man's scorn; yet the lower he sunk, the loftier
became
men's opinions of his natural parts and his
professional knowledge; and Squire
Schlachtenschlager
was wont to say, `he pelieved Affidafy
mate petter speeches now than he tidt afore, fen
he fas a soper man.' While such generous opinions
prevailed, the lawyer had still `something to do'
in the way of his profession; but the sad
condition
of his outward man showed that this was
far from being profitable. Indeed, if the truth
must be told, his admirers, though of humours
sufficiently
litigious, were oftener inclined to employ
than able to pay; and those of better estates,
however
they marvelled at the sagacity, and applauded
the speeches of the man of buckram, were rather
shy of applying to him for assistance, until they
felt their cases to be growing desperate. The
consequence
of this state of things was, that Mr.
Theophilus Affidavy was compelled to resort to
many shifts to obtain a subsistence, that added
little
to his reputation; and would indeed have been
hooted from the county, had he not been protected
by the armour of imputed genius, which his habits
seemed to fasten around him.
The account he received of the wealth of the
unfortunate Hyland produced a strong effect upon
his acquisitive propensities; and he saw at a
glance, that if his counsel could be of no benefit
to the prisoner, it might undoubtedly be of some
to himself. He is a Hawk of the Hollow, he
muttered to himself, and so every one will be
against him. Good! There will be much apparent
merit therefore in undertaking his defence. His
case is bad,awful badbetter! To volunteer in
such a case, will infer at once the possession of
extraordinary skill, worthy of extraordinary
reward
.
He has moneyexcellent! But,
botheration
,
the other Jack-brains will find that out, and
dive at him before me. Must have
Schlachtenschlager's
horse, if I have to steal himnobody
else will lend me one. An old ass; but can twist
him round my thumb as easily as a tape of
tobacco
.
Such were the reflections of the attorney, as
with his brother jurors, one of whom had given
him a seat in his little Jersey wagon, he followed
Schlachtenschlager, to share the feast this worthy
had prepared for his associates at the Green Tree.
The soliloquy of the lawyer seemed to infer a
doubt of the performance of the promise
Schlachtenschlager
had so generously made of lending
him a horse. This doubt was engendered by a
sudden change in the sky, which, from having
been perfectly clear and placid, suddenly began to
be covered with clouds, and these of an
appearance
so gloomy and menacing that full half the
jurors became alarmed, and, excusing themselves
from accepting the proffered hospitality, hurried
to their homes, leaving the revels to be shared by
those who dwelt in the Squire's immediate
neighbourhood
.
The attorney, wonderful to be said,
had as strong an impulse to be gone as others,
although
fully sensible of the excellence of the
magistrate's
potables, and of the painful sacrifice he
should make in tearing himself away; but on the
other hand, he perceived that a violent
thunderstorm
was brewing, and he knew the Squire to
be a prudent man, who loved his beast as he loved
his wife, and indeed a great deal better, and would
be loath to lend him after the storm had once set
in. For this reason, as soon as he had reached
the inn, he reminded the Squire of his promise,
swore he would drink but a single glass, and then
be off, without waiting for the rain.
The Squire scratched his head, and replied,
Vy, Mr. Affidafy, I don't know. The
veather
vill be padt, and I don't like it: it vill pe padt
on the horse. So, Affidafy, ve vill vait a little and
see; and, pesides, my poy, added the dignitary,
clapping him on the shoulder, as if to atone by
condescension for the disappointment he inflicted,
ve fill not forget the dtrinking, and the
jolly-making
.
Py mine heart, my poy, ve fill have
petter
fun for you than trampling about in the rain
mit a stumpling horse. Fat, man, fy we're all
Deutschers put you! Here's Jake Musser, and
Hans Fackeltrager, and Alberick Klappermuhle,
and Franz Beschwerlich, and Simson Kleiber, and
mineself; and then there's you. Mine Gott, ve
fill be jolly; for I will proach a parrel of
Nierensteiner
,mine
soul! it is as goodt as any in the
whole Rheingau! and I do keep it for mineself.
And ve fill dtrink and ve fill sing, as if ve fas all
in the Rheingau itself; for my voman, Gott pless
her, she is cone to the fillage, and the poys is out
a looking after the ploodty Hawks. Aha, Affidafy,
my poy! you shall see fat it is to dtrink Rhine
wine, mit six goodt Deutschers to help you. Fat
do you say, poys? can you sing the Rheinweinlied
in a t'under-storm? Aha, you see, Affidafy!
Fell, if ve are few, vy ve fill be merry.
It was in vain to pursue his desire, at such a
moment
;
and indeed the attorney's blood tingled
with joy at the thought of the flowing bowls,
offered
in such an oration. Very well, you old fool,
he muttered to himself, I will drink till your
cursed sour old cider trash, that you call Rhine
wine, has opened your heart; and then,
botheration
,
I will bubble you out of the best horse in your
stable. Well, it is well it's no worse: it
will
rain,
and that cats and dogs.
The indications of the weather were not falsified
by the event. In less than half an hour after all
were safely housed, the heavens were covered with
pitchy clouds, from which were discharged
dazzling
thunderbolts. Then came a terrific blast of
wind, rending boughts from the trees, and making
the chimneys rock on the housetop; and this again
was followed by a furious driving rain, falling in
such torrents as promised in a few hours to swell
the smallest brooks into impassable rivers. This
continued until nightfall, and was then only
terminated
to be succeeded by deceitful intervals of
calm, broken in upon, even when least expected,
by violent gusts of wind and rain.
It is not our design to pursue the conversation,
nor to describe the revels of the six Deutschers
and their American companion, under the roof of
the Herr Schlachtenschlager. Secure from the
tempest, they defied its rage, and made even the
roar of the thunder and the plash of the rain
contribute
to their enjoyment. Armstrong has
described
,
in a few lines that find a responsive chord
in every bosom, the luxurious addition to the
comfort
of a warm bed, produced by the tumult of a
midnight tempest:
Oh! when the growling winds contend, and all
The sounding forest fluctuates in the storm,
To sink in warm repose, and hear the din
Howl o'er the steady battlements, delights
Beyond the luxury of vulgar sleep.
The same cause is said by those who are
philosophic
in such matters, to add peculiar zest to the
hissing of the tea-kettle, and the rattle of the
punchbowl
.
Perhaps, then, it was the violence of the
storm, rather than the excellence of the liquor,
which betrayed the worthy Sclachtenschlager and
his guests into a degree of conviviality somewhat
inconsistent with the melancholy duties they had
just rendered to the commonwealth and the dead.
But whatever was the cause, it is very certain
they forgot the dead and the commonwealth
together
,
and by nightfall were seven of the happiest
men in all the rebellious colonies of America. By
that time Affidavy was as glorified in his spirit as
the rest; and suddenly starting up in the midst of
a crashing peal of thunder, he hiccuped, and then
roared,
Success to the Rhine wine, sweet or sour!
and the devil take him that won't sing its praises
as loudly as e'er a rascal of the Rheingau itself!
So up, you German pigs, and let's sing! up, you
Hanz, Franz, Alberick, Jake, and Simson! up, you
old rogue Schlachtenschlager, for you can sing
like a cherubim! and up, you jolly dog, Teff
Affidavy
,
who is up already, and can sing as well as
the best! join hands, bring flowers, crown the cup,
and sing the Rheinweinlied like seven angelsthe
Rheinweinlied, you hard-headed, jolly dogs, in
broad Deutsch! and after that, we'll sing it in my
own translation, botheration, which is better than
the original, for all that ass, Jingleum, says
he
made it. Are you ready?
Ready! responded the happy six; and in an
instant every man was singing, at the top of his
voice, the famous Rheinweinlieda song of such
noble and heart-stirring capacity, at least so far as
the music is concerned, that if it be objected to it,
that it has sometimes set a singer beside himself,
it may be wondered how any one can hear it and
keep sober at all. The winds blew, the rain fell,
and the lightning flashed, while this jolly company
rose round the table, and sang in concert the praises
of old father Rhine.
VOL. II.M
THE RHEINWEINLIED.
I.
Bekrnzt mit Laub den lieben vollen Becher,
Und trinkt ihn frhlich leer.
In ganz Europia, Ihr Herren Zecher!
Ist solch ein Wein nicht mehr.
II.
Ihn bringt das Vaterland ans seiner Flle:
Wie wr er sonst so gut?
Wie wr er sonst so edel, wre stille
Un doch voll Krafft und Muth?
III.
Am Rhein, am Rhein, da wachsen unsre Reben;
Gesegnet sei der Rhein!
Da wachsen sie am ufer hin, und geben
Uns diesen Labewein.
IV.
So trinkt ihn denn, und lasst uns alle Wege
Uns freum und frhlich seyn!
Und wsster wir wo iemand traurig lge,
Wir gben ihm den Wein.
Bravo! bravissimo! bravississimo! cried
Affidavy. Here's to you, you dogs`
Ihr Herren
Zecher
!' And now for
my
paraphrase. All you
that don't know it, why you may sing the German
lingo over again: the two will go very well
together
.
So saying, he burst forth on the following
rifacimento
of the original; the others, in general,
holding fast to their own more sonorous
expressions
;
the effect of which Babel-like intermixture
of languages was to increase the noise, if it did not
add to the spirit of the author.
I.
The right Rhine wine!
We'll crown the cup with roses,
And quaff about, and laugh about,
Till all eyes wink!
Such joys divine
Sure mother Nature owes us:
So laugh about, and quaff about,
Come, drink, boys, drink!
II.
Our Father-land!
'Tis that the vine produces:
How else should be this jolly wine
So good, so good?
Long as we stand,
We'll put it to its uses:
So laugh about, and quaff about,
As true souls should!
III.
Oh Rhine! old Rhine,
With milk and honey flowing!
There grows the tree so well love we,
The Vine, the Vine!
There clusters shine
On branches ever growing:
So laugh about, and quaff about
The good Rhine wine!
IV.
Come, drink, ha! ha!
And, sure, we'll all be merry;
Come, drink, ha, ha! come, laugh, ha, ha!
Oh! ha, ha, ha!
As full are we
As e'er a Rhine-wine berry:
So laugh about, and quaff about,
Oh! ha, ha, ha!
It may be supposed that Affidavy had long since,
in the joy of revelry, discharged from his mind all
memory of the case which had so inflamed his
fancy, and was content to leave it to be snapped
up by a more fortunate rival. How far this was
from the truth may be inferred from a
phenomenon
that presented itself about an hour after
nightfall
,
at which period he appeared on the porch,
followed by Schlachtenschlager and the rest, all
singing with as much zeal as before, but vastly out
of time and tune. A saddled horse stood at the
door, on whose back some assisted the attorney to
clamber, while others were seen holding by railing
and pillar, and venting much good counsel with a
deal of bad music. The Squire himself stood
embracing
a pillar, now poking forth his bare noddle
to the drops trickling from the porch-roof, and now
withdrawing it, to utter divers `teufels!' and `
donners
!'
as the cold element profaned his visage of
dignity, yet still maintaining his stand, and
expatiating
on the merit of the service he was rendering
his guest.
You see, Affidafy, man, he cried, I'm a
goodt-natured fellow: put there's my horse, my
pest horse, and it's a padt night; and, Affidafy,
man, you're as dtrunk as a chudge, poor man.
But ho, ho! that's no matter, for ve're all so:
`As full are ve
As ever vas a Rhine-fine perry:'
Very goodt that, Affidafy!Fell, ve're all mortal
sinners; and, mine Gott, there is but little left in
mine parrel, and Nierensteiner costs money. Fell!
goodt pye, Affidafy, my poy, goodt night. Take
goodt care of the horse, for he's my pest horse,
Affidafy, for I'm a goodt-natured fellow as ever it
vas. Goodt night, Affidafy!And Goodt
night, Affidafy! muttered all, as the attorney,
fetching a desperate reel in the saddle, waved a
graceful adieu, and turned to depart. Instead of
replying, however, to the farewell, he burst out
again with
`The right Rhine wine!'
and the others obeying the invitation, again opened
their lips, and chanted
Bekrnzt mit Laub,
till he
was out of sight. Then they staggered back into
the house, to continue their orgies; where we will
leave them, to follow the course of the attorney.
M 2
CHAPTER XIII.
If thou beest a man, show thyself in thy likeness: if thou
beest a devil, take 't as thou list.
Tempest.
The
violence of the storm was over, but the
ferment in the elements was not yet allayed. The
clouds had broken, and ever and anon, through
their ragged gaps, the eye might trace fields of
blue sky, studded with stars, which were as
suddenly
swept out of sight, as gusts came roaring
from the tops of distant hills, discharging brief
but furious showers.
On such occasions, it was not easy to pick a way
along the road, which was washed into gullies and
scattered over with the riven branches of trees,
besides being, in the hollow places, converted into
pools; so that it might have been considered
difficult
to proceed, even by the light of day.
It was fortunate, perhaps, for Affidavy, that he
was in no condition to be daunted, either by
difficulties
or dangers, of which, indeed, it is most
probable
he remained profoundly unconscious, from
the beginning of his ride to the end. He se forth
on his dark journey, trolling at the top of his voice
some snatches of the jolly chorus, in which he had
borne no mean part, and plying his heels about the
ribs of his horse in such a way as to drum out a
kind of barrel-head accompaniment, as agreeable
to himself as it was perhaps advantageous to the
animal;for this, instead of being
Schlachtenschlager's
best horse, as he had said, was a drowsy,
lazy, pacific, and somewhat worthless beast, which
the Squire's man, supposing that any one might serve
the lawyer's turn on such an occasion, had
considerately
substituted for the better one which his
master really designed to provide. On this
animal
,
then, Affidavy departed, bidding defiance to
storm and peril, and singing as he went.
Sometimes
,
however, he launched into harangues, as if
declaiming before a court and jury, especially
when, as was sometimes the case, the beast he
bestrode took advantage of his abstraction, to
pause before some gully or pool of water, and
even, now and then, to stand stock-still in the
middle
of the road, where there was no obstruction
whatever. Nay, he once or twice, relying upon
the indifference of his rider, took the liberty of
turning his head, and jogging backwards; and how
the manuvre was detected and counteracted by
one in Affidavy's happy condition, we are wholly
unable to say. But counteracted it was, and by
midnight,that is to say, after a ride of three
hours, the attorney found that his steed had borne
him the full distance of two and a half miles from
his master's house; at which rate of travel, it was
quite evident, he might expect to reach the village,
perhaps three or four miles further, some time
before
noon of the following day. At midnight,
however, the horse was brought to a stand by an
unforeseen difficulty. It was in a hollow place or
glen, thickly wooded, that was crossed by the road
at right angles; at the bottom of it flowed a
watercourse
,
small and shallow on all ordinary
occasions
,
but which the violent rains, assisted by
certain
accidental obstructions, had now swelled into
a broad and formidable pool. The trunks and
branches of trees, swept down by the earlier wash
of the flood, and lodged among rocks and the
standing stems of other trees on the lower side of
the road, had made a sort of dam, through which
the waters could not escape so rapidly as they
collected; and, in consequence, they had swelled
so high, as to be already heard falling over it like
a cataract.
When Affidavy arrived at the brink of this
flood, his steed came to a sudden halt, of which
the rider took no notice for a considerable time,
his mind being wrapped up in the remembrance of
the joyous potations from which nothing on earth,
save the prospect of a good case, could have drawn
him, and his ears still tingling with the uproar of
the Rheinweinlied. This he trolled over with great
fervour, and in the midst of it, plying his heels as
usual, the horse, after one or two snorts by way of
remonstrance, took heart of grace, and crept into
the water.
Botheration, cried the attorney, as he felt the
cold element sweeping over his legs, will it never
have done raining? Hhhip, Durgan.
Gentlemen
of the jury, I appeal, not to your hearts, for
I disdain taking advantage of,of your weakness,
nor to your heads, forforwho the devil ever
supposed a juryman had one?Botheration, it
rains cats and dogs all round, and my legs are
growing marvellous cold. That old
Schlachtenschlager
!
he, he! a great old ass, and his
Nierensteiner
nothing but sour old crab-cider.A gold
watch worth forty pounds,a purse of guineas
bills of exchangelong credits.Dispute the
jurisdiction
of the courtHillo! what's all that
smashing in the court? I insist upon orderWho
says I am out of order? Drunk! I despise the
thing! Hillo, Schlachtenschlager! what's the
matter
?
Never mind the rainstrike up: let it blow
its worst,strike up, old boy.
`Come, drink, ha, ha!
And, sure, we'll all be merry;
Come, drink, ha, ha! come laugh, ha, ha!'
Botheration!
In the midst of the attorney's song, and just
when he had reached the middle of the pool, there
happened a catastrophe, which might have
frightened
any other man out of his propriety. This
was nothing less than the sudden giving way of the
dam of logs, the disruption of which was followed
by the escape of the whole accumulated body of
waters, and that with a fury that nothing could
resist. In an instant the attorney was swept from
his horse, soused head over ears in the flood, and
would have been drowned had he not been luckily
dashed into the crotch of a low and twisted
buttonwood
,
and there left astride a horizontal
bough, by the retreating waters. The whole thing
was effected in a trice, indeed with such magical
celerity, that he failed to notice the main point of
the casualty, which was the loss of his horse; and
supposing himself still at ease in the saddle, he
plied his heels with their accustomed vigour
against the regardless trunk, wondering somewhat
at the immobility of his charger, and the rush of
the current at his feet.
Botheration, he cried; hip, Durgan, get up;
dzick! That's a fine fellow! Will it never
be done raining?
`Come, drink, ha, ha! come laugh, ha, ha!
Oh, ha!'
Hip, horsey, hip! And thus he went on, now
spurring the timber flanks of his charger, and now
trolling forth the drunken chorus, in the midst of
the stream, where he would perhaps have
remained
until morning, or until sleep had caused him to
relax his hold, had not his extraordinary outcries
reached the ears of a traveller, who rode to his
assistance, the water being already reduced to its
ordinary level, and finding him incapable of
helping
himself, pulled him from his seat, and dragged
him to the other side of the stream.
Botheration, what's the matter? cried the
attorney
,
who seemed to recover his senses a little,
upon finding himself on his feet; where's
Durgan
?
Sure, o' my life, I did'nt come here on foot!
Odds bodikins! where's Schlachtenschlager?
Hillo, there! botheration, you sir! what are you
doing with my horse?
Your
horse! exclaimed the traveller. Are
you drunk yet?
Drunk! I defy the insinuation, cried Affidavy,
and demand protection of the court.Down, you
rogue, or I'll indict you for horse-thieving. A
pretty prank to play upon an honest man, riding
for life and death! Botheration, Sir Sauce-box,
whoever you are, give me my horse, or I shall
lose the best case was ever entrusted to a lawyer
a gold watch worth forty poundsbills of exchange
letters of creditand a purse of guineas!
Now were you not drunk, said the traveller,
and more of a beast than the animal that bore
you, I could tell you of a case much more to your
interest to be engaged in.
Hah! a case? what sort of a case? Odds
bodikins
,
I'm your man!
You are drunken Tef Affidavy?
Drunken! That's actionable. Tef!
Tef
Affidavy!
Theophilus Affidavy, Esq.
Esquire,
do you hear?
Ay, it is all one. Theophilus Affidavy, sober,
might be the man for my money, with twenty guineas
to begin upon; but Theophilus Affidavy, drunk
Twenty guineas! cried the lawyer: God
bless all our souls! twenty guineas for a retaining
fee! Why then I'll be Theophilus Affidavy, sober,
or Tef Affidavy, drunk, or any thing else that can
be wished of man or angel. Out with your money,
and state the case.
Ay,when you are sober.
Sober! Twenty guineas would fetch me to,
if I had been swimming in Schlachtenschlager's
whiskey-barrel for two weeks on a stretch.
Botheration
,
I'll take another dip in the slough there,
and come out as clean as a peeled orange. But
are you sure that a'n't my horse?
Quite; and if your beast belongs to the Squire,
you may make your mind easy that he is now safe
in his master's stables. I saw a saddled horse on
the road, galloping as if a wild-cat was on the
back of him.
Good! cried the attorney at law; if I had
drowned him, there would have been the devil to
pay with old Schlachtenschlager. Hold fast, till I
duck the devil out of me. And without waiting
to say another word, he ran into the brook, where
he began to splash about him with great spirit, the
stranger, all the time, sitting by and observing him
in silence.
There is, in all cases of drunkenness, a certain
degree of voluntary intoxication, as it may be
called, in which the mind yields itself a prisoner,
before it is entirely overcome by the strength of
the enemy. This is evinced by the rapidity with
which many good souls, in jovial company, work
themselves into frenzy; but still more by the
facility
with which they shake it off, when there is
any special call for sobriety. In half the instances,
even where the conduct is most extravagant, the
individual retains a consciousness, more or less
perfect, of his absurd acts, is aware that they
proceed
from a madness partly simulated, and
sensible
of some power in himself of controlling them,
though not easily disposed to the labour of
exercising
it. We will not pretend to say that Mr.
Affidavy, while he sat bestraddling the sycamore,
was altogether conscious of his situation; but it is
quite certain, he retained so much power of curing
his folly, even in that extremity, that a less counter
stimulus than the offer of a twenty-guinea fee would
have sufficed to bring him to his senses. He
frisked
about in the water for a few minutes, dipped
his head under two or three times, and came out,
not entirely sober indeed, but, as he said himself,
`as fit for business as he ever was.'
If you doubt, stranger, whoever you are, he
said, I'll sing you a song, orNo, hang it, we've
had enough of
that,
I'll make you a speech to
court and jury extempore, and right to the point.
But come now, jingle your money, and let's begin:
or, if it's all one to you, we'll jog back to
Schlachtenschlager's
and borrow a dry shirt, and so give
counsel like a gentleman.
To this proposal the traveller demurred, and
requesting the lawyer to follow him, rode up to
the brow of the hill, where he dismounted, and
suffered his horse to range at will through the
bushes, he himself taking a seat on a stone, and
inviting Affidavy to do the same.
A botheration strange fancy this, of yours,
certainly, said the lawyer: are we to sit here,
like two stray ducks, and be soaked for nothing?
Look over your head, said the stranger:
there is not a cloud left in the heaven. No, not
one, he muttered as if to himself; and come
weal or wo, come death or come life, the sun will
shine to-morrow as bright as ever.
Tush, you're right; the storm has given us the
go-by, said the lawyer. But concerning the
case, and that twenty-guinea feeWhat's your
name?
Guineas, said the other, rattling a purse
apparently
well filled with his namesakes, upon the
stone.
Excellent! said the lawyer; but that won't
do for a jury. Come, sir, your cognomination,
compellation, and so forth? your
proprium
vocamen
,
style and title,Tom, Dick, or Harry, as the
case may be? and then for
the
case!
Quisnam
homo est? unde et quo?
No man is drunk who
can quote Latin, for it is cursed hard stuff to
remember
.
In the king's lingo, who are you? and
what's the case in question?
Who I am, we will pass, said the traveller,
that having nothing to do with the case. As for
the case itself, I am told, it is one of murder.
The devil it is! cried Affidavy. Why here's
hanging work thickening in the county! But what
are the circumstances? Who's killed? and who
is the killer?
The first was a young man, named Henry
Falconer,the second another young man, called
Hyland Gilbert
Hah! why, that's
my
case, that I've been
labouring
after all night! and I assure youBut
God bless our two souls! he added suddenly,
springing to his feet as if in alarm, who are
you
sir? An honest man, sir? I hope, an honest man,
sir, and no bloody-minded Hawk, sir! for if you
are, sir, I give you warning, sir, if you make an
attack upon me, sir, that I carry pistols, sir, and,
sir
Peace, fool, said the other, with a stern voice.
Sit down, and fear nothing. If you had twenty
pistols, what care I for them?I, he added, with
a laugh both jocose and bitter, that am armed
with twentyguineas?
Right, sir; but if you are a tory, sirI don't
mean to insult you, sir,but as to aiding and
abetting
a gentleman of the tory party, sir: why, sir, I
am a man of principle, sir, and I must have time
to reflect.
Go to the brook and wallow again: you shall
VOL. II.N
have five minutes to reflect, or rather to sober, for
you are not yet in your senses. Why, fool, do you
think I will hurt you? or hark! is there a tory
bullet in the clink of an English guinea? Come,
sit down, and listen. You have nothing to do with
tories, save to take their money.There is one
lying in prison in yonder village below, who needs
the help of a lawyer. Yourself then, Affidavy, or
another.
Oh, if there be no treason in the matter, said
the attorney, why thenthat is, if you will
take that cursed tomahawk away, for I dare say
you've got one about you, Mr.that is to say,
captainZounds, Mr. Oran Gilbert! I know you
very well; and I hope you won't murder me, or
do me any mischief, if it were even for old times'
sake; for we were very good friends in old times.
Ay, said the refugee; and for that reason,
I have offered you twenty guineas, and
employment
on a business that may bring you as many
perhaps five times as many more, which any one
else will be as happy to accept.
Botheration, there is no occasion, said
Affidavy
,
creeping timorously back. I see what it
is; I'm not afraid of you, but you have a cursed
bad name. I don't agree with you in principles,
that is, in politics; but it sha'nt be said, I refused
my professional services to an old friend in
distress
With twenty guineas in his hand, said the
tory.
Ay; and with as many, or five times as many
at the back of them
In case of success.
Oh, yes, certainly. I understand the case now:
your brother, captain
We will drop all titles,brother, captain, and
every one else, said the tory. The young man,
Hyland Gilbert, is a prisoner.
Ay; and
Was he hurt?
A bruise or so.
And he shot Henry Falconer?
As dead as a herring: I sat on the body
myself
.
And he will be tried for that, as for a murder?
Ay, faith, and hanged too, unless'
Unless
what?
Unless we can prove him innocent, or establish
a legal irresponsibility.
Or snatch him out of his den, some such bright
midnight as this?
Tush, said the lawyer, waxing in courage,
I have nothing to do with that. But cheer up.
There's a way of managing these cases, and I
have thought of it already. But concerning that
bill of exchange and letter of credit? They say,
the younker has money enougha rich estate in
the Islands?
Fear not for your reward, said Oran Gilbert.
Do what's expected of you, and you shall have
gold enough to content you.
Here then is the state of the case, said
Affidavy
:
if the young man be tried in this county,
were it but for killing a farmer's dog, he will die.
The namesaving your presencethe name of
Gilbert will be hanging matter with any jury. But
I'll be shorthe bears the king's commission,
does he not? the commission of a lieutenant among
the royal refugees?
And what then? said Oran.
Why then, he must dispute the jurisdiction of
the civil tribunal, and claim to be considered a
prisoner of war. The attack upon the Folly is
somewhat of a civil offence, to be sure; but he
was taken, as we may say, in battle; and, in
battle
,
he killed the man for whose murder he will be
certainly arraigned, if proceedings are not
quashed
in the beginning. As a commissioned officer
of the crown, however
And what if he be
not
a commissioned
officer
,
said the refugee, with a low voice.
Why then, replied Affidavy, I have to say,
gentlemen of the juryPshaw! that is,hemp
seed and a white shirtyou understand me? But
with the commissionwe will produce that, and
then
You shall have it, said the refugee; but
added
,It
will do no good. A court civil or a court
martial,how should a Gilbert look for mercy
from either? What turn would the king's
commission
serve
me,
if a prisoner? Look you, Affidavy,
there are better ways of ending the matter. An
hundred guineas are clinking in the bag these
came from: it is but the opening of a jail-door to
earn it.
Ay! are you there, Truepenny?Sir, I'm a
lawyer and a gentleman; and as to aiding and
abetting in any jail-breakingzounds, sir! for
what do you take me?
For a wiser man than you would have your
neighbours believe,for a man
too
wise to boggle
long at a choice betwixt a hundred guineas held
in comfort at home, and empty pockets, with
hands and heels tied together, in a cave of the
mountains.
God bless our two souls, said Affidavy, what
do you mean?
To have your help, or take good care no one
else has it, said Oran, laughing. Then, laying his
hand upon the lawyer's arm, he added, with the
same untimely accompaniment to accents full of
sternness, Look ye, Affidavy, you have heard
too much for your own comfort, unless you are
ready to hear all. You are a friend, ora
prisoner
.
At these words, the lawyer was filled with
dismay
,
and indeed struck dumb. The terror that
beset him, when he first conceived with whom he
was confronted on the dark and lonely hill,
recurred
with double violence; he thought of nothing
less than being tomahawked and scalped on the
spot, and would have taken to his heels without
further ceremony, had his strength availed him to
shake off the grasp of his companion.
Fear naught, said Oran, detaining him on his
seat, and speaking decisively: We were old
friends once, as you say, Affidavy: I remember,
you robbed Elsie Bell's strawberry-patch, when
you were a boy, and I thumped you for it. So,
fear nothing.Why, man, am I a snake, or a
beast, that I should hurt such a creature as
you?
Know me better.
Well, I will, said the attorney, still trembling.
But, botheration, sir, this is a strange way of
stating
a case to a lawyer! As to opening jail-doors,
Mr. Oran Gilbert, why I won't oppose: if you
were to bribe Bob Lingo, the jailer, why, I say,
I'm mum. But what more can you expect?
Botheration, sir, I'm no turnkey! I'll be mum, sir;
but as to joining you in any such prank, God bless
our two souls, why that would ruin me! And why
should you think of such a thing? 'Tis needless,
sir,as needless as dangerous. The king's
commission
is our pillar of safety: with that in his
hand, the prisoner can demand, ay, and force his
claim to be admitted, to be treated as a prisoner of
war; and then, sir, if the matter comes to a
court-martial
When it comes to that, said Oran, what is
N 2
to save him from being tried and condemned as a
spy?
What? said the lawyer; why a very
simple
thing. We will hire some one to swear he did
not receive the commission until after his flight
from Hawk-Hollow: and as for the change of
name, intentions, and all that, why we shall have
time to coin any lies that may serve our purpose.
As to treason, we escape all arraignment there,
his domicile being clearly within a foreign
jurisdiction
.
In a word, said Oran Gilbert, and to end
your scheme at once, he is
not
a commissioned
officer. Fool that he was, continued the brother,
bitterly, he refused, and to the last, the warrant
that would have been his best friend.
Whew! said Affidavy, this alters the case
with a vengeance. Refused the commission?
Ay; and it is now in my own hands.
Oho, is it? Why then, all's one. We'll clap it
into his hands,fill up the blanks, if it needs,
produce
it in court, and who is the wiser?
You can, at least, try him with it, said the
refugee; but I know what it will end in. You
will see him refuse it, even in prison.
Why then, said Affidavy,Hum, hawe
won't be particular. Jail-doors
will
open
sometimes
;
and in case of an hundred guineas down
on the nail(a dangerous business, captain!)
and something more in prospect(you
understand
,
captain?)Reputation, captain, reputation!
'T may bring me by the heels, captain.Another
hundred therefore, (say, to be paid at New York;
for I don't care if I turn tory along with you,
provided
I am not set to fighting:) an hundred on the
nail, and another at York city, and I don't care if
I close with you. And then, we must have fifty
or so for Bob Lingo; (no managing such an
affair
without money.) A deused dull county this, and
business all worn out. So, captain, an hundred on
the nail, and
It is enough, said the refugee; you talk
now like a man of sense; and here are the twenty
for earnest. Let us proceed; I have more to tell
you.
Then rising, and whistling to his horse, which
obeyed the summons, and followed him with great
docility, he led the way with Affidavy along the
road, exchanging counsels with this precious limb
of the law, on the subject that had drawn him so
near to the head quarters of his foes.
CHAPTER XIV.
What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies,
Whom thou, in terms so bloody, and so dear,
Hast made thine enemies?
Therefore, by law thou art condemn'd to die.
Shakspeare
.
On
the following morning, Affidavy presented
himself at the prison, and demanded access to his
client.
Client! said the jailer, with a stare. Why
now, Affidavy, man, (begging your pardon for
being familiar,) there's none of your birds
roosting
in my hen-house.
A smaller on that, Lingo,come, what will
you lay? said the man of law, seizing upon the
official's hand, and shaking it with great apparent
friendship. Come, stir about, Lingo; clink, clink,
stir bolt, clash key, and open. It's long since we've
had a crack together; but we'll have a jolly rouse
yet. Ah! that knotty old Schlachtenschlager! my
head is in a reel yet; must have something to steady
my nerves.
Well, squire, said Lingo, a coarse-featured,
shag-headed personage, with a fist like the butt of
an oak-tree, and altogether a low and mean look
which might have been supposed to sink him
below
the notice of the attorney, had not Affidavy's
habits made him long since a fitting associate for
even a meaner man; Well, squire, he said, with
an air as if even he regarded his visiter with some
little contempt, I don't care if I treat you to a
drop; though my whiskey's none of the smoothest,
neither.
Curse your whiskey! said the man of law,
pulling a guinea from his pocket. Do you see
this yellow boy, my lad of knuckles? Botheration
upon you, I came here to spend the day with you,
and I intend to treat you royally. So, call your
boy, Hanschen, and let him fetch me a quart of
cognac from old Brauntweinpunsch's, for he keeps
the best in all Hillborough. And do you take care
of the change for me, and help yourself, if you
like, while I am holding counsel with the
prisoner
.
Icod, said Lingo, balancing the coin in his
hand, I never stick at a good offer; but I should
like to know where this little feller came from.
Howsomever, 'tis none of my business; and so
Hans shall go. But, who's your client, squire?
I'm glad you've got a job, for you're a devil of a
feller at a speech,I always said that for you.
Which prisoner do you wish to see?
Why, the young Hawk of the Hollow, to be
sure.
Odds bobs, squire, said Lingo, scratching his
head, you're too late for that cock-robin, I'm
thinking.
Too late! He ha'n't broke jail already! cried
the alarmed attorney.
Broke jail
already!
echoed Lingo, with a
grin. I dunna what you mean by that; but if
he breaks jail at any time, while I'm king of the
ring, you may call me Jack Robinson. No, the
matter's not so bad as that: but he sent yesterday
for young Pepperel
God bless our two souls! ejaculated the
lawyer.
And they say, continued Lingo, he is to
have old Timberkin likewise; for, it seems, the
younker has money.
What! old Long-tongue Timberkin? Zounds,
we'll have the whole crow's-nest at the picking!
Oons, man, let me in to him.
Well, I dunna, muttered Lingo, leading the
way, however, to the prisoner's cell; I reckon,
'twere as well to save his money for something
else; for it's a clear case with him, eh, squire?
And as he spoke, he made a gesture with his finger
around his throat, the meaning of which was not
to be mistaken. Howsomever, here you are.
When you're done with him, just knock at the
door, and I'll let you out.
The next moment, Affidavy found himself alone
with the prisoner. He sat, apparently half
stupified
,
on a low bed, beneath a grated window,
from which a silvery light fell upon the crown of
his head, his shoulders, his knees, and his hands
that were clasped upon them, while his visage, and
nearly all his person, were lost in dusky shadow.
A little table with food and water was at his side,
but both were left apparently untouched. His
limbs were unfettered; and this circumstance
Affidavy
might have referred to the humanity of the
jailer, had he not perceived at a glance how
unnecessary
was such a precaution with one whose
bodily powers were as much enfeebled as those of
his spirit. Indeed, there was a look of such utter
wretchedness about the unfortunate youth as might
have softened a harder heart than the jailer's; and
even Affidavy began to survey him with a touch
of pity. He raised his eyes, when the door was
opened, but cast them again on the floor; for
indeed
there was so little in Affidavy's appearance
to excite attention, that he supposed him to be
some assistant of the jailer, or perhaps a common
officer, come on some errand of duty, with which
he would be soon made acquainted. This
suspicion
was dispelled by the attorney; who no sooner
heard the bolt shoot back into the stone door-post,
than he advanced, declaring his name and
character
.
Affidavy? muttered the youth, with a dejected
voice: I thought it was Mr. Timberkin, that Mr.
Pepperel was to bring me.
Pshaw, botheration, said the lawyer, you
were a goose to send for such ninnies; we can do
better without them. And what can these fellows
do for you? Where will you find them riding
about of a stormy night, picking up evidence,
laying
plans, and so on? However, we can find them
something to do: I'll sort them; I know what they
are fitted for. You stare at meVery well; I
understand what you mean. I come from your
friends, sir, and
From my friends? cried Hyland, starting up,
wildly: from whom? I have no friends here
none, at least, but
one;
and, oh God of heaven!
they tell me I have killed her too!
Oh, you mean old Elsie, said the attorney:
hang her, (that is, poor old soul!) she's not dead
yet.
But Catherine?Miss Loring?Captain
Loring's
daughter? cried the youth, with a voice
and countenance of despair; what news of
her?
Aha! I understand, muttered Affidavy. But
don't be alarmed; there's no death there.A
little
fright and grief, sir,that's all; they never kill
one. Hyland clasped his hands, and buried his
face between them; and the lawyer continued,
Quite a small matter, I assure you, and will
blow by, when we get you safely off.
Get me off! cried Hyland, again starting to
his feet, in the greatest agitation. Is there any
hope of that? No, there is none! he exclaimed,
vehemently: I am a blood-stained man, I have
taken life, I am a murderer
Tush and botheration, hush! said Affidavy,
clapping his hand over the prisoner's mouth; why
need you be blabbing? That was confession
enough to end the matter, without plea or witness:
`tis just a charge to the jury, a verdict in the box,
and then a long face and the hangman.
Misery! misery! cried the unhappy youth:
and to this I have brought myself! the death, the
ignominy, of a felon! I know it, I see it very
clearly, he added with indescribable emotion, I
see how it must endgood God, upon the gallows!
But it shall not be; I will die firstthank heaven,
I am dying already! Put but the trial offthey
say the court opens this day!put it off but a
week; you shall have an hundred guineas, five
hundred, a thousand, all that I have!only put off
the trial a week, that I may die before they drag
me into the light again! I deserve to die, I am
willing to die, but not, oh heaven! not upon a
gibbet!
Zounds! cried Affidavy, who strove in vain
to interrupt this burst of frenzied feelings, you
are taking the best way to reach a gibbet,
notwithstanding
.
You are mad, I believe; botheration,
sir, if you talk this way, there will be no saving
you
Saving me! Can I be saved? that is, not from
death, but from ignominious death? Hark you,
sir,they have taken away my money, but I have
enough more. Get me a knife, a pistol, a rope, a
dose of poison
Tush; if you do not cease this mad raving,
and let me speak, I will be gone; you are making
the case desperate. Be silent, and listen. Your
case is bad, sir, very bad, I must confess, sir. But
you have friends, sir; and you may hope; yes, you
may hopeif you are wise, sir, you may hope.
You haveNow don't start, or cry out, or I'll
leave youEhem, sir, I must whisperyou have
relations,a brother, sir
Oran! cried the prisoner, who would have
again started up, had he not been held in his seat
by Affidavy: oh, heaven be thanked! he has not
deserted me! Have you seen him? where is he?
what can he do for me? will he rescue me?
Tush, you must be quiet. If you will speak,
let it be in a whisper. As for the trial, why we
will stop that if we can. A British officer, with a
king's commission in his hand, taken in arms,
cannot
be shuffled into a cart by a civil tribunal, for
following his vocation, and slitting a throat or two.
Now, Mr. Lieutenant Gilbert, you understand me?
You have a commission.
No, by heaven! I refused it: I am no officer,
and this will not avail me. I am no officer, I was
none; nor was I so much even as a volunteer. I
refused the commission up to the last moment, and
this is the end of it: I would not be the enemy of
what was my native country,of my countrymen;
and now they are all enemies of mine! I was not
a member of the band; I never acted with it,
never save that fatal once, and then I went not to
make war,no, not even upon the poor wretch I
killedWould to God the pistol had been turned
against my own breast!
Tush, said Affidavy, interrupting what bade
fair to end in another violent paroxysm, that's
wide of the question. The band looked upon you
as officer; and unless that fellow, Sterling
The villain! it is he has ruined me!
Unless he can swear to the contrary, which he
can't, (and, botheration, there's a way of stopping
his mouth altogether;) who will be the wiser?
VOL. II.O
Now if we could get Dancy Parkins admitted,
along with Sterling, as evidence for the
commonwealth
However,
we can't; and we'll say no
moreabout it: the prosecuting attorney swears he'll
hang him. His mouth is, at all events, sealed. We
are safe enough. Here is the commission: Now,
sir, you will put a bold face on the matter, insist
upon your privilege, and
Perjure myself with a lie? avow myself the
enemy of my native land? and so die worse and
more degraded than I am? Never! Duplicity
has made me what I am; a deception that I
thought innocent and harmless, has brought me
to this pass. Had I come without concealment,
then I had left without disgrace, without crime.
Oh fool, fool that I was! Talk of this no more: it
was on this ground Mr. Pepperel thought of
defending
me; but on this ground I will not be
defended
.
Oho! and young ninny has been before me
there, too? muttered the lawyer. Well,
botheration
,
he continued, falling into a deep study, in
which he held counsel only with himself,there
is but the one shift in which the rascals won't join
me,but one path in which I can walk this
goosehead
off alone. Well now, all depends upon Lingo:
the rogue has a head as thick as a mountain, and
a considerable deal harder. `Twere a shame to
waste gold upon such a clod-headed pig. Give
him fifty guineas! God bless our two souls! it
were a mere casting of pearls before swine, and,
in some sort, a robbing of my own pockets. A
shilling's worth of laudanum were a better fee,
besides being cheaper. But, we'll see.
Having concluded his meditations, he turned to
the prisoner, who sat surveying him with an
anxious countenance, as if expecting some better
comfort from his thoughts, and then said,
Well, botheration, we'll have to think of
another
thing. It is well you are not fettered.
The young man writhed as if struck with a lash;
but before he could speak, Affidavy continued,
though with an emphatic gesture for silence,
For that saves us all the vexation and danger of
sawing. You see this little instrument? he said,
displaying a file. Now, be quiet on your life, sir.
You will understand from this, that there is
something
in the wind boding you good. You are sick
and wastedyou were hurt in the scuffle, too;
but put you beyond these stone walls, with a
saddled
horse under you, could you ride him?Why,
botheration, what makes you tremble so?
Oh heaven! cried Hyland, do not mock me!
Nay, I will whisper. Give me the file: I will cut
the grating through.
It does not need, said Affidavy, and I have
no notion of running any risk by leaving it in your
hands. But you must understand, sir, (hold your
ear close,) that this is a very ugly piece of
business
,
especially for
me:
if discovered, sir, I am a
ruined man; the penalty, sir, is the very next thing
to hanging; ay, sir, and in my estimation,
somewhat
worse; but that's according as we think of
it. Now, sir
I understand you, muttered Hyland. You
shall name your own rewardhalf of my estate,
if you will; nay, all
all,
so you get me but to the
woods, where I can die in peace, and
undishonoured
!
Tush, we'll not think of death: you'll live and
be happy. Then as for reward, why, sir, I would
not have you think me extortionate, or capable of
taking advantage of your distress. No, sir, by no
means; I am a lawyer, sir, but an honest man.
For God's sake, take what you will. Say
nothing
more; you shall have your wish.
Oh, sir, said Affidavy, there is no hurry.
As for taking all your estate, or even half of it,
sir,sir, do not believe I will think of that! No,
sir; I am neither a buzzard nor a niggur's dog.
But I must be indemnified for losses: I ruin
myself
,
sir,I must sacrifice an excellent practice,
sir,my reputation, sir, and my prospects. In a
word, sir, I must e'en take to my heels along with
you; for after such a prank as a jail-breaking, the
county will be too hot to hold me. Sir, I
remember
your father: he was a wronged man, sir; and
my feelings will not suffer me to see his youngest
son too severely handled. I once knew your
brothers
,
sir, and I always thought they were badly
treated. Sir, I feel much grieved to see poor old
Mr. Gilbert's son brought to such a pass. Sir, my
regard for your deceased parent makes me do
what I do; and, (not to whip the devil round the
stump any longer, sir,) I must confess, sir, that
what I do is a very scoundrelly piece of business,
sir; which if any body had proposed to me in
behalf
of any other person in the world, I should
certainly
,
sir, have knocked the proposer over the
mazzard,I would, sir, botheration.
What needs more words? said Hyland, too
much agitated to think of weighing the motives of
his new ally in the balance of conscience or
interest
.
Make your demand, and have it.
Ah! sir, said Affidavy, with a snuffle through
the nose, it is a sorrowful thing to be driven from
home and friends, to wander an exile over the
earth! There's my poor Mrs. Affidavy,the thing
will break her heart. However, he added, for
the prisoner began to wax frantic with impatience,
I don't believe in breaking hearts, after all,
especially Mrs. Affidavy's. Sir, you are a rich
man, and a young man, and a man without family
or cares. I will not sell my humanity, sir; no,
botheration, I'm above that; but I will accept of
your superfluity what will indemnify me for the
losses I endure in your service. Your case is very
bad, sir; and indeed, if you were even a
commissioned
officer, it could not be much better. The
indictment is already framed, and will this day, or
at furthest to-morrow, be returned a true bill by
the grand jury. You are a rich man, sirhad I
pleaded your cause and saved your life, I should
have expected a fee of five hundred guineas, (a
small sum for a rich man's life;) and there's old
Long-tongue and Pepperel would have demanded
as much more, each. But, sir, I'll save you five
hundred guineas; and leave these fellows to
whistle
.
We'll say a thousand guineas, then, and
All, I tell you, all, all! cried the unhappy
prisoner
.
Take any thing, take every thing
God forbid! cried Affidavy, devoutly; I
will not prey upon you. If you, from your own
generosity, should think of adding five hundred
more to the fifteen hundred, why sir, I should
thankfully receive them. But I leave that to
yourself
,
sir. At present, sir, I shall be content with
what I have named; and will take your note of
hand for the amount. You see, sir, he added,
drawing from a huge and well thumbed
pocket-wallet
,
a slip of paper, which with an ink-horn,
he immediately deposited on the table, I have
drawn this entirely in your favour, payment not
to be demanded unless upon the successful
completion
of a certain service not mentioned, and
then in such way as will suit your convenience.
O 2
If I fail, sir, I am ruined, sir, and yet receive
nothing
.
Allow me to fill the blanks, sir, and then,
sir, you can sign. I will fill them first, sir, in
order that you may see I take no advantage of
you, sir. Two thousand guineas, sir, is a small
sum, a very small sum, when one thinks of a
gallows.Sir, be not alarmedyour hand
trembles
,
sir; but I trust to your honour to recognise
the signatureyes, sir, I prefer your honour to
twenty witnesses, sir. You shall escape, sir; or
damn it, sir, added the harpy, in the enthusiasm
of gratitude, I will hang along with you!
It was fortunate the worthy Affidavy had some
bowels of compassion; for had he filled up the
blanks of his villanous contract with an amount
comprehending the whole worldly wealth of the
poor prisoner, it would have been subscribed with
equal alacrity. What was gold in the balance
with life? what price could be held dear that
procured
a remission from ignominy? Hyland
clutched at the pen as at the bolt of his
prisondoor
;
and, in the same frenzy, subscribed, in
addition
,
an order committing his good roan horse
to the disposition of his counsel, which Affidavy
declared to be necessary, Hyland neither asked or
sought to know how, to the success of the
enterprise
.
This accomplished, and the papers safely
deposited away in the wallet, the attorney wrung
his client by the hand, and that somewhat wildly,
giving him to understand that he was to hold
himself
in readiness that very night to escape, and
recommending him to sleep a little during the day,
the better to support the toil of flight. He charged
him, twenty times over, to be silent and wary, to
look as wo-begone and despairing as possible, and
above all things to hold no conversation that could
be avoided, with his other counsel. Then wringing
his hand again, with the most convulsive sympathy,
he knocked at the cell-door, was let out, and would
have run into the open air without ultering a word,
so big was his mind with the conception of his
vast fee, had he not been arrested by the
astonished
jailer.
Ods bobs! said Lingo, have you forgot the
brandy, squire?
Botheration! cried Affidavy, with a wild
stare.
Ods bobs! re-echoed Lingo, is the man mad?
Why, Affidavy, what ails you? You look as white
and wild as the prisoner!
Oh! ah! ay! the prisoner? yes, the prisoner,
said the attorney, rubbing his nose and chin with
great zeal, and recovering his wits. Oh, ay, I
remember: the prisoner, poor fellow! Ah, Lingo,
Lingo! 'tis a hard case, a sorrowful case, a
heartaching
case. I declare, Lingo, I could sit down
and blubber; I could, botheration, I could! and
here the sympathetic counsel, to Lingo's
amazement
,
burst into a loud uproarious laugh, such as
he had never been known to give vent to before.
The devil's in the man, sure enough, said
Lingo. But I see, I see, he muttered,
surveying
Affidavy sagaciously, he has been blowing it
a little too hard, and now he's getting a touch of
the
Horrors
. Well, well, brandy's the best cure
for that; and he shall have a snap at his own
medicine
.
So saying, the jailer poured out a glass of cognac,
the rich odour of which had no sooner reached
Affidavy's nostrils than his spirits became
composed
,
he stretched forth his hand, and the
smacking
of his lips proclaimed the fervour of his
satisfaction
.
Old Brauntweinpunsch for ever! he cried.
Ah, Lingo, you dog! you know what's what!
Ehem, sir, botheration and tush! God bless our
two souls, but I'm monstrous sleepy! Out all last
night, Lingo, in the rain; was upset in the brook
up at old Schlachtenschlager's, and half drowned,
and hadn't a wink of sleep. I believe, I was
dreaming
all the time the poor fellow up there was
telling
his story. Must go home and nap a little
But no, I can't! Will finish the jug there, Lingo,
before the day's out, ehem. Can give us a bed,
here, Lingo, man, in case of necessity? What d'ye
say? Rather full at Mrs. Affidavy's, and a
washday
,
too. Oh, you dog, botheration, we'll have a
rouse under lock and key to-night, won't we?
Have something to tell you, and must be near the
prisoner. But mum, boy, mum's the word! We'll
have a rouse to the health of my client.
With that, the attorney made another long face,
fell into a second roar of merriment, and went
flying from the prison.
CHAPTER XV.
If this should fail,
And that our drift look through our bad performance,
`Twere better not essay'd: therefore this project
Should have a back, or second, that might hold,
If this should blast in proof.
Hamlet.
It
was night before Affidavy returned again to
the prison; a circumstance that might be supposed
to puzzle the brain of the jailer not a little,
whenever
he happened to cast his eyes upon the bottle
provided at the lawyer's own expense, and
considered
the notorious degree of attraction existing
between the material spirits of the one, and the
immaterial spirit of the other. Before he had yet
determined whether the phenomenon should be
attributed to the disorder of mind he was first
disposed
to suspect on the part of Affidavy, or to
some uncommon display of his zeal on the
prisoner's
behalf, Affidavy made his appearance, and
notwithstanding the lateness of the hour, was
immediately
admitted,not so much, however, as a
man of law visiting his client, as an old friend and
crony, whom Lingo introduced for his own private
satisfaction. The attorney, nevertheless, after
squeezing the jailer's hand, and giving way to a
grin of extraordinary friendship, averred he must
see his client, before indulging a moment in
pleasure
;
and assuring Lingo, with uncommon spirit
and generosity, that he designed treating him like
a prince, bade him, out of the funds he had placed
in his hands, lay in a store of all drinkables he
could devise, with pipes and tobacco, and so forth,
so that they might have a jolly time of it together.
Then, after remaining half an hour with the
prisoner
,
he returned to the jailer's private quarters,
snapped his fingures, as if exulting at being delivered
from toil and restraint, swore he was the busiest
dog that ever slaved at a case, but would take his
comfort and his ease, without troubling himself
farther for the night, were all the gallows-dogs in
the world calling on him for assistance. Drink,
Lingo, you rogue, said he; give me a pipe, and
snuff the candle; for I abhor taking the first whiff
out of a greasy old cotton-wick. Drink, you
bigfisted
,
honest old sly-boots; and I'll tell you all
about the case.
Well, squire, I'm for you, said Lingo,
swallowing
a draught that showed him to be serious;
but I reckon I know all about the case; and it's
a clear hanging matter, as you must own.
If I do, botheration on me! said the lawyer.
There's two sides to every case; and all killing
a'n't murder, nor manslaughter neither, for the
matter of that.
Well, it's well to keep a good heartI always
said you had good pluck, Affidavy, especially in
desperate cases: but there was old Timberkin
here this afternoon, who went off with a long face;
and there was Pepperel, who as much as
confessed
there was no hope for the young one. And
why should there be? For my part, I don't reckon
it any great matter to have plumped a bullet into
one of the Falconer kidney; but when it comes to
a bloody refugee playing such outdacious tricks,
why there, Affidavy, I stick; it's clear ag'in all
principle; and there's ne'er a man of any jury you
can pack in the country, but will say
Hang!
Tush, drinkhere's to you. You've been
gabbling with Pepperel and Timberkin
numskulls
,
Lingobetween you and me, numskulls.
What do they know about the case? what have
they been doing to study it? Here have they been
all day laying their fool's pates together over it, like
two owls at mid-day over a dead bull-frog, not
knowing what to make of it. Drink, you rascal.
Now had you but been at old Schlachtenschlager's
last night! Ah!However, that's neither here nor
there. Now,I,my boy,botheration,I study my cases
in another manner, and I have been studying this
hard all day. But how? Ay, there's the question,
tush. Riding about, hunting witnesses from post
to pillar, serving
subpnas,
and all that, and
smelling
out the intents of the prosecution.
What witnesses do you want? said Lingo:
it's a clear case, and the younker owns to it. I'm
to swear myself, that he admitted the murder: he
made no deninal
He's an ass, said Affidavy; a fool and a
madman
,
who would knock his head against a post,
sooner than go round it, were his skull no thicker
even than a pumpkin-shell.
Oh, ay! said Lingo, nodding over his glass,
I see what you're at: you'll make it out a
non
cumpuss
case? But that won't do, squire; I swear
ag'in' you there: there's no mad in him; there's
more in some of the witnesses. But I suppose you
have been raking up for witnesses about old Elsie
Bell's? The lad begged I would send for her; but,
they say, she is in a dying way?
Bad enough, bad enough, said the lawyer:
and a good witness, too; but we can do without
her.
Well, I reckon you'll want all you have, said
the jailer; for they're strong for the
commonwealth
.
There's Dancy Parkins, they've taken
him for state's evidence, along with this here
gallivanting
fellow, Sterling, that came in for quarter,
and a power of others beside. I dunna why
they're so easy on Dancy; but they say, he's not
deep in for't; and the prosecution's ag'in' hanging
him. They say, Colonel Falconer has sworn he
will have the youngster's blood, if it costs him the
price of Hawk-Hollow twice over.
Tush, what care we? The devil take
Falconer
,
and the witnesses too,as undoubtedly the
devil will. As for your Sterling, I can smash his
testimony as I would a rotten apple. Botheration,
the man has a neck of his own.
Oh, ay, in the matter of the spying? said
Lingo: but they say, they will wink and let him
off, if Colonel Falconer be so minded; and they
say, too, he was promised protection by the
soldiers
,
and a clear pardon, on condition he fetched
'em into all Oran Gilbert's hiding-places. I don't
see, for my part, how a soldier can promise any
such thing, seeing that a soldier is neither a judge
nor a governor. And moresomover, there's the
matter of the attempt to do murder on Colonel
Falconer; for, I reckon, that can be proved on
him; and how he is to get clear of that, if the
Colonel pushes him, I don't know. Howsomever,
his case is badthe man has a bad conscience;
though, perhaps, 'tis only a small touch of the
horrors
,for
he has been drinking hard ever since he
has been in prison.
Oh, the devil take him, base turncoat and
betrayer
,
said Affidavy: I hold honour among
thieves to be as good a rule as honesty between
friends. And between you and me, Lingo, he has
served the Hawks a turn they will not forget. You
know how they hanged that soldier, Parker? Well
now, two pigs to a pound of butter, as the saying
is, you'll hear of this fellow swinging in a swamp,
some time before doomsday.
Ay; when they get him, said Lingo, and
with all my heart. But, you see, there's no talk of
proceeding against him; and when the trial's over,
I reckon he'll show the county a clean pair of
heelsthat is, if he ever gets over his hurts; for,
you must know, there's something of the staggers
about him,a sort of horrors, as I said,but I
don't know; and if you stay here long enough,
you'll hear him squeal out in his sleep, like a
choking
dog. Ods bobs! he made a squeak last night,
and I thought the devil had him: so I runs into his
room, and there I sees him sitting on his bed-side,
all of a shiver, and as white as a sheet, singing out,
as if he was talking to old Nicodemus,
`Shake not your jolly locks at me,'
or something of that natur', I dunna what, but it
was about locks and bolts, and the lord knows
what; but I fetched him a box on the ear; and
that brought him to, and he fell to groaning. And
now, Affidavy, here's to you; and I don't care if I
do you a bit of a service, though I don't see what
good can come of it. If it will do your cause any
service, to knock this here testimony on the head,
why a hint's as good as a long sermon, as the
saying
is. Just 'validate him on the p'int of his upper
story, and call me and Hanschen to swear to his
doings and sayings; for I reckon, he's a clearer
non cumpuss
case than the prisoner. Howsomever,
that can't do no good; for I'm clear in for
swearing
VOL. II.P
to the youngster's admitting he killed the
deceased
,
which is quite a settler of the whole hash.
Tush, said Affidavy, let him swear, and
swear his best. There is testimony enough to do
the business, if we trust to that. The devil take
the case; I won't bother my brains with it any
further. However, Lingo, my boy, it was a queer
thing of yours, that letting the prisoner go clear of
gloves and garters. He might break jail,eh, my
boy!
As how? said Lingo. No, squire, you don't
come over me there. I clapped the irons on him
at first; but, you see, poor fellow, I saw he was sick,
and just as weak and heavy-hearted as a pipped
poult, and no more fear of dodging in him than an
old horse: so I knocked the clinkers off, and let
him have the swing of the room, poor fellow;
and there he's safe enough. Moresomover, I
never heard tell of his being much of a Hawk, only
in blood and name; and I have a sort of pity on
him.
Ah, yes, said Affidavy, with a melancholy
stare; if you were to hear his story, Lingo, it
would melt your heart; for you have a soft heart,
Lingo, a merciful heart, Lingo; and it will go well
with you, Lingo; for there's something said in the
Bible about the merciful.
Well, said Lingo, I don't set up for much of
that, nor for much religion neither; but I never
beats a prisoner, except when he's contrary; and
this here youngster seems much of a gentleman;
and I have a notion, if he's well treated, he may
leave me something; for he has a gold watch,
(howsomever, the Sheriff's got it;) and, they say,
he's well-to-do in the world.But, squire, drink
on; it's getting late.
Let it, said Affidavy; here am I fixed for the
night; for how do I know but that you may be in
trouble before morning, and may want a friend to
help you?
Trouble! and help! said Lingo, looking up
with surprise. If you mean that Sterling and his
squeaking, why, ods bobs, it only needs a cuff or
two to bring him about. Ods bobs, Affidavy, he
added, with a grin, if you stay, I reckon, it's
you
may want a friend to help you. I don't say
nothing
;
but he that's got a speech to make before
court and jury to-morrow, should not be too free
of the creatur' to-night.
Affidavy, who had not yet betrayed any strong
symptoms of being affected by his good cheer,
shook his head mysteriously, and then replied,
There's no telling what might happen, Lingo.
These refugees are devils incarnate, as far as
daring
goes. The whole regiment here is out in
chase of them, and all the able-bodied men of the
village in company; so that there's nothing left to
keep guard over us but old women and young
ones. Now, Lingo, we'll suppose a casehow
many men, armed with muskets and axes, would
it take to sack your stone jug here, smash open a
door, and let out the prisoners?
Ods bobs! said Lingo, I don't know: but I
reckon I could hold out, me and Hanschen, until
we had assistance. But, howsomever, that's
supposing
a case that can't happen.
Don't be too secure, said the attorney, with a
solemn voice; for there's no saying what may
happen, when there's such a man as Oran Gilbert
in the case. I reckon, an axe and a few crowbars,
with an auger or two, might soon make way
through the yard-gate; and then, the back-door
would be but a mere joke; and then, Lingo, why
surrender, or hard axe and soft head would be the
end of it.
Ods bobs! said Lingo, what puts such a
notion as that into your head? There's ne'er a
tory, now, within forty miles of us!
Ah, Lingo! This is a wicked world, with a
good many crooked ways in it; and there's a deal
of 'em lead to the jail-door. My own notion is,
that Oran Gilbert is lying where no one would
think of disturbing him. Now, Lingo, you and I
are friends. You're an honest fellow, Lingo, but,
botheration, you're mortal. And so, Lingo, I
shouldn't trust you too far, if Oran Gilbert came
to the wall-gate, about the time of cricket-cry,
chucked you over a purse with a matter of ten
guineas or so in it, while you stood peeping at the
key-hole.
Oho! said Lingo, staring at the attorney with
that sort of perplexity which a stupid man betrays
when endeavouring to fathom the point of a jest,
which he is sensible ought to be laughed at; Oho,
squire, I see what you are after,he, he, he! he
said, beginning to giggle, and lifting a glass as he
laughed. I'm a mortal man, sure enough, and
might take a fee, as well as e'er a lawyer in the
land. But ten guineas is a small sum, Affidavy;
and as for opening a jail-door for such a small
matter, why, Affidavy, that's onlyhe, he, he!
And so you've been retained by the tories? he, he,
he! Well, I was wondering where the yallow boy
came from,he, he, he!
Tush! retained by the tories?
I!
said the
man of law, somewhat disconcerted.
Oh, squire, a joke for a joke's all fair; tit for
tat, you know,
`Tit for tat,
Butter for fat,
Kick my dog, and I'll kill your cat,'
as the saying is; and the worthy Lingo again
burst into a peal of mirth, which allayed the
sudden
alarm of his companion. Affidavy looked him
in the face, and became satisfied from the air of
stupid glee which invested the jailer's features,
that the liquor was suddenly beginning to fill his
noddle; and in this conceit he was confirmed by
Lingo adding, after another preliminary giggle,
Well now, Affidavy, I'm an honest feller,as
you say, but I scorn being a fool. I know what's
what; and I wish somebody would chuck me ten
guineas over the wall-gate; I wouldn't ask him
whether he was a tory or true American; for, you
see, a guinea's a guinea, and clean stuff, no matter
what pocket it comes from. But then, squire, as
to opening the gate for such a small matter, he,
he, he! why, I'm too honest for that. I'm a poor
man, but, as I said, he, he, he! I scorn being a
fool; and so, he, he, he! as you and me is friends,
Affidavy, why, if the man was to chuck about fifty
more to the back of 'em, why, he, he, he! I don't
know what might become of my prisoners.
Fifty guineas! cried Affidavy, grinning in
return
,
but with a sort of scorn; that's putting
your honesty at a higher price than your soul, for
which, botheration, I would not give half the
money.
He, he! said Lingo, slapping his boon
companion
on the knee, and nodding and winking in a
manner meant to be exceedingly significant; but
come now, what'll they give? for I'll stand to
reason.
Give!
who
give? said Affidavy, affecting
surprise
.
Oh! the tories, you mean. Tush, how do
P 2
I know? Perhaps you might get twelve or
thirteen
guineas out of them; and that's a good round
sum.
He, he, he! said Lingo; but what do you
get yourself?
I! said Affidavy, again alarmed. His
trepidation
was however driven to flight by another fit
of laughter, in which Lingo's honest countenance
indicated the most expressive innocence of all
suspicion.
Ods bobs! said he, I wouldn't sell a
prisoner
under fifty pounds; and if they'd talk to me
about that, he, he, he!and here he could scarce
proceed for laughing: No, no; if you'll strike a
bargain for me for fifty pounds, in hard money, why
then, he, he! they may take my prisoners, and hang
them, if they will. But it's all one; there's no such
luck for poor Bob Lingo: honesty won't fetch any
thing worth having now-a-days. Fifty guineas! a
small sum: why one could get more for letting a tory
in
jail. But, he, he, he! it's all one to Bob Lingo.
I'm 'mazing sleepy, squire! But I know what'll
keep me awake, he, he! I've got a barrel of
wonderful
fine cherry bounce; and, he, he! I'll go
fetch a pitcher of it, and we'll make a night of it,
I warrant me.
With these words, he left the apartment.
Bravissimo! said the attorney, as soon as he
had departed; I'll cheat the unconscionable rascal
out of every penny. He's as drunk as a pig
already
.
He stole to the door, peeped out, and then,
satisfied
that Lingo was beyond observation,
proceeded
to pour into a glass, from a little vial he drew
from his pocket, a goodly dose of laudanum, to
which he forthwith added sugar and brandy,
muttering
to himself all the while, Here's a dose for
the dog will make him sleep like a wood-chuck at
Christmas; but 'twont hurt him. Botheration, I'm
sleepy myself, the lord knows: but two thousand
guineas! Two thousand devils! I'm a made man,
even if the young ass repents his bargain and
makes me 'bate one half!Give
him
fifty guineas!
pearls before swine! He'll sleep like a top; and as
for Hanschen, why he's fast alreadyDevils!
what's that?Oh, the drunken fool has tumbled
over a chair, and smashed the pitcher!Could
hear the clink and clatter together. Am
somewhat
drunk myself; but a little does me good.
Having completed the soporific potion so kindly
designed for Lingo, and not without producing
some clattering of glasses, for he was far from
being sober, he sat down and prepared a second
glass as much like the first as possible, except that
he took good care not to qualify it from the vial,
which he restored to his pocket. He then began
to hum, and kick his heels together, wondering
what kept the jailer away so long. The town is
already fast asleep, he grumbled, and my three
jolly tories will be whistling at the gate like seven
thousand katydids. Poor Mrs. Affidavy! how she
will stare and scold in the morning! Odd rabbit
her, she has a tongue might suit a judge on the
bench; and, botheration, it will be a lucky day for
me, when I'm well quit of her.
While he rejoiced over his prospect of
deliverance
,
Lingo re-entered the apartment, bearing a
huge pitcher, from which he contrived, at every
step, to discharge, so wide and uncertain was his
gait, no mean quantity of its purple contents.
Indeed
,
if appearances were to be trusted, he was
already so far gone in intoxication, that it needed
but one glass more to stretch him on the floor; and
Affidavy hailed his infirmity as the herald of
success
.
Ods bobs! said the jailer, staggering up to
the table, and depositing his burthen with so little
dexterity that half its contents went splashing over
his friend, here's stuff for you! But a jail's a bad
place to keep liquor. Ods bobs, I broke my shin
over a fetter-bolt, and, ods bobs, I broke my new
blue pitcher; but, ods bobs, who cares for
expense
?
Botheration, said Affidavy, here I've mixed
you a brandy cock-tail, and you've spilled the
bounce into it. However, I warrant, it's all the
better.
Ay, I warrant me, old Teff, said Lingo,
giving
him an affectionate hug round the neck, and
we'll drink it, my boy, like a lord and a
truehearted
American. But, ods bobs, my boy, gi' me
a chair; for, d'ye see, I sprained my leg, and it's
weak under me.
Oh, ay, said Affidavy, dragging the jailer's
chair round to his own end of the table. But
stop there, you fool, you've got
my
glass!
Hiccupwhere's the difference? he, he!
said Lingo, yielding, however, the glass he had
taken, and receiving that which Affidavy had so
craftily prepared. Here's to you, old Teff
Affidavy
!
Here's to you! said the lawyer; and both
raised the glasses to their lips. The attorney
watched his victim with the eyes of a mouser
intent upon her prey. He saw him swallow one
mouthful, and then a second, and thenthe jailer
withdrew the vessel from his lips.
Botheration! murmured Affidavy to himself,
does the villain taste it?
He was soon relieved from his fear. Lingo laid
the glass on the table, and turning to Affidavy,
burst into a fit of maudlin weeping, betraying, at
the same time, a strong disposition to repeat the
fraternal embrace. As Affidavy felt no inclination
to balk this friendly intention, he laid down his
own glass, and was instantly taken round the neck
by the jailer, who exclaimed, in the most pathetic
manner in the world,
Ods bobs, old Teff, I don't know what will
become
of me!
Why, what's the matter? said Affidavy.
Why, ods bobs, blubbered the other, one
day, when I was a little boy, I licked my father;
and there's no good can come of it.
Tush, you ass, said the attorney, you might
have trounced your mother too, if you had been so
minded. But, botheration on you, let me go, and
drink your cock-tail.
Well, I will, said Lingo; but it's a
murdering
piece of business to whip one's father;
and I've a notion to give myself up, and let 'em
hang me. But I can't hang without counsel, and
I can't spare money to pay a fee. Now, old Teff,
my boy, you're my friend, and if you'll make a
speech for me for nothingI always stuck up
for your being the 'cutest lawyer in the county,
and I'll lick any body that says No to itnow
if you'll make me a speech, I reckon I may get off
for nothing, with a clear 'quittal.
Drink, you fool, said Affidavy; I'll take the
case, and charge you nothing.
He, he! said Lingo, snatching up his glass,
we'll go 'em, then, slick as a snake in a new
skin. Here's to you, Teff, my old boy! and the
devil eat his liver that don't drink smash down to
the bottom! Hiccup,here's to you.
He swallowed his potation, and the attorney,
without a moment's hesitation, drained his own
at a single draught. But scarce had he
withdrawn
the glass from his lips, before he started
up, exclaiming,
God bless our two souls! what was in the
glass? Ah, Lingo, you fool, 'twas that cursed
bounce you spilled in it! Vile trash, you dog, vile
trash!
What! my bounce? cried Lingo, indignantly;
as good bounce as was ever brewed, and, ods
bobs, a good deal better. But now, you jolly old
Teff, let's sing a song. Don't sit there staring at
me, like a starved cat; but sing, you old rascal;
let's sing `Vain Britons.'
The oddest taste in the world, said Affidavy,
in obvious bewilderment: sure there must have
been some mistake!And, in effect, there was;
for at the very moment when the jailer was
embracing
his friend, and beseeching the favour of
his counsel, he slid one hand behind him to the
table, and there kept it until he had effected a
mutual
interchange of places between the two glasses;
the consequence of which was, that when the
fondling
fit was over, and the vessels resumed, he
himself got possession of the innocent draught,
while Affidavy caught up and swallowed that
designed
for his companion. Had Lingo been in any
condition but that in which he appeared, the
attorney
would have conceived the trick in a moment;
but a look at the jailer's innocent visage was
sufficient
to banish all suspicion of foul play; and in
consequence, he could only stare about him in
wonder and perplexity, nodding his head up and
down in a manner the most ludicrous in the world,
while Lingo testified his indifference and
patriotism
together, by lanching out, in a quavering,
drunken voice, upon a camp-song, said to be then
highly popular among the continental soldiers.
`Vain Britons! boast no longer, with insolence and glee,
By land your conquering legions, your matchless strength by
sea;
For lo! at length Americans their sword have girded on,
And sung the loud Huzza! huzza! for war and Washington!'
`Sent forth by North for vengeance, your gallant champions
came;
With
tea,
with
treason,
and with
George,
their lips were all on
flame:
Yet, sacrilegious though it seem, we rebels still live on,
And laugh to scorn your empty threats, and so does
Washington
.'
`Still deaf to mild entreaties, still blind to England's good,
Your knaves, for thirty pieces, betrayed your country's blood:
Like sop's cur, you'll only gain a shadow for a bone,
Yet find us dangerous shades, indeed, inspired by Washington.'
The third stanza of this patriotic roundelay
(there are a dozen stanzas altogether,) was sung
by Lingo with especial emphasis, particularly the
second and third line, and might have conveyed to
the attorney some inkling of the true state of the
question between them, had not his senses been
already overpowered. The strength of the draught,
aided not a little by the vigilance of the
succeeding
night, was too much for Affidavy's brain; and
before the stanza was concluded, he slipped from
his chair to the floor, and there lay like a log.
The jailer concluded the song; then springing
up, he burst into a hearty laugh, exclaiming, Ods
bobs, I've outlawyered the lawyer! and there he
is, as fast as a poker. Now, you old fool, he
added, without a vestige of intoxication remaining,
(and indeed his drunkenness had been all assumed)
if there was too much stuff in the mixing, why e'en
take the consequence, for it was all of your own
brewing.
Then stooping down, he examined Affidavy's
pockets. The first thing he laid hands on, was the
vial of laudanum, which he smelt at with great
glee; he then filched out a leathern purse,
containing
,
according to his own verbal inventory,
sixteen
guineas in gold, two Spanish dollars, a
French crown-piece, and an English shillingOho
old Teff! The next thing discovered was the
pocket-wallet, from which he drew to light the
note of hand which the cormorant had caused the
prisoner to sign in the morning. All these
different
items he deposited under lock and key, in a
closet, from which he also drew a pair of
horse-pistols
,
and an old horseman's sword, all of which
he proceeded to buckle round his body.
While thus engaged, some one softly
approached
,
tapped at the door, and being bidden to enter,
disclosed the features of his assistant Hanschen.
Done him up! said Lingo, pointing to
the prostrate figure; and then demanded, All
ready?
Yaw.
How many?
Fy, dtare's Sturmhausen, Schnapps, and tree
oders, mit guns and pistols.
Ods bobs, then, we'll nab'em; for they can't
muster half so many. Have you chained the
prisoner
?
Yaw; and he turned pale, and fainted afay.
Then I put polts on Tancy Parkins; and now I fill
go fix the t'oder, Shterling.
Never mind him; he's safe. Now, Hans, you must
fight like a bull-dog, if there's any fighting at all.
But not a word about the lawyer here. Here's a
pistol: take a swig at the bounce, and we'll carry
it down to the boys, to warm their hearts a little.
If we catch that Oran, ods bobs, I don't know' what
the reward is, but it will be the making of us.
Yaw, said Hans; and picking up the pitcher,
he followed the jailer into the yard. Here they
found five stout men, with whom the jailer
conversed
in whispers, and then, after all had drunk of
the pitcher, he led them towards the gate, saying,
as he bade them lie down on either side of it,
Now mind ye, men; I hold to the lock, and here's
my cue: If any enters, why I claps the gate to
behind them, and then outs with the key; and then
you're to jump up and on em, taking 'em alive, if
you can. But mind ye, you're not to stir, till you
hear me give the signal to fall on; and the signal
is,
You're welcome, gentlemen
. Don't forget it.
Now, 'taint sure they'll come; but if they do, ods
bobs, we've got 'em!
Having thus received their instructions, the
whole party squatted down on the ground, and
awaited the issue of their adventure in silence.
The village jail was a small, though strong,
building
of stone, and the yard, therefore, on the rear,
in which the prisoners were sometimes allowed to
air themselves, was of no great extent. It was
surrounded, however, by a high and strong wall,
the gate to which was of heavy double planking,
strengthened with bars of iron; and the lock was
of weight sufficient to make any prisoner despair
of forcing it.
It was perhaps midnight, when these silent
guards,seven in number, including the jailer and
his assistant,took their places. The night was
perfectly clear, and so far unfavorable to the
assailants, if assailants they really were; of which,
it must be confessed, honest Lingo could not affect
to be certain, his whole information amounting to
VOL. II.Q
no more than the few ambiguous phrases he had
caught from Affidavy. But then this fellow, under
a stupid countenance, concealed an astonishing
fund of quickness and cunning, of which the
attorney
little dreamed; and long before Affidavy had
opened his lips on the subject, Lingo had seen and
noted enough to give edge to the native
suspiciousness
of his character. The appearance of
Affidavy himself, claiming to be one of the
prisoner's
counsel, instantly set his wits to work; he
marvelled who had retained him, since he knew he
had not yet seen the prisoner. Then the
appearance
of the guinea, a rare coin in such hands, and
devoted with such magnificent nonchalance to the
purpose of doing honour to
him,
was not without
its virtue in stirring his conjectures, especially
when it came to be added to the invitation
Affidavy
so coolly gave himself to repeat his visit, and
spend the night in the jail. He ascertained
without
trouble, that the attorney soon after leaving
the prisoner, had ridden into the country, where
he remained all day, without once seeking a
conference
with either of the prisoner's original
counsellors
;
and one or two other little circumstances
he discovered, which prepared him to understand,
and make the most of what Affidavy afterwards
divulged in the form of supposition.
All his discoveries, however, went no further
than to induce a belief that some design for
rescuing
the young Gilbert was on foot; but where,
and in what manner, the enterprise was to be
attempted, he was left to infer as he could. He did
not doubt, indeed, that the attempt was expected
to be made with his connivance, and that Affidavy
had been bought to bribe him into compliance;
though the covetousness of this unworthy and
degraded
limb of the law had led him upon a device
for dispensing with the jailer's services, and so
clapping the additional reward into his own pocket.
This circumstance convinced him the force of the
conspirators could not be very great; and besides,
he had good reason to suppose that not more than
two or three could succeed, whatever might be
their boldness, in making their way to the village,
while the band was so closely beset at a distance.
At all events, he muttered to himself, as he sat
by the gate, listening for the sound of footsteps, if
there should come even a dozen of them, and
there's not so many left in the gang, I can let in
just as many as will serve my turn, and then slap
the door to on the rest.Hist! It sounded like the
tramp of a horse; yet 'twas only the splash of the
river over the stones. Well now, if they shouldn't
come, here's so much trouble for nothing, and the
lord knows how much cherry-bounce. Silence
there, you Hanschen! you're asleep. Ods bobs,
men, don't scratch your heads so hard!
He kept watch for perhaps the space of an hour,
without hearing the stir of man or beast, or indeed
any other sound besides the rush of the river, which
rolls down a pebbly declivity hard by, and the
chirping of numerous field-crickets on the trees of
neighbouring gardens; when suddenly one of these
insects; tired, as it seemed, of its dewy perch,
which it had exchanged for the dry planks of the
gate, or perhaps just waked up in the key-hole,
began its nocturnal cry with a zeal and energy
that instantly captivated the jailer's attention. It
now struck his recollection that the attorney had,
in some way or other, drawn these minstrels of the
night into his suppositions; and he began to fancy
the sound might be a signal made by the tories,
though he could not imagine how the organs of a
human being could be ever taught to imitate a cry
so peculiar. He felt his own inability to answer it
in the same tone; and not knowing how otherwise
to bring the affair to a point, he replied by a goodly
whistle, which his companions supposed to be the
signal of the enemy, and therefore prepared to
start up at a moment's warning. The whistle was
instantly followed by a slight tap on the gate, and
Lingo, waving his hand to his backers to be silent,
boldly turned the key. Then slipping the bolt
aside, he saw three human figures on the outside,
ready to enter. Two to one, he muttered to
himself, opening the gate wide enough to admit one
to pass at a time. One actually entered, and was
moving aside, without speaking, to make way for
the others, when Lingo's scheme was defeated by
a sudden rattling of chains at the window of
Hyland's
cell, and by a voice crying out, Beware!
beware! you are betrayed!Up and on 'em!
cried Lingo
Gentlemen, you are welcome!
and as
he spoke, he made a grasp at the first comer,
which was answered so effectually, that he
instantly
found himself sprawling on his back, with
such a blaze of lights dancing in his eyes, that
he thought his whole brain had been
converted
into a ball of fire. The next instant, there was
a loud cry of voices, and a roar of pistols, which,
reverberating from wall to wall, filled the narrow
yard with the most dreadful din; and Lingo
started
up just in time to behold a tall figure darting
through the gate into the open air.
Fire and furies! he cried, rushing after the
fugitive; I'll pay you for that touch of the
tomahawk
,
you bloody tory! and the next moment
coming up with his chase, he struck him a blow
with his heavy sword, that brought him to the
ground. Then pouncing upon him, and assisted
by another who ran to his assistance, crying that
`all were taken,' he dragged the prisoner into the
yard and secured the gate. Lights, Hanschen!
he cried, Yaw, said Hanschen; but fat's the
use? Here's one teadt, and anoder tying. And
here's Sturmhausen has his headt proke; and
here's me mit my finkers chopped off by the tamt
schelm
rogues. But I have kilt vone, mine Gott be
thank'd! and I fill hang the t'oders!
Before Hanschen had wholly delivered himself
of his private ills and triumphs, a loud huzza was
set up by the others, upon hearing that all the
three assailants were secured. Lights were
instantly
brought into the yard, and, sure enough,
there lay three men on the ground, one of whom
was stone dead, his head blown to atoms by
Hanschen's
pistol, a second writhing to all appearance
in the agonies of death, and a thirdbut what
were the surprise and mortification of the jailer,
when in this third, the man he had cut down with
his own hands, he beheld the visage of his
prisoner
,
Sterling.
Upon this discovery being made, all was again
confusion; the gate was a second time thrown
open, but only that they might behold the whole
village in commotion, the alarm having been given
by the previous tumult. It was plain that the third
individual, and he perhaps the most important of
all, had made his escape. To add to the confusion
of the scene, the wounded tory, upon hearing
some of those who raised him pronounce the
name of Sterling, suddenly snatched a pistol from
one, and discharged it at this unlucky personage,
with a bitter oath. It was struck from his hands,
however, so that it did no hurt to any one.
The jailer, now in fear lest the other prisoners
might have broken from their cells, ran to those
occupied respectively by Hyland Gilbert and
Q 2
Dancy Parkins, both of whom he found in fetters,
the former, in truth, secured by a bolt to the floor,
so that, although he had some freedom of motion,
he could not approach the window near enough
to look out, and must therefore have been led to
give the alarm to the rescuers by hearing the
crash of the bolt in the gate. This was additional
evidence of the guilt of Affidavy; but at that
moment
,
the jailer did not trouble himself to think of
that discomfited personage. He stared at the
prisoner
,
heard his beseeching demand, `Who had been
taken? who had been hurt?' answered it by a
profane
oath, and then ran to Parkins's cell. He then
stepped to that occupied by Sterling, and found
that this individual, seduced perhaps by the sounds
of wassailing below, had employed his time in
removing
with a knife a hinge from his door, by which
means he had made his way into the yard, where he
took advantage of the commotion so unexpectedly
displayed, to make a bold dash for freedom. What
had seduced this wretch, who was in no immediate
peril of death, or even trial, and who had freely
rendered himself into the hands of justice, to
attempt
his escape, Lingo could not imagine; and
in truth he did not attempt to solve the mystery.
He satisfied himself that he had given him a severe,
perhaps a serious cut, betwixt the neck and
shoulder
,
and then had him carried into his cell, not
without some very hearty curses upon his
enterprise
,
and its effects in robbing him of a more
valuable prize. These were borne by the
adventurer
without any reply save ghastly looks; and
indeed Mr. Sterling was a greatly altered man,
presenting an appearance even more wo-begone
and wretched than that of Hyland, the victim of
his anger. As if to mark the jailer's indignation
in the strongest way, the wounded refugee was
deposited in the same chamber, as well as the body
of his comrade.
Upon examining into the condition of the
defenders
,
it was found that Hanschen had received
a cut over the hand, which, as was discovered
afterwards, had been inflicted not by a foe, but by
one of his fellow-defenders; and this had deprived
him of a finger, and perhaps of the service of two
others. Another man had been hurt by a bullet
in the leg, and a third had been stunned, like Lingo,
by a stroke on the head. As for Lingo himself, he
discovered, with some surprise, that the blow which
prostrated him had left a wide and ugly gash on
his crown, though not one from which he had
cause to apprehend serious consequences. The
only ill effect it produced was, to sour his temper
to an uncommon degree; so that after peace was
restored in his dominions, and his aiders and
abettors
all discharged for the night, he betook himself
to the sleeping Affidavy, and bestowed some three
or four such kicks upon his ribs, that it was a
wonder
he left a sound one in his body. But even
these failed to rouse the stupified attorney; and at
last, calling to Hanschen for assistance, he dragged
him up into Sterling's cell, where he deposited
him on the floor, betwixt the dead man and the
dying.
Now here are four bites for the devil together,
he said; and if they all die before morning, it's
all one to Bob Lingo.
With these words, he descended to look after
his wound, which was bleeding freely.
CHAPTER XVI.
Jaff
.
Ha!
Pierre
.
Speak; is't fitting?
Jaff
.
Fitting!
Pierre
.
Yes; is't fitting?
Jaff
.
What's to be done?
Pierre
.
I'd have thee undertake
Something that's noble to preserve my memory
From the disgrace that's ready to attaint it.
Otway.
The
attorney's sleep was long and sound; and,
by and by, notwithstanding the exciting nature of
the midnight events, sleep visited the eyes of all
others in the prison, even those of the hapless
Hyland
.
The misery of his situation was complete.
His hopes of escape, confirmed almost to
certainty
by Affidavy in his last visit, in which the
whole plan was explained to him by this honest
gentleman, threw him into a frenzy of joy; and it
was with unspeakable agitation that he listened to
the subdued murmurs below, which told him the
first and most critical scene of the conspiracy had
already begun. How the attempt of Affidavy
upon the head of the jailer terminated has been
already seen; how the scheme might have
eventuated
,
had this rapacious wretch followed out the
plan he had proposed to the others, which was to
bribe the jailer into connivance, it is not so easy
to say, Lingo being perhaps too much of a
philosopher
in his way, to refuse a good price for his
honesty. But Affidavy, while he held the bone in
his mouth, hungered exceedingly for the shadow,
or, to speak more strictly, for that smaller morsel
destined for the jaws of his friend; and, in
consequence
,
adopted the foolish device of the `
hocussed'
cup, in which he encountered so signal a
failure. While Hyland sat in his cell, devoured
by expectation, the door was opened, and the
jailer's assistant entered, bearing a heavy set of
fetters, which he forthwith proceeded to fasten
upon his limbs. This was the first moment they
were ever thus dishonoured; but the unhappy
youth thought not of the disgrace; he saw at once
that the scheme of flight was defeated, and that
his hopes had been encouraged, only to be blasted.
The agitation of his spirits threw him into a swoon;
rousing from which, he gave himself up to despair,
until his thoughts were diverted into a new
channel
by an unexpected commotion below, which was
indeed caused by nothing less than the entrance
into the prison of the five men whom Hanschen
had secretly summoned to his assistance. He
heard them pass into the yard, and inferred at
once that the scheme for his escape was intended
to be turned against his unsuspecting friends. For
this reason, he gave the alarm, the instant he
heard the gate swinging on its hinges, and would
have done so sooner, had he been able to approach
the window, so as to look out upon the
proceedings
of the jailer. Let his sufferings be imagined,
when he heard the sudden din of pistols and voices,
followed by execrations and groans, without
knowing
aught of the result of the rencounter, except
that it had been fatal to his own hopes. He saw
the jailer look into the apartment, his visage
stained
with blood, and then depart without satisfying
his painful curiosity; and then followed a long
period of silence, equally oppressive and
distracting
.
Great as was his distress, however, it
contributed
in the end to stupify his mind; and towards
morning, he fell into an uneasy slumber, to add
the tortures of the ideal to those of the material
world. From this he was aroused by a noise, as
it seemed, at his window; and starting up, he
distinctly
heard a voice pronounce his name. It was
but a whisper, and that fainter than the lowest
chirping of the insects; but he recognized at once
the tones of Oran; and, scarce repressing a cry of
joy, he rushed towards the window. The chain
was still upon his body, and its clash, with the
rattling
of the ring by which it was attached to the
floor, told to Oran, as well as to his own spirit,
how vain was the effort. The cell which he
inhabited
was in a corner of the building, and the
wall of the yard was perhaps within six or seven
feet of the window, which was more elevated, and
therefore overlooked it. It was possible for a man,
standing on the top of the wall, and of sufficient
strength of body to support himself, lizard-like,
while leaning towards the window, almost to reach
it with his arms; and Hyland, who had noted
these circumstances before, easily understood the
situation of his visiter, which besides being
extremely
dangerous, was also exposed to
observation
.
I cannot approach, Oran, he cried in the
same whispering tones; I am chained to the
floor.
Hold forth your hand, muttered the refugee,
and cast me the end of your neckcloth. You
shall have files and aquafortis; and to-morrow
night you shall be free. Cast out the neckcloth.
I cannot, replied the prisoner, with a voice of
despair; I cannot reach the bars, even if I had
files to cut them. What shall I do? Oh, brother,
brother! why did you leave me? Speak, brother,
for Heaven's sake, speak! Can you help me?
The refugee remained silent, apparently struck
dumb, either by the reproach of his brother, or by
the discovery of his inability to help himself; and
Hyland, imagining that his silence was owing to
some sudden alarm, held his own peace, awaiting
the event. In a short time, however, the refugee
spoke again: the whisper was as low as before,
but it was broken by some strong tumult of feeling.
I can
not
help you, Hyland, he said,
unless
,
unlessBut hold; I will fling a file through
the bars, and you can saw yourself free. Throw
your bed on the floor under the window, that it
may make no noise. Are you ready?
I am, said Hyland; and the next instant he
heard the steel instrument strike upon the bars of
the grating, whence it fell ringing among the
stones in the yard. A second was cast with
better
effect, and entering the window, fell upon the
couch. But as if fate now designed to tantalize
the unhappy youth into distraction, he no sooner
sought to obtain it by dragging the bed towards
him, than he heard it fall off upon the floor, where
it remained beyond his reach, and must remain
until discovered by the jailer. This mishap being
communicated to Oran, drew from him an
exclamation
,
in which Hyland was made aware of his
hopeless situation:
God help you! he cried, I can do no more.
Yes, Oran, yes! exclaimed the prisoner,
you can help me yet. Throw me a knife
Hah! said Oran, and you will use it on the
jailer? ay! as he bears you to the court house, in
the morning! Strike him in the throatI will be
by, and, perhapsWell, well, you will at least die
like a man, not like a dog. Will you kill him?
No! said the youth; God pardon me the
blood I have shed already: I will never more harm
a human beingno, not even to save my wretched
body from shame. Yet throw it to me, throw it
to me!
And for what? muttered Oran, in tones scarce
audible.
For what? replied the prisoner. Oh God,
do you ask me, brother?
For your own bosom then? Ay, can we do no
more? And the lawyers, then, can give you no hope,
not even for money?
None, none: I am condemned alreadyThe
knife, the knife!
The dream's out! said Oran, with what
seemed a laugh. When I was a little boy, and
the rest were but babes about me, I dreamed, one
night, that there were seven of us together, though
there were but four of them born, and that I killed
them. And so they say
I have
indeed! Well, boy,
I have killed you, as well as the rest, and now I
am alone. You shall have the knifeyet be not
in a hurry. Something may turn up: Sir Guy
may demand a military trialBut no, I am lying
to my own heart: you must die, Hyland, you must
die! for even I cannot help you.
The knife will help me.
Take it! said the refugee, with a voice so
loud as to show his feelings had got the better of
his caution,and indeed his accents betrayed the
most vehement agitation; take it! he cried,
flinging it against the window with a motion so
reckless or perturbed, that it did not even strike the
bars, but coming in contact with the stone
framework
,
it rebounded and fell, like the file, to the
ground below. Ha ha! you see, brother! there
is no hope for you,no, not even in the knife!
Brother! cried Hyland, you can help me
yet.
It is false! said the other: my band is
broken
,
my body bleeding, and now, if they would
send a boy against me, why a boy might take me.
Listen, brotherit is my dying prayer, said
Hyland, and nothing else can be done. Before
midnight of the coming dayperhaps earlierI
shall be a doomed mandoomed to death
doomed to the gallows? Brother, don't let me die
on the gallows! Where is Staples? He can send
a bullet through the eye of a leaping buck; I have
seen him kill a night-hawk on the wing. Brother,
you will be my heirgive him what you will, give
him
all,
and let him come to-morrow night on the
square, and when he sees a candle held at this
window, let him fire at it,let him aim well,at
the candle, brother, at the candle! Oh heaven! do
you not hear me?
I hear, said Oran. A wild freak that, but
good! ay, boy, good, good, good! But Staples
ha, ha! Choose another: take the whole band; one
will be as ready to serve you as another.
Had not the prisoner been prevented by his own
feelings from giving note to any thing save the
mere words of the refugee, he might have detected
the traces of some extraordinary emotion in the
unusual abruptness of his expressions. He even
failed to observe the incongruity between Oran's
invitation to choose an executioner from his whole
band, and the late declaration he had made,
that the band was broken up. He repeated the
name of Staples, adding, Let it be Staples,
brother, for he is the boldest and truest: he fears
nothing, and he misses nothing.
Call him out of the yard then, said Oran;
he lies there cold as a stone.
VOL. II.R
Ashburn then, Tom Ashburn! cried Hyland,
after an exclamation of dismay at the intelligence;
he is the next boldest, and a true shot.
Another, another! They fished him out of the
river at the Foul Rift, yoked fast to the carcass
of his horse.
Bettson, then!
He lies, with Staples, dead in the yard here.
Good God! is there none left then to save me
from this horror. Oh brother, send any one. Is
there not one?
There is
one,
said Oran, and his teeth
chattered
as he spoke; there is one, and only one;
but he shoots well too, and is as bold as any.
Farewell, young brotherthe streaks are in the
sky: we will never see one another more. Reach
forth your hand, brother, and let me touch it.
Alas, Oran, I am chained to the floor.
Ay,I forget: 'tis all one. Say that you beg
God to forgive me, and that you forgive me
yourself
let
me hear you say it.
Wherefore, Oran? Alas, wherefore?
For what I have done to you; for what
But it is nothing. But say it, though; say it, or
hope for no friend in the thing you speak of.
God forgive you then, Oran, muttered the
brother, almost mechanically; I forgive you
myself.
It is enough, said OranFarewell. And
these were the last words Hyland ever heard him
utter. He descended from the wall
how
the prisoner
knew no more than how he had climbed it,and
that so suddenly, that although Hyland called to
him again, the moment the farewell had past his
lips, he was already beyond hearing. Finding
that he was really gone, the prisoner fell upon his
knees, and strove to invoke forgiveness of the act
he meditated: for he rightly felt that it must be but
a form of self-murder.
He then threw himself on his couch, looked back
upon the events that had marked his existence in
the valley, and wept over the misery they had
entailed
upon one whom his love had wrapped in the
same destruction with himself.
CHAPTER XVII.
Convict by many witnesses and proofs,
And by thine own confession.
Mahino Faliero
.
The
Master of Fiction has compared the course
of a supposititious history to the career of a stone,
rolled down the side of a mountain; which, at
first, labouring and stumbling along, in a slow and
hesitating manner, as if on the point of being
arrested
by every petty obstruction, gathers force as
it descends, and at last pitches onwards with
impetuous
leaps, which soon conduct it to the bottom.
To give the figure the completeness of an
allegory
,
it may be added, that when the moving body
has once acquired a little superfluous momentum
of its own, it communicates it to other stones, and
these again to others, which, increasing in number
as they grow in velocity, are at last seen rattling
down to the vale below, in a perfect avalanche,
as confounding to the sense as it is hurrying to
the spirits. In this manner, a single incident
begins
its weary course along the declivity of story,
stirring up others as it rolls onward; until, in the
end, there is such a mass in motion, that, if all
were to be described as fully as at the starting, it
would require a Briareus himself to do them
justice
.
It is, then, difficult to keep pace even with
the original event, the course of which is as
violent
as the others; and this can be done only by
imitating the hurry of the moving body, and
marching
,
in great leaps, to the end.
We must pass by, with a word, the
confusion
caused throughout the whole village by the
rencounter in the prison-yard; the steps that
were taken in consequence to follow the refugee
who had escaped; the proceedings that were had
in relation to the bodies, (for the wounded Staples
expired within a few hours after his surrender;)
and, finally, those that paved the way for the trial
of the unfortunate Hyland.
The morning broke; the hour of trial
approached
;
the village was thronged with the idle and the
curious; the court was opened, the grand jury
empannelled
and charged, and in a short time
returned
into court a formal bill of indictment against
Hyland Gilbert, with some two or three
aliases,
for
the wilful murder of Henry Falconer.
The details of the trial it is not our purpose to
narrate. There were the usual preliminary
flourishes
,
thrusts, and counter-thrusts, on the part of
the counsel, with those applications for
postponement
and arguments against it, that weary the
patience of the good citizens who come to a
tribunal
of life and death as to a raree-show; and
perhaps
with some such feelings as conducted the
ancient Romans to the amphitheatre. There was
even an attempt made by the prisoner's counsel
(of whom the unlucky Affidavy was
not
oneat
least, he did not make his appearance,) to oppose
the jurisdiction of the court, precisely as Affidavy
had boasted he would do, but with so little zeal and
energy, that it was soon seen the prisoner was to
derive no benefit from such a plea. In fact, from
the beginning to the end, the counsel for the
prisoner
conducted the case in so spiritless and
desponding
a manner, as to convey the most
melancholy
R 2
prognostic to those who judge of the
goodness
or badness of a cause by the colour of a
counsellor's complexion. It seemed as if they
were themselves too well satisfied of his guilt to
think of contending for his innocence; and it was
soon seen that they had good cause to despair;
for the prisoner, upon being formally arraigned at
the bar, rose up, and despite the opposition of his
counsel, insisted upon pleading
Guilty
to the
indictment
.
From the consequences of this rashnessa
result
of mingled remorse and despairthe unhappy
young man was saved by the humanity of his
judges, who directed the plea of Not Guilty to be
entered, as, we believe, is usual, or at least
frequent
,
in such cases.
Upon being asked `How he would be tried?' he
answered, with the same readiness, By God and
my country; and the elder of his counsel making
some trivial remark on the latter word, coupled
with the hint that his
domicil
was strictly within a
foreign territory, he repeated the word with great
vehemence, insisting `that he was born upon the
soil on which he stood, and whether he lived or
died, and whether it owned the sway of the royal
government, or assumed the state of a free
Republic
,
it was still as much
his
country as before,
since still the land of his birth.'
He was directed to resume his seat; but the
readiness with which he seemed to abandon all the
little hopes remaining to him softened the hearts of
his judges, and brought tears into the eyes of
many who came to see, in a Gilbert and refugee,
some dread-looking monster, and beheld only an
emaciated youth, evidently nurtured on the lap
of gentleness. Indeed, there was no little
confusion
produced on several occasions, by the
compassion
his appearance excited; one instance of
which happened, when Captain Loring, summoned
entirely without the knowledge of Hyland, along
with two or three others, for no imaginable
purpose
,
but to testify to the mildness of his disposition
and the excellence of his previous character,
entered
the witness's box, and laid eyes on the youth
for the first time since his arrest. He no sooner
beheld his wretched plight, than forgetting half
his own wrongs, he began to blubber and stretch
out his arms, and declare, `after all, adzooks, he
didn't believe his young Herman had committed
the murder, for all they said of him.' Then being
reproved, and something in the rebuke reminding
him of his daughter, he burst into a rage,
reproaching
the young man for his deceit and base
outrage
,
from which he was only diverted by a second
rebuke, to begin to blubber and defend as before.
In short, it was soon found that his testimony
was not to be obtained, and as his wits were pretty
generally thought to be infirm, he was directed to
be removed. This was, however, at a later stage
of the trial, and after the more important witnesses
had been examined. These comprehended those
individuals who were present at the scene of blood,
the chief of whom were captain Caliver,
lieutenant
Brooks, and the adventurer Sterling. The
evidence of the two former might have been
esteemed
sufficient of itself to convict the prisoner,
and there seemed a degree of cruelty in bringing
into the court, merely to confirm their testimony, a
man enduring so much bodily suffering as this
wretched Sterling. It seemed, that he had
received
some serious injury, when hurled so
roughly
by Oran Gilbert among the rocks; for it was
remarked
,
soon after the cavalcade was formed that
conducted the body of young Falconer to
Hawk-Hollow
,
that he became wan and troubled, and
occasionally a little wandering in his behaviour.
He had grown worse during the three days he was
confined in prison, and had caused no little trouble
by his groans at night. In addition to all this, he
had bled freely from the cut he received from the
jailer, while attempting to escape; that attempt, as
he averred on a previous occasion, having been
made in his sleep, he being occasionally afflicted
with the infirmity of somnambulism. When he
appeared in court, all were struck with his haggard
appearance; the light of cunning had departed
from his eyes and mouth, being superseded in the
one by a certain wild, yet torpid and smouldering
ray, such as might be looked for in the organs of
an expiring maniac, while the other was distorted
with pain, of which it was hard to say whether it
existed most in mind or body. Upon being called
upon to declare what he knew in relation to the
prisoner and the deceased, he swore, to the
surprise
of every one, `that he knew nothing to
prove the prisoner's guilt, but much that spoke in
favour of his innocence.'
Even Hyland, who had leaned his head down
in passive despair, was startled at a declaration so
unexpected; his counsel became a little animated,
and the Deputy Attorney General reminded the
witness, `that he was now in a court of justice,
speaking to truth upon oath, and not upon the
boards of a theatre, delivering the tricksy
paradoxes
of a play-wright.'
Very true, said Sterling, with a ghastly smile;
but that day is over.
Upon being asked what he meant by the last
expression
,
he replied, `that he alluded to his original
profession of the stage, on which he once had his
day, like others.' He then proceeded to state, that
while pursuing his vocation, some years before, in
the island of Jamaica, he had several times seen
the prisoner, then a young man of eighteen or
twenty, the heir of a rich widow, his kinswoman,
and occupying a highly favourable situation in
society, and being, as far as he knew, of estimable
character. He next encountered him in the month
of May, at the tavern of Elsie Bell; although he
did not immediately recognise him. The third
time he saw him was at the Terrapin Hole, among,
or near to, the refugees, among whom, as he caused
it to appear, he had himself stumbled by accident;
the consequence of which was that he was induced
to join the band, to protect himself from a peculiar
peril in which he was placed. On the evening of
that day, he accompanied the leader of the band
to the park of Gilbert's Folly, where the prisoner
was found struggling in mortal combat with the
deceased. A conflict ensuing, of which he could
say but little, having spent several hours previously
in drinking, he did himself attack the deceased
with a pistol, scarce knowing, in his intoxication,
what he did, and would have killed him, had he
not been restrained by the prisoner, who took the
pistol from his hand, and assisted the deceased to
make his escape; and this the prisoner did,
added
the witness, with a firm voice, although, at
that moment, he was bleeding from a pistol-shot,
received but a moment before from the deceased,
with whom he had fought a duel, and by whom he
had been treated with some unfairness and much
barbarity.
He then continued to state, that the design
having
been communicated to him of carrying off
Miss Loring, he himself, esteeming it rather a wild
frolic than a serious outrage, had obtained
permission
to co-operate in an assumed character; and
that what confirmed him in the belief that no
wrong was meditated to any one, was his
overhearing
a conversation betwixt the prisoner and
Oran Gilbert, in which the former insisted that no
one should be injured, particularly naming the
deceased
and his
father, Colonel
Falconer. At the time
the band broke into the house, he, being again
overcome
by wine and in a mischievous mood,
knocked
down the deceased with a fiddle; and had the
prisoner been moved by any malicious impulse, he
could have easily killed him at that time. As for
the murder itself, all that he could say was, that at
the moment the pistols were discharged, he was
himself nearer to the prisoner than was any other
person on the ground; and yet he could neither
swear upon his knowledge nor to the best of his
belief, that the prisoner had fired the pistol that
terminated the deceased's career. There were
several pistols fired, he knew not by whom, nor
did he believe any man could say by whom, for
the morning was still dark, and all were in
confusion
.
It was as likely that the deceased had been
killed by his own (the deceased's) pistol, as by the
prisoner's; for being notoriously an expert shot,
nothing but accident could have caused him to
miss the prisoner, at whom he aimed, and who was
so night at hand; and the accident that diverted
the pistol from the prisoner, might have turned it
against the neck of the deceased himself. Finally,
he was convinced, that, be the matter as it might,
there could have been no malice aforethought on
the prisoner's part, or he would have taken
advantage
of those moments to execute his purpose when
he could have done so without risk or discovery.
This testimony, which was justly esteemed
extraordinary
,
coming as it did from one who had
been admitted as evidence against the prisoner,
produced a remarkable effect throughout the whole
court and jury, as well as the spectators; and was
indeed more like a harangue designed for the
prisoner's
benefit than any thing else. It was
delivered
with pain, but still firmly, and at the close,
the witness appearing to be exhausted, he was
allowed
to retire, while the Deputy, saying, `he was
gratified to hear such mitigating circumstances
advanced in the prisoner's favour,' added that he
would summon two witnesses to prove the murder
from the prisoner's own voluntary confession, and
would then produce two pistols, the only ones
discharged
,
one of which he would prove had been
fired by the deceased, the other by the prisoner.
The jailer and his assistant were called, and both
swore, that the prisoner had repeatedly called
himself
a murderer.
Honest Schlachtenschlager, who had officiated
as coroner, was then summoned, and appeared in
court, bearing five pistols, being those delivered to
him by Brooks, while sitting on the inquest. These
being handed to the latter gentleman, he
immediately
identified one as the weapon discharged by
the deceased; the second, he averred, he had
taken from the ground at the prisoner's side, and
the other, its fellow, from his holsters: the
remaining
pair belonged to Sterling, and had been taken
from him before or after the murder, he knew not
which, and had been by the witness given into the
possession of Schlachtenschlager.
Yes, said Schlachtenschlager, that fas fat
the young man said. T'at pistol mit the colden
star on the preech, and the plue parrel, fas the
ploodty feapon.
Here the worthy magistrate was directed to
hold his tongue, his evidence not having been
required
,
and his commentaries being wholly
superfluous
.
But he had said enough to give a new and
unexpected turn to the whole proceedings; for the
prisoner, who had been staring from the pistols to
the witness, with a sort of passive recklessness, no
sooner heard the words `golden star,' and `blue
barrel,' uttered than he started up as if seized with
a fit of madness, his eyes staring out of his head,
his arms outstretched, and his whole figure
displaying
the influence of some extraordinary
conception
.
The golden star! the blue barrel! he cried, in
a voice that thrilled every bosom. Oh heaven!
have I been mad up to this moment? Ha, ha, ha!
what a fool! what a dolt! Give me the pistol!
Sit down, said one of the judges; and even
his own counsel endeavoured to force him back on
his seat.
I won't sit down, he cried in the same tones.
The pistol! the pistol! my life depends upon it!
Oh, heaven be thanked! I am an innocent man.
The pistol! look at the pistol: there is a shot in
the vent, and it will not fire! I remember now, it
flashed when aimed at Sterling. Call Dancy
Parkins
examine
it, look at it, prick it with a needle,
blow in it, pour water in itit could not harm
him! No! heaven be thanked! no, no, no! And
so great became his agitation, that he fell to the
floor in a fit of convulsions.
This singular announcement produced
unspeakable
agitation. The court was ordered to be
cleared
,
and the prisoner to be withdrawn a moment,
until restored to his senses. Dancy Parkins was
then called, and upon being shown the pistol, swore
positively to the effect, that one of them (he knew
not which,) had become useless in consequence of
a leaden shot, or some other substance, getting
into the vent; that the day before the attempt
upon Gilbert's Folly, he had been directed by the
prisoner, upon whom he attended, to remove the
obstruction; that he had received it for that purpose,
but finding the removal more difficult than he
anticipated
,
and being hurried by other
circumstances
,
he returned it to the prisoner's holsters,
intending to resume the task at another time; and
then being separated from him, for the purpose of
intercepting the clergyman, had forgotten it
entirely
.
He knew not which of the two pistols it
was; but if, as he supposed, the prisoner had not
attempted to fire both, one would be found charged:
the other, that is to say, the one out of order, he
had himself taken care to empty of its contents
before attempting to remove the shot from the
vent.
The pistols were immediately examined, and one
found well charged. The other was empty; and,
as had been said, and as was hoped by almost
every man present, it was discovered that there
was some foreign body in the vent, which
rendered
it wholly unserviceable.
This is indeed extraordinary! said a judge on
the bench.
With your honour's permission, said the
Deputy
,
who had been whispering to one of the under
functionaries of justice, and now looked up in some
perplexity, I will recall the witness Sterling to
the stand; though I humbly submit, I know no
more than your honour what he has to say more.
Yet he desires to be recalled.
Ay, let him come, said Hyland, clasping his
hands with joy. He remembers the
circumstance
;
for I showed him the pistol, and he
told me the shot could be only taken out by a
drill.
VOL. II.s
At this moment, the current of feeling was
strongly in the prisoner's favour, and the condition
of his weapon rendering it impossible that
it
could
have discharged the fatal bullet, there was scarce
a man present who did not believe him innocent,
and believe so with pleasure, notwithstanding his
unhappy connexion with the outlaws. But it was
destined to be seen upon what a reed they had
based their commiseration and belief, when
Sterling
,
appearing again, craved to mention a
circumstance
which was now recalled to his memory
by the turn of proceedings, and of which his
previous
forgetfulness should be rightly attributed to
illness and disorder of mind. He remembered
well the conversation of which the prisoner spoke;
he
had
said, that nothing but a drill would remove
the obstruction;
but
and here he spoke with a
degree of agitation that showed his reluctance to
advance any thing against the prisonerit
happened
that the conversation terminated in himself
offering to remove the difficulty, by taking the
pistol with him to Elsie Bell's, where some
instrument
might be found to serve the purpose; that he
had,
accordingly, taken it, leaving one of his own
pistols with the prisoner, but had found neither
leisure nor opportunity to repair it; that the
circumstances
of flight had prevented a re-exchange;
and finally, that the incident had not been again
thought of by him until the present moment. He
was not himself disarmed until after Falconer's
death; he had a pistol in his hand at the moment,
which he dropped, while seizing upon the prisoner;
and taking it up again (as he supposed) afterwards,
it was probable he had then, without observing it,
regained his own; and
this
might perhaps be the
weapon with which the unfortunate shot had been
fired. He was disarmed a few moments
afterwards
,
and was then seized with indisposition,
which prevented his examining into the matter,
or indeed thinking of it.
This testimony was as decisive as it was wholly
unexpected. It struck the prisoner dumb, and his
looks of horror were esteemed the best proofs of
guilt. It was in vain that he afterwards exclaimed
that the witness had sworn falsely; he had no
testimony
to disprove the story, and it was one that
all others found apt and true, especially when
Sterling's
pistols having been examined, one of them
was discovered to be empty. No one had
dreamed
of doubting the prisoner's guilt, until the moment
when his sudden burst of animation at the sight of
the weapons, threw all into confusion; and such
was the change of feeling produced by Sterling's
testimony, that it soon became the general
impression
that the prisoner had been playing a part in
first acknowledging himself guilty, and then
affecting
to be surprised into a belief of his own
innocence
.
Such an opinion as this could not, indeed,
long prevail; for it was manifest, upon
considering
the circumstances, that the prisoner must have
been as ignorant as others of the true condition of
the pistols, unless he had previously, as if in
anticipation
of arrest, founded his whole scheme of
bloodshed upon the accident of the obstruction;
in which case he must have fired the other pistol,
which was still loaded, or used some third one,
which he had cast out of sight, although instantly
surrounded by many different persons. The
testimony
of Sterling afforded the only and the best
solution of the riddle, as far as it related to the
crime; while in regard to the prisoner himself, all
that could be imagined to account for his change
of deportment, was to suppose that even
he
had
forgotten the original exchange of weapons,that
he was inspired with the hope of escape, upon the
presentation of his own as that by which the
murder
had been committed,and that that hope, thus
accidentally excited, still nerved him to assert his
innocence.
The contest was however over, the hour of grace
was past, and the jury, after being charged in a
manner highly unfavourable to him, were sent out
to form a verdict, the character of which no one
thought of doubting. It was even supposed that a
few moments would suffice to terminate their
deliberations
,
and that they would shortly return, to
pronounce the word of doom. In this, however,
the spectators were disappointed: some merciful,
or doubting member of the panel had thrown a
difficulty in the way of others; and, the prisoner
being remanded, the court was adjourned until
such time as they should be found to have agreed
upon a verdict.
In the meanwhile, expectation was still on the
stretch; the spectators from a distance still
lingered
in the village, the villagers themselves wandered
up and down, or collected together at their doors
in groups, all awaiting the tap of the bell that
should call the court together to receive the
verdict
,
and all agitated by the thousand rumours that
were supposed to have made their way from the
jury-room. It was twenty times, at least, in the
course of the night, reported that the jury had
already
agreed, and twenty times there was a rush
of people towards the court-doors, anxious and
eager to behold the bearing of the prisoner, while
listening to the word that should consign him to
the death of a felon; but twenty times curiosity
was disappointed; and the morning came
without
bringing the jury from their place of
deliberation
.
But long before the night had passed away, a
new feature was added to the story of Hyland's
fate, and new characters mingled in the drama,
bringing with them new revolutions.
s 2
CHAPTER XVIII.
Peace: thou hast told a tale, whose every word
Threatens eternal slaughter to thy soul.
Heaven is angry, and, be thou resolved,
Thou art a man remark'd to taste of mischief:
Look for't; though it come late, it will come sure.
Ford
.
The
appearance of the refugees, with the fierce
though unavailing contest they had attempted with
the pursuers on the night of the outrage, had spread
the alarm far and wide; and this was not
diminished
by the daring assault on the prison, as it
was called, the real character of that enterprise
not having yet generally transpired. One
consequence
of the alarm was, to draw to the scene of
commotion the governor, or President as he was
then called, of the commonwealth, who happened
in the neighbourhood upon some tour of duty, and
arrived after nightfall, so that his person was not
generally known before day. One of the first
persons upon whom he laid his eyes, after entering
the hotel, was his old and distinguished
acquaintance
Colonel Falconer, with whose unhappy loss
he was already acquainted, as well as with many
incidents of the trial. Upon saluting him by name,
the Colonel became greatly agitated, and besought
him not to repeat the word, if he would not have
him murdered before his eyes; with other
expressions
indicative of a disordered mind, which the
dignitary attributed at once to his melancholy
bereavement
.
He then accompanied him to a
private
apartment, where he attempted to soothe him
by condoling with him on his loss, but found him
incapable of listening to argument or entreaty.
The death of his son did not seem to affect him so
deeply as the malice of the murderer, of whom he
spoke with a bitterness and vindictiveness of
feeling
that shocked his hearer. It has been seen how
his heart softened over this unhappy youth, when
he met him at the water-fall, and deemed that he
owed a life to his virtue. The death of his son
had, however, converted his feelings into a new
channel; and he saw in the humanity that drove
him from the Hollow, only the evidence of a
coldblooded
design to withdraw him from the scene,
that his son might perish unaided; and this design
he contrasted with his own friendly resolutions.
In short, the demon of revenge had entered his
spirit, along with that of fear; for, it seemed, the
repeated discoveries of Oran Gilbert penetrating
even to the haunts of his foes, had infected him
with terror on his own account. The sight of the
governor, in whose hands lay the power of life
and death, seemed to throw him into alarm, lest
he had come with the design of pardoning the
murderer; and he lanched at once into a strain
of vehement complaint, in which he mingled
denunciations
against the prisoner with personal calls
upon the governor for justice.
In the midst of this scene, which the magistrate
strove in vain to bring to an end, the door of the
chamber was thrown open, and the figure of Elsie
Bell entered the apartment. She had risen from
a bed of sickness,it might have been supposed
from a bed of death, for her appearance was more
like that of a moving corse than a living being:
and as she tottered up to Colonel Falconer, who
stood aghast at the spectacle, her bloodless cheeks,
livid lips, and eyes shining, almost without
speculation
,
through the gray locks that had escaped
from her head-dress, filled even the governor with
awe.
Where is Richard Falconer? she cried, I
heard his voice but now; and it called for justice!
Her looks wandered from the governor, upon
whom they were first fixed, to the object of her
inquiry; and it is impossible to describe the
expression
of mingled triumph and horror with
which she surveyed him. She raised her shrivelled
hands, and shaking them with a fierce but palsied
motion, cried,
Yes, Richard Falconer, you called for justice,
and now you have it. It has come, at last, in
blood, and in blood richer than that of your own
bosom. The death-bed curse of a ruined woman
will not be forgotten,it curses for ever!
For God's sake, governor, cried Falconer,
trembling from head to foot, leave me, or take
the wretched creature away.
Yes, leave us, said the widow: let no one
look upon him more, let no one look upon him
now. Away, if you have pity for him who has
none for himself.
The governor looked at Falconer, and
perceiving
that, although incapable of utterance, he made
earnest gestures to him to depart, he left the
chamber
without speaking a word, but with a look
indicating
amazement and suspicion. He was no
sooner gone than Elsie, stepping up to Falconer,
laid her hand on his arm, now seemingly as
palsied
as her own, and said, with accents that sounded
in his ear like the cry of a raven,
You asked for justiceay, I heard the words
with my own ears! you asked for blood,the
blood of him who has shed that of your son! You
called for justiceit was for justice on your
own head! Richard Falconer, she continued,
well may you tremble; the curse of Jessie
Gilbert
is now upon your soul, and it will be on it for
ever.
Woman, said Falconer, endeavouring to
shake her off, but in vain, you will drive me
distracted
.
I will do you no such mercy, said Elsie:
Hearkenthe last words of Jessie Gilbert were a
curse,the curse of a broken-hearted woman
upon her betrayer: she died cursing you, and now
the curse you feel, without knowing half its
dreadfulness
.
Richard Falconer, you ask for the blood
of Henry Falconer's murderer. Miserable man.!
she added, relaxing her grasp, and clasping her
hands with horror, it is the blood of your own
son,the blood of the child of Jessie Gilbert!
Hah! said Falconer,but said no more. He
gazed in the face of the speaker, and read a
dreadful
confirmation of her words, while she continued
to utter, as in a kind of insane exultation,
Is not this revenge for Jessie Gilbert? The
brother kills the brother, and the father kills the
son!ay, as he before killed the mother! Now,
Richard Falconer, repent and diethe victim is
avenged! It is true!
It is false! false as hell! said Falconer,
recovering
speech; or what, oh God of heaven!
what am I!
The avenger of your own black and heartless
villany, said the woman. Hearken, Richard
Falconer
,
and you shall know all. When Oran
Gilbert
knew the shame of his sister, he swore its
miserable fruit should never see the light; and I
knew he would slay it, even out of hatred of the
father. That night! that night! it was a night of
horror. Jessie Gilbert lay dead, with a babe
wailing on her bosom; and the mother, the
broken-hearted
step-mother gave to my hands her own
untimely
and still-born offspringthe brothers raved
at the door, calling for the child of shame. I had
mercymercy on your child,not because it was
yours, but because it was the babe of Jessie. I
laid it in the arms of the step-mother, and it lived.
She kept the secret, and the father of her you
betrayed
kept it also, though he sent it afar from his
sight. Thus was it savedthus was the child of
sorrow preserved, that he might imbrue his hands
in the blood of his brother, and then perish at the
call of his father!
Wretch! said Falconer, sinking on a seat,
and this dreadful secret you kept, that
I
might
be made the most miserable of men? And you
incited on the unhappy Hyland to the murder of
his brother?
I did what I could to save him,not for your
sake, though, Richard Falconer, but for the love
of Jessie. I warned the boy of his dangernay,
I would have told him of his birth, but that I
knew it would kill him; and I loved him for his
goodness. Why should I have filled him with
shame, staining him who was innocent of his
father's crimes, with the disgrace of his birth?
Elsie Bell, said Falconer rising and
advancing
towards her, I am a villain.My poor
Harriet! my poor Harriet he added, and as the
widow looked into his face, she was amazed to
see it streaming with tears. But for her, but for
her
, he added, but for her and my wretched
Henrybut for my children, Elsie, I might, I
would
have done justice to Jessie's memory. Oh God!
had I but known of this thing before! But why,
now,
should it be known? You revenge the
murdered
Jessie not on me, Elsie, but on my poor
Harriet. The stain you feared to cast on the
name of Hyland, you fling on the forehead of my
daughter. Elsie Bell, Elsie Bell, he exclaimed,
in unspeakable agitation, while drops of sweat
rolled from his temples and mingled with his tears,
if I tell you what you know not, though it show
me to have done worse by Jessie Gilbert than you
dream, it will destroy my remaining child. And
why should I destroy her? Why fling her before
the world as a creature to be scorned, for the sake
of a wretched fratricide? I will not do it,I will say
no morewhat
have
I said? When they are dead,
when all are dead, then let me lay bare my
baseness
,
and think of the memory of Jessie. But
this child,this wretched, this blood-stained
Hyland
,I
will save his life,the governor shall
grant me his pardon; it cannot be that he will
refuse
meBut I will never see him, no, never
Hah! hear! what is this? They are bringing him
forth! Hark! they are shouting aloud for his
condemnation
!Oh
heaven support me! To this
II have brought him!
But we have not the courage to pursue further
the agonies of the wretched father, whom a
sudden
commotion in the street, with loud cries of
To the court! to the court! the jury have made
a verdict! one of twenty false rumours to which
expectation gave birth,threw into new
transports
of anguish. At last, moved by an irresistible
impulse, he started up and ran into the streets,
through which he made his way to the prison.
In the meanwhile, Hyland strode (for though
securely fettered, he was no longer chained to the
floor,) to and fro in his cell, a changed, we might
almost say, a happy, man. The sight of his
pistols
in the court had introduced a new set of
associations
,
from which he perceived clearly, that,
although he had so long esteemed himself the
author of Falconer's death, that young man had,
in truth, fallen by some other hand. The story
told by Sterling of the exchange of pistols between
him and the prisoner, was, as Hyland had
pronounced
it, a sheer fabrication; although he was
unable to devise any reason Sterling could have
for swearing falsely; his original testimony
having
made it clear, that he was not actuated by
motives of malice. He remembered that he had
raised a weapon against his rival, which, as others
were, discharged at the same moment, he did not
dream had failed to go off; although he now
recalled
to mind that the same onehe had taken it
from the same side of the saddlehad flashed in
his hands, when aimed at the head of Sterling.
Remembering these circumstances in connexion
with Dancy's declaration that he had restored the
pistol, entirely empty, to the holsters, he saw at once,
however others failed to see it, that Providence had
interposed to save him from the crime of
bloodshed
,
and that he was therefore, save in intent,
wholly innocent. This persuasion was enough to
banish his despair, which was founded chiefly on
remorse; and perhaps, in great measure, also, his
apprehensions; although in a cooler moment, he
would have perceived upon how weak a
foundation
he built his hope of escape, so long as the
falsehood of Sterling was not exposed.
Twenty times he endeavoured to throw himself
upon his knees, to thank Heaven for its signal
interposition
in his favour; but his devotions were
checked
by the tumult of his mind, which increased at
last into such distraction, that although he
received
a visit from his jailer, whose errand had no
unimportant bearing upon his interests, he failed
to take any advantage of Lingo's good will, or
even to understand the purport of his
communications
.
The fact was, the note of hand which he
had drawn from Affidavy's pocket, besides
affording
confirmatory evidence of that worthy
individual's
connexion with the attempted rescue, had
made a strong impression upon Lingo's cupidity;
and his object in the visit was nothing less than to
intimate
his
willingness to serve the prisoner in the
same way, and on much more reasonable terms.
But he found the prisoner in no condition to treat
with him on such a delicate subject; and after
unmasking
his battery, and uttering several broad
hints in regard to his friendly intentions, he was
forced to give over in despair, resolving,
however
,
to open negotiations at a more favourable
moment.
In the meanwhile, Hyland still paced to and fro
through his dungeon, till his feeble limbs refused to
support him longer. He then threw himself upon
his couch, and becoming more collected, pondered
bitterly over his situation. He heard the rush of
the people towards the court-house, which was at
no great distance, as well as their shouts `that the
jury had descended!' and he felt at once, with a
thrill of fear, that he still lay hovering on the brink
of a precipice. He started up in an agony of
mind not to be controlled, and throwing himself
upon his knees, began to invoke heaven with wild
exclamations; when the door of his cell was
thrown open, a bright lamp flashed in his face, and
looking up, his eye fell upon that of Colonel
Falconer
,
who entered the room, followed by the
tottering
Elsie. The door was closed behind them,
VOL. II.T
and Falconer stood rooted to the floor, surveying
his wretched offspring, who seemed petrified at
his appearance, while Elsie stepping up to him,
held the lamp to his face, and bade the father look
upon the features of his son.
It is Jessie's face over again, she muttered,
and as pale, as ghastly, and as distracted as
when she cursed her betrayer. She cursed him,
but do not
you,
Hylandthe curse has fallen upon
all. Now, Richard Falconer, behold your son,
and remember Jessie Gilbert!
His son! cried Hyland, starting to his feet;
his
son! Are you mad? Oh, Elsie, I am half
distracted myself. Why do you bring that man
to me?
Because, said Elsie; he claims to see his
offspring.
His offspring! Vain old woman!
Would that you were not, said Colonel
Falconer
,
with clasped hands. I am now punished
enough. Alas, wretched boy, you have killed
your father's son. Hearken to this woman, and
then add to the crime that already stains you, a
malediction upon your parent.
It is true, Hyland, it is true, said Elsie. As
there is a heaven above you, you look upon
your own father, and you have killed your
half-brother
.
I have killed nobody, said the youth,
impetuously
;
and if you would have me still innocent,
drive that man away. His son! sooner make me
the way-side beggar'snay, make me believe
myself
a murderer rather. His son!
Ay, said Colonel Falconer, with deep emotion,
the sinful son of a sinful parent.!
Stand away! approach me not! said Hyland,
for Falconer was approaching. Your misfortune
has turned your brain. Touch me not, for I
remember
my sister!
Your mother, boy, your mother! said Elsie.
Be it my mother, if you will: what then
have I but more cause to curse the author of her
shame?
The author of her death, not shame, said
Falconer
,
with a smothered voice. Murderer of
your brother, even for your sake I will take that
veil of disgrace from your mother's memory that
must be hung round the brows of my daughter. Do
not curse me, my sonElsie Bell, I deceived you
all, and it was the deceit that killed my poor Jessie.
This boy was born in wedlock,the child of the
abandoned and broken-hearted, yet wedded, wife
of her destroyer.
Your wife! gracious heaven, your wife! said
Elsie, on whom these words produced as strong an
effect as upon the bewildered Hyland. Now,
Richard Falconer, if you have spoken the truth,
you are indeed a blacker villain than ever men
believed you.
I am, said Falconer; for with the lie I
killed
my wife and laid her in a grave of dishonour.
You were made to believe it was but a mock
ceremony
that united us: it was a legal and
honourable
tie, and broken only by the death of Jessie.
And for what purpose? You know, Elsie Bell, you
know very well, yes, surely you know, he added,
with much agitation, and as if afraid to speak further.
But Elsie sternly affirming her ignorance of any
cause he had for destroying the peace and good name
of her whom he acknowledged his lawful wife, and
Hyland now regarding him with a look of mingled
fear and entreaty, he essayed to speak; and again
the sweat-drops, oozing from his temples, betrayed
the anguish and shame of mind with which he
exposed
an act of unexampled duplicity and baseness.
His confession was indeed one which no light
remorse
could have wrung from his spirit; but it
was made, and made without concealment or
attempted
extenuation, although it undoubtedly
revealed
a strong if not just reason for his failure to
rescue from shame the memory of his betrayed
wife. He had begun the world as a needy
adventurer
;
but was early patronized by a gentleman of
great wealth, with whose daughter, an only child,
he soon presumed to fall deeply in love; the
consequence
of which was the withdrawal of his
patron's
favour, and immediate expulsion from his
house. It appeared, that he had not failed to make
some impression upon the lady's heart; but she
was a spoiled child and coquette, and he left her
with but little hope of ever deriving any advantage
from her tenderness. He betook himself to the
army, was transferred, in course of time, to the
frontiers, and in less than two years after his
departure
,
found himself recovering from the wounds
he had received at the Moravian town, under the
roof of Gilbert's Folly. The youth and beauty of
Jessie, his gratitude for her kindness, and still
more, perhaps, for her affection, which the
simplehearted
maiden gave him almost at first sight,
and had not the power to conceal, touched
his imagination, if not his feelings; and in a
moment of excitement, and folly, he proffered
her his hand, and was married. The marriage
was secretit might be added, accidental; for
the freedom of manners, at that day, and in that
country, allowing such license, he often, as he
recovered
,
found himself galloping with the merry
maiden on visits among the settlements a dozen
or more miles distant; and it was upon one of
these occasions that he gave his love and faith
together
to the thoughtless maiden. The knot was,
however, no sooner tied, than he was seized with
fears and regrets: he had already received
overtures
towards a reconciliation by his old patron,
and without well conceiving in what manner he
could profit by a return of friendship in such
quarter
,
he persuaded himself, and his bride also, that
his interest demanded some temporary
concealment
of their union. To this Jessie was easily
induced
to accede; for having no distrust in her
lover, she saw in such concealment only an
additional
frolic, such as she esteemed her marriage to
be. She feared no censure from her parent, who
had indeed long since signified the pleasure with
which he would receive so gallant a gentleman for
his son-in-law; and she looked forward with merry
anticipation to the hour when she should present
herself to him as a bride of a month's standing.
She consented therefore, not merely with
readiness
,
but alacrity, to preserve the wedding a strict
secret; and in that fatal consent paved the way for
her own ruin and untimely end. We will speak the
remainder of the mournful story in a word. The
overtures from the patron were renewed, and
were accompanied by the smiles of his daughter.
Falconer looked upon Jessie with anger, perhaps
with abhorrence,she stood in the way of his
fortune
.
The old love smiled again, and forgetting
that now the smile came too late, he yielded to the
intoxication of his original passion, threw himself
at her feet, and became, even with her father's
consent, an accepted lover. The state of his mind
can be now better imagined than described; love,
avarice, and ambition together, as well as a
consciousness
that he had involved himself beyond all
retreat, urged him to persevere in a suit both
dishonourable
and criminal; and Jessie was now
T2
thought of only to be hated. Months passed by, and
the jest of the frolic was over; yet the marriage
was not divulged; the young bride begged to
disclose
the secret, and every entreaty filled him with
new alarm and anger; until the accidental death
of the regimental chaplain by whom they had been
united, and the previous decease of the only
witnesses
to the ceremony, put him upon a scheme
for relieving himself from his bonds worthy rather
of a fiend than a human being. His witnesses were
two soldiers of his company, whom he had bribed
to silence so liberally, that they quarrelled together
in their cups, and fought, and that with such fury,
that one was killed on the spot, and the other died
before he could be brought to a trial. The
chaplain
was drowned five months after in attempting
to cross a flooded river. There remained
therefore
no witness of the union, and the only
testimony
remaining, to wit, the certificate signed by
the unfortunate chaplain, was already in
Falconer's
hands. Opportunitythe devil that seduces
beyond all other fiendsdestroyed every vestige
of honour and humanity in his bosom; he fled from
his betrayed wife, leaving her to believe that the
ceremony of marriage between them had been
only a brutal mockery, contrived by a villain for
her ruin. He left her to believe this, to madden,
and to die; and before she had drawn her last
sigh,nay, upon the morning of that dreadful
midnight that saw her expire,he had yielded to
the fate he had encouraged, and taken a second
wife to his bosom.
I lived, I prospered, he cried, when he had
brought his dark confession to a close; and two
fair infants sat upon my knee; but their looks were
curses to metheir birth was
infamous;
and I
myself, though men knew it not, was in the eye of
God and the law, a
felon!
Now, Hyland, son of
the wronged Jessie, I have defended your mother's
memory; but I am not less a villain. Expose me
to the world, curse me, for I deserve ityes! he
added, with wildness, and even falling upon his
knees before the horror-struck son,expose me
and curse me, but have pity upon my child,have
mercy upon your sister,the sister of the brother
you slew,my poor, wretched, dishonoured
Harriet
.
God forgive you, sir, said Hyland, with tears.
Leave meI cannot call you
father:
but I will
not disgrace your daughter. No, I will notbut
my motherAnd she
was
my mother then?
my mother's name must rest no longer in infamy.
Go, sir; I forgive youthat is, I will not upbraid
you; but I cannot, I cannot call you father. I am
innocent of Henry'sof my brother's death
Yes, I will call him brother, for surely
he
never
wronged my poor mother. Take this much
comfort
my
hand never fired the pistol that killed
him; and, whether I live or die, it will soon be
seen that I am innocent of his blood.
God grant it, said Colonel Falconer, but with
an accent showing how vaguely the thought of
Henry now sat on his bosom. God grant it
buthark! what is that? They cry again! It is
the descent of the jury! Oh Heaven, I am
punished
indeed for that act of baseness! Farewell, my
son: I do not ask you for forgivenessbut touch
my hand, grasp my hand but once
I cannot, said Hyland, recoiling with such
horror, that the unhappy father bowed his head
with shame. He then snatched up the light,
unconscious
of what he did, and moved towards the
door, as if to depart; but a louder cry from the
street striking his ear, he again turned round, and
looked Hyland in the face.
They are calling for your blood, he said,
but they do not know you killed your brother!
What! not touch my hand? Well, it is but
justice
,I
will not trouble you more.
With these words, he turned to depart, still
holding the lamp; but had scarce moved his foot,
before there was heard, at a little distance without,
the sound, as it seemed, of a rifle, or other small
arms.
Oh Heaven! my father! cried Hyland, starting
up, with a voice that thrilled Elsie to the brain,
I have killed my father!
The lamp fell from Colonel Falconer's hands,
and all was in darkness. As Hyland rushed to
where he had stood, his foot struck against a
prostrate
body; and reaching down, he found his hand
slipping in a puddle of warm blood.
Elsie! Elsie! cried the distracted youth, a
light for God's sake! It was meant for
me,
but it
has struck my father! Why did I forget? Oh, I
thought not of my folly.Help me, Elsiehe
groans.
Enough,--let me lie where I am, said
Falconer
,
with a voice almost inaudible. There is
retribution
for all.
Call the jailer!Quick, jailer, quick! cried
Hyland, as the door opened, disclosing the broad
and wondering visage of Hanschen: help me to
place him upon the bed; and then, oh for God's
sake, quick for a surgeon!
But Hanschen answered only by slapping to the
door, without uttering a word; and making his
way as fast as he could towards the cell of
Sterling
,
in which was, at that moment, presented a
scene of not less fearful character than that which
had passed before Hyland's eyes.
CHAPTER XIX.
Let me sit heavy on thy soul to-morrow.
King Richard
III.
It
was not until long after noon of the day of
trial that Affidavy woke from the stupefaction into
which he was plunged by the cup he had so
craftily
qualified; and then it was some time before he
could summon his recollection, and conceive where
he was. He found himself in a cell obviously of
the prison; for the single window that lighted it
was strongly grated, and the door fast bolted on
the outside. There was a bed hard by, in which,
as was apparent from its condition, some one had
passed the night; but who that might have been
he knew not, no one being now visible. As for
himself, he found that his couch had been nothing
better than the hard floor; and close by where he
lay, he discovered a pool of coagulated blood. He
was seized with alarm, and finding the door refuse
all egress, he ran to the window, and beheld in the
yard which it overlooked, a sight that, besides
filling him with new terror, conveyed an inkling
to his mind of his true situation and its cause.
This was nothing less than the dead bodies of two
men, lying stiff and gory upon a bench, without
even a cloth to conceal them from the light of
day.
Botheration, and God bless my soul! he cried,
I'm a ruined man!
Done up,as clean as a skinned eel, said a
voice at his back; and, looking round, he beheld
his friend, the jailer, enter the cell, with a grim
smile on his visage, which was not much improved
in beauty by a red handkerchief, that swathed it
round from jaw to top-knot. Done up, Teffy, my
boy, as slick as a new bolt. Who'll you have for
your counsel?or do you think of pleading your
own cause? Ods bobs, you can make a good
speech;I always said that for you.
Counsel!cause!speech! echoed the man
of law;God bless our two souls!
Amen,or e'er a one of 'em, said Lingo,
with solemn utterance; for I'm thinking it will
go hard with one of us. Howsomever, I'm glad
to see you in your senses. Sorry you had so hard
a bed of it; but howsomever, when they hang your
client up there, I'll give you better quarters. I
reckon, it will be imprisonment for life with you;
though some says, they are to try you on the
capital
charge of aiding and 'betting with the tories,
which is clean hanging treason.
God bless our two souls! said Affidavy, with
an air of wo and terror so irresistibly ludicrous,
that Lingo, perceiving his utterance failed to
supply
any further expressions, burst into a loud laugh,
and threw himself on the vacant bed, where he
rolled over and over, giving way to mirth and
triumph together.
Blarney and ods bobs! he cried, after he had
amused himself awhile in this fashion; and so
you thought to come the humbug over
me,
old
Teff! Ha, ha, ha! I always said you could make
a good speech, and so you can; but as to pulling
straws with Bob Lingo, why I never said no such
thing, for I won't lie for no man. How did you
like the cock-tail, with the cherry-bounce and
doctor's
stuff in it? Ods bobs, did you think I could
go any such liquor as that? But now you see what
you've come to,clean done up, broke, smashed,
pounded into hominy, and cribbed under lock and
key. So much for not playing fair, and making
honest snacks of the plunder! Where's them
seventeen
guineas in goold? and the note for two
thousand
more? Oh, you old ox-fly! would you have
sucked the poor young feller's blood?
At the mention of these valuables, Affidavy, who
stood mute with surprise and dismay, clapped his
hands into his pockets, first into one and then the
other, and groaned to find them empty. You've
robbed me, Bob Lingo! he said.
As clean as ever I curried a horse, said the
jailer, betaking himself to his own pockets, and
displaying both the money and the treacherous
note, the latter of which he moved before
Affidavy's
eyes with peculiar glee, saying,
Here's evidence that'll be a smasher; and then
the bottle of laudanum! Oh, you old Teff, he
cried, shaking his fist, but more in exultation than
anger, when you mean to p'ison any of your
friends, don't you go for to get the p'ison the same
day; lay it up a month before-hand. Ods bobs, if
you wasn't as poor as a rat, I'd have an action
ag'in you on my own account, for an attempt to
murder. But, ods bobs, I do think now you look
like a singed cat,I do, Affidavy!
Here he burst into another roar, having indulged
which, he rose, and satisfied with the terror he had
inflicted, proceeded very cooly to inform the
discomfited
prisoner that his case was not so bad as
he thought; that he had not `blowed him' yet;
and that he didn't know whether he would, for he
was a merciful man in his way. I smoked you,
Affidavy, said he, as soon as I heard you talk
of
your
client, and saw you show that 'ere guinea,
'specially when you fell so much in love with
me of a sudden, and with the jail here. I sent
Hans after you, and he saw you ride out on the
prisoner's horse; and, ods bobs, I thought of
sending
some so'diers to dog after you; but they was
all out in the bushes already. Then I went to the
doctor's shop, to get some laudanum for an aching
tooth, and said he, `Vy there's Affidafy has peen
pying laudanum for an aching tooth, too!'Oho!
said I; and then, old boy, I was ready for you.
And you see the end! while you was lying
snorting
here like a corn-fed pig, we was knocking the
tories on the head at the yard-gate. And then we
had the coroner on 'em, and you no wiser; and
the magistrates and all the town inquiring into the
fuss, and you no wiser; and there, indeed, there's
your client, poor fellow, they're trying in court as
hard as they can, the evidence all over, the
speeches half done, and still, Affidavy, my boy,
you no wiser. Ha, ha! I do think you look like
an apple-dumpling that's tumbled out of the pot,
and staring up out of the ashes!
Well, Bob, said Affidavy, with an attempt at
a laugh, that ended in a groan, I knock under to
you: you've beat me hollow. But now, if you
please, and with many thanks to you for not
blabbing
,
I'll take that wallet, and the guineas; and
as for the silver, why I don't care if you keep it.
No, I reckon not, said Lingo, with a grin.
But, I'm thinking, you'll just take the silver
yourself
,
and be thankful I let you off so easy. What,
man, do you suppose I'll run the risk of defending
you from a prosecutiona criminal prosecution,
d'ye seeby holding my tongue, for nothing?
Don't go to be such a fool.
Well then, said Theophilus, with a groan,
do as you like, and let me out.
Not so fast, neither, said Lingo; and then
added, with a nod of the head, I reckon there's
more of the shiners where these come from?
Well, said Affidavy, what then?
Why then, said Lingo, I don't care if I run
a risk with you, and go snacks.
Will you? said Affidavy. Then, ehem,
humph!You know what I mean; and there's a
thousand a-piece on that note!
The ready, old boy, the ready! hang all your
paper promises; I go for the ready.
Well then, let me out, and I'll state the case to
one we know of. But, I fear, the ready's not to
be hadWe'll take a second note of the prisoner.
Ods bobs! are you there with your notes still?
Now if you come to that, I reckon I can do all that
without assistance, and no snacks neither. And
so good by to you.
With that the jailer, giving the attorney another
nod, flung out of the cell, taking good care,
however
,
to lock the door behind him; leaving
Affidavy
to suspect, as he did, that Lingo was resolved
to manage the case, and reap the harvest, on his
own account.
Oh the villain! sighed the disconsolate
attorney
.
But I'll be even with him yet. Let me see
humgood! the rascal is already implicated,
having concealed myfaugh! So he will not dare
to accuse me now. Well, I'll see through it by
and by. That cursed laudanum! I do think it has
turned my brain into a dough-cakeVery well
Was there ever such an ass!That I should let
such a jolterhead get the upper hand of me!I
wonder what's the matter with my ribs!Nothing
VOL. II.U
to drink!no, botheration, nor to eat, neither.
Very well, Bob Lingo; I'll remember you.
He then sought to relieve the perplexity of his
mind by walking about; but the excessive and
unnatural debauch had bereft him of strength, so
that he was soon compelled to sit down upon the
bed, where he found the stupor, which had not yet
entirely deserted his faculties, returning and
growing
upon him, in spite of all his efforts to resist it.
In a word, he became again very drowsy, and
fearing lest some additional evil should befall him
if caught again napping, he rose up and looked
from the window, to divert his mind from its
lethargy. He saw, from the ruddy hue of the
sunshine
on the neighbouring roofs, and the golden
tinge of the floating clouds, that the day was
already
declining; by which he perceived how long
he had already slept, and wondered that, after
such a siege of slumber, he should so soon feel any
inclination to sleep again. But, while he
wondered
,
he found the clouds and house-tops blending
their outlines together on his vision, while the hum
of the village grew confused in his ear. He
stalked about again, then again sat down on the
bed; when, fearing lest that should seduce him into
slumber, and being incapable of remaining longer
upon his feet, he betook himself to a corner, where
he sat down on the floor, pursuing his
meditations
;
and there, after much nodding, musing, and
scratching of head, he fell, in spite of all efforts to
the contrary, fast asleep.
He slept long and soundly; and the shadows of
night had been long gathered over the earth,
before
certain sounds in the narrow apartment,
mingling with his dreams, imparted to them the
horrors of nightmare, and then suddenly dispelled
them. He was awakened by a human groan,
hollow and sepulchral, but so loud that he deemed
it was breathed just at his ear; and looking up, he
beheld a spectacle that caused his hair to bristle
with terror. It was, as he perceived, dark night;
but a lamp, standing upon a little table near the
bed, poured a dim and ghastly light over the cell,
sufficient to reveal the few objects it contained.
Upon the bed sat a tall man, in his night-gear,
with a visage of death-like hue, and eyes staring
out of his head, which he rolled now to the right
hand and now to the left, as if gazing upon objects
invisible to the attorney; although Affidavy was
accustomed to declare afterwards, when good
cheer made him communicative, that he distinctly
saw at the right hand of the sick man, and not
fifteen feet from himself, a figure as of a man
swathed in a bloody sheet, that stood gazing the
other in the face, and gradually melted into the
obscurity, as he himself surveyed it more intently.
Be that as it may, there was enough of the ghostly
and terrific in the appearance and expressions of
the sick man, to keep the attorney cowering with
fear in his corner, without any addition of horrors
from the world of spirits; and accordingly,
Affidavy
sat looking on and listening, without the
power to move, or even to rise.
The sick man continued to roll his eyes,
occasionally
uttering deep groans, and now and then
muttering expressions that showed the horror of
his mind, without, at first, clearly disclosing the
cause.
Ay, wave your hand, he heard him say, as if
addressing some phantom revealed only to his own
senses; wave your hand, and point to the bloody
throat: it was well aimed, boy, well aimed, and it
was well done. I care not for
you:
it is the other
that moves me; for him I killed with a lie, and
there he sits smiling! His face is black and
swollen, yet he smiles; his arms are bound behind,
yet he smiles; a rope is round his neck, yet he
smiles.Ay, smile, boy, smile! that smile is
heavier
on my heart than the frown of the soldier!
A smile! men would call that poor revenge; but
we, boy, ha, ha! we know better!
He then fell back upon the bed, and lay for a
moment quiet; so that Affidavy had leisure to
recall
his spirits, and penetrate the mystery, which
had at first so deeply appalled him. His first
thought was, that he was enclosed with some
wounded refugee, captured in the toils to which
he himself had unwittingly brought him; but
remembering
presently that he had seen two bodies
stretched in the yard below, and had good reason,
from Lingo's expressions, to believe the third man
had made his escape, he perceived that this must
be some prisoner of an earlier date; and he knew
that, the night before, there were but three in
Lingo's
charge. With the person of the unfortunate
Hyland he was already well acquainted, and Dancy
Parkins was, it might be said, his old acquaintance.
His thoughts reverted immediately to Sterling,
whom he had never seen; and he remembered, at
the same time, that Lingo had hinted to him the
ease with which he might weaken this man's
testimony
,
if that were desirable, by convicting him of
insanity. Oho, the dog, Lingo! said he to
himself
;
he has shut me up with a madman then?
Now, if he should be dangerous, God bless our two
souls!Ha! there, he's rising again! God bless
our two souls!
They are gone then? muttered the wretch,
in whose sunken features, hollow voice, and
altered
spirit, one would with difficulty have
recognised
the humorous, bold, and reckless adventurer;
they are gone; but it will not be long. Hah! he
added, fixing his eye, with a fearful stare, upon the
vacant wall, you come again, and frowning!
Yet I fear not: other men have shed blood, and
lived happy. It is not for you, but for the other
him that lies across my feet smiling! Hah, what!
he screamed, rather than said, as his eye,
wandering
towards the foot of the bed, suddenly fell upon
the figure of Affidavy, in his corner, now cowering
low with terror, are there
three?
Devil! you
lie! he exclaimed, leaping out of bed, there
were but twohim that I shot, and him that I
killed with false witness. Ha, ha, ha! these are
juggling fiends! devils of legerdemain! that make
a man worse than he is! You look me in the face
Well! I look back:do you think to fright me?
Look at me then, and say, if you dare, that
I
hurt
you!
And with these words, he advanced towards
Affidavy, who now perceived that his right arm
was swathed in bandages across his breast, as if
maimed by some injury. But his left hand he
brandished with menacing gesticulation, and his
countenance was covered with a ghastly frown;
so that Affidavy feared nothing less than that he
should be immediately torn to pieces. From this
apprehension, which deprived him of the power of
raising a finger in self-defence, he was relieved by
the sudden appearance of the jailer, who, entering
the cell with an oath, seized upon the madman,
and shook him with violence, until he groaned
with pain, suffering himself to be pushed back upon
the bed.
U 2
I'll have the law of you, Bob Lingo! said the
attorney, starting up from an ecstasy of fear to
lanch into a tumult of rage; I'll have the law of
you, you villain! and what's more, I'll chouse you
out of your fees and bribes,your cheating and
tampering with the prisoner, Hyland Gilbert: he's
an innocent man, you rascal, and you know it!
and here's this man Sterling has avowed the
murder
himself.
Ods bobs! said Lingo, what do you
mean?
I mean what I say, cried Affidavy, whom
rage, the desire of requiting upon Lingo some of
the disappointments he had himself endured, and a
sudden prospect that seemed to open on him of
retrieving his lost fortune, had restored to the
possession
of his faculties. I mean, that my client,
Hyland Gilbert, whom you cheated out of my
services
,
is an innocent man; and that there lies the
true criminal. He has confessed the whole
matter
;
murder and perjurymurder and perjury,
you villain! do you hear that? and I'll make him
depose the particulars, you cheating, covetous,
conniving rapscallion! and so chouse you out of
all your expected fees, you rascal! botheration, I
will!Harkee, you Sterling! he said, now
advancing
boldly towards the object of his late fears,
you've blabbed all, and so you may as well
confess
at once. I overheard all you said; and my
testimony will settle the matter; so, for the good
of your soul, confess. You're a dying man;
the devil's as good as got you alreadyyou'll
not last a day longer; so confess, confess, and
don't damn yourself for ever, by hanging an
innocent man. What! do you pretend to deny it?
he continued; adopting a course of persuasion
founded on what he had witnessed of the
prisoner's
hallucinations do you see that young man
there, with the bloody throat, frowning? Look
I know him wellit is young Harry Falconer!
Ay, said Sterling, rolling his eyes to the wall;
but where is the other?
Why, they are hanging him; and all because
you swore falsely against him.
Is he alive yet? muttered Sterling; I thought
he was dead. Send me a priest, and I'll confess.
A priest! A magistrate, you mean.
It is all oneI am a dying man; there is
something wrong here,
here,
he murmured,
striking his forehead. I will do reparationask
me what you will; but drive Henry Falconer out
of the room; ay, and take that young Hawk off
my feethe chills them to the marrow.
It was
your
pistol killed Henry Falconer?
cried the lawyer.
Ay; I shot him over Gilbert's shoulder. I fired
at both; either would have served me. But
who was the
third
one? Old Falconer did not
die!
A justice of the peace, Lingo! do you hear?
said Affidavy, grinning with triumph. I reckon
I'll sort you, you covetous, cheating dog!
Come, squire, don't be mad, whispered the
jailer, with two or three significant winks: We'll
go snacks yet.
What, you rascal, do you think to bribe me to
keep silence? Oho! you cormorant, I've got the
play now in my own hands; and we
won't
go
snacks: I work on my own foundation. You've
heard the man's words here; deny them if you
can. Send for a squire, or refuse at your peril;
I'll bawl out the window, and raise the town.
There's no need of being contractious, said
Lingo, coolly. I sent Hanschen for old Squire
Leger an hour ago; for I reckon I was a leetle
before you! The man asked for him of his own
accord, while you was a snoozing in the corner;
for it's a gone case with him, and he knows it.
The lawyer was petrified at this announcement;
it was a new and mortal disappointment; for he
designed to make profitable use to himself of his
discovery; and to complete his confusion, the door
was opened at that moment, and Hanschen entered,
ushering in the worthy Schlachtenschlager, whom
he had lighted upon by accident, after searching
in vain for the other magistrate, after whom he
had been sent an hour before. The attorney
groaned; with one hand he grasped the Squire's
extended palm, and the other he shook in the face
of Lingo, who grinned, and winked, and nodded
at him, with the most provoking good-humour.
But Affidavy was not a man to be disheartened
even in such an extremity; he no longer dreaded
an exposure of his extra-professional services on
the prisoner's behalf; and he perceived that there
was still a field, although a narrow one, on which
to display his zeal. Trusting therefore to his skill
to make his client sensible of the full merit of his
labour, he addressed himself to the task of shriving
the discovered felon, with a tact and sagacity that
were soon perceived to be as useful as they were
really indispensable.
It was found that Sterling was in a very critical
state, his bodily powers being completely wrecked,
and his mind so much unhinged that he could
scarce answer two consecutive questions without
wandering. The causes that had brought him to
this condition it was not easy to imagine, unless
by supposing he had received some fatal internal
injury during his struggle with Oran Gilbert; or
by referring all at once to the horror of mind with
which, it seemed, he had been affected from the
moment he felt himself a homicide. A homicide
he was, as was soon made apparent; for being led
on and assisted by the questions of Affidavy, he
confessed, without any reluctance or attempt at
equivocation, that he had sworn falsely in regard
to the exchange of pistols betwixt himself and
Hyland, such exchange never having taken
place; and that he, and no other, had shot the
pistol that killed young Falconer. The reasons
for this act were but imperfectly developed; and
the strongest seemed to be a bitter hatred he had
conceived against the deceased, in consequence of
an indignity offered him long since in the theatre,
from which he had been hissed, chiefly through
Falconer's instrumentality. Such a cause for
vengeance
may be understood by those who
remember
the rivers of blood poured out at Lyons, ten
years after, to satiate the rankling fury of a Collot
d'Herbois. It will be remembered in what
manner
he volunteered, while in the swamp with Oran
Gilbert, to take the life of this unlucky youth; as
well as the attempt he made upon it the following
night, in the park, when he discovered him
struggling
with Hyland. It appeared, besides, that after
having rendered himself into the hands of the
pursuers
,
and confessed his true name and character,
the reckless lieutenant pursued him with divers
jests and jeers, which were the more intolerable
that his quarrel with the Gilberts had left his mind
in a state of furious passion; and an additional
incentive was offered by the scuffle between the
two rivals, in which any execution of vengeance
would be so readily imputed to accident, if traced
to him at all. He succeeded beyond his
expectations
;
the object of his hatred lay a corpse before
himbut from that moment Sterling was another
and a changed man. His mind was filled with
horrornot remorse, for to the last he testified
nothing like penitencebut with a nameless and
oppressive dread, which was increased tenfold by
the reflection that this act had, or would in the end,
deprive a second fellow being of life, that second
being the unfortunate youth whom an
extraordinary
accident had imbued with a belief that he
was himself the murderer. Hence the singular
turn of his testimony, and his attempt to throw a
doubt upon the prisoner's guilt; until the sudden
discovery of the damaged pistol struck him with
a fear, until then unfelt, for his own safety. He
dreaded lest his own weapons, which had been
taken from him immediately after the catastrophe,
and from which, in the agitation of his spirits, he
had forgotten to remove the evidences of guilt,
should be examined, and thus suspicion diverted
upon himself. To prevent this, he invented the
falsehood concerning the exchange, and thus
screened himself from suspicion, at the expense of
a second act of murder. But from that moment his
horror became insupportable; and after struggling
with it in vain, and becoming persuaded that his
own fate was drawing nigh, he summoned Lingo,
made a deliberate confession of his villany, and
desired that his deposition might be taken, before
his madness, of whose approaches he seemed
conscious
,
should render reparation impossible.
It was now taken, and with difficulty, but it was
conclusive; and so intent became all present upon
the strange and impressive story, and, after it was
concluded, so eager were all to confirm it by
inducing
repetitions of the most important
circumstances
,
that even the sudden sound of fire-arms
on the square, followed by the outcries in Hyland's
cell, were unheard and unnoticed, until Hanschen
suddenly rushed among them, with the intelligence,
as he expressed it, `that there fas murdter going
on in the Hawk's room.'
All started up, leaving Sterling to rave, perhaps
to die, alone, and made their way to the prisoner's
apartment, where Colonel Falconer was found
weltering in blood in the arms of Elsie and his
son, a rifle-bullet having penetrated his side, and
lodged in the body; and it was soon gathered,
from the remorseful expressions of Hyland, that it
had been shot by a refugeethe last act of
friendship
that could be rendered to a helpless and
hopeless
comrade.
It was shot by Oran Gilbert, said Elsie Bell,
for there is none left but him! Yes, Richard
Falconer, I said it would come sooner or later!
It is well for you, too,you will not see the death
of your son's murderer!
He is innocent! said Affidavy, snatching at
his client's hand. Botheration, my boy, we've
found the true murderer! He has confessed, and
you are an innocent man. The pistol was shot by
Sterling! We'll clear you, or secure a free
pardon
.
By Sterling! murmured Colonel Falconer.
Then, oh heaven! then is my son guiltless of his
brother's blood!
I am, father, I am! said Hyland; but,
wretch that I am, my madness and folly have
killed my father!
I die content.I will do you justice, my son
I am not so faint as beforeThey shall carry me
totoI forgetit is no matterWell, well
With these words he fell into a swoon, in which
he was at first esteemed dead; but a surgeon
having been sent for, and now entering the cell,
he declared, upon a hasty inspection of the wound,
that it was by no means mortal, and that there
was every reason to prognosticate a speedy
recovery
.
The sufferer was then carried to the inn,
and put to bed; but with no such assurances of
life as had been pronounced in the prison. A
consultation
was called, the result of which was a
more rational declaration, that his days were
already numbered.
CHAPTER XX.
Farewell ye dungeons dark and strong,
The wretch's destiny;
M`Pherson's time will not be long
On yonder gallows-tree.
M`
Pherson's Farewell
.
The
singular discovery of Hyland's innocence
was long before morning bruited over the village,
and besides exciting a double interest in his fate,
produced no little curiosity in regard to the
movements
of the jury, who were still deliberating over
the charge, as well as to the course to be pursued
by the court, in such a strange conjuncture of
circumstances
.
Expectation was not, however, kept long at
stretch. An early and formal representation of
the discovery being made by the prisoner's
counsel
to the presiding judge, the court was
straightway
convened, and the jury ordered to be recalled,
for the purpose of receiving the new testimony.
This, consisting of Sterling's deposition and the
evidence of witnesses as to its authenticity, it may
he supposed, was sufficient to terminate their
deliberations
in a moment. Had the confession been
made at a later period, it would undoubtedly have
saved the prisoner's life; but it occurred at a time
to save his good name,to save it, at least, from
the reproach, which, however undeserved, must
ever follow upon even unjust conviction. His true
story and character, and, in fact, his real
parentage
,
VOL. II.X
were now becoming generally known; new
friends, as well as many an old one, were
labouring
in his service, and all were desirous to see the
end of a prosecution, that had caused him so much
unmerited suffering. The trial was therefore
despatched without difficulty; the evidence was
given; a few brief and impressive words,
indicative
of their gratification at the defendant's
happy escape from his difficulties, and their own
from a share in wrong-doing, were pronounced
by the bench; after which the whole matter was
submitted to the jury, who, without leaving their
seats, immediately returned a verdict of acquittal.
The defendant was then discharged, in the
ordinary
way, by proclamation, and shed tears of
genuine transport to find himself released from
the ignominy that had before, as strongly almost
as his remorse, crushed him to the earth. He
had scarce stepped from the bar before he found
himself in the arms of Captain Loring, who
hugged and blubbered, and swore `adzooks, he
always thought him an honest fellow, for all of
their talking; and adzooks, it was no wonder he
loved him, since he was of his own blood and bone,
though he didn't like his having so much Gilbert
blood in him; and if he had only told him as much
before, it would have been much better for him,
and, adzooks, for his poor Kate, and, adzooks, for
the picture!'
At the bed-side of the dying Falconer he found
his father's daughter. His sister!With what
strange and contradictory emotions he received
the hand of the being, to whose unhappy hostility
he owed the long series of sufferings and
indignities
that had brought him almost to the grave.
And she,with what feelings she must have
herself
seen in the object of her greatest hate, one to
whom nature had given the strongest claims on
her love. But the place in which they met called
for other than selfish emotions: it was at the
deathbed
of their common parent.
It is not our design to pursue further in detail
the history of this unfortunate man. The bullet of
Oran Gilbert (for it was now known that the shot
could have been fired by no other, all the members
of his band having been either killed or captured,)
had been well aimed, though he who fired it deemed
it was speeded against the breast of his own brother.
The better victim lingered but a few days, and
then expired; so that the same grave which
received
his unlucky son closed over the guilt and
sorrow of the parent. He lived long enough to
remove the veil of shame from the sepulchre of
the betrayed wife, and to do her reparation in the
person of her son; but it was, as he had before
declared, at the expense of his daughter. She
never more lifted up her head. A sense of her
parent's baseness, and the disgrace now attached
to her own origin, with perhaps the bitter
consciousness
that her cruel design upon the happiness
of her friend had caused the ruin that surrounded
her, weighed her to the earth; and two years
after her father's death, she was herself borne to
the grave, the last victim of the retribution which
so often visits the sins of the father upon the heads
of his children.
It remains but to reveal the fate of two other
prominent persons in the story, before exchanging
the gloom pervading the last act of the tragedy,
for the sunshine that should mark the close.
The prisoner Sterling, notwithstanding his own
expectations of a speedy dissolution, lingered a full
month before he expired; and in all that time
displayed
the workings of the hallucination which had
been the consequence of his crime. He saw before
him continuallyfor day and night were now alike
to himthe ghastly figure of young Falconer,
frowning
at his bed-side; and frequently the phantom of
the elder brother was added, in imagination, to the
terrors of the other. He died in this fearful frame
of mind; and thus carried to the after-tribunal the
guilt which escaped the punishment of man.
The fate of Oran Gilbert remained for many
months wrapped in obscurity. He must have fired
the shot that struck a bosom he had so often
coveted
to pierce, from the open square behind the
prison
;
yet he effected his escape from the village
without pursuit and almost without observation,
the discharge of the rifle having excited but little
notice at a moment when all the crowded throngs
in the streets were rushing towards the court. The
alarm, however, being soon given, many men
armed themselves and started in pursuit, though
without any knowledge of the direction in which
he had fled, and, indeed, without at first being
aware whom they followed. The first traces of
him were discovered in the Hollow, at Elsie Bell's
cottage, which it seems he had entered before day,
and there rested for awhile, to the great terror of
the little negro girl Margery, who was at that time
the only inmate of the hovel, and to whom he
appeared
little short of a demon, his countenance
being wild and dreadful, and his words and
actions
,
at least in her opinion, distracted. It was
from the circumstances developed here, that the
pursuers found they were upon the track of Oran
Gilbert himself, now deprived of all followers, and
flying with the dreadful persuasion at his spirit,
that his hand had slain the last of his father's
children
.
It appeared from little Margery's account, that,
after wildly searching the house over, he asked for
Elsie, and being told she was in the village, sat
down upon a chair, whence the girl soon saw
blood fall upon the floor; and, in fact, upon
examination
,
it was found that a considerable
quantity
of gore still lay by the chair on which he had
rested. He then called for water, and a napkin,
the latter of which he put upon his right side,
securing
it under a leathern belt; after which he
drank freely of the water, and going into Elsie's
private apartment, he took from the wall a little
sampler, a relic, as it appeared, of his deceased
sister, tore it to pieces, and scattered it over the
floor. He then proceeded to the chamber so long
inhabited by Hyland, where finding many little
sketches, and other neglected scraps, he destroyed
them in like manner. After this, he descended to
the room below, took up his gun, which he charged
with great care, and hunted about until he had
found a strong and sharp-pointed knife, which he
stuck in his belt; and then, drinking again from
the pitcher, he left the hovel, without uttering a
single word, and Margery heard him ride away,
apparently towards the mountain.
This was enough for the pursuers, whose
numbers
had been increased by volunteers along the
way; and they instantly resumed the road, though
with no great hope of coming up with the fugitive,
who had foiled them so many times already. They
knew, however, that the land was full of parties
still in search of him, none of which had perhaps
been so close upon his track as themselves. They
were also inspired by a discovery that was made
when they came to examine the marks of his
horse's feet in the moist earth bordering the runlet
in the oak-yard, and this was, that the animal had
cast a shoe; for which reason, they supposed, the
X 2
rider would be soon compelled to abandon him,
and seek shelter in some fast place among the
woods, where he might be surrounded, and
perhaps
taken alive. They rode on therefore with
new spirit, and coming at an early hour in the
morning upon the river bank, led by the tracks of
his horse, which did not seem once to have left
the road, they descried him, or at least a horseman
they supposed to be him, riding along the bluff, at
a slow gait, indicative of the daring or
recklessness
of his character.
He rode a black horse, apparently of great
native
strength and spirit; but, it was now obvious,
the animal had been of late taxed severely, and
beyond his powers; for which reason, it was not
doubted, the fugitive could be overtaken, before he
reached the mountain, which was still distant three
or four miles. The party proclaimed their
discovery
and their hopes, by setting up a great shout.
At this, to their surprise, the refugee checked his
wearied steed, and turned round, as if for the
purpose
of making battle,a display of andacity and
resolution that went far to cool the ardour of many
who had been, a moment before, the bravest of the
whole party. They saw him fling the rifle he
carried
into the hollow of his left arm, and then, with
his right hand, remove from his visage the long
locks of black hair that had, a moment before,
swung wildly in the wind; and they fancied they
beheld, even at the distance which separated them
from him, a smile writhing over his pallid features,
like that of the panther at bay.
Well done, old Oran the 'Awk! cried one of
the party, taking a long rifle from his shoulder,
and advancing to the head of the others, who had
come to an universal halt. He was a man of
middle
age, with a face as bleak and weather-worn as
the rocks at the river's edge, tall and gaunt of
frame, but sinewy, and of a certain bully-like look
about the fists and eyes, that showed him to be no
inconsiderable man in his degree. Well done,
old Oran the 'Awk! he cried; I up'old you to
be game, chock-full; and so, if you're for a pull
ag'in' current, why, I'm clear for showing fair play.
So men, just 'old by, like honest fellers; and, my
logs 'gin' his, I'll show him what long shots is; for
he and me was good friends of old.
Go it, Dan Potts, the raftsman! cried several
of his companions, handling their own arms, as if
to try their virtues at a distance, while others cried
out, to advance in a body without further delay,
but set no example themselves, the appearance of
the outlaw being uninviting to all save the bold
raftsman, who continued to move onwards, though
slowly and cautiously, as if well aware of the
danger
of a personal contest with one who had been,
as he said, his good friend in old times. But the
refugee, without regarding the challenge of the
raftsman, took advantage of the hesitation of his
companions to change his own plans, and by
suddenly
turning his horse and spurring off with
unexpected
speed, he gained a considerable space
before they could recover from their surprise and
follow. They darted after him, however, with
what activity they could; and cheering one
another
with their voices, they rode on at such a
pace that, in a few moments, the whole party was
sweeping betwixt the yawning jaws of the Gap, up
the course of which he directed his flight.
The mountain is here perhaps two thousand feet
or more, in elevation. Its course is oblique to the
river, which itself is bent and twisted out of its
path by the irregular protrusion and retrogression
of cliffs and promontories. The right bank of the
river, looking to the east, is fenced by a dizzy and
inaccessible wall of crags; while the mountain on
the other side, presenting a similar wall to the
south, dips down, westward, to the water in an
angle more practicable to human daring, though
the whole declivity is covered over with loose
rocks, the remnants of some stony avalanche,
tumbled from pinnacles above by the same
convulsion
that thrust the mountain from the bowels
of the earth, or shivered it, already uprisen,
asunder. A few withered hemlocks are here
and there seen springing from between these
disjointed
fragments, which are, in other places,
veiled
by patches of flowering-raspberry, alder, and
other shrubs; though, in general, the eye reposes
on rocks entirely bald and naked, or, at best, tufted
with mosses, lichens, and ferns. It presents a
scene of dreary sterility and gloom; but its savage
wildness can be only appreciated by those who
clamber up to its summit over those loose and
ever-precarious rocks, which afford the only
footing
.
Into the gorge bounded by these frowning limits
the refugee was seen to urge his steed; when
suddenly
,
to the amazement of the pursuers, he turned
from the road, dashed through a wall of rosebays
that hedged it in, and the next moment plunged
into the river, swimming his horse right towards
the opposite mountain. The cause of this
extraordinary
step was soon perceived; for the next instant
a troop of horse in the continental uniform, came
dashing down the Gap, uttering a wild hurrah, that
made the rocks ring. It was one of the many
parties
of military by whom all the passes of the
county were guarded; and it seemed the fugitive
had rushed almost amongst them, before he
discovered
their presence. Nothing remained for
him, thus checked in front, and retreat cut off
behind
,
but to fling himself into the river, and seek
refuge among the dens of the eastern mountain;
and this he attempted, though the chances were
ten to one that he should be shot from his horse,
before he reached the opposite bank. In fact,
he had scarce swum beyond the middle of the
stream, before the two parties rushed to the
water's
edge and let fly a volley, which, had it not
been fired almost altogether from pistols, must
have brought his flight to a bloody close. The
water was seen bubbling around him, as the
bullets
pattered like rain-drops over its surface; but
he still swam on, as if unhurt, and some dozen or
more of the boldest riders present spurred their
horses into the river to follow.
Well done, old Oran the 'Awk! cried Dan
Potts, waving over his head the long rifle he had
not thought fit yet to discharge; it's agin my
conscience to shoot an old friend in the back,
'specially
when there's no tree to cover him.
Bang away, Dan Potts, cried others; shoot,
for the honour of the county.
The county be dd, said Dan Potts; I
shoots from my own raft. And with that, he raised
his weapon, and taking deadly aim right betwixt
the refugee's shoulders, drew the trigger. But at
that moment, the horse, which had until now
breasted his way gallantly through the deep water,
flung himself aloft in terror or in agony, and rolling
backwards, plunged his rider into the water, so that
he escaped the shot entirely, as perhaps the
animal
did also, though that could never be known
with certainty.
I swog! and may I wreck my next raft on the
Foul Rift, if I didn't! said Dan Potts, but I hit
the' oss on the 'ead, and cuss the bit of his master!
Neversomever, I'll try for a spell ag'in, and the
next'll be a right-down rusty!
With these words he spurred his horse into the
river, with which his employment as a raftsman
had doubtless made him familiar; for, whether it
proceeded from this circumstance, or some other
advantage he possessed over the others, he was
soon at the head of the swimmers, and leading the
pursuit.
In the meanwhile, Oran Gilbert was seen to
spring erect on his horse's back; but the animal
never raised his head again from the water, and
Oran, abandoning him entirely, trusted to his own
courage and strength of arm to reach the rocks
that were now close at hand. In this attempt he
succeeded. He was seen to issue from the water,
and aim his rifle, which he still retained, at the
advancing Potts.
Try it ag'in, old 'Awk! roared Dan, as he
saw the imperfect flash expire, without being
followed
by any explosion; try it ag'in, old boy; or
out knife and be ready!
The only answer the tory deigned the bravado
was, to fling his now unserviceable and
burdensome
piece into the river, and then rush up the
mountain with all his speed. He was soon lost
sight of among the rocks and bushes; a piece of
good fortune which he owed to a simple expedient.
As he clambered up, he took care to spurn from
its lodgment every stone that shook under his foot,
which rolling down the declivity, became a source
of extreme confusion and peril to the pursuers, (as
such are indeed yet to the laggards in a mere
party of pleasure,) who were thus forced to loiter
in the ascent, after having previously lost some
time in securing their horses at the bottom of the
hill, until there remained little hopes of overtaking
him. The raftsman was the only individual who,
in this conjuncture, was able to proceed with any
spirit. He pressed upward, dodging the
descending
rocks with infinite address and agility, and was
soon lost sight of; until, finally, even his voice, with
which he continued to cheer the others, was no
longer heard.
The mountain was, however, climbed at last; but
the refugee had vanished. The only practicable
path conducts you to the summit of the hill along
the edge of the southern precipices; and the last
step is from a shelf that overhangs the wooded
abyss below, whence, peeping over the brink of
the cliffs at their most tremendous height, the eye
looks over many a league of blue hill and misty
hollow, of living wood and winding river,a scene
whose loveliness is made more impressive by
contrast
with the savage desolation that reigns around
the point of view. A broad table of stone, shelving
downwards, and in part overhanging the abyss, lies
like a parapet upon the extreme brink of the
precipice
;
and it is from this, lying upon his breast,
clinging with foot and hand to its crevices and the
stunted bushes that grow upon its surface, and
advancing
his head beyond the naked verge, that the
adventurous spectator looks down into the dizzy
gulf below,if he have indeed the courage to
look.
Upon this platform the raftsman was found
reposing
,
his elbows resting upon the parapet stone,
and his countenance betraying wonder mingled
with perplexity. Upon being asked what had
become
of the fugitive, he pointed to certain marks
of fresh blood that lay on the stones where he
stood, hard-by the parapet, which was itself
dabbled
with blood; and, in addition, the black lichens
with which it was overgrown, were torn up, as by
the struggles of some human being sliding down
its inclined surface towards the horrible abyss
beneath; and a shrub springing from the verge,
was snapped off, as if broken by a human hand.
I once, said the raftsman, chased a
two-year
buck off this here very rock; and I reckon,
you may see some of his bones among the bushes
below. I was hunting with Oran Gilbert; we
were boys together; and, I remember, he said, `It
was a brave jump for a hard-pushed beast, and a
wise one, too.' Now let any man run his nose over
the rock's edge, and tell me what he sees swinging
to a bush some fifty or sixty fathoms below; for, to
my eyes, it has much the look of a green
hunting-shirt
,
or a big rag of it. There's a stream of blood
running up along the rocks, and here's the ending
of it. There was some old wound bursting out
on him afresh, and, to my thought, the man was not
able to run further; and so he remembered the
deer, and took a jump;and I must say, it was a
brave fancy of his, and a wise one too.
To this conjecture confirmation was given, when
one of the party, having peered over the rock,
declared that he saw the flutter of some garment,
hanging on a bush many a weary foot below. The
stones were hunted over again; a track of blood
was plainly distinguished, and had been remarked
before, staining the rocks for some distance below;
and on this platform it ended. The closest search
could not detect any mark to show that the
fugitive
had proceeded a step further; it was believed
at once, that, having reached this spot, and found
himself incapable of proceeding further, the
pursuers
,
headed by Potts, pressing him close, he had
thrown himself from the rocks, preferring a death
in keeping with his savage career, to falling alive
into the hands of his foes. There was no other
way to account for his disappearance, the
presence
of blood on the parapet, and the wave of the
garment below; and, indeed, a second, and then
a third person, looking down, they swore they
could see, among the bushes at the bottom of
the cliffs, something that looked like a human
form, as they doubted not it was. It was
accordingly
resolved to descend the mountain
without delay, which, after uttering a loud shout
of triumph they did, with the single exception of
the raftsman; who, declaring himself overcome
with fatigue, sat down upon a stone on the
platform
to rest, and was soon lost sight of by the
others. As the last man left the shelf, he beckoned
to him with his hand, nodded his head, and took
other means to arrest his attention; but these
being disregarded, or perhaps unperceived, he
ceased his signals, and muttered half to himself,
half aloud,
Well done, Tom Wolf; you're no fox, and a
man must ha' said, `Fifty guineas!' aloud, to fetch
you. But I was a fool to think on't; no 'alves
and no quarters, is my cry; and a man mought
as well take the money and the credit into his own
hands, without sharing; for, I reckon, the
creatur's
clean done up, and can make no more fight
than a 'possum. Neversomever, there's no
varmint
of the woods or water can stand by him for
a trick; and so we'll look sharp, Dan Potts, and
see what'll come out of it. I reckon I shall make
them 'ere fellers stare! They say, the governor
has offered five hundred dollars for him, hard
money
,
dead or alive. Five hundred dollars isn't to
be made, every day, a-rafting. There's a big hole
under that stone; and, I remember, he boasted he
had been down in it afore; which was like enough,
for he was always a ventur'ing devil.
VOL. II.Y
It may be gathered from these expressions what
cause had prevented the raftsman leaving the
shelf with his companions. Immediately beneath
the projecting portion of the table-rock, so often
mentioned, there is a cavity or niche in the face of
the cliff, visible, on a clear day, even from the foot
of the mountain, and inaccessible from the top only
because there are few men in the world of
sufficient
nerve to attempt reaching it, by climbing over
the face of the cliff,an exploit the very thought
of which is appalling. It occurred to the ancient
comrade of the refugee, that the latter, persuaded
he must be captured, unless he could throw his
pursuers off the scent, or delay the chase for a
time, might have bethought him of the stratagem
of causing them to believe he had thrown himself
from the rocks, while, all the time, he was lying
snugly and safely in the cavity beneath the
shelving
rock, from which he might be expected to
sally out, the moment the pursuers had descended.
This was rather a conceit in the raftsman's mind
than a positive suspicion; but it was sufficient to
impel him upon a new course of action, a main
incentive to which was the prospect it seemed to
open to him of securing the rewards that had been
offered for the apprehension of the noted outlaw.
He sat down therefore upon a stone opposite to
the parapet, and scarce twenty feet from it,
holding
his rifle ready cocked upon his knee, his knife
loosened in the sheath, and his little hunting-axe
lying at his feet; and he sat thus without fear,
knowing that, even if the refugee were armed and
in the pride of his strength and daring, he could
not ascend to the shelf, without being entirely at
his mercy. He sat in silence, expecting each
moment to see the fierce eyes of the outcast
peering
over the rock, or to hear the rattling of stones
along the face of the cliff, denoting that he had left
his hiding-place, and was beginning to ascend. He
sat watching, however, a long time in vain;and
was beginning to believe that his suspicion was
groundless, and that the desperate Oran had in truth
leaped from the cliff, when suddenly there rose
beyond the verge of the rock the apparition of a
human head, but so spectral, so pale, so ghastly
with blood, and so wildly unnatural of expression,
that he was seized with a sudden fear, and beheld
the whole body succeed it, and the refugee himself
(for it was he) stand erect upon the parapet,
before
he could raise his piece, and charge him to
surrender.
I have you, Oran, old friend! he said, at last;
so down knife, and take quarter. If you move
foot or hand, I'll fire upon you.
The outlaw heard his voice, and beheld the
threatening weapon, without any manifestation of
surprise. He bent his eyes upon him with a stare
that curdled the raftsman's blood. Fire! he
said, and laughed; and then suddenly drawing the
knife he had taken from Elsie's cottage, he made
a fierce spring from the rock right against the
uplifted rifle. The attack was so unexpected and
energetic that Potts had scarce time to pull the
trigger, before the tory lighted on the shelf at his
feet. He drew it, however, with the certainty that
the next moment the assailant would be lying
dead at his foothe drew it, and not even a flash
burst from the treacherous powder; it snapped in
his hands; and before he could exchange it for
another weapon, nay, before he could even draw
his knife, he found the blade of his opponent
glimmering
at his breast. He caught at his wrist, the
only expedient that saved him from a mortal thrust:
and being of great nerve, he strove, at the same
time, to hurl the tory upon the rock. But great as
was his strength, and feeble as he had supposed
the powers of Oran to be, the attempt was foiled,
and he began in his heart to curse the
covetousness
,
that had deprived him of a helper, in such a
time of need. As he caught the wrist of Oran in
his left hand, he sought, with the other, to snatch
his own knife from the sheath; but the motion was
anticipated, and his own right hand grasped in
Oran's left; so that the two stood for an instant
facing one another, entangled, as it might be said,
like two wild bucks, that have, at the first blow,
interlocked their antlers together, and thus remain
glaring at each other, waging battle only with
their eyes. In that instant, the raftsman beheld
enough to make him repent the temerity with
which he had sought to bring the refugee to bay.
Instead of being weakened by loss of blood, or
exhausted
by the toil of ascending the mountain, it
seemed as if he was suddenly imbued with new
strength, as well as additional fury, by the mere
presence of a foe; and there was that in his
countenance
,
which expressed, along with a native love
of conflict, the malignant ferocity of a maniac.
Indeed, his appearance was so fearful, and his
ability to resist to the uttermost so manifest, that
the raftsman felt strongly moved to call for a
parley and propose a mutual release; but the
desire
came too late. The tory perceived the
fainting
of his heart, and laughed:
I never did harm to you or yours, Dan Potts,
he said; but you shall never say so more. You
would sell the blood of a dying manyou must
first win it.
With that, he relaxed his grasp on the
raftsman's
right hand, as if for the purpose of seizing
him by the throat; and Potts took instant
advantage
of the motion, to snatch his knife from its
sheath. The motion was a trick of juggling, such
as the outlaw had learned among the red
associates
of his boyhood, and perhaps practised in
similar encounters before. The next instant, he
had thrown the whole weight of his body upon the
raftsman's breast, and directing the half-drawn
blade at the same time with his hand, Potts fell
upon the rock, his own weapon buried to the
handle
in his side.
Go! shouted the victor, leaping up, and
dragging
his victim towards a corner of the shelf,
where no parapet intervened betwixt them and
the abyss,to your fellow bloodhounds below!
Something in memory of Hyland Gilbert!
He struck the body with his foot,it rolled
crashing over the slender twigs and decaying
flakes of stone on the brink of the precipice, and
then disappeared, with not a sound to indicate its
fall upon the shivered rocks below. The next
moment
,
the victor ran from the platform, and was
buried among the forests that darken the long and
desolate summit of the ridge.
It was perhaps two hours, or more, before the
party of pursuers, descending the mountain to the
river, and making their way along the lesser
elevation
of rocks, heaped at the foot of the great
southern precipice, from which they have fallen,
reached the spot where they expected to find the
mangled corse of the outlaw. Their astonishment
and horror may be conceived, when, instead of
that, they lighted upon the body of the raftsman,
known by his garments, for scarce a vestige of
humanity remained, and sought to penetrate the
mysterious cause of his fall. The true reason was
rather supposed than inferred; but their suspicions
were confirmed when the mountain was
re-ascended
,
and his axe and cap found lying on the
shelf, as well as a new track of blood, leading
along the ridge. This was followed, until it led
them to a spot, where, it was evident, the fugitive
had rested awhile and bound up his wounds. But
here the trace entirely failed, and was never again
recovered. The mountains were hunted over and
over for weeks, but not the slightest vestige of the
refugee rewarded the search.
In the course of the ensuing winter, a party of
hunters, following a wolf, were led to the banks of
one of those little lakes, that lie, like dots of sapphire
and crystal, along the broken ridges of the
mountain
.
In this remote nook, in a hollow, surrounded
by jagged rocks and hemlock-trees, were found
several rude huts, or wigwams, of boughs, now in
ruins, such as the hunters make, when they `camp
out' in the wilderness, with the remains of fires in
front of each. This place was supposed to have
been one of the chief retreats of the refugees. At
some distance from the huts, on the edge of the
lake, they fell upon the bones of a human being,
scattered about among the stones and bushes, as if
rent asunder by wild beasts; and near them was
discovered a rusted rifle, which, being taken to the
valley, was recognised as the weapon of Potts,
the raftsman, which had not been found either
upon the platform where the party of pursuers had
left him, or near his body. This circumstance
induced a suspicion that the bones were those of
Oran Gilbert, who had armed himself with the
raftsman's piece, before leaving the platform.
There remained no other memorial of his fate,
and no other circumstance was found to identify
the skeleton with the man once so much dreaded
and detested; but it was not doubted that hither,
into the savage wilderness, he had dragged his
mangled frame, and perished miserably.
The close of Hyland's story may be readily
imagined
.
His sufferings he might have considered
as being retributive in their nature,since his
return
to the land of his birth had no worthier cause
than a desire to take part in the conflict against her
liberties. This desire had been indeed cooled by
personal observation of the feelings and principles
which supported his countrymen through a long
period of disaster and suffering; and the last blow
was given to the unworthy ambition by the love
for one of his country's daughters that soon
entangled
his spirit. The giving way to wrath and
the lust of blood, though but for a moment, had
been followed by the last and heaviest of his griefs,
not the lightest of which was his temporary belief
in his own guilt, and his consequent remorse. But
the shadow had now departed from him, and for
ever; and it was soon perceived by all who chose
to ponder over his history, that his greatest crime
had been his affection, and the ill-judged deed of
violence into which it had led him.
His meeting with the Captain's daughter, after his
liberation, was one of mingled joy and grief; but it
was the last one marked with tears. The bloom
returned
again to Catherine's cheek, and, in course of
time, the gay and merry spirit, native to her bosom,
revisited its former cell; and if a shadow ever again
darkened her countenance, it was only when,
sometimes
wandering along the brook and by the
waterfall, (whence the bones of Jessie had been
long since removed, to be deposited near those of
her step-mother in the village church-yard,) she
remembered
the trials of sorrow, and the scenes of
blood, through which she had been conducted to
final happiness. She wept, indeed, when Harriet
died, for she had forgiven her; but that was the
only grief that clouded a long period of peace and
sunshine.
Our inquiries after the fate of the less important
personages of our tradition have never been very
satisfactory in results. Americans are a race of
Utilitarians, all busied in the acquisition of
profitable
knowledge, and just as ready, if not as
anxious, to forget all lore of an useless
character
.
The little anecdotes of a district last but
for a generation; the fathers tell then to the
children
,
but the children find something better to
think about, and so forget them. We know
nothing
of the latter years of Elsie Bell, but can
readily believe they passed in comfort and peace.
Her little cottage has long since vanished from the
earth, the running of newer and better roads in
other places having long since diverted all travel
from the precincts of Hawk-Hollow.
Dancy Parkins, we suppose, under the
auspicious
patronage of the new master of the valley,
pursued his claims to the love of the fair Phbe;
but as that was a matter of much more
consequence
to him than the reader, we never cared
much to inquire his fate.
Our curiosity in relation to the career of the
unworthy
limb of the law, Theophilus Affidavy, Esq.,
has been somewhat stronger; yet we could never
find that a single act of his life, or even his name,
has been retained by those who dwell near the
scene of his exploits. His adventure in the brook,
with his ride on the back of the buttonwood tree,
has, by some strange accident, travelled into an
adjacent county, where it is told as a very good
story, though the honour is supposed to attach to
an individual of another name and profession.
But it is with a strange story as with an old pun;
it finds fathers, as it travels.
As for Captain Loring, all we have to say of
him is, that he lived long enough to rejoice over
the union of his daughter with Hyland Falconer
as much as he would perhaps have mourned over
her early grave, had her destiny wedded her to the
unlucky younger brother. He lived also to see,
with a rapture that lasted to his dying day, the
painter resume the brush, and put the last finish to
`the grand picture of the Battle of Brandywine,
and Tom Loring, dying.'
THE END.THE RHEINWEINLIED.
I.
Bekrnzt mit Laub den lieben vollen Becher,
Und trinkt ihn frhlich leer.
In ganz Europia, Ihr Herren Zecher!
Ist solch ein Wein nicht mehr.
II.
Ihn bringt das Vaterland ans seiner Flle:
Wie wr er sonst so gut?
Wie wr er sonst so edel, wre stille
Un doch voll Krafft und Muth?
III.
Am Rhein, am Rhein, da wachsen unsre Reben;
Gesegnet sei der Rhein!
Da wachsen sie am ufer hin, und geben
Uns diesen Labewein.
IV.
So trinkt ihn denn, und lasst uns alle Wege
Uns freum und frhlich seyn!
Und wsster wir wo iemand traurig lge,
Wir gben ihm den Wein.