PART I.
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTIONTHE TRAVELERS.
A few years since, most of the western States
and Territoriesparticularly those bordering upon
the great Mississippiwere infested with bands
of lawless desperadoes, collected from all parts
of the globe, who, having become criminals in
their native land, here sought an asylum, either
beyond the pale of the law entirely, or where
stern Justice being weak, was relaxed from that
severity which she exercised in the more
populous
sections of the country. Here, in many
cases, they formed themselves into bands,
choosing
some one of the more bold and daring of their
party for leadertheir purpose, doubtless, being
the greater facility of proceeding in their
depredations
,
as well as firmer security against
apprehension
.
But, although, as we have remarked, they
formed
themselves into bands or parties, yet rarely, in
fact we believe only in extreme cases, did they
openly act in concert; their policy being to
conceal
from their more honest neighbors the fact
that there was such a regular organized
combination
of men for outlawry purposes in the
vicinity
.
It was their policy, also, to disperse
themselves
throughout the country; to meet only at
certain intervals, and then in secret, under cover
of night; by which means they would appear as
honest citizens; live, many of them, unsuspected,
and in all cases be among the first to learn of
whatever
movement might chance to be in progress
detrimental to their interests as a body, or to any
member individually, and thus be enabled to take
measures to prevent, or lay secret plans to
counteract
it. This will, we think, sufficiently
account
for their, in many cases, long and
sometimes
undisturbed career of dissipation and crime.
Our story opens a few years subsequent to the
close of the last war with England, and at a
period
when the interior of Missourithe theatre of
the scenes, incidents and characters which are
about to followwas, comparatively, but little
known; in fact, we believe we may with propriety
say, there were portions within its territorial
boundaries at this time unseen and untrod by the
eye and foot of the white man. But
notwithstanding
there were sections of it uninhabited,
there was already a tide of emigration setting in
from the eastward, which rendered it probable
that in the course of a few years, at the farthest,
it would not only be fully explored, but settled,
by some of the more enterprising and
industrious
inhabitants of the States lying east of the
great Mississippi. Even now the eastern portion
of it was beginning to exhibit signs of settlement
and civilization, and already the blue smoke arose
from many a cot which here and there dotted the
long line of forest bordering on the Mississippi.
This forest followed the windings of the river
and extended back some fifteen or twenty miles,
opening, in some places, upon the large and
beautiful
prairie, where the tall grass waved to and fro
in the breeze, containing its legions of wild
animals
,
and where the eye could range
uninterruptedly
for miles on miles, as over some vast sea,
until finally shut in by the far distant horizon.
In some parts of this forest the ground for miles
was nearly level, and only required the removal
of the underbrush to make it a beautiful grove,
while other parts were wild, rocky and
mountainous
,
presenting to the eye of the beholder
many grand and romantic scenes, as though
Nature
had designed to soothe, awe and display her
power by strong and varying contrasts.
As before remarked, that region of country
known as Missouri, was fast emerging from
savage
to civilized lifefrom a gloomy wilderness to
the abodes of civilization. The axe might now
be heard in the forests where, but a few years
before, echoed the wild war-whoop of the Indian.
On the banks of that rapid and mighty stream,
from which Missouri takes her name, a few
regular
settlements had sprung upamong the most
prominent of which we will mention the old town
of Franklin, a place that has long since
disappeared
,
having been literally swept away by the
eternal knawings of this river whose bed is
continually
changing.
The inhabitants of Missouri at the time of
which we write, as must naturally be the case in
every new settlement, were composed of all
classes
,
from the refined, educated and intellectual, to
the coarse, ignorant, demi-savage race, which are
ever found to exist as a kind of medium between
refinement and utter barbarity.
Having made these few preliminary remarks,
so that the reader may form an idea of the then
existing state of the country, we will now at
once proceed with our story.
It was near the close of a hot sultry day, in
the summer of 18, that two travelers were
slowly
wending their way over a wild and somewhat
mountainous tract of land, some thirty miles
distant
and in a south-westerly direction from St.
Louis. The elder of the two was a man about
thirty-five years of age, whose height rather
exceeded
six feet, and although not what might be
termed of handsome proportions, yet of that close
knit and sinewy build which gives evidence of
great muscular strength and a capability of
enduring
much hardship and fatigue. His
forehead
,
which was visible from his hat being partly
removed, was of medium proportions, on one side
of which was carelessly parted his long raven
colored hair. His face was long, thin and rather
strongly marked. His mouth was large, around
which played a peculiar smile which, to convey
an idea of, we shall term a philosophical one.
His lips were thickcheeks somewhat hollow
nose long and pointedeyes small and grey, with
a peculiar twinkle in the latter, when speaking,
which led one to fancy there was more meant
than saidand altogether the whole expression
of his features was a combination of cunning,
shrewdness and candor, mingled with a quiet,
thoughtful and humorous turn of mind. In
speech he was very deliberate, and no matter by
what circumstances surrounded, would never fail
to give each word its proper bearing. His dress
was a plain home-spun suit of sheep's greyan
article much worn by the yeomen of that day
and his dialect partook strongly of that
peculiarity
which distinguishes the people of New
England
particularly
those who have little access to
societyfrom almost every other; and was,
besides
,
of that uncouth form of speech, which is
engendered from habit, when not polished by the
refinement of education.
His companion was a very different personage;
in fact, of an entirely opposite cast. In years he
was some five the other's juniorsome three
inches
less in statureof a form full of grace and
elasticitya face almost rounda complexion
ruddylarge, restless grey eyeswith much
hauteur
in his bearing, and of an active and rather
irritable temperament. His articulation
corresponded
with his temperament, being quick and
impetuous, and his language gave evidence of his
superiority over the other in point of education.
His dress was a plain suit of black, a little the
worse for wear perhaps, but of an excellent fit,
which, together with the fine texture of the cloth,
the graceful ease with which it was worn, had
been proof sufficient the wearer was no laborer,
even were not the soft white hand, holding a light
fancy cane, to be taken as evidence.
To some, perhaps, it may appear singular
that two individuals, so directly opposite in
personal
appearance, manners, dress and
temperament
,
should be companions, and what is more,
friends; yet such was the case. Notwithstanding
the old adage that like clings to like, it must
be admitted we have a great many exceptions,
and that like clings to unlike may be said with
propriety of the social relations and connections
of mankind in general. It is by this process the
great strings of Nature are made to blend their
sounds in harmony.
It was, as we have said, near the close of the
day, and the last rays of the setting sun had been
intercepted by a thick, black thunder cloud, which,
approaching rapidly, threatened our travelers with
a heavy shower. For some minutes neither spoke,
but silently glancing toward the west, both
immediately
advanced from a slow to a rapid pace.
The younger was the first to break silence with
the exclamation Ha! as a flash of lightning,
more vivid than any previous, flung its red lurid
glare over them, and for a moment seemed to put
the forest in a blaze, followed almost
instantaneously
by a heavy crash of thunder. By
heavens
!
Bernard, there is no mistaking that! How
far are we now from Webber's?
Wal, I should guess about five miles, replied
Bernard.
Five miles! echoed the other quickly, with a
touch of sarcasm. Why, Harvey, what are you
thinking about? It was only ten miles when we
last enquired, nearly two hours since, and now
you think we have only reached half way!
Pshaw!
Wal, remarked Bernard, coolly and quietly,
this ere's a free country, and every body's got a
right to their own opinion any how; and so, as the
feller said, if you don't like the distance at five
miles, you can have it for any distance you're a
mind to.
For a moment a half angry smile played around
the mouth of the younger, as though he would
have laughed, but was checked by some opposite
feeling, while he bit his nether lip and tapped his
cane in the palm of his left hand with a quick,
nervous motion.
Well, well, rejoined he, quickly, if we have
yet five miles to travel, our pace must be still
increased
,
for the night gathers fast!
I calculate we'd about as well be seeking for
a shelter, remarked Bernard, quietly.
A shelter! exclaimed the other in surprise;
surely you do not dream of spending the night
in this lonely place?
Wal, as to the matter o' that, answered
Bernard
,
I reckon I don't dream no how, 'cause I'm
awake and its a sartin thing; and when a body's
awake and sartin, ye see he ain't a dreaming;
butand he looked coolly at the other, speaking
slowly and impressivelyif you want to tell
your friends of your adventures, and put this 'ere
night in as one of 'em, you haint got a minute to
lose 'tween this and the time your head's under
something more powerful to protect it than that
are beaver.
Why, what mean you? cried the other,
turning somewhat pale.
D'ye see that are cloud? said Bernard,
elevating
his finger to an angle of some forty-five
degrees
;
now mark all the twists in't, and keep
tally for about a minute all them are streaks o'
lightning dancing up and down, and I reckon
you'll come to the conclusion that the safest place
for Marcus Tyrone don't lay in the open air by
any means.
Ay! true, true! returned Tyrone, with a
start. You are right, Bernard, right; for there
is something awful in yonder cloud. But what is
to be done? We can reach no habitation, and to
remain here is, I fear, but to expose ourselves to
certain death! Can we not find shelter under
some of these rocks?
Why, ye see, Mark, I'll jest tell ye how 'tis,
answered Bernard. If we don't find some place
to git our heads under soon, its my opinion they
wont be no further use to us; for that are storm
aint a going to be no common one, or else I aint
no judge. Now right away here to the left o' us
is a cave; for a feller pointed it out to me when I
traveled this way afore, and said folks kind o'
reckened as how it were a renrensomething,
for robbers.
Rendezvous, doubtless, remarked Tyrone.
O yes, that's it! I don't see what makes
folks use such tarnal hard names now-a-days;
they didn't use to when I got edicated. 'Spect
they're gitting a great deal smarter, oh! Mark?
Doubtless, replied the other, with a smile.
But of the cave, Harvey?
O yes; wal, I calculate we'd about as well be
putting our heads inside on't, for we wont no
more'n git killed if its got robbers in it, and if we
stay out here, I swow we'll git blown clean into
a jiffy, for that are harrycane yonder aint a going
to be over nice about what it does, that's a fact.
But where is this cave, Harvey?
D'ye see that are rough pile o' stones, right
away there, that look jest as if they'd been
playing
stone wall all their lives?
Ay, ay.
Wal, that's the place, and I swow we can't
git there too soon, for that are last streak o'
lightning
fairly felt hot. Come on, Mark, don't go to
getting skeered now.
Pshaw! returned Tyrone, his features
becoming
a shade more pale; and following Bernard,
he proceeded directly towards the spot designated;
though, perhaps, with feelings less at ease than
he would have his companion imagine.
The cave alluded to, was situated near the
brow of a steep, rocky hill or bluff, some several
rods distant to the left of the road, which our
travelers had just quitted, and appeared to have
been formed by some great convulsion of nature,
in the rending and upheaving of rocks, which
had fallen together so as to leave a cavity
sufficiently
large to contain several persons. The
mouth of this cave fronted the south, and
overlooked
the beautiful Maramee, which rolled
sparkling
along some fifty yards below, and was
surrounded
by scenery romantic in the extreme.
The hill on which it stood was a portion of a
ridge which extended in an irregular line far
away to the southwest and northeast.
Immediately
above and below this cave were large
projecting
rocks, which, to all appearance, were so
slightly bedded in the earth, that but little force
was necessary to send them thundering to the
bottom. A dwarfish growth of shrub-oaks had
struggled up between them, and presented their
rough, shaggy tops above, as though to give the
scene an air of wildness and desolation. But
notwithstanding this, there was a fine redeeming
trait in the surrounding sceneryviewed from
the brow of the hillwhose beauty was
heightened
by contrasts the most pleasing. At its base
on the western side, was a finely timbered forest,
stretching far away northward, and finally
opening
upon a beautiful strip of meadow or prairie
land, over which the eye might wander for miles,
to rest at last upon a blue hazy ridge of
mountains
in the distance.
The view towards the east and south was not
so extensive, but this likewise had its attractions.
A distant perspective was cut off by another
ridge, running almost parallel to the one just
described
;
but the loss was amply compensated, by
the wild picturesque scenery presented, and the
gentle murmur which stole sweetly upon the ear,
as the Maramee sent its waters foaming and
dashing
over its rocky bed between, anon to glance
off into a still silvery belt and for a time mirror
surrounding objects ere forever lost in the bosom
of the mighty Mississippi.
The road of which mention has already been
madethough it would, perhaps, poorly compare
with some of the present daywas, for this
period
and section of country, uncommonly good
being mostly clear of stones, stumps, brush and
the likeso that a skilful horseman might dash
rapidly over it with little danger of life or limb.
To the eastward it followed the windings of the
Maramee, for some considerable distance, through
a thick, dark ravine, and then branched off
through a level and extensive forest.
As light one horse vehicles were not in use at
this period, and more especially in this part of
the country, the horse was ridden instead by
those who prefered an easier and more speedy
locomotion than walking, and in consequence
every settler of note was supplied with a number
of these noble animals, for the use of himself and
family.
But we fear the reader will think us digressing,
and so let us return to our travelers.
CHAPTER II.
THE STORMTHE KIDNAPPERS.
Although Bernard approached the cave with a
firm step, apparently indifferent as to what might
be therein concealed, yet it must be admitted
there were feelings within his breast strangely at
variance with his calm, unmoved exterior. Twice
he seemed on the point of coming to a halt, but
then, as though actuated by some counteracting
feeling, he strode steadily onward, and was soon
standing at the entrance. It was now fast
growing
dark, for the coming storm had considerably
advanced the night, and although the sun had
barely set, objects at but a little distance appeared
dim and indistinct, save when thrown into bold
relief, for a moment, by some vivid flash of
lightning
,
when, as if to repair the error, they
apparently
sunk into a deeper gloom than ever.
Casting a hasty glance behind him, and
perceiving
his companion close at hand, Bernard
motioned
him to silence, and had cautiously began
his entrance, when a hurried exclamation from
the other caused him to look around, and seeing
him gazing steadily towards the west, he turned
his eyes in that direction, and soon became
transfixed
as though by a spell.
We have already remarked it was growing dark,
but below the gloom had deepened into night,
which lay like a pall along the valley, into which
even the lightning, as it played along the tops of
the trees with a lurid glare, seemed unable to
penetrate
.
But the scene higher up was what had
caught and riveted the attention of our travelers.
Just over the summit of another hill, towards
the west, was a white misty streak, which lay
spread along the horizon, like in appearance a
bank of snow seen through a fog, above which
awful black clouds were rolling, and tumbling,
and twisting themselves into the most angry
shapes possible  belching forth their forked
tongues of lightningseeming like some dark
and mighty spirits of the etherial, enraged, and
charging with all Heaven's artillery against this
nether world. During the intervals between each
clap of thunder, a roaring sound, like that of some
distant waterfall, was borne to the ears of the
travelers with a startling distinctness, gradually
increasing each moment, until it sounded like the
roll of an hundred drums.
During this brief spacefor brief indeed it was
not a twig was seen to movenot a leaf to stir
but all, all was motionless, us though Nature
were holding her breath in awe of some great and
mighty convulsion. The air felt hot, thick and
oppressive, as from the breath of an evil spirit.
Suddenly the trees on the other hill became
dreadfully
agitatedbowing their heads, and writhing,
and twisting themselves into all manner of shapes
possible, while a dark misty shadow crept, or
rather swept along, and buried them in terrible
night.
Thus it appeared to our travelers, who,
warned
by this and a few heavy drops of rain, now
eagerly sought their shelter; Bernard, as
previously
,
taking the precedence. Moving cautiously
forward, after entering the mouth of the cave
for caution was a part of his naturehe presently
gained the interior, where he was immediately
joined by his companion.
A flash of lightning at this moment discovered
to our travellers that they were the only
occupants
of the cave, when something like a sigh
from Bernard, and the ejaculation of Thank
God! from Tyrone, attested the relief felt by
both.
I say, Mark, began Bernard, who was the first
to speak, I don't believe this ere cave's a ren
what d'ye call it?
Rendezvous, answered Tyrone.
O yes, rendezvous. I say, I don't believe this
ere cave's a rendezvous for robbers, for when that
are last streak o' lightning danced around in here,
I could'nt see no traces of its being inhabited.
But what led you to think inhabited, Harvey?
Why, when I's out here afore, I hearn a good
deal o' talk about a banditti, which had been
skeering people round here, and some feller told
me they used to meet in this ere cave.
Indeed? But why did not the citizens take
measures to apprehend them? enquired the other.
Wal, there was some such kind o' talk, but I
don't know how it come out, for jest about that
time I went back to the East, and haint never
heard nothing on't since. But I say, Mark, its
lucky we've got in here, I swowrobbers or not
for that are harrycane's ripping every thing
afore it. Jest listen how it roars. I never
the remainder of the sentence, if spoken, was
drowned in a terrible crash of thunder, that shook
the ground beneath them, and caused both the
speaker and his companion to start involuntarily.
During the conversation just recorded, the
storm had been rushing on with all the wild fury
of a tornado, and now came sweeping down the
opposite hilltearing along through the valley
up the hilldashing against the cave, as though
to rend it asundersnapping lofty trees like twigs
tearing them, in many instances, quite up by
the roots--hissing, and foaming, and roaringon,
on it went in its mad career, seeking new victims
amid the quiet glades, and making the very earth
beneath it tremble in its fierce carousal! For
some half hour our travelers stood muteawed
to silence by the raging of the elementsgazing
forth through the aperture, assisted by the
incessant
flashes of lightning, upon the awful
devastation
going on without.
A fortunate escape, truly! remarked Tyrone,
at length, drawing a long breath.
Jest what I's a thinking on exactly,
returned
Bernard. I knowed when I seed it a coming
up, that there wouldn't be no child's play about
it; but its gone clean ahead o' my calculations
altogether. How them are streaks o' lightning
did dance around us here, and cut capers 'mong
the trees. I never seed the like on't afore in all
my born days. For the matter o' that, they
haint done yet, added he, as a bright flash for a
moment blinded him, and a peal of thunder shook
the cave.
For some minutes his companion made no
reply
,
and then in a complaining, petulent tone
said: Was there ever any thing so unlucky?
Only to think of our being literally forced to pass
the night in such a place as this, and so near our
destination too! I declare it vexes me.
Hello! What's all this ere gammon about
now? cried Bernard. You're the strangest,
queerest chap I ever seed in all my life; one
minute
all thankfulness and the next all grumbles.
Why don't ye larn a little patience? A body'd
think when you'd jest 'scaped with your life, you
would'nt, in all human probability, set up
grumbling
for half an hour, at least.
Well, well, Bernard, say no more, replied
Tyrone, in a voice of contrition. You know
my hasty, impatient nature, and must overlook
my language. I know it was wrong in me to
complain; but I had set my heart so much on
reaching Webber's to-night, that it seemed hard
to relinquish the design.
Now you speak a little more sensible like,
rejoined Bernard; and as to gitting to Webber's,
I guess we'll be able to do it yit. The moon 'll
be up in about an hour, and I reckon this ere
storm will clear away by that time.
And Bernard was right. In an hour the storm
had passed on to the east, leaving behind it a few
broken, scattered clouds, sailing lazily through
the airabove which Heaven's diamonds gleamed
and sparklednow hidden from the sight, now
shining out merrilywhile the far off flashes and
distant rumble betokened the storm still speeding
on in its fury. Anon the moon arose, slowly and
majestically, to pour her silvery flood of light
upon the scene,
While here and there a modest star
Drew back from Luna's ray,
Yet shining in its realm afar,
Perchance the queen of day.
Our travelers, now that the storm was passed
and moon risen, deeming it expedient to resume
their journey, emerged at once from the cave,
and had advanced a few paces towards the road,
when their attention and progress were arrested
by the sound of voices in conversation. At first
the sounds were indistinct, but gradually they
seemed to grow louder, denoting thereby the
approach
of the speakers. At length they descried
two figures descending the hill, and instantly
crouching behind a rock, were enabled to
overhear
a few sentences as they passed.
I don't believe a word on't, growled a gruff
voice, accompanied with an oath. Its only one
of the old fool's freaks; and for my part, I've
served him long enough, and blast me if I don't
slit his wesand, as soon as I find out whar he
stows the shiners, and then make off and set
up for a gentleman in some foreign part; hey,
Bill? ha, ha, ha!
Hist! returned his companion. Thar's no
perticular use in telling every body else what
you're going to do, as I knows on; and besides,
if the gal and her lover should happen to hear
ye, why ye see its all up at once. Curses on that
ar' storm, he added; I'm feard as how they'll
bunk somewhere and take daylight for't. I
wouldn't like 'em to slip me now, for such a
chance don't come every day, you know.
But what can the old fool want of the gal?
growled the other.
Why I've told ye once, youbut hark!
they're
coming, and so here the conversation
became
so indistinct that our travelers could make
out nothing further, save the word pistols,
which occured shortly after; but enough had
been gleaned to denote foul play, and
simultaneously
grasping their weapons, both advanced
cautiously
in the direction taken by the others.
The moon as yet had not risen sufficiently to
be of any material service in distinguishing
objects
even on the summit of the hill, and the
ravine
below still lay in the gloomy repose of
solitude
and darkness.
Gliding quickly forward, but at the same time
as stealthily as possible, our travelers soon gained
sufficient on the ruffians to enable them to see
their dusky forms, and overhear their
conversation
.
At length the foremost two came to a halt, at
the foot of the hill, just where you enter the
ravine
already mentioned, and separating, each took
his station opposite the otherone on either side
of the roadwhich being at this point
uncommonly
narrow, owing to some rocks having been
removed and piled up on either hand, made it a
desirable place for their attack upon the
individuals
approaching, who must necessarily pass
within their reach.
Ensconsing themselves behind some bushes,
which grew by the way side, Bernard and Tyrone
awaited in anxious suspense the moment when
they would, probablyin defence of othersbe
called into action of no enviable nature. For
some moments all was still, and then the silence
was broken by one of the ruffians.
I say, Bill Riley! began he of the gruff
voice, blast me, but your ears is a little
over-keen
to-night. Per'aps you hears 'em coming
now, but hang me if I do, and what's more, haint
heard 'em.
Per'aps I's mistaken, answered the other;
at least I thought I heard 'em. However, thar's
no perticular harm in being ready 'gin they do
come, you know.
You're right thar', my trump. But what d'ye
think, croney; is't best to leave the younker in
Heaven?
No! no! Curdish, replied the other
vehenently
;
no murder, if we can help it. Tap the
feller over, but no killing; that's a perticularly
agly business, brings ugly consequences, and a
feller's mighty apt to catch hemp fever arter it.
No, no, Jack, my boy, we musn't have no
killing
.
Jest knock the younker over gentlymount
his horseI'll mount behind the gal, and then
we'll sort o' travel, you know.
Why hang me for a green un, but I think
rayther think, Billwe'll travel then, ha, ha, ha.
But 'sposin, my ace o' trumps, the younker
happens
to take it into his head not to be knocked
over gently?
Why then, Jack, you must kind o' take it out
agin, you know,ha, ha, ha.
Well, well, growled Curdish, don't be gittin'
foolish over it.
No! returned the other drily; one fool in a
party'll do, I reckon.
Following this last remark, was a pause of
some minutes, when the conversation was again
renewed by Curdish.
I say, Bill, what's yer honest, disinterested,
confidential and most perticular opinion of old
Ben, any how?
Why that's come at without any study,
answered
Bill. I jest think he's an arrant knave.
A what?
A bloody rascal!
I'll take yer fist on that, Bill, by , and
the speaker uttered an oath. What a long
hooked
nose he's got, haint he? If I'd such a nose,
by St. Christopher! I'd sell myself for a screech
owlha, ha, ha.
Hush, Jack! You always laugh as if you
wer' a going to split yer jaws.
Ye-e-s, per'aps so.
By-the-by, Jack, I couldn't never exactly
understand
how you and old Ben come to be on
such friendly terms? You've said you didn't
like him.
Like him! cried Jack. O yes, I like him
ha, ha, ha! Jest wait, Bill, don't be in a hurry,
and I'll show ye how I like him. Hang me for
a dog, if I don't cut his bloody old heart out o'
him 'fore I'm done!
Well but Jack, I say, how the dence comes it
you've seemed on such friendly terms?
Why ye see, Bill, I'll tell ye. The old chap
kind o' did me a favor one time, in the way of
savin' me from the hemp fever, in the case o'
that ar' young man as was suddenly missed, when
people took the perticular trouble to swear that I
put him out o' the way, you know; and
being's
I'm sort o' in his power yit, why I've
rather
kept up an affectionate feeling, ye seeha, ha,
ha! But I say, old feller, seein' as how I've
answered
your question, maybe you'll have the
perticular goodness to answer mine. What is
the old cut-throat goin' to do with the gal?
Why's I've told ye afore, I ain't sure, but
I 'spect thar's a curious design about it. I've
bin kind o' watching round, a pickin' up a little
here and a little thar, puttin' 'em together and
guessin' on the whole, and it looks rayther
mysterious
,
I tell ye. You know the old feller we
stuck and fleeced a few months back, and how
old Ben, not satisfied, stuck him twice more, and
then saved his lifea thing he warn't never
known to do afore; well you know as how he got
hold o' some papers too, which he said warn't o'
no account to us, and so took 'em for his share,
which looked sort o' curious agin, and which
bein' all put together, makes me think as how
them ar' papers, this gal, and the 'tother old feller
ar' all kind o' mixed up into a secret; for ever
since he's bin mighty anxious to git hold o' the
gal, and I overhearn him say one time, when
talkin' to himself, that he'd sometime be a great
man, and as soon he could get the gal he was
goin' to mizzle and set sail on the big brine.
Set sail, eh! growled Curdish. He said as
how he'd set sail, did he? Well, blast me, if he
don't too; but it'll be an ugly voyage he'll be
goin', by! or else Jack Curdish ain't no
prophet
.
The conversation after this for something over
an hour, was carried on in a tone so low, that our
travelers were unable to distinguish what was
said, when the voice of Riley was again heard to
articulate:
I'm afeard this ere storm's knocked our
calculations
all in the head, Jack.
Hark! returned the other; don't you hear
'em?
Ha! yes, 'tis they at last. Now be careful,
my boy, and jest do up the thing safe and genteel,
for thar's a few shiners at stake, you know. As
he spoke, horses were heard approaching at a quick
pace, and presently the voices of their riders in
conversation.
Now then, Mark, whispered Bernard,
grasping
a pistol with one hand and his companion's
arm with the other, jest let us show these ere
chaps that there's other folks about.
Ay! returned Tyrone, setting his teeth hard,
they need an honest man's lesson.
A thrilling scream aroused them to action, and
both sprang forward at once. Immediately after
was heard the sharp report of a pistola groan
another scream, and the clatter of a horse's hoofs
on through the ravine.
CHAPTER III.
THE LOVERSTHE WARNINGTHE CAPTURE.
We must now go back in our narrative, to a
short time previous to its opening in the first
chapter. On the same road already mentioned as
leading on through the ravine, about ten miles to
the northeast of the place described in the
foregoing
chapter, and on the same day the events
just recorded took place, were two personages,
well mounted on a couple of beautiful horses,
riding along at a leisure pace. Of the two, one was
a young man, apparently about twenty years of
age, of a fine form and manly bearing. His
countenance
was well shaped, open, frank and noble,
and of a high intellectual cast; while his bright,
hazel eye sparkled with a true poetic expression.
His forehead was smooth, broad and high,
surmounted
by dark brown hair, which hung in
graceful curls far down his neck, giving to him
a somewhat feminine, though not unpleasing,
appearance
.
He was well dresseduncommonly so
for this section of the countryin a fine suit of
black; the lower extremity of his pantaloons
being
encased in fine buckskin leggins, while his
head was covered by a beautiful cap of dark silk
velvet, on either side of which a couple of gold
mounted buttons shone conspicuously. He rode
his high mettled steed in that easy, graceful,
dignified
manner, which sets forth the rider to so
much advantage, and which is only acquired by
constant practice, together with a knowledge of
the rules of horsemanship.
His companion was a female, elegantly attired
in a riding suit, and likewise rode very gracefully.
Of years she had seen some eighteen, was medium
in stature, and beautifully formed. Her
countenance
,
strictly speaking, could scarce be account
ed handsome, for her features were not entirely
regular; yet there was something so noble, so
intelligent
in the expression, her dark blue eyes
were so lit up with the fires of an earnest soul,
that ten to one you would pronounce her
beautiful
,
ere the form of her features was distinctly
recognised; thus unconsciously awarding another
proof of the mind's immortal triumph over
matter
.
Her hair was a glossy auburn, the front of
which was neatly braided, brought down with a
graceful curve below her ears, and fastened
behind
.
Her checks were slightly dimpled, and
around her mouth lingered one of those pleasing
expressionsa sort of half smilewhich,
combined
with a bright flashing eye, invariably wins
upon the beholder in spite of himself, and leads
us to fancy there is an influence of a Mesmeric
nature connected therewith.
The country through which the two were
traveling, was mostly level, and heavily shaded
by thick, dark woods, stretching far away on
either hand, occasionally broken a little in places
by the clearing up of some settler, whereby the
beams of the sun poured gently in, refreshing to
the eyes of civilization, as the cool springs of
water
to the thirsty traveler of the Arabian Desert.
It was an exceedingly warm day, and the
travelers
would have suffered much, had they not
been so well protected from the rays of the sun,
which already far advanced toward the western
horizon, threw the shade of the lofty trees
directly
across their path. Still the air was hot and
sultry, unaccompanied by any cooling breeze, and
although jogging along at a very moderate pace,
both horse and rider perspired freely.
Ah! how refreshing! exclaimed the lady, as
a cool breeze fanned for an instant her heated
brow, rustling the leaves with that pleasing sound
so delightful in a forest. See, even my noble
Fanny pricks up her ears, and seems greatly
rejoiced.
Ay, and so does Sir Harry, returned her
companion. It is delightful truly, after this
intense
and almost suffocating heat. Ah! it dies
away again; I would it were to continue.
Well, Edward, let us be thankful for a little,
you know that is my motto.
True, Emily, and I agree with all my heart.
All?
enquired Emily with emphasis, casting
her head a little one side, and throwing on him
one of her peculiar, fascinating glances; with
all
your heart, Edward?
That is,
all
there is left me, replied Edward,
with a meaning smile, gracefully bowing to the
lady.
Ay, that indeed! well put in, Sir Knight! but
a little late withal. However, better late than
never, says the adage, and I trust you will be a
little more circumspect of speech hereafter.
I will do any thing you require, Emily,
returned
Edward gallantly; you have only to
command
to be obeyed.
Indeed, Sir Knight! you are very proficient in
promises; you have yielded to a hard task-master,
and I fear me if put to the test, your actions
would much belie your words.
Nay, indeed, Emily, you are in error; only
give me the trial, and see if I do not produce the
proof.
Well, sir, since you require it, please ride
forward
and announce to the good inhabitantsif
you should chance to meet anythat a lady is
approaching
,
in the person of Emily Novance, whose
gallant by her orders goes before as a herall.
What? you hesitate! is this the way I am to be
obeyed? Go, sir! it is my command!
Nay, but Emily, this is unfair.
So, then, you question my orders, do you?
Ah! I fear you are like all the rest of your sex
full of promises, which doubtless you all fulfil,
when the fulfilment proves agreeable to
yourselves
;
but when otherwise, ah me! for our sex;
and the speaker shook her head with an arch
look.
Now, now, Emily; but I see you are
determined
to carry the point your own way, so I
will fain give in, lest I get worsted by argument.
Ay, do if you please, Sir Knight! and you
will oblige me much, very much.
For some minutes after this both rode along in
silence, when the conversation was again opened
by Edward.
I say, Emily, began he, at length, to one of
your refined taste, does not this country life, so
tone, so solitary, in the woods as it were, seem
very irksome? Methinks to one of your light
turn of mind, that had been used to the gay crowds
which throng the city, it must be very tiresome,
full of sameness, causing
ennvi
and discontent.
Indeed! exclaimed the lady, a slight flush
singing her fair noble features, while her eyes
sparkled with more than wonted brilliancy.
Indeed
!
think you so? then have I given you more
credit for discernment than you really possess, if
thus you judge the heart of Emily Nevance!
What are the gay crowds of the city, of which
you speak? Of what are they composed, but
of fops and foolsapes of fashionwalking
advertisements for tailors and millinerswhose
mirrors are their prophets, and themselves the
only God they worship!whose very souls are
confined within the trappings of dress, and know
as little of what human beings should be, as the
insects that crawl beneath our feet! And do you
think I sigh for their society? No! give me
Nature
in her wildest, grandest, seul-inspiring moods!
away from the haunts of men, let me
contemplate
her in silence, and in awe! 'Tis then, far
from loncliness, I feel I hold communion with the
All Pervading Spirit! I look around me, and
behold
the works of One, compared with whom, I
sink into utter insignificance. Ay! away with
dusty cities! Give me the hills, the dales, the
rocky steeps, the level plains, the tall, majestic,
sighing forests, with the music of their creating
the laughing, rippling, sunay streams, that dance
along in childish gleeand with a soul pure,
sinless
in the sight of God, I will rest content to
spend my days in holy contemplation.
Spoken like yourself, Emily!my sentiments,
for the world! exclaimed Edward, with a bright,
enthusiastic animation of countenance that told
the feelings within more eloquently far than words
I was but jesting, dear Emily.
Well, I am glad to hear you say that, at all
events. I should be sorry to have you form such
an opinion of me as you first expressed. This
was said in a sad, almost mournful tone of voice,
while the speaker bent her head forward, and
appeared
to be examining some of the trappings of
the saddle.
Nay, never fear, dear Emily, that I will think
aught of you but what is most worthy, replied
Edward, in that deep, earnest tone of voice which
invariably carries conviction with it the speaker is
sincere. But why, continued he, after a pause
of some moments, during which each seemed
buried in some deep study, why, dearest Emily,
when every thing concurs to prove us so fitly
adapted to each other, why will you withhold
your consent to be mine? O, if you did but
know the deep, ardent passion I possess for you,
methinks you would not turn so deaf an ear to
all my pleadings!
There, Edward, you do me wrong, replied
Emily; I am not deaf to your pleadings, far from
it; nor do I in the least doubt the passion of which
you speak; but Edward, as I told you before, we
are both as yet young, and I would rather, ere you
bind yourself by a solemn promise, that you look
more about you, lest by too hasty nuptials you do
an act which you may repent the remainder of
your days. Besides, you know you are wealthy;
I am not; and your parents will, perchance, object
to your wedding one so far beneath you.
Ah! Emily, sighed Edward, that is the
unkindest
word of all.
Beneath
me, cried he
suddenly
,
by heavens! it were not well for any to
utter that in my presence, save Emily Nevance!
Beneath me, indeed! and in what am I your
superior
?
In gold! And did not you yourself
despise
it but now, and all its idle votaries?
But then, Edward, you know the world
Pshaw! what care I for the world? The
world
nonsense! I am a man, and I stand on my own
opinions, in matters of my own concern! Surely
I would be mad, or worse than mad, to sacrifice
my own happiness to please the world!
But then, Edward, you know your parents
may think differently in regard to the opinions of
the world.
For some minutes Edward, mused thoughtfully,
before making a reply. He knew that Emily was
correct in her surmises, for his parents were both
rich and proudhis father more especiallyand
he knew too that the latter, in his own mind, had
already disposed of his hand, to one he had never
seem, simply because she was a personage of
wealth; and consequently, that it would be a
difficult
matter, even if done at all, to gain their
consent to his union with another, and
furthermore
too, when that other was poor; but still he
loved Emily sincerely, deeply, and was fully
determined
not to sacrifice his own happiness to
gratify
the caprices of others, even were those
others
his parents.
Well, Emily, he at length replied, depend
upon it, whatever my parents may think, my
views and sentiments shall, at least, ever remain
unaltered; and since you will not now
sacredly
promise to become mine, I will live on the
joyful hope of some day winning your consent
some day calling you so, with the sanction of the
laws of both God and man.
And I, rejoined Emily, in a low sweet tone,
with her eyes cast down, I will live on in the
sincere hope, that should that day ever come, I
may be worthy of you.
Ah, then you admit
No! for the present I admit nothing. But see!
the sun is already nearing the western horizon,
where black clouds are looming up in sullen
majesty
,
and we have a goocly distance yet to ride.
Let us put our horses to the spur.
Ay, you are right, returned Edward; time
flies so rapidly when with those we love we
scarcely
head it. But we must make amends for our
delay
in this instance, as I like not the looks of
yonder
claud, and methought but now I heard the
distant sound of thunder.
Accordingly putting spurs to the noble animals,
they rode forward at a fast gallop. Half an hour
of good riding brought them to an humble cottage,
where, finding the storm was likely to prove
detrimental
if they continued their journey, they
concluded to await its termination. Alighting,
Edward secured the horses under a sort of shed,
and then led the way into the hovel, which was a
rough, homely fabric, composed of logs, put
together
in the rude, half-civilized manner common to the
first settlers of the West. At the door, or entrance,
they were met by a femalethe hostessa woman
somewhat past the middle age, of rather an
unprepossessing
appearance, who gave them a cold
salutation
,
and learning the object of their visit,
civilly
bade them enter. She was dressed in the
simplest, coarsest garb of the day, and wore a stern,
haughty, or rather an angry look, which made her
person appear to her guests anything but
agreeable
.
The room which they entered waslow, dark,
and dirty; the groundfor it could not boast of a
floorbeing strewed with damp, filthy straw. In
one corner was some of a fresher, cleanlier
appearance; used, undoubtedly, as a place of rest
for the occupants. Several rough benches
promiscuously
standing about, together with a plain
deal table, a few pots and kettles, apparently
completed
the stock of furniture.
You're jest in time, remarked the hostess,
retreating
within, and pointing our travelers to
one of the benches; you haint bin a minnet
too quick; for sich a guster as we're goin' to
have, arn't seen in these diggins often.
Do you think, madam, we shall have a severe
shower? enquired Edward, casually.
Think!
cried she contemptuously, drawing
herself up, her small black eyes flashing angrily,
I arn't one to think, sir!
I knows!
Thar's goin'
to happen one of the greatest gusters as ever was
knowd on, sir! The tall big trees ar' going to
snap like pipe stems! Listen! The thunder growls
like a savarageous lion! The lightning dances
like mad!
Think
, indeed! Hetty Brogan what
tells fortunes, arn't one as thinks much, I reckon
Thar! d'ye hear that? screamed she, as a
tremendous
crash of thunder broke over their heads.
That ar's the speret o' the storm, cheering it on!
Hist! d'ye hear that ar' roarin? I tell ye its
comin'
.
Young folks, bewar'! thar's danger in your
way! I see itthe stormthe woods! and she
strode to and fro the apartment, her eyes turned
upward, apparently fixed on some distant object,
gesticulating, the while, in that wild manner,
which led our travelers to believe her touched with
insanity. Suddenly stretching out her long bony
arm, pausing, and pointing with her finger in the
direction she was gazing, while with the other she
seemed to brush a mist from before her eyes, she
exclaimed with vehemence, I see it again! the
woods!the ambushallall! Young folks
bewar'
!
thar's danger in your way!be a vivid
flash of lightning, followed instantaneously by
another crash of thunder, that made the old
cabin
tremble, here cut her speech short. Well,
enough, muttered she to herself, if Jack and
Bill only manage to play their parts, I'll git more
credit for witcheraft.
The storm now howled in all its fury, making
the rough old timbers of the cabin creak and
tremble, as though about to be demolished, while
a thick, heavy darkness shut in every object, save
when relieved by the lurid glare of lightaing.
Edward and Emily sat mute, gazing upon the
scene with that sense of awe, which intelligent
and sensitive minds ever experience, when brought
by the fierce combat of the elements into the
presence of the Almighty Spirit of the
Universe
.
Something less than two hours served to clear
away the storm, when our travelers prepared to
leave. The horses were found safe, though the
saddles
were rendered disagreeable from being
saturated
with the rain. This, however, being of minor
importance, they mounted, thanked the hostess
for her accommodation, and rode awayshe the
while repeating: Bewar', thar's danger on yer
way! so long as they were within hearing.
What think you of that old woman?
enquired
Emily, as they rode along, carefully
picleing
their way, it still being dark, while here and
there a tree felled directly across their path, warned
them to move cautiously.
Why, I scarcely gave her a thought, except
to think her a little deranged, answered
Edward
.
But if what she vaguely hinted should prove
true
Poh! Emily, interrupted Edward, do not
give it a thought. Surely, you are not frightened
at the idle outpourings of such an illiterate old
woman as that?
I scarcely know, Edward, whether I am or
not. But something weighs heavily on my spirits,
and I feel a strange foreboding of some coming
ill.
O, the effect of the storm no doubt; it will
soon pass away; come, come, do not be
down-hearted
,
the moon will be up presently, and then
we can move forward with greater facility.
They now rode on for some time in silence,
occasionally
venturing their horses into a trot,
whenever
the road appeared a little more open, until they
entered the ravine, where the trees being of much
smaller growth, of a swampy nature, had made
little or no obstruction to their progress, when
giving their steeds the reins, they moved forward
at a much faster pace. The Maramee, running
along to their left, being much swolen by the late
rains, now rolled on with that sullen, gloomy,
monotonous
sound, which the turbulent waters of a
flood will invariably produce.
Oh, how gloomy! began Emily, breaking the
silence they had for some time maintained; I
shall feel much relieved when we pass this lonely
place, for here every sound seems to send a chill
to my heart.
And my spirits, returned Edward, from
some cause, are less buoyant than is common with
me. I wonder if that old woman could have any
secret meaning in what she said? But no! pshaw!
what a foolish idea; and he tried to laugh, as if to
shake off his thoughts, but the attempt ended in
a hollow tone, that sounded strange and
unnatural
.
I fear, Edward, there was more in her words
than you are willing to eredence. But here we
are, thank Heaven! at the foot of the hill: now
then, we shall leave this what more she would
have added was interrupted by a scream, as two
figures, springing from either side of the path,
grasped the bridles of both Edward's horse and
her own. The next moment Emily felt herself
seized by one of the raffians, who instantly
mounted
behind hersaw her companion felled to the
groundsaw two more figures rush forward
heard the report of a pistola groan, and
uttering
another wild scream of fear and despair, she
was rapidly borne away into the dark ravine.
In the execution of this nefarious design,
Curdish
was less successful than Riley; for having
struck Edward from his horse, and just as his foot
was placed in the stirrup to mount, a shot from
the pistol of Bernard disabled him, and he was
immediately taken prisoner. At this juncture
Edward, recovering from the stunning effects of
the blow, sprang to his feet, and learning from
Tyrone how matters were, in an agitated voice of
deep emotion, said:
Gentlemen, you are both strangers to me, but
you have acted like
men
, and from my heart I
thank you. Some five miles from here, on this
road, you will find a cottage occupied by one
Webber, where you can confine this villain, and
take such measures as you may think proper.
Inform Webber of the circumstances, and say
that Edward Merton has gone in pursuit of his
ward.
His ward! echoed Bernard and Tyrone in a
breath.
Even so; adieu! and mounting his horse,
which stood by him, while speaking, he drove the
spurs into his sides, and dashed on in pursuit of
the kidnapper, with that wild, reckless daring,
that uncertainty of purpose, which hot-brained
youth ever exhibits, ere subdued by the stern,
calm teachings of experience.
Heavens! exclaimed Tyrone, as Merton rode
away, ere he was fully aware of his purpose; his
rashness may spoil all. But come, Bernard, let us
take this cut-throat along, and forward to
Webber's
as soon as possible.
Wal, that's to my notion exactly, returned
Bernard. So, Mr. Jack Curdish, you didn't
quite come it this ere time, I guess, did ye?
Pre'aps
you'll have better luck agin you git another
such a chance. If I's you, I wouldn't holler and
laugh quite so loud next time; I'd du it all a great
deal more stiller like; I would, I swow, that's a
fact.
Curses on ye! growled Curdish between his
clenched teeth. I'll pay ye some day, hang me
if I don't!
O, you needn't cuss and squirm, 'cause 't wont
be o' no use, not a darned bit. I guess I've seen
chaps afore to-day git cured, when they got a
little
obstropulous, mighty tarnal quick too; so come
along with ye; and taking hold of one arm,
while Tyrone walked on the other side, the arm
of which was broken by the shot of Bernard, they
proceeded in the direction of Webber's, where
they arrived in about an hour and a half, and
where for the present we shall leave them.
CHAPTER IV.
THE PURSUITTHE INFORMATIONTHE MYSTERIOUS
STRANGERS.
Wild and turbulent as the waters that rushed
along by his side, were the thoughts and feelings
crowding the breast of Edward Merton, as he
spurred his noble animal on through the ravine.
His mind was now a perfect chaos, where hope
and fear, love and revenge, were alternately
struggling
for the mastery. One thought, however,
was ever uppermost: Emily Nevance
must
be
rescued; but as to the manner time and place, he
scarcely gave a thought; for amid the whirlwind
of ideas crowding his brain, there were none of
calm delit ration, so essential to the effecting of
his purpose. As he cleared the ravine and entered
the forest, he was very forcibly reminded of his
headlong speed, by the stumbling of his horse
against a tree that had been blown partly across
the road, by which he was nearly thrown to the
earth.
Immediately dismounting, and finding his horse
not materially injuredhaving only in one or two
places slightly ruptured the skinMerton seated
himself upon the fallen tree, and for a few
minutes
seemed to hold a consultation with himself.
Whatever this consultation was, it probably
savored
more of reason than his former transactions;
for on remounting he proceeded at a much slower
pace, his mind evidently occupied with matters
which at first had been overlooked.
Yes, she
must
be saved! exclaimed he, at
length, vehemently. But how is this to be done?
where can I find her? for what purpose is she thus
taken away? Doubtless for some foul end! Oh
God! if she but come to harmbut no! no! I will
not think itit must not,
shall
not be!and yet,
and yet, if it
should
beand Edward pressed
his hands to his throbbing, burning temples, in an
agony of mind almost insupportable. Oh, the
villain! if he do but wrong her, I swear his heart's
blood shall answer for it, though I spend a life in
search for him! But why do I idle here, when
perhaps I may overtake the ruffianmay save her
from death, or what is worse, dishonor? Gods! if
he wrong her! and as he spoke, Merton buried
the rowels in the flanks of the gallant horse which
bore him, and again he was wildly dashing
forward
,
seemingly forgetful of the former accident.
But he remained unharmed, and a few minutes
hard riding brought him to the cot which had
protected
him from the storm, when, as if struck by
a sudden thought, he ejaculated, Ha! I will
know, and immediately reined in his noble beast,
already covered with foam, close to the entrance.
A loud hallo not serving to bring any one to the
door, he sprang to the ground and for some time
vigorously applied his fist to it with no better
success. As he was about to remount, however,
thinking there was no one within, the sound of
smothered voices caught his ear and determined
him to continue. His efforts were at last rewarded
by a somewhat husky voice calling out:
Who's thar'?
A friend! replied Merton.
What d'ye want?
To gain an entrance.
We don't never admit strangers arter night;
call to-morrow.
I cannot delay!my business is urgent.
Who d'ye want to see?
Hetty Brogan.
Here the smothered conversation was again
renewed
,
which at length resulted in the door being
unbolted, and a man's head peeping cautiously
out.
Ar' ye alone? enquired the same husky voice.
I am! replied Merton.
What brings ye here?
I wish to question Hetty Brogan.
Consarning fortins?
Yes!
Come in.
Merton immediately secured his horse and
entered
.
Some half smothered embers on a rude
hearth cast forth a sombrous light, and served to
relieve the various objects from total darkness.
Hetty immediately came forward and enquired of
Merton his business.
When I was here a short time since, answered
he, you warned me of danger lying on my path,
to which I then gave little heedfor, to tell you
the truth, I thought you deranged; but I have
since learned the sad reality. I was felled from
my horse by a ruffianly blow, while my
companion
was kidnapped and borne I know not whither.
It matters not to me at present how you gained
the knowledge you imparted, but I wish to know
more. Tell me, if indeed you can tell, where she
is at the present moment, or whither her
destination
,
and you shall be richly rewarded.
To tell you whar' she is don't lay in my
power
.
Her destination is
Where? where?for Heaven's sake speak!
exclaimed Merton, as the old woman paused.
Thar', thar', don't git in a passion: you hain't
said what you'd give to know; and I reckon as
how Hetty Brogan arn't one as tells for nothing.
Speak, then! old woman; there is gold to
unloose
the hinges of your tongue! cried Merton,
placing in the hands of Hetty a well filled purse,
which she grasped with avidity and dropped into
a side pocket; then motioning him to a seat, she
resumed:
Why, ye see, misterwhat's yer name, sir?
No matter! go on with your story! said
Merton
,
sternly.
Ye see, this ere ar' rather ticklish business;
and I don't much like the idea o' gitting myself
into a scrape, which prehaps I might do by telling
a hot-headed younker like you, what you want to
know consarning the gal, without first gitting
precautions taken.
Do you mean to say you are going to refuse
me the information for which you are already
paid? enquired Merton, angrily.
Now, now, don't be gitting angry, don't. I
only wanted to make you promise you wont
never
in no way use this ar' information against me;
`cause if some folks should find it out, my head
wouldn't be worth that; and she snapped her
fingers.
Well, well, go on! I promise all you desire, on
the honor of a gentleman, returned Merton,
hastily.
Well, then, d'ye ever happen to hears o' old
Ben David, the Jew, what lives on the bank of
the Mississippi?
Ay! heard of him for a cut-throat!
Hush! not so loud.
Well, well!speak, speak! what of him?
Thar's whar' the gal's gone.
Gracious Heavens! cried Merton, wildly,
springing from his seat and clasping his forehead
with his hand; surely, surely not there! My
God! what can be done? I will fly to her
instantly
!but
how gained you this information?yet
no matter!I will fly this instant! and Edward
bounded to the door, where he suddenly recoiled
as though met by some repulsive obstacle, while
at the same instant the dark figure of a man filled
the entrance, and a deep voice cried, Hold!
The next moment the figure had advanced into
the centre of the room and the door was again
closed.
Hetty, what means this? who have we here?
asked the same deep, stern voice.
Aagena stranger, sir! as was just
enquiring
his way to the river, sir! stammered
Hetty, confusedly, who on the entrance of the
last comer had retreated to the farther-side of the
apartment, where the darkness screened her from
observation.
Ha! you seem agitated! Beware now you
deceive me! A light here!quicka light!
The individual whom we first noticed as
questioning
Merton previous to his entrance, and who
had since remained a silent spectator, advanced to
the fire and placed thereon a pine knot, which
immediately sent forth a ruddy gleam, lighting
the whole cabin and producing a picturesque
effect. A momentary pause ensued, during which
the gaze of Merton and the stranger met. The
latter was tall, commanding in figure, with broad
massive chest and limbs to correspond. The
outline
of his form was decidedly handsome, as was
also that of his features, which although of a
dark, almost dingy hue, were very expressive, and
seemed lit up with the fires of a mighty, and but
for a certain slight sinister expression, a noble
soul. His eyes were dark and brillianthis
forehead
broad and high, surmounted by jet-black
hair, which fell down around his neck in long
glossy ringlets. His face was medium in length,
with rather prominent cheek-bones, cheeks a
little
dimpled, from which ran two gently curved
lines, terminating at the corners of his mouth.
His lips were thin and generally compressed
though when otherwise, turned up with
something
of a sneer. His chin rose prominently
from a graceful curve below his mouth, on which
was a handsome imperial, and ended with an oval
turn. His dress was fashioned much like a sailor's.
He wore a roundabout of dark blue cloth, richly
embroidered with silk and tassel, tastefully set off
by two rows of gold mounted buttons.
Underneath
of this he wore a fine blue shirt, with large
open collar, falling negligently back from the
neck, secured by a dark silk cravat, which was in
turn secured by running through a plain gold
ring. His nether garments were in singular
contrast
with his upper. His pantaloons of coarse,
dark cloth, were fastened around the waist by a
sort of wampum helt, in which were confined a
knife and two pistols. They came a little below
his knees, where they were met by leggins from
the skin of deer, which connecting with
moceasins
,
formed a sort of rough boot. On his head
he wore a singular covering of untanned leather,
shaped something between a hat and cap.
Altogether
,
his whole appearance bespoke a man of a
wild, reckless, yet withal, fanciful disposition.
For a moment he stood gazing on Merton with
a severe expressionhis dark eyes gleaming with
unusual brightnesshis broad forehead gradually
contracting into a frown, as he found his bold gaze
returned by one equally bold and unquailing.
Who are you, and what is your business here?
demanded he, in the tone of one who deems he has
a right to know.
Ere I answer, replied Merton, somewhat
haughtily, without removing his gaze, I would
know by what right you question.
By the right of might! rejoined the other
quickly, his dark eyes flashing.
Indeed!
Ay, sir, indeed! and his lips parted with a
sneer. Come, sir, do not trifle! he resumed,
again compressing his lips. If you are
unfortunate
,
speak out, and if it is in my power I will
assist you; but if you are beat on an evil errand
and his eyes flashed fiercely
beware!
My errand is truly not one of evil, and I am
rather unfortunate, returned Merton, struck by
a singular frankness about the other, and
thinking
he might perhaps render him assistance. But
whom have I the honor of addressing?
I am called Barton. But go on! go on! I
would know your story! he added hastily.
Merton simply related some of the incidents
with which the reader is already acquainted.
Ha! exclaimed Bartonas Edward concluded
his account of the kidnapping of Emilyand
you are now in pursuit?
I am.
But where can the villain have borne her?
Here, Hetty, you pretend in second sight, give
us the desired information!
Why rea-really sir, I
Speak, woman! interrupted Barton, fiercely.
You know me; he muttered in an under tone.
I-I thinks to-to-David's, sir! stammered
Hetty
,
turning pale and trembling.
What, the Jew! cried Barton, with a start.
Here, young man; and turning to Edward, he
hastily drew from his finger a curiously wrought
ring; take this, and speed! speed! for there is not
a moment to be lost. Do you know the
residence
of the Jew?
I know the vicinity, and can find it,
answered
Edward.
Enough, then! away, away! for you have no
time to lose. Find the Jew, present this ring,
and demand the girl. He will not refuse your
demand.
He dare not!
added Barton, with
strong emphasis, as he saw Edward look
incredulous
.
But
Nay, young man, no questions now. I will
see you anon and explain all. Enough, that I
have taken a fancy, and am willing to serve you.
But come, comeaway, away, or you may be too
late! and hurrying Merton from the house,
Barton
assisted him to mount, and then turned away
with an abrupt adieu! Once more burying the
rowels in his horse, in an instant Merton was
rapidly
speeding on to the great river, lost in vague
conjectures concerning this singular individual,
and how his own strange adventure might
terminate
.
CHAPTER V.
THE JEWTHE KIDNAPPERTHE RESCUE.
On the margin of the Mississippi, some eight
or ten miles below St. Louis, stood, at the time
of which we write, an old, somewhat dilapidated,
and apparently untenanted log hut. Although
standing on the bank of the river, it was well
screened from observation by thick branching
trees and a dense shrubbery, which completely
surrounded it. The ground in the rear of it was
mostly level; but in front, it abruptly descended
to the river, which came sweeping along some
thirty yards below. The hut itself, on close
inspection
,
presented both externally and
internally
a very disagreeable appearance. It contained
but one apartment, if we except a place
partitioned
off at one end, for what purpose may,
perhaps, be seen hereafter. However ugly and
disagreeable the matter may prove, dear reader, it
now becomes necessary for us to introduce you
within the precints of this old dwellingfor
dwelling
indeed it wasat an hour not the most
agreeable
,
were you obliged to enter corporeally.
Seated upon an old stool, beside a small table,
on which his elbow rested, his head in turn
resting
upon his hand, was a man over whom some
sixty years had made their circling rounds. One
hand held a paper, on which he was intently
gazing
,
while some few others were scattered
carelessly
over the table. It was near the witching
time of night, and a dim, flickering candle served
to show the outline of his form, and bring his
features into a more bold relief. His countenance
was strongly marked by several lines which
depicted
cunning and avarice to a remarkable
degree
.
His eyes were small, dark and piercing,
and were surmounted by heavy beetling brows.
His forehead was low, and deeply wrinkled; and
his head, though a little bald, was generally
covered with long hair, besprinkled with the silver
touches of time. The most striking feature of his
face, was his nose; being long, pointed and
aquiine
denoting
him to be one of that often despised
race, the Jew. His beard was suffered to grow,
unmolested by the civilizing touches of a razor;
was rough, of a dirty brown color; and came
below
his chin sufficiently, with his head bent
forward
,
to rest on his bosom. His skin was dark
and filthy, deeply wrinkled, and begrimed with
dirt. Altogether his whole appearance
betokeued
a man full of treachery and deceit; of
dark sinister motives; and one who, to a person of
the least refined taste, would prove repugnant in
the extreme.
He was seated as before said, intently gazing on
a paper held in his hand, which trembling in the
light, threw over his swarthy, hideous features a
flitting shade; making them, if possible, even more
hideous in expression. Gradually his small, while a
sinister smile hovered around the corners of his
mouth, as he uttered a low, chuckling laugh.
Suddenly starting, a paleness overspread his
countenance
,
the paper dropped from his hand, and he
looked hurriedly around the room, vainly
endeavoring
to peer into the darkness, his limbs
trembling
with cowardly fear, exclaiming:
Ha! mine Gott! vot wash dat? O! poh, poh!
twas noshings; vot fors should I pees afraids?
noshings vill hurtish me; and turning to the
table, he again took up the paper, muttering
Dis ish von good documents, as shall makes mine
fortunes. De old Jew vill von days pe a very
great mans, mid a young handsome wifes; and
again he chuckled, with a fiendish glee.
Scanning the papers for a few minutes, he
commenced
rolling them carefully together, and
ended
by securing them with a string. When done,
he laid the roll upon the table before him, and
gazed upon it long and wistfully:then rising
from his seat, he shuffled slowly across the
apartment
,
to the place already mentioned as being
partitioned off, where disappearing for a few
minutes
,
he reappeared, returned, reseated himself
on his stool, crossed his arms an the table, bent
his head forward, and, judging from his vacant
stare, was soon engaged in some deep study.
Ha! mine Gott! but dey mush succeeds!
exclaimed
he, at length, as though speaking from a
train of thought:yet I fears dat infernal
showers
will make it too mush bad. Ah! vot wash dat!
cried he suddenly, starting up and bending forward
in alistening attitude. Blessed pe Fader Abram!
dat ish de signals, continued he, rubbing his
hands, chuckling, and advancing towards the
door, as a clear, shrill whistle rang through the
hovel. Ah, mine Gott! mine Gott! von day nows
I shall haves plenty of monish; and he attempted
a feeble imitation at dancing, which, with his
stooped figure and trembling limbs, presented a
spectacle disgusting as it was ridiculous.
Advancing to the door, the opened it, gave an
answering signal from a piece of ivory which he
applied to his mouth, and then leaned against the
door post, as if in expectation of some visitor.
For some minutes all was silent, and then came
the sound of approaching footsteps, with which
was occasionally mingled a grunt and a deep
muttered
curse, as though the comer was toiling with
some heavy burthen. Directly the figure of a
man was seen struggling through the bushes,
bearing a human body in his arms, and a moment
after, entering the hovel, he deposited it on the
ground.
Thar,' Mister Jew David, when you want
another
gal cotched, I reckons as how you'll have
to cotch her yerselffor Bill Riley aint found
on such an errand agin, not afore this scrape's
forgot, anyhow.
Vare ish Mistoor Jacks? enquired the Jew.
Why ye see, old feller, that ar's much easier
axed, than answered. Most likely he's in a
straight jacket by this time, if he arn't already
bored through the body. I did'nt wait to see how
it come out, for I thought one was about as many
as I could tend on, conveniently.
Vy, vot dosh you means? cried the Jew, in
alarm.
O, nothing much, only somebody happened to
hear what was a goin' on, and come up in a hurry,
pistol in hand, which probably went off
accidentally
,
and ye see Jack arn't here; that's all I know
about it.
Oh, mine Gott! mine Gott! do you thinks
Jacks vosh kilt? enquired the Jew, his dark eyes
gleaming strangely.
Can't saymost likely he's dead by this
time.
A low, half-smothered chuckle escaped the
Jew, which Bill overheard, and turning fiercely
to him, exclaimed:
Look ye here, old rough-head! I believe you're
a most outrageous, old villainous cut-throat! I
do upon my honor.
Vot fors you shays dat? asked the Jew, with
a savage grin.
Cause I jest think so, and I al'ays like to
speak my mind. Here you are now, laughing to
yerself, for ye darn't to laugh out like a man,
thinking Jack, poor feller's, dead. Well, it's
lucky for you if he is: that's my opinion about
it.
Vot for you shays dat? repeated the Jew,
turning a little pale.
Come, come, old feller, not so fast. Bill
Riley
don't peach; if he didand he looked keenly
at the Jew, drawing his right hand obliquely
across his throat, making a gurgling sound
somebody might get that ar' you know. But
come, he added, I've done the job, and now I'll
trouble you for the chinkersa cool hundred, you
remember.
Oh, mine Gott! it vosh but fifty! cried the
Jew, starting back.
Fifty apiece, old covey, and thar's two on us,
which jest makes it a hundred. As Jack's not
here, I'll jest take his for him, and in case I cum
across him, its easily paid over, ye see.
Oh, mine Gott! I vill not not do so,
whimpered
the Jew, who in Jack's absence thought he
might cheat him of his share.
You won't, eh? exclaimed Bill, advancing to
the table and returning with the light, which he
held close to the features of Emily, who lay
extended
on the ground, pale and motionless, yet
even lovely withal: Look thar,' Jew! d'ye see
that ar' innocent young lady, whom God forgive
me, for bringing into harm's way! D'ye see her?
Now look at me; and he drew himself up to his
full height, bringing the light full in front of his
face, while the Jew stood wondering:Look
well! d'ye see me? do I look like a feller that can
be trifled with? Then drawing a pistol, he raised
it to a level with the head of David, who turned
pale, trembled, and threw up his hands in an
imploring
attitude as he continued: Now mark
me, Jew David, if them ar' chinkers arn't
forthcoming
in about two minutes, I'll send a bullet
through your head, by! and he concluded
with an oath.
Oh, Fader Abram! exclaimed the Jew,
trembling like an aspen leaf; poot down de
pishtools
,
Mistoor Rileys, and you shall haves de
monish.
For a moment the other stood gazing on him
with a look of ineffable scorn, and as he did so,
the trio formed a scene worthy the pencil of an
artist.
Near the centre of the room was Riley, his tall
straight form drawn proudly up, one foot thrown
a little back, his right hand grasping a pistol, his
left the light, which throwing its gleams upon
his countenance, exhibited it in strong relief. His
features were not handsomestrictly speaking
and yet they were well formed; the outlines bold
and rather prepossessing. Their expression was
stern, rather than villainous, and his clear, bold,
grey eyes, which were now fastened with
intensity
upon the Jew, spoke more the courage of a
man, than the braggadocio of a scoundrel. There
was something in his look which told you he
would do what he said; and one that to trifle with
under circumstances like the present, would prove
a dangerous individual. His lips thin, and
generally
close drawn over his teeth, were now parted
and slightly drawn up with a sneer, wherein was
concentrated all the scorn which a truly brave
man feels at the sight of a whimpering, cowardly
ruffian. Some two or three feet in front of Riley,
stood the Jew; his withered form, blanched cheeks,
quivering lips and trembling limbs, presenting a
striking contrast. Ay, he, the dastardly
cutthroat
,
who would not flinch from burying the
murderer's dagger in the heart of some poor,
unsuspecting
victim, now quaked and trembled at
only the bare thought of death overtaking his
shriveled, worthless carcase! A little to the left
of Riley, lay the apparently lifeless form of
Emily
Nevance; her pale features looking even more
pale and death-like, as the dim light of the lamp
fell faintly upon her lovely, upturned
countenance
;
while night formed the back-ground, and
compietely encircling them, threw a dark veil over
surrounding objects.
After gazing a moment on the Jew, Riley
advanced
to the table, replaced the light, seated
himself on the stool, and then bade the Israelite
make haste with the chinkers.
Old David tottered slowly across the apartment,
to the closet before spoken of, groaning at the very
idea of parting with so much money; but
presently
he returned, bringing with him a leathern
purse, which he emptied on the table, exclaiming;
Dare, Mistoor Rileys, ish all my monish.
Oh! mine Gott! I shall always more pe one
ruined
mans.
Riley deigned no reply, but cooly commenced
counting the money and transferring it to his
pockets. Then turning to the Jew, he enquired
what he intended to do with the lady.
The Jew looked at him steadily for a moment,
and then as if satisfied there was nothing to fear,
replied, with a grin, his small black eyes twinkling
with savage humor:
Vy, Mistoor Rileys, I tinks I shall makes her
my vife.
Your what? cried Bill, half starting up.
My vife, repeated the Jew, scarcely knowing
whether to be alarmed or not.
Your wife, eh? ha, ha, ha!that's capital; a
mighty good joke that, old boyha, ha, ha!
You're such a good looking, soft eyed, clean faced
old beauty, that if the lady don't fall in love with
ye at first sight, you'll have the perticular
satisfaction
o' knowing the fault warn't yours, anyhow
ha, ha, ha!
He, he, he! laughed the Jew, grinning
hideously
.
But I say, Jew, what's yer object in throwin'
yerself away at such a tender age?
Vot fors mine objects? repeated the Jew,
enquiringly
.
Yes! what'll ye get by marryin' this ere lady?
for in course ye'll gain somethin' or yer wouldn't
do it.
O, mine Gott! I shall marrys for loves,
Mistoor Rileys; replied the Jew, with stoical
gravity.
For love, eh?ha, ha, ha!ho, ho, ho!
roared Bill, holding his sides:For love, eh?
and again he went into convulsive fits of laughter.
Why you confounded, stupid old heathen! do
you think as how you can make an ass o' Bill
Riley? Do you really think thar's anything
perticularly verdant about him? Lovepaugh!
your shrivelled old carcase never fell in love with
anything yet, unless thar' was monish attached
to't. Now jest mark me! continued he,
looking
steadily at the Jew, raising the forefinger of his
right hand, and assuming a serious tone of voice:
Thar's a mystery connected with this ere
business
,
and per'aps you thinks as how you can blind
me, and per'aps you may; but I tell you one
thing, bewar' what you do! for if this ere gal
comes to harm, through your doings, I, Bill
Riley
,
swear by the honor of a gentleman, to send a
bullet through yer loathsome carcase! I do, by
heavens! And Jew, I know more consarnin' this,
than you're a thinkin' on. Thar's some secret
connected with this gal's birth, and you intend
crossin' the big waters.
The Jew started back, exclaiming: Vy, how
you finds dat outs?
Ha! then I'm right there, thought Bill.
No matter how I found it out, he replied; but
ye see I know a little what's a goin' on, so have a
care friend David. But enough! I'll have to
begin
to travel; so good bye, old boy, and jest keep
yer eye skinned for squalls; and rising as he
spoke, he moved for the door.
At this juncture, Emily, whom they supposed
lay in a swoon, but who in reality bad feigned it,
in order to learn as much as possible regarding
the wherefore of her capture; and who, thinking
from the foregoing conversation there might be
something gained by appealing to the feelings of
Riley; uttered a scream, and sprang into a sitting
posture, exclaiming:
Save me, save me! But her plan did not
succeed. Riley, either fearful of being discovered,
or that she might work upon his feelings, pushed
quickly forward and disappeared.
As the door closed behind the kidnapper, the
Jew looked hurriedly around, gave a low chuckle,
rubbed his hands together, and advanced towards
Emily, who instantly sprang to her feet.
Recoiling
a step or two, he gazed upon her with
undisguised
admiration, as well he might. Her
beauful
figure drawn gracefully up, the flush of
excitement
mounting her face and neck with a
ruddy
glow, her proud lip curling with a look of
scorn, again reflected from her brilliant, dark
blue eyes, as she crossed her arms on her breast
and stood regarding him; formed a picture which
might win the admiration of even a miserly
cutthroat
.
O, mine Gott! she does looks so mush pooty!
cried the JewVot a fine wifes!
Jew, began Emily, in a dignified tone,
what means this? why have I been brought
hither?
For a moment the Jew looked at her steadily,
and as he did so, his ugly features contracted into
a grin, followed by a low chuckle.
You ish very mush pootish, gal, he replied,
and Ben David vill makes you his wifes.
Never!
cried Emily, in a voice so loud, bold
and firm, that the Jew involuntarily started back
Never, sir!
I
become your
wife?
No! sooner
would I die a thousand deaths!
O, mine Gott! she does looks so mush pootish!
exclaimed old David, recovering from his surprise
as Emily ceased, and gazing upon her with a
doting
look of exultation. Come, young ladish,
we vill takes a walk, continued he, approaching
and taking hold of her arm, which she threw off
with a contemptuous look,at the same time
drawing a dagger from the folds of her dress, while
the Jew again started suddenly back, she
exclaimed
:
Beware, Jew, beware! It were better for you to
beard a lion in his den, than a woman armed, in
my situation. Do not attempt to touch me with
your foul, polluted hands, or your much fouler
soul, thrice damned with sin, with all its hideous
weight of guilt, shall wing its flight and stand
arraigned
before the bar of the eternal God! And
Jew, continued she solemnly, there
is
a God!
and one of justice.
So sudden the action, so bold the movement, so
solemn the tone of Emily, all combined, took the
Jew completely by surprise; and he stood for a
moment, gazing upon her dark blue,
soul-speaking
eyes, with alook wherein was blended all the
awe, admiration and respect, which one like him
was capable of expressing. It was but for a
moment
however. A dark shade suddenly flitted
across his forehead; his eyes shot forth strange,
savage gleams; his lips quivered, as he attempted
to compress them over his almost toothless gums,
and he bent on Emily a look so full of the
expression
of a fiend, that she felt her eye quail, while
the blood receded to her heart and a tremor of
secret
terror ran throughout her system.
Applying the ivory to his lips, the Jew gave a
peculiar whistle, which was immediately answered
from without. A minute later, two figures
entered
the doorway; and ere Emily had fairly
comprehended
what was going forward, she found
herself pinioned in the grasp of two ruffians.
Oh! exclaimed she, all is lost! and she
uttered
a heart-piercing scream.
The Jew chuckled merrily, and advancing
toward
her, until she felt his very breath on her
face, said:
You looks very mush more pootish; and he
attempted to press his loathsome lips against her
face. Recoiling as much as lay in her power
each wrist being grasped by the strong arm of a
manEmily managed to evade what she would
have suffered death sooner than permitted, a
kiss from the Jew. At this moment she thought
of Edward, and scarcely knowing why, she called
upon his name for help.
Vot fors you calls? chuckled the Jew.
Mistoor
Edwards vill not comes!
'Tis a lie! uttered a deep, manly voice, that
made Emily scream for joy, as the figure of a
man sprang quickly forward, a pistol in either
hand, still exclaiming:Back, fiends of hell!
back! ere I send a bullet through your brains! and
the next instant Emily was clasped in the arms
of Edward Merton, who pressed her to his bosom
with all the wild foundness of a first passionate love.
After leaving Merton in the previous chapter,
he had ridden quickly forward, but had been
somewhat
delayed, as the exact location of the old hut
was unknown to him. He had secured his horse
at a short distance, and was searching along the
bank of the river, assisted by the light of the moon,
which pouring down her silvery flood of light,
gave to each thing a calm and pleasing effect
when the scream of Emily arresting his attention,
effectually enabled him to find the house; which
being completely surrounded by trees and bushes,
had thus far eluded his observation. Instantly
springing forward, he reached the entrance just
in time to hear the voice of her he loved, in tones
that went to his very soul, calling on him for
help, and the taunting reply of the Jew. Mad,
almost, with hope, rage and fear combined, he
entered as described; but so suddenly, and
unexpectedly
,
that the ruffians relaxed their hold and
retreated to the farther side of the apartment;
while the Jew, not knowing what he had to fear,
stood trembling with very fright. Seeing there
was but one, however, he somewhat recovered,
exclaiming
:
Vy you don't sheize him? vot fors you ish
afraids?
Off, ruffians, off! or by heavens you journey to
another world! cried Merton, springing in front
of Emily. And as for you, old dastardly
cutthroat
!
continued he, turning to David, as the
ruffians pausedI have a word to say, which
you will do well to heed! This girl I demand by
virtue of this ring! and as he spoke, he presented
the one given him by Barton.
Whether Merton expected this to have any
effect
on the Jew or not, certain it is that he was
very much surprised at the singular change it did
effect; for the Jew instantly advanced in a
fawning
manner, while the ruffians slunk quietly
away. Content that his purpose was gained,
without seeking the mysterious cause, Merton,
accompanied by Emily, quitted the hovel as soon
as possible. The Jew followed them to the door,
whispering them a good night, pleasant journey
and so forth, and even went so far as to offer his
service as a guide, which of course was declined.
As Merton entered the bushes, he looked back
and saw the Jew standing in the doorway, his
face upturned as though gazing at the stars. At
this moment a cloud which had obseured the rays
of the moon passed, and the light streaming full
upon his countenance, exhibited features so
wrought up in expression with all that was dark,
treacherous and devilish, that in Merton's
estimation
the owner was well worthy to become the
master fiend of hell itself.
A short walk of a few minutes brought them
to the spot where Merton had left his horse, when
to the surprise of both, they found the one Emily
had ridden standing along side. Merton
accounted
for this by supposing that the kidnapper,
either forgetting, or not having any further
use, had left her at liberty, when attracted
by the neighing of Sir Harry she had sought him
out. Assisting Emily to mount, he was soon
once more astride his own fine steed; and moving
away with lightened hearts, they were shortly
traversing a path which led on toward Webber's,
engaged in mutual explanations of what had
occurred
to each in the others absence; and if in
doing
so, Merton did ride a little closer to the side of
Emily than was actually necessaryand if when
the moon shone full on her fair countenance, he
did bend forward and gaze thereon with a look of
fondness that told of holy love, drinking in the
glances of her dark blue eyesand if in attempting
to lay hold of her bridle-rein, to guide her horse
in the better path, he sometimes touched her
hand, pressing it within his own, and whispered
words so soft and low the very zephyrs could not
catch their import, causing her head to droop,
while a rosy tint sprang brightly o'er her face,
is it anything that the reader should stop to
wonder
at? We think not. Very few but would
have done the same under like circumstances.
CHAPTER VI.
WEBBER AND HIS FAMILYRETROSPECTION
MYSTERY
EMILY
NEVANCE.
About five miles from the place where our tale
first opens and in a southwesterly direction, stood
a neat cottage, in size and appearance greatly the
superior of the generality of these buildings,
erected in this part of the country. It was
composed
of logs it is true, but then parts of them
were hewn and put together with compactness
and regularity, while the crevices were neatly
filled with a clay-like substance. The roof was
pierced by a chimney built of stone, and was well
thatched with straw. A stranger, after traveling
through much of the surrounding country, would
have been struck with the air of taste and elegant
neatness
belonging to it, compared with the more
slovenly appearance of many of its neighbors.
The ground round about, was generally level, of
a fertile order, and exhibited marks of fruitful
tillage. In the immediate vicinity of the cottage,
grass had sprung up, forming a thick green sward,
a sure indicative of civilization. A few fences,
rough it is true, but still answering the purpose
for which they were designed, marked out the
fields of tillage, and secured the crops from the
invasion of cattle. In the rear of the cottage,
was formed a garden; back of which, in orchard
regularity, were set out various kinds of domestic
treessuch as the apple, pear, peach, and so forth.
Opposite the house, some hundred yards distant,
was a barn, built of logs, where the cattle could
find shelter from the rough storms of winter.
In front of the house ran the road before
mentioned
,
which wound over a hill a short distance
3
to the right. Altogether, the whole betokened
the owner a farmer of the first class, bred in some
of the Eastern States, who had come to the Far
West with the intention of here passing the
remainder of his days. Such was the fact; and
although in speaking of him and his family, we
may digress a little from the main story, we trust
the reader will deem such digression pardonable.
William Webber was a man in size far above
the ordinarystanding six feet one inch, with
limbs and body well proportioned. In years he
numbered some forty-five, with a robust,
healthy
look about his face that would have set him
five years younger. There was nothing
remarkable
in his countenance, which was open and frank
in expression, wherein was likewise written a look
of honest hospitality. His complexion was light,
with light-brown hair, cut close and combed up
above a high, intellectual forehead. His eyes were
grey, full, and very expressive, as were his
features
generally. Around his mouth were a few
lines that denoted firmness, when roused, with
courage to act; while his features exhibited a
calm self-possession that would be of very
material
service to one in the hour of peril.
He had been born and bred in the good old State
of Massachusetts, where he lived in comfortable
circumstances, until about five years previous to
the opening of our story; when following up a
desire he had for sometime entertained, he came to
the West, purchased the land where he now
resided
,
built the cottage, returned, and soon
removed
his family hither; which consisted of a
wife and two sonsone now aged twenty, the
other some three years his elder.
His wife was a robust, healthy looking woman,
some five years his junior, of the medium height,
very fleshy, with a full, round,
good-natured-looking
countenance, such as we behold almost daily,
and one to whom the adage, fat, fair and forty,
would be truly applicable.
The eldest son, John, in some respects
resembled
his fathertall, well-built, with features of
a similar shape, though in expression far different.
In saying there was a resemblance between him
and his father, we wish the reader to distinctly
understand
it was only in the formation of the
features
all
else being totally different. His
complexion
was dark, with jet black hair, and eyes
somewhat shaded by dark, heavy, overhanging
brows. Around his mouth were lines similar to
those of his father, yet taking more of a sinister
turn. His look generally, was that of a man
dark, deep, and treacherous, and one little likely
to inspire confidence. But it was when he
smiled, which he did but seldom, that you would
have been the most struck by an expression from
which you would involuntarily recoil, as from
the gaze of a deadly serpent.
From youth up, John had been a being isolated
as it were from the world, wrapped up in his own
dark thoughts, communing but seldom with any,
and then with those of a disposition like to his
own. Already had he caused his father much
anxiety and trouble; and was, in fact, one cause
of his removing to the West, where he thought
he would be free from the snares and temptations
likely to be thrown around him in the East, and
where as he supposed he would be free at least
from companions in vice, and where, to sum up,
he would in all probability spend his days in
honest
pursuits. Could the first design of his father
have been strictly carried out, viz: that of
removing
him from temptation, bad company, and
so forth, the latter might perchance have followed.
But alas! in selecting the West, and more
especially
this part of it, he undesignedly opened a
field for the cultivation of his son's natural
disposition
,
by throwing him among the most
depraved
villains of which society could boast.
That he was an apt scholar, the sequel of our
story will probably show.
His brother Rufus, younger by three years, was
of a make and disposition in every respect totally
different. In stature he was of the medium size,
straight and slim, with light hair, and a fair, sunny
countenance. His features were regular,
approaching
perhaps a little too much the feminine,
with such an open, expressive frankness of look,
that your confidence was immediately won. His
disposition was mild and affable, his voice rich and
musical in tone, while his full blue eyes not
unfrequently
flashed forth gleams of a lofty
intellect
.
Around his mouth also, were lines similar
to those of his father, expressive of firmness and
a determination of character.
There is one other of whom we must speak to
complete the family, in order to do which it will
be necessary for us to go back somewhat in our
narrative. About fifteen years prior to the date
of our story, a stranger, accompanied by a little
girl some three years of age, cailed late one
evening
at the residence of Webber, and requested
permission to tarry through the night, which
request
was granted. He was a dark, stern
looking
man, some thirty-five years of age, and of a
moody, taciturn disposition. But little was
gleaned
from his conversation, as to who he was or
whence he came. In the morning he asked
permission
for the child to remain a few days, stating
as a reason that business of importance called him
away. The permission was granted and he took
his leave, since when he had never been heard
from. Enquiries were instituted by Webber, but
nothing authentic had ever been heard
concerning
him. A man answering his description was
seen a short time after in the western part of
New York, apparently bound for the West; and
Webber came to the conclusion the child had
been voluntarily deserted; the more so, as on
questioning her, the account she gave was of
harsh treatment, and sometimes severe
chastisement
,
for asking of home. The child was too
young to give even a succinct detail of her
adventures
,
remembering only some of the more
glaring, such as the dark man carrying her away
from home, putting her in a house that floated on
the water, and the likefrom all of which
Webber
drew his conclusions that she had been brought
from another country, perhaps across the
Atlantic
,
by an intrigueing design he was unable to
fathom.
It was a riddle too deep for the gossips
infesting
the neighborhood of Webber (as what place
do they not) to solve, concerning who was the
child, who were her parents, where she came
from, and so forth; and after various conjectures,
probable and improbable, they finally agreed that
her parents were no better than they should be,
and that being of that doubtful cast, it were
better
to shun the company of the child, lest by
intercourse
their prudish decorum should be
vielated
,
and their over-wise virtuous principles
become
contaminated.
So much for ye, moth-eaters of reputation
colleagues of idleness and breeders of scandal!
who strain at a knat and swallow a camel
blasting all with your polluted breath whom the
world hath not acknowledged above your reach
preying upon society as the worm will sooner or
later prey upon your corrupted flesh!God send
that the innocent and harmless wanderer be not
caught within your damning toils!
If the child was shunned by some, she was not
by all; for Webber, to whom she soon became
an object of affection, determined to rear her as
though she were his own; and as she grew older,
he had no cause to regret it; for naturally of a
sweet, affectionate disposition, she won friends
among those who were at first disposed to treat
her uncivilly, while to Webber she clung with all
the fondness of a child to a parent.
Time in the meanwhile rolled on, and what at
first created a great commotion among the
gossips
,
gradually wore away, settled down into a
shake of the head whenever the object of
calumny
approached, until at length, won over in
spite of themselves by her angel disposition, even
the retailers of scandal ceased their persecutions
and the unknown wanderer became an object of
general regard.
About this period an event took place, which
created another mighty sensation, although
gossip
this time ran in a very different channel from
the previous one. It was a calm summer evening
in the month of August. The sun had just
retired
behind the Western hill, and was yet
tipping
the mountain tops with a rich golden tint;
the songsters were singing their farewell songs
for the night; the breeze came with that gentle,
soothing effect, so delightful on such an eve,
making
one feel that placid, yet saddened happiness,
which wins our thoughts from the darker things
of life, and directs them into a higher, nobler,
holier vein. Around the porch of Webber's
dwelling were seated himself, wife, and two
children
one
a fair-haired boy of winning
appearance
,
the other a girl of bright eyes and golden
tresses, whose age might be thirteen. In the
countenance of the latter there was something
so noble, so fascinating, combined with such a
quiet, thoughtful, almost melancholy air, that ten
to one a stranger would have paused to wonder
why one so young should bear the look of
maturer
years. As Webber gazed upon her, and
mused on her sad, singular fatetorn from home
and friends at so early an agethrown upon the
world for protection, and thought what if such
had been the case with one of his own children,
he involuntarily hove a sigh, and vowed to watch
over her with more than a parent's care.
Suddenly the attention of the group, which had
been occupied in various ways, was arrested by
the rapid approach of a horseman. A minute
later he was standing among them, his horse
foaming and panting from hard riding, while with
his own head uncovered he wiped the perspiration
from his heated brow.
Is your name Webber? demanded he of that
individual.
It is.
William Webber?
The same.
Ten years ago a stranger left with you a little
girl: am I right?
You are, answered Webber, wondering what
was to be revealed. This is the child; and he
pointed towards her.
The stranger turned an enquiring glance,
examined
her attentively from head to foot,
apparently
much struck by her appearance, and then
said abruptly: Enough! I am commanded to
deliver you this packet; saying which he placed
a sealed package in Webber's handturned
mounted his horsedashed the spurs into his sides,
and ere the astonished group had recovered from
their surprise, he was fast speeding out of sight.
Strange, remarked Webber, breaking the
seal; what new mystery is this? As he spoke,
he opened the parcel, and was surprised to find ten
one hundred dollar notes, accompanied with the
following singular epistle:
To William Webber, greeting:
Ten years
since was placed in your charge a child, who bears
or bore the name of Emily Nevance. In the
name of God! treat her well! Educate her for
any station in society, and accept the notes
enclosed
,
with the thanks of the
Unknown
.
CHAPTER VI.
Great was the wonderment among the gossips,
when the news went forth of Emily's great
fortune
,for
rumor soon swelled it into a fortune
and the following six months were employed by
all the unmarriageable spinsters and old ladies
with spectacles, in conjectures and discussions as
to the strange singularity of such an event; and
she who had in her earlier years been considered
in birth far beneath them, was now, by this
incident
,
placed far above. Oh! the inconsistency of
human beings!
A new epoch was now opened to Emily; for
Webber, punctual to what he considered a duty,
took immediate steps to place her in one of the
best institutions in the city of New York, in
charge of a distant relative, who, moving in the
best circles of society, gave her not only the
advantages
of intellectual education, but also that of
acquiring the ease, grace and dignity belonging to
the true etiquette of fashion. Soon after this
disposition of Emily, Webber made a tour to the
West, purchased a farm as already shown, and
removed thither with his family.
Four years passed, and Emily saw nothing of
the Webbers. During this period she had grown
to womanhood, and what had promised so well
when young, was amply fulfilled in maturer years.
She became attractive in person, graceful in
accomplishments
,
while her intellectual faculties far
exceeded ordinary minds. Her temperament was
truly poetic, with nothing of affectation or
coquetry
(which spoils so many) in her manner.
She was a warm patriot and enthusiast; and when
conversing on some noble theme, dull must be
the eye that would not flash, or the mind that
would not fire, with the inspiration thrown from
her speaking eyes and glowing flowery language.
It was in New York that Edward Merton, then
a student in the University, first became
acquainted
with Emily; and struck, we might add
fascinated
,
with manners and appearance so far above
the gay flirting things with which she was
surrounded
,
he sought, gained an introduction, and
almost immediately commenced paying her his
addresses. The result of those addresses, thus far,
the reader has already seen.
Although it was generally believed that Emily
was rich, yet she knew to the contrary; and
possessed
of a pride too noble to take advantage of
such a reputation, she, through a sensitive
delicacy
,
repulsed the advancements often made by
those whom she considered her superiors in point
of wealth. Wealth was certainly a great bar to
the progress of Merton; a bar, in fact, which he
found far more difficult to pass than he at first
supposed; and although his nobleness of heart,
his sincere, ardent passion, inspired within her
own breast feelings of affectionof loveyet
pride prevailed; and Merton, to whom she revealed
her scruples, saw with painful regret that unless
there were some counteracting power, Emily
might love, but would never consent to be his.
Tired of city life, and the gay frivolties of the
day, Emily longed for the quiet retreat of her
guardian; and having made preparations to that
effect, about six months prior to the opening of
our story, she, accompanied by Merton, whose
father resided in St. Louis, set out for the West.
Happy, most happy, was the meeting between
Emily and her friends, who had been to her as
parents
and brothers. Webber, when he came
fairly
to recognise the long lost one, as he termed
her, could scarcely restrain himself for joy.
Even John, as he extended the hand of welcome,
seemed to smile with less of deceit and more of
earnestness than was his wont; while Rufus
approached
her with that bashful timidity, almost
amounting to awe, which persons of sensitive
minds often exhibit when they fancy themselves
in the presence of their superiors.
A great change had been wrought in the
personal
appearance of Emily. She had left them
as it were a child, and as such they remembered
her; consequently there was surprise mingled
with their joy, to behold such a fine, graceful,
lady-like form, combined with such ease and
dignity
of manner, returned in place of the image on
which memory still dwelt. But as it is not our
purpose to enter into details here, therefore let it
suffice, that up to the time of the commencement
of our story, things had run on smoothly.
Merton, whose collegiate course was finished,
was now preparing to practice law in St. Louis;
but sometimes finding bright eyes a much more
pleasing study, not unfrequently wandered off in
the direction of Webber's; and almost as
frequently
,
through a singular coincidence, he and Emily
might be seen mounted on their fine steeds,
scouring
the country in various directions:in fact, it
was on one of these excursions, in which they
were first introduced to the reader. As their
proceedings
since then have been made known, we
trust sufficient has been said to justify us in
proceeding
with our tale.
CHAPTER VII.
WEBBER'SSINGULAR CONDUCT OF RUFUS
ARRIVAL
OF BERNARD AND TYRONE WITH THEIR
PRISONER
ILLNESS
OF RUFUSRETURN OF EDWARD
AND EMILYMORE MYSTERY.
At the time of which we write, the unsettled
state of the country required every settler to be as
much as possible on his guard, and for this
purpose
Webber had provided his house with a heavy
oaken door, strengthened still more by cross bars
of iron, through which passed bolts of the same
solid material. The windows were protected by
shutters similar to the door, and when closed,
which could be done almost at a moment's notice,
the house, manned by a few within, seemed of
sufficient strength to withstand a regular seige.
A few loop-holes, cut here and there, would
enable
those within to fire on an attacking party,
with but little danger to themselves. The main,
in fact the only entrance to the house, was by the
door already mentioned, which opened into a hall
running through the centre of the building, on
either side of which was a door, opening in turn
into other apartments. To the right of the
entrance
was a room of good dimensions,
comfortably
furnished, containing an old fashioned
fire-place
,
where the meals were cooked and served,
and where the family generally assembled. From
this apartment was a stair-case leading to a floor
above, which ran along under the roof, forming a
place of deposit for old rubbish, and which, if
necessary
,
could be used as a sleeping room. The
cottage was well furnished throughout, better
than could reasonably have been expected in this
part of the countryWebber having brought
much of the furniture with him from the East.
In the apartment to the right, just spoken of,
on the evening of the day which opens our tale,
were assembled Webber, his wife and younger
son. In the middle of the floor stood a table,
covered with a clean white cloth, on which were
ranged various dishes, some evidently used, while
others remained untouched in their places,
indicating
that a part of the family, and a part only, had
partaken of the evening's repast. A candle placed
on the table, served to light the apartment and
exhibit the features of the occupants, all of whom
seemed to wear an air of gloomy apprehension.
The doors and windows being thrown open,
admitted
the breeze, which came with a cool and
invigorating effect. For some minutes the
silence
remained unbroken, while Webber arose
from his seat, and paced with anxious strides the
floor of the apartment.
I wonder they do not arrive! at length he
exclaimed; they surely have had time enough
since the shower! and as he spoke he strode to
the door.
The moon had sufficiently risen to throw light
upon a scene, where the work of devastation had
been carried on to a remarkable degree. As
Webber
gazed around him, he beheld in every
direction
tall, lofty trees torn from their foundations
limbs torn from the trunks of othersfences
leveled
to the ground, and the crops, the toil of a
season, beat to the earth as though trampled by
a caravan. But with this it was evident his mind
was but little occupied; for after casting a hasty
glance over the scene, he turned in another
direction
,
and his eye followed the road, which at some
little distance to the east wound over the brow of
a hill. Here he gazed intently for a few moments,
while the gloom which had been settling over his
features, gradually deepened. As he stood gazing
thus, a sigh, which seemed to come from the
heart, caused him to turn his head, when he
beheld
Rufuswho had noiselessly followed him to
the doorwith his eyes fixed in the same
direction
,
his features pale, almost ghastlywhile the
workings of his countenance, and the quivering
of his lips, denoted a strange nervous excitability.
Rufus! Rufus! cried Webber, taking hold of
his arm; what means this, my son?why are
you so agitated?
The young man started, passed his hand across
his eyes, looked hurriedly around, as one
suddenly
awakened from a dream; and then, while a
slight flush tinged his handsome features, quietly
withdrew without deigning a reply.
At another time such singularity of conduct
on the part of his son, would have attracted the
attention of Webber to know the cause; but
under
the present circumstances, his own mind was
too much occupied to give it heed. For a moment
longer, he stood, his eyes fixed in the direction
mentioned, and then, as if sadly disappointed, with
slow and musing pace returned to the
apartment
.
Strange! said he, that they do not return.
I fear they have met with some serious accident;
for this storm has been most alarming in its
consequences
.
Had we not better go in search? enquired
Rufus, his voice trembling with emotion.
True, my son, we must! replied Webber,
with decision. Can the horses be found
conveniently
?
I observed two, but a few paces distant,
rejoined
Rufus.
But you will not both leave? said Mrs.
Webber
,
enquiringly.
Why, no, answered Webber, thoughtfully;
one I think will be sufficient.
Then
I
will go, said Rufus, with energy.
Why so, my son?
Ask me not, father; I have reasons, replied
he, confusedly.
Well, be it so; but be speedy. As he spoke,
he started, for he fancied he heard voices in
conversation
;
and moving quickly to the door, both
father and son listened attentively.
Ha! they come! exclaimed Webber, as some
figures were descried descending the hill.
She
is not there! cried Rufus, quickly.
How know you that? enquired Webber!
With my eyes I cannot distinguish individuals
at that distance. How know you Emily is not
there, Rufus?
But Rufus was gone; and his father discerned
his figure, at some little distance, gliding swiftly
on in the direction of the horses. A moment or
two later, he heard the clattering of hoofs, and
his son rode quickly past. He called to him, but
in vain. He heard not, heeded not, but urged his
horse to his utmost speed.
Why the youth is insane! remarked
Webber
,
to himself. Ha! he stops!he has met
them returning. But no! on he goes again!
now he dashes over the hill!surely, something
has happened, or he would have returned; and
with an agitated step, he moved on in the same
direction.
The voices of the approaching party were, in
the meanwhile, growing louder as they neared
him, and Webber was soon enabled to hear their
conversation. He paused to listen, for he fancied
he heard a voice with which he was not
unfamiliar
.
Now jest keep right on, Mr. Jack; you haint
got a great ways furder to go, no how; and I
kind o' guess you'll git rested by the time you'll
be wanted to travel agin. Now ye needn't look
so tarnal cross about it;I don't much like the idea
o' bragging over a chap that's hampered, but I'll
jest tell ye what 'tis, Mr. Jack Curdish, I jest think
I could lick you in a fair rough and tumble fight
in about two minutes; I do, I swow!
Hush! said another voice. Be not too
over-bearing
remember
the man is your prisoner.
Wal so I do, Mark; but the feller won't say
nothing. He's as stuffey as a mule, and I's jest
trying to see if I could'nt brag something out o'
him.
Why, Harvey Bernard! cried Webber,
springing
forward, as he fully recognised the speaker,
and grasping his hand,welcome, most welcome,
friend Harvey.
Jest the same old Webber yit, returned
Bernard
,
giving his hand a hearty shake. Why you
look jest as naternal as life. This ere's Marcus
Tyrone, a friend o' mine.
Welcome, Tyrone, said Webber, cordially
extending his hand.
This other chap's name's Jack Curdish. You
needn't shake hands with him; for he's jest as
big a rascal as ever run.
Why, what mean you? enquired Webber, in
surprise.
Tell him, Mark; you can git at it a great
deal quicker than I can.
Tyrone accordingly explained, in as few words
as possible, how matters stood.
Gods! exclaimed Webber, as he heard of
Emily's capture, his features working with the
most powerful emotion; and for a moment he
buried his face in his hands, while his whole frame
shook convulsively. Again resuming his
outward
calmness, he walked close to the side of
Curdish, who glanced uneasily about him, and in
a voice of suppressed passion, between his
clenched
teeth, said: Curdish, by the living God above
us! if that girl come to harm, I will make such
an example of you, that it shall find a place on
history's page for its atrocity! Tell me, where
is the girl? and if I succeed in finding her,
unharmed
,
it shall go much better with you.
I'll tell you nothing to-night, growled
Curdish
;
who fearful of consequences, if they went
in pursuit, thought he would gain time by
delaying
the search.
Why not to-night?
'Cause I won'tthat's why!hang me, if
I'm goin' to give ye any more explanations.
Then your blood be on your own head!
rejoined
Webber, sternly. To the house with
him, as fast as possible! I will hurry forward
and prepare a place for his reception.
In a few minutes Curdish was placed in the
room on the left of the hall, the door and
windows
made fast, and there left to pass the
remainder
of the night, in communion with his own
dark thoughts. And dark and dreadful are the
thoughts of the guilty!for their conscience is
a hell, from which there is no escape.
After a brief consultation, Webber and his
friends concluded it were better to wait till
morning
,
ere they set out in search of Emily; the
more so, as both Edward and Rufus had already
gone in pursuit, and perchance, by awaiting,
tidings might be gained of her. But little was
said, for all felt a heaviness of heart; and wearied
by traveling, Bernard and Tyrone partook of the
food set before them, in gloomy silence.
This is a sad meeting! began Webber, after
a long pause, in a voice so changed that both
Bernard and Tyrone involuntarily started. A
sad meeting! If this girl comes to harm, I fear
my reason will desert me.
Why, William! cried his wife; are your
thoughts more bound up in the child of a stranger,
than in your own flesh and blood?
Yes, Sarah, I confess it is even so. I have
struggled hard against itI have sought to share
my affection alike with each member of my
family
;
but why, I know notperhaps by her angel
dispositionthe gentle forsaken has been the
idol of my secret thoughts. But enough of this,
Sarah; the subject is painful to me; and he
pressed his hands against his heated temples, as
though to still their throbbing.
What course do you intend to pursue with
your prisoner? enquired Tyrone, anxious to
draw his thoughts into another channel.
Death!
exclaimed Webber, quickly and
fiercely
,
while his teeth clenched, and his brow
contracted
into a frown of unshaken resolve.
Death! cried all at once.
Ay, death! there must be an example made!
said Webber, in a deep, stern tone.
William! cried his wife, rushing to him:
You are not yourself,do not talk thus!
Sarah, returned Webber, gently pushing her
from him, while the frown grew darker on his
brow, seek not to alter it; I have said.
But why not appeal to the law for redress?
asked Tyrone.
You overlook, Tyrone, that our laws here
are almost ineffective, and force us, in a measure,
to make our own.
True! I did not think of that.
Now, Bill Webber, I'll jest tell you what 'tis,
began Bernard: I know my opinion aint o' no
great account, any how; but I've known you
ever since I was a leetle boy, and somehow I kind
o' feel I have a right to say something; and I'm
jest agoing to say, if you could manage to punish
this ere infernal scoundrel some way, without
taking his life, you'll feel a great deal better when
you come to die yourself. I haint the least doubt
but the feller oughter die, to get his deserts; but
ye see, the Almighty made him, and has kept him
alive, so far, and will undoubtedly punish him,
some day or other; and now the question is,
whether you hadn't better let the Almighty take
his own way about it, instead of taking all o' the
responsibility yourself?
I know your honest heart, Bernard, said
Webber, approaching and grasping his hand; I
know in all you say, you aim for my own good;
but in this I am resolved, and must have my own
way, therefore seek not to alter me.
Wal, if your mind's made up, rejoined
Bernard
,
I aint the chap to say anything furder;
only if you want any help, Harvey Bernard's right
here, and he haint never been known to refuse a
friend assistance yit. I jest spoke, 'cause I kind
o' considered it a duty to do it, and bein' as how
I've eased my mind, I haint nothing furder to
say about the matter.
Just at this instant was heard the clatter of a
horse's hoofs, and all sprang eagerly to the door.
What news, my son? cried Webber, as Rufus,
pale and breathless, leaped from his panting steed.
She
they are safe and coming! replied he,
almost wildly.
Thank God, and you! exclaimed Webber,
clasping him in his arms, as though he were a
child. You have relieved my brain of a weight
of anguish. But what is the matter, my son?
added he in alarm, as he became aware of an
increasing
languor on the part of Rufus.
Father, I am ill! sighed Rufus, faintly.
You are indeed, my son! and he bore him
into the house.
Cordials, such as they had, were administered,
but to no effect. He grew wild, delirious, and
was finally placed in bed, in a high state of fever.
His mother, whose whole soul seemed bound up
in him, paced the room, wringing her hands in an
agony of grief, and crying: Oh, my God! my
God! spare me this!
There are some people so constituted by nature,
that they possess no feelings in common with the
rest of mankind. With those around them they
have no kindred ties, no sympathetic chord that
vibrates at the slightest touch, linking soul with
soul in the holy bond of friendship. They live
in, yet separate as it were, from the world; and
are thought by the rest of mankind to be cold,
unsocial
,
unfeeling. Perhaps in a great measure
they are so; yet notwithstanding, they have their
objects of affection, for the heart must cling to
something, and in proportion as they isolate
themselves from the many, so does their soul
embrace
the few, or the one, with a violence of
passion
others deem not they possess. Such was, in
part, the case with Mrs. Webber. 'Tis true she
liked her husband, she liked her family, her
friends, but Rufus was the idol, the only idol of
her soul. In him were her hopes, fears and joys
centered. A woman that said very little, she
was not one to make an outward show of
affection
,
by a thousand little demonstrations that
count so much in the eyes of the world, and a
stranger might have thought she felt alike toward
all. She would steal away unseen, and hour by
hour watch, concentrating her very soul on him,
with all the deep, holy devotion of a mother's love.
And well was he worthyfor within his breast
beat a pure, a high-minded, noble heart. What
then were her feelings when she saw him
stretched
on a bed of sicknesspainwith reason, the
immortal endowment of God, tottering upon its
throne? Who shall tellwho describe a
mother's
anguish in a scene like this? when she beholds
the beloved of her soul in the jaws of earth's
mightiest
foe, Death! Words fail, the pen droops, and
we veil the feelings from the eyes of all but
imagination
.
An hour or two later Merton and Emily
arrived
.
They were warmly greeted, but there
was no rejoicing. Over all hung the cold icy
gloom which pervades the house of mourning.
Words were said in whispers, and each glided
stealthily about, with that mysterious air which
reminds one of the fabled spectres of tradition.
Emily, like a ministering spirit, immediately took
her place at the bedside of the sufferer. She felt
grieved to the heart, for she loved him with a
sister's love. Both herself and Merton were
surprised
to learn he had been in pursuit of them.
They had never seen him. Once they had
fancied
they heard the sound of a horse somewhat
distant, but nothing further. This annunciation
surprised all, for it was evident that he had seen
them, as he had told of their coming. Webber
mused on the singular conduct of Rufus, prior to
his departure, which now struck him with force,
shook his head gravely, but said nothing. As
soon as Merton had partaken of some refreshment,
he mounted another horse and rode swiftly to St.
Louis for a physician, who arrived toward night
of the following day. He felt of the sufferer's
pulselooked gravefelt of his pulse againshook
his head, and pronounced it a severe case of
intermittent
fever.
On opening the door of the apartment where
Curdish had been confined, to the astonishment of
all it was found empty, which was the more
unaccountable
,
as everything was fast just as it had
been left the evening before. Webber was both
vexed and perplexed that the villain had thus
escaped
;
but after reasoning awhile with himself,
he came to the conclusion that under the present
circumstances it was all for the best; and his
thoughts of vengeance gradually emerged into
fears for the life of his youngest born.
We must now leave all for the present, and turn
to another scene.
PART II.
CHAPTER I.
THE GRAND RENDEZVOUS OF THE BANDITTITHE
BANDIT CHIEF AND HIS WIFETHE SONGTHE
TALE.
On the banks of the Osage, some several miles
from where it empties into the dark and muddy
Missouri, is a wild, gloomy and romantic spot.
Even at the present day it has not been reached
by civilization, and still stands alone in the solemn
grandeur of nature. Here mountains rear their
rugged heads steep and stupendous; there fearful
chasms yawn as if awaiting some prey for their
mighty jaws; while anon dashes along some
sparkling
rivulet, leaping from rock to rock, making
music in its devious course, until finally plunging
into some larger stream, its tiny youthful song is
forever buried in oblivion.
From the Osage, back for some little distance,
flows a creekreflecting its rugged banks in its
silvery bosom as in a mirrorand terminates in a
semi, or three-quarter circled cove, surrounded
by tall, majestic, overhanging cliffs. This water
is supplied from the Osage, and passing as it does
between such craggy steeps, forms a dark, lonely,
silent retreat. The rocks surrounding its
termination
are high and arching, so that their base can
only be approached by water. Within this cove,
beneath these rocks, at the time of which we
write, was an extensive cavernknown at the
present day by the name of The Robber's Cave.
It was well calculated as a fugitive retreat; for
defended
by a few, it would be a risky attack for a
combined force, even though possessed of
overwhelming
numbers. It could be approached only
by boats coming from the Osage, as the sides of
the creek were lined with precipitous rocks,
where descent would be at the imminent peril of
the hardy adventurer. It was, in fact, a spot
which seemed as it were planned and fortified by
Nature, in one of her wildest moods, for some
great and daring enterprise.
Standing on the summit of one of the
surrounding
cliffs, the eye embraced an extensive scope of
country, whose ragged, picturesque surface
presented
scenes sublimely beautiful, and as
variegated
as the wildest conceptions of the most vivid
imagination. Here you beheld a stunted growth
of trees overhanging some frightful precipice;
there rocks piled topling up, until they seemed
ready to fall with a crashing vengeance upon
minor
objects below; while winding like a silvery
belt between, at some little distance, was the dark
and silent Osage, gliding on to be united with one
of earth's mightiest rivers, and then forever lost
in its last long home of the boundless deep.
There is, in contemplating the beauty and
grandeur
of Nature, something so fascinating, so holy,
so inspiringwe feel so drawn away from the
many petty trifles of common life, that to die
amid such scenes appears to us as it were robbing
Death of half his terrors. 'Tis then we feel
purified
elevated;
we feel that we are alone in the
presence of GodAlmighty God! and when it
shall be our fate, as sooner or later it must be, (and
with all) to pass the bourne whence none return,
O! let our body be consigned to dust beside
the dashing of some stream, away from the haunts
of men, where the soul, the sublime soul of Nature
herself pervades!
The cavern of which we have made mention,
and to which we must now turn our attention,
was entered from the creek, through a small
aperture
some two feet above the water. From this
you descended rather abruptly some ten or fifteen
feet, when you found yourself in a large, arching
cave of stone, sufficient in size to contain an
hundred and fifty persons. From this was a low
arched passage through the rock, leading into
another
apartment, some twenty by thirty feet.
This secret retreat, at the date of our story, was
the grand rendezvous of a numerous banditti, of
whom mention has been made in the opening.
Along the sides of the cave were ranged pistols,
knives, rifles, carbines, powder-flasks, and all the
various insignia of warfare. At one end was
erected
a platform, whereon the chief of the banditti
sat or stood, when holding public council. Along
the sides were ranged oaken benches, where the
members could be seated, and the whole together
wore an air of comfort and convenience. But of
the Inner Cave, or Chieftain's Chamber, as it was
generally called, we wish for the present to
speak more particularly. Could one have been
introduced into it privately, or without knowing
where he was, and seen it lighted in all its
brilliancy
,
he would have fancied himself in the
gorgeous
apartment of some palace, rather than in a
robber's cave. Everything in the shape of
splendor
and luxury was there. A rich damask silk
curtain, arranged in graceful folds, extended round
and completely screened the walls; against which,
from floor to ceiling, extended four splendid
mirrors
,
in gilt frames, each placed opposite the other,
occupying the four sides of the apartment and
reflecting
every object in it. Much of the
intervening
space on the walls was filled with paintings of
various and fanciful designs, but all evidently
executed
by artists of no ordinary talent:in fact,
some of them were from the great masters of
Europe
.
On the floor, which was dark, of marble
polish, stood several sofas, of elegant
workmanship
,
together with a table of solid stone, most
beautifully carved, on which, strange as it may
seem, were piled books and music. A guitar and
violin, evidently in much requisition, were lying
carelessly on one of the sofas, beside which,
in seeming contrast, lay a brace of pistols, a gold
mounted short sword and a silver handled dirk.
In fact, several of the last mentioned articles were
occupying positions in different parts of the
Chamber
,
strangely at variance with its otherwise
poetical
aspect. There was no outlet to this
apartment
,
save the aperture already mentioned as
connecting it with the larger cave, and
consequently
the light, which must of necessity be
artificial
,
proceeded from a gold mounted chandelier,
suspended midway of the ceiling, and gave to
each thing a soft, dreamy, voluptuous appearance.
We have said there was no outlet, save one;
but in addition to what the reader has already
seen, was a recess, entered by drawing aside the
folds of the curtain, sufficiently large for a
sleeping
apartment, and was doubtless used for this
purpose, as it contained the requisites.
It may perhaps appear strange to the reader,
that so much of luxury, civilization, and even
refinement
,
should be found at this period, so far
back in the wilds of Missouri, and what is more,
in a robber's cave. But to the very circumstance
of its being a robber's cave, let it be attributed;
for the access that an organized banditti would
have to various kinds of plunder, may be said to
be almost limitless. That such things as we have
mentioned could have been procured and brought
hither, no one will questionthat they were, we
assert. There is also another thing to be taken
into consideration. That the chief of these
outlaws
was no ordinary individual, that he was a
man of some learning, taste and refinementof a
fanciful, poetical temperamentthe selection and
arrangement of the articles in his private
apartment
go to prove. But this will doubtless be
developed
in the progress of our story, therefore we
will not anticipate, but turn our attention to the
present occupants of the Chieftain's Chamber.
On the afternoon of the same day with which
we closed the preceding chapter, reclining in an
easy, graceful attitude on one of the sofas of this
elegant apartment, was a beautiful female of some
twenty summers. To give anything like a
perfect
description of her dress and appearance, will,
we fear, be an impossibility; yet we may be able
to draw a sketch, from which the imagination of
the reader may fill the picture. Her features were
cast in nature's finest mould, and though not
strictly classic, yet possessing an appearance of
delicate chiseling, if we may so express it, which is
never seen save in those whose mental power
predominates
over their physicalor, in other words,
whose intellectual commands our respect, where
otherwise the animal would excite our passions.
Her skin was dark and spoke her Spanish origin.
Her hair was black, and fell in a sort of
graceful
negligence around a beautiful rounded neck,
which was bared low, and gave her a somewhat
voluptuous appearance; nor was this lessened by
her round, plump, soft armsbare nearly to her
shouldersone of which was thrown gracefully
under her head, and ended in a small pretty hand,
with gently tapering fingers,the latter, by the
way, glittering with rings of great value. Her
eyes were blacksparkling blackin whose
liquid
depths you could see the fire of passion, the
jealousy of love and the revenge of hate. Love
was therewild passionate lovebut it was love
that must know no rival, else the fawn would be
changed to the tigress. It was love that would
dare all,sacrifice all, for the object on which it was
fixed; but that object must love in return, or be
itself a sacrifice. There was about her mouth a
peculiar expression, which we cannot forbear to
notice. It was a smile, but then it was a smile
wherein you could read to a certain extent the
mind which governed it. Was she sad, it was
mournful; was she happy, it was pleasing; was
she angry, it was full of scorn, defiance and
revenge
;
but in all moods, all changes of feeling, it
was ever there, it was ever a smile Her dress
was cut low around the neck, leaving the arms
also bare, and was fancifully trimmed with gold
lace, which gave it a very singular effect.
The other occupant of the Chamber was a female
slavea mulattowho was standing before one
of the mirrors, arranging her curly hair with great
precision, and viewing her comely features with
no small degree of pride. She was of good
proportions
,
some twenty-five years of age, possessed
a rather pleasing countenance, and, for one of her
race, of more than ordinary intellect. She was
gaily and somewhat fantastically dressed.
For a few moments the lady on the sofa gazed
upon her slave in that languid manner which
bespeaks
the mind occupied in some pleasing reverie,
and then slightly raising herself and altering her
position, in a voice peculiar for its musical tones,
said:
Cyntha, do you hear the dip of oars?
The other listened a moment, and then made
answer: No, missus.
I think your ears are a little dull, Cyntha.
Question the sentinel!
The other instantly disappeared into the larger
cave and quickly returned. O yes, missus right,
massa coming.
As I thought, replied the lady, with a
pleasing
smile. You see, Cyntha, the ears of love
are quick.
O yesum, missus, I knows 'em berry quick.
Well, now, arrange my hair, quickly as
possible
.
The slave sprang to her mistress, with the
agility
of one accustomed to obey with promptness the
slightest command of her superiors, and in a few
moments all was arranged in tasteful order.
Scarcely was it completed, when a heavy tread
was heard in the Outer Cave, and the next
moment
a figure of commanding appearance stood
full in the light of the Chieftain's Chamber. The
lady arose, flew to his arms, and the lips of both
met: then leading her to a sofa, he seated himself
beside her, removing at the same time from his
head a cap of very singular construction, and
exhibiting
a forehead broad and high, surmounted
by glossy raven hair, which fell in ringlets adown
his face and around a neck, whose full, handsome
proportions were indicitive of great muscular
power. His complexion was dark, darker even
than the lady's. His eyes were black and
brilliant
his
features bold, though in outline rather
handsome, and his chin was graced with an
imperial
.
His dress was of a strange order, and seemed
to combine the sailor and the back-woodsmanin
fact he was a man that the most casual observer
would not have passed without a second notice.
Turning to the lady with a look of tender
admiration
,
he threw his arms around her waist, drew
her fondly to him, and again pressed his lips to
hers, saying at the same time, in a low tone:
My Inez looks beautiful to-day!
And Inez is proud that Ronald thinks so,
replied
the lady, with a smile of sweetness, her eyes
beaming with love, and fixed earnestly upon his.
But tell me, Ronald, why have you been thus
long away? Oh, wearily the hours have passed,
and methought last night would never bring a
morn.
Business, Inez, business prolonged my
absence
,
answered the other somewhat hurriedly.
But come, he added, as though to change the
theme, let us have some music! I am sighing
for a tender strain, to drown a world of thought!
Thought, Ronald, thought! what makes you
think? enquired Inez, gazing into his face with a
look of anxiety.
Nothing, love, nothing. Ho! Cynthathe
music! and as the slave brought forward the
guitar, he continued:There Inez, my pretty
one, come, music, music!a song, love, a song!
Inez took the guitar, still eyeing him steadily,
as though there was something in his humor
unnatural
and which she could not comprehend.
Will you not accompany me, Ronald?
No, Inez, I will listen.
What shall I play and sing?
Anything! something wild!
Wild, Ronald?
Wild and sweet, Inez.
Ronald, you are not yourself; and Inez ran
her fingers over the strings, paused and gazed
tenderly
upon him. Something troubles you,
Ronald
.
Tell me, tell your Inez the secret; and
the smile was mournful.
I swear to you it is nothingI am cheerful;
and he turned to her with a smile. But the song!
the song!
Shall it be The Rover?
Ay! The Rover.
Inez made no further remark, but tuning her
instrument, in a voice rich in melody sang
THE ROVER.
Thoughtful he stood
On the mountain's high brow
Sadly he gazed
On the valley below;
For there, 'mid a grove, by a silvery stream,
Was the spot of his childhood, his youth's happy dream.
Sadly he mused
As his look wandered o'er
Childhood's bright scenes,
That must know him no more;
And his eyes they grew dim, and his cheeks they grew
pale,
For he felt he was gazing his last on the vale.
Slowly he turned
From that sweet quiet spot;
One struggle and all
Life's bright scenes seemed forgot;
And far down the mountain the Rover's voice rang,
As in musical tones thus wildly he sang:
`Ha, ha, ha!ha, ha, ha!
I'm a Rover and free;
And the wide world is mine
No shackles for me:
Over mountain and valley,
Over ocean I'll roam;
And the spot that is brightest
Shall give me a home!
`Ha, ha, ha!ha, ha, ha!
I am free as the air;
But ye who have made me.
I charge ye, beware!
For I'll come like the tempest,
In furious wrath,
And wo to ye, wo,
Who have darkened my path!
`Ha, ha, ha!ha, ha, ha!
I laugh at thy scorn,
Proud lady, that dared
To call me lowly horn:
But deem not the Rover
Will ever forget;
And I swear to thee, lady,
We meet again yet.
`Ha, ha, ha!ha, ha, ha!
I will stand by thy side;
Will scoff thee, will taunt thee,
Will humble thy pride!
And loudly I'll laugh,
As on low bended knee,
Thou suest for favor
Of me, lady, me!
`Ha, ha, ha!I go forth,
And the world shall proclaim
In shuddering wonder
The hold Rover's name!
And ye who have forced me
Thus early to care,
Beware of the Rover,
I charge ye, beware!'
Well sung, Inez! exclaimed Ronald, with
animation
,
as the last notes died away. Well sung!
and apropos: there is something in the song much
in unison with my own feelings; and somehow
there seems a connection between the Rover and
myself. Where learned you the song?
In a southern city, of a traveling minstrel.
It reminds me forcibly of my boyhood days,
returned Ronald, with a half-stifled sigh.
Indeed! said Inez, gazing earnestly upon
him. You have often promised me the story of
your birth, Ronald; why not tell it me now?
I would have told you ere this, love; but
somehow
the recalling of the golden days of youth,
the revival of the past, ever tends to make me
sad; and you know I dislike being sad, Inez.
But no matteryou shall have the story now;
there will perhaps never be a time more
appropriate
.
Cyntha, you may leave us; and as the
slave departed, he continued: Prepare yourself
to listenso runs the tale:
England is the land of my nativity. My
mother
,
God rest her soul! I well remember. She was
one of those sweet, gentle, affectionate, sensitive
beings, that occasionally find their way into this
world of sorrow and strife, as though to remind
man if the picture be dark, it has its bright,
sunny spots. She was a woman on whom none
could gaze with feelings of indifference. She
was herself all soul, all feeling; one whose eyes
would ever grow dim at a tale of sorrow. Oh!
how I loved her!with what wild, passionate
devotion! My very existence seemed centered
in hers; and the very idea of a separation by
death would often fill my young eyes with tears.
I remember we lived in comfortable
circumstances
.
We occupied a beautiful little cottage,
surrounded by a landscape variegated and
pleasing
,
stretching far away in gentle undulations,
like the swell of the ocean in a calm, and ending
in hills, which to my young fancy seemed rising
as guardians to overlook and watch the valley
below
.
There was a delightful quiet about the spot,
which even as I recall it lends a soothing
influence
to my restless, turbulent spirit. Near to
our cottage was a shady grove, through which
slowly meandered a lovely stream, on whose
velvet-like
banks I have lingered many an hour,
angling for the finy tribe in its placid bosom. In
the more immediate vicinity of the cottage was
a garden of flowers, of all kinds and hues, and
the walls themselves were shaded by the
creeping
,
clinging ivy. The whole scene might be
described as a perfect picture of domestic
happiness
;
and to this and my mother's gentle
disposition
,
I have ever felt myself indebted for those
finer feelings which are so foreign to my
present
occupation.
But notwithstanding this seeming happiness
(and, alas! reality has taught me that if we
fathom
the human heart we shall find in most cases
that what we took for happiness was but the
seeming
)
there was sorrow even in that cottagein
the heart of my own beloved mother. It often
appeared strange to me, even in my earliest days,
that I never saw my father, that I never heard
my mother speak of him; and when curiosity
excited me to enquire of heras it sometimes
wouldthe reason, she ever grew sad,
melancholy
,
and put me off with the answer that she
would inform me at some future timethat I was
not yet enough advanced in years to understand.
This of course but added fuel to the flame; but
as I saw the question ever pained her, I finally
dropped it altogether, trusting that she would
inform
me in her own good time.
She was a woman of fine taste and education,
and under her own instructions I was early
taught to read and write; and possessing a choice
library of poetry and romance, and my mind
being
naturally bent in that channel, I took to
books with great avidity, and whiled away many
a long evening, or what would otherwise have
been so, in reading to her such passages as I
fancied
most in accordance with her gentle spirit.
Thus passed the first twelve and happiest years
of my existence.
Feeling that I had now arrived at the proper
age, and that it was a duty she owed me, she
determined
on sending me to school; and though
the idea of parting with me was painful, yet as
she felt it was for my own benefit she did so, the
pleadings of duty became paramount to feeling,
and unknown to myself every thing was arranged
for my departure. When she first broke the news
to me, it came like the shock of an unexpected
thunder-bolt; nor could I believe her really in
earnest until she had thrice reiterated it. Never
shall I forget the feelings which the thought of
separation occasioned. Separation had been the
one secret dread of my life; but it had been the
separation of death onlyvoluntary separation
having never entered my mind. She at once
perceived
my feelingsfor they found a sad echo in
her own heart, and by gentle reasoning sought to
convince me of the necessity and benefit of our
parting for a time. She informed me it was in
her power to give me an education; but beyond
that little or nothing; and she felt anxious I should
gain that, which, whatever misfortunes might
befal
me in after years, would ever be mine. I
listened
to her,I saw her mind was bent upon it,
and I acquiesced, without a word of murmur. A
few days and we parted; but sad, most sad, was
the parting. Pardon me, Inez, but the thought of
it makes me childish, and Ronald passed his hand
across his eyes, and for a few moments remained
silent.
Never, he resumed at length, shall I forget
her sweet, mournful features, as she stood gazing
upon me, on the morning of my departure, with
a look wherein was concentrated all the deep
yearnings of a mother's heart, for a son she might
never behold again; and doubtless there was a
presentiment of this kind at work within her,
for when we came to the final adieu, she clasped
me to her heart, almost convulsively,the tears
rolled down her cheeks,and it was with difficulty
she could utter, `God bless you, my son!
farewell
!
If we never meet again'she paused
`forget not my memory!' My feelings, Inez, you
may imagine; I cannot describe themwords are
too weak. Thus we partedRonald paused as
if struggling with some deep emotion, and them
added, faintlyforever!
Forever! exclaimed Inez, involuntarily.
Ay, forever! Butthe story:I must be
more brief. The school to which I was sent was
some hundred miles distant, and was one, if truth
must be said, better calculated to learn me in the
ways and vices of the world, than in knowledge
of books. I was there thrown among all classes,
and left without a guide to choose my
companions
.
Naturally of a bold, reckless disposition, I
unfortunately became a favorite of the worst
class; and by degrees was led into scenes of
revelry
and wickedness, of the existence of which,
ere I went there, I had never even dreamed. It is
unnecessary for me to dwell in detail; suffice it,
therefore, that at the end of three years I left the
school in disgrace. An hour after my dismissal,
I received the news of the death of my mother,
the only friend I had in the world. Oh! what were
my feelings! I have an indistinct recollection of
a pressurea whirla fire in my brain, and I
knew no more. I was madraving mad! The
messenger who bore me the news, bore me home
a maniac. Home, no! Oh God! it was home
no longer! Ere I recovered my reason, my
mother
was mouldering in the dust. I shall not dwell
on my feelings of grief and utter desolation, when
I again comprehended all:the subject is too
painful
,
and other matters press me for narration.
The only legacy left me was a sealed package,
which I opened with a trembling handthe
contents
I distinctly remember, for they are
engraved
upon the very tablets of my heart. A
letter
within, ran thus:
`My dear son, God be with you! I am dying,
and can never see you again on earth, but will in
the land of spirits. My strength is failingI
have but a few minutes to live, and will devote
them to you. You have often questioned me of
your father. I have delayed answering you,but
the time has now come when it is necessary you
should know all. God give me strength to pen,
and you to read the secret of my life!and
Ronald
,
dear Ronald, whatever you do, do not
reproach
,
do not curse my memory! I shall enter
but little into detail, for time and strength will
not permit. At the age of twelve I was left an
orphan, and was taken in charge of some distant
relatives of my mother, with whom I lived in
easy circumstances, until the age of sixteen.
They were not wealthy, and yet had enough
wherewithal to live independent. They treated
me with much affection, and life passed pleasantly
for four years. At the age of sixteen, I
accidentally
became acquainted with Walter
Langdon
,
only son of Sir Edgar Langdon, whose large
estate and residencefor he was very wealthy
was but a few miles distant. He found
opportunity
and declared his attachment, but at the
same time informed me that our relations on either
side would be opposed to our union, and begged
me to make no mention of it, but to prepare
myself
and elope with him; that when the ceremony
was over, and no alternative, all parties would
become reconciled. He was young, handsome, and
accomplishedhis powers of conversation
brilliant
.
He plead with a warmth of passion I could
not withstandfor know, Ronald, I loved him,
with the ardent first love of a girl of sixteen, and
I consented. Alas! Ronald, that I am forced to
tell you more: this rash act was my ruin!
`My strength is failing so rapidly I cannot
enter
into particulars, my son,and yet, why should
I?they would only pain you to read, and me to
write. Suffice, Ronald, that he deceived meI
became his victim--and you, Oh God! you are
the offspring of our guilt.
`Shortly after this I learned, to my horror, that
he had united himself with a lady of wealth. He
afterward saw me and offered me the reparation
of money:alas! what a reparation to one whose
hopes were ruined! Had it not been for you, my
son, I never would have lived to feel my disgrace.
As it was, I accepted his offer, on condition that
he would never see me more. To this he
reluctantly
consented, and gave me a life lease of the
place where you were reared, and settled on me
a certain annuity, which ceases at my death. By
economy I have been enabled to save a thousand
pounds, which is here enclosed. Take it,
Ronald
,
and may God enable you to live an honest
life. Poor boy! you are homelessfriendless,
for she who has watched over and loved you as
only a mother can, will, ere this reaches you, be
in her grave. God support you, dear Ronald!
But for the thought of your grief and suffering,
I could die contented. I have, save you, no
friend on earth,all have thrown me off and
treated me with contempt. Well, well, it is all
for the best; may God forgive them! It is a just
punishment for my sin; and yet it is hardvery,
very hard. Oh! Ronald--dear, dear Ronald!--
that I could see you once againcould clasp you
once more to this broken heartcould feel you
close my aching eyes!but no! no! it cannot
bedeath is upon me! I feel it in my palsying
limbsmy leaden eye-lids--my struggling breath.
I would advise you, but I cannot; I leave you to
act as you think proper; but, my son, do nothing
rash! Oh! Ronald, do not curse me!will you?
Oh! if I but knew you would forgive me!but
ah!God!I am going. Adieu! adieu!Ronald,
bear your mother's name, and drop a tear upon
the earth that covers her. Farewellfarewell!
Clarrisse Bonardi
.'
Oh! Gods! Inez, what think you were my
feelings, when I read this? It seemed as though
all the demons of hell itself were at work within
my heart! Is this the world? cried I. Do men
live and pass unpunisheday! and more!are
they courted by the world, that trample upon and
break the hearts of God's loveliest images? Does
society uphold men in deeds of wickedness that
would even blacken the character of hell's
archfiend
?
Do they drag man before their mock
tribunals, and sentence him to rot in prison,
because
necessity forced him to take a morsel of
bread to save himself and offspring from
starvation
?
Is this society?is this the boasted land
of justice and religion? Then deliver me from
it!then let me war against it!ay! let me be
an outlaw from that society, which is itself an
outlaw from all that is good! Such were the
thoughts, Inez, that rushed forth from my
burning
brain! Boy I was in years, but boy no longer!
I felt I was alone in a world black, with sin, and
must choose and act for myself. Nor was I
without
experience. The last three years of my life,
if not in book learning, had advanced me much in
knowledge of the world. A change had come
over me. Once I thought of nothing but
innocent
affections and happy dreams of the future.
Now clouds dark and gloomy rose in wild
fantastic
shapes before me. And life, what was it?
and what was I? What hopes had I of
brightness
?
A being of noble birth, but not I galized
by the laws of the land, sent into the world to be
the jeer of my fellows! I, son of Sir Walter
Langdon
for
he had now assumed the title of his
father, deceasedwho by right should claim his
affection, to be looked upon by himby my own
fatheras a being low-born, and perhaps spurned
from his presence, should I seek him out? Oh!
how these thoughts crowded upon me!
I went abroad, young as I was, and visited the
principal cities of Europe. At the end of three
years I returned to England, exhausted in funds,
and for the first time determined on visiting my
father. I sought him out and stood before him.
He demanded my name and business. My name,
I replied, is one you will long remember: Ronald
Bonardi, or Ronald Langdon, as circumstances
may be. He turned pale and his eye sunk before
my steady gaze; then recovering his
self-possession
,
he bade me begone and never enter his
presence
againsaid he knew me notthat I was a
base imposter! Oh! Inez, that moment had
nearly
been fatal to him, such a wild passion was
aroused within me! I could feel the blood drop
by drop retreating to my heart, and I fairly reeled.
Such words from my fatherfrom the author of
my existencenearly dethroned my reason! By
a mighty effort I conquered myself and replied,
my lips quivering with suppressed passion, that
I would leave on
one
condition and never see him
more. He demanded it. Money! was my only
answer. He gave me money and I left; but ere I
did, I told him the orphan's curse was on him;
ay! father though he was, I cursed and left him
trembling. That curse, Inez, was fulfilled
terribly
fulfilled. His wife, then in the bloom of health,
shortly after died. His son, near my own age,
was murdered. His daughter, then some three
years of age, disappeared suddenly; and he, to
sum up, survived but a few monthsdying a
maniacand his estate passed into the hands of
another. By what singular fatality I was avenged,
I know not; but so was the termination.
I came to America, and caring little what
became
of me, led a dissolute life. For twelve years
I traveled through the States a professional
gambler
.
This course of life tended to harden me to
almost any deed whereby I might be the gainer in
the shape of gold, that glittering earth to which all
classes bow in humble reverence. By chance I
fell in with a lawless band of desperadoes, who,
through a fancy I never could account for, chose
me for their leader. I accepted the office on
condition
that I should have absolute sway so long
as remained their chief, and that they would
allow
me to organize them as I saw proper. To
this, without a dissenting voice, they consented,
and I was elected captain for the term of five
years. My first proceeding was to find a safe
rendezvous and establish such a code of laws as I
deemed most beneficial to us as a body. This was
done, and it is needless to tell you this was the
place chosen for our secret retreat. For two years,
Inez, ere I saw you, I led a wild life; and though
by my deeds I made myself an outlaw, yet to this
day my hands are free from the stain of blood; still
I fear, if, I remain much longer chief, I shall have
to put in force a law, which, as executioner, will
not leave me guiltless.
What mean you, Ronald? asked Inez,
quickly
,
who had been listening to his story with
breathless
attention.
There is disaffection creeping into our ranks,
which I fear will result in treachery and mutiny.
Some evidences I have already seen. To the
offender
the punishment is death by the hands of the
chief.
God save you from such a crime! dear
Ronald
,
cried Inez, throwing her arms around his
neck and gazing tenderly upon him.
Ah! gentle Inez, said Ronald, with deep
emotion, tenderly embracing her, why should
fate doom you to be linked to a bandit chief?
Was there no better destiny in store for you?
I murmur not, Ronald, replied Inez, sweetly.
True, you do not; yet am I not blind to your
feelings. When first I saw you, dearest Inez,
three years since, I felt what it was to lovenever
till then. In disguise I sought your
acquaintance
;
in disguise I won your affections; but my
love was deep and true, and in disguise I could not
wed you. No! base as I had beenbase as I
then wasa bandit chiefan outlaw from society
I could not farther deceive the only being I
loved on earth. It was painful, very painful, to
think that I must tear myself from you, and
perchance
never see you more. Oh! how many
sleepless nights it cost me! how much heart
rending
misery! But my resolution was taken. I
loved you, and would not drag you to perdition.
I would tell you all and part forever. I told you all;
but O, what was my surprisemy joywhen
instead
of spurning me from your sight, you told
me with your own sweet lips our fates were one!
For a time, sweet Inez, I could not believe it
reality
;
that there was for the outcast so much joy
in store; but the altar proved it true. Since then,
Inez, I have never been the same being. Then,
for the first time in my long career of crime, did I
feel guilt; for the first time sighed to be an honest
man. But my oath as bandit chief bound me for
five years. I could not break it, and three years
had yet to expire. Those three years, Inez, you
have shared with me; have been the sunlight of
my existence; have tended to make me a better
man. To-day my term of office expires, and I am
released from my oath.
To-day, Ronald, dear Ronald! cried Inez, in
a transport of joy; and you will leave this place
then, will you not?
Ah! Inez, that is what troubles me. To-night
a leader must be chosen. By a law which with
us is as unchangeable as those of the Medes and
Persians, if one of our band be chosen without a
dissenting vote, to the office of chief, he is bound
to accept. If but one vote be cast against him he
can act his pleasuretwo-thirds of the members
present being sufficient, if in favor, to constitute
him duly elected. I fear a re-election without a
dissenting voice.
But can you not bribe some one to vote against
you?
The offer, Inez, is punishable with death. No!
I must bide the result, and that result I fear. I
would that I could be released and left to retire to
some secluded spot in quiet to enjoy the company
of my own dear Inez. But I am a child of fate
and must submit to the decree of destiny. If I am
again elected, as I said before, I fear I shall, in my
official capacity, be compelled to act in a manner
foreign to my present feelings. Besides, we have
of late been very inactive, and there has been
dissatisfaction
expressed in regard to it by some of
the members. Already preparations are being
made
for an attack on a rich planter, whose estate
lying
in Tennessee, borders on the Mississippi in
a manner
favorable to our design; and I, as captain
of the banditti, must head the expedition.
Alas! Ronald, sighed Inez, sorrowfully.
Alas! Inez, returned Ronald, that fate
should will it. Ah! fate! fate! Without there,
ho! who knocks? This was addressed to some
one in the Outer Cave, who had given the signal
for the chief, by three distinct raps on the wall.
The presence of our captain is needed, was
the reply.
I come, returned Ronald; and pressing his
lips once more to those of Inez, he hastily arose
and quitted the apartment. Inez gazed after him
in silence for a time; and then bending over her
guitar, sung a low, sweet, mournful strain.
CHAPTER II.
THE MEETING OF THE BANDITTITHE ADDRESSTHE
SUSPICIONTHE ELECTIONTHE APPOINTMENT
THE INITIATIONTHE OATH.
The night succeeding the day in which we have
introduced the reader into the grand rendezvous
of the banditti, was densely dark. Clouds low and
heavy canopied the heavens and veiled the light
of moon and stars. To add to the gloom without,
was a thick fog and drizzly rain, which completely
forbade all objects to the eye, unless aided by
artificial light. Within the larger cave, running
through its centre, was a row of torches, whose
red, flickering glare gave each thing a somewhat
sombre and fantastical appearance. Near the
farther
end stood a group of four figures, coarsely
habited, whose large statures and brawny limbs
gave evidence of great animal power. Their
features
,
by the light of the torches, were anything
but preposessing, and varied in expression only by
the inner workings of fierce passions. They were
evidently on some exciting topic, for their
gesticulations
were quick and fierce, their language low
and energetic, occasionally mingled with a
guttural
oath, which, like the distant sound of
thunder
,
told of the accumulating storm of passion ere
long to burst in fury on some devoted head.
Neither
of them wore coat or vest; but a coarse shirt
covered their shoulders, and being entirely open
in front, left their broad, bronzed bosoms free.
With the exception of one, their muscular arms
were bare; this exception being doubtless caused
by an accident, as the owner carried his arm in a
sling. Around each waist passed a belt, in which,
convenient to the hand, were placed pistols, knives
and daggers, ready for use at any moment. For
some time the conversation, as we have said, was
low and hurried; but at length a voice, as though
passion had got the better of prudence, exclaimed
somewhat loudly:
Hang me, but they shall both die! I
Hush, fool! interrupted another; would ye
spoil all with your imprudence? We may be
overheard, he added, in a lower tone, and again
the voices died away to a murmur. Leaving them
to the plotting of their own dark deeds, we will
now turn our attention to another part of the cave.
We have previously mentioned, that to enter
this retreat, you must descend abruptly some
fifteen
feet. This was done by means of a ladder,
which could be removed at a moment's notice. At
the foot of this ladder, day and night, paced a
sentinel
,
whose imperious orders were to admit no
one, not even the chief himself, without the
password
and countersign; and furthermore, should
any individual, be he chief or not, persist in
advancing
without giving both pass-word and
countersign
,
after being three times warned of the
consequences, it should be the duty of the
sentinel
to fire on said person with intent to take life;
in failure whereof, or being found asleep on his
post, his own life was the forfeit. For farther
safety against a sudden attack, was a trap door
exactly
under the entrance, so constructed, that by
touching a secret spring it would fly open and
leave an aperture some fifty feet in depth, at the
bottom of which were sharp stones, so placed that
no living body could fall on them from above and
survive the shock.
At the foot of the ladder mentioned, on the
evening in question, paced the sentinel, with the
steady gait and regular wheel of an old soldier
bearing on his shoulder a rifle. For some minutes
nothing was heard but the murmur of the voices
already spoken of, and his own measured tread.
At length a sound, like the plash of an oar, fell
upon his ear. Suddenly pausing, he bent his head
forward in a listening attitude; and then, as if
satisfied
all was right, resumed his walk. But little
time elapsed ere the sound of oars was heard
distinctly
,
and the hum of voices from without.
Directly
came a sound like the striking of an oar
three times flatwise upon the water, when the
sentinel paused, and in a quick, sharp voice, sung
out:
Heta benare?
[1]
[1]
Meaning: Who goes there?
Ele lio!
Meaning: A friend.
was the answer.
Come forward and give the pass and
countersign
!
A figure instantly stood in the mouth of the
cave, crossed his arms on his breast, drew a
dagger from his belt, passed it across his neck,
touched the point to his heart, and returned it;
all of which was done with a rapid motion,
uttering
,
at the same time, the pass-word: Eliona!
All rightdescend! returned the sentinel;
and as the figure passed down, another stood in
the entrance, went through the same ceremony,
and was followed in quick succession by some
fifty others. At length the signal was given that
all had entered, and the last comer took up his
position as sentinel on the outside of the cave,
while the other kept his round within as usual.
The group we have mentioned previously, on
the entrance of the new comers dispersed and
mingled with them. For some ten minutes there
was a general hum of voices, engaged on different
topics, when suddenly Ronald came forth from
the Chieftain's Chamber, and all was silent. With
a dignified step he proceeded to and mounted the
platform or stand, where he was greeted with three
loud, hearty cheers. As he listened to this
spontaneous
tribute to his popularity, his dark eye
flashed, a look of pride shot across his stern, dark
features, and raising his hand to command silence,
he thus addressed the assemblage:
Gentlemen and brothers:To me, I must
confess
,
the present moment is a proud one; for it
revives
the time when, with one universal voice as
it were, you proclaimed me your captaingave
me, a stranger, your confidence; which you are
aware, as well as myself, was no less than placing
your lives at my disposal; and shows that your
confidence in me is still unshaken. Five years
ago, this night, I was elected your chief; in
doing
which you made my simplest word an imper
ative law. That you should confer at a venture
such honor, such absolute rule, on myself, on one
you had never even proved, was, and remains to
this day with me a matter of surprise and
mystery
.
What I had done previously to merit your
confidence, I know not; but I felt at that
moment
,
gentlemen, that as you considered me
worthy
to govern you, I would throw the whole
strength of my mind, would concentrate my whole
thoughts upon one theme, which should be for
your prosperity; and to prove, if possible, your
confidence not misplaced. That I have succeeded,
I
feel
in the welcome sound of your glad voices.
He paused, and a universal shout echoed through
the cave.
For five years, he resumed, I have been your
leader; and by this means, as you are well aware,
have made myself an outlaw, and a price has been
set on the head of the bandit chief. That I do not
fear being betrayedthat I do not fear,
notwithstanding
this, to mingle in society, even where
danger is the most apparentyou, gentlemen,
from my actions, can bear ample witness: but,
gentlemen, in regard to this matter for the future,
I would ask a favor.
You are aware, at least most of you, that three
years ago I married Inez Orlandia lady of noble
descent, whose self-sacrificing love was such that
she chose life with me, a bandit, rather than a
higher destinyor at least what the world would
term a higherwith another. Since then,
gentlemen
,
as you have doubtless perceived, I have
never been the same beinghave never taken the
same interest in the rough sports of our wild life.
To-night you again choose a leader for another
five years; and the favor I would ask of you
is, that you will exempt me from your choice.
Let a division of all our spoils be made, and let
me, gentlemen, retire into private life. It is the
wish, save your prosperity, nearest my heart; and
I await your answer. Again he paused, and the
cave was silent as the hall of death; not even so
much as a whisper relieved the stillness. Each
appeared taken by surprise, and awaiting the
answer
of his neighbor.
Ronald cast a hurried glance over the
assemblage
,
and read in their grave and saddened
countenances
,
as one used to reading the thoughts
of the heart by the features, that he would meet
with opposition in this respect, even from those
who loved him best; that save him there was
no one in whom they would be united; that, in
short, he was the man of their choice, without
whom disorganization must take place. There
is, in all, who possess strong feelings, an innate
pride in being thought the first in his profession
even though that profession be to gamble or
steal; a secret satisfaction in knowing that in his
line he is popular, and feeling himself that he
excels
.
Such thoughts, such feelings, were busy in
the breast of Ronald, as his eye ran over the
group; and pride and regret were struggling
within
him for the mastery. Pride, that his services
were held in such high esteem by those who had
tried himregret, that he could not retire in
seclusion
to enjoy life with his own loved Inez.
But the struggle was but momentary. Pride was,
perhaps, his ruling passion; and even here pride
prevailed. He could not look upon their
earnest
,
saddened faces, at his loss, unmoved; and
with an animated eye, and a flush on his strongly
marked features, that gave him an almost noble
look, in a voice of some emotion, he said.
Gentlemen, you speak not, and yet I am
answered
;
ay, loudly answered, in the silence that
reigns around mein the sad faces of those who
were wont to be joyous in my success;and,
gentlemen
,
let me tell you, whatever may have been
my feelings in asking, I am truly proud of your
answer. Yes! gentlemen, you have decided my
fate! Henceforth I am with youwith my life
will I serve you!
It would be impossible to describe the scene
of joyous excitement that followed this
announcement
.
We shall not attempt it. Suffice, that
never before had the cave echoed such prolonged
and deafening cheers; and even Inez, who sat
with her head bent forward, in the Inner Cave,
raised it with a look of pride, although she felt
her fondest hopes were forever destroyed. When
the tumult had a little subsided, so that he could
be heard, Ronald resumed:
Gentlemen, let us to business! I pray you
be seated, that we may proceed in order.
Piketon
,
you will call the roll! As he spoke, each
quietly took his seat on one of the benches before
spoken of as ranging along the walls, with the
exception of the one called Piketon, who stepped
forward and mounted the platform beside the
captain
.
He was a tall, broad-shouldered, muscular
man, with tolerably good features,an eye black
and piercing, dark hair, Roman noseof a look
rather stern than villainous, and some thirty
years of age. There was, too, about him an
expression
of intelligence superior to most of those
present. As he came upon the stand, Ronald
handed him a paper, containing the names of the
members, which he called off in a clear, distinct
voice, pricking those from whom no answer was
returned.
How many present? enquired Ronald.
Piketon ran his eye over the list and answered:
Sixty-seven, excluding the sentinels.
Who stands on duty at the cave?
Moorehead and Farrar.
Morris and Parker guard the Entrance,
returned
Ronald, which adds four, leaving absent
twenty-one: am I right?
Piketon again ran his eye over the list, counting
the names pricked, and answered: You are,
captain
.
Four of the absentLemly, Davis, Sulton
and Vanceyou may strike off altogether, said
Ronald, sadly:they are written on the roll of
eternity! Alas! poor fellows! they met with
untimely
fatesthe first two shot, the last two
hunga warning that we should be prudent, or
like fates may be our own. Fourteen of the
absent
I can account for; and he mentioned their
names. They are scattered throughout the
United
Statestwo in New Orleans, five in New York,
one in Boston, two in Philadelphia, two in
Baltimore
,
and two in Cincinnati. They are on secret
service, acting under my instructions, and with
whom I am holding regular correspondence; by
which means I am informed of every thing that
tends to the benefit of our societysuch as the
description of travelers bound for the West, who
are supposed to carry money, and the best method
of obtaining it; which, as you are aware,
gentlemen
,
we have not unfrequently done by
gambling
.
Many of you have, at different times,
expressed
wonder that I knew so well how to choose
my victims; and I have deemed it no more than
right, on the present occasion, to explain; for I
feel you are all entitled to my confidence.
A murmur of delighted surprise, at their
captain's
ingenuity, now ran among the assemblage,
and ended in a hearty cheer, with: Long live
Ronald Bonardi!
Great astonishment, I ween, continued the
captain, with a smile, would some of the nabobs
feel, did they know, when sitting down to a quiet
game of cards with me, a fellow-traveler, that
they would rise completely fleeced by Ronald
Bonardi
,
a bandit chief. But come, he added,
turning
to Piketon, let us finish our business. There
are three names not yet accounted for: you will
call them!
Again Piketon scanned the list closely, and after
a moment's pause, said: The missing are
Garrish
,
Riley, and David the Jew.
Ha! exclaimed Ronald, pressing his nether
lip between his teeth, as though struck by a
sudden
thought:The Jew! not here? I know not
why, but I half suspect Ben David meditates foul
play.
And I'll swear to 't, cap'en, spoke a gruff
voice, from one of the benches.
An electric thrill appeared to run through the
assemblage, and several of the party sprang to
their feet, grasping the handles of their weapons
as though to draw them.
Pray, be seated, gentlemen, said Ronald,
waiving
his hand, and let the accuser stand forth.
The request was immediately obeyed; and the
individual
previously mentioned as having his arm
in a sling, stepped forward. He was a man of
large frame, mostly bone and muscle, having a
head much too large for his body, with features
coarse and repulsivepartly covered by a rough,
dirt-brown bearda large nose, and an eye every
way villainous. His hair was of a similar color
to his beardwas long, coarse and matted; and
he was, besides, stoop-shouldered and bow-legged;
in short, a man where the animal was wholly
predominant
.
His age might be forty.
Ha! Curdish, continued Ronald, eyeing him
steadily, is it you, his friend, that accuse him?
I don't exactly reckon myself his friend,
growled Curdish, with an oath; though I have
did him some favors.
By reason of which you have doubtless
suffered
some of late, added Ronald, pointing to his
arm. How happened it, Jack?
Curdish glanced at his arm, and his features
grew more fierce and his eye more villainous, as
he replied: Well, yes, I got a little hurt thar', in
a scrimmage on his account; but and he
uttered
a horrible oathI'll be even with the
rascals
yit, or I aint what I used to be.
If all I learn is true, Curdish, you deserved
what you got, and more! returned Ronald,
knitting
his brows, and eyeing him sternly; but of
this another time. Of what do you accuse the
Jew? Beware, now, of your accusation! for if
false, you know the penalty.
I can't read, and I don't know how the law
runs, said Curdish, somewhat doggedly.
I will inform you then, rejoined Ronald; and
stooping down, he unlocked a small trap-door in
the floor of the ptatform on which he stood, took
therefrom a parchment, turned to the light,
examined
it a moment, and read as follows:
Sec. II, Art. IX
. If any member shall be
known to give any evidence against another
member
that is not strictly true, or which may be
proved to be false, he shall suffer death, as
provided
under the Black Law, in Article XV of
Section
I: which is, added Ronald, to be publicly
shot by the captain of the band, and his body
thrown to wild beasts. You understand the law
4
on this point now, Curdish, so proceed! Of what
do you accuse the Jew?
Curdish appeared somewhat staggered at the
consequences of a false statement, and his face
grew a shade paler, as he replied: I'm not
exactly
ready to prove what I's going to say,
cap'en.
Then you had better not say it, answered
Ronald. You can tell me of your suspicions
privately, and I will take measures to learn
whether or no they be well founded. You may
resume your place; and I trust, for the future,
ere you offer to swear to a thing, you will at least
know yourself of what you intend to swear, or
the terminus may not be agreeable. As I said,
you may resume your place and take part in the
business of the evening; after which you will
consider yourself under arrest, as there are other
matters of which I wish to question you!
But cap'en
No more! said Ronald, sternly, waiving his
hand. Curdish bit his lips and slowly retired.
`Gentlemen, continued the captain, trust
me, all shall be properly looked to; and if I find a
traitor among ushe set his teeth close and laid
his hand upon a pistol in his beltby Heaven,
he dies! But to our business. You will now
proceed
,
gentlemen, to the election of your captain.
Let each vote for him he deems most capable and
worthy of holding the office. Piketon, you will
go to each member present and take down the
name of his choice. Piketon obeyed, and in a
few minutes returned to the stand and said:
Ronald Bonardi is re-elected captain of this band,
for the term of five years, without a dissenting
vote. The announcement was followed by three
hearty cheers, and Long live Ronald Bonardi!
When the noise had again subsided, Bonardi
said: Contrary to my wish, gentlemen, when I
came before you this evening, I find that I have
been unanimously chosen your leader for another
term. I shall endeavor to fulfil my duties
faithfully
;
and, gentlemen, let me add, strictly. I fear,
by some evidences which have of late come before
meand he glanced at Curdishthat I have
been heretofore too lenienttoo negligent. I
shall make the future atone for the past; and
whoever
among you breaks a law, though he be my
bosom friend, I swear to you he shall suffer the
penaltyeven though that penalty be his death
by my hands! Let each and all of you bear this
in mind and seriously reflect upon it.
We, gentlemen, are outlaws; we war upon
society
;
but, mark me, we war only upon the rich
and avaricious! Most of us have had causes for
forsaking that society, those laws which govern
the mass. Those causes have been various; and
yet, in the end, they almost invariably resolve
themselves into one cause; which is, that society
and its laws did not protect, did not do us justice.
But notwithstanding we separate from the mass,
we must have laws of our own; and by those laws
we must abide. Notwitstanding we are outlaws,
warring against the nabobs of the world; against
those who, had they the power, would trample us
under their feet; let us not forget that we are men,
and that we have no right to touch the humble,
the innocent, the defenceless. No! whatever we
do, let us bear in mind that they are exempt from
our encroachments. But above all, gentlemen,
under no circumstances whatever let our hands be
raised against women! Let them be sacred in our
eyes! Let us remember that what they are, so
are, or were, our mothers, our sisters and, with
many of you I can add, our wives! Gentlemen,
I ask this of you as men, as brothers, with whose
fate my own is now linked! I ask it of you in
formal declaration! I ask you to swear it, by
rising
to your feet! He paused, and almost
simultaneously
the assemblage arose. Some few were
rather tardyamong whom was Curdishbut all
finally stood upon their feet.
Be seated, gentlemen, resumed Ronald; it is
enough; you have all sworn, and it is now become
a law; and a law let him break who dares!for by
all I hold sacred, I swear to you, whoever shall
dare to violate it, I will slay, so help me God!
and his close shut teeth, his compressed lips and
flashing eyes, as he gazed on his audience, told
them it was no idle threat.
As I find, gentlemen, continued he, in
tending
to my various business affairs, that I require
some one to fill my place when absent, I have
concluded
to appoint me a lieutenant, whom you will
all respect and obey as myself. He is one well
known among you, well tried and proved to be
worthy of the responsible office, and I trust you
will approve my choice. Piketon, added he,
turning
to that individual, henceforth you are second
in command; let your duty be done faithfully!
A prolonged cheer of satisfaction responded to
this announcement. Piketon, much embarrassed,
was about to reply, but Ronald stopped him with:
Nay, no remarks; and approaching, he put
upon his finger a ring, adding: This, Piketon,
is your badge of office. Gentlemen, you will all
remember it, there is but one other like it, and
you will all respect either whenever seen.
Turning
to Piketon, in a low voice not heard by the
others, he continued: You will order Garrish,
Riley and David under arrest, to meet here as soon
as possible. If they dispute your authority, show
them the ring. If they refuse then to comply,
make their lives the penalty! If you choose, take
with you some trusty followers.
Your orders, captain, shall be obeyed to the
letter, returned the lieutenant, respectfully.
Ronald again turned to the audience.
Gentlemen
,
the attack we have of late been planning
on the Tennessee planter, I shall not touch upon
to-night. It may be advantageous and it may not.
I will think more upon it, and mayhap something
better will take its place. Is there any other
business
before the meeting?
Piketon whispered in his ear.
Ah! true, true, he resumed, I had
forgotten
;
where is he?
He waits in a boat on the creek, answered
Piketon.
Gentlemen, John Webber wishes to become a
member of our fraternity. You know him, some
of you have tried him, know you ought why we
should not admit him?
We do not, answered several voices.
Enough! Moorehead, give Farrar the signal
to admit Webber!
The sentinel within made a low peculiar
whistle
,
which was answered from without, and
directly
a figure stood in the entrance, gave the pass
and countersign, and descended the ladder. He
was very wet, for it still continued raining; and as
he came forward, the torches threw their lurid
glare upon features which a close observer might
have seen were pale from excitement. Piketon
stepped forward and conducted him to the stand.
Bonardi addressed him:
Webber, I understand you wish to join our
fraternity. You of course are not ignorant that in
doing so you are joining a band outlawed by
society
;
that in doing so you become an outlaw also,
and place yourself in a position not envied by
those who have received from society proper
treatment
.
What object may have induced you to this
step, it is not my purpose to enquire; enough that
you have desired to take it, knowing that you are
becoming a brother with those whose deeds by the
world are considered crimescrimes too, which
are punished with imprisonment and sometimes
death. You are doubtless aware also, that in
joining
us you are binding yourself to us in a manner
that makes your life no longer your own, but a
property of the whole; ready to be sacrificed in
defence of the whole, should necessity require it, at
any moment. As you are bound to us, so are we
bound to you; and if in difficulty, we are bound as
a body, if possible, to rescue you, even at the peril
of our own lives. In joining us you become a
partner in all our spoils, in all our dangers, in all
our triumphs, in all our troubles. These matters
of course you understand?
Webber bowed.
It now only remains, then, for me to
administer
the oath. You will please hold up your right
hand!
Webber complied.
By this token of assent, you, John Webber,
in the presence of Almighty God, and these
witnesses
,
solemnly swear that you will devote your
life to us and our cause, so long as we remain a
band; that you will abide by all our laws, stand
ready to uphold them under all difficulties, under
all circumstances whatever; in failure whereof,
you ardently pray us to take your life as a
sacrifice
,
and the Author of your being to condemn you
to eternal torments forever and ever!in further
confirmation of which, you will kneel, repeat this
oath and sign our constitution.
These requisitions being complied with, Ronald
continued: You are now a brother; and after a
pause, added emphatically:
Forget not your
oath!
Piketon, you will read our laws and
bylaws
,
that he may not plead ignorance should he
transgress, which I pray God he may not do! for
I have sworn to inflict the penalty set to each law,
on him who breaks it; and I now again swear that
I will keep my oath!and, Piketon, you will add
the law of this evening, regarding women, the
innocent
and defenceless.
After this had been gone through with
occupying
some half hour moreRonald said:
Gentlemen
,
for your attention this evening I thank
you. Our business is now closed. What, ho!
Cyntha!the wine! and as the slave came forth
from the Chieftain's Chamber, he added:
Gentlemen
,
make yourselves happy; there is wine,
and cards for those who wish to play; but I pray
you be as quiet as possible, and no quarreling!
When through with your pastime, return
peaceably
to your homes, and when anything of
importance
occurs you shall be duly warned. I shall
now retire. Piketon, you will preside in my
place; and with a graceful bow, Ronald entered
the Chieftain's Chamber and joined his own
beloved
Inez, who was sitting expectant.
All passed off quietly, and ere daylight most of
the party were on their way to their several places
of abode, which were scattered throughout the
adjoining
countrymany of them being regular
settlers
.
Some few, however, remainedhaving
partaken rather too freely of the wine; but with
the exception of Curdish and four others retained
as sentinels, all departed on the following day.
CHAPTER III.
THE CRISIS OF THE INVALIDTHE STROLLTHE
MEDITATIONTHE LANDSCAPETHE VILLAIN
THE TERRIBLE THREAT.
It may be said and with truth, that the heart in
a great measure governs the vision, and gives to
objects coming before the eye their light and dark
phases. But few stop to reason and realize how
much this is the case in our every day life. One
day every thing we behold is bright and joyous,
another day dark and gloomy,and yet the same
heavens are above us, the same earth at our feet,
the same sounds of tuneful nature around us.
One day every person we meet wears a cheerful
smile, another day all seem to frown; and we are
apt to think, like the man, who, becoming
intoxicated
,
regretted that all his friends were so, and
wondered much the very trees should keep them
company, while he walked perfectly sober; we
are apt, we say, to think all others at fault, when
in fact the whole change lies with ourself, and
the discord arises from our own heart-strings being
out of tune.
The transition from gloom to joy is oftentimes
rapid; and when so, always exhilerating. It
gives elasticity to all our movements, and we feel
running through our whole being a thrill of
indiscribable
pleasure, almost amounting to
intoxication
.
Such were the feelings pervading the
different
members, now constituting the family of
Webber
,
some ten days from the preceding events.
The day was beautiful; one of those that ever
seem to harmonize best with the upreaching
poetry
of a rejoicing heart. One of those days that
seem to let Heaven down a little nearer to us
making us feel as though we could love every
thing we see, rejoice in every sound we hear.
The sun rose in splendor and poured his bright
beams through a deep blue sky, where not a cloud
floated to intercept his rays even for a moment,
like a young heart free from the cloud-spots of
a yet untried world. The air was soft, and as it
gently floated along, stirring the leaves and
kissing
the flowers, it stole the perfume of the latter
and bore it on to refresh all who should inhale it.
The little birds had not forgotten it was a joyous
day, and their sweet songs went up in gentle
chorus
to their Maker, filling the air with melody.
In the cottage of Webber we have said there was
cheerfulness on every countenance. Each moved
with an elastic step and bounding heart, and each
in their own way felt happy.
Perhaps we never experience happiness equal to
that which succeeds a time of gloom and
desponcy
;
and the reader will remember we left the
family
of Webber in gloom, caused by the sudden
illness of one beloved by all. It is natural to
infer
then, that the change which had taken place
in the feelings of all, sprung from the change for
the better which had taken place in the sufferer.
Such was the fact. For nine days Rufus had
lain in a state so critical that life and death might
be said to be in an equal contest for the mastery.
Night and day a watcher had stood by his
bedside
,
fearful to turn away for a moment, lest the
slightest negligence should prove fatal. For
several
days and nights his mother never quitted his
sidewatching him with all the deep anguish a
mother's heart can feel for one she loves, when
beholding that one racked by pains she would give
her own life to alleviateand then leaving only
because worn out nature forced her to repose.
But her place had been supplied by one, who, if
she did not love him so deeply, at least loved him
with a tender sister's love. Yes, the noble
hearted
,
gentle Emily Nevance had stood by his side,
like some angel of the Spirit Land awaiting to
bear him to the abode of the blest; and what is
strange too, he had ever seemed more at ease, had
ever remained more quiet when she was present.
He had been at times wild and delirious, and for
hours would rave incoherently when she was
absent
,
occasionally uttering a detached sentence so
as to be understood: God, it is my doom! Emily
never more: 'Tis pasttis past!from which
those who heard him could glean nothing, save
that there was some deep trouble on his mind, some
inward working they could not fathom,but
strange, we say, it was, that when Emily was
present, although he did not seem to recognise
her, he ever remained quiet; and sometimes a
wan smile would steal over his pale, thin features,
like a faint ray of sunlight lingering upon some
decaying structure. What was there in her
presence
that could so effect the invalid? Could it be
that her gentle spirit had action upon his?that
there was a secret communion, unknown to either,
between them? It had been noticed by Emily,
had been noticed by others, and had been
commented
on by the different members of the
household
among
whom we must reckon our former
acquaintances, Bernard and Tyrone, who still
remained
.
It had been noticed too by the
physician
;
but noticed only as a fact he could not
account
for. There was a cause for it undoubtedly;
and perhaps one, the father of the sick one, had
vaguely divined that cause; but if so, he told it not,
and with the rest, even with Emily herself, it yet
remained a mystery.
The evening previous to the opening of this
chapter had been an eventful one. Nine days of
anxiety had passed wearily away, when the
physician
foresaw that a crisis was at hand which
must terminate in life or death. He had, as
before
stated, marked the effect of Emily's presence
on the invalid, and consequently gave orders that in
this trial none should be present but herselfno,
not even the mother. The order had been obeyed;
but oh! who can tell that mother's feelings, when
she knew that a few hours must decide the fate
of her darling childperhaps to terminate in death
and she not be with him to gaze upon his
treasured
features, nor press her lips again to his in
life? Oh! what years of agony were in those few
hours of suspense!
On the evening in question then,the ninth
from his attackEmily took her position, alone,
by the side of Rufus, and watched him with
painful
feelings. He had sunk into a deep sleep, a
sleep almost like death itself, for scarcely was his
breathing perceptible. She knew from that
sleep he would never wake, or wake to life free
from danger. All was silent, as though death
were already there. A dim light, standing some
distance back, gave a twilight shade to the whole
apartment; and she could barely discern the
outline
of his pale, marble-like features, which she
sometimes fancied were already stiffening in
death. As she occasionally gazed upon him, an
indescribable awe crept over her. Was he dead
had his bright spirit gone forever? she would
sometimes question herself; and then the thought,
if such was the case, what agony would be hers to
witness in beholding the anguish of his mother,
who with the rest of the occupants were waiting
in gloomy silence the signal from her to weep or
rejoicemade her feel more gloomy and
depressed
.
Thus passed two hourstwo long trying hours
and yet no change; the sufferer had moved not,
and she began to fancy his spirit had passed quietly
away. With a trembling hand she raised the
light, approached, and held it near his features.
All was calmhe did not seem to breathe. She
bent down her head, but could hear no sound
indicating
life. He is gone, she thought, and
tears of anguish filled her eyes; and as she raised
her head, a drop fell on his cheek. It was
nothing
of itself, and yet, as it had been the Promethean
spark, the invalid started, drew a long breath,
opened his eyes, fixing them intently upon Emily,
who stood perfectly motionless, fearful lest in his
weak state a sudden move might prove fatal to
him. He gazed upon her with a sign of
recognition
in his intelligent features, and then passed his
hand across his eyes, as one assuring himself
whether he be dreaming or not. Again he gazed
upon her intently, and a bright flush mounted his
cheek, as he said:
Emily, is it you, or a spirit I behold?
Thank God, he is safe! ejaculated Emily,
clasping her hands and looking upward, while tears
of joy stole down her sweet features; and bending
over, she pressed her lips to his forehead.
O, Emily, is this reality! exclaimed Rufus,
with a thrill of joy lighting up his countenance.
O say it is not a dream!
It is no dream, Rufus, said she, looking
tenderly
upon him.
Then I
have
been dreaming, returned he,
gazing
slowly around the apartment. I must have
slept long, and yet it is still dark. I do not
remember
coming into this room. How came I
here, and why were you watching me?
You have been ill, Rufus, very ill. For nine
days you have stood on the verge of the grave!
Illnine days! repeated he, looking
incredulously
,
and placing his hand to his head, as though
to collect his thoughts: I do feel weak. As he
took his hand down, it caught his eye, and starting
at the sight of its thin, bony appearance, he
murmured
:
I have indeed been ill. But where was
I taken, Emily? I remember nothing.
At the door here, just as you had returned
from a search for me.
Search for you, Emily! repeated he,
earnestly
,
partly raising himself in beda search for
you! Then it was no dream, Emily, it was no
dream! Ha! added he, pressing one hand to his
forehead, while a look of mental anguish hovered
on his features: II remember now, it was no
dream! Oh, God! that it were anything but
reality
!Oh!
Emily he paused and fell back
on the pillow with a groan.
Why, Rufus, what means this? exclaimed
Emily, in alarm.
I must not tell youit was nothingit is
over now, he replied, faintly.
If you had fears for me, you perceive I have
safely returned, said she, soothingly.
But with
another!
added he emphatically.
A sudden thought flashed across her brain, but
instantly discarding it, she rejoined: True, with
another; but why should that trouble you,
Rufus
?
I was with a friend, whom you know and
esteem. I went forth with Edward Merton and
returned with him. What see you wrong in that,
Rufus?
Ero he could reply, the door opened and his
mother softly entered. She had heard voices in
conversationhis voiceand her heart would let
her wait no longer.
O, mother, dear mother! cried Rufus, as he
saw her approaching.
God of mercy!he lives! he lives! shrieked
she; and rushing forward, she clasped him to her
bosom, raised her eyes to Heaven, and poured out
her heart in a prayer of thanksgiving to the
Supreme
Ruler. Webber was next to enter, and
with tearful eyes he pressed his lips to the pale
cheek of Rufus and uttered: God be praised!
The physician followed Webber, accompanied by
Bernard and Tyrone; but all three paused as they
entered the apartmentwhich we should have
mentioned was the same from which Curdish
escapedand gazed upon the scene with heartfelt
emotion.
We shall not dwell longer here; suffice, that
that night was one of rejoicing, and the next
morning one, as we have shown, well calculated
to add to the joy of lightened hearts. Each rose
refreshed in body and mind; and the invalid, as
he gazed forth through the open windows, heard
the song of birds, and felt the soft air upon his
wasted features with a thrill of delight.
After paying Rufus a morning visit, and
finding
him gradually recovering, Emily,who on
his account had of late closely confined herself
to the houseand as the morning was so fine
toocould not resist the inclination of walking
abroad to taste the fresh air, and view nature in
all her loveliness; for she was one whose soul
was ever open to such delights. Shortly after,
she stole quietly away; and taking a path which
led through the farm of Webber to the
southward
,
she made her way with a light step toward
a gentle eminence, some half a mile distant,
which overlooked a beautiful portion of the
country
,
and where she was wont to spend many a
pleasant hour in meditating upon the handiwork
of the Supreme Being. There was a deep,
inward
joy in her heart as she tripped along the
winding path; now beside fields of grain,
struggling
up as though to regain what they had lost
by the devastating tornado; now through tall,
rank grass, where occasionally a flower might be
seen peeping forth, like a modest maiden from her
lattice bower; now through bushes rejoicing in
beautiful foliage, where the little birds made their
nests and sung their songs:there was deep,
inward
joy in her heart, we say, as she tripped
along; a sweet, dreamy sensation of delight, such
as she had not felt before for a long time.
The mind of Emily was one of those deep, pure,
earnest, sensitive ones, that in a measure take their
coloring from those around them, as the
chameleon
from the objects with which it comes in
contact
.
Not that she was fickle, vacilating,
governed
only by the opinions of those whose words
fell last upon her ear: no, by no means; for in
this respect she could be swayed only by the best
of reasoning; but she was one of those who are
full of soul and feeling, and she was acted upon
by the feelings of others. Naturally of buoyant
spirits, full of vivacity and cheerfulness, she
delighted
to see every one around her in the same
moodevery one happy; and she could not
rejoice
,
could not be gay, where she knew another
was in grief, or any way in trouble. Her mind
was quick, energetic, but full of sympathy; and
the latter noble virtue was, perhaps, her ruling
passion. Hence, while she knew that one of the
family with whom she had been reared,to
whom, for their kindness, she felt she owed such
a debt of gratitude, and one too whom she loved
with all the earnest affection of a sisterwas
lying in such a critical state, with death staring
him in the face, she could not feel happycould
not remove the weight of anguish that lay like
lead upon her heart. But now the case was
altered
.
With his return to reason and
convalescence
,
returned her buoyant, joyous spirits,
rising just in proportion to their long and severe
depression. It was a day too, above all others,
that she loved, and every thing seemed to
conspire
to make her happy.
Thus, for a time, as we have said, she tripped
along with a gay airgazing with delight upon
the scene around her,occasionally stopping to
pluck a flower that pleased her fancy, to be
woven
into a garland for the sick one, with whom as
yet her gentle thoughts were mostly occupied.
Suddenly her mind turned into another
channel
a
shade stole over her sweet features, and
her step grew tardy. The cause was a natural
and simple one. By one of those sudden flashes
which an active temperament is subject to, the
night of the storm and her capture rose up before
her; and for a moment all the wild feelings of
that terrible time came back with the vividness
of reality; and what seems strange too, this had
never occurred before. 'Tis true she had thought
of it at times; but then her thoughts had been
vague and transitory,for grief was at her heart
for the welfare of one she too much esteemed to
think of herself. But now the case was
different
,there
were no strong emotions to throw
aside those scenes of alarm and terror, and they
came back with startling force. She saw again
the old hut, where she and Merton had remained
during that terrific storm; she saw the old
woman
standing before her, with her wild looks,
rapid gesticulationsheard her prophetic words
of warning, and felt a kind of awe creeping over
her. She remembered her feelings too, while
going
through that lonely passher seizure by
Riley
,
and wild ride to the riverher interview with
the old Jewher despair, when pinioned in the
grasp of his villainous subordinates; and, finnally,
the sweet charm of her release by the one of all
others whom she loved.
As her train of thoughts led Emily to think of
Edward, she dwelt for a time upon his noble,
generous naturehis winning ways, and deep,
ardent love for her; love which she feltmight
returnand both be happy, but for the disparity
in their positions as viewed by the world. She
saw him an only heir of a rich, aristocratic father,
whom she had every reason to believe would
oppose
any other than a wealthy alliance for his
son. She feared too, even if consent were gained
to their union, the opposition Edward would have
to encounter, in this respect, would tend to
weaken
those ties of affection which now bound him
so strongly to her, and make him regret, in secret
at leastfor she believed him of too generous and
noble a nature to show it openlythat he had ever
sought her hand. Her mind was one of those
intuitive ones that pierce below the polished
surface
and read the human heart as it is, with its
good and bad parts commingled; and she felt,
however much she might love him,and love
him she certainly didshe must, as a duty to him,
in securing his happiness, discourage his suit. As
these thoughts came up before her, with all the
force of her good sense of propriety, her features
grew sad, and her head drooped with a pensive
air.
And then Emily's mind reverted to herself
her humble conditiona dependant upon the
charity of others. Who was she? She had often
heard Webber relate the story of how she became
an inmate of his housea member of his family
and there was a mystery about it which
troubled
her. Perhaps she was of low birth, an
offspring
of guilt, and consequently no mate for
Edward
Merton, even setting wealth aside; and this
reflection but made her feelings more sad and
painful
.
From this her mind again returned to her
capture, and the conversation she had overheard
between Riley and the Jew, regarding herself.
She remembered Riley's assertion that there was
some secret connected with her birth, and the
answer of the Jew by asking him how he had
found that out; and also Riley's remark that he
would make money by marrying her, by which a
ray of hope sprung up that she might be of good
descent, perhaps one of a wealthy family. And
then her wonder how the Jew, if such was the
case, should know any thing of this; and if not,
why he should wish to seize upon her person.
Perhaps he had got hold of proofssome paper or
papers which would establish rights wrongfully
wrested from her. She had heard of such things
happening to othersmight they not happen to
herself? And then the mysterious note Webber
had received some five years ago, accompanied
with money, charging him to educate her for any
station in society:what did that mean? Was
there not some connection between that and the
knowledge possessed by the Jew? As these
thoughts came to her, overwhelmed as they were
by mystery, hope revived that some day this
mystery
would be cleared up, and she perhaps would
then stand fair before the world. But then again,
how was this to be done? What probability was
there that such, even if her surmises were
correct
,
would ever take place? She could not but
admit to herself that, at the best, this was but a
wild speculationa vision of the braina sort of
castle in the air affair, without form or substance;
in fact, but little less than an impossibility; and
again all hope of such a termination died away,
leaving her if any thing more in the dark, more
in gloom, for the faint gleam which had for a
moment shone upon her.
Thus musing to herself upon the various
matters
recorded, Emily came to a rough fence,
which shut in the field of culture, and ran along
at the base of the hill or eminence previously
mentioned. The slightest incident at times is
enough to change the current of our thoughts;
and as Emily looked up at this interruption to her
progress, and marked the loveliness of every thing
around, she felt a sweet thrill of pleasure steal
through her veins, and all her gloomy feelings
emerged into an intellectual enthusiasm for the
beauties of nature. Crossing the fence, she
moved at a quickened pace up the hill, whose
brow was some hundred yards distant, and there
paused to gaze with rapture upon the beautiful
landscape spread out before her.
The scene now brought to her view was
indeed
a delightful one, and one worthy of a
description
.
The summit of the hill itself was
shaded by a pleasant grove of trees, underneath
which were several large, flat rocksforming to
one weary of walking various tempting seats for
repose. Beside one of these rocks was a large
old oak, which, although now fast verging to
decay
,
still bore on its aged limbs a goodly covering
of foliage. This, of all others, was Emily's fa
vorite spot; and after pausing for a moment, she
approached and sprang lightly upon the stone.
From this her range of vision was somewhat
extended
;
for being on the farther line of the hill
from her approach, she could command a view of
its base to the southward. The hill, in this
direction
,
was unlike its northern aspectbeing more
rough and precipitous, and more densely shaded
by a growth of shrubby trees; if, in fact, they
might be allowed the appellation of trees at all.
Directly at its base, however, were some of a
larger kind, which had struggled up among rocks
and bushes, like ambitious men to overlook their
fellows. Rippling along at the roots of these,
over a rough bed, was the Marameea glimpse
and sound of whose limpid waters could both be
seen and heard from where Emily stood. On the
opposite side of this stream rose another hill to
about the same heightbeing also similar in
appearance
to the one just described. Beyond this
latter, to the southward, the land was lower for a
considerable distance, so that the next object
which met the eye was the dim outline of a range
of mountains far away. To the left, or eastward,
the eye could follow the bed of the river between
these hills for something like a mile, when the
view was again cut off by a sudden turn in its
courseappearing to the observer as though the
two ridges met and formed an oval termination.
From this all trace of the opposite hill was lost;
but the one on which Emily stood could be seen
making an angle of some forty-five degrees, and
shooting off in a serpentine manner to the
northeast
forming,
in fact, the same ridge, a part of
which we described in the commencement of our
story. About half way from where Emily stood
to the angle mentioned, was a smaller elevation,
bearing a few points west of north, running past
Webber's cottage, some little distance to the east,
and forming the hill from which was first descried
the approach of Bernard and Tyrone.
Turning to the west and south, the scene
presented
was by far the most extended and beautiful.
A few hundred yards to the westward, the hills
or ridges we have been describing made a
handsome
curve to the left, leaving the vision free
scope over rather a level country for a goodly
number of milesnow touching on a strip of
prairie, now upon a dark, heavy woodrelieved
here and there by a glimpse of some cottage,
whose light blue smoke curling slowly upward
in the morning sun gave a pleasing sensation of
domestic happiness, and whose clearings around
told that settlement and civilization were slowly
creeping into the late abodes of the savage and
wild beast. To the north, passing over the
farmer-like
appearance of Webber's fields of grain,
mowing lots, pasture groundshis orchard,
garden
,
dwelling, stablingall of which caused the
eye to linger awhile, and particularly Emily's,
with a quiet sensation of pleasure,passing over
these, we say, in a northern direction, some eight
or ten miles distant, the eye fell upon what
appeared
a long narrow strip of silver; but which a close
examination would have proved to be neither
more nor less than a small portion of the deep,
dark, rapid, muddy Missouri. Occasionally,
throughout the landscape, some smaller streams
winding about here and there, appearing like
silver threads thrown carelessly upon a carpet,
added their little to the perfection of the whole.
Such, reader, is but an imperfect sketch of the
country in the vicinity of Emily's new home,
and the scene which she now gazed upon with
feelings known only to the lovers of nature and
the beautiful.
If we have failed in attempting to bring to the
view of the reader a picture of what Emily saw
and we feel we havefor what is description
after
all, but description; and how far short it falls
of the realityof those thousand little things
which in themselves are nothing, but which are
needful in making up the whole,if we have
failed, we say, in describing what she saw, we
utterly despair of giving the sounds she heard
the rustling of the leaves, the murmur of the
streamlet, the humming of the insects, the
singing
of the birds, the ten thousand, in fact,
indescribable
voices by which nature completes her
inimitable
song of harmony. But let these pass;
suffice that she saw and heard enough to hold
her too much enraptured to notice the approach
of anothera tall dark figurewho, finding her
attention so much occupied, came to a pause a few
feet distant, and deliberately folding his arms on
his breast, stood for some moments regarding her
in silence, but evidently with no ordinary feelings.
We have said he was a tall dark figure; but in
the latter adjective, dark, we have reference only
to his complexion and the expression of his
features
,
which were of a sinister cast. His eyes
were black, but of that peculiar black which is
most repulsive, and were shaded by thick,
overhanging
brows, that gave them at all times a look
of sullen fierceness. There was nothing further
remarkable in his countenance, unless a few
singularly
drawn lines near his mouth, indicative of
a determination to carry out whatever design he
might attempt, and a peculiar smile, sometimes
seen, but a smile so devilish that those who saw
never forgot it. He was young, or at least
exceeded
not twenty-four years, and in person well
and even handsomely formed. His dress was
rather careless, consisting of coarse pantaloons
fastened around the waist by a leather belta
coarse shirt, open about the necka sailor-like
jacketa light straw hat and heavy boots.
For some moments he stood regarding Emily
with a strange lookthe look of one who had
resolved
upon a certain result, yet was almost
undetermined
how to proceed, should all not succeed
to his hopes. There was also a look of
tenderness
mingled with a heavy frown, as though
nature
had roused to combat two opposite passions.
Meanwhile Emily stood gazing upon the
landscape
with a bright eye and pleasing smile; but
whether her thoughts were now on what she saw,
or appeared to see, or whether they had wandered
away to the one she loved, we shall not stop to
analyze; though we might, perhaps, true to
nature
,
premise the latter. At length she started,
as by some sudden thought, and turning a little,
started again on beholding the person we have
described. There seemed a sort of revulsion at
once in her feelings; for the blood in her cheeks
returned to her heart, leaving them pale, as though
a presentiment of trouble had came over her, and
in spite of herself she trembled. This was but
momentary however, for the next instant she was
calm; and as if half ashamed of thus betraying
herself, and the more perfectly to regain her
composure
,
or secrete her real thoughts, she said with
laugh:
Well, I declare, John, I hope you are more
successful with the ladies generally, on your first
appearance, for I must own you frightened me.
There was something in the tone of her voice
and manner of speaking, notwithstanding her
laugh and familiar language, that appeared forced
and unnatural, which John Webberfor such
the reader has doubtless divined him to be
noticed
.
He had noticed too her sudden start when
she first beheld himher palenessher
tremulous
agitationin fact, nothing had escaped him;
but he had attributed to all these a very different
cause from the real one, and he answered
accordingly
:
I did not intend to frighten you, Emily;
though I presume a pleasant surprise is not in
the end a disagreeable fright?
True, it is not, answered Emily, who felt
relieved
that he had not seen her repugnance to
him; for it was against her gentle disposition to
wound the feelings of any; and although there
ever had been in his nature something dark and
uncongenial with her own, a something to make
her feel reserved and oppressed in his presence,
yet she had never forgotten he was the son of her
benefactor, and had always striven to keep her
feelings under, to appear if anything more
happy
than usual that he might not detect it. In
this she had over acted, as is sometimes the case;
or rather, we might say, overreached herself; for
had she shown more of her real feelings, it had
doubtless been better for her in the endhad
saved her many a bitter pang. In a word, to
make him think her not displeased in his
company
,
she had, without intending it, forced him to
think his company
more
agreeable to her than
others. Perfectly reckless in all moral principles,
careless about searching for cause, he stopped at
effect, and looked upon everything as a matter of
course. Without any distinct notions of love,
congeniality of soul, and the like, he had formed a
resolve in his own mind that Emily some day
should become his wife. A resolve with him
was almost the same thing as a certainty, for he
never counted on a failure; and having once set it
down as a fact, he rarely ever thought again upon
it, until the time came round for its
accomplishment
.
The resolve concerning Emily he had
made some three months after her arrival from
New York. Her manner and appearance had
struck him then as belonging to no ordinary
person
,
and from thinking of this a fancy had sprung
up that she would suit him better than any
woman he had ever seen. This with him was
enough; and without intimating it to her, or
ascertaining
her feelings on the subject, he had
dropped it, with the idea that all was settled.
Had he been of a different temperament, he would
doubtless have felt uneasy at the attentions which
he could not avoid seeing were paid her by
Merton
,
and her apparent pleasure while in his
company
.
But this with him was a matter of course
affair, and he never gave it a thought; or, if he
did, it was only to smile to himself, as much as
to say, to use an old proverb, you are reckoning
without your host. Another than him, too,
would have felt indignant at her capture, and
would have revenged himself perhaps on the
actors
in that scene; but he never suffered a word to
escape him concerning it. True, he did not know
of it till after her releasehaving been out that
evening, as was customary with him, till
somewhat
late. On his return he had found the
family
up in a state of agitation, occasioned by the
events which had happened, and the sickness of
his brother Rufus. He had heard the whole
apparently
unmoved; and learning that Curdish
was a prisoner, and knowing that he belonged to
the banditti, had watched his opportunity and set
him at liberty. Nor was this done for any love
he bore Curdish, but merely for a selfish motive,
by which alone he was governed. To gratify
self, or to get revenge, which is only another
species
of self, he would go to any extreme, do any
act however devilish. Some months previous to
this event, he had come in contact with several
rough spirits like himself, and by an intuitive
faculty and close observation, had divined that
they were a part of a regular organised band; and
so expressed himself to them, accompanied by a
request to admit him as a member. This they
would not do without putting him to the proof;
and consequently his liberation of Curdish,
knowing
him to be one of the band, was only another
of the many good services he had done them.
Such is but an imperfect insight into the
character
and motives governing him who now stood
before Emily Nevance; and although we may
have digressed somewhat in imparting this
information
,
yet as he is destined to bear a
conspicuous
part in our story, we felt it to be a matter
with which the reader should at once be made
acquainted.
With John Webber the time had now come
wherein he had resolved to communicate to
Emily
his design of making her his partner for life.
For some days he had been absent from home,
and was even that very morning returning,
pondering
this in his mind, and how best to proceed,
when on looking up he was both surprised and
rejoiced
to behold the object of his musings before
him. This was only so much in his favor, he
thought, and too good an opportunity to pass
unimproved. Accordingly he approached, as
we have shown, and stood for some time
regarding
her in silence, with very curious feelings.
Her surprise and agitation on seeing him he
attributed
to the deep interest she took in his
welfare
;
or what in another, who could have better
comprehended the meaning of the word, would
have been termed love; hence the answer he
made in reply to her remark. But to resume the
conversation from which we have digressed.
For a moment after Emily spoke, there was a
silence, and feeling unless something was said it
would become very embarrassing, and resolving
to change the subject, she resumed:
But you seem to absent yourself from us
lately
,
John; I have not seen you for some days.
Yes, Emily, for some days I have been
absent
,
replied he, still drawing from this remark
a favorable augury to the success of his design.
Good news at homehave you learned it?
No, I was but now on my way there. Is
Rufus
dead?
Dead! echoed Emily, with a start. I trust
you would not call that good news, John?
I beg your pardon, answered he, coloring at
the manner in which he was betraying himself;
perhaps I did not understand you. Did you say
good
news?
I did. Your brother Rufus is free from
danger
and recovering rapidly.
Ah! yes, returned he, in a careless tone;
certainly
yesfree
from dangeryesthat is good
news.
Emily, notwitstanding she knew him to be a
man of self, was both surprised and shocked at
this unnatural tone of indifference at the welfare
of an only brother; but by a mighty effort she
managed to prevent her feelings from making
themselves manifest, and continued:
Yes, the crisis in his fever come last night, and
thank God, he lives! By the orders of the
physician
I stood by his side and had the joy of seeing
him return again to life, almost as one from the
dead.
Joy, Emily, replied John, with one of his
devilish smiles, that made her involuntarily
shudder
;
was it then such joy to see him return to
life, as you say?
Why, John, what mean you? asked she,
quickly. You surprise me with such remarks!
Do I? said John, drily.
Indeed you do! exclaimed she, with warmth.
I do not understand such expressions!
O, as to that, he returned, shrugging his
shoulders, it was merely a question,that is all
let it pass!
But it was an unnatural question, rejoined
Emily, with a flushed cheek; and one I am
surprised
to hear one brother ask concerning another!
Well!
returned John, with emphasis,
contracting
his brows and speaking through his
teeth, I say let it pass! I might have my
reasons
for asking it, you know; and he fastened
his dark eyes keenly upon her. But to the
point. I came here to speak on a different
subject
,
and one that, if truth must be told, interests
me more.
Say on, then! replied Emily, evidently
anxious
to finish the conversation as soon as possible:
I listen.
You know, Emily, resumed John, I am a
man of few words, and consequently you will
pardon me for coming at once to the point.
Proceed! said Emily, as he paused.
Well, then, to be brief, I came here to tell you
I love you, and have resolved to make you my
wife.
Good God! exclaimed Emily, staggering
back at this sudden and altogether unexpected
announcement
:
You are not in earnest, John?
Certainly I am, replied he, coolly; why
not? I like you better than any woman I have
ever seen.
But gasped she.
O, never mind, he continued, interrupting
her; spare your remarksit is all settled. I
know what you would say, maiden-like, that you
are unworthy and all that: but I will spare your
excuses; it is all settled; we will be married in a
month, and then if you choose you know you can
tell me afterward.
His cool impudent manner completely puzzled
Emily, at the same time that it roused her
indignation
.
She could not believe him in earnest,
and yet a kind of presentiment whispered her he
was so. If he was in earnest, she foresaw there
was difficulty in embryo, and how to extricate
herself was a matter of serious reflection. She
saw at once, that in either case, whether he was
trifling or not, her best course was to be firm and
decided in her replies, and accordingly she
answered
:
But, John, I do not love you.
Ah! do not, eh? Well, that is a matter of
small moment: such things are as likely to come
after marriage as before.
But, John, I could
never
love you!
May-be, though that can best be proven by
the test.
But, surely, you are not in earnest in this
business, John?
Am I not! cried he, somewhat fiercely, with
a black look. Have I not said I wasin earnest?
But you have not consulted my feelings!
O, that with me is of minor importance!
But not with me, sir! replied Emily,
reddening
with vexation.
Well, well, returned he, sharply, on that
point suit yourself. I say it is settled!
And I say it is settled rejoined Emily,
firmly.
Well, what more? interrupted he.
But not as you think, continued she,
finishing
the sentence.
Not as I think!what mean you? asked he,
glaring upon her with a fierce look, and knitting
his brows.
I will never marry you! she replied.
Never marry me? repeated he.
Never! I will give my hand only where I
love.
Ha! exclaimed he, taking a step backward
his whole frame shaking with fierce passionhis
voice trembling so he could scarcely command it,
and hissing from between his clenched teeth:
Are you in earnest?
I am! replied she, firmly, though inwardly
frightened at his fierce aspect.
For some time John did not speak, during
which his features underwent contortions awful
to behold and impossible to describe. All the wild
demon of his nature was aroused, and every evil
thought and passion seemed struggling for vent.
His eyes grew fieryhis face grew lividhis veins
swelled, marking out dark blue lineshis brows
contracted, forming a black streak across his
forehead
his
nostrils expandedhis bosom heaved
his teeth closed tightlyhis lips contracted, from
which issued a frothy substance,while over all,
like an ignis-futuus in some dismal swamp, played
that dark, sinister, devilish smile. Emily was
frightened. Never before had she seen or
dreamed
of a look so awful. Pale and breathless she
stood and gazed upon him, as one hanging over
some mighty chasm might be supposed to gaze
upon some teriffic monster about to spring and
hurl both to destruction. She could not speak
nor move. She was spell-bound to the rock.
For some moments both stood thus. At length
he started, threw up both hands, and stamped with
one foot fiercely on the ground; and then from
between his teeth hissed these words, which made
her blood curdle:
You have said! you have rejected me! Let
your fate save you if it can! Hear me: By every
thing I hold most sacred, I swear you
shall
be
mine! and turning away he rushed like a
madman
down the hill toward the river, while Emily,
whose nerves had been held rigid by fear, as soon
as he was gone sank fainting upon the rock.
Poor girl! Her troubles had only begun.
CHAPTER IV.
THE CONVERSATIONTHE MYSTERY CANVASSED
THE PLAN TO UNRAVEL THE MYSTERYTHE PLOT
THICKENS.
The evening succeeding the events just
detailed
,
found Webber, Bernard and Tyrone seated in
the room to the right of the entrance of the
residence
of the first named, engaged in close
conversation
.
None of the other occupants of the
house were presentEmily and Mrs. Webber
both being in the apartment to the left with
Rufus
,who
by the way was considered gradually
recoveringand John had not yet returned. The
conversation of the trio referred to had been
carried
on for some time on various topics of little
interest to the reader, but just at the moment we
have chosen to again introduce them, it had taken
another turn, which, as it has a bearing on our
story
,
is necessary for us to relate.
You ask me, remarked Webber, in reply to
some previous question of Tyrone, what I know
of her history? I answer, but little; in fact,
absolutely
nothing, prior to her being left in my
charge, the particulars of which you remember I
gave you some day or two since. There is
something
very mysterious about the matter, and I
would go to any expense within my power to
have it cleared up. Poor girl! I often grieve for
her; for although she in my presence ever appears
cheerful and contented, yet I have watched her
when she thought herself unseen, and I know it
troubles her. She is a girl of thoughtvery
sensitive
withaland I know the obscurity of her
birth must give her painful feelings. Did you
not notice how pale she appeared on her return
from her walk in the morning?
I did, answered Tyrone. She looked as
one just recovered from a terrible fright.
I was alarmed myself, continued Webber,
and thought something serious had taken place;
but when I questioned her, she forced a smile
upon her pale features and assured me it was
nothing but a little dizziness in the head which
would soon pass away. I said no more, but that
she must take care of herselfthought in my own
mind the disease is of a very different nature.
Such a look as she then had and has since worn,
notwithstanding her effort to conceal it, is never
produced by bodily suffering, when the mind is in
the proper state, or all my observations have gone
for nothing. As you remarked, she looked as a
person who had been frightened; though what
should occur to produce that I do not know,
unless
the recalling of the night of her kidnapping;
and I scarcely know how that, at this time, should
so effect her. No, no, it was not that; perhaps
she saw one of the villains concerned in that
business:Gods! if that rascal Curdish had not
escaped me! (here Webber shut his teeth close,
while his eyes flashed fiercely) yet we may meet
again! he added; and then resuming the
conversation
where he had broken it off, continued:
But if she had seen any of them she would have
told me so. No! it must have been caused by her
own serious reflections. Ha! added he again, as
if struck by some new thought, perhaps
Merton
but
no, no! Merton is an honorable man.
Perhaps he was about to say something
concerning Rufus, but thinking better of it,
paused.
Speaking of that night, Webber, remarked
Tyrone, have you ever formed any idea of the
design
of those ruffians in seizing upon her person?
Why no, unless for sensual gratification.
That warnt it, put in Bernard, who had for
some time been a listener. I've been a thinking
the hull matter over myself, and I tell ye for
sartain
that warnt it. There's something plaguey
mysterious about it; and since you've been a
talking
,
an idea's popped into my head that that are
scrape was brought about by a different cause from
what you think.
Ah! said Webber; and pray what cause de
you assign for it, Harvey?
At this moment the door opened and John
Webber entered. His features were somewhat
pale, but in other respects much as usual; though
a close observer might have detected the previous
workings of passion, as little marks in a forest tell
of the storm that has just swept over it. With a
simple nod of recognition to the occupants he took
up a chair and seated himself some distance from
them.
Why, John, said his father, turning to him,
why do you absent yourself thus of late? and at
a time too when you are most wanted at home?
You know there is much labor needed on the
farm, and I am not able to accomplish it alone.
Besides, too, your brother has been very sick, but
by God's blessing is now better! though he might
have been dead and buried without you being the
wiser for it. I have not seen you but twice
during
his illness. Where have you been?
I have had business to keep me absent,
replied
John, sullenly, evading a direct answer.
Yes, you always have business! rejoined
Webber
,
rather sharply; but I trust you will close
your business soon, if you have not already done
so, and be a little more at home!
I trust I am of age and can act for myself!
grumbled John.
Webber, who knew too well his son's morose
disposition and evil temper to carry the matter
farther at present, made no reply, but turning to
Bernard, said: I will now hear your answer
with regard to what you suppose the cause.
Wal, as I was saying, returned Bernard,
while you've been talking, I've been a thinking
the matter over, and I remember hearing one o'
them are rascals, in his conversation with the
tother, say that the old feller what hired 'em, and
the gal, and some other feller was all kind o'
mixed
up into a secretat least he guessed so, from
knowing the first old feller'd got hold o' some
papers
,
and had been mighty anxious to git the gal
ever since.
Ah! true, true! rejoined Tyrone; I
remember
now hearing the same remark; but not
knowing
then to whom it referred, had quite forgotten
it.
Strange! strange! said Webber, thoughtfully;
more mystery. Can it be possible there was
some one at the bottom of that affair who knows
her history? It may be. The more I think of
it, the more mysterious everything concerning it
appears. My mind has been so much occupied
with the uncertain fate of my son since that event,
that I have never till now thought of it so
seriously
;
and have never even questioned Emily or
Merton on the subjectwhat took placehow he
found heror how she was rescued; but I will do
so now, and perhaps she will be able to throw
some light upon the matter. As he spoke, he
arose, passed out of the room, and presently
returned
with the object of their conversation.
The features of Emily as she entered were very
pale, their expression very sad; and though she
strove to look cheerful, it was evident to all she
was undergoing severe mental suffering. As she
came forward and took her seat, her eye fell upon
John, and she gave an involuntary start, while
every muscle of her face quivered.
Good heavens, Emily, you are not well!
exclaimed
Webber, as he noticed the change in her
appearance. Tell me, my child, truly, are you
not ill?
II did feel a little unwell, just at this
moment
,
replied Emily, by a mighty effort recover
ing her composure; but I am better now.
Indeed
,
she added, seeing Webber looked at her
doubtfully, I feel quite well again.
Webber shook his head gravely; and then, as if
fearful of agitating her, proceeded directly to the
matter in point.
We were talking, Emily, of the events of that
night of your seizure by those ruffians, and have
sent for you to give us the particulars of what
you saw and heard.
Glad of anything that would for a moment
relieve
her mind of the painful thoughts now
agitating
her, Emily proceeded at once to give a full
narration of what she had seen and heard herself,
and also the particulars of Edward's adventures,
as related by himself on that eventful night, all of
which matters being familiar to the reader, we
shall not again detail.
Depend upon't, I's right! said Bernard,
triumphantly
,
as Emily concluded. That are
stingy
old Jew warnt doing that are rascally business
for nothing.
True, rejoined Webber, thoughtfully, there
does appear a mysterious connection between that
and what has gone before. And then that old
woman's warningher knowledge of what was
taking placethe sudden entrance of the
stranger
,
who gave his name as Bartonthe ring and
its wonderful effect upon the Jew, are matters
which look very mysterious, and show a deep laid
plot of some kind,and then that conversation
between the kidnapper and the Jew indicates that
the latter has some, or at least thinks he has some,
secret knowledge of Emily. This affair must be
looked into at once. But then, again, that
counter-plot
of the ringwhat had that to do with it?
I do not understand it. Barton, too, Barton,
continued he, musingly, why I know one of that
namea gentleman that has been some time in
these partsa speculator in landcan it be that
he is the same? But nopshaw! what should he
know of the Jew? What think you of the whole
affair, Tyrone?
Why that is what I hardly know myself,
answered the person addressed. As you say, it
appears like a deep laid scheme in the first
instance
;
but then that counter-plot, or whatever it
may be, perplexes me. Ha! an idea strikes me:
May it not be possible that these ruffians are a part
of an organised band, who were acting without
the knowledge of their leader, or carrying out
some plan of his before it was fully ripe for
execution
,
and so were interrupted by him?
Heavens! exclaimed Webber, starting; I
think you are right. At least there has been a
band of outlaws in this quarter; for when I first
came here, it was almost a daily occurence to hear
of horse-stealing, robbery, and even murder; and
the name of Ronald Bonardi, the bold, reckless
leader of this banditti, was passed from ear to ear,
among the more timid, with feelings of
superstitious
awe and horror. In fact, to such an
alarming
extent were his depredations carried on, at
one time, that the whole country became aroused,
private meetings were held among the more
peaceable
citizens or settlers, and a heavy reward was
offered to any one who should take him dead or
alive; but he was never caught. It was supposed
he got information of their proceedings and
left this part of the country; for since that time,
with but few exceptions, the settlers have
remained
undisturbedthough I have heard of some few
exploits since, that smack of his, but for the most
part they happened east of the Mississippi.
I jest recollect hearing the same kind o' yarns
told about that are chap when I's out this way
afore, said Bernard; and I told Mark here, when
I seed that are harrycane coming up, and knowed
we'd have to crawl into the cave, that like as not
we'd get into a robber's nest, and it made Mark
quite skeery like.
Pshaw! exclaimed Tyrone, with an angry
gesture, the color deepening in his face; have
done with such nonsense, Bernard!
Fact, I swow! returned Bernard, looking
slyly
at Webber and giving him the wink. Webber
smiled, but made no reply.
What was the personal appearance of this
bandit
chief? enquired Tyrone, not heeding the last
remark.
In size he was rather large and well formed,
replied Webber; at least that seems the most
correct information on the subject; though some
who saw him solemnly declared him to be a
monster
a
giant; but doubtless their fears made them
exaggerate. His features I believe were never
seen, as he always wore a mask. In some of his
exploitsin fact I may say allhe exhibited a
wild eccentricity of manner, that distinguished
him from all his followers. He has been described
by some as bloodthirsty and utterly ferocious; but
then, again, others relate anecdotes which prove
him, notwithstanding, to have been a man of
feeling
;
for he has been known to rob an individual
and then return him his money, when he saw he
was likely to be distressed by the loss.
Occasionally
too, a poor man has been surprised at having
a purse of money placed in his hand, by a masked
stranger, accompanied with these words, uttered
in a slow, solemn tone: `Remember in turn the
needy, and in your prayers forget not Ronald
Bonardi
.'
A singular being! remarked Tyrone,
musingly
.
He had, decidedly, some fine redeeming
traits. Do you think him still living?
As to that I am undecided, answered
Webber
.
But if he be living, he has either reformed
or left this part of the countryfor of late I have
heard nothing of him. I am inclined to the
opinion
,
however, that he is living, but has quit his
former mode of life. Were he still in this
vicinity
,
I should be strongly inclined to believe him
the person who gave Merton the ringit being
somewhat characteristic of the manwere it not
for one or two reasons to the contrary. In the
first place, Bonardi would not have revealed his
features. In the second place, this person gave
his name as Barton, and Bonardi would have
given his own.
But when he gave his name as Bonardi, his
features, by your account, were always masked,
remarked Tyrone; consequently, unmasked, no
person would know him as Bonardi; and might
he not, under such circumstances, give his name
as Barton?
Such a thing might be, it is true, replied
Webber, thoughtfully, but I do not think it
likely. In sooth, to me the whole affair looks
improbable, from the fact that I do not believe
Bonardi to be in this section, or we should ere
this have heard of him. No, now that I think
of it again, Tyrone, your suggestion that these
ruffians are a part of an organised band, does not
appear so plausible. I should rather judge them to
be some low, desperate characters, employed for
the occasion by the Jew, whose reputation as a
cowardly villain is wide spread. The ring
business
,
as I said before, I do not understand. It
might have been that this was a signal,
understood
among themselves as indicating danger, and
to forego their design, whatever it was, until a
better opportunity should present itself. If this
was the case, their cards were well played. But
I must question Merton, when I see him, and get
more of the particulars.
Speaking of these matters, Webber, did you
not feel unsafe here, with your family, when you
first settled, knowing that you were surrounded
by such a band of desperadoes, and in a country
too so thinly populated that you would be likely
to get no assistance, even if attacked, with no
laws of force sufficient to protect either property
or person? enquired Tyrone.
Why, such matters did trouble me some at
first, replied Webber; and in consequence of
this I built my cottage very strong, and secured
me some dozen of good rifles and plenty of
ammunition
which
I still have on handthough,
thank Heaven! I have never been molested, nor
had occasion to use them. The seizure of Emily
is the first trouble of the kind that has ever
happened
with any of my family: and somehow I
have never looked on this so seriously as I do
now; for since all the circumstances have been
explained, I think there will be more trouble.
But do not be alarmed, Emily, continued he,
addressing himself more directly to her; you
shall be protected; only do not venture out too
far aloneat least not for the present.
Rest assured I shall not! said Emily, stealing
a look at John, who sat perfectly unmoved,
apparently
heeding nothing that was said.
What course do you intend to pursue, in
regard
to this matter? enquired Tyrone.
Can I depend upon you to assist me, Tyrone?
You can, to all that lies in my power.
And you, Harvey, I know will stand by an
old friend!
Wal I guess I will now, answered Bernard,
his cheeks flushing and his eye brightening at this
complimentary appeal to his courage: I guess I
will now; jest try me and see if I don't. Stand
by ye, Bill Webberyou who I've known ever
since I was a leetle boywhy, darn me for a
sneaking coward, if I wont go it clean to the
death, plum! I swow I will, and no backing!
Well, then, rejoined Webber, smiling at the
enthusiasm of his friend, my course is decided.
We will arm ourselves and proceed at once to
the hut of the old woman, who seems to know so
much of the matter, and force her to reveal the
full particulars, who were the instigators, actors,
and also their whereabouts at the present time.
We will then take her along with us, both as a
guide and to prevent her communicating with
any of the villains, and proceed next to the hut
of the old Jew, whom I shall take into custody
for further examination; and if he has any secret
papers, concerning Emily, I will have them, and
know how he obtained them. We will then
return
,
and if it be necessary for more help, in
order
to secure the others, I will call upon
neighbor
Winslowwho has lately settled within a
mile of me, and has five brave, hardy sonsand
neighbor Mason, living some half a mile farther
on, who has four more; and between the two
families I think I can raise sufficient force to teach
these ruffians better manners than meddling with
me or mine! By heavens! and I will so teach
them too, ere I have done with them, or my name
is not William Webber!
Jest the same old grit in ye yit! remarked
Bernard, approvingly. Jest the same Bill
Webber
you used to be! You always had a
go-a-head-a-tiveness
about ye, when there was any pluck
needed. I haint forgot how you gin it to that
are tarnal horse-thief, that was so plaguey
desperate
nobody else dared to touch him, and you only
a boy then, as one may say.
That was a hard fight, returned Webber.
Perhaps I could not handle myself so well now,
as then; but still I think I could do something, if
forced into a fight, even now.
But when do you think of proceeding in this
business? asked Tyrone.
Early on to-morrow, replied Webber. It
has been too long delayed already. Had it not
been for the severe illness of Rufus, I should have
enquired into the matter sooner, and long ere this
would have been like a blood-hound on the track
of the ruffians. Perhaps it is better though, as it
is; for they would then, doubtless, have been on
their guardexpecting, as they naturally would,
a pursuit. Now I trust to take them unawares.
But do you not think they have fled the
country
?
asked Tyrone.
No! I do not; from the fact, as it appears,
that the person of Emily is what they sought;
and they will be likely to hover in the vicinity for
a second trial.
By the way, Webber, a thought strikes me!
said Tyrone, suddenly. Have you ever been
able to account for the escape of Curdish?
No! answered Webber, I have not. That
was another very mysterious affair, which has
perplexed
me not a little. No one could have
entered
the house after John came home, for the
door was bolted on the inside; and after that I
looked into the room, and saw Curdish still there;
otherwise I should have supposed he escaped by
means of a false key; but had he done so, the
outer door would not have remained bolted on
the inside, as was the case in the morning. What
think you of it, John?
I know nothing about itmuttered John
only that I see nothing so very mysterious
concerning
it. As to the door being bolted on the
inside, I can say, that having occasion to get up
in the night, I found it standing open, and bolted
it myself. Curdy, or Curdish, or whatever his
name may be, might have had a false key for all
I know to the contrary. Such things are too
common, I think, to be
very
mysterious.
Why, this explains it then! rejoined
Webber
.
Why did you not mention this before,
John?
Because I'm not very talkative, replied John,
drily.
Well, said Webber, with a stern look,
should I be so fortunate as to again have him in
my power, it will require something more than
false keys to save him! A pause followed this
last remark, and each individual appeared
absorbed
in thought. Webber at length resumed
the conversation, by asking Bernard how long he
intended to remain in the vicinity.
Wal, as to that, replied Bernard, it depends
altogether on circumstances. I jest cum out with
friend Mark, here, to look at the land in these
ere diggins, and see what sort of a speculation I
might make; but as you've got into a bit of a
fuss here, I'll jest kind o' keep an eye in this ere
quarter, and be ready to do all I can for ye.
Thank you, Harvey! returned Webber,
warmly. And you, Tyrone, how is it with
you?
Why, as Bernard has just remarked, I came
out here to examine the state of the country, and
attend to some professional business in St.
Louis
.
By profession, as you are aware, I am a
lawyer
though
but lately admitted to the bar. I
had an opportunity some months since of
purchasing
a section of landnorth of, but bordering
on the Missouriwhich I embraced. Some time
after, I received a letter from a gentleman in St.
Louis, offering me for it four times the amount I
paid. This excited my curiosity to know what
had induced the offer; and as I had a desire of
seeing
this western countryof which so much has
been said of lateand as my friend Bernard was
desirous of coming out here also, I concluded to
be his companion for the journey. I had heard of
you frequently, from various sources, and
Bernard
being an old schoolmate of yours, I
determined
on paying you a visit.
I am right glad you have done so, returned
Webber, cordially; and there seems almost a
Providence
in your very conclusion, from the fact that
you came so opportune; for without your timely
assistance I know not what might have been the
result of that knavish affair. I trust you will
consider
my house your home, so long as you choose
to remain in the West; and for the invaluable
service
both you and Bernard have already rendered
me and mine, accept my warmest thanks, and
hold me ever gratful.
As for myself, gentlemen, said Emily, rising,
I cannot express what I feel; but you may
conceive
it somewhat, when I say that to both of you,
under God, I hold myself indebtedthough
perhaps
indirectlyfor the preservation of my
honor
,
which of course is dearer to me than life; and
stepping gracefully forward, she frankly extended
a hand to each, her eyes beaming with the
grateful
emotions of her heart.
Both Bernard and Tyrone were affected at this
unexpected elucidation of feelingthis
heart-touching
frankness of Webber and Emily, the
latter more especiallyand in spite of themselves
both felt their eyes growing moist.
Hang it all! returned Bernard, at length,
drawing his hard, rough hand across his eyes,
you make a feller soft jest for nothing, Emily, I
swow! Why we didn't du a tarnal thing for ye,
hardly, and yit you're praising on us jest as if
we'd done some great things. Take it all back,
Emily, du, until we've done something worth
talking about. I can stand fighting putty
tolerable
well, but a woman's soft talk clean upsets me
altogether.
I cannot but be affected at your noble
frankness
,
Emily, said Tyrone, gazing tenderly upon
her; but as Bernard has just remarked, I would
you had waited until we did something more
deserving
;
though God knows, Emily, I will
sacrifice
my life for you if necessary!
Put me in that are scrape, Mark! put me in
that are scrape, tu! cried Bernard.
It was now Emily's turn to be affected; and
without venturing a reply, she pressed their hands,
turned away and abruptly left the room. A
moment
after, John arose and disappeared alsofor
what purpose will be seen anon. Half an hour
later, a horse, bearing a rider, might have been
heard going swiftly toward the east.
After some further conversation, not essential
to our story, Webber, Bernard and Tyrone,
together
with Mrs. Webber and Emily, retired for
the night, and the outer door was strongly bolted,
though John had not returned.
PART III.
CHAPTER I.
THE VILLAINSTHE GAMETHE PLANTHE
INTERRUPTION
THE
OATH.
The detail of our story now calls us to the old
hovel made somewhat conspicuous in the former
part of it by the events which then transpired.
The same evening on which the foregoing
conversation
occurredthough perhaps at a later hour
a group of five rough, villainous looking fellows
were assembled within the walls of the hut
boasting
Hetty Brogan for a hostess. Four of these
ruffians were the same as seen at the cave on the
night of the meeting of the banditti, then described
as plotting among themselves some deed of
wickedness
.
They were seated on rough benches,
around a plain deal table, whereon lay a small
pile of money, the owner of which was to be
determined
by the cards now held in their hands.
Near one corner of the table stood a feeble ligbt,
seemingly struggling with the surrounding
darkness
,
while opposite it was a bottle, evidently
more for use than ornament, judging by the
reddened
eyes and swollen flushed faces of the party.
The fifth personfor there were five besides
the hostesswas standing a little back, so much
in the shade that his features were undiscernable,
and engaged with the latter in conversation. The
game at the table just at this point had become
very interesting, if one were to judge by the
earnest
expression in each of their faces. Two of
the party had thrown up their cards, and were
watching with intense interest the proceedings of
the other two, who were drawing their money
preparatory to increasing the stakes.
Here, Saxtonsaid one of the two last
mentioned
,
whose arm was confined in a sling,
addressing
one of the others, and placing at the same
time a well filled purse on the tablejest
unloose
that ar' a bit; I haint got the use of my
fingers
enough for such fine work. The other
complied, and at his second request emptied the
contents on the table. Thar's the shiners for ye,
Nileshe continuedjest go ahead, who's
afeard?
I aint, answered Niles, the very picture of a
ruffian and his opponent for the stakes; I aint
afeard, so here goes five shiners better; and he
added a handful of money to the stakes lying on
the table.
You want to brag, hey! do ye? returned the
other. Ha, ha, ha!hang me, but you shall
brag for something, then! Thar's yer five and ten
better; and Curdishfor the reader has
doubtless
recognised himthrew down fifteen dollars.
You don't blaff me that way, croney, said
Niles, at the same time adding seven half eagles to
the pile; thar's twenty-five dollars better.
Well, observed Curdish, all or nothing
thems my sentiments! and after counting what
money still remained, he pushed the whole into
the centre of the table.
Well, what 've ye got? asked Niles.
I reckon it takes a cool ten yit, Mr. Niles,
afore you'll be allowed to ask that ar' perticular
question; replied Curdish, rather sarcastically.
I'm broke, Jack, rejoined the other; jest
draw out that ar' ten of yourn!
No, by Jupiter, I dont! growled Curdish,
sullenly
.
Then we'll jest fight for stakes! cried Niles,
grasping the money with one hand, and drawing a
pistol with the other.
Curdish sprang to his feet with an oath, and
the consequences might have been fatal to one or
both, had not the others interfered and restrained
them. The matter was finally settled by Saxton
loaning Niles ten dollars, which made the stakes
even, and a decision was called for.
Three aces and a pair of kings! said Niles,
throwing down his hand with a triumphant look.
Ha, ha, ha! roared Curdish, throwing down
a
flush
. I reckon as how I'll take them ar'
stakes, Mr. Niles!
Beat by ! grumbled the other, uttering
an oath, while Curdish with one hand commenced
transferring the money to his pocket.
Hurray, old woman! more of that ar' licher
here, d'ye hear? cried Curdish, whose success
made him feel rather elated. By Jupiter! we'll
have a merry nightha, ha, ha! Blast me, but
we'll have a night on'they, Bill Riley!ha,
ha, ha! and rising from his seat, he reached forth
his brawny hand and gave Rileywhom we have
noticed as the one standing apart in conversation
with Hettya familiar slap on the shoulder.
Hush! Jack, returned Riley; don't go to
bein' so boisterous now.
Boisterous!ha, ha, ha!who's a better right!
plenty o' money, by Jupiter! and Curdish brought
his hand down with force on his pocket, making
the contents jingle.
Let him laugh as can laugh last, Jack
Curdish
!
said Niles, somewhat fiercely, who felt
vexed and mortified both at his loss and the
hilarity
of the other. Saxton, will ye jest lend me
another five?
No! answered Saxton; no more playing
to-night
!
We've got other business to look to.
Right, thar', my trump! cried Curdish, with
an oath: I'd like to have forgot it. Hurray!
here comes Hetty with more licker. Blast me,
but she's an ace o' trumps, is Hetty! Hurray,
boys! take another pull all roundjest to steady
nerves, you know, ha, ha, ha! and then let's to
business. As he spoke, Hetty, who according
to Curdish's orders had taken the bottle to refill,
returned and placed it on the table, saying:
Thar's the rale genewine critter, gintlemen,
for them as wants to drink: none better in the
United States of Amerecay, although I sez it as
shouldn't.
Whether the gentlemen thought so or not, they
made no remark, but the bottle went round until
its contents had disappeared. As Curdish, who
was the last to drink, placed it again on the table,
he turned to Riley, and in a low voice said:
That ar' fifty of the old Jew told tolerable well
to-night in the way of interest,hey, Bill!ha,
ha, ha! So the old villain chuckled did he, to
think as how I's dead, and warnt a goin' to pay
over the chinkers? Hang me, but we'll have a
settlement some day! I jest kind o' owe him a
fewhere Curdish set his teeth hard, and
uttered
a horrible oath. But I say, Bill, how d'ye
come out with the cap'en?
O, I jest got a little severe talkin' to, and
caution about the future, that's all, replied Riley.
But what's the reason you warnt thar' the
night of the meetin'? asked Curdish.
Why, ye see, arter I got my money of old
David, I put off to St. Louis, got on a spree, and
forgot all about it till the thing was all over with.
Did the cap'en want to know anything about
that ar' scrape with the gal?
Yes, he axed me very perticular about it, and
then insiniwated that another such a scrape might
be likely to injure my health.
Used me jest the same way, said Curdish,
with an oath. Blast me, but he's gittin' a leetle
too perticular! Wonder if he thinks us
gentlemen
ar' a goin' to be idle all our lives? Since
he's got married, hang me if he does anything as
he used to do it! He with a wife,ha, ha, ha!
Why four year ago, I'd jest as soon thought of
gittin' married myself. Me married hey! Bill
ha, ha, ha!how'd I look with a woman tied to
me? Here Curdish, excited by the liquor he
had drank, and what he conceived to be the
ridiculousness
of such an idea, burst into a hearty
roar. What's yer perticular opinion about it,
gentlemen, said he at length, recovering his
gravity
,
and turning to the rest of the party, who were
conversing among themselves: dont ye think
the cap'en's gittin' a leetle too perticular lately?
Why that's my opinion, answered Saxton.
Well them's my sentiments! returned
Curdish
,
with another oath; and blast me if I don't
Hush! be careful! interposed Riley;
remember
you're talkin' about our cap'en!
Well, 'sposin' I am? growled Curdish,
frowning
;
he arnt no more than a manand I'm a
manand blast me if I dont tell him so, and do
jest I please! 'Sposin' he is cap'en, I say, he's
no more than a man!d'ye understand that,
gentlemen
,
hey! d'ye understand that, I say?
Ay, ay! answered a voice, we understand,
of course.
Of course we do-does, hiccoughed another
of the party, called Besley, on whom the liquor
was taking effect. Of course we-we does,
hur-ray!
Well, then, gentlemen, resumed Curdish
who also began to feel quarrelsome from the same
canseit's all right, by St. Christopher! and
blast me, but I'll blow his brains
Hold, rash fool! cried Riley, interrupting
him. You don't know what yer talkin' about!
Do you perticularly want to get us all shot, hey?
The cap'en's right about the gal! We hadn't
no business to be meddling with innocent
women
.
Hang me, but we've a right to meddle with
jest who we please! rejoined Curdish, with an
oath; and who says we haint, is a liar, and no
gentleman!
Them's strong words, Jack! returned
Riley
;
but I aint a-goin' to quarrel with ye
to-night
.
Come, come, said Saxton, interposing, we've
enemies enough, without quarrelling among
ourselves
;
and what's more, Jack, you ought to be
the last one to raise a fightseein' as how we
come here at your request. You said you'd got
a plan to lay afore us, and we'd jest like to know
now what it is.
Well, I reckon its putty soon got at, returned
Curdish, with a savage look. It's nothing more
nor less than what we's talkin' about tother night.
You see that ar' arm, don't ye? Well, that ar'
arm was shot by a  Yankee, when him and
another feller interfered in a scrape that
perticularly
belonged to me and Bill Riley; and what I
want's revenge!nothing more nor less than
their heart's blood, by ! and he closed with
a terrible oath.
But, Jack, you know that's a perticularly
dangerous
business! remarked Riley, who not
having
been with the others on the night in question,
now learned of the intentions of Curdish for the
first time.
'Sposing 'tis?by St. Christopher! who's
afeared?
The-them's it! hiccoughed Besleywho
was already too far gone to understand much of
what was said, but who occasionally caught at a
phrase and fancied he must say something in
return
:
The-them's it!who's afeared?
Hurhur-ray
!
But, said Saxton, what's the plan, and what's
the pay if we succeed? Ye see the affair's an
ugly one, the best way you can fix it, Jack, and
the temptation must be good, you know, for us
gentlemen
The-them's it! I-I say the tem-temptation's
goodhur-hurray! interrupted Bosley, who
fancied the temptation somehow referred to
drinking
.
As to the plan, answered Curdish, I don't
know much about it. Ye see I haint no great
head for plans, any how; though John Webber's
offered to give me instruction how to manage,
provided I'll jest help him in another scrape,
consarnin'
that 'ar' same gal what we had to do with
afore.
He
want's to carry her off this time.
Blast me, but she's gittin' quite pop'ler
somehow
ha,
ha, ha! But about the paythat's
all right. Ye see its 'spected they've got lots of
chinkers about 'em, and them as helps me can
divide
'em,all I want's revenge!
I'm with ye! cried Niles, with an oath.
I'm in! returned Saxton.
The-them's it! hiccoughed Besley:
Hurray
!
Well, all as goes in this ere business, will have
to help in tother; that's the perticular agreement
'tween me and John. What d'ye say, Bill?
I'll have nothin' to do with 't! answered
Riley. That ar' other scrape did me; besides,
you know the cap'en's orders
Hang the cap'en! interrupted Curdish,
fiercesposin'
He needn't know any thing about it; and
sposin' he did, it arnt none o' his business! I
reckon we've got a right to make an honest livin'.
without askin' him! If we haint, why blast me
we'll make a right!
5
Well, I say I'll have nothin' to do with 'it!
rejoined Riley, firmly.
Per'aps you wants to peach! said Curdish,
angrily. You're gittin' altogether over nice,
somehow, lately.
You know me well enough on that score,
Jack, answered Riley, to know you're
insiniwatin'
what's base and ungentlemanly; and if I'd
a notion to quarrel, you'd have to take back them
ar' words, or one or both on us would be gittin'
cold afore five minutes!
Some folks ar' perticularly wonderful smart
in big talk, retorted Curdish; but they don't
skeer
Come, come, Jack, interrupted Saxton; I'll
answer for Bill's honesty; and if he don't want
to jine us, why jest let him stay awaythe fewer
the number the greater the spoil, you know.
The-them's it! hiccoughed Besley, again.
Thar's enough on us, any how, put in Niles;
and I'm of Sax's opinion, that if Bill don't want
to jine, we'd better jest let him stay away.
But haint you got no plan how to go to work?
asked Saxton.
Hist! exclaimed Riley, suddenly, bending his
head forward in a listening attitude: Don't you
hear a noise?
The others paused and listened also. I hear
the hoofs of a horse! said Saxton, shortly.
Comin' fast! remarked Riley. What's the
game I wonder?
The sound which at first was rumbling and
distant, now came clear and distinct, and could
not be mistaken. It was a horse urged to his
greatest speed. A moment more the blow of the
animal was audible to the listeners, and the clatter
of his hoofs had paused at the door.
Curdish and Saxton turned a little pale. I
wonder what's in the wind! said the latter.
Surely we haint been betrayed?
I don't know, answered Curdish, unless it's
John Webber. Nobody else knew any thing about
our comin' here, unless Hettyhere he cast a
fierce look on the hostess, who catching the
expression
,
quickly made answer:
D'ye spose I'd peach, Jack Curdish?
Not and live! growled Curdish, with an oath.
It's only one, any how, said Saxton, looking
to the pistols in his belt.
At this moment a knock was heard on the door.
Who's thar? demanded Hetty, in a shrill
voice.
Ele lio! was the answer.
Blast me, but it's John Webber! exclaimed
Curdish. I knows the voice. Ye needn't fear,
Hetty; open the door!
Hetty immediately complied, and true to the
suggestion of Curdish, John Webber entered.
There was a lurking devil in his eye, if we may
be allowed an old expression, as he scanned with
a rapid glance both the apartment and its
occupants
.
There was something in that eye too, that
forbade familiarity, which each of the partyfor
all they knew him to be one of their band, and
believed him as great a villian as themselvesfelt;
a something that awed them to a certain respect,
(a sort of devilish mental superiority) which John
who was no novice in reading the thoughts of
kindred spiritsperceived; and for a moment that
dark smile lingered on his features.
We's jest talkin' about you, remarked
Curdish
,
who was the first to speak. They say talk
about the devil
Well? interupted John, sharply.
O, nothing, added Curdish, who somehow
fancied it would not be politic to finish the
sentence
.
You were talking about me, then! said John,
with a stern look: Well?
Yes, we's jest mentioning over that ar'
business
,
you know, about how 'twas best to git at
them ar' fellers, ye see.
Yes, I know and see! returned John,
quickly
;
and will add, that the chance you are looking
for will come sooner and in a different manner
than you expect.
Several of the party started with looks of
surprise
.
Ha! exclaimed Curdishthar's some
meaning in that!
I never speak without
meaning!
returned
John, emphasizing the last word.
What's in the wind? enquired Saxton.
Hark ye, fellows! answered John; before I
proceed farther, there must be an understanding.
I am aware, and doubtless you are alsoif not you
should bethat there are no ties of friendship
between
us. We are drawn together and act
together
only so far as our separate interests make
it necessary. Whatever those interests are,
matters
not; suffice that they are enough for our
present union. To come to the point. I am
willing to serve you, so far as lies in my power,
but you must serve me in return! Is this the
understanding?
Ay! ay! answered Curdish, Saxton, Niles
and Besleythe last of whom, by the way, owing
doubtless to the turn matters had taken, had
recovered
sufficiently to understand what was
going
forward.
But one of your party does not answer,
remarked
John, glancing at Riley.
I've told 'em afore, I'd have nothin' to do
with't! said Riley.
John put his mouth to the ear of Curdish, and
whispered: Can he be trusted?
I'll answer for him! replied Curdish, in a
whisper also.
And Hetty?
She's right!
Enough! said John, aloud. Those of you
who are willing to enter into an agreement to
serve me, when called upon, for the service I shall
render you, will now swear to do so by kissing this
dagger. As he spoke, he drew from his breast a
long, polished weapon, of the kind named, and
reached it to Curdish, who took and pressed it
to his lips. Saxton, Niles, and Besley did the
same.
You have all now deliberately sworn!
resumed
John, as he again took the weapon. Now
mark me, fellows! continued he, with a cold,
stern look, compressing his lips and speaking
through his clenched teeth: I never trifle
myself
,
and will not be trifled with! Whoever
among you shall dare wilfully, to break his oath,
by that dread eternity before us! I swear he shall
stain this steel with his heart's blood! and giving
it a flourish, so that it sparkled in the light, he
returned
it to its sheath, while the others gazed
upon him in silence with an awe they had
seldom
or never felt before in the presence of any
human being. Villains though they weredark,
treacherous villainsthey inwardly
acknowledged
John Webber their master. Nor did this
escape his piercing eyes; and with that devilish
smile playing for a moment on his features, he
again resumed:
I see you understand me. 'Tis well. Now
to business. I accidentally overheard a
conversation
this evening which concerns you all. A
project is under way to seize upon the person of
Hetty, here, early to-morrow morning.
What's that? screamed Hetty, who had been
listening attentively, while the others started with
looks of alarm.
Peace, woman! said John, sternly, and
listen
!
Their object in seizing her is to force her
to tell all she knows concerning that kidnapping
affair, who were the instigators and actors in it,
and also where they may be found, which mayhap
concerns some of you especiallyI know not but
all.
By St. Christopher! exclaimed Curdish,
springing to his feet: I
Hold! cried John, fiercely; I have no time
to dally, so do not interrupt me again! The party
for this business consists of three,two of them
are the men you seek, the third is my father. By
knowing their intentions beforehand, you will be
able to mature plans to your liking, with which I
shall have nothing to do. This much, however,
must
be borne in mind! Of the two with my
father, I have nothing to sayyou will deal with
them as you see proper; but with regard to my
father himself, understand me:Not a hair of his
head must be harmed! Secure him if you can,
from doing you violence, but raise not a weapon
against him! Understand me further:Should
he be harmed, I will
know
who harmed him; and
by that Heaven above, and that Hell beneath us!
I swear, him will I pursue till his corse lies cold
beneath my feet! and the aspect of his features
as he spoke, was terrible; so much so that those
very ruffians, bred in crime, felt a sense of secret
fear,even as a wild, savage beast has been known
to tremble before the awful majesty of the eye and
mind of his superior, man.
For a moment after John spoke all was silent,
when he again added: I think our business for
the present is settled. When your services are
required, you will be informed. I have no
time to tarry, and so good night! Turning
away, as he spoke, he abruptly disappeared,
mounted
his horse and rode swiftly away, but in an
opposite
direction whence he came.
Blast me, what a look! was the first
exclamation
after the departure of John, which proceeded
from Curdish.
Never saw the like on't! remarked Niles.
Nor I! added Saxton.
Nor I! repeated Besley.
'Twarnt human! put in Hetty.
Well, comrades, said Riley, who was the last
to speak, it was devilish enough, and no
mistake
;
but if I arnt mistaken, you've got other
matters to think on. I've said all along I'd have
nothin' to do with't, when you talked about
attacking
others; but since we're agoin' to be
attacked
ourselves, I arnt one as will flinch; so
you may jest put me down on the defence, though
somehow I've got a presentiment it'll be my last
undertakin'!
Good! cried Curdish. I jest knowed as how
you'd come up trump, Bill. More licker, Hetty,
and then by St. Christopher we'll lay our plans!
Whatever those plans were, our story itself in
its progress must alone develope.
CHAPTER II.
THE JEWTHE PLAN OF REVENGETHE PAPERS
THE PRISONERTHE STRANGERTHE SPY.
On that same night old David the Jew sat alone
in the hovel wherein we first introduced him to
the reader. His features bore the same coarse,
villainous, repulsive aspect as then, and the
apartment
the same dirty, gloomy appearance. The
Jew, as then, sat by a sort of rough table,
whereon
stood a pale, sickly light of his own
construction
his
elbow inclined downward and resting
on it so as to support his head with his hand.
The light stood some little distance before him,
and its pale gleam fell on a countenance where all
the worst passions of the human heart were
manifesting
themselves by sudden and sometimes awful
contortions of the muscles. Now a heavy frown
would gather over his features, like some black,
portentous cloud over a dismal swamp, and his
small black eyes would look cold and devilish, and
his shrivelled bloodless lips would compress, and
his lower jaw move as though he were
endeavoring
to grate his teeth. Now the expression would
take a wilder, fiercer and more fiend-like aspect, and
his eyes would sparkle with a strange and terrible
gleam, and his thin, bony hand would clutch at
the air, as though he felt it were at the throat of
some victim of his undying hate. And thus he
sat, for an hour, buried to the outer world in the
gloom of his own dark, guilty thoughts, with his
eyes fixed on vacancymotionless, save the
nervous
agitations we have describedalonean old,
grey headed mana sad and revolting picture of
humanity. Oh! who would wish to enter to the
depths of such a soul and see its awful workings,
where no ray of God's sunshine ever entered?
Better be in the dark, cold and cheerless charnal
house, among the mouldering remnants of
mortality
!
Thus, as we have said, for an hour sat the
Jew. At length he started to his feet, and with
his old frame shaking with age and debility,
commenced
shuffling to and fro the apartment, with
his head bent forward, and his trembling hands
locked in each other behind him. Suddenly he
paused, and reaching forth his clenched hand,
shook it as it were at vacancy, while his
countenance
assumed that same fierce, terrible
expression
.
Revenge! hissed he, at last, through his pale
quivering lips: Revenge! dat ish itdat ish
mine naturerevenge! mine Gott! I vill haves
revenge! Dey tinks de Jew ish old and feebles and
can't hurtish dem, and dey dares to imposhe upon
hims, dey dares to lies about hims, dey dares to
spoils his plans for getting monish; and by Fader
Abram! dey shall hangs, dey shall dies, dey shall
rots, and old Ben Davids shall lives to shee it!
Here he again commenced shuffling across the
apartment, but shortly paused and again resumed:
I got de gals, I paid mine monish for her, and
den, mine Gott! just as I was to makes mine
fortunes
mid her, dey sends and takes her away, and
mine monish gone too! Oh, mine Gott! mine
Gott! And den dey gets up storish about de
old Jew, and hash hims arresteds, and shays he
ish going to betrays 'em; and den de captains shays
he shalls pe watched, and if he finds he hash peen
in any more scrapes he shalls pe shots, and dat vill
pe de ends of de old Jew. Ah, mine Gott! mine
Gott! dey doesent knows de old Jewdey doesent
knows de old Jew! Ben Davids shall outvits 'em
yet! Ben Davids shall blows de whole partish;
and den dey shall pe caughts, and Ben Davids shall
gets de monish for telling, and den he vill haves
revenge
,
and den he vill laughs! Here the old
Jew, as though the consummation of his design
had already taken place, chuckled with a glee that
partook more of the nature of a fiend than a
human
being. Again he resumed:
Yish, to-morrows I shall takes mine monish
and vill go to St. Louis, and dare I shall finds a
magistrates, and shall tells him all about de
partish
,
and den, mine Gott! ve shall shee who ish
arresteds, and who shall get shots! Ha, ha!
Captains
Bonardies, den ve shall shee! Ha, ha!
Mistoor Rileys, den ve shall shee! Ha, ha!ha,
ha! den ve shall shee who gets aheads of old Ben
Davids! Yish, mine Gott! ha, ha! ve shall shee
den! and the old Jew rubbed together his hands,
and chuckled merrily until a severe cough
interrupted
him.
Vell, now I shall looks to mine monish, said
he, as soon as he had recovered sufficiently to
speak; and mine papers too. Ha! mine Gott!
cried he, starting as though some new thought
had come over him suddenly: De papers! yish,
de papers!perhaps I cans sells de papers! Ha!
yish, I knows de young mans as loves de gal,
and he shall puy de papers, and I shall asks mush
for de papers, and den I shall haves plenty of
monish
ha,
ha!plenty of monish; and again the
old Jew rubbed his bony hands together and
chuckled. Glancing cautiously around, as though
to assure himself no other being was present,
although
he knew the outer door was strongly
bolted
,
and felt perfectly confident he was alone,
(such by the way being the force of habit) he
proceeded to the closet we have before had
occasion
to notice as occupying one corner of the
apartment, and for a moment disappeared. It
was but for a moment however; and when he
returned, he bore in one hand a roll of papers,
and in the other a bag of money. Approaching
with a feeble step he deposited both on the table,
and then reseated himself on the old stool.
Untying
the bag he poured forth its contents, and
then for a few minutes sat and gazed upon the
pile with the exulting, avaricious look of a miser.
Perhaps this in a measure was excusable; for
the pile, to say the truth, was by no means an
invaluable one, and might have tempted others of
a less avaricious nature than the Jew to eye it
with delight. It was mostly of goldold
genuine
coinsmany of them Spanish doubloons,
English
guineas, and the likeoccasionally
interspersed
with a few pieces of silver.
For some minutes, we say, the old Jew sat and
gazed upon his treasure, and then commenced
handling each piece separately, with a childish
delight
placing
each in the palm of his hand, or
on the end of his fingers, and then moving his
hand up and down as though to ascertain its
weight. In this manner passed another hour
perhaps morewhen he returned the money
piece by piece to the bag, taking due note of the
exact amount that none might be missing. This
done, and the whole secured by the string, he laid
it gently upon the table, took up the papers,
unrolled
and examined them attentively for some
half hour more; when, as if satisfied with his
scrutiny, he rolled them together, and gathering
up his money returned again to the closet. Here,
feeling along the side next to the wall, low down,
he came to a kind of panel, when touching a
secret spring it immediately flew open, disclosing
a small iron door. Touching another spring, this
door opened, leaving an aperture into a small iron
safe, where the Jew quickly deposited his money
and papers, and then reclosed both the safe door
and panel. Scarcely was this completed, when a
deep sepulchral groan seemed to issue from
beneath
him.
Ha! exclaimed he starting, I had forgot
mine prisoners. Vell, vot fors should I keeps him
longers? Vot more use vill he pe now I vonders!
No, he will pe no more use. I shall take mine
papers, and mine monish, and shall come pack no
mores. Vell, den he shall dies! Yish, mine
Gott! he shall dies! and den he will tells no
storish
on de old Jew. Ha! yish, mine Gott! dat ish
rightshe shall dies! As he spoke, the old Jew
tottered back to the table, with a savage look on
his grim, ugly featuresa hellish gleam in his
small black eyesand taking up the light
returned
once more to the closet. Here he paused,
and taking from a narrow shelf a somewhat rusty
dagger, he examined it attentively for a moment,
with a fierce gleam of satisfaction. Dat shall
do mine pusiness, he muttered; and raising a
trap-door near his feet, he slowly commenced
his descent down a damp, mildewed ladder, into a
slimy, nauseous vault, bearing the light with him.
The passage which the Jew descended was very
narrow, and was walled up on either hand to
prevent
the earth from caving in. In depth it might
have been some fifteen feet, and in extent some
thirty more. The air was cold, for both the
ground and walls were moist; and on the latter
stood large drops, which glistened as the pale
gleam of the light fell upon them, like the eyes
of so many serpents. But this was by no means
its worst feature. The air, though cold, was close
and heavy; so much so as to be difficult of
respiration
;
and was, besides, filled with a stench
almost
insupportable. At the bottom of the ladder
the Jew for a moment pausedwith his feet
sliding
upon what seemed greasy earthand then
turning slowly around, moved cautiously along
the passage, with the light held before him in one
hand, and the dagger in the other, occasionally
resting an arm against the walls to prevent
himself
from falling, until he came to the terminus,
where was revealed a spectacle of the most
piteous
,
revolting, and inhuman nature.
On a bed of damp, filthy strawground into
the earth until it was completely coated with a
clayey loam, and chained to the walllay the thin,
sickly, wasted figure of what had once been a
powerful man, now passed the middle age of life.
He was scarcely more than a skeleton. His once
strongly marked countenancenow of a pale
livid, ghastly huehad wasted away until every
bone stood prominent. His cheeks had fallen in;
and his large, dark eyes,as they rolled in their
hollow, bony sockets, and gleamed out from
between
his long, grey, matted, dirty hair, which
partly screened his featureswere sepulchral and
awful to behold. His limbs and body were but
partially covered by rags of the most filthy
description
,
whileas if to complete the foulest
picture
of human wretchedness imaginablerusty
iron chains, fastened around his ankles, clanked
to the move of his feet.
Such was the prisoner of the Jew. Such was
the awfully loathsome, heart sickening sight,
which he now gazed upon with a savage joy.
Such was the scene before him; but worseay,
worsefor we
dare
not describe it as it was in
reality
.
It would shock the senses. And who was
this man? and how came he there in the power of
the Jew? Let the sequel of our story answer. As
the prisoner saw the Jew approaching, he partly
raised himself on one arm and groaned. As the
Jew paused before him, with a dagger in his hand,
and murder in his eye, the prisoner groaned again;
and then in a deep, hollow voice, said:
Oh, or God-sake, give me food! I am dying
I am dying of starvation! Days I know have
passed since I have seen yousince aught has
passed these lips! and the wretched man sunk
back upon his wretched bed with a second groan.
For some time the Jew returned no answer,
but stood and gazed upon him with a fiendish
smile. Then he lookod at his dagger, and then
he spoke:
You shall shee me no more nevers. You
shall gets no more foods. I shall kills you. You
shall dies mid mine daggers. I am going avays.
I shall needs you no mores. The gal vill not pe
mines, and vot for should you lives? No, mine
Gott! you shall dies! The Jew spoke rapidly,
in short sentences, and as he concluded he raised
his weapon and bent forward in an attitude to
strike.
Oh, spare me! for God-sake, spare me! release
me! groaned the victim, glaring wildly upon
him: I am not ready to die now.
He, he, he! chuckled the Jew, with a hideous
grin. Vot for you tinks I shall spares you?
You haves no monish. I can makes no monish
mid you. Shall I spares you to tell storish on de
old Jew, ha, ha? No, mine Gott! you shall
dies! You shall dies now! and placing one knee
on the ground as he spoke, he again raised the
dagger, bent himself forward, and with a rapid
motion
struck at the heart of his victim.
But he failed of his mark. The other, who had
been watching him intently, gathered all his
remaining
strength for a final effort, marked the
blow as it descended, caught his arm with one
hand, and with the other wrenched the weapon
from him. So sudden and so unexpected was
this, that the Jew started to his feet and retreated
some paces in absolute terror. Then, as he
comprehended
all, and saw how his victim had foiled
him, he uttered a volley of curses at his own
stupidity
,
stamped the earth with his foot, and beat
his head with his clenched hand in a paroxysm of
rage.
What might have been the resultwhat dark
and inhuman revenge he might have taken on the
unhappy object before himhad nothing occurred
to interrupt and draw off his thoughtswe do not
pretend to say; but just at this instant was heard
a noise, like the quick tramp of a horse, and
immediately
followed a loud knocking at the door
above. As the Jew heard this, he started,
turned
palethat is as pale as his brown,
dirt-begrimed
features would permitand trembled in every
limb. Again the knocking was renewed, even
louder than before, and not daring to pause longer
he turned and made haste up the ladder. At the
top he paused to reclose the door of the vault, and
then tottering into the larger apartment placed
the light upon the table. As he did so, he was
still more startled by hearing a deep, heavy voice
say:
Open this door, or I will burst it from its
fastenings
!
Who ish dare? cried the Jew, in a trembling
voice.
Ele lio! was the answer.
The Jew, though still frightened, felt much re
lieved by this, as it proved the person, whoever
he was, to be one of the banditti; and shuffling to
the door, he quickly withdrew the bolts and
admitted
a tall figure, whose features were
completely
concealed under a black mask. The stranger,
without ceremony, walked directly into the
middle
of the apartment, and then drawing from his
breast a long, polished dagger, turned quickly
round and abruptly accosted the Jew, who stood
with his hand still upon the door, a perfect picture
of cowardly fright.
Come forward, Jew; I have a few words to
say, and but little time to say them in.
The Jew hesitated.
Must I
force
you to obey me? said the
stranger
,
with a menacing gesture, stamping his foot
fiercely on the ground.
The Jew, too frightened to speak, reluctantly
complied.
You are an old man, Jew, continued the
stranger, and a man of crime. The only thing
that convinces me there is a Hell in the future
world, is in gazing upon such a being as youfor
who would suppose that you could ever inhabit
Heaven? But enough of that: I am no moralist,
and only preach what I practice. My business
here is of a different nature, and quickly told.
You have in your possession certain papers,
relating
to a certain young lady, whom you know,
but whose name it is unnecessary to mention. I
have come for these papers.
Me haves papers! exclaimed the Jew, in
pretended
astonishment: I haves no papers.
You will oblige me by getting them as soon as
possible, returned the stranger, cooly, not
heeding
the Jew's remark, as I have but little time
to tarry.
But I tells you I haves no papers! repeated
the Jew.
Sorry! returned the other, carelessly
feeling
of the point of the dagger still held in his hand.
Sorry you have not got them, Jew, as I shall be
much disappointed.
Vell, I swears to you I haves not one papers
at all! said the Jew, feeling somewhat reassured
at the mild tone in which the other spoke. If I
did haves papers I should gives thems to you mid
pleasures.
How far below the surface do you think the
centre of an honest man's heart lies? asked the
stranger, abruptly.
Vell, how you tinks I knows? replied the Jew,
in wonder. Vot fors you shays dat?
Because I thought it likely you might know,
having measured the distance often with your
dagger! rejoined the other, still toying with his
own.
You ish vons very strange beings! remarked
the Jew.
As you do not know, resumed the stranger,
how far the distance to the centre of an honest
man's heart, how far do you judge it to be to the
centre of your own?
Eh! vot fors you shays dat? repeated the
Jew in alarm, who now began to fancy there was
an under current to the other's interrogations.
O, I merely enquired, replied the stranger,
that I might know how much of this bright steel
it would be necessary for me to stain.
Oh, mine Gott! cried the Jew, shaking with
fear: you vills not kills me?
Why not? said the stranger, sternly. Have
you not done such deeds often, and on younger
menmen too whose lives were valuable to
society
?
Why should I spare you? You are old,
and have lived long enough; besides, would I not
be benefitting society by sending you to your
last account?
Oh! mine Gott! you vills not kills me?
repeated
the Jew, sinking upon his knees, and
extending
his shrivelled old hands in supplication.
Kill you! cried the other fiercely, grasping
him by the arm, and raising his long glittering
steel: Kill you! ay, as I would a copper snake.
Oh, oh, oh! shrieked the Jew, who now
believed
his last hour had come. Spares me
spares mespares me! and you shall haves
monish
you
shall haves gold! Oh, oh! mine Gott!
mine Gott!
Money! returned the stranger,
contemptuously
:
I do not seek your money: your blood
stained coins I do not want, for a curse is on
them. There is but one consideration for which
I would spare your life, and that is not in your
power to grant; at least so you have sworn, and
of course you would not swear falsely.
O, mine Gott! yish, de papers! exclaimed the
Jew, with a ray of hope breaking in upon him.
O, yish, Mistoor Strangers, mine Gott! yish,
you shall haves de papers.
O, then you did swear falsely, eh? and you
really have the papers? said the other, releasing
his hold of the Jew. How lucky you thought
of it in time. Up, then, and get themfor I am
in haste.
Oh, you vills not takes
Up, I say! interrupted the stranger, fiercely,
stamping his foot violently. Up I say, quickly!
or by! you rise no more. Quick now, the
papers! added he, as the Jew started to his
feet.
David, who saw there was no middle course,
turned away with a groan to obey the order.
Proceeding to the safe, he drew forth the papers,
returned and gave them to the stranger, with a
sigh and a mental curse. Turning to the light,
the figure in the mask examined them for a
moment
with evident surprise.
Ha! he exclaimed: there has been foul play
here, Jew; but I have no time to enquire into it
nowanother time will do; and rolling them
together as he spoke, without another word he
turned and quitted the apartment. A moment
later the tramp of a horse was heard speeding
westward.
That horse bore a riderthat rider was John
Webber.
We shall not delay to picture the rage of the
Jew, when he found he had again been
imposed
uponagain been foiled in another of his
schemes; suffice that he cursed, raved, stamped,
and beat his head like a madman. Thirsting for
revenge on the banditti, whom he now looked
upon as enemies, and thinking his movoments
less likely to be observed if done in the night, he
determined to start for St. Louis, and early on the
morrow betray the band and seek for protection
under the law. Accordingly he took his money,
the only thing valuable he could carry with him,
and within an hour from the departure of John,
set forth on his treacherous mission. Engrossed
by his wild thoughts of revenge, his prisoner had
been forgotten.
As the Jew quitted the hovel, a dark, crooked
object came out from beneath the table
straightened
itself into the tall figure of a manopened
the door softly, and disappeared after him.
Who was that figure? how came he there? and
for what purpose? Did the Jew reach St. Louis
that night? Did he ever reach St. Louis?
Who reads shall learn.
CHAPTER III.
THE HORSEMENTHE ATTACKTHE FIGHTTHE
DEATHTHE ESCAPETHE SUSPICIONTHE
STORY
THE
SURPRISETHE SEARCHTHE PRISONER
THE RELEASE.
On the morning following that night of events,
the sun rose in splendor, and as his golden rays
rested upon the ridge where our story first opened,
they occasionally, from between the branches of the
surrounding trees, fell with a mellow gleam upon
three figures, well mounted on three noble steeds.
Two of the three were large, powerful men, while
the third, well formed, full of grace and activity,
was by no means an inferior individual. Each of
the party was well armed, with two pistols, a long
hunting knife, and a rifle slung behind him,
across his shoulders, ready for immediate use
when necessary. That they had ridden fast was
evident from the expanded nostrils and foaming
breasts of the animals beneath them; but at the
moment introduced their speed was only a fast
walk, and they were gazing in various directions
upon the beautiful scenery around with seeming
delight.
This ere's a putty considerable kind o' a
country of yourn, Bill Webber, remarked
Bernard
,
at lengthfor the reader has doubtless
recognised
the three horsemen as Webber, Bernard
and Tyrone:a putty considerable kind o' a
country, I swow, and no mistake. Its wuth a
feller's travel out here jest to look at it like, let
alone the chance he has for gittin' intu a bit o' a
fuss now and then. Why a look at the old
Mississippi
'd pay the cost, I'm darned if twouldn't,
that's a fact, don't you think so Mark?
Howsomever
,
I seed it when I's out here afore
continued
he, without waiting for a reply from
Tyrone
so
twasn't exactly new to me, though I
looked on't with jest about the same satisfaction
as I did at first. Mark, here, though, thought
he'd got right on tu the ocean, kerslap.
Pshaw! exclaimed Tyrone, who was not
particularly
fond of a joke; you always exaggerate,
Harvey. 'Tis true I thought it a great stream,
and in that opinion I am borne out by
geographical
facts, which prove it one of the first in the
world, but I did not mistake it for the ocean,
nevertheless
.
O you needn't try to creep out on't now,
Mark; it's all fact, I swow! said Bernard, casting a
side glance at Webber, who smiled and changed
the conversation by saying:
I suppose we are near the cave you mentioned,
Harvey?
Right down there's the spot, he replied
pointing to the right,where you see them are
stones all jumbled up together, jest as if they didn't
care 'bout how they looked.
I remember the place now, very well,
returned
Webber; for only a short time since a
man was supposed to have been murdered there.
Ah! exclaimed Tyrone, with interest:
happened
it very lately?
About four months since, answered Webber.
Indeed! Why you did not mention this
before
,
to my recollection.
In fact I had forgotten it, said Webber, in
reply; such things being too common in this
country to live long in memory, unless the
individual
be well known, and this one was a
stranger
.
It is not known for a certainty that he was
murdered, but circumstances place it beyond a
doubt. A man somewhat past the middle age was
seen in this vicinity during the day, and the night
succeeding one of my neighbors heard a shriek
and cry for help, proceeding as near as he could
judge from yonder cave; but being unarmed and
alone he dared not go to the rescue; the more so, as
he believed there would be more than one to
encounter
.
A search wasinstituted the day following,
but save some marks of blood in and about the
cave, nothing was discovered of importance. As
the stranger has never been seen since, it is
believed
that he was attacked by ruffians, murdered
for his money, and his body sunk in the Maramee.
It was thought by many that the old Jew could
tell something of the matter if so disposed; and
now I think of it, doubtless these same kidnappers
were concerned also.
Such is my opinion from what I can gather by
your narration, observed Tyrone.
Well, returned Webber, compressing his
lips, a day of retribution is at hand, and an
evenger
on their traillet them beware!
The party had by this time reached the foot of
the hill. Right here's the place where I had the
satisfaction of trying my science on that are
scoundrel
,
Curdish! said Bernard, as they rode past
where the attack had been made on Edward and
Emily.
Well chosen for their design, returned
Webber
;
but I trust, Harvey, when you display your
science again, you will make a better shot than
before.
I'd jest like to git another chance to display it
like, rejoined Bernard.
Doubtless you will have one ere long, said
Webber; but come, we waste time; let us to the
spur.
Accordingly at the word they set forward at a
rapid gallop, through the ravine previously
mentioned
,
nor did they loose rein again until they
neared the old hut occupied by Hetty Brogan,
when turning aside into some bushes they came
to a halt, and Webber said:
Look well to your weapons, comrades; for
somehow I have a presentiment we shall have
difficulty
ere we have done here. The door is closed
however, and the hut has the appearance of
being
deserted; nevertheless we are on an ugly
mission
,
and there is nothing lost by being cautious.
It is possible Hetty may not have arisen, though
the sun is already over the hill; and it is possible
too there may be some of the rascals within, as
they doubtless, at times, make this place a
rendezvous
;
but I will soon ascertain; saying which he
dismounted and threw his reins to Bernard.
Look a here, Bill Webber, returned the
latter
,
afore you go to work in this ere business,
jest listen a minute. Ye see, Bill, you're putty
considerable kind o' apt to have every thing jest
your own way, but in this ere perticular case I
want mine.
Well, Harvey, what is it? asked Webber.
Why to say it right out and out it's jest this:
You're somewhat older than I am, and per'aps aint
quite so strong, though you're a putty strong
man, that's a fact; but then you've got a family
and I haint, and what's more, never expect to
have; though I did love a gal Down East, as the
saying is, but then she kind o' took to another
feller, and so I jest let her go it, and concluded to
punish the hull race by never gitting married at
all.
Well, well, Harvey, but what has that to do
with this affair? asked Webber, a little
impatiently
.
Why jest this: that you'll stay out here with
the horses, and let me and Mark venter in; 'cause
per'aps there'll be trouble, and like enough
somebody'll
git hurt; and if its me, ye see, why I haint
no family depending on me, and twont matter
much.
Noble, generous fellow! exclaimed Webber,
warmly, approaching and grasping his hand,
while a tear glistened in his eye. I know you
well, Bernard, and I know that you would give
your life for a friend at any moment; still I do not
think that I have any more claims on your life
because it would be freely given, nor that I
should stand back and let you run all the risks
because you are single. 'Tis true I have a
family
,
who would mourn my loss should I meet
with a fatal accident; but then I have no right
to sacrifice a friend on this account, neither will
I do it.
O, as to that, replied Bernard, you aint a
going to sacrifice any body in that way, so you
needn't be afeard; but one thing I'm jest a going
to tell you, and that is, if you don't want to
quarrel
with me, you'll jest stay here with these ere
animals, and let me and Mark go ahead. As
Bernard spoke, both himself and Tyrone
dismounted
.
I shall add my voice, said the latter, that
you take Bernard's advice.
Well, comrades, answered Webber, since
you are both determined on this point, why of
course I must acquiesce; but do not be too
venturesome
,
and bear in mind I hold the horses
here, ready for instant mounting if necessary.
All right, returned Bernard, drawing his
pistols
and looking to their priming, while Tyrone did
the same. All right, I say; and now Mark, we'll
jest go ahead; and at the word both started
forward
.
The hut was only some hundred yards distant,
and but little time elapsed ere Bernard was knocking
on the door. Not receiving an answer to this, he
pressed with considerable force against it, when
somewhat to his surprise it quietly swung back
on its hinges.
I guess the bird's flew, Tyrone, said he, in a
low voice, as pistol in hand he entered, followed in
like manner by his companion.
One thing is certain, returned Tyrone, as
having entered he glanced around the gloomy
apartment, and that is that nobody is here but
ourselves.
True's preaching, Mark, rejoined Bernard;
but I can tell you one thing more, they haint
been gone long, and there's been a number on 'em
here too. Don't you see them ere cards scattered
all about, and that are bottle on the table, and
these ere wet spots, where they've spilt their
licker; and don't you smell old stinking tobacker
smoke too?
Right! answered Tyrone; these certainly
are sure indications of a party having been here
quite lately, and perhaps even now are not far
off-Who
knows
His speech was here cut short by the sudden
entrance of three figures, whose faces were
concealed
by black masks.
Ha! by St. Christopher, we've got you now!
cried the foremost, whose left arm was bandaged,
and whom of course the reader will at once
recognise
as Curdish. You don't 'scape this ar'
perticular
time, you  Yankee! and rushing forward,
he fired a pistol directly at the head of Bernard,
who, though taken by surprise, and but a
moment
left for thought, still had sufficient presence
of mind to cast his head aside, just at the instant
of the discharge, by which means the ball slightly
grazed his cheek, carried away a small portion of
his ear, and lodged in the wall beyond.
There's such a thing as being mistaken in this
ere world, Mr. Jack Curdish, returned Bernard,
cooly, following his example, and sending a ball
through the fleshy portion of the wounded arm of
his antagonist, near the shoulder, who staggered
back with a howl of rage and pain, and gnashed
his teeth together in terrible fury.
Instantly recovering himself, and drawing a
long knife from his belt, Curdish again sprang
forward
,
with a horrible oath, and aimed a rapid blow
at the heart of the other. But here again Bernard's
coolness and dexterity saved him; for watching
the movement with a keen, sure eye, he sprang
suddenly asidethe blow missed its objectand
Curdish, who had thrown his whole force into it,
fell heavily against him. Quick as thought
Bernard
again started back, and ere the other had
time to regain his balance, with a tremendous
blow he drove the breech of the discharged pistol
full in his face, destroying his mask, and he fell
backward upon the ground--senseless--his features
besmeared with blood. This, Bernard was on the
point of following up with severer measures, when
a cry, and a glance at Tyrone, arresting him, he
sprang quickly to his relieffortunately just in
time to save his life.
Whether the manner of attack on Bernard and
Tyrone was preconcerted, or whether the ruffians
were governed by circumstances after their
entrance
,
we do not pretend to say; but certain it is, in
either case, there was a grand oversight in their
proceedings; for had two attacked Beruard,
instead
of Tyrone, the result might have been more
to their liking. Doubtless, Curdish, thirsting for
revenge, and feeling sure of his man, had chosen
Bernard for himselfaloneexpecting to give
him a sudden quietus, while the other two should
as easily despatch his companion. Be this as it
may, however, no sooner did Curdish rush
towards
Bernardwho was standing near the centre
of the room, and the farthest from the doorthan
his two followers, Saxton and Riley, turned upon
Tyrone. Saxton being the foremost of the two,
instantly snapped a pistol at the breast of Tyrone,
which fortunately missed fire, when Tyrone,
seeing
how matters stood, and knowing his life
depended
upon his greatest exertions, discharged
each of his pistols in quick succession, but with
no other effect than that of slightly wounding
Riley
in the head. Perceiving his failureowing
to his hasteand knowing there was not a
moment
to be lost, as his enemies were close upon
him, he took one step backward, and then
suddenly
bounding into the air, planted both feet
against the breast of Saxton with such
tremendous
force that he fell back upon Riley, who, not
being prepared for the shock, was thrown to the
ground. Following up this slight advantage,
Tyrone
instantly drew his knife and made a pass at
Saxton's throat, who caught his arm with a
mighty grasp, as the blow was in progress, and
then closing in with, endeavored to wrench the
weapon from him, or get an opportunity to draw
his own. Saxton, although a powerful man, and
far superior to Tyrone in size and strength, was
yet greatly his inferior in supleness and science;
and taking advantage of his knowledge of
wrestling
,
Tyrone had no sooner fairly closed in with
him, than by a dexterous movement he coiled his
legs around the other's, took a sudden lock, and
threw him upon his back with tremendous
violence
himself
falling uppermost. Ere he could
make use of this advantage, Saxton seized upon
the rifle which was still attached to Tyrone's
shoulderone hand on either sideand by this
means drew him down with so close a hug,
that his breath was completely suspended, and all
power of action. Riley had by this time regained
his feet; and on a call from Saxton to release him
by killing Tyrone, and somewhat enraged at his
own wound and fall, he drew a pistol, cocked,
presented it to his head, and his finger was already
pulling upon the trigger, when Bernard, who had
seen the movement in time to reach him,
suddenly
hurled him backward, by which means the
muzzle was elevated sufficiently, as it went off, to
clear the head of Tyrone, and bury the ball in the
earth a few feet beyond.
You wont try that are motion again soon, I
guess, remarked Bernard, cooly, as he deliberately
drew his other pistol, pointed it at the head of
Riley
,
and glanced steadily along the barrel. Take
that for your pains! he added, and with the word
came a sharp report. Riley bounded from the
earth, with a shriek, and fell dead at his feethis
forehead pierced by a ball.
His presentiment had proved too true.
At this moment came the report of a rifle, and
a cry from without. Bernard started in alarm.
Webber was evidently attackedperhaps killed.
No time was to be lost. Unslinging his rifle
with the rapidity of thought, he dealt Saxton so
powerful a blow with the breech, that his hold
instantly relaxed, leaving Tyrone free.
Up, Mark! cried Bernard; I guess there's
more work on hand out o' doors; and without
pausing longer he rushed forth, followed by
Tyrone
,
both of whom made all haste possible to
where Webber had been left with the horses.
Here, much to their joy, they found Webber,
rifle in hand, in company with Edward Merton,
who had just arrived and dismounted from his
horse, which he still held by the bridle.
Thank God, friends, you are safe! exclaimed
Webber, joyfully, as they approached, extending
a hand to each, while Merton did the same: I
feared you were killed, as I heard the report of
several pistols.
Why we've had a putty considerable rough
time on't, said Bernard in reply; but I guess
as how them are chaps have had a rougher
though one on 'em I don't believe knows much
about it now, or ever will know again either.
Have you killed one, Harvey? asked
Webber
,
quickly.
Wal I rather guess as how one on 'em 'll be
gitting cold afore long, he answered; at least
that's my candid opinion about it; but I thought
there was a fuss out here, for I heerd a gun go
off, and heerd somebody holler like too, or my
ears deceived me.
Why yes, returned Webber, there was some
trouble here a few minutes since; but thanks to
the timely arrival of friend Edward, here, nothing
serious has happened on our part, though
whether
the other side escaped as scatheless is
somewhat
doubtful.
Then you were attacked also? said Tyrone.
I was, answered Webber. Scarcely had
you entered the hut, and while I was anxiously
looking in that direction, anticipating difficulty
for you, two men crept stealthily behind and
instantaneously
seized me, one hold of either arm,
which they crossed upon my back. I made a
sudden spring forward, but I am not what I once
was I find, and they were both strong men and
held me firmly. At that moment I saw three
ruffians enter the hut, and immediately heard
several
reports of firearms in quick succession, and
believed that all was over with both of you; for
taken as you were by surprise, I did not deem it
possible for you to escape. I made another
attempt
to free myself, but in vain; and thinking
my own time had now come, I resigned myself
to my fate, expecting every moment to be shot or
stabbed in the back. But much to my surpise
however, instead of such severe measures, I only
felt my captors securing my hands with a cord,
and hope revived that they were not perhaps
seeking
my life. Why they used no other violence is
yet a mystery. At this moment a horseman
dashed suddenly into the bushes, and with a thrill
of joy I recognised in the rider the familiar face of
friend Merton. At sight of him a panic seemed
to seize upon my captors, who instantly let go
their hold and fled. Determined not to let them
part without a token of remembrance, I unslung
my rifle, which they had left untouched, and with
a hasty aim fired at the nearest, just as he was
leaving my sight by entering some thick shrubbery.
What was the result of the shot I know not; but
he appeared to stumble forward, and uttered a
piercing cry as of painwhich were, I presume,
the sounds you heard. I had just time to grasp
Edward
by the hand, tell him of your supposed
fates, and the necessity, if living, of our coming
speedidy to your assistance, when, to my
astonishment
,
and I need not add joy, I saw you both
issue
forth, and awaited your approach. But come,
we have already talked too long in a time when
decided action is so necessary. Let us reload as
speedily as possible, and follow up our so far good
fortune.
Right! said Bernard and Tyrone in a breath;
and all four instantly commenced carrying out
Webber's suggestion. We wish the reader to
bear in mind here, that though we have been
somewhat long in describing the events as they
took placeowing to our relating each one
separately
the
whole time occupied, from the
entrance
of Curdish, Riley and Saxton, to the
meeting
of Webber, Bernard and Tyrone, did not
exceed
three minutes.
But a short time elapsed ere our party were
again ready for action; and nothing daunted by
what had taken place, on a second suggestion
from Webber, they made the bridles of their
horses
fast to some of the shrubbery, and all four set
forward to the old hut, to secure the ruffians
not doubting they were still there. But in this
they were mistaken; for on arriving at the place,
not a trace of either, with the exception of some
red spots of blood, could be found,Curdish and
Saxton having recovered in their absence and left,
bearing the corpse of Riley with them.
Well, remarked Webber, as he glanced
around
the late scene of strife, they have escaped
us I perceive; and perhaps it is better that it is so,
as we still have other very important matters on
our hands, which they might have prevented us
from attending to in season.
To what do you allude? asked Tyrone.
Have you forgotten the Jew and those papers
that is if he has any in his possession?
Ah! true, rejoined Tyrone:But do you
think of proceeding upon that business at once?
I do, answered Webber, as soon as may be;
for if he is connected with these fellows, as I
doubt not he is, he will be likely to receive from
them information of what has happened; and
perhaps
,
expecting a like visit from us, will decamp
at least for the time being; and by the way too,
the more so, as these fellows doubtlessthough I
cannot for the life of me imagine where they got
it--had knowledge of our present design; for you
see they had their plans all laid to attack us,
while Hetty herself, whom we came to seek, is
absent.
It does certainly appear singular, observed
Tyrone, thoughtfully, after a short pause; but
still I do not see how they could have been
informed
;
for it was only last evening we talked the
matter over, and it has been communicated to no
one since.
Webber suddenly started, as though some
disagreeable
thought had flashed through his mind,
and his cheeks grew pale and red, and he hung his
head thoughtfully for some time, but made no
answer
.
Perhaps a vague suspicion of his son John
whose disposition he knew too welltroubled
him. But whatever it was, as we have said, he
returned no answer Bernard was the next to
speak.
I've been a thinking it all over, Mark, said
he, and I rather guess I can 'splain it away
without
making any witchery on't. Ye see its been
tarnal hot weather lately, and all the winders has
been hysted 'bout our house, so that if any feller
was about as chose to listen, he could hear all that
was said easy enough. Now this ere was the case
last night, when we's talking it all over, and like
as not one of these ere same chaps come along, and
played the spy, and got hold of all twas said; and
like as not too he's done it all along afore, jest to
know like how things was a going on.
True, rejoined Tyrone, I did not think of
this before; but now it strikes me very forcibly as
being correct. What is your opinion on the
subject
,
Webber?
It may be so, answered the latter; I hope it
is; and then turning abruptly to Merton, he
continued:By the way, Edward, you are the
very person I wished to see, to question
concerning
that stranger whom you met here, and who
gave his name as Bartonthe particulars of which
I got from Emily. At the mention of the name
of Emily, there was a brighter glow on the cheeks
of Edward, which Webber apparently heeded not
as he continued:I wish you to describe the
personal appearance of this Barton.
Merton did so.
Do you think Barton is his real name? asked
Webber, as the other concluded his description.
I have no reason to doubt it, answered
Merton
.
Did he tell you his occupation?
Not at our first interview, but he has since
done so.
Ah! then you have seen him again?
I have. I rode in company with him awhile
this morninghe overtaking me shortly after my
leaving St. Louis, while the day was yet grey,
and parting from me some three miles back, to go
and look at some land, which he stated he had
lately been purchasing.
He is then a land speculator?
Such he told me was his business.
'Tis the same then, said Webber. But
what does he know of the Jew, and how did he
explain that matter of the ring?
O, simply as thus, answered Merton. He
stated that some months since he had purchased a
large tract of land, at a very low price, from the
fact that the titles to it were considered very
doubtful, on account of a supposed prior claim;
that afterward, examining the land, he had found
it of great value, by reason of its lead mines; that
determining, if possible, to find whether there
was a prior claimand, if so, to purchase it, ere his
discovery leaked outhe had advertised the same
in the papers, and posted bills in different sections
of the countrythe result of which had been his
receiving a call from the Jew, who held the
papers
of prior right, and who offered to sell, but on
high terms:that on asking the Jew to produce
his documents, he had done so; but to his utter
astonishment had found that the deedthough
drawn up in proper formlacked the signatures
of two persons necessary to make it valid,said
persons names having once been there, to all
appearance
,
but since faded out, owing, doubtless,
to their having been written with a villainous ink,
to render the instrument valueless:that at this
discovery the rage and disappointment of the Jew
had been great: and he had declared in piteous
tones that he was a ruined manhaving
exhausted
all his funds in the purchase of this now
worthless
paper: that thinking perhaps the Jew had been
duped, and taking pity on his grey hairs, he had
agreed to pay him a fair price for his papers,
notwithstanding
,
but on condition that he should
grant him any favor in his power, at any
moment
,
upon his presenting a curious ring, which
he wore on his finger, or on its being presented
by any one he might see proper to deputise:that
to this the Jew had sworn most solemnly, by his
religion, and by everything he held sacredand
that the first trial of his oath had been made by
myself, in the release of Emily. Such was his
story.
And a singular one, added Webber, in reply;
though perhaps a true one.
Wal now, Bill, I jest don't believe a darned
word on't, said Bernard. If all the stories
'bout that are tarnal old Jew be true, he aint the
feller that would mind anything 'bout an oath.
Unless for his interest to do so, rejoined
Webber
.
You overlook, Harvey, that it might, for
that time, have been more to his interest to let
the girl go than to detain her. Doubtless his
intentions
were, and still are, to recapture her. He
is a cunning knave. But whether true or false,
it is the best and only explanation we have of the
matter at present; and so we will take it for what
it is and let it dropfor time wears fast, and
we should even now be on the road; saying
which, he turned and led the way from the cottage.
Do you need my services? enquired Merton,
as the party retraced their steps to their horses.
No! answered Webber: I trust our force is
sufficient; and as I presume you were on your
way to see Emily, you had better ride on; and
doubtless your presence will cheer her, for she
seems exceedingly low spirited.
Ah! ejaculated Merton, with a flushed
countenance
;
I will see her then, and quickly.
By this time they had reached the bushes,
where the animals were standing, and each
selecting
his own, all four were presently mounted.
As they rode out into the path and separated
Merton to go on to Webber's, and the other three
to the riverWebber turned in his saddle, and
said:
Do not mention this little skirmish, Edward,
to any of my family, as it would only alarm
them needlessly; and spurring his horse as he
spoke, he started off in full gallop, while the
others
imitated his example.
A good ride of two hours brought the party of
Webber to the river, and a few minutes more
served to discover the residence of the Jew; for
although neither of them had seen it before, the
exact location had been clearly pointed out.
Dismounting at a little distance, and fastening
their horses, they together proceeded to the old
hovel. As they neared the entrance, they were
somewhat surprised to see the figure of a mana
little distance below them, near the water's edge
his face turned from them, apparently in a
meditative
mood. At sight of him all three made a
halt, and Bernard and Tyrone laid their hands on
their pistols, thinking perhaps it was another of
the gang with whom they had been contending.
Webber thought differently, however, and bidding
them stand where they were, he started
cautiously
forward to ascertain. At the same time the
figure turned his head to the right and leftas
though examining the exact location of the banks
and streamby which means Webber caught a
side view of his features, and at once recognised
him as Barton. Turning to his friends,
heinformed
them who he was, and all three proceeded at
once towards him. Hearing footsteps behind
him, Barton started, drew a pistol from a
wampum
belt around his waist, and suddenly
confronted
them; when, perceiving the familiar face
of Webber, and nothing in the looks of his
companions
of a hostile nature, he quickly replaced
the weapon, and, stepping forward, frankly
extended
his hand, saying at the same time, in an
easy, cordial tone:
I give you good morning, friend Webber; and
you also, gentlemen, politely bowing to the
others
;
and a beautiful morning it is, truly.
As we have heretofore, on his first introduction
to the reader, taken much pains in describing the
personal appearance and singular dress of Barton,
we shall not do so now, but refer the curious to
that; merely stating, by the way, that his look
and dress were now almost exactly as thensave
perhaps a more bland expression of countenance,
and a change from his then strange cap to one of
silk velvet, from which hung a silver corded
tassel
.
After the usual salutations were over, Barton
said: I trust you to excuse me, gentlemen, for
drawing an offensive weapon; but I knew not who
were approaching, and this part of the country is
not entirely free, as you are aware, from
dangerous
individuals.
You may well say as we are aware, returned
Webber; for scarcely two hours since we were
contending for our lives with a party of villains.
Ah! exclaimed Barton, with a start, his dark
eye brightening; pray, and who were they?
I know not, answered Webber, unless the
same gang that kidnapped my ward Emily, who
through your interference was rescued again, for
which service hold me ever indebted.
Nay, that was but my duty! replied Barton,
hastily. But are you sure that any of these
persons
are the same as were concerned in that
affair? asked he, with interest.
I could not tell, for their faces were concealed
by masks, answered Webber; though I doubt
not two of them are the samein fact, I have
never seen but one myself.
And that are one was there, said Bernard,
for sartin; for when I knocked him down with
the butt of one o' my shooting irons, his tarnal
black thing come off, so as I could see his face;
and, besides, I knowed his voice.
His name? demanded Barton, quickly.
Jack Curdish!
Ha! ejaculated Barton, mentally, with a start:
So, so, as I feared! and then turning to
Webber
,
while his features exhibited great severity of
expression, he continued: But how did the
fight commence, and how terminate?
Webber in a few words explained alltelling
him of their design of taking Hetty and the Jew
prisones, and how it was supposed the party of
Curdish got wind of it, and so laid in wait.
Barton mused for a few moments, with a
troubled expression, and then said: And so one
was killed, and three others wounded? Truly,
you fought well, gentlemen! And so Hetty was
away? Well, and the Jew is also away.
How! exclaimed Webber; the Jew gone
too?
So you will find, when you enter you hovel.
I had but just quitted it when you came hither.
Then our plan has certainly been divulged,
returned Webber, gravely, placing his hand to his
brow, while a look of mental anguish swept over
his features. He has got news of our design
upon him and fled; and all hope of obtaining the
papers, should he have any, is lost.
To what papers do you allude? asked
Baton
.
Webber here informed him of his suspicion in
regard to the Jew's seizure of Emily, and why he
supposed the latter held proofs of her parentage.
Ha! then there is a mystery about her birth?
rejoined Barton, enquiringly.
There is! answered Webber; and then in a
few words he related the most prominent events
of her life.
Barton again reflected some time, seriously, and
then said abruptly: I must see her. If I can
assist you in this matter I will. For the present
adieu!
Whither now? enquired Webber, as he
turned
to depart; and why such haste?
I must immediately to St. Louis, replied
Barton, as I have business of importance there
that will not brook delay. I will see you anon
and talk this matter over.
By the way, Barton, said Webber, as he
again turned to go, you are much about the
country, in various sections, and I wish to
enquire
if you have heard of late any thing of that
strange bandit leader, Ronald Bonardi, who
created
so much excitement here a few years ago?
At the mention of Bonardi, there was a
perceptible
start in Barton, a little palor in his cheek,
and a slight quiver of some of the muscles
around his mouth; but all passed instantlywas
noticed by Bernard onlyand when he replied,
all was again calm.
I have not, he said, in answer to Webber's
question; but wherefore do you ask?
Merely to satisfy a curiosity, replied
Webber
.
I was relating some anecdotes of him last
evening. He was a strange, singular being; but
I do not think myself he was so bad as he has
been represented. Doubtless you have heard
much of him in your travels?
For a moment Barton looked Webber steadily
in the eye, and then replied: I
have
heard of
him; but I have no time to talk of him now: I
will, as I said before, see you again. A happy
morning to you all, gentlemen; and turning
away, he strode forward a few yards to where his
horse was standing concealed amid some thick
shrubbery, when hastily mounting, he touched
him with his spurs, and was quickly out of sight.
Barton aint his name! muttered Bernard, as
he watched him disappear.
Come, said Webber, if the Jew has gone,
we will search his house, at all events; and
retracing
their steps up the hill, all three entered
the hovel. A place just fit for such an old
villain
!
remarked Webber, as he glanced around
the dirty apartment. Ha! continued he, as he
noticed the closet at the farther end, what have
we here? and passing through the door, he
examined
every part of it minutely; but, save an
old pistol-lock lying on the shelf, with a broken,
rusty dagger beside it, he found nothing; and he
was just on the point of leaving, when his foot
struck against a ring in the floor. Stooping
down, he took hold of it, and pulling gently, was
surprised to find it raised a trap-door. Ho,
comrades
,
cried he, here is a discovery! Ugh, what
a stench! he added, as having thrown open the
door, he attempted to peer into the darkness
below
.
What means this? asked Tyrone, as he
entered
and strove also to look down.
Some of the old Jew's villainy, I presume,
replied Webber; but we must explore it, at all
events, for I see a ladder leading down. But
then, he added, we have no light, and it were
useless to go down without one. Ugh! it smells
like a charnal house.
There is a sort of candle on the table that
would serve us, returned Tyrone, if we only
had the means of lighting it.
O, that is easily done, rejoined Webber; and
stepping into the larger apartment, he drew one
of his pistols, applied some fine paper to the pan,
and fired the charge into the ground. The flash
ignited the paper, and lighting the candle, he
shortly returned to the mouth of the vault. You
had better stay without, by the horses, Bernard,
continued he, as we should not leave our watch
too long in a place so every way villainous!
Will you descend with me, Tyrone?
I will! replied the latter.
Webber carefully placed his feet upon the
ladder
,
and about half of his body had disappeared,
when there issued from below a deep, sepulchral
groan. Webber was a brave man, and so was his
companion; but there was something awful in
that sound, and both turned pale.
Heavens! exclaimed the former, after
listening
a moment, what was that, Tyrone? Ere
the other could reply, that same hollow sound
came up again. God of Heaven! cried
Webber
,
it is some human beingprobably one
stabbed by the Jew and thrown down here to
die! Follow me! and quickly descending the
ladder, he was immediately joined by Tyrone.
Holding the light before them, they slowly groped
their way along the passage to where the prisoner
lay starving to death in his rusty chains.
Oh, my God, what a sight! exclaimed
Webber
,
turning pale, as the light gleamed full upon
the loathsome spectacle before him, while Tyrone
was too deeply affected to speak.
Foodfood! ejaculated the prisoner, in an
unearthly voice, unable to rise for his weakness.
Oh, for God-sake give me food, or kill me! Oh,
oh! I am dying for food!
Great Heaven, and starving to death in this
land of plenty! said Webber, turning away, and
wiping a tear from his eye. Be quiet, poor
man! resumed he, turning to the prisoner; be
quietyou shall have food.
Ha! cried the other wildly, partly rising and
gazing upon Webber; who speaks in that kind
tone?
A friend, replied Webber, come to release
you.
Friend! screamed the prisoner; friend
release
yes,
yesI know you,ha, ha, ha! and
so overpowered was he with joy, at the thought
of escape from his dungeon, that he fainted and
fell back.
Let us raise him, said Webber, bending
down. Ho! chains here, and no means to cut
themwhat is to be done?
One of us had better speed instantly to St.
Louis, replied Tyrone, and get tools.
And food, and a blanket to wrap around him,
and a physician also, rejoined Webber, hastily.
Yes, yes; and I will go, for I know where every
thing can be found. Stay you here, Tyrone,
stay you here, and cheer him when he revives.
I will be back presently. My God, what a sight
what misery! Oh, Jew, Jew, your cup of
iniquity
is full! God forgive you, for I cannot!
saying which, he gave Tyrone the light, darted
along the passage, up the ladder, and was soon
standing by Bernard. Hurriedly explaining what
he had seen, Webber mounted the fleetest horse,
and, burying the spurs in his flanks, away
bounded
the noble animal in the direction of St. Louis,
distant some eight or ten miles.
We shall not dwell longer here, for other and
more important matters are pressing hard upon
us. Suffice, that in a couple of hours Webber
returned
his
horse dripping waterbringing the
necessary articles, and a physician with him:
that the prisoner was somewhat restored, his
chains cut, and, wrapped in a blanket, was placed
upon a horse in front of Bernard; and that about
noon the whole partywith the exception of the
physician, who returned to St. Louisset out for
Webber's, where they arrived a little after
nightfall
,
only to feel more deeply the thrusts of
villainy
,
and pass a sleepless night of activity and
anguish.
PART IV.
CHAPTER I.
LOVETHE INVALIDTHE CONVERSATIONTHE
PRESENTIMENTTHE WARNINGTHE
DEPARTURE
.
Lovemighty lovedeep, pure, inward,
soul-stirring
love! Who in journeying through life
has not at sometime felt its rapturous pleasures
its mental torturing pains?for love has
pleasures
,
and love has pains:pleasures the most
deeply thrillingpains of the deepest anguish.
What a powerful thing is love! How it stirs up
all the secret springs of our beingrouses into
action energies and passions that we knew not
were in usneutralizing, at the same time, and
sometimes almost completely destroying, others
that we deemed were all powerful. All potent
love! Monarch of the mental realm; to which
allhigh or low, rich or poor,are forced to
bow! Confined to no grade or clime, it sweeps
through the universe, and is felt in the soft airs of
Italyin the frozen regions of Lapland. It stalks
through the palaces of the mighty ones of earth
it lingers in the hovel of the peasant and the
outcast. It softens the hearts of emperors and
kings, and bends them to its willit elevates,
tranquilizes, and makes contentment often in the
souls of the lowly born. It abounds in savage, as
in civilized life; and the untutored outpourings of
the artless Indian of the forest are as sweet to the
ear of the savage maiden, as the most refined and
flowery phrases of the courtly lover to her who
is polished by the arts of civilization. All
conquering
love! Who can withstand it? It warms
into new life the heart of the stoicit destroys
the seeming eternal reason raised fallacies of the
great philosopher; and as one by one his
self-conquering
theories melt away before him, he
sighs to own that love is his master, and thus
prove himself a frail piece of mortality. All
pervading
love! Who has not felt its presence?
O, it is sweet to loveto gaze upon some
gentle
or noble being, and feel all the deep emotions,
all the secret sympathies of our nature centered
there, as it were a nucleus to our own vitality.
And then to feel that that love is returned; to
know, to realize there is a spontaneous unity, a
sympathetic yearning of soul for soul; that there
is in this cold and selfish world at least one heart
in which we may place confidenceone being on
whom we can rely, to stand by us, let good or ill
betideone kindred soul that will ever smile
when we rejoice, weep when we do mourn--O,
this, this is sweetay, sweet indeed! And who
hath not at some time of his or her life felt this?
and who that hath felt, hath not sighed a
rejoicing
sigh that there was such a thing as love?
But love without hopelove without a
reciprocity
of feelingto love one that you know can
never be yours; one that you know loves
another;
as Shakspeare says:
Ay, there's the rub.
Oh, love without hope is terribleterrible! To
feel your whole life and soul centred in a being
a being every way worthy, but one who is in turn
fixed upon another, and sees you not, knows you
not, save as a frienda friend in the cold, worldly
meaning of the term, and perhaps not even that,
or, what is worse, loves you as a sister or a brother,
and, dreaming not of a warmer feeling in your
own breast, makes you perchance a repository of
confidence, and paints in glowing colors your
rival
to your faceoh, how this can wring the
heart!how make it heave, and palpitate, and
burn, and ache; and the brain too, grow hot, and
seeth, and wither, and strain, and reel with this
one mighty, terrible truthsapping at length all
the foundations of an otherwise noble intellect
destroying the system, and ending in the cold and
silent grave! But few, comparatively speaking,
feel this, thank God! but oh, to those few, how
terrible the feeling! We may talk of the rack,
and the dumnable inventions of torture for the
physical man; but oh! what are they when
compared
with the rack that rends the soul?
But, says the reader, on with the story! Ay,
and on with the story say we.
It was a beautiful morning--the same with which
we opened the chapter preceedingand the sun,
as he rose in a reddened halo, and peered gently
over the eastern hill, poured his soft mild rays
through the doorway and open casements of
Webber's
cottage, traced out bright spots upon the
curtains and floor, and seemed striving to give
every thing around, animate and inanimate, a
look of gladness to welcome his approach. All
nature without wore a cheerful smile; and every
little zephyr that passed went loaded with
perfume
and song; but with these bright things our
task is not; ah, no! ours to peer into the depths of
that strange thing, the human heart, to decipher
the characters on its tablets, and thus trace the
cause of outward effects.
Let us now enter the apartment of the invalid,
some half hour after the departure of Webber,
Bernard and Tyrone. But two persons were
thereEmily and Rufus--Mrs. Webber being
employed with the morning labor of the
house-wife
in the other apartment. Emily was seated
by a tablea few feet from the bed on which
reclined
Rufuswith one soft pearly hand resting
upon it, and her now pale, sad, but still sweet face
inclined downwards, and her deep blue eyes
gazing
upon the floor, with that peculiar
expression
which tells the mind is absent. Sad though
she was, and with that touching sadness which
goes at once to the heart, yet one in gazing upon
her could scarcely wish her otherwise, she looked
so exceedingly lovely. She was dressed plain,
but neat; while her bright auburn hair was
arranged
with that negligent grace which gives
even to beauty another charm; and as the rays of
the sun, occasionally, from the swaying of the
curtains, streamed in upon it, and deepened its
golden hue, one could easily fancy hers the head
of an angel encircled by a golden halo.
On the bed, with his head slightly raised and
supported by his handwith his pale, wan, but
still handsome features turned towards Emily,
and his full blue eyes fastened tenderly but sadly
upon herlay the gentle Rufus, a prey to a
disease
a
disease of the mindthat was destined
ere long to bear him to that silent home,
That undiscovered country.
From whose bourne no traveler returns.
And what was that diseasethat strange disease
of the mindthat was wearing away one just
ripening
into the bloom of manhood, with
apparently
everything before him to make life happy?
What secret trouble in one so young could be
draining the fountains of life and making the
fertile
spot a desert? It is time the reader should
know, if he or she (as we doubt not) have not
already
divined.
He was dying of hopeless love!
Ay,
and before him sat the being in whom his vitality,
as it were, was centeredtotally unconscious of
his consuming passion. And well was it for her
she knew it not; for it would have been another
pangay, and a terrible oneto a gentle heart
already too full of anguish! She could not have
returned his passion, for her own heart was set
upon another; and to know him daily wasting
awayand to know, too, that she was the cause
would have been a grief almost insupportable.
This he knew, from what he had seen and heard,
and had resolved to carry his secret with him to
the grave, which he now felt was not far distant.
Thrown together in childhood, from a child up
Rufus had loved Emilydeeply, purely loved her
and his was a soul to love but one, and that one
with an intensity of passion more powerful than
life itself. His playmate in youth, he had dreamed
bright dreams of coming yearshad painted
beautiful and happy pictures from the fancy
wrought scenes of the shaded future; dreams
which had proved but dreamspictures in which
there was no reality. His first pang had been on
their first separation some years before; but he had
been buoyed up and soothed by the charmer Hope.
He had thought of her daily, almost hourly,
during
her absencehad longed for, and yet almost
dreaded the meeting with her again. That
meeting
had at last taken place, and he had seen her,
after a long absence, blooming in all the graces of
a refined, noble, intellectual woman! He had
seen her more polished and beautiful than even
an ardent fancy had painted her, and with his
own mind more expanded and matured, he had felt
his passion more intense; which, like the pent up
waters of a spring, he knew must find vent, or,
pressed back into its source, the heart,
undermine
,
and finally destroy the clayey casement
around it.
But alas for him! too soon he discovered
another
had at least fixed her attention, if not already
won her affections, and a strong presentiment had
told him the result. Still the presentiment had
not proved a certainty, and the sweet voice of the
charmer Hope had occasionally whispered, All
may yet be well.
Thus six months had rolled away, with him al
most wearily; for although near the gentle being
of his secret love, yet he daily had seen new
evidences
to prove him farther from her heart than
ever; and doubts, and fears, with occasionally a
ray of hope, and sleepless nights, and days of
anguish
,
had already done their work on a
constitution
never at any time the strongest. Thus,
we say, six months had rolled away, which brings
us to the opening of our storythe night of the
storm, and of Emily's capturein which the reader
will remember his introduction and singular
conduct
.
And yet that conduct and result, when we
know the motive powerthe state of his
constitution
,
and temperamentappears perfectly
simple
and natural. And so it is, we may add, with
every thing in natureeverything around us,
that to our limited vision appears mysterious for
the time,no sooner do we learn the cause, than
we admit the effect could not have been
otherwise
,
without violating some law of nature.
On the day in question, then, when he had
seen Emily ride forth with Edward, a
presentiment
had come over him of trouble, and sorrow
to come; and his steps had been slow, his brow
clouded, and his heart heavy; and hence the cause
of his wild manner, which had so surprised his
father, when it became evident some accident had
occurred to prevent their return. Having paused,
as the reader will remember, a moment on the
hill, he had learned from Tyrone the whole state
of the case, and again dashed on with a wildness
bordering on insanity. Instinctivelyfor reason
could scarcely be deemed paramount with him
thenhe had shaped his course directly for the
Mississippi; but ere he could reach it, his quick
ear had caught the sound of her sweet voice; and
at the same time, by the light of the moon, he
had descried both Edward and Emily
approaching
.
Being completely in the shade, they had
not observed him; and instantly reining his
horse to one side, he had waited in a thicket for
them to pass. And then and there, in that lonely
place, with his mind torn on the rack of terrible
excitement, he had heard soft words from her
own sweet lips that went like daggers to his
heart, and extinguished the last faint gleam of
hope.
For a few minutes after that magical voice had
died away in the distance, Rufus had sat his horse
more like a statue than a human being. And
then and there a terrible feeling had swept over
him; a feeling of despair and deatha
consciousness
of life, but life with heated irons on his
brain, and poisoned arrows in his heartwhile
reason, like a candle consumed to the stick, was
flickering in the socket. For a few minutes he
had sat thus; and then, with reason and instinct
combined, had come a desire to reach home.
Mechauically
he had urged his high-spirited beast
onward, and taking a circuitous route, had come
into the road ahead of Edward and Emily, who,
in consequence, had never seen him. Thus he
reached home, as we have previously shown, long
in advance of the others; but the excitement only
had supported him; and when the foaming steed
paused at the door, and he had announced their
safety, his nerves relaxed, reason for the time
fled, and he had been borne into the house in a
high state of fever, placed upon a bed, from
which he was destined never to rise. That there
were other causes, besides these we have
mentioned
,
combined to produce his sickness, we do
not deny; but that these were the only
preventatives
to his recovery, we assert. Having thus
G
laid bare the secrets of his heart, and the causes
of what might otherwise seem mysterious
actions
,
let us new turn to him again.
For a few minutes Rufus gazed upon Emily
Nevancewho still sat as we have described
herwith a look of intense sadness; and then
with a deep drawn sigh, he said:
Why do you look so sad, Emily? I fear
something has gone wrong with you!
At the sound of his voice, which was low and
musical, Emily started, raised her facenow
somewhat flushedand turning to Rufus, looked
at him earnestly a moment, and then replied:
Sad, Rufus; do I then look sad?
Indeed you do, Emily; very, very sad. I
noticed it yesterday, after your return from a
walk; and I have noticed, too, that you have not
smiled since, as you used to do. I fear
something
troubles you, Emily!
Emily's face grew a shade paler. You are
right, Rufus, she answered; something does
trouble methough I did not intend to betray it
by my looks.
Will you not tell me what it is? asked he,
tenderly.
Emily shook her head sadly, and said: No, I
must not reveal it to you, Rufus!
True, he returned, while a look of anguish
swept ever his pale, thin, but still handsome
features: I should have remembered, ere I asked,
that I am not your confident.
Nor is any one my confident in this matter,
Rufus, rejoined Emily, quickly, a little touched
at his remark, while the color again tinged her
fair features: I would tell you as soon as another,
Rufus!
Forgive me, Emily, forgive me! returned
he, sinking back upon the pillow, and placing his
hand to his head as though in pain. I was too
hasty, and wronged you. I know you would tell
me if it was proper for me to know.
Emily was affected; and approaching the bed,
she took one of his thin hands in hers, while a tear
glistened in her eye. Oh, you are so sensitive!
she said; but do not be troubled so, dear Rufus,
or I shall grow more sad myself. You ask me to
forgive you. I would gladly do so, had I any
thing to forgive; but the fault was all my own. I
should not have spoken so hastily, knowing your
almost too sensitive nature.
For a moment Rufus made no reply, while
Emily stood by him, one of his hands pressed in
hers, and the other upon his eyes; and then, with
a great effort at composure, in a voice slightly
trembling, he enquired:
Have you seen Edward, of late?
But once since that terrible night, answered
Emily, casting down her eyes, while an
involuntary
sigh escape I her, which Rufus noted. He
came once, about a week since, while you were
lying in that dangerous state, but made only a
short stay, as we were all too much engaged to
talk with him.
Doubtless ere long he will be here again?
said Rufus, enquiringly.
He mentioned to-day, when he departed,
returned
Emily, with her eyes still bent
downward
.
But you are agitated, Rufus, continued
she, suddenly looking up, as she felt his hand
tremble in hers: What troubles you thus,
Rufus
?
It is passed, he answered, after a moment's
silence. I am somewhat subject to nervous
agitations, and this was one.
But what is the cause of these? asked Emily.
I have often noticed such before at different
periods
during your illness.
Nay, Emily, returned he sadly, I cannot
answer you.
I fear something lies heavy on your mind,
rejoined Emily, soothingly. Oh, that I had the
power to alleviate, and restore you to health and
cheerfulness!
Rufus withdrew his hand from his eyes as
Emily
spoke, and gazed upon her long and earnestly,
with an expression which one of Emily's
perception
,
but less occupied than she with painful
thoughts, would never have mistaken. Do not
think of me, he said, at length. You have, it
I divine rightly, trouble enough of your own.
As to health and cheerfulness, I shall see them no
more.
Oh, do notdo not talk thus! returned
Emily
,
quickly. Banish, Rufus, banish all such
gloomy thoughts! You are young, and I see no
reason why you should not have before you a
long life of happiness.
Rufus shook his head sadly. Ah, you do not
see, he answered, because you cannot see,
Emily; but he not deceived. I have a
presentiment
that speaks to me in a voice you cannot hear,
by which I feel certain I shall never recover.
But why should you think thus, Rufus?
Your physician has pronounced you out of
danger, and says that in a few days you will be
entirely well again.
Ah, Emily, I repeat, be not deceived. My
physician, doubtless, is a very good and skilful
one, but in this he is mistaken, as time will shortly
prove. Yes, I feel that I am upon a bed of death.
But a little while and I shall pass from among
the livingmissed and mourned by a few only
and quickly be forgotten.
Oh no, nonot forgotten, Rufus, exclaimed
Emily, vehemently; not forgotten, while Emily
Nevance lives! But come, come, added she,
do not talk of such things; they make me more
and more sad!
Well, well, rejoined Rufus, gently, we will
talk of them no more then, Emily; for Heaven
knows you are sad enough with matters of your
own, without being burdened with an additional
weight from me! We will strive to be more
cheerful, Emily; we will talk of the past. You
shall tell me of your life in the city, and how you
first became acquainted with the noble Edward
Merton.
At the mention of the name of Edward, Rufus
perceived a gentle glow suffuse the cheeks of
Emily; and a brightening of the eye, with a look of
pleasure, told plainly that the task he had
assigned
her was by no means a hard one. And such
was the fact. Oppressed by a weight of gloomy
thoughts of impending evil, since her interview
with John the day previous, Emily felt glad of
anything that would for the time relieve her; and
seating herself by the side of Rufus, she
immediately
complied with his request; and began by
telling him her first sensations when she arrived
in the great metropolisspoke of the manners
and customs of the citizensof the different
grades of societyand, finally, touched upon
Edward
their
first interviewgradually launching
out upon his noble appearance, manly qualities,
and generous nature. As she did so, her very
soul appeared to run in her voice, her eyes sparkled,
her features became animated, and she seemed for
the time completely carried away by a noble
enthusiasm
.
Alas, little did she know that every
word she uttered went like pointed steel to the
heart of Rufus! Little did she dream that her
narration was placing him upon a rack of mental
torture! But Rufus knew before the state of her
feelings; and he had asked her to speak of the past,
and of Edward, merely to relieve her of the gloomy
thoughts which he knew must be occupying her
mind, to cause her so much sadness. This he did,
regardless of the pain it occasioned himself, which
he bore with a sort of melancholy or saddened
gladnessif the reader will allow us an
expression
so paradoxical.
Thus passed two hours, when the conversation
was interrupted by the arrival of Edward himself.
Emily started up with an expression of joy, and
sprang to the door to meet him, while Rufus
turned his head away, for a few moments, ere his
entrance, with a look of deep anguish. When
Edward did enter, however, all was calm again,
and Rufus turned to him with a smile, and
friendly
greeting. Nor was this forced for appearance
sake as one might suppose; for in his heart Rufus
cherished for his rival the most friendly feelings
believing him to be a warm hearted, noble
fellow
and
the cause of his anguish, when Emily
spoke of Edward, might be attributed to grief at
his own hopeless fate, rather than to envy or
jealousy
of the other.
After passing the usual salutations of the day,
and some little conversation on other matters had
occurred, Merton proceeded to look to the
condition
of his horse; which done, he returned to the
house, and passed the morning in a social way, in
company with Emily and Rufus, occasionally
joined for a few minutes by Mrs. Webber herself.
After dinner, as the day was so fine, Edward
proposed to Emily to take a short ride through
the country. You seem to be somewhat
depressed
in spirits, he said, and I think a little
healthy exercise in the open air will prove highly
beneficial to you.
Emily hesitated some moments, ere making a
reply, while a heavy foreboding of coming ill
depressed
her even more. At length she answered.
I somehow do not think it advisable to go forth
to-day; and besides, did I wish to, my Fanny is
absent, on an expedition of a different nature, so
you percieve I have no animal to ride.
Well, you shall take mine then, returned
Edward, while I will content myself to walk.
But go you must, most certainly, Emily; for I
know it will be for your goodotherwise I would
not urge you.
After some farther gentle persuasion, Emily
consented, on condition they should not go far,
and return ere nightfall.
Your distance and time shall be mine,
answered
Merton; and proceeding at once to the
stable
,
he shifted the saddle, and directly led forth
his noble beast, which seemed to walk as though
already conscious of the lovely burden he was
about to bear. Emily in the meantime had put
on her riding dress, velvet cap, and stood in the
door awaiting his returnwith her green veil
thrown back from her fair features, which now
looked more beautiful than ever. As Merton led
forth the graceful animal, Emily marked with an
experienced eye his stately step, his full breast,
his handsomely curved neck, and, as she did so, a
smile of pride lingered around the corners of her
mouth, giving an animation to her whole face
pride for the animal of which she was soon to
become, as 'twere, a part.
While standing thus, and when Edward had
approached within a few paces, she heard the
voice of Rufus, and turned back to know what
was required.
Come hither, Emily, he said, in a low tone,
as she entered the room, partly raising himself in
bed; come hither; I have a few words to say to
you. As Emily approached, she perceived he
was a good deal agitated, and once or twice he
pressed his hand to his temples as though in pain.
You seem troubled, Rufus, remarked she,
gently. Are you more ill than usual?
I am far from being well, he replied, taking
her hand, and gazing upon her with a sad, carnest
expression, which she could not account for. I
am far from being well, Emily; but I did not call
you back to tell you of my ailings.
What then, Rufus? asked she mildly, with a
tender look, as he paused; what then?
Perhaps you will laugh at me, Emily, for what
I am going to say, replied he solemnly; yet I
beg of you to heed it well!
I shall not laugh, Rufus, say on! rejoined
Emily.
I see by your dress, he continued; you are
going forth for a ride. Do not ride far, and make
sure of your return ere the shadows stretch their
full length toward the east!
Such was my intention, Rufus, returned
Emily, surprised at his carnest look and tone;
but why this caution from you?
I know not why, Emily, answered he
sadly
,
but something tells me if we do not meet
again ere the sun has sunk to rest, we meet no
more in time.
Why this is strange imagining, Rufusvery
strange! said Emily, quickly and solemnly, her
own foreboding recurring to her. What reason
have you for thinking thus, Rufus?
I can give no reason, Emily, save that God,
who orders all things for the best, sees proper at
times, to warn us of approaching danger and
dissolution
,
by what is called a presentiment; which,
in my opinion, is but the spirit acting for a short
period without the physical taking cognizance
thereofand thus pierces and shows us what is
directly impending behind the veil of the future.
I too have had some strange forebodings of
late, said Emily, thoughtfully; though I
scarcely
know to what they tend.
Ah, that accounts for your sadness, then!
rejoined
Rufus; but if you feel any hesitation now,
Emily, I beg of you not to gofor I cannot shake
off the idea, that if you do, we part for the last
time!
Oh, do not think and say thus! exclaimed
Emily, with emotion, who in spite of herself felt
a feeling of awe creeping over her. Do not say
thus, Rufus! You have long years before you
yet.
Rufus shook his head with a wan smile.
You do not know, he said, what I know, or
you would not say that. I repeat what I have told
you before, that from this bed I shall never rise!
Are you nearly ready? enquired the voice
of Merton from without.
I must go, dear Rufus, for I have promised
him I would; otherwise I would not; said
Emily
,
hastily. But I will not go far, Rufus, and
will return ere sunset; this I promise you.
Well, returned Rufus, sadly, his eyes filling
with tears, God enable you to keep your
promise
,
Emily! but for fear of the worst I bid you
farewell! and he pressed her hand respectfully
to his lips. If we do not meet again on earth,
he added, in a trembling voice, I trust we shall in
Heaven! Farewell.
But you unnerve me, Rufus, said Emily,
bursting into tears. Surely you are making a
too solemn affair of thisor are you in reality
dying, Rufus? and the very thought seemed to
startle her.
I do not feel myself to be dying in the literal
sense of the term, answered Rufus. I may
live weeks, even months to come; and I may
scarcely live daysso uncertain do I look upon
the time allotted me.
Nay, then, Rufus, returned Emily, hastily
drying her tears, do not give way to such gloomy
thoughts. I will return again presently; but I
see Edward is getting impatient, and I must not
keep him longer waiting. There, good bye! and
bending down as she spoke, she pressed a kiss
upon his forehead, and turned quickly away.
Farewell! uttered he again, in a low,
trembling
voice. If we should never meet again,
Emily, remember II cannot tell you, he
said, as she paused near the doorso farewell!
and he sunk back upon his pillow, and turned his
head away; while Emily, her heart beating with
strange emotions, quickly joined Edward.
As Emily approached, Edward could not but
perceive that she had been weeping; but wisely
choosing to make no comment thereon, he
assisted
her to mount, and merely saying, To the
north, Emily, he led her horse forward in that
direction a short distance, and then yielding the
guidance wholly to her, walked along by her side.
Their departure had been marked with an eager
look, by a tall figure, standing a little distance in
the rear of the cottageon whose features, as
they passed from his sight, played a strange, dark
smile; and muttering, Now is my time! he
turned quickly round, and abruptly disappeared.
Who was that figure? and what was the
meaning
of those singular words?
CHAPTER II.
THE MEDITATIONTHE INTERRUPTIONTHE
CONVERSATION
THE
ARBOR OF LOVETHE
DECLARATION
THE
STORMTHE MYSTERIOUS
DISAPPEARANCE
THE
SEARCH.
For some time Edward and Emily pursued
their way slowly and in silence, for in the hearts
of both were deep and powerful feelings. With
Emily herself, circumstances had combined to
depress her spirits with a gloominess seldom or
never felt before; for each thing that had
transpired
of late, seemed to rush in upon her now, as
if to overwhelm and crush her beneath the
gathering
weight. A thousand thoughts, black and
portentous as the clouds that herald a terrible
storm, came flitting like evil spirits through her
mindeach bearing its own dark and cheerless
aspect
enlivened
by no ray of hope, no sunshine
of gladness. Even the temporary relief she had
found while talking with Rufus of the past and
of Edward, had, from her after thoughts, and the
contrast, served to produce only a painful
reaction
;
and although the one she lovedthe one
she had extolled in such glowing languagewas
now by her side, yet that very fact itself, instead
of making her joyful, only added to her grief.
And wherefore this?
We have, on a previous occasion, attempted to
give the reader an insight into the character of
Emily, which, if fully borne in mind, will be
sufficient to show why she was thus actuated. It
will be remembered we described her as very
sensitive, and self-sacrificing, and one incapable
of wounding the feelings of another, when it
was possible for her to avoid doing so without in
the end making matters still worse. It will be
remembered, too, we described her feelings in
regard
to herself, and her doubtful parentage, as
being very painful; and also her attachment for
Edwardwhich, on this account, she deemed
herself compelled by a sense of duty to break
offas being no less so. These were enough to
have made her sad, if not gloomy, even now;
for she knew the result of her decision must be
very painful both to Edward and herself; but the
events which had since transpired, had added
their sombre coloring to the already dark picture,
until not one bright spot remained. The strange
and awful appearance of Johnas he stood like
a demon before her, overpowered by ragewas
still present to her vision; and his dark and
terrible
words of threatening were still ringing in
her ears. What might be the result of that
interview
to
what act of villainy on his part it
might tendwas impossible for her to foresee;
but, as we have shown, a heavy foreboding of
coming ill had settled on her spirita foreboding
she had found impossible to shake off. Had he
been a stranger who thus accosted heror any
one not directly in the family with whom she had
been reared, and to whom, for a thousand little
acts of kindness, she felt herself so much
indebted
she
would have related at once the whole
occurrence
,
that proper precautions might be taken
to secure her against violence. But as the case
stood, in the present instance, she did not feel
herself at liberty to do sofrom the fact that,
knowing the strong temperaments of both father
and son, she foresaw consequences of a
disagreeable
nature must naturally ensue, and that she,
however indirectly, would be the moving cause
of a rupture, and perhaps a disunion in the
family
;
and besides, too, she vaguely trusted the
whole affair would terminate in simply a threat;
that John might have uttered it, while in
passion
,
merely to intimidate her; and that when he
should come to himself, he would see his folly
and let it pass. This we say she hoped; but in
truth she doubted, and feared, and it troubled her
much notwithstanding. She longed to make
some one her confidant, and take advice
regarding
the proper course for her to pursue; but she
knew of none in whose keeping the secret would
be safeno, not even with Edward himself; for
in his earnest regard for her welfare, she knew
he would feel himself justified in at once laying
the matter before Webber, and even confronting
John himself, when probably a quarrel, and a
duel, perhaps, would be the result. No, she must
keep it locked in her own breast, and bear her
painful thoughts in silence. All these things,
together with the grief she felt for Rufus, and
the recollection of their solemn parting, and his
seeming prophetic words, were sufficient, as we
have said, to cloud Emily's naturally bright
spirit
with a gloom she had never known before; and
pondering these all over in her mind, as she rode
along, she allowed her head to droop, and gazed
upon the ground with an abstracted air.
Edward, as he walked along by her side, was
also busy with thoughts of his own; and his eyes,
too, were bent on the ground, while the
expression
of his features, if not sad, was at least
solemn
.
And what was there to cause this? We
answer, many things.
As the reader is aware, Edward's first interview
with Emily had been while a student in the city
of New York; and from that moment he had
felt that his future happiness or misery rested
with her; and, in consequence, he had studiously
sought to win her affections. In this, as the
reader
is also aware, he had succeeded; and twice he
had offered her his hand; but although not
exactly
refused, he had been put off with the plea
that both were yet too young, and that she could
not think of wedding him until he had asked and
obtained the consent of his parents. This with
him had been a severe drawback; for although
he felt he might succeed in gaining the consent of
his mother, yet he knew his fatherwho was a
wealthy merchant in St. Louis, and whose soul
was centered on goldhad, for years, in his own
mind, destined him to marry, so soon as both
parties were of the proper age, a distant
relation
an
heiress of great wealth. That in this
alliance, money was all his father sought or cared
for, he believed; and the very thought that he
should thus give his hand for gold, was, to one of
his proud, noble spirit, repugnant in the extreme;
and he had fully determined in his own mind
such an event should never take place; and to
such an extreme will prejudice of this kind
sometimes
carry a person of his temperament, that it
is a questionable point whether, had Emily
herself
been the heiress, and he known it previously,
he had not on this account refused even her.
Convinced, at length, that though Emily
ardently
loved him, she on this one point would
remain
firm in her first decision, he had resolved
after his interview with her on the night of the
opening of our storyto lay the whole affair
before
his father, tell him exactly how matters were
in every particular, the hopelessness of his
expecting
him to form another attachment, and
thus endeavor to win his consent. This he had
done, or rather had attempted to do; for scarcely
had he broached the subject, so that his father
understood
the drift of it, ere the latter, in a terrible
passion, bade him begone, and never speak to him
of the like againtelling him he should never
marry one poorer than himself with his consent,
and that should he dare to marry without his
consent
,
he would both disown and disinherit him.
Although Edward had been in part prepared
for this, from knowing his father's worldly
motives
and hasty temper, yet the result had been to
cause him great pain and despondency. But
though he might despond, Edward was not one
to despair, while there was even the faintest gleam
of hope remaining; and he had determined, as a
last resource, to see Emily, tell her all, offer her
his hand once more, and abide her decision.
With this intent he had called upon her once
since that night; but owing to the severe illness
of Rufus, no opportunity had presented itself for
conversation on the subject, and he had resolved
upon to-day for his next meetingwhich
meeting
,
as the reader knows, has already taken place.
Not being sufficiently in private in the cottage for
his purpose Edward, on this account, partly, and
partly on account of her gloomy appearance, had
been strenuous in urging Emily to ride forth.
Occupied
in thinking on this subject, and how best to
introduce it, for a goodly distance kept Edward
silent, while Emily, as we have shown, was, from
various causes, silent also.
The longest soliloquy or meditation must come
to an end; and both Edward and Emily found
themselves suddenly aroused from their reveries
by a rather ludicrous circumstance. So intently
had their minds been fixed upon the matters just
recorded, that no attention whatever had been
paid by either to the course of the beast; which
having been left entirely free, thought, doubtless,
he had a perfect right to choose for himself, and
accordingly had quitted the path they
supposed
themselves pursuing, and was, at this
moment
,
quietly endeavoring to force his way
through some dense shrubberythe limbs of
which coming in rather severe contact with his
more reasoning companions, and some what startled
them.
What a strange, vacillating creature is a human
being! How changeable, and what an embodied
medley of inconsistencies! No sooner did
Edward
and Emily look up at this interruption, see
the predicament in which they were placed, and
fully comprehend the ridiculous appearance of
their situation, than, in spite of their gloomy
thoughts, their dark forebodings, both were forced
into a gay laugh.
Truly, Emily, said Edward, with a smile, as
they turned back to retrace their steps, this
little
incident should prove warning sufficient that
we have both been too gloomy for a day so
beautiful
.
Lookhow bright shines the sun! Listen
how sweet and merrily sing the birds!
Right, Edward! exclaimed Emily, with
animation
,
as she cast her eye over the scene, and
felt the poetry in her heart giving a warm
glow to her features. Right, Edward! We
have no right to mar so joyful a scene as this by
gloomy thoughts! We, human beings, the
noblest
creatures of Him who created all!creatures
endowed with reason, and knowledge to
comprehend
the beauty and magnificence of His works!
alone, as 'twere, too, with great Nature herself!
should
we
not be as happy as these sweet
warblers
that comprehend nothing, and yet sing for
very joy? Oh, she continued, with a sparkling
eye, and a deeper glow on her sweet features, while
her very form seemed to expand with the
upreachings
of a full, a noble soul, Oh, how these
very songsters rebuke me with their silvery tones,
for being east down, and seeing nothing but what
is black and cheerless, when God has placed me
in a world so bright and lovely, and given me
too an immortal spirit, to soar when done with
these into a brighter and more glorious realm of
light, where one sad thought can never come, nor
pain, nor aught but joy eternal!
Ah, now, now I see my Emily again! cried
Edward, joyfully, whose eyes, bent on hers, were
sparkling with enthusiams, and whose features
were radiant with delight. Go on, dear Emily,
go on! I could listen to those sweet tones forever!
Do you not think, Edward, resumed Emily,
that we make at least one-half of our misery by
letting imagination paint dark pictures instead of
bright ones?
Ay, and in many cases all, answered Merton;
for how often are we prone to imagine dire events
that never happen, and in that imagination
undergo
more real misery than we would even in
the reality itself. And even when we are
actually
suffering, if we look closely into ourselves, we
shall find, as a general thing, that that very
suffering
rests almost entirely in the manner we
look upon it. Take as a proof of this, the terrible
fate of the ancient martyrswho, when hooted
and reviled at by a barbarous crowd, and dragged
in chains to the stake, and there burnt alive, sung
psalms and smiled, until the red flames, more
mereiful than the inhuman monsters around,
released
them. Did they not feel the pains of
corporeal
punishment? They were flesh and blood
like ourselves, and just as sensitive to the touch;
but still they believed they were dying in a holy
cause, and hope taught them to look beyond the
present, and, aided by their imagination, they
already
stood on the very threshold of Heaven and
felt happy. Let us then, Emily, if the present
seem dark, take a lesson from those martyrs, look
forward with bright hope to the future, and thus
meet our troubles with a smile!
Bright hope to the future, repeated Emily,
with a sigh, as again the events of the last few
days came crowding upon her; the future in
spite of me looks dark.
Again gloomy, Emily, returned Merton,
with an earnest, tender look; you who were
wont to be so buoyant and cheerful; there is some
deep cause for this, Emily, and I would fain
know what it is! But, he added hastily, I have
somewhat to tell you first, and on your answer
perhaps will depend my right to question you.
A slight paleness overspread the features of
Emily
,
as though she already divined the nature of
the communication, her hand grasped the rein
tightly, and there was a slight nervous agitation
apparent in her features. Recovering herself by
a strong effort, she at length articulated calmly,
Go on, Edward!
Not here, said Edward. Some half mile,
in this direction, is a beautiful spot, you
remember
,
near a murmuring stream, where we once
whiled away two of the sweetest hours of my life.
I will tell you there, Emily, for no other place
seems so appropriate.
Emily bowed her head in token of assent, and
for some time rode on in silence, while Edward
kept his place by her side, but was silent also.
About a quarter of a mile further on, they
ascended
a slight elevation, which commanded a fair
prospect of the surrounding country, for a goodly
distance to the north and westa prospect every
way delightful, variegated with woods and plains,
all clothed in the soft green robes of summer,
with here and there some sparkling stream
winding
along with a laughing murmur, like the first
outpourings of a young, free heart. The day
was hot and somewhat sultry, yet as their course
had been mostly through a deep wood, it had not
been particularly oppressive; but as they gazed
over the scene described, each thing seemed fairly
reeling in the heat, while the sun now shone bright
and clear upon them.
How beautiful! exclaimed Edward, shading
his face with his hand, to let his eye rest for a
moment upon the landscape.
Very, very beautiful! returned Emily,
drawing
rein, and pausing to gaze upon it.
Come, Emily, said Edward, turning to her,
do not tarry herethe heat is too excessive!
Yonder I see the spot, which, since I rested there
with you, has ever lingered in my memory, and
often comes up in my dreams, like a something
too bright for reality. I would fain be there
again with you, even though for the last time.
There was a tender melancholy in the voice of
Edward as he spoke, that touched the heart of
his fair hearer, and caused her to turn her head
away with a sad expressionbut she returned no
answer. Again moving onward, a few minutes
served to bring them to the place mentioned,
which was a delightful one truly, and seemed just
fitted for an arbor of love. It was a flat piece of
ground, sloping gently to the north, shaded by
tall, wide-branching trees, and free from
underbrush
,
through the centre of which glided
with a soothing melody, a clear, sparkling
streamlet
,
by whose side lay the trunk of an old tree, fast
crumbling back to that dust from which it sprang
a gentle warning, as 'twere, to those young
beings
now approaching, that at the longest but a
little time could elapse ere a similar fate would be
theirs. The ground was smooth, and carpeted
with rank grass, interspersed with various kinds of
wild flowers, which added a beauty to what must
even otherwise have been accounted beautiful.
Occasionally throughout the grove might be seen
some gay squirrel, bounding merrily away with a
ringing chirup, while handsome plumed birds
fluttered and sung in the branches of the trees.
It was not Paradise, and yet Paradise need scarcely
have been more lovely.
Yonder, Emily, said Edward, as they entered
the grove, by that sweet singing streamlet, is
the old tree which served us for a seat when here
beforelet us try it again; and he assisted
Emily
to dismount, who immediately advanced
towards
it with a trembling step and a palpitating
heart, for she felt she was about to experience the
most trying period of her life. Securing his
horse to a neighboring tree, Merton quickly joined
her.
Here, he resumed, in a voice slightly
trembling
,
after pausing a few moments to collect his
thoughts, and, if truth must be said, gain courage
for the undertaking; here, Emily, where we are
alonewith Nature around and God abovein a
spot that is lovely enough to be consecrated to
love and all things holywhere the voice of man
but seldom intrudeshere, where there are no
ears to listen but our ownhere have I led you
to harken to my tale and decide my fate.
Emily bent down her eyes, her features grew
pale, and her hands trembledbut she answered
not; and Edward, after gazing upon her a
moment
in silence, again resumed.
Two years since, Emily, as you are aware,
we met for the first time, in the city of New
York. It is almost needless to repeat what I long
ere this have told you, and more than once, that
then, for the first time, I knew what it was to
love. To praise each particular grace or charm
that captivated me, would be too much like the
idle flattery of the world; suffice, that I saw
enough in you to win my affections, and I loved
youloved you purelyas I never more can love
another. I fancied too, and not without cause,
that my passion was returned; and waiting a
suitable
time and opportunity, I declared my feelings,
and offered you my hand. You did not refuse
me, or I should certainly never have troubled
you again; but you asked if my parents were
aware of this; and on my replying in the
negative
,
said that perchance they would refuse their
consent, because you were poor; that we were
both too young to fully know our own minds;
that in an undertaking like this, the journeying
through life as companions, we should be well
assured that nothing hereafter would cause us to
regret having chosen hastily; that time would be
the proper test to prove whether in sincerity we
both loved, or whether it was merely a fancy.
This was your reply; and although I was then
fully satisfied that for one I should never so love
another, yet I felt the force of your answer, and
acquiesced. That, Emily, was fifteen months
ago; and though with you after that, almost daily,
until my return to the West, wherein you
accompanied
meand very often in your society
sinceyet never did I directly speak on this
subject
again, till the evening of your capture, when
I again asked you to be mineagain offered you
my hand. You did not refuse me thenno, you
even told me you loved me; which, although I
fully believed before, yet hearing from your own
sweet lips, made my heart bound with rapture;
but at the same time you stated you were poor,
and consequently were not my equal in this; and
that you could not consent, unless assured of the
consent of my parents.
'Tis true, Emily, that in many things we should
consult and take the advice of those who have
reared us from infancybut it does not follow we
should in all, particularly in matters of the heart;
and when, too, a person like myself has arrived
at the age of discretion, and knows what is the
most conducive to his own happiness.
Think, dear Emily, think even for a moment
seriously upon it, and your kind heart will tell
you it is wrongvery, very wrongfor those
who have passed, or are passing, into the decline
of life, and have lost in part, or by a rude contact
with a selfish world benumbed, those fine and
holy feelings of love, which entwining around
the heart of youth, soften and make it green, even
as the ivy around the oak adds beauty and
gentleness
to its appearance; wrong, I say, for those
to dictate to the youngwho are full of the joys
and poetry of the morning of lifewhere they
shall give their hand; and this, too, when
mercenary
considerations are their ruling motives for
so doing; and by this make them unhappy, and
destroy all the sweets of existenceforcing them
to sigh for the final rest of the cold and silent
grave. Think upon it, Emily, and how
inconsistent
does it appear. What has money to do
with the heart? Can it ease one pang? Can it
still one pulsation? Can it make us forget to
think upon the pastupon those we have loved?
Can it make us escape ourselves? Can it procure
us a higher seat in Heaven? Can it add to our
devotions to an all-seeing God? Can it purchase
one really happy moment? No, dear Emily, it
can do none of these. Then wherefore should
we make ourselves miserablewherefore throw
away the happiness already in our grasp, for its
weight of misery, even though a mine of gold be
put in the balance? And then, too, how
inconsistent
that we should be forced into these
measures
by those who should seek our happiness?
who, as I said before, are rapidly approaching old
age and dissolution, and whom we have a right to
suppose, by the regular order of events, will long
precede us to the tomb,how inconsistent that
we should be made wretched to please them, who
will soon leave us alone, to drink deep of sorrow,
and entail it upon our posterity. No, no, dear
Emily, this should not be! Parents may advise
in such matters, but they have no right, by the
laws of either God or man, to usurp authority,
and become dictators and tyrants! So soon as
they do this, they overstep their proper limits, and
sever the tie of consanguinity.
Edward spoke gently, in a calm, earnest,
musical
tone, with his head turned towards Emily, and
his dark hazel eye resting tenderly upon her
while she, as he went on, becoming deeply
interested
,
gradually raised her head, and now sat with
her soft blue eyes looking with a mournful
sweetness
into his, with that peculiar expression which
can never be mistaken for other than one of love.
Edward noticed these changes with a beating
heartfor he fancied in them were favorable
augeries
to his fondest hopesand with a cheek
slightly flushed, and a voice perhaps a little more
passionate, he still went on.
Such, dear Emily, as I have pointed out as
most reprehensible in parents, are, I grieve to say,
the ruling motives of mine. I would not say
aught to wrong those who gave me birthwho
watched over me in infancy, and reared me in
affluenceno, far be it from me to do this, or
willingly wound their feelings; yet as much as
I may love and respect them, I must respect
myself
,
nor allow myself to be sold for gold. Nay,
interrupt me notI see you do not understand,
so listen!
My father is wealthyvery wealthyand
might, were he so disposed, do much good, and
make many a poor being around him, as well as
his own son, happy. But alas and alas, dear
Emily
,
he has made money his Godat whose shrine
he sacrifices all those high and noble feelings,
which, rightly exercised, almost make a god of
man! Without seeking to know my feelings on
the subject, he has, in his ambitious dreams,
bestowed
my hand where my heart is not, upon one
whose sufficient merit in his eyes, is, that she can
more than balance the scale with him in gold.
You grow pale, Emilybut fear not, sweet one,
and listen!
When I parted with you on that eventful
night, I did so with the determination of telling
my father all, and gaining, if possible, his consent
to our union. To this end I seized upon the first
opportunity, when in private, and began my
story
.
But alas, Emily, all hope of that was soon
over! He heard me but a few moments, and then
in rage spurned me from his presence, and said
that did I marry without his consent, he would
both disown and disinherit me, and that his
consent
should never be given to my union with one
poorer than himself. I forgot not he was my
father, and quitted his sight without replynever
to speak with him on the like again. And now,
dear Emily, my fate rests with you. I have
sought you to tell you all, and offer you once
more my hand. I am sorry, for your sweet sake,
I have not wealth to offerfor my own I care
not. I am young, and strong, and thank God, I
have a good education, which, with proper
energy
,
will enable me to go through the world with
ease, if I but have one sweet being to cheer me
on! Wealth I do not seekI may add, do not
want. If you are willing to share with me the
struggles of lifethe good and ill'tis all I ask
to make me happy; and to make you so, dear
Emily
,
I will toil early and latewill be ambitious,
and seek to win a name you shall be proud of.
Ponder well, dear Emily, ere you decide
and let no false notions of the world, what it will
think or say, sway you nowfor by your
answer
I shall abide. Remember on the words
which you are about to utter hang the destiny of
both; and once said, are registered in God's book
in Heaven, and beyond recall! You have had
time sufficient ere this, to know your own mind,
and whether you will be content to be mine, even
while dark clouds are lowering around me. If
you are poor, remember so am I, and therefore
in this shall be your equal; but above all, dear
Emily, if you have any hesitation, I charge you
think wellthink wellere you pronounce the
sentence which shall sever us forever!for if you
reject me now, in this world we shall never, never
meet again; and whatever my unhappy fate may
be, it shall be yours to bear with you, even to your
bed of death, the solemn reflection that it was
once
in your power to have elevated and made me
happy! I have done, dear Emily, and
tremblingly
listen for your reply.
During the latter part of his remarks, Emily's
head had sunk upon her breast, her eyes were bent
down, while her cheeks paled and flushed
alternately
.
For some time after the mournful cadence of
his loved voice had ceased to sound in her ear, she
sat mute, and, save now and then a slight tremor,
immovable; while Edward, with his eyes intently
fastened upon her, gazed as one who awaits an
answer of life or death. At length Emily, in a
low voice, without raising her head, articulated:
Have you considered, Edward, that I am
almost
a homeless wanderer, who knows nothing of
my parentage?
I have considered all, dear Emilyeverything
for this with me has been no hasty
undertaking
.
Then take me, Edward! cried Emily,
impulsively
,
suddenly looking up, and turning her soft
blue eyes, moist with tears, sweetly upon him:
Take me, dear Edward, I am thine, thine
forever
!
Bless you, bless you, my own, dearest Emily,
for those sweet, sweet words! and bounding
forward
,
Edward caught her in his arms, strained her
for a few moments to his heart in silence, and
then bending down, impressed upon her soft lips
the first rapturous, hely kiss of love. It was a
moment of bliss to be felt, but never to be
described
.
When I came here, dear Edward, said Emily,
at length, gazing up into his face with a look of
love, while she still reclined against his breast,
it was to tell you we must part; but you have
conquered, and henceforth and forever I am thine.
Edward, his soul too full to vent itself in idle
words, again strained her to his heart in silence,
while the soft voice of the bright streamlet that
colled sweetly along at their feet, sent up a quiet
melody that found an echo in the hearts of both.
Seating themselves once more upon the fallen
tree, Edward and Emily, fresh in the mutual and
holy confidence of two hearts pledged to one
destiny
,
passed two bright hours unheeded, in the
interchange of the thoughts and feelings
awakened
in the breasts of each. We say two bright
hours unheededfor when did love take note of
time? Had the two hours been four, to them it
had been the same, and would have seemed but as
many minutes. At the end of the time
mentioned
,
however, they were aroused to a
consciousness
of the outer world, by hearing the booming
sound of heavy thunder; and on looking up with
a start, from a conversation the most happy, they
were surprised to find it already growing dark,
from the black heavy clouds of an approaching
storm having already obscured the rays of the
sun. Owing to the density of a wood covering a
hill on the opposite side of the streamlet, our
lovers
were unable to obtain a view of the shower,
which was approaching from that direction.
Ha, that is near! exclaimed Merton, starting
to his feet, as following not long after a bright
flash, came the heavy booming of another peal of
thunder. We must make all haste home,
Emily
,
or we shall be caught in the rain. Ha! cried
he again, pointing to the west, I see the point of
an angry cloud just rising over the brow of yon
hill. The storm is nearer than I thought. Come,
dear Emily, let us hastelet us haste; and
seizing
her by the hand as he spoke, both sprang
quickly towards the horse, which stood some
twenty
paces distant, with his bridle-rein made fast to
the limb of a tree.
Whether their sudden movements startled him,
or whether he was just at this instant stung by
some insect, matters not; but scarcely had our
lovers advanced to within ten paces of the animal,
when he threw himself suddenly back, and pulled
with all his force upon the bridle. Merton
instantly
darted forward, but was too late. The
rein broke, and with a roguish shake of the head,
and a slight neigh, Sir Harry bounded gaily away.
How unfortunate! exclaimed Merton; just
at this moment too when time is so precious. But
be not alarmed, Emily, he will not go far, and I
will soon overtake him. Stay you here. In five
minutes I will be with you; and then we must
both ride, and ride hard!
Be sure you be not long, returned Emily, in
a voice that trembled from a sudden fear she could
not account for, while her cheeks grew pale from
the same cause; be sure you be not long,
Edward
!
As the latter predicted, the beast did not go
far; for from the gallop in which he set off,
he shortly slackened to a trot, finally paused
altogether
,
and amused himself by cropping some
herbage until his master came up, which,
notwithstanding
,
occupied some minutes. Hastily
tying together the broken reins, Edward threw
them over Sir Harry's neck, bounded upon the
saddle, and rode quickly back to where he had left
Emily; but, strange to say, she was nowhere to
be seen.
At first astonishment siezed upon Merton that
she should absent herself at such a critical time;
but astonishment soon gave way to alarmalarm
to horrorwhen on calling her name loudly
several
times no answer was returned but the gloomy
echo of his own voice. What could it mean
where had she gone, and what terrible fate
had befallen her, that she did not return? were
questions which he asked himself with a wildness
bordering upon insanity, while he rode up and
down and through the grove, still calling at the
extent
of his voice her dearly loved name. Could
she have been seized by some wild beast?
Edward
thought, and shuddered, and felt his brain
reel. He sprang from his horse and examined the
ground around where she had stoodbut no, there
were no marks of blood or violence; besides, had
this been the case, he would have heard her
screams. What could it mean? Springing upon
his horse again, for some three quarters of an hour
he rode wildly to and fro, calling upon her sweet
namebut, alas! in vainshe answered not.
In the meantime the shower had been steadily
approaching, and already now a few large drops,
precursors of what was to follow, fell with a
rattling
sound upon the trees. Night advancing
also, had already began to robe objects in her
sombre mantle, while the lightning flashed
fiercely
,
and the thunder followed quickly, crash on
crash. Merton, forced into the belief that a longer
search was useless, and hurried away by the storm
and a faint hope that she might, fearing delay
while he was absent, have started for home, alone,
now buried the rowels in the animal's sides; and
although the distance was three good miles, in less
than fifteen minutes his horse stood panting at
Webber's door. By this time it had become very
dark, and the rain was falling in torrents, while
the lightning flashed and the thunder roared as
incessantly
as ever. The party had just returned,
and their horses were still standing in front of the
cottage, where they had been left until the storm
should abate. Webber was standing in the door.
Has Emily arrived? cried Edward,
breathlessly
.
Good heavens! Edward, exclaimed he, is she
not with you? Speakspeak!
Oh God! ejaculated Merton, wringing his
hands in agony, she is lostshe is lost!
Lost! screamed Webber, rushing forth; great
God! what mean you? In a few hurried words
Merton explained what had chanced, while
Bernard
,
Tyrone and Mrs. Webber, hearing the
exclamations
,
reached the door in time to learn all.
Mountmount! cried Webber, springing
upon one of the horses, while Bernard and
Tyrone
quickly followed his example. Mount and
away, for we
must
find her! A minute later,
all four were riding as if for lifeMerton in
advance
.
A groan drew Mrs. Webber's attention
to her son. On entering the room she found
Rufus
had fainted. He had heard enough to know
that Emily was lost, and that, as he had predicted,
they would never meet again on earth.
The search of the party proved fruitless, and
towards morning they returned. It was renewed
the next day, and the next, and the next; and yet
on the third night they had found no traces
gleaned no tidings of Emily. It was a severe blow
to allto Webber and Merton in particular.
Leaving them to their search, however, in
ignorance
of her fate, we will turn to the cause of
our fair heroine's sudden and mysterious
disappearance
,
and the wherefore she did not return.
CHAPTER III.
THE CAPTURETHE VILLAINSTHE RIDETHE
HOVEL-CAVETHE INTERVIEWTHE THREAT
THE REPENTANTTHE CONSEQUENCES.
Scarcely had Edward departed, and while
Emily
stood gazing on his retreating form, with a
secret
fear, the cause of which she was unable to
divine, when two figures, their faces concealed by
masks, approached her stealthily from behind,
threw a bandage over her mouth to prevent her
cries for help, raised her in their brawny arms,
and, without a word, bore her speedily away
directly
past the fallen tree, where she had but a
few minutes before in a happy confidence
plighted
herself to him she lovedacross the silvery
stream that had the while sung its seeming song
of loveup into the dark wood of the hill beyond.
Here for a moment they paused to rest, and then,
without speaking, again bore her onward some
three hundred yards, still deeper into the wood,
and farther from him who should have been there
to protect her. When they paused again, it was
beside two powerful horses, on one of which she
was instantly mounted in front of one of her
captors
,
while his companion, springing into the sad
dle, led the way, as fast as the ground would
permit
,
in a westerly direction. At this moment
Emily heard in the distance the voice of Edward
calling upon her name, and a keen pang shot
through her soul. Her captors heard it also, but
with very different feelings; for the one in advance,
turning to his companion, said:
We's jest in time Saxton, for if we'd a been a
little sooner or a little later, we'd a have to put a
veto on the tune of that ar' gentlemanand you
know that was strictly agin orders.
Right, Niles, we jest hit the proper moment;
but isn't that the feller what frightened you off
in the morning, afore you'd got the old gentleman
fairly tied?
Why that's the chap that rode up, it's true;
but I don't like the idea of your callin' it
frightened
offfor if it hadn't a bin you know, that
we wasn't to hurt him, I'd a made a different
business on't altogether. As 'twas, I thought I'd
run.
And git shot?
Yes, so it turned out it seemsthough I only
lost two fingers by the operation, and by!
I'll be even for them yit, if I live long enough.
But you didn't do anything to brag on, in lettin
them ar' two fellers whip three on ye, and kill
one at that!
The other replied only by uttering a terrible
oath, and setting his teeth hard.
Well, resumed Niles, it was an ugly
business
,
take it all round, and we got the worst
on'tBill
was killedJack had his face badly battered,
and another ball through his arm, which may be
'll do him tooyou got a sore head, and I lost two
fingers; while Besley, whose legs was a leetle the
longest, got off clear. But I say, Sax., jest tie a
handkerchief over that ar' gal's eyes, so she can't
examine directions, you know that's orders, and
then let's ridefor ye see its gittin' dark in these
ere woods, and a big shower to back it.
In a moment Emily found her eyes bandaged,
and then she could feel the horses urged on to
greater speed, while peal on peal, each nearer than
the last, came to her ear the thunder of the
approaching
storm. Poor girl! she felt it was
useless
to struggle against her destiny, whatever it
might be, and commending herself to the care of
Him who watches alike over the powerful and
defenceless
,
she resigned herself to her fate. Her
captors had again become silent, and on, on they
rode for some half hour, as fast as the beasts could
carry them. At the end of the time mentioned,
they came to a halt by some dwelling, and Emily
could hear the low murmur of several other voices
in hurried conversation. At length one more
loud, and in dictation, struck her ear with a
familiar
sound, and fairly made her blood run cold.
It was the voice of John Webber.
You will stop here and refresh until this storm
has passed, which it will have done in less than
two hours, and then you must mount and on
again till you reach the point designated, for this
side of there it will not do to remain. I must
return
this night, or I may be suspected. Jack is
too badly wounded to be your company.
Between
ourselves, I fear his day is over. Hetty
will go with you, and in her charge you can trust
her. You know the route, so that you can follow
it in the night, do you not?
We do, answered the voice of Niles.
'Tis well. Thus far your parts have been
admirably
performed. Complete as well, and you
shall have a suitable reward. I do not ask your
services for nothing. But come, come, dismount
and enter, for already the rain I see approaching.
Feed well your horses. I must this moment
away. As the voice concluded, Emily heard
the tramping of another horse, fast growing
distant
,
and felt herself seized and borne under some
shelter, on which, a few moments after, the rain
dashed violently, while she was almost stunned by
the oft repeated crashing of the thunder.
The storm raged for upwards of an hour, and
then ceased. In the course of two hours, Emily
was again mounted, and borne away, while she
became aware of the party being increased by an
additional membera womanwhich was at all
events some consolation, although she could
neither speak nor see, owing to the bandages
being
still kept around her mouth and eyes. On,
on the party dashed; now up some steep bluff;
now down into some deep dingle; now through a
forest and tangled brushwood; now over a barren,
sandy, open plain; now through streams whose
waters swollen by the late rain rolled on with a
sullen murmuron, on they went, heeding no
obstruction, rarely ever speaking to each other;
on, onstill onwhile hour after hour went by,
and yet no pause. At length they halted once
more to gain some refreshment, and Emily felt
herself removed from the horse she had ridden to
another, and again they went on. At last,
wearied
by excitement and travel, Emily, in spite of
her struggles to the contrary, gradually sunk into
the arms of Morpheus, and for the time her trials
and troubles were forgotten.
As when we fall asleep in some quiet spot with
no sounds near, a gentle shake or noise will wake
us, so when we sink into slumber amid
confusion
,
silence will produce the same effectand
Emily was awakened by the party again coming to
a halt. On opening her eyesfor during the latter
part of her ride the bandage around them had fallen
offshe found herself in a wild, mountainous
region
,
with nothing cheering around, no habitation
and no human beings nearsave, in the first
instance
,a
kind of half cave and hovel in the side of a
steep mountain, formed of wood, rocks and clay;
and, in the last, the rough, ugly visages of her two
captors, and the face of Hetty Brogan, whom she
recognised with a thrill of joy, from the fact that
she was a woman, and that her face was familiar,
although she had never seen it but once before,
and then under circumstances by no means
pleasant
;
still it was at least the face of a woman, one
too she had seen before, and it gave her joy.
Well, we're here at last, Saxton, said Niles;
though we've had a tolerable tough night on't.
Ay, we've had all o' that, Niles, and I reckon
as how he'll have to pay well for't. See, the sun
already shines on yonder hill, and we've traveled
all night. Our poor horses, as well as us, are
confoundedly
tired, although we've changed once on
the way. Well, let's in with the gal and be off
that's all o' our part, you know, for Hetty'll have
to tend to the rest. About five miles from here's
a good place for feedin' and restin', so let's be a
movin'; and dismounting while speaking,
Saxton
assisted Emily to do the same, while Hetty,
following his example, threw her bridle rein to
Niles, who still remained in the saddle. Thar',
Hetty, continued Saxton, turning to her, and
pointing to Emily, you'll be responsible for the
rest; so good bye, old woman; and springing
upon his horse again, he turned away and rode
slowly down the hill, followed by Niles, who also
led the beast which had borne Hetty hither.
I'm glad you're gone, said Hetty, gazing
after
them with no very amiable expression; for I
can al'ays breathe a great deal easier when you
don't breathe the same air. Come, lady, you've
had a hard ride for one of your tender breeding;
and Hetty turned to Emily with a compassionate
look, and you're pale and troubled, gal; so come,
come, let's in; but stop, they shan't keep that ar'
thing round your jaws no longer; and Hetty
removed the bandage from Emily's mouth.
Oh, Hetty, good Hetty, cried Emily, in an
entreating tone, as soon as she could speak, Oh,
good Hetty, where am I, and why was I brought
hither? Oh, speak, speak, and tell me, good
Hetty
!
Thar', thar', jest stop now, and don't go to
calling me good Hetty, 'cause I arn't no such a
thing. I haint did nothin' good for more'n
sixteen
year, so don't call me good! But come, gal,
come, let's in; and taking Emily by the hand,
she led the way into the hovel-cave just
mentioned
,
without giving her a word of explanation.
It was a gloomy placepart natural, part
artificial
in
one of the wildest and most dismal spots
to be found on the mountains lining the banks of
the Osage. It had evidently but just been
constructed
or refitted, for the earth withinthe only
floor it could boastwas soft and fresh, as though
lately placed there by the spade. The roof was
formed of a large projecting rock, partly
embedded
in the mountain, and the sides and front of
stones, brush and earth thrown compactly
together
.
It could boast a rude door, which was,
with the exception of two loop holes, the only
place to admit light and air. Within was a rough
table, whereon lay a tinder box and candleone or
two rough benches made of logsand a rude pen
at one end, filled with straw, which was to answer
the purpose of a bed. Such was the apartment
into which Hetty and Emily now enteredthe
latter with feelings of horror and disgust.
Oh, Hetty, exclaimed Emily, as she glanced
around, I beseech you tell me what this means,
and why I have been stolen from home and
brought hither!
'Pon my soul, lady, answered Hetty, I
don't know no more'n you do! We poor womens
has to obey orders sometimes without asking
questions
;
and all I knows is, that I've got to tend 'pon
ye till he comes.
Who comes? cried Emily.
Why that ar' young man as had you stolen.
Was it John Webber? asked Emily,
breathlessly
.
Why ye see I arn't to mention names, 'cause
its agin orders. You might guess worse, though,
I reckon.
Oh Heaven, 'tis he! exclaimed Emily,
clasping
her hands. I feared, I feared 'twas so!
Base, base man, he designs to work my ruin! Oh
God, Father of the innocent and defenceless, I
pray thee protect me in this trying hour, and
deliver
me from the hands of those who would do
me wrong!
I don't think as how he means to hurt you,
lady, said Hetty; though 'twixt us I think he's
a bad man.
If he did not wish to do me wrong, why did
he tear me away from those I love, and bear me
beyond the reach of friends? asked Emily.
Well, I can't answer ye, replied Hetty; and
besides, I've broke orders in what I've done
already
so
you musn't ask me no more questions,
gal, 'cause I'll have to refuse to speak to ye!
Heaven help me! groaned Emily; and
casting
herself upon one of the benches, she bowed
her face in her hands and wept bitterly.
I hate to see ye cry, lady, said Hetty, in a
softened tone; I do indeed! and as she gazed
upon Emily, her brown, ugly, weather-beaten
features assumed an expression of tender
compassion
.
Give me your hand, gal! I sometimes
tell fortins.
Emily mechanically obeyed, and Hetty, after
looking on the palm of it a moment, continued:
Thar's trouble here, gal, and no mistake. I see
the lines is crossed and cut up badly; but thar's
one, the line of life, as runs out on't smoothly
so don't be afeard, cause it'll all turn out right in
the end, depend on't!
But when is he to come? enquired Emily,
not heeding the last remarks of Hetty.
Thar', I shan't answer ye no more!
returned
Hetty, who felt offended that her fortune
telling powers had been thus slighted. I'll not
answer ye agin, so don't speak to me! and true
to her word, from that moment Emily could get
nothing out of her. Left to herself and her own
gloomy reflectionsapprehending something
terrible
to comewith Emily, the day, as might be
conjectured, wore wearily away. And what was
to happen? What was to be her fateaway from
home and friends, and no voice to whisper in her
ear a single word of consolation and hope? And
Johna man she believed capable of any act
however devilishwhat was his design upon
her? She remembered his dark, mysterious words
of threatening, and shuddered. Oh! why had she
not made them known, and been saved this
terrible
result? And Edward, what must be his
feelings
to find her gone so suddenly, and no trace
left whereby he could glean an inkling of her fate?
And her guardian too, how must he feel?and
Rufus, whose prophetic words were sounding like
a death-knell in her ear? She might in truth
never see him again on earth. Alasalaspoor
girl! as one by one such thoughts as these came
rushing through her brain, she felt her head throb
and ache, and deemed but little more would drive
her mad. Thus passed one of the longest days of
her life.
Towards night Hetty placed some refreshments
on the table, which she had found in a basket;
but Emily refused to eat, and early retired to her
rude bed, only to pass a horrible night of feverish
anxiety, and to dream, whenever she slept, strange
fantastic dreams, that awoke her with a
shuddering
start. The next morning she arose with red,
swollen eyes, and a pale, sickly look. She
endeavored
to eat a little to support nature, for she
felt herself growing weak, but her stomach
refused
food; and faint, and exhausted, she retired
again to her pallet of straw. From time to time
Hetty glanced at her with an uneasy, anxious
look, but still said nothing. As the day wore
on, Emily began to feel more and more the
horrors
of her situationher brain was pressed to
bewilderment. What was to be her fate? This
silent suspense was terribleterrible! It was
taking
away her reason!and she felt that any
fate, even death itself, would be preferable to this
brain-wrought torture. Noon came, but brought
no relief; and as the afternoon waned away,
Emily
felt she was growing mad. At length she
started up and listened. She fancied she heard a
distant footfall. A few moments of anxiety
confirmed
it, and she could hear distinctly the tramp
of a horse. Then it paused, and Emily's heart
beat fast. Presently she heard a rustling of the
bushes. The sound came nearer and nearer.
It was a joyful sound, let what would follow. It
was a relief from that dull, death-like weariness
of suspense. Nearer and nearer it came, till at
length the tall, dark figure of John Webber filled
the entrance. Emily sunk back upon her pallet
with strange, deep feelings. It was the one she
wished, yet dreaded to see. He might relieve her
from suspense, only to plunge her into more
fearful
reality. Without ceremony, without even
noticing Hetty, John strode directly towards
Emily
,
and when within a few feet of her paused.
As he caught a full view of her features, there
was a slight start of surprise apparent in his own.
He could scarcely credit so great a change, in
so short a time.
Well, Emily, and so we meet here! were
the first words he uttered, in a tone somewhat
stern.
Oh, John, said Emily, casting upon him a
look of imploring anguish, that would have moved
to tears of pity any heart less hard than his:
Oh, John, how could you be so cruelto take
me, who have been reared in your father's
family
,
taught to look upon you as a brother, and
treat you at all times as a friendhow could you
take me away from home, and all I love, by the
hands of ruffians, and bring me to this wild,
uninhabited
region? Oh, what have I ever done,
that I should receive such treatment at your
hands?
Refused me! replied John, contracting his
brows.
Refused you, because I did not, could not
love you, returned Emily, and because I would
not perjure myself before God and man, by
accepting
your hand, and swearing to love and
cherish you. But is this to excuse you before
high Heaven for an act so base?
I seek no excuse for my acts! answered John,
smiling with one of his devilish smiles. Rail
on, Emilyrail on!but when you have done,
please inform me why you think you were brought
hither by my commands! and he turned his dark
eye upon Hetty, who trembled and grew pale.
I myself heard you giving directions, at the
place where my captors first paused, replied
Emily, noticing his glance and the agitation of
Hetty. Blame her not for thisfor if your
commands to her were silence, I can answer that
you have been strictly obeyed. Since yesterday
morning, not three words has she spoken; and to
all my entreaties to the contrary has turned a deaf
ear.
'Tis well, said John, that she has not
forgotten
her duty. And so it seems you recognised
my voice. Well, since you know all, perhaps
'tis better. I will not disguise that it is by my
will and acts you are here. I saw you when you
departed with that fellow Merton, and I judged
by the course you took where you might be found.
I knew, too, where were some bold spirits, who
would not fail to obey my commands, even were
those commands to murder; and I immediately
informed them of your whereabouts, and what
they must perform for me. Their task has been
well executed, for you are here in my power.
What you are here for, I presume you know; but
lest you should feign ignorance, I will inform you.
You will remember an interview we had a short
time since, during which I offered, and you
refused
my hand. I then swore you should be
mine, and you are here to fulfil that oath. The
matter you perceive is simple, and easily
understood
.
But, John, I told you then I could not love
you!
And I told you then, Emily, it mattered not.
Lovepshaw!what is it? A mere fancy of a
brain disordered, or intoxicatedwhichever you
like--by the silly romance of youth, ere the mind
has fully settled upon the realities of life. A strange
something that afflicts some people in the head, as
the nightmare does others in the body. Thank
Heaven, I was never troubled with either
complaint
!
Even were I to set love aside, I could not be
yours! rejoined Emily.
Wherefore?
My hand is pledged to another.
Ha! is it so? Well, then, you must break that
pledge.
But surely, John, there must be some pity in
your heart! Oh, do not--do not drive me to hate
one I have ever been taught to look upon as a
brother! Oh, I beg of you, release mereturn
me to my home, and I will bless you! I know
you are a child of passion, and one who in
moments
of excitement would be likely to err; but
oh! bring calm reflection to your aid, and retrieve
ere too late the wrong you have done me! Do
this, John, do this, and you shall never have cause
to repent it! I will do all in my power to make
you happy; and I solemnly swear to you, from
my lips shall never pass an accusation or reproach!
I will strictly conceal, as I have concealed your
threat, that aught of anything but kind regards
ever passed between us. Oh, will you not do this,
and make me happy, and others, and yourself
happy also?
On one condition, Emily, I will release you.
Name it! cried Emily, breathlessly.
That you will swear to be mine at the altar.
Oh, you know I cannot do this, John, so
wherefore
urge me?
I know you
must
do this, or worse! returned
John, with a dark look.
No, no, no! cried Emily; you cannot,
cannot
be so cruel, John!
I see you do not
know
me! said John, with
another devilish smile.
But what motive can induce you to destroy
the happiness of a poor, nameless, I might add,
homeless girl, who never did you wrong? No,
no! you cannotI will believe you cannot be
so cruel!
I see you do not know me! repeated John;
nonor even know yourself. You say you
are a nameless girlbut therein you err.
Listen
!
Six months ago, when you came on from
New York, I was struck with your appearance;
and thinking much on you, your kindness to me
in days gone by, and your affability then, I felt
for you what some enthusiastic youth would
probably term love; but which I, in a more matter
of fact way, simply termed a fancy, or an
attachment
.
Thinking much on this, I finally resolved
you should be mine at a no distant day. A
resolve
with me is but the precursor of a result
as I do not like to break one, for fear of setting
myself a bad example. Well, to cut matters
short, I saw you a few days sincealonetold
you of my intention, and you refused me. That,
even that of itself, Emily, had been enough to
tempt me to almost any extreme, rather than fail
in my designbut to that was shortly added
another and more important inducement. You
of course remember the conversation in my
father's house on the evening of that day. You
will remember, too, it was then suggested that
the Jew might have in his possession proofs of
your parentage. The suggestion seemed to me
a good one, as I had other reasons for thinking
the same. Well, on that same nightwhile you
were probably sleeping and dreaming of love, or
some other foolish thing--I saw the Jew and
obtained
those proofs.
Ah, then he had proofs! cried Emily,
suddenly
,
a gleam of joy passing over her pale,
careworn
features.
Ay, he had proofs, answered John, which
proofs are now in my possession, and I trust are
sufficient to establish you an heiress of noble
birth.
O joyjoy! exclaimed Emily, with a radiant
smile upon her countenance. At least then I
am not of mean parentage. O, have you the
papers with you?
They are here; and John placed his hand
upon his breast.
O, let me behold them, and learn who I
am!
On the one condition you shall have the full
benefit of themwithout complying with that,
you shall never see them. It is now in your
power to choose, wealth and a name, or poverty
and disgrace. If you accept my hand, you shall
be richrefuse, and you shall see of what deeds
I am capable! I do not ask your decision now
you shall have a few hours to deliberate. I have
business which calls me away; but ere
to-morrow's
dawn I shall be here again, and then you
must decide! Ponder well upon it, girl, and do
not force me to extremes! Remember you are
here, in my power, and beyond the reach of
assistance
.
If you decide to accept my hand, all
shall be well; but if you persist in your
obstinacy
,
then know, girl--and his dark eyes fastened
upon her gleamed strangelythen know, girl,
there
is
a way to make even one as proud and
high-born as you,
glad
to accept the hand even
of a man as base and low-born as I. I pray you
drive me not to extremes! Mine you
must
be,
by fair means or foul!
Oh, God! groaned Emily, burying her face
in her hands, while a cold shudder passed over
her.
Remember your decision! and John turned
upon his heel to depart. As he did so, his eye
fell upon Hetty, and with a start he advanced
rapidly to her, caught her by the wrist, while she
trembled and grew white with fear.
You have heard what you should not! he
said, in a low, hurried tone, his eyes glaring upon
her with an awful expression. My secret is in
your possession. Secrets of desperate men are
sometimes dangerous. Bewarebeware! Breathe
but a word, be it never so light, of what you have
here seen and heard, or shall see and hear
henceforth
,
and this bright steel (partly drawing a
dagger
)
shall revel in your heart's blood!
Remember
remember!
and with this he strode to the
door and disappeared.
For some moments Hetty remained in the
position
he had left her, pale and trembling; and then
proceeding to the door herself, she gazed down the
hill, and saw him mount his horse and ride away,
with feelings that boded him no good. When
fully assured he was gone, she glanced cautiously
around,as if to be certain no person was
lurking
about the premisesand then closing the door,
with a trembling step she hurriedly returned to
Emily, whom she found sobbing bitterly.
Lady, said she, touching her on the arm,
casting upon her a wild glance, and speaking in
a quick, fearful tone, scarcely above her breath:
Lady, we're in danger, both on us!
Emily looked up with a start.
We're in danger, gal, repeated Hetty; for
'mong all the villains I've ever known, I've never
seed the like of him as has just left us!
We are indeed in danger! replied Emily,
earnestly, grasping Hetty by the hand. There
is no dark deed of which John Webber, to gain
his ends, is incapable.
I know it, I know it, gal! returned Hetty,
quickly. I've watched him while he were a
talkin'
to you; I've heard it allall he's said, and
your sweet replies, that moved me, hard as I am,
to tearsand I know his heart's a rock. Lady,
for more'n sixteen year I've been mixed with bad
men. My husband was a robber himself, and got
shot in his business. I've seen men robbed and
murdered without crying a bit; but looking on
you, somehow's made me a child agin, and made
me think on my innocent daysfor once, gal, I
were as innocent as you be. Oh, lady, believe
me, I pities you!
Oh then, dear, kind Hetty, assist me to
escape
!
rejoined Emily, springing from her
pallet
where
during her interview with John she
had remainedand kneeling at the other's feet.
Oh, assist me to escape, and you shall be
rewarded
richly
rewarded! You will by so doing
save me from a fate worse than death itself; and
the good God, who sees all things, will reward you
for it!
My will's good enough, gal, but what can I
do? You're a great many miles from home, and
you couldn't never reach thar' without being
discovered
,
and then my life wouldn't be worth a
button.
Oh, God! and is it so? cried Emily, hiding
her face in her hands.
Come, come, lady, don't cry now, don't
cause it makes me feel bad. Rise, gal, rise! It's
I that ought to be kneeling to you, that is so good
and pure. Rise, gal, and I promise you all as can
be done I'll do, though it costs me my life. Thar's
only one way to save you, gal, and that may fail.
Ha! one way! cried Emily, starting to her
feet. One way!well, well!speak, speak!
It's dangerous, galpre'aps it 'll failbut it's
the only one as I thinks on now.
Well, wellspeak!what is it?
Did ye ever here galand Hetty glanced
cautiously around, as if fearful of listenersdid
ye ever hear o' Ronald Bonardi, the great bandit
cap'en?
I have! replied Emily, with a shudder.
He lives in this ere quarter.
Lives in this quarter! repeated Emily, in
astonishment
.
What mean you, Hetty? Surely,
Bonardi and his band are not in this country now!
You mean he
did
live here?
Hush, gal, hushnot so loud! said Hetty,
trembling with fear at the course she was taking.
If we're heerd, it's all up with me. The great
cap'en does live here, and it's to him I'll have to
go to git you rescued.
Ha! exclaimed Emily, with a start. Hetty,
you must be insane! Rescue me by appealing
to that terrible man?
It's the only way, returned Hetty. It's
your only chance of escape, gal; besides, he aint
so terrible towards women; cause I knows him,
and knows as how he's made a law too, for I've
hearn 'em talk about it, as makes it death for any
of his band to touch womens. It was he that
but 'll you swear to keep it secret, and all I've
said?
Most solemnly! replied Emily.
It was he then, gal, that the conclusion
of the sentence was whispered in Emily's ear.
Indeed! exclaimed Emily, pausing
thoughtfully
.
This is strangemost strange! But why
do you think he will interfere in this instance?
To punish them as has broke his law.
Ha! then my captors were of his band?
Yes, and him as holds you!
How! what mean you?
Hist! John Webber.
Great Heaven! cried Emily, throwing up her
hands, starting back, and gazing upon Hetty in
astonishment. Can this be true! John
Webber
a bandit?
It's true, ladymost true, said Hetty;
though if 'twas known as how I told, it 'nd
cost me my life!
Fear not, Hetty; you will find your
confidence
not misplaced; but now how do you intend
to proceed?
Why's, I said, it's dangerous business,
answered
Hetty, and pre'aps 'll cost me my life;
but for your sweet sake I'll risk it; and if I die,
I'll at least have the intention of one good deed
to balance agin my wicked acts. I'll hunt out
the cave where the great cap'en lives, for I knows
it's somewhere in this ere quarter, and if I can
only jest find it, and see him, then all's safe. But
pre'aps John 'll come back, and miss me, and
then hunt me out and murder me. Pre'aps I'll
not be able to find it, and git lost, and git torn to
death by wild beasts. Thar's a great deal o'
danger
about it, ladybut for your sweet sake I'll
risk it; and if I don't never come back, and you
don't never hear nothin' more o' Hetty Brogan,
and you happen to 'scape some other way, you'll
sometimes think on her, wont you, lady?
Indeed, indeed I will! cried Emily, throwing
her arms around Hetty, and bursting into tears.
Indeed I will, Hetty. God bless you!
Whatever
your errors may have been, you have a kind
heart, and God will forgive you! I cannot but
love you, although you have been my jailor;
and if we both escape, you shall evermore find
a true friend in Emily Nevance!
Thar', thar', said Hetty, wiping her eyes;
don't say no more, don't, 'cause I can't stand
so much goodness! I'll goI'll gofor it'll be
sweet to die for ye anyhow. Keep up your
sperets, gal, 'cause I'm in a good cause, and think
I'll succeed. Thar', good bye! and Hetty
turned away.
Good bye, and may God protect you! said
Emily, fervently; and as Hetty disappeared, she
bent her knees in a prayer of supplication to
Him who holds the destinies of the weakest and
the most mighty in his hands.
CHAPTER IV.
THE BANDIT AND HIS WIFETHE MEETING OF THE
BANDITTITHE TRIALTHE SENTENCETHE
EXECUTION
THE
SECRET DESIGNTHE EXTRA
SIGNAL
.
On the same day of the events immediately
preceding
,
and at the hour of twilight, Ronald
Bonardi
was seated by the richly carved table in the
gorgeous apartment known as the Chieftain's
Chamber. His head was uncovered, and his long,
black, curling hair, thrown back from his high,
broad, pale forehead, in rough disorder, seemed
indicative of a mind disturbed and ill at ease.
This was signally apparent in his features. His
brows were knit together, and there was a
combination
of the sad and sullen in his eyes, as
though by one thing he was grieved, and by
another roused to a severe, unshaken
determination
,
the terminus of which would be far from
pleasant. There was great severity also exhibited
around his mouth, the lips of which were
compressed
and drawn slightly apart, leaving visible
a small portion of his front teeth. He was seated,
as we have said, by the table, and his eyes were
resting with the expression we have described,
upon
some two or three letters which were lying
open thereon. At a little distance in front, on a
sofa, sat his wife, the beautiful Inez, her large
dark eyes fastened tenderly upon him, with a look
of sorrow, while the smile we have previously
described around her mouth, was mournful. Her
features were pale, exhibiting tokens of much
anxiety, and one would easily be led to fancy she
had been weeping. Behind Inez stood the slave
Cyntha, gazing also upon the bandit captain, with
an expression little less sad than that of her
mistress
.
For some five minutes Bonardi sat in the same
position, during which time not a muscle of his
features changed, as though made fast by the spell
of some deep revery, while the other two,
immoveable
as himself, gazed on in silence. At
length he started, and with a deep drawn sigh
relaxed
his rigidity of expression, and his eyes
wandered
to those of Inez with a softer glance. No
sooner did Inez notice the change, than with an
airy bound she sprang forward, threw her soft
arms around his neck, buried her head upon his
shoulder, while her dark curls mingled playfully
with his.
My Inez, my own dear Inez, said Ronald,
in a low, tender voice, far sweeter to her ear than
the softest notes of music, my own dear Inez,
you at least are true! As he spoke, he threw
one arm around her waist, drew her fondly to
him, and, as she turned her eyes towards him,
now moist with tears, pressed a kiss of love upon
her rosy lips. Yes, my own dear Inez, you at
least are true!
True, Ronald, murmured Inez, ay, true,
true, forever, ever true! and she bowed her head
upon his breast and wept. But why do you say
thus, dear Ronald, and why do you look so
grieved
and angered to-day? enquired she at length,
looking up with a sigh. Are not all true, dear
Ronald?
No, dearest, replied he, compressing his lips,
all are not true: I would to Heaven they were!
But they at least shall find
me
true to what I have
sworn.
There is trouble then, dear Ronald, and
danger
perhaps, said Inez, quickly.
There is trouble, Inez, much trouble; but I
apprehend no danger as yet. I have a few
treacherous
spirits to deal with, and then I trust all will
be well. My letters from abroad bring me bad
news. Three of my best men, whom I sent forth
as spies, are dead, through their own imprudence.
One shot in a street fight in Cincinnati; one killed
in a duel in New Orleans; and the third, in New
York, for shooting a man on a slight provocation,
has been tried and executed. This is sad news
to receive by one post, for they were all tried
men and true. Each had in his possession
private
papers of great moment, from two of whom
they were recovered by their comrades,
immediately
after their death; but with regard to the
third, the one executed in New York, it has not
turned out so wellhis papers having been seized
upon by the authorities. I have some fears how
it may terminate; for in those so lost, was a secret
plan of extending our band in that quarter; in
fact, of establishing a league, the head quarters of
which should be here, throughout different
sections
of the United States. However, the secret
correspondence was written in an invisible ink,
which will only show when the paper is heated,
while in ordinary ink was written something
entirely
foreign to the subject. I do not think it
probable they will warm the papersif not, all is
safe; and even should they do so, I fancy the
contents, by reason of the characters introduced,
will prevent them from making any thing of them
that will lead to our detection: still I would they
had them not. In the neighborhood of
Cincinnati
we have already found a few bold hearts who
are ready and willing to join us. But enough of
this, dear Inez, for it is matter that scarcely
concerns
,
and of course cannot interest you.
Any thing that concerns or interests you,
dear Ronald, I always listen to with delight,
said Inez, sweetly.
Ah, what would life be without you, sweet
one; and again Ronald, bending down, pressed
his lips to hers. But, dear Inez, I must no longer
here, for I have deep matters on my hands.
To-night
our band meets on a special purpose, and
already I hear them assembling in the Outer Cave.
There, there, dear Inez, I must go; and pressing
his lips again to hers, he arose and gathered up the
letters on the table. Ho! Cyntha, continued
he, turning to the slave, bring wine! and as the
latter obeyed, he took the cup from her hand and
drained it. Again! he added, reaching it forth.
Again it was filled, and again he emptied it. Once
more, Cyntha, said he, with a wild light in his
eyes; once more! The slave obeyed, and the
third cup was drained.
Oh, Ronald, dear Ronald, what means this?
cried Inez, who had been gazing upon him with
a look of astonishment. You are not yourself,
dear Ronald! Something terrible is going to take
place! You, who seldom taste liquor, have drank
three cups, and there is an awful look in your
eye. Oh, dear Ronald, tell me, tell me what is
about to happen! and she threw her arms around,
as though to detain him.
Nay, said he, gently disengaging himself,
there are things, dear Inez, of which one like
you should know nothing. Question not, but
remember you are a bandit's wife!
But one who loves him to whom she pledged
her hand no less for that, returned Inez,
sweetly
.
I fear you are about to encounter danger,
dear Ronald, and if  and if
Nay, nay, interrupted he, fear not. I
apprehend
no danger. But hark! there is the
signal
for me. I must be detained no longer; and
turning hastily away, without further ceremony,
he drew aside the crimson curtains concealing the
passage, and entered the Outer Cave, while Inez,
with a sad expression, gazed long upon the spot
where she had seen him disappear.
As Ronald had said, a special meeting of the
band had been called for this evening, and
already
a large number had assembled when he
appeared
among them, with an expression on his
features but few had ever seen before. With a
quick, firm step he mounted the stand, where the
lieutenant already was before him.
Has the roll been called? demanded he of the
latter.
It has not, captain, answered Piketon.
The time set for the meeting has not yet
expired
.
You may as well call it, however, for I see
most of our band are here; and should the others
arrive in due time, they shall be exempted from
disobedience.
As the lieutenant proceeded to obey his
command
,
Bonardi stepped down and closed the door
of the Inner Cave. It was a massive stone, some
ten inches in thickness, and swung on heavy
iron hinges. Many an eye of that reckless band
of outlaws, was fastened with an enquiring look
upon their leader as he did this, for it was a
something
done only on rare occasions, and when
matters
were of a too private nature for the ears of
women.
Give me the roll! said Bonardi, as the
lieutenant
concluded the call; and taking it in his
hand, his eye ran over it hastily, but with a keen,
sure glance. They are all here, he continued
in a low tone to Piketon, that I expected, with
the exception of Saxton, Curdish and Niles. You
will proceed, as soon as circumstances will admit,
to find and order them under arrest, to meet here;
and, mark you! put spies upon them, that they
may not escape. I have my doubts of their
fidelity
;
but not a word of this to any oneyou
understand
?
Piketon bowed.
Gentlemen, said Bonardi, in a louder tone,
addressing the assemblage, you are here met for
a special purpose, as of course you are aware,
being notified out of your regular time. For
your promptness in responding to the call, I
thank you! and by it feel assured that though I may
govern
some
traitors, most of my band are true.
I perceive surprise on your countenances, by
which I know that most of you do not understand
me. I shall not detain you with any long
explanation
,
but rather let actions speak. In short,
gentlemen, you are here met to witness the trial of
a traitor!
At the last words, a sudden start was visible
with most of the party present, while with some
few it was accompanied with a slight paleness.
Bonardi noticed all, with a quick, searching
glance, and turning to Piketon, added: Bring
up the prisoner.
Raising a trap door at the far end of the
platform
which
by the way was some fifteen feet in
lengthPiketon immediately disappeared, while
every eye was bent in that direction, with a look
of anxious wonder, to learn who was the one
suspected
of a crime in their eyes so degrading, and
which, if followed by conviction, must end in a
manner the most tragical. They were not long
kept in suspense, for Piketon shortly reappeared;
and low curses, deep imprecations, horrible oaths,
and fierce, angry gestures succeeded, as they
recognised in his companion, the ugly, quivering,
coward'y features, and the stooped, aged,
trembling
form of David the Jew. As Piketon led
him forward in front of the stand, his small black
eyes turned with a rapid, sickly glance from one
to the other of the party; but he saw nothing,
save such dark, stern, angry looks, as made his
very heart shrink within him.
Oh, good shentlemens
Silence, Jew! interrupted Bonardi, in a voice
of thunder. You are here to speak only when
called upon!
Oh, good Mistoor Captains
Silence, I say! cried Bonardi, with an angry
gesture. This insolence in the face of my
commands
is unbearable! Piketon, place a pistol to
his head; and if he speak again ere spoken to,
send a bullet through his brain! Piketon
instantly
obeyed, and the Jew, knowing the
command
would be promptly executed to the letter,
stood mute and trembling.
You remember, gentlemen, said Ronald,
that when we met here last, one of our party,
Curdishwho I am sorry to say is now absent
insinuated in rather strong terms that the Jew
intended to betray usor to that effectbut at
the same time was not willing to swear to it.
You will also recollect that I ordered him under
arrest, and told you the matter should be looked
to. I questioned him in private, and learned
enough to be satisfied that for the present our
safety
might depend upon having the Jew closely
watched. However, as I wished also to give the
latter a fair opportunity to forego any wicked
design
he might have in contemplation, and to talk
with him on some other matters, I ordered him
under arrest likewise. During my examination
of him, I became more than ever convinced that
he was meditating treachery; and my last words to
him were, `go Jew, but beware, for a sleepless eye
will be upon you!' He made no reply, but there
was in his countenance a look of savage cunning,
which seemed to say, `I shall outwit and betray
you.' So I interpreted it; and as soon as he was
gone, I called one of my sentinelsa man in whom
I had implicit confidence, both as to being trusted,
and possessing sufficient cunning to overreach
the Jewrelated the whole matter, bade him dog
his steps, and take whatever measures he might
see proper to learn if my suspicious were correct;
and, if so, so soon as he could gather proof
sufficient
,
to bring him hitherwhich latter you
perceive
,
gentlemen, has been done. Now for the
proof. Hendrick, you will stand forth, so as to
confront the prisoner!
At the word, a tall, thin faced, intellectual,
cunning looking man, with grey eyes, came
forward
to the stand.
I suppose you are aware, Hendrick,
continued
the captain, addressing him, of the penalty
of giving false evidence?
I am! replied Hendrick, calmly.
Enough! Now let us hear your testimony in
regard to David.
Shall I relate everything that occurred,
captain
?
No, it is unnecessary for us to waste time.
Relate only that which bears directly on his
treasonable
design.
Well, then, began Hendrick, after
following
the Jew through all his crooks and turns,
until
he reached his place of abode, on the banks of
the Mississippi, which he did about dusk on the
third day from his leaving herehaving traveled
the whole distance on footI determined, if
possible
,
to secrete myself within his hovel, where I
judged I should be the better able to learn of his
private intentions. Fortunately his own
imprudence
favored me in the first, as his tongue
afterwards
did in the last. By great adroitness I
managed
to keep him within sight the whole distance,
and remain myself unseen. As I have said, he
reached his hovel about dusk of the third day; and
the shadows of the coming night favoring me, I
was enabled to be close upon him when he
entered
.
To my surprise he did not close and bolt his
door immediately, and availing myself of this, a
moment or two after, I noiselessly followed him
across the threshold, and found him engaged with
flint and steel in striking a light. The flash from
the steel enabled me to perceive a table, which I
succeeded in reaching, and concealing myself
under
,
without alarming him. After having lit a
candle, he proceeded to bolt his door, and then,
as if he felt himself entirely free from danger, let
off a volley of curses and all manner of
imprecations
on the banditti, its captain especially,
which he finished by swearing to have
revenge
on the whole party. After this, for a time,
he became more quiet, and proceeding to a kind
of closet, regaled himself with food. This done,
he seated himself by the table, underneath which
I was lying, and for some two hours was silent.
At length he began again, by uttering the word
revenge, and swearing he would have it on those
who had foiled him in a matter concerning some
girl; that to get this revenge, he would, on the
following day, proceed to St. Louis, betray the
band, and secure the reward offered for our
captain's
head.
As Hendrick said this, several of the party
present, unable longer to smother their wrath,
burst into a yell of rage, with cries of, Death
death! Away with him! Enough proof! Wretch!
Villian!while knives and pistols flashed in the
light of the torches, and some few moved forward
as if to seize the Jew, who, ghastly and
breathless
,
was nearly fainting with terror.
Hold! exclaimed Bonardi, waiving his hand
with dignity. Justice shall be done, gentlemen,
fear not. In an instant that rough sea of
passion
was calm as a still lake, when Ronald again
added, Go on, Hendrick, but be brief as
possible
.
Railing in this manner for awhile, resumed
Hendrick, he finally touched upon his money,
some papers in his possession, and how best he
might dispose of the latter.
Yes, papers! said Bonardi, quickly,
interrupting
the speaker. Yes, well, what of the
papers?
Why, as I did not understand the allusion,
answered Hendrick, I paid but little regard to
his remarks; though I remember his muttering
something about disposing of them to some one
who loved the girl, probably meaning the same
one he had alluded to before.
The same, doubtless, but continue.
After going on in this manner sometime, he
proceeded to the closet, and brought forth a bag
and some papers. The bag contained money, as
I could tell by hearing him empty it on the table;
and for a full hour he amused himself, as nigh as
I could judge, in counting and handling it, and
some half hour more in examining the papers,
when he returned them to the closet. While
there, I heard him mutter something about
killing
some one; then he came for the light, and
seemed much agitated. Soon after he went back,
the light disappeared, and curiosity prompting
me, I crept forth to learn what had become of
him. I entered the closet carefully, and, to my
surprise, found a trap-door raised, leading down
into a vault, from which issued a stench so
disagreeable
,
that I immediately retired, but not
until
I had heard some words passed with one
below
,
whom the Jew, as I judged, had gone down
to murder.
Indeed! remarked Ronald, with interest,
here is mystery, truly. I would I had known
of this before. Speak, Jew, who had you there?
But the Jew, in his fright and astonishment at
hearing all these things, which he believed known
only to himself, so correctly narrated, had lost all
power of speech, and Ronald nodded to Hendrick
to proceed.
How it terminated below, I do not know,
continued the witness; but just at this moment
I was astonished by hearing the approach of a
horse, and, following immediately, a knocking
on the door, with a demand for admittance, and
I crept under the table, wondering what I was to
behold next. The Jew shortly appeared,
evidently
much alarmed, for he enquired in a trembling
voice who was there. The answer was in our
phrase, `Ele lio.'
Ha! exclaimed Bonardi: Well?
The Jew, out of fear, then opened the door,
when a tall figure walked in, and, after some
prevar
ication, told him (the Jew) that he had
papers
concerning a young girl, for which he (the
stranger) had come expressly. This the Jew
stoutly denied, when the stranger took another
method, and frightened him into owning the
truth. The result was that the Jew brought
forward
the papers, and gave them to the other, who
immediately departed.
And do you know that stranger? asked
Ronald
.
I do not, for his face was concealed by a
mask.
That he is one of our band, is evident from
his reply to the Jew, said Ronald. See you
in any person present a figure corresponding with
his?
Hendrick glanced slowly around upon the
assemblage
,
who were listening with breathless
interest
,
until his eye fell upon John Webber,
where it rested for a moment, while the latter
grew deadly pale. Hendrick noticed this, and
replied:
I see none, captain, that
better
corresponds
than the person of Webber.
Ha! how is this, sir? asked Ronald, quickly,
fastening his eyes keenly upon John, and
marking
the change in his countenance. How is
this, sir?
I know nothing of it, replied John, firmly,
immediately recovering himself.
The voice tallies well, remarked Hendrick.
Would you insinuate, sir! began John, with
a flashing eye, and fierce expression.
Hold! exclaimed Ronald, interrupting him;
this is no place to quarrel. You say you know
nothing of itso let it pass. If I find you have
deceived me, however,beware, sir, beware!
Hendrick, you will proceed with your evidence
concerning the Jew.
After the stranger had departed, again
resumed
Hendrick, the Jew seemed beside
himself
with rage; and instead of waiting for the
morrow, as was his first intention, he swore he
would instantly set off for St. Louis, betray the
band, and at once seek security from the law.
With this intent he started, and with a very
different
one I followed. When he had reached
some half way, I touched him on the shoulder,
and told him I arrested him in the name of
Ronald
Bonardi. He trembled violently, and offered
me his bag of gold to let him go. I answered I
was not to be bought, and brought him hither.
Thus ends my testimony, which, according to
our laws, I affirm before God and man is true,
and stake my life upon the oath!
You have done well, Hendrick, said Ronald,
as the other concluded, and deserve great praise,
with a suitable reward.
The praise is sufficient, noble captain,
returned
Hendrick. The reward I wish not. I
have done but my duty.
Nevertheless you shall not be forgotten.
Promptly to reward, as promptly to punish, shall
henceforth be the justice motto of Ronald
Bonardi
.
Gentlemen, you have heard the testimony
against the Jew. If there is one or more among
you, who doubts the evidence just given, or who
believes the Jew guiltless of the crime with
which he is chargednamely, intentional
perjury
,
and treason against us as a bodyhe or they
will now come forward and make known the
same.
Silence reigned throughout the cave. Not a
man moved.
Jew, continued Bonardi, solemnly, with
compressed lips, before this body, in the hearts of
each, you stand condemned as a traitor. When
you joined us, you took a solemn oath, which in
your heart you have broken, as you would have
broken by your deeds, had not our interference
prevented. Your minutes are numbered. You
are an old, grey-headed, grey-bearded man, and
your soul is black with crimes, which, if not
repented
of now, will go with you to another world.
You present a spectacle at once pitiable and
revolting
;
and base as you are, I cannot but regret
that it falls to my lot to fulfil the letter of our law,
and make you an example to others; but I have
sworn to do my duty faithfully; and were you
my own brother, my bosom friend, I would keep
my oath. Although appearances were much
against you when here before, I deemed it my
duty to warn you, so that if in reality you
meditated
treachery, you might have a chance to
repent
of your base design in season. You heeded
not my warning, and now with you rest the
consequences
.
Your sentence is death! Have you
any request to make ere the fatal moment? If so,
speak! we listen.
Oh, oh! mine Gott! mercysmercys! gasped
the Jew, sinking upon his knees.
Coward! cried Ronald, fiercely; base,
paltry
coward!you were unworthyto belong to us!
I'll hear no more! Piketon, you will put a
bandage
around his eyes, and lead him forward. If he
attempt to cry out, gag him! But this latter
injunction
was unnecessary, for the Jew in his
fright had actually fainted.
Piketon instantly passed a kerchief around
the Jew's eyes; and then, placing his hands under
his armpits, raised and drew him forward, with
his feet trailing on the ground, to within a short
distance of where paced the sentinel, while every
eye followed the movement, and every heart felt
a pressure of awe upon it. As long as they had
been a band, an execution they had never yet
witnessed.
It only remains now, said Bonardi, in a deep,
solemn voice, for me to read the law, that I may
not be accused hereafter of acting illegally; and
taking from a desk before him a roll of
parchment
,
he opened it and read as follows:
Sec. II, Art. X
. If any member shall at any
time be accused of treasonable intentions, he shall
be duly tried before the captain, and such
members
as the latter may deem advisable to be
present
,
and if found guilty of betraying the band, or
even of an attempt to betray the same, he shall
suffer death within an hour from his conviction,
as provided under the Black Law, in Article XV
of Section I. Taking up another roll he
continued
:
Black Law, Sec. I, Art. XV
. Any member
sentenced to punishment under this law, shall be
shot in the head, unto death, by the hand of the
chief, and his body be cast forth in the open air,
to be devoured by wild beasts.
And now, gentlemen, continued Bonardi,
laying down the roll, am I not fully justified in
all that I have done, and am about to do, in
executing
yonder traitor?
You are, you are! cried a dozen voices.
Enough!
Drawing a pistol from his belt, Ronald
descended
from the stand, and with a firm step, and
compressed
lips, walked forward to the Jew, while
each member rose to his feet, to look on with an
expression peculiar to himself. And strange and
varying were those expressions. Some frowned
heavily; some smiled darkly; some looked pale,
and shut their teeth hard; and some gazed on
with seeming indifference. Bonardi himself
seemed
composed and calm, with a look of unshaken
determination; but there was, notwithstanding, a
slight paleness in his features, an unusual
compression
of the lips, as though requiring an effort
to keep them firm. As he approached the Jew,
who was lying on the ground, the latter appeared
suddenly to recover his senses, and with one hand
raised himself into a sitting posture, while with
the other he removed from his eyes the bandage,
and with a horror stricken look glared round
upon the assembly.
'Tis well, Jew! said Ronald, as he paused
by his side, while the cave was as silent as the
chamber of death. You would see once more the
faces of those you would have betrayed. 'Tis
well, Jew, 'tis well! Look well on each, and bear
the impression with you to eternity, for on earth
you will behold them no more. Brothers of you
they werewho would have risked life for you,
many of them, if necessarybut they are your
brothers no more.
The Jew turned his old eyes upon the speaker,
with a strange, bewildered expression. For a
moment Ronald ceased, and then said solemnly:
Justice waits. Your time, Jew, has come.
Farewell! Raising his pistol as he spoke, with
the last words came a sharp reporta shudder
passed through the assemblyand the Jew, with
a ghastly contortion of visage, fell back without
a groan.
His soul was with his God.
So die all traitors! spoke the voice of Ronald
Bonardi, after a moment's pause, in a tone so deep
and solemn almost sepulchral, that it thrilled the
bosom of every one present. Comrades, and
he moved his eyes slowly over each, in a most
impressive manner, comrades, whose turn
among
you next? 'Tis the first blood upon my
hands; and he held them forth, and gazed sadly
upon them; whose blood is destined to cover the
foul stain? Be warned, be warned in time! and
turning away, he slowly retraced his steps to the
farther end of the cave, and again mounted the
stand. Bear the corpse without the cave until
7
you depart, he continued, when some of you
will take it in a boat to the Osage, row a short
distance up the stream, and cast it upon the bank,
far above high water mark. So ends the career
of the Jew.
As he spoke, four men laid hold of the body and
bore it up the ladder. In a moment they
returned
,
when Bonardi resumed:
Here, he said, taking up a well filled bag,
is the money which belonged to the deceased.
This will be divided among you, when our other
business for the evening is closed. Piketon will
make the division. By our law, I am entitled to
one-tenth. Hendrick, besides your share, you
will accept mine.
But, captain
Nay, Hendrick, no remark: I would have it
so. And now, comrades, I have something
important
to communicate. Listen! You will
remember
that for some time past we have held in
contemplation an attack on a rich planter
living
in Tennessee. To speak candidly my own
mind, I must say the design never suited me;
and in its place I have one to offer, which I trust
will meet your approbation. Some two or three
days since, I received a letter from one of my
secret
agents in New Orleans, which informs me
that of late there has been a great run on the banks
there for specie; and that to supply the demand,
they will be forced to borrow, for a time, from
neighboring cities; and that he believed an order
had already been sent to St. Louis for a large sum,
which doubtless would shortly pass down on one
of the steamers, and which, should we be
fortunate
enough to capture, would in all probability
make our fortunes. As soon as I had read this, I
set to work to learn the truth of it; and as I am well
known among the merchants and men of wealth
in St. Louis, as a speculator in land, under a
different
cognomen, I was not long in finding it
fully
corroborated. By dint of perseverence, I have
been enabled to learn that a boat, which leaves
within a few days, will carry this money; of the
amount I am yet ignorant, though without
question
the sum will be large. My plan is this: I
will ascertain to a certainty the day of her leaving,
and also the hour. I will learn, too, the speed of
the boat, and calculate the distance, so that we
may find a good point to station ourselves, where
the current hugs the western shore, and where
she will pass about dark. In the meantime I will
procure several skiffs, and have them floated down
to the rendezvous. These must be manned, and
lie concealed under cover of the bank until the
given signal. As the steamer heaves in sight,
some two or three of our party must hail her from
the bank, when she, under the impression that
they wish to take passage, will lay to and send out
a boat. As the latter touches the shore, the
oarsman
must be seized, gagged and bound, quickly
and quietly, while some three of our party will
instantly leap into the boat and row back.
Instead
of approaching the larger boat direct, they
will cross her bows, and when on the other side,
will seemingly get into a fight, and discharge
several
pistols. This of course will attract the
attention
of all on board the steamer, and be the
signal for the concealed boats to shoot out and
approach her on the larboard sideher head being
up streamwhich must be done with lightning
speed, but without noise. These, however, will
be commanded by Piketon and myself. The
moment
we come along side, some of the boldest and
most agile of our party will follow me in leaping
on board, where will be found three of our band,
who have come down from St. Louis, ready to
show us where the money is stowed, and assist
us in getting it into our boats. The money will
be found in small casks, which can be easily
handled
,
and, to succeed, must be handled
expeditiously
.
It is not probable that we can remove it all;
but in the confusion that will ensue, doubtless
enough to enrich us. If we are pressed hard, we
must discharge some of our pistols, not with the
intention of wounding, but merely to frighten,
and thicken the confusion, while at the same time
we will add the old cry, which I trust is not yet
forgotten: `Yield to the attack of Ronald
Bonardi
!'
We must keep a plenty of undischarged
pistols by us, however, to be used only in cases of
extreme necessity, and then not to take life if it
can be avoided. As soon as we have
accomplished
our design, I will give the signal by a shrill
whistle, when each man must spring for his boat,
and row as for life to the shore. We will then
knock out the heads of the casks, empty the
money into bags, throw them across our saddles,
(for our horses must be in waiting, close at hand)
mount and away, in various directions, to
rendezvous
here as soon as possible. Such is my plan.
As he concluded, the cave echoed with three
tremendous cheers, and Long live Ronald
Bonardi
,
when he immediately responded:
I am pleased, gentlemen, to know that my
project finds with you so much favor; but I will
not disguise from you, what I cannot from
myself
,
that my plan may fail; and at the best, will
be attended with a great deal of danger, perhaps
loss of life; and, furthermore, that it will in all
probability rouse up the country against us, as
was done heretofore. In the latter case, each
must make his way out of it as quietly as
possible
,
and remain until the storm has blown over.
And now, a word or two more, and I have done.
You will each and all of you hold yourselves in
readiness for a moment's warning, with horses
well fed and rested for a long journey. When
you hear the signal of three blasts on a bugle, be
it night or day, you will mount and ride to the
river. The rendezvous is the hut of the traitor
Jew, where you will learn more. And now, so
soon as Piketon has made a division of the money,
you will quietly disperse to your several homes,
and hold yourselves, as I said before, prepared for
any event. For your kind attention, I thank you!
Adieu.
Descending from the stand, Bonardi opened the
stone door and entered the Chieftain's Chamber,
with a clouded brow and heavy heart; for he felt
there was blood upon his hands. An hour later,
he was seated by the table, on which rested his
arms, with his head bowed upon them, while Inez,
standing by his side, was playing upon her
guitar
,
and singing a tender strain. Suddenly he
raised his head.
Ha! said he; there is the signal for me again!
What can it mean at this hour? and rising as he
spoke, he entered the larger cave, where he found
the sentinel alone, the remainder of the party
having
departed.
A woman awaits you in a boat without,
captain
,
said the sentinel, bowing respectfully.
She could not give the pass and countersign, and
so I could not admit her.
A woman! exclaimed Ronald, in
astonishment
.
To see mea woman!what wants she
here? and with a quick step, he moved forward
and mounted the ladder. In a few minutes he
returned, and seemed much agitated.
Inez, said he, entering the Inner Cave, it
is necessary for me to be absent now. Ere
morning
I will return; and without waiting a reply,
he seized upon a brace of pistols lying on the ta
ble and withdrew. Did Piketon leave word
where he should rest to-night? asked he of the
sentinel, as he again mounted the ladder.
Ay, captain; he mentioned the Hollow.
'Tis well! and Ronald disappeared.
PART V.
CHAPTER I.
THE CAPTIVETHE TRAITORTHE AWFUL DESIGN
THE ARRESTTHE SUSPICION AND
CONFIRMATION
THE
MURDER AND ESCAPETHE
MESSENGER
THE
RESULT.
Never had Emily experienced such loneliness,
such utter desolation, as she did after the
disappearance
of Hetty, as recorded in a previous
chapter. On her she fancied now hung her
destiny
,
life or death. Would she succeed? The
very thought of a failure made her shudder with
horror. She had felt lonely and desolate while
Hetty was with her, but now she felt doubly so.
Then at least she was in the presence of a human
beingone of her own sexbut now she was
alone,alone, too, in a wild, mountainous region;
not only far from friends, but, for aught she
knew to the contrary, far from civilization, with
a dark and awful cloud resting upon her mental
sight, and weighing down her spirits. She threw
herself upon her pallet and tried to be composed;
but she only rolled to and fro with the more
feverish
anxiety. She tried to hope for the best, and
in her imagination draw bright pictures of the
future; but dark, shadowy forms, like evil
phantoms
,
would come between, and the sunny spots
go out in gloom. Thus hour on hour went by
each increasing, rather than diminishing, her
soul-torturing
anxietywhile night crept gradually
on, to add its horrors, until Emily felt herself
drawn to the very verge of despair. At last, some
two hours later, she heard steps approaching; and
then she could almost hear too the beatings of
her own heart, so wildly it palpitated. Were
they steps of friend or foe? A few moments
served to decide; for the voice of him she
feared-too
soon heardwas of itself sufficient to
announce
the worst. John Webber had entered.
How is this, Hetty? said he, pausing in the
doorway: No light!what means it?
Hetty is not here, replied Emily, in a
faltering
voice; but I am anxiously looking for her
return.
Ha! has she been
long
gone? enquired John,
as a suspicion of the cause of her absence flitted
through his mind.
She has been gone some minutes, answered
Emily, without adding the whole truth, that those
minutes had already run into hours; but she
knew, for Hetty's safety and her own, it was
necessary
to dissemble somewhatthough she
would not have been guilty of a direct falsehood,
even to have prevented the worst.
I will teach her better when she returns,
said John, angrily, proceeding to the table and
striking a light. 'Tis as well though, perhaps,
he added, a few moments after, for our
conversation
will not require the ears of a third. You
remember, I presume, the conditions imposed,
when last I quitted you?
Too well I remember them, answered
Emily
,
in a trembling voice.
Well, I have come for my answer!
But give me more time, John, to deliberate!
Time! good heavens! how much time do
you women require to answer a simple question?
But I have been so distracted since you left,
that my mind could settle steadily upon nothing.
Settle it now, then! You have only to
decide
whether you will be mine by your own free
will or no. Mine I have said you
must
be!but
of course I prefer your free consent. Upon this
point, Emily, I am determined; and to show you
something of the strength of my determination,
I now swear to you, that I would sacrifice every
living thing that should stand in my wayay,
even my soul's salvationrather than be foiled in
my purpose. Emily, I am a desperate man, and
I beg of you, for your own sake, force me not to
extremes!
I cannot answer you now, John, said
Emily
,
anxious to prolong the time as much as
possible
,
in the hope of receiving assistance: Give
me till to-morrow.
And to-morrow you will say, give me till
to-morrow
,
returned John, and so forth, and so
on, until you by some means effect your escape.
No, by heavens, girl, this
shall
not be!your
answer
must
be now! and John grasped her by the
arm, and gazed upon her with a wicked look.
Let go your hold, sir! cried Emily, her
indignation
fully aroused at this; and springing from
a sitting posture to her feet, she threw off his
grasp. Shame on you! continued she, with a
flashing eye; shame on you, for a villain and
coward! Brave deeds these, truly, for a man of
your strength, to attack an unprotected female!
Go, get you hence, and repent of your acts! Go,
go, for shame on you, go!
When you have done, hissed John, through
his clenched teeth, his face livid with passion,
when you have done, girl, let me know your
decision!
You will have it, then! replied Emily,
firmly
,
fixing her eye unquailingly upon his. Then
hear me! Ere I would wed you, I would suffer
my limbs to be torn from me one by one! Rather
than embrace you, I would go into some old
charnel
house, and clasp to my bosom the loathsome
tenant of a half century! Sooner than endure
your hateful presence, I would seek the wildest
spot on these mountains, and make my bed with
serpents! You are answered.
Astonishment and rage for a time kept John
silent; and after a moment's pause, Emily went
on.
I have entreated you in vain to restore me to
my friends and home. You have mocked me by
your replies of cowardly threats. You have
sought to intimidate me; but know, sir, I have a
spirit, when roused, as unbending as your own!
Now hear me! Let me go in peace, and the past
shall be forgotten, and with this adventure your
name shall never be coupled. Place but your
hand upon me, with foul intent, and if I escape,
I will expose, and bring you to that justice
you deserve for your crimes!
Brave girl! cried John, bursting into a wild,
fiendish laugh, that in spite of her, made Emily's
blood run cold, and her heart seem to shrink within
her. You talk well, girl, well; but do you
knowand again that awful smile lingered
upon his featuresdo you know, my pretty
one, that I think you will never escape to put
your threat in execution. You think, then,
that my threats were made to intimidate you?
Ha, ha, ha!
I said you did not know me!
Let me see: You said ere you would wed me,
you would be torn limb from limb. Ha, ha,
ha!that was well saidvery well. Again:
Rather than embrace me, you would clasp to
your innocent bosom some mouldy tenant of a
charnel househa, ha, ha! Once more: Sooner
than endure my hateful presence, you would
make a bed among serpents. So, soha, ha!
all very good in theory; but I presume you were
somewhat excited when you spoke, and did not
think of putting them in practice. And then
your spirit, when roused, is as unbending as my
own. Ha, ha, ha! Well, well, we shall see. If
it prove so, girl, there will be rare sportrare
sport. But why do you tremble so? Why do
you look so pale? Is this the unbending spirit of
the one who boasts so boldly about dying? I
trust you will not falter now. I would not have
you for the world. Why this is not even a
commeneement
.
Now, girl, you must know that I
care as little about life as yourself. Why should
I seek to prolong existence?it will be death at
last; and it is, besides, sweet to die to get revenge;
and it will be doubly sweet to die in your sweet
company, girl!
Great God! gasped Emily, sinking with
fright upon a bench, as, having listened to the
words of John, she marked the awful light in his
dark, snake-like eyes. What fearful utterances
are these?
I was simply talking about dying, answered
John; and thinking how pleasantly we could die
together. I regret, on your account, there is no
charnel house near, so that you could have the
pleasure of hugging a corpse; but as to the snakes,
I think you can be well accommodated in these
mountains!
For God-sake speak the worst! what do you
mean? shrieked Emily, who felt the expressions
of John were dethroning her reason.
Why simply this, replied John. You have
decided to put me to extremes. Extremes with
me go farfarther, perhaps, than with many
othersfor they are bounded only by death. I
had you stolen and brought hither, it is true; but
no violence was offered you. All I required of
you, to regain your liberty, was merely a pledge,
to the effect that you would be mine at the altar.
This I am sure was honorable, though you saw
proper to think otherwise. Well, I waited
patiently
for your answer, and at length received it
in the negative. In that answer you decided the
fates of both. It now remains for me to fulfil
my oath; which was, you remember, that you
should be mine; whereby I implicitly meant you
should be mine unto death. Were I to dishonor
and leave you here, you would escape and inform
on me. Were I to murder you, doubtless it
would leak out, and I should, sooner or later,
have to suffer the consequence. Therefore, be it
known to you, my dear girl, that as I have
resolved
upon what the world would term your
dishonor
and death, I have concluded also to die
with you; and as you think a nest of serpents
an agreeable place of rest, compared to my
hateful
presence, why I have concluded to find one,
and rest there with you, until death shall rid us
of each other, or bind us more strongly together
in another state.
Emily gasped for breath, and placed her hands
before her eyes, as if to shut out the horrid sight
imagination had already conjured up.
To show you I am in earnest, continued
John, my first act shall be one of justice to a
certain rich English gentleman, now probably
living in splendor in England. These papers,
dearestand John drew forth the roll he had
received
from the Jewthese papers speak of you
expressly, tell who you are, who were your
parents
,
and how you came to be stolen away from
England and brought to this country. They are
very interesting documents to peruse, I assure
you, and are signed by the gentleman who had
the honor of conducting you over here, and
leaving
you at my father's, some fifteen years ago.
They speak well of you, and seem to insinuate
your birth is noble. Had you consented to marry
me, I should have taken great pleasure in reading
them to you; but as matters now stand, I do not
like to waste the time; besides, as you and I are not
long for this world, it were better not to set our
minds too much upon worldly things; therefore
you will excuse me for putting such temptations
out of the way; and as he concluded, John
deliberately
tore the papers into a thousand pieces,
and cast the fragments upon the ground.
Oh God! John, wherefore this torture?
groaned Emily, in an agony of mind almost
insupportable
.
Why not murder me at once
for death to this is a thousand times preferable!
Do you think so? Well, come then and let
us seek it! and approaching, John grasped her
by the arm. Let us forth, girl, ere Hetty's
return
,
into these wild woods; and if we are not
devoured by wild beasts ere morning, we will in
company, on the morrow, seek out a reptile nest,
and there die quietly together. Come, girl,
come! and quick as thought John raised her in
his arms. Emily uttered one wild, thrilling
scream, and fainted away. Screams, girl, will
avail you nothing here, said John, with another
fiendish laugh. As he spoke, he started, and
Emily
slid from his embrace to the ground, in a state
of insensibility. A deep voice sounded in his
ear:
Ho! villain and traitor! and the next
moment
a heavy hand laid upon his shoulder, sent
him reeling to the farther side of the apartment.
So, sir, then you are caught in the act!
John looked up in astonishment and rage, and
saw before him the powerful and commanding
form of Ronald Bonardi. By his side stood the
lieutenant, and between himself and the door,
five more of the band, all powerful men, all well
armed, with pistols and hunting knives in their
hands. John ran his dark eye rapidly over the
group, and for a moment seemed to waverbut
his resolution was quickly taken. His first
impulse
was to shoot down Bonardi, and trust the
rest to chance. A second thought altered his
purpose. Resistance now would be followed by
instant deathduplicity might save him; and
although
but a few minutes before he had seemed so
willing to die, yet now he felt differently; and had
it been necessary, would even have stooped to beg
his life, were it only to get revenge. As we have
said, John's resolution was quickly taken; and
that resolution was to effect by duplicity what
he could not by resistance. In a moment all
traces of anger had passed from his features, and
in a calm voice he said:
Captain, you have surprised me; and to you,
and these gentlemen, I yield myself a prisoner.
Circumstances, I will admit, are against me; but
all I ask is a fair trial, and no violence. You have
disturbed me in an affair of love; and who of you,
gentlemen, has not at sometime had one of his
own. I know our laws, captain, and am willing
to abide by them. Let this lady bear witness, and
I am content. I crave only justice.
And that, John Webber, you shall have,
replied
Ronald, sternly. Justice you shall have
be it liberty or death. On the evidence of this
lady, and another, shall rest your fate. Have you
any thing further?
Only, most noble captain, that I may be
treated
as an honorable prisoner.
Be it so. Piketon, you will conduct him,
guarded by these men, to the cave, and there
await me. Unless he offer resistance, touch him
not. Should he do so, shoot him on the spot!
Beware on him, beware on him! cried Hetty,
rushing in, who thus far had deemed it the most
prudent to remain without.
Silence, woman! exclaimed Bonardi, sternly:
But one commands here! Piketon, conduct him
hence!
Ha! treachery, treachery! ejaculated John,
mentally. Fool,fool that I was to trust in
woman! and surrounded by Piketon, and his
five followers, he disappeared through the
doorway
.
Poor girl! she has fainted, said Ronald,
turning
to Emily, who still lay upon the ground; and
carefully raising her in his arms, he laid her
gently
upon the rude bed. Hetty, bring the light
hither, and some water, quick! Hetty instantly
obeyed, and as the light gleamed full upon her
fair, pale, marble-like features, Ronald started,
and his brow became clouded. Ha! exclaimed
he; that faceso like! I must think my
suspicions
correct. Hetty, sprinkle the water on her
face. There, there, that is sufficient. See! she
revives. How is she called, Hetty?
She's called Emily Nevance, answered Hetty;
but I hearn John Webber say as how that warn't
her name, and that she were a great lady.
By heavens! 'tis so. How strangehow
strange, that we should meet thus, for the first
time! Look to herlook to her! and Ronald
turned away, and walked to and fro the
apartment
in much agitation.
In the meantime Emily revived, opened her
eyes with a shudder, and fastened them upon
Hetty, who was bending over her with a
compassionate
look. For a moment Emily seemed
bewildered; and then, with a scream of joy, she
sprang up and clasped Hetty around the neck,
crying, God bless you, Hetty! God bless you!
You have saved me, good woman, you have
saved me from a fate a thousand times worse than
death! and overcome by her feelings, she sunk
back completely exhausted.
'Taint me that's done it, gal; it's him! and
Hetty pointed to Ronald, who was still pacing to
and fro.
But how, Hetty? enquired Emily, as soon as
she could recover strength to speak. I
remember
nothing. Where is John Webber?
O, they've took him awaythey've got him
At this moment came the sharp report of
two pistols, followed instantly by two distinct
cries of distress, and then, in quick succession,
several other sharp reports, and louder cries of a
different nature. Emily sprang up and grasped
Hetty in terror, while Ronald bounded to the
door, and rushed forth down the hill.
What ho! he shouted. Piketon, what ho!
A couple of minutes and he was joined by his
lieutenant, who came running to him out of
breath.
What means this, Piketon?has he dared to
resist
?
He has escaped, captain!
Escaped! echoed Bonardi, in astonishment,
grasping the other by the arm.
Ay, captain; he shot down the two guards
nearest him and fled. We fired several shots
after
him, but unluckily all missed.
What ho! men, shouted Ronald, at the top
of his lungs; fifty guineas to him who takes John
Webber. ere morning, dead or alive!
The offer is in vain, captain, said the
lieutenant
.
How, vain?
We are all on foot. His horse it seems was
in waiting below, which he reached in advance of
us, and mounted ere we came up. Ere we can
get to our horses, he will have full twenty miles
between us.
Oh, the treacherous villain! ejaculated
Bonardi
,
with a terrible oath. He will betray, and
have the country roused up against us! But by
my mother's soul, he shall not escape punishment
even should it cost me my own life! Piketon,
he should have been disarmed!
True, captain.
It was a foolish oversight in me. Well, well,
experience is a good teacher. The
smooth-tongued
hypocrite! I did not think he would
venture to resistleast of all, escape. Well, well,
it is useless whining now. Call in your men,
Piketon, and look to your wounded comrades.
When done, report matters, and I will give you
farther orders. So, sodark deeds thicken;
and with his hand pressed upon his temples,
Ronald
slowly retraced his steps up the hill, while
Piketon sounded the recall, by applying a piece
of ivory to his lips, that gave out a shrill whistle;
and being shortly joined by three of his party,
proceeded to look after the two who were
wounded
.
In the meantime Ronald had returned and
entered the apartment where were Emily and
Hetty
,
both pale and much frightened.
Be not alarmed, said he, in a mild tone; no
harm shall come to you.
What has happened, kind sir? enquired
Emily
,
anxiously.
John Webber has escaped, after shooting two
of my men, answered Ronald, biting his nether
lip.
I knowed it, I knowed it! cried Hetty.
He's the greatest villain as ever run! I told you
beware on him!
And I should have heeded your warning,
returned
Ronald; but it is useless to repent it now.
You have much to fear from him, said
Emily
,
respeetfully.
So I doubt not; and you, Emilyfor such I
am told is your namehave had much to fear,
rejoined Ronald, approaching her.
Kind sir, returned Emily, casting upon him
a grateful look, and shuddering at the thought of
her late narrow escape, to you, and this good
woman, I owe my lifeay, more than lifeand
I lack for words to express to you both the deep
thanks I feel; and her eyes filled with tears.
Your look, Emily, is thanks sufficient,
replied
Ronald, affected by her earnest manner. In
my heart I already feel more than repaid for what
little I have done; and besides, there is another
chord touched, Emily, that you dream not of. I
regret that it is impossible for me to restore you
to your anxious friends, immediatelyand to one,
the dearest friend of allbut I will do so as soon
as practicable. In the meantime I beg of you to
put yourself under my guidance, and accept of
my hospitality. My wife will be delighted to
serve you.
You are then, married? said Emily.
I am, replied Ronald, sadly, to a lovely
being
,
far too good and gentle for one like me, and
of my calling. But let that pass; you shall see
her and judge for yourself. I presume Hetty has
already informed you who I am. Doubtless my
name is familiar to your ear, coupled with every
thing that is wicked and base?
I have heard somewhat of you that should
have been otherwise, answered Emily; though
I have also heard of many acts of your generosity,
which go to prove you possess, notwithstanding,
a kind heart.
Thank you! returned Ronald, deeply
affected
.
I am a man of circumstances, Emily, and
circumstances have made me what I am. You
little dream how closely you are connected with
those circumstances.
Me! exclaimed Emily, in astonishment.
Ay! but let it pass now. Anon I will explain
all. As in coming here, and by what will follow,
I have in a measure placed myself and othersor
at least the secret of our existence and rendezvous
in your power, you will, I trust, think nothing
hard of me, if I exact from you a sacred pledge,
that what you have learned, seen and heard, or
shall learn, see and hear, you will neverunder
any circumstances whateverdivulge while I am
living.
To this most solemnly I pledge me, returned
Emily, and call God to witness the vow! What
you have done, has been to save me from an awful
fate; and were I to take advantage of this against
you, I should truly be the most ungrateful of my
sexay, unworthy the name of woman. You
have nothing to fear from me, kind sir.
Enough, enough!your simple word is enough
I ask nothing further. And now, so soon as
my lieutenant returns, you will with me to the
cave. But, ha! what have we here, torn into so
many fragments? added he, enquiringly, as his
eye fell upon the papers destroyed by John a few
minutes before.
Alas! sir, I suppose them to be proofs of my
parentage, answered Emily, sadly.
And this too was the work of John Webber?
It was.
The villain! But we shall meet again, ere
long; and then there will be a reckoninga
squaring of accounts, said Ronald, with
quivering
lips, while a dark shade rested on his counte
nance. Do you know what was written
thereon
?
I do not.
Did he mention the names of your parents?
He did not; and said unless I would consent
to marry him, I should never learn them.
In that he was mistakenfor I will inform
you.
You, sir! exclaimed Emily, starting in
surprise
.
Ay! yet hold a moment! Possibly I may
myself be mistaken; and gathering up several
of the pieces, Ronald examined them by the light
a few moments, attentively. Yes, yes,
continued
he, at length; I am right; my suspicions
were correct.
Oh then, sir, cried Emily, breathlessly, I
beseech you inform me!
I will. You are the legitimate daughter, only
living child, and truly legal heir of
Fenton is dead! cried Piketon, at this
moment
rushing in and interrupting him.
Dead! echoed Bonardi, staggering back.
Ay, captain. Webber's ball entered the left
breast, near the heart, and he has just this
moment
expired.
A thousand curses on the villain! And the
other?
Is not mortally wounded. His shoulder-blade
is broken.
Bonardi pressed his hands hard against his
temples
,
and tried to look calm; but there came,
notwithstanding
,
a dark and terrible expression upon
his features.
This, Piketon, said he, at length, in a deep,
heavy voice, is too muchtoo much! You will
return and see to the burial of Fenton, poor
fellow
,
and that the other is well attended to.
Better
leave him at Mosley's, as he is something of a
surgeon himself. As soon as all is complete, meet
me at the cave, with as many of our band as you
can easily collect. Webber
must
be punished!
Send hither Kelly.
Ay, captain!
As Piketon departed, Bonardi strode to and fro
the apartment, in great agitation, until the
arrival
of Kelly, when turning to Emily, he said:
Pardon me, Emily, I am too much agitated,
just at present, to continue the subject on which
we were speaking. I will resume it anon, and tell
you all. If you are ready now, we will hence as
soon as possible. I regret my gallant steed is not
with me, as I fear the distance will fatigue youit
being some seven miles, and for the most part over
a rough country.
Thank you, returned Emily, for the
generous
regard you are pleased to express in my
behalf
;
but I doubt not I can easily walk it; I have
sometimes done as much, and felt it not.
We will then set forth. Kelly, you will
accompany
us; and in a few minutes the party were
on their way to the cave.
Emily, however, had counted too strongly on
her own powers; for worn out with excitement,
and weakened by loss of rest and food, she soon
found her limbs failing her; and ere they had
reached a mile, she sunk down completely
exhausted
.
Ronald immediately raised her in his arms,
without apparent effort, and the party again
proceeded
.
Kelly occasionally relieved him, and in
this manner they reached their destination, in
something over two hours from their time of
starting
.
The sentinel looked much surprised, on seeing
Ronald descend the ladder with a lady in his arms,
but as it was no business of his, he made no
remark
.
As he entered the Chieftain's Chamber,
Inez and Cyntha were no less surprised; nor was
their surprise lessened by the manner of Ronald,
who was laboring under great mental excitement.
Placing Emily carefully upon one of the sofas, he
turned abruptly to his wife, and said:
Inez, as you love me, look well to this lady;
for she has been foully dealt with, and has need of
your most tender care.
Inez looked at him steadily a moment, and her
features assumed a strange expression. Ronald
noticed it, and immediately added:
Nay, love, no jealousy. This woman will
explain
all; and he turned to Hetty, who, having
followed him in, now stood gazing around upon
the splendor of the apartment, with a surprised
and bewildered look.
O yes, returned Hetty, who had heard the
allusion
to herself; I'll tell this ar' beautiful lady
all as I knows.
But why, dear Ronald, do you leave me?
enquired
Inez, sadly, as he turned to depart.
I have weighty matters to which I must
attend
immediately, answered Ronald, drawing her
fondly to him, and pressing his lips to hers. Be
not uneasy, dear Inez, I shall pass the night in
the Outer Cave. But look to that young lady,
for she is faint and sick; and as Inez turned to
Emily, Ronald withdrew, and closed the stone
door behind him.
When in the larger cave, and with the
exception
of the sentinel entirely alone, Bonardi paced
to and fro in an excited mood, while the muscles
of his face underwent various changes, and his
hands clenched and unclenched, as one in deep
agony of mind. In this manner he continued
some hour and a half, when he was interrupted by
the arrival of Piketon, with some twenty of the
band, whom he had found in the Retreat, as it was
calleda kind of hostlery, some half mile distant,
kept by one of the party, where, on the nights of
their meetings, the members who had ridden from
a distance, generally left their horses to be fed, and
not unfrequently spent the night themselves, in
drinking, card playing, and the like; and where
the sentinels boarded and slept, and, when not on
duty, could generally be found. This Retreat
was kept by one Mosley, who was the one
designated
by Bonardi, in his directions to Piketon
concerning
leaving his wounded comrade. The
Hollow
,
where Bonardi had found Piketon, and the
five who accompanied him, was another place of a
similar character, some half mile farther on.
Captain, said Piketon, approaching Bonardi,
I have obeyed your orders.
'Tis well. Do these fellows know what has
taken place?
They know that John Webber has proved
treacherous, and shot Fenton and Allen.
And what say they?
They have but one voice: `Death to the
traitor
!'
Ay, and by  he shall not escape it! cried
Bonardi, fiercely, uttering an oath.
To-morrow
he or I must die!
I trust not you, captain.
I do not know, said Ronald, gravely. A
something tells me I am not long for this world.
It may be only a foolish fancybut let it pass.
At dawn to-morrow we must mount and follow
him. Doubtless we shall find him at his father's.
No matter where, however, when found he must
die! I hope we may meet him ere he has
betrayed
us fully, but I fear not. Ten of these fellows
must remain here, to guard the cavethe others
will with us. You will divide them, and leave
the truest and most courageous here. How now!
what means this? This last remark was
occasioned
by the sudden appearance of a new comer,
who, having descended the ladder, approached
Bonardi
direct. What news, Ellis?
The steamer leaves to-morrow, captain,
between
the hours of five and seven in the evening.
Indeed! Are you sure, Ellis?
I had it from the officers of the boat.
So soon! this is unlucky. When got you the
information?
At noon of yesterday. I started out of St. Louis
late last night, and have scarcely been out of my
saddle since. I have fatigued two horses, and am
now rather fatigued myself.
You have done well, Ellis, for 'tis a hard ride
a very hard ride. To-morrow nighthow
unlucky
!
What could have induced them to alter
their time?for when I saw them, they positively
asserted they would not leave within a week.
Piketon, what can be done? It is almost
impossible
for us to reach the rendezvous in time
certainly
we cannot without a relay. How unlucky
this news did not arrive sooner, ere the meeting
had broken up! Well, well, we must do our best
under the circumstances. For the present we
must let Webber passat least this other
business
must be attended to first. Ellis, have the
small boats been dropped down to old Davids?
Ay, captain, that was done last night.
'Tis well. Piketon, leave ten men here to
guard the cave, withdraw the others, and have them
mount and singly ride for the rendezvous. Tell
them they must reach there ere sunset
to-morrow
,
or the prize will be lost. By going singly,
and separate routes, they will be enabled to get
relays among the settlers, without exciting
suspicion
.
'Tis a long fatiguing ride of a hundred
miles, and I do not count on our band being there
in fullstill I trust there will be enough to
capture
the money. You had better yourself give
the signal, as soon as possible. Doubtless you
will be enabled to overtake some of the band on
their way home. In every case, tell them they
must
reach there ere sunset to-morrow! Where
is Hendrick?
He has gone with four comrades to arrest
Saxton
and Niles, who I have learned are in this
vicinity
.
Right! Tell the men that remain, to have
both strictly guarded when brought hither. And
now to spend an hour with Inez, and then for
action. I have a noble steed at the Retreat, and
relays on the route, so that doubtless I shall be
there in advance of you all. By the by, tell those
who remain here as guards, that if we are
successful
,
they shall share equally with us. And now,
Piketon, speed! speed! for there is not a moment
to be lost! saying which, Bonardi turned
abruptly
on his heel, and entered the Inner Cave;
while the lieutenant, with great rapidity and
precision
,
set about obeying his commands.
CHAPTER II.
THE RENDEZVOUSTHE ATTACKTHE TERRIBLE
FIGHTTHE AWFUL EXPLOSIONTHE FLIGHT
AND PURSUIT.
In something less than an hour from the close
of the events detailed in the preceding chapter, a
single horseman was riding swiftly through that
range of country lying between the Osage and
the great Father of Watersas it is sometimes
calledand extending south of the Missouri some
thirty miles. Ever and anon this horseman would
pause beside some peace-looking cottage, and
sound three clear distinct blasts on a bugle; and
then a dark figure or two would be seen to glide
forth from his covert, a few hurried words would
be said in a low voice; and then again the single
horseman would dash on, as though riding for
life, while shortly after, from the place he had just
quitted, another horsemansometimes two or
threewould ride forth with speed, as though in
hot pursuit of the one who had gone before.
When the grey dawn of morning had begun to
trace the outline of hills, and trees, and streams,
in a soft, hazy relief, it revealed too the dim
outline
of that same horseman, far to the eastward
of where he had been seen at the hour of
midnight
,
still speeding on as before, yet ever and
anon pausing to sound three musical blasts on a
bugle, which he bore in his hand. As the sun
rose in beauty over the eastern hills, and poured
his gentle rays into deep green woods, into
pleasant
valleys, on to sparkling streams, they
occasionally
cast back the shadow of that horseman,
still speeding on, and the shadows too of various
other horsemensome directly in his trail, some
in different points of compass from himall
speeding eastward. As the day wore on, he was
seen mounted on a different horse, still urging on
the noble animal, which at every step and bound
neared him to the great Mississippi. When the
sun had far declined toward the western horizon,
that horseman drew rein beside an old hovel,
which stood on the west bank of the great river,
and but a short time since inhabited by old David
the Jew. Scarcely had he paused, when a tall
figure darted out of the hovel, and Ronald
Bonardi
stood beside him.
Welcome, Piketon, welcome! cried the
latter
,
joyfully. I feared you would be too late. I
said I should be here before you; but your task
has been much the hardest, as I can perceive by
your wearied looks; and your horse too hangs his
head sadly, and drips water like rain. But what
news of the others? Will the main body of them
be here in time?
I trust it will, captain. They cannot be far
behind.
By the way, Piketon, ten of them have
already
arrived, and are concealedhorses and all
in the bushes just below here. As the boat leaves
St. Louis at an hour so late, I think this will be
our best point of attack; and by heavens! since
we are here, the attack shall be made, whether
the others arrive or not. But come, go in, go in
and refresh yourself. You will find wine and
food on the table; for the one who came down
with the small boats, had the good foresight to
provide both, as well as plenty of grain for the
horses. Go in, Piketon, while I lead your horse
into the covert below, when I will immediately
join you.
Thank you, captain! I feel that wine and
food are every thing to me now; and Piketon
entered the hovel. In a few minutes Bonardi
was with him.
I hear the tramp of more horses, said the
latter, as he entered, so that doubtless our party
will soon be increased; and in fact it needs be
soon, to be of any service to us, for the sun al
ready dips in the trees of the western mountains,
and the boat will probably pass here at early dark,
though I hope not till a later hour. Hark! they
come; and Bonardi turned back to the door, just
as three horseman rode up from different points
of compasstheir horses dripping water, and
themselves looking much fatigued.
Scarcely had Bonardi given them directions
how to dispose of themselves, when up rode two
moreand then another, and another. In fact
they were now gathering fast; and in less time
than an hour, the party of twelve had swelled to
upwards of forty, all strong and well armed men.
The sun, in the meantime, had gone down, and
grey twilight was already deepening into night,
when Bonardi, thinking that longer delay might
prove fatal to his design, now ordered his men to
take up their positions, and be in readiness for
action
.
Some five or six boats, lying concealed in
the water below, were instantly manned, while
four of the party were stationed above, at
different
points, as look-outs or sentinels, ready to give
warning in case of danger, and likewise directions
to the new comers, as fast as they should arrive,
which they were continually doing. Three others
were to hail the steamer, and, should she send out
a small boat, which was probable, six more were
to be in attendance to seize and gag the oarsmen.
In fact the attack was to be made precisely
according
to the plan given out by Bonardi, as
detailed
in a previous chapter.
Having seen his men disposed of according to
his directions, Bonardi went to each of the
sentinels
,
and charged them to be vigilant, as it was
not impossible that Webber, in a spirit of
revenge
,
had already blown the scheme, and, by
being
sharply on the look-out, been enabled to learn
of their sudden movements, the time of the
steamer's
departure, and also to collect a force sufficient
to attack them. Should they see or hear any
thing they might judge indicative of danger,
without being positive, they were to give the
signal
by a shrill whistleif positive, by discharging
a pistol. In case of an attack, they were to fight
in any manner they might see proper; but in case
they heard a blast from the bugle, they were to
make their way, quickly as possible, to the spot
whence it proceeded. Having given these
directions
to the sentinels, Bonardi repaired to the
members whose duty it was to act on landtold
them his suspicionshis orders to the sentinels
regarding
signals, and an attackthe latter of which
referred equally to themselves. This done, he
returned
to the boats, repeated all he had said, and
took his station in one of them, ready to lead
them on when the proper moment should arrive.
All now gradually sunk into deep silence, for
each one of that band of outlaws was busy with
thoughts of his own. They were awaiting, under
cover of darkness, to make an attack, where, in all
probability, more or less lives would be lost; and
doubtless many a one felt a secret foreboding that
this might be his last night on earth. Although
Bonardi, after giving his orders, said nothing, yet
he appeared very restless, and seemed greatly
disturbed
by some inward trouble. In this manner
passed some fifteen minutes, when he leaped
suddenly
ashore, and merely saying he would be
with them again presently, strode directly up the
hill, and entered the hovel. Here he found a
bottle
,
which he applied to his lips, and, judging by
the time he held it there, drank much. He then
returned to the boats with a heavy step.
Strange, said he, as he approached, that I
hear nothing of her! Piketon, it is possible Ellis
may have been mistaken in the time.
It is possible, captain, answered Piketon,
though but now I fancied I heard her.
Hark! exclaimed Bonardi, suddenly. You
are right, Piketon, you are right; by heavens she
comes! Be ready, men, be readythen be
silent
!
A few minutes fully confirmed the approach of
a steamer; for although not in sight, yet the
puffing
sound produced by the escape of steam, was
clearly audible to the anxious listeners. Ere she
rounded the point just above, it became evident
by the change of sound, that she was effecting a
landing; but presently she was again in motion;
and then on she came, like some terrific monster,
with great red eyes of fire, and smoke and flame
issuing from its nostrils. On, on she came,
bearing
down apparently directly towards those dark
spirits, who were impatiently waiting their time
for action. Soon she was within speaking
distance
,
when she was immediately hailed from the
shore, which was answered by the ringing of a
bell. The steam was next thrown off, and she
commenced rounding to, apparently with much
difficulty.
We cannot land, said a voice from on board,
and our boat has been stove. If you have no
boat, we shall be obliged to leave you.
Ha! this looks suspicious! ejaculated Ronald,
mentally. But the trial must be made. Quick,
Jeffrey, cried he, leaping ashore, and running
up to the group of three, who stood as though
awaiting further orders, cry back there is a boat
here, and a man who will row you to them! and
then hie to it, and do not forget your instructions.
You, continued he, turning to another group of
twelve, standing a few feet distant, six of whom
had but lately arrived, will remain here to cover
us. I am suspicious, from various slight causes,
that we shall be attacked. If we are, fight, men,
fight like devils, and we will soon join you!
Saying this in a low, rapid tone, Bonardi hurried
back and sprang into his boat.
In the meantime, Jeffrey had done the captain's
bidding, with great rapidity, and was even now,
with his two comrades, shoving off from the shore.
It was by this time so dark, that a small boat on
the water could be seen only at a short distance,
save when it crossed the lights gleaming out from
the larger one; consequently the other boats
remained
in close obscurity. Scarcely a minute
elapsed, ere a boat, containing three individuals,
was seen crossing the bow of the steamer.
Stand to your oars, men! said Bonardi,
rapidly
.
You will hear the signal in a moment; and
then, as you love money, forget not to row! Ha!
there it is! As he spoke, there came several
reports
of firearms, and the next instant five boats
shot out into the stream, with lightning rapidity.
But a few seconds elapsed ere they were
alongside
the steamer, when, just as Bonardi was on
the point of leaping aboard, the engineer
suddenly
let on a full head of steam, the wheels turned
quickly, the boat shot forwad instantly, crushing
one of the smaller ones, and at the same time a
murderous fire was directed among the bandits,
from a hitherto concealed enemy, doing terrible
execution. Several of them sprang up and fell
back dead, against their comrades, or into the
water, while others sank down wounded, amid
shrieks, groans, and direful imprecations. To add
to the consternation and horror of Ronald and his
men, the pistols of the sentinels on the hill were
now heard in quick succession, followed by a roar
of musketry, rapid discharge of pistols, fierce
yells and groans, and the noise of a hand-to-hand
combat. By the light of the discharges, Ronald
saw the men he had left on shore, hemmed in by
overwhelming numbers, fighting desperately.
By all the holy saints! cried he, we are
betrayed
!
To shore! To horse!
Scarcely were the words uttered, ere every
boat seemed almost to leap from the waterso
powerfully were the oars applied by desperate
men. But a landing was not to be effected
without
trouble. As the boats touched the shore, a
party in waiting poured a destructive fire among
them, and numbers fell.
Onward! shouted Bonardi; and leaping on to
the bank, pistols in hand, he shot down the two
nearest himdashed out the brains of a third with
one of his discharged weaponsseized the fourth
as though he were a child, and threw him over his
head into the Mississippidrew his knife, and
literally cut his way through them, unharmed,
followed by Piketon, and some twenty of his
bandall fighting like fiends, neither giving nor
asking quarter.
Sound the bugle, and to horse! shouted
Bonardi
.
Instantly a loud, clear blast, rang out upon the
air; and following their brave leader, the bandits
rushed down the stream some thirty yards, to
where their horses stood in waitingnot having
as yet been discovered by the attacking party.
Bounding into their saddles, with the agility of
men well trained to horsemanship, with their
knives still in their hands, reeking with blood,
they cut the reins that attached them to the small
trees of the thicket, in which they were
concealed
,
and, plunging their spurs into their sides, rode
wildly out, with a fierce yell of triumph, just as
their pursuers were coming up.
Charge, comrades, charge! again shouted, in
thunder tones, the voice of Bonardi. Down in
your saddles, and knives to their hearts!
Never was a terrible order obeyed more rapidly.
At the word, each wheeled into a line with his
leaderthrew himself forward, until his head
touched his horse's neckextended his arm, until
the blade of his knife reached beyond the nostrils
of the animal he rodeand then, like a sweeping
avalanche, the whole party spurred down upon the
main body of their opponents, whom they
stabbed
and rode over, with a havoc that, in
honorable
warfare, would have rendered the charge
immortal
.
But all was in vain. The bandits had
been surprised and taken at too great a
disadvantage
to themselves, by nearly double their
numbers
,
to cope successfully with their adversaries
now; and the more so, as the latter had discovered
the remaining horses, and were already mounting
them. In the charge just made, five more of his
party had gone down; so that out of all his stout,
hardy followers, Bonardi found, on sounding the
bugle again, only some fifteen who answered to
the summons. The remainder he supposed either
killed, wounded, or taken prisoners, as the firing
and noise of combat had ceased.
We are lost! said he, sadly, reining in his
horse, some hundred yards from the scene of
action
.
Comrades, our day is over. All that men
could do, under the circumstances, we have done.
You, comrades, have fought like menmost
bravelybut, alas! to what avail? Oh,
treachery
,
treachery! But, comrades, you may yet
escape
.
If you wish to go, I give you freedom.
For myself, I shall back to the cave, and, if
necessary
,
die defending it. My time I feel is near.
Forty brave fellowsall lostall lost! Oh God,
what a thought! What say you, comrades; will
you leave or follow me?
Follow, to the death! shouted all.
'Tis well. Let us away then, ere these
hell-hounds
get too close upon our track; for they
have mounted our own horses, and are now on the
move. Ha!the steamerlook! Great God,
what a sight!
What a sight indeed! for just as Bonardi spoke,
there came a tremendous explosion, and the heads,
legs and arms of some fifty human beingsbut a
moment before in all the vigor and passion of life
were now hissing and whizzing through the air,
in every direction, while shrieks and groans were
heard, of the most agonizing description. To
add to the awful spectacle, the boat immediately
took fire, and lay perfectly unmanageable
floating
down with the currentwhile some few, who
had escaped the explosion, could be seen running
to and fro, calling for help, or plunging into the
watery element, and thus avoiding one terrible
death only to meet with another. The light from
the burning wreck now gleamed across the dark,
rolling waters of the Mississippi, upon the banks
and trees, with a sickly effectdisplaying the
outlines
of a hundred dark figures, on foot and on
horse, some standing, some running to the small
boats, and pushing out from the shore, to the
assistance
of their fellow creatures, while others
were lying scattered here and there on the ground,
mangled and bloody, dying and dead. It was a
sight to be seen but once; but once seen, never to
be forgotten. Had we time and space, we might
call up the picture to the reader's eye far more
vividly; but it would only be a sad, heart rending,
bloody pictureand 'twere better that it pass.
So, said Ronald, musingly, gazing upon the
scene, with a melancholy air: So, then; in
attempting
our destruction, they have sent
themselves
to eternity. Well, one God sees all
overrules
allorders allat least my mother taught me
so when a child Oh, that I were a child again!
and he drew his hand across his eyes, and turned
his head away. Suddenly he started, and the whole
aspect of his features changed, from the sad and
mild, to the fierce and terrible. Look! cried he,
rising in his stirrups, and grasping the arm of
Piketon
,
who was sitting his horse along side him.
Look! Piketonlook! comradesyonder,
yonder
!
Gods! do you see nothing?
I see nothing but men on horseback, quietly
gazing on the burning vessel, answered Piketon.
But one of thosea tall figurea little
separated
from the restis the accursed traitor, John
Webber! hissed Ronald, rapidly. He does not
see us, and thinks, doubtless, with the others, that
we are all taken, killed, or fled. Let us remark
here, that Ronald and his men were now
occupying
a position on the hill--in a thicketwhere
they could observe all that was taking place
below
,
and remain themselves concealed. Now,
then, comrades, continued Bonardi, for one
more act ere we die. Draw your knives, men,
and swear by the mangled corses of your dead
comrades, that unto death you will follow yon
traitor, so long as a man of you remain alive!
We swear! cried all, vehemently, touching
the blades of their knives to their lips.
Enough! Now, Piketon, to cut him off, ere
he joins the main body. You, with six men, will
defile carefully down on this side; but slowly, so as
not to attract attention. I, with the rest, will ride
around and suddenly come in before him, when,
to save his life, he will be forced to turn and fly.
If he do so, follow; and Heaven save him if he
escape
us!
In a moment the party of Bonardi was in
motion
.
In a few more, his manuvre was
successfully
executed; and Johnwho supposed
Bonardi either killed or taken, and was now
quietly
gazing upon the awful sight on the river
suddenly found himself confronted by the only
man he feared, and cut off by his followers from
joining those who might render him assistance.
His only safety was now in flight; and with a yell of
despair, he turned and fled. That yell was echoed
by some fifteen sturdy horsemen, who
immediately
joined in pursuit, all eager for his heart's
blood.
The cries of John, and his pursuers, were heard
far aroundringing out upon the night air like
those of so many fiends; but they were quickly
drowned by still louder shouts of, The bandits,
the bandits!Bonardi, Bonardi! and suddenly
wheeling their animals, some twenty horsemen
dashed madly forward, to join in the wild chase.
Ere we follow them, however, let us briefly
glance at the causes which led to these results,
take one more look at the scene before us, and
then close it forever.
After the escape of John, from Piketon and his
companionsas related in the chapter preceding
he had ridden directly for home, with dark
thoughts of revenge uppermost in his mind. He
knew if taken, death would assuredly follow,
as he had that evening had ample witness in the
case of the Jew. His only safety he now felt was
in the total overthrow of Bonardi and the banditti;
and to effect this as soon as possible, was his only
theme, as he spurred rapidly on. In doing this,
he would not only secure his own life, but
obtain
the revenge he sought on those who had dared
to come between him and his victim. But how
to effect this suddenly, was the main object. At
first he thought of seeking his father, and
acquainting
him of the whereabouts of Emily, and
the rendezvous of the banditsstating that she
had been seized, carried off, and was now held in
durance by them. This he knew would rouse
the ire of his fatherwho was as yet ignorant of
Bonardi being in the vicinityand that as soon
as possible, he would raise a large company from
the surrounding country, go forth to rescue
Emily, and exterminate the band. But this,
even at the best, would consume much time, and
doubtless prove of no avail; from the fact that
most of the bandits themselves were known as
settlers
,
and so scattered through the country, that
the least stir of this kind would be known to them
in season to effect an escape, or, what was more
probable, rally themselves into a body, ambush,
and slaughter their opponents. This project,
therefore, was a hazardous one; the more so, as
in the meantime they might seek him out and kill
him; and he knew sufficient of Ronald Bonardi,
to render this thought a not improbable, and,
consequently, a startling one. They might even
now be on his trailsuch a thing was not
unlikely
and
he urged his beast up hill and down, over
hollow and plain, through forest, thicket and
stream, at his greatest speed.
At length he found, to his regret and
consternation
,
that the noble animal was beginning to
falter. There was but one coursehis place must
be supplied by another; and in this, chance
favored
him; for shortly after, he rode past a
cottage
,
where he perceived several horses lying
down. Immediately reining in, he alighted,
selected
the best, transferred bridle and saddle, and,
in less than five minutes, was again speeding on,
leaving his own horse behind him. When the
sun rose, he was within twenty miles of his
father's
cottage; and for the first time he slackened
his speed, to meditate upon the wisest course for
him to pursue. A thought struck him! He
would ride at once to St. Louis, learn at what time
the steamer was to leave, and possibly he might
hear of something advantageous to his foul
design
.
When he reached home, some two hours later,
he found that the partyconsisting of his father,
Merton, Bernard and Tyronehad just started on
a third day's search for Emily, and that Rufus
was lying in a very critical state. This latter,
however, troubled him not; and without heeding
anything further, he changed his horse, and
immediately
set off for St. Louis, where he arrived
about two o'clock the same day. He knew from
Bonardi's plan, that three of the band were to be
on board when the boat should leave; and
accordingly
he at once repaired hither, to learn if
anything
new had occurred. Two of them he found
without difficulty, and learned, to his surprise and
joy, that the boat was to leave that evening; that
the third had been gone some thirty-six hours to
inform Bonardi of the fact; and that it was
supposed
the latter would get the information in
time, by hard riding, to be at the general
rendezvous
,
where the boat, owing to some slight delays,
would probably pass at early dark.
Than this information, nothing could have
suited John's purpose better; and he immediately
hastened to a magistrate informed him of the
whole affair, and, to give it an air of truth, stated
that he himself was a member of the band, whose
conscience had forced him to betray the wicked
course his fraternity were pursuing. This
information
of course was of the most startling
character
to the magistratewho believed Bonardi and
his men had quitted the country some three years
beforeand instantly making out warrants, he
sent off and had the two men on the boat arrested.
On confronting them with John, one of them
became
much alarmed, and, on the promise of a
pardon
,
immediately corroborated his statement.
The affair resulted in the whole matter being
speedily
made known to the governor, who promptly
ordered two companies of militia, consisting of over
a hundred men, several of whom had served in
the late war, to act as a posse to the Sheriff, in
arresting
or exterminating the outlaws.
The Sheriff himself was a man of extreme
measures, who cared little for the sacrifice of life,
so his ends were by such means
accomplished
.
His plan was, to have the boat start at the
given time, as though nothing had been
discovered
,
and, with his posse, to go down on her
himself
;
that ere fully in sight of the rendezvous,
some seventy-five should land, and proceed thence
on foot; that the steamer, when hailed, should
round to, but manage to avoid sending out a boat
well judging, if the banditti were there
concealed
,
they would not allow their scheme to be
frustrated
by a circumstance so trifling,that the
steam should be compressed until the boats came
along side, so that the steamer might start
suddenly
,
and by this means throw them into confusion;
that at the same time the party concealed on
board, should pour among them a well directed
fire, which was also to be a signal to those on
shore to be ready to intercept their landing. In
fact, the attack was carried out exactly as planned,
and the reader has already seen the result. The
grand oversight was in compressing the steam,
and then throwing it suddenly upon the engine,
which shortly after produced the terrible
explosion
we have recorded.
Having thus briefly explained the matters most
directly connected with our story, and trusting
the reader is as anxious to quit this scene of
wholesale
slaughter as ourself, we shall, after giving a
slight summary of what followed, leave it at once
and forever.
But few of those poor beings on board the ill
fated steamer at the time of her explosion, were
saved; and these mostly by the aid of the boats,
which had been brought hither by the orders of
Bonardi, for a very different purpose. Some two
or three of the number who leaped into the stream,
swam to the shorethe rest were drowned. In
less than an hour, the boat burned to the water's
edge and sunk--bearing down with her the gold
and silver coin, the primary cause of the dire
mishap
and loss of life. In the meantime a
messenger
was despatched, post haste, to St. Louis; which
resulted in the arrival, some three hours later, of
another steamer. This, ere morning, bore back a
strange medley of citizens, soldiers, and bandits;
some well, some wounded, some dying, some
dead. Of the party of Bonardi, some few were
taken prisoners; but these, generally speaking,
consisted of those who were too severely wounded
to fight or escape, and who afterwards, with but
few exceptions, died of their woundsthe main
body having either fled or been killed. Of the
soldiers, a number were killed in the fight, and
many wounded. The prisoners who survived
their injuries, together with some three or four
others, captured unharmed, were afterwards tried
by the authorities, and disposed of according to
the evidence found against them.
On that same night, a steamer, chartered for
the purpose, having on board a large body of
armed men, and two six-pound cannon, departed
for the Osage; the object of the expedition being
to find the grand rendezvous of the banditti,
arrest
or exterminate the remainder of the band,
and, particularly to secure, living or dead, the
body of Ronald Bonardi.
CHAPTER III.
THE RETURNTHE DEATH OF THE INVALIDTHE
ALARMTHE DEATH OF THE TRAITORTHE FIGHT
AND FLIGHTTHE RALLY AND EXPEDITION.
An hour later than that in which the attack
was made on the bandits, through the treachery
of John, the party of his father returned from a
third days search for Emily, fatigued in body and
depressed in spirits. Three days had they
traversed
the country in every direction, making
diligent
enquiries of every person they met, and yet,
of what had become of her, not the slightest cue
had they gained; and consequently, as we have
said, they returned most sadly depressed in spirits,
and worn out in body. In fact, hope of ever
beholding
her again had almost become extinct; for
to them it was probable she had been seized by
the Jew and his accomplices, and taken out of the
country. And this latter seemed the more
probable
,
from their having been at the residence of
the Jew, on the day she disappeared, and knew
him to have been absent.
On Webber and Merton the sad truth fell with
a crushing effect; and men though they were,
both wept for grief. In fact, the latter, when he
found all search had been in vain, knew it would
have to be relinquished, and felt the sweet being
of his soul's adorationshe whose heart and hand
in the holy confidence of love, had been pledged
to himwas now gone, forever gone, pressed his
hands to his burning temples, and strove, as a
man, but vainly strove to be calm. Life to
him now seemed a lonely path, through a
barren
waste, where not one bright flower by the
wayside grew, to relieve it of utter desolation;
where no ray of sunlight came, to dispel, even for
a moment, the oppressive gloom.
Slowly, sadly, and in silence, the party
referred
to, reined in their horses on the night in
question, at the cottage of Webberlitttle
dreaming
that beneath that humble roof, the ingrate,
the black hearted villain, the cause of their
present
trouble, had been sheltered, and fed; and that
there too, their sorrow was soon to find an
additional
weight. At the door they were met by
Mrs. Webber, who was pale and trembling with
intense grief and excitement.
Oh, you have comeyou have come, thank
God! uttered she, in the low, rapid accents of
heart touching misery. I feared, oh God! I
feared you would be too late. Quick! quick!
Sarah, Sarah, gasped Webber, what, what
has happened? Speak, Sarah! for Heaven-sake
speak!
Alas! William, Rufus
Well, Sarah!
Is dying.
Great Heaven! and staggering back, Webber
would have fallen, had not the arms of Bernard,
who was close behind, supported him.
Like the sudden shock of an earthquake, this
startling announcement came upon those who
heard it; for they believed Rufus free of danger,
and slowly, yet gradually recovering. He had
been pronounced convalescent by his physician,
and the events of the last few days had so
engrossed
their attention, that by them he had in a
measure been forgotten. From the moment of
his fainting, on hearing of the disappearance of
Emily, as previously mentioned, he had
gradually
declined. His motherwhose very existence,
as we have before stated, seemed bound up in his
noticed the change, with all a fond mother's
feelings of grief and alarm. Night and day since,
had she remained almost constantly by his side;
and on the evening previous, when the party
returned
,
she had made known to her husband her
fears. Wearied by a hard day's ride, and
thinking
her fears had made her exaggerate, Webber,
contrary to his usual custom, had seemed almost
indifferent to his wife's remarks; and merely
saying
,
He will be better anon, retired early to
rest, to be in readiness to pursue his search for
Emily
on the following day. Several times during
the day on which we have again introduced him,
his conscience had reproved him for neglecting
his son; and it was not without considerable
anxiety
,
that he once more approached home;
consequently
the powerful effect produced by the
sudden
and alarming announcement of his wife.
Recovering, somewhat, from the first terrible
shock, Webber sprang forward, and in a moment
stood by his son, followed by his wife, Merton,
Bernard and Tyrone. A light, standing on the
table by the bed, cast a mournful gleamif we
may so be allowed the expressionon to the pale,
calm features of the dying youth, who, save an
unnatural breathing, seemed like one asleep.
Rufus! gasped his father, grasping his thin
hand. Rufus, my son!
Slowly the invalid unclosed his eyes, and for a
moment looked up with a vacant stare.
Rufus, my son! Oh, God! do you not know
me?
Father, said Rufus, calmly, a look of
recognition
lighting up his thin features, at the same time
raising himself on his elbow, and glancing slowly
around: FathermotherEdwardyes, yes,
I know you all; but I am weak, father, and he
sunk back on his pillow. Suddenly he started,
and a bright flush passed over his wan features.
Emily! cried he, quickly: Emily! what of
her? have you found her? and he gazed with an
intense look on his father's tearful eye.
Alas! my son, we have not.
Too welltoo well I knew it, he murmured,
clasping his hands, and gazing upward with a
solemn
,
devout look. We
shall
meet again, but it
will be there; and stretching forth his wasted,
bony arm, he pointed above: It will be there
in Heaven!
Oh! dear, dear Rufus, cried his mother,
springing forward, unable to control herself longer,
and bending on him a look of the most intense
anguish, while every eye in the room filled with
water: Oh! dear, dear Rufus, say you will meet
again on earth!
Rufus gazed upon her a moment, and shook
his head sadly. Mother, dear mother, speak not
thus! My minutes are all numbered. II am
dying, mother.
Oh God, support me! returned she, sinking
into a chair, and covering her face with her hands.
Nay, mothernay, fathernay, friends
continued he, weep not! We must all die, sooner
or later, and death is only terrible when we are
not prepared to meet it. It is only parting for a
time, to meet again in the bright and glorious land
of spirits. I feel I shall be happy when my spirit
has thrown off this clayey tenement, and entered
upon its second existence. Oh, my dear parents
and friends, I beseech you, weep not for me! for I
was not, could not be happy here. Edward,
come hither; I have somewhat to say to you, ere
I set out upon my long journey.
Edward approached with tearful eyes, and took
his hand.
You, my noble friend, continued Rufus, are
sadalmost heart-brokenfor the sweet being
you love is gone; but be not cast downbe not
disheartenedfor you will meet again, and see
many happy days on earth. Nay, shake not your
head with that despairing look, for what I tell
you is true. My spirit is already on the verge of
eternity, and looks with a prophetic eye into the
future. But now I had a dream; and in that dream
I saw you and Emily meet. There was sadness
in the hearts of both; but it gradually rolled away,
as mist from the mountain tops, and joy, like
sunlight, shone in your faces.
Mark these words!
they are prophetic
. You will see her, you will
love her, you will cherish and guard her, with all
the pure, deep devotion of a holy love, emanating
from a high minded, noble, manly heart. Ere
that time, however, these frail limbs will have
stiffened in deaththis soul will have flown to
the presence of its God; therefore shall I give you
my secret, and request that you bear to her my
dying words. Tell her, Edward, that one who is
gone, loved her no less deeply, no less purely, no
less sacredly than yourself. Tell her that from
youth up she was the sole ideal of his longings,
the angel visitant of his dreams. Tell her that
Hope, like a star, once rose and shone brightly on
the broad field of his future imaginings, but that
its light went out in the Hope of another. Tell
her to think sometimes on this, and sometimes
cast a glance upon the lowly grave of Rufus
Webber. You will tell her this, Edward?
Should we meet again, my gentle friend, I
will, replied Edward, pressing the hand of
Rufus
.
You will meet again, Edward
, and in that
thought I die happy.
And you loved her so, said Edward, deeply
affected; and I knew it not.
And she knew it not, returned Rufus. I
saw she loved another, and I would not pain her
with the story. But that is now past, and so
forget
it. Ah! II feel my voice is going: I feel
myself
growing fainter; and so, dear Edward,
farewell
!
Edward pressed his hand, and turned away with
a burst of grief.
Father?
My son!
I am going fast. Where is John?
Alas! he is not here.
Then bid him farewell for me, and tell him it
was the dying request of his brother, that he
shun bad company. Father, farewell! and he
pressed his handa hand that shook with the
agonies
of a father's heart. Mother, and the
voice of Rufus faltered.
Oh! my childmy sonmy own dear
Rufus
!
cried she, throwing her arms around his
neck, and pressing kiss after kiss upon his
bloodless
,
quivering lips: Oh! my sonmy sonI
cannot, cannot part with you!
Mother, dear mother, returned he, in
faltering
accents: Mother, be calmbe calm!
Remember
it is the will of God, who orders all
things for the best. We shall soon meet again in
another, in a better world. Ah! ah! death is
coming
.
Mother, farefare-well! Friendsallall
farefarewell! Inin Heaven! and with these
words the lips of the gentle Rufus were sealed
forever.
For an hour life remained in his body; but from
that moment Rufus spoke no more, nor seemed
he conscious of anything that transpired
afterward
,
although his mother still clung to, and
entreated
him in the most heart-rending tones to
speak to her again. At the expiration of the time
mentioned, his gentle spirit passed away, as one
sinking into a quiet sleep.
His mother, when fully convinced that he was
gonethat in sad truth his dearly loved voice
she would never hear againslowly unclasped
her arms from his neck, and, with her eyes fixed
steadfastly upon him, sank into a seat by his side,
seemingly unconscious of everything around.
His father stood and gazed upon him for a few
moments with folded arms, while his features
writhed in agony, his chest heaved, and his heart
beat fast and almost audibly. In silence, in
sorrow
,
stood Merton, Bernard and Tyrone, near the
foot of the bed, gazing upon the corpseforming
a most impressive group for a mournful picture.
Suddenly each started, and gazed into each others
faces enquiringly. A shrill cry came borne upon
the air, and with it a sound like the rushing of
waters. Another, and another cry, and nearer
and louder came the rushing sound. What
could it mean? All sprang to the door; and
although
it was dark, yet dashing over the hill to
the right, they could trace the dim outline of a
horseman; and, following close, another
another
and
still, and still anotherand more behind.
There must be something alarming! said
Webber, quickly. What can it mean?
Scarcely were the words uttered, ere the
foremost
horseman dashed up to the door, leaped from
his steed, and rushed in in breathless haste.
John! cried Webber, in astonishment.
Quick! quick! fatherclose the dooror I
shall be murdered! I am pursued by Ronald
Bonardi
and his men!
Ronald Bonardi! echoed all, in a breath; and
springing back, the door was bolted just as the
other horsemen were beginning to come up.
Ay, Ronald Bonardi, answered John,
rapidly
.
He and his band are the kidnappers of
Emiily
.
I know their secret retreat, and for this they
would murder me!
Emily! cried Merton, breathlessly, Emily!
speakspeak!where is she?
In Bonardi's cave, on the Osage river.
Oh, John, you give me new life!
Then use it defending mine, by killing these
ruffians, and I will restore her to you.
Quick! quick! said a deep voice from without,
for our time is most precious.
The next moment there came a tremendous
crash, making the whole house tremblethe door,
bolts, bars and all, were splintered and broken
into a hundred pieceswhile a tall, muscular
figure leaped forward, into the centre of the
astonished
group, and the same deep voice shouted:
Ho, traitor!
'Tis he! shrieked John, turning to fly.
Ay, 'tis he! shouted back the figure; and then
there came a flasha crackand with a yell of
pain John sank to the floor.
How!Barton! gasped Webber, in
astonishment
,
as he caught a glimpse of the intruder's
features.
Barton and Bonardi are one!
As he spoke, the figure seized upon the body of
John, with the strength of a giant, and, turning,
bounded into the midst of his followers, who
stood crowded around the doorway to cover his
retreat.
To horse! to horse! he shouted; and darting
away at the word, in a moment more each man
was in his saddle.
So rapidly was this whole movement executed
for it occupied far less time in action, than we have
in descriptionthat neither Webber himself,
Merton
,
Bernard nor Tyrone, recovered from the
torpor
of a sudden astonishment, ere the bandits had
escaped themactually shooting, seizing, and
bearing John from their midst.
Good God! exclaimed Webber, is my house
to be broken into, my son murdered and borne
away, without a hand being raised to rescue or
avenge him? Follow, men! and rushing forth,
he was quickly joined by his three companions.
By this time the bandits were all mounted, and
Bonardi, still supporting John, was just balancing
himself in his saddle, when he observed Webber
rushing towards him.
Away! he shouted to his men; and burying
his own spurs in his horse's flanks, he darted
off.
Webber instantly drew a pistol, and taking aim
as well as the darkness would permit, pulled the
trigger. A flasha reporta groan succeeded
and he could perceive Bonardi waver in his saddle;
but still he sat his horsethe animal slackened not
his speedand in a few seconds both horse and
rider disappeared, while Webber's attention was
suddenly called to another quarter, where the
bandits were being attacked by another party of
horsemen that had just come up.
From the flight of John from the river, the
chase had been a desperate, and an equal one;
with the exception, that in the hard run of thirty
miles, the bandits had succeeded in distancing
their pursuers some quarter of a mile, so that they
had just sufficient time, after John entered the
cottage, to seize upon a huge stick of timber,
break open the door, capture the traitor and
mount, before the others were upon them. As
their design was now accomplished, they turned
upon their pursuers, headed by Piketonfor
Bonardi
still kept upon his courseand a terrible
fight ensued. Webber and his companions not
knowing friend from foe, retreated into the house,
to be ready to defend it in case of necessity.
I guess they're having a putty hard tussle, by
the way them are shooting irons are going off,
remarked Bernard. Hadn't we better assist them
are fellers that come up last, eh, Bill?
Gladly, if we could assist them; but to attempt
it now would be fool-hardy, answered Webber.
As soon as this fight is over, we must rally as
large a company as possible, and start
immediately
for the Osage, to rescue Emily, and punish the
murderers of my son Oh, God! am I to be made
childless in one night! and Webber leaned against
the wall of his cottage for support. And to
think, too, continued he, after a moment's pause,
how basely I have been deceived! I can
scarcely
realize my having been, more or less, for three
years past, the companion of that notorious
bandit
,
Ronald Bonardi, under the assumed name of
Barton!
Wal, when I seed him at the river, and you
was a talking to him about himself, I guessed
then his name wasn't Barton, said Bernard.
Well, well, he shall not escape again! replied
Webber, sternly. He shall be brought to justice,
unless he die defending himself; for I will follow
him to the world's end myself, sooner than
suffer
him to go unpunished. Fool that I was, to
let him shoot down my son before my own eyes!
And then to actually bear him off! What
unheard
of daring!
The whole affair transpired so suddenly,
remarked
Tyrone, that for one I really knew not
what was taking place, until he had fled.
The same with myself, said Edward. But
I am much mistaken, or he suffers now; for when
Webber fired, I heard him groan, and fancied I
saw him reel in the saddle.
I kind o' thought as how that are shot did him
too, rejoined Bernard. But if it didn't, there's
more where that come from, I guess, as will.
Ay, rejoined Webber, fiercely, there is!
But hist! The fighting seems to have ceased, and
there is a horseman approaching.
House, ho! shouted a voice from without.
What would you? answered Webber,
interrogatively
.
Rest and food for the night, for our horses and
ourselves, replied the voice.
Who are you? demanded Webber.
An officer of justice, at the head of a party
of soldiers, sent out to arrest or exterminate
these accursed bandits, who, with the
exception
of three killed, have again escaped us. We
would tarry here until daylight, ere we pursue
them further; for our horses are fatigued, two of
our men are killed, and three or four others
wounded. If you can accommodate us, I will see
that you are remunerated, and will also give you
the full particulars of what has occurred.
I am in a sad condition to do so, answered
Webber, gloomily; for one son lies a corpse in
the house, another has just been shot and borne
away, my wife sits buried in grief, and I am
nearly
distracted myself; but still, such
accommodation
as I have, you are most welcome to; and we
will endeavor, ere morning, to increase your
party
for the pursuit.
As further detail seems unnecessary here, we
trust the reader will allow us to substitute a brief
summary of what followed. The party in
question
remained at Webber's through the nightall
resting, with the exception of the wounded, in
the out-houses. The latter were cared for, as well
as circumstances would permit, and their wounds
not being of a very serious nature, they departed
the next morning for St. Louis, bearing their two
dead comrades with them. During the night a
search was made, in the direction taken by
Bonardi
,
for the body of John; it being thought
probable
,
the former, if wounded, might drop him on
the way, and possibly with life remaining--though
for the latter there was little hope;but the
expedition
proved fruitless, and the party returned
some three hours later, not having discovered the
least trace.
Merton, anxious to start early on the morrow
to the rescue of her he loved, rode most of the
night from farm to farm, among the settlers,
giving
each a brief account of what had happened,
and beseeching them to join in ridding the
country
of the outlaws; the result of which was, the
additional force of some twenty-five, able bodied,
determined men, well mounted and armed, who,
with the party at Webber's, set out at daylight on
a journey to the Osage, to search for the grand
rendezvous, apprehend, disperse, or annihilate the
banditti.
In this expedition, Webber and Tyrone did not
join; the former, because he did not consider it
prudent to leave his house in a totally unguarded
state, with the corpse of his son within, and his
wife in a very feeble condition, but little better
than a stupid insanity, caused from her
overwhelming
grief; and the latter, because it was
deemed advisable that one at least should remain
as a companion for the former. Moreover,
Webber
had learned, in course of conversation with
the officer mentioned, the astounding particulars
of what had occurred at the river, and the cause
of hate against his son, from his having been a
member and betrayed the band, the which had
served to completely unnerve, and almost render
him insane also.
Besides Webber, his wife and Tyrone, there
was another individual within that house of
mourning, whom we have, during the excitement
of the past few days, lost sight of altogether; but
whom we shall bring once more before the reader,
ere we close our now nearly completed story.
We allude to the prisoner of the Jew, who, under
the treatment he had of late received, was fast
regaining
health and strength. But leaving each
8
and all for the present, let us precede the party
just departed, to the cave on the Osage.
CHAPTER IV.
THE CAVETHE BANDIT'S WIFE AND HER GUEST
THE BANDIT'S ARRIVALTHE LAST PARTINGTHE
AMBUSHTHE ATTACKTHE FAREWELL VOLLEY
THE AWFUL CATASTROPHETHE MEETING OF
THE LOVERSTHE RETURN.
On the afternoon of the day succeeding the
fight, and the second from the departure of
Bonardi
,
a rough group of some fifteen outlaws
were lounging about the Outer Cavesome
talking
,
some polishing their weapons, and some
playing
cards. These consisted of the ten left as
guards, with the addition of Hendrick and his four
companions, who returned the day previous,
bringing in Saxton and Niles prisoners, both of
whom were now confined in the dungeon below,
the place whence Piketon led forth the Jew on the
night of his trial and execution.
In the Inner Cave were four females
consisting
of Emily, Inez, Hetty and Cyntha; and to
these we shall, for the present, direct our
attention
.
Inez and Emily, at the moment
introduced
,
were reclining on sofas, but a little distance
apart, while the other two, Hetty and Cyntha,
were occupying one corner of the apartment,
conversing
together in a low tone.
Since the departure of Ronald, Inez had
lavished
upon Emily the most tender care,
anticipating
her every wish, and doing all in her power
to restore her strength, and contribute to her
happiness
.
Partly from Ronald, ere his departure,
and afterwards from Hetty and Emily herself, she
had learned the story of the wrongs of the latter,
and all the gentle sympathies of the woman had
been elicited in her behalf. From Ronald, too, she
had learned a secret, of which Emily and Hetty
were as yet ignorant, accompanied by a request
that she would not reveal it, unless some
unforeseen
accident should prevent his return.
The parting between Ronald and Inez had been
affecting and solemn. He had not revealed to
Inez his design, but she could perceive by his pale
features, and an agitation which he vainly strove
to conceal, that he was about setting forth on an
unusual, if not dangerous mission. Hence, as we
have said, the parting had been affecting and
solemn
;
and since that time, Inez, although she strove
to be cheerful, and paid the most tender regards
to the wants of Emily, could not banish from her
mind thoughts dark and painful; and in
consequence
an air of gloomy abstraction would not
unfrequently
take possession of her. On the day
we again introduce her, these painful reveries
had become more frequent than beforemore
prolongedand in one of them we now find her.
And here, had we space to devote it, we might
moralize
upon the causes producing these results.
It is thought the spirit, in many cases, when
approaching the confines of that vast eternity
before
it, grows brighter, more etherial, and is less
allied to the corporeal substance around it
consequently
,
is more sensitive to events about to
happen--and by its elevation or depression,
prognosticates
,
many times, the good or evil that will
shortly follow: moreover, too, that with an intuitive
sense, it sometimes communicates to the body
what and whom this good or evil will effect, and
what will be the result. Hence the spiritual, or
second sight. We believe, too, the spirit is not
unfrequently acted upon, when far from death
ourselves, with regard to the fate of some dearly
beloved friend, (but not so clearly as in the
former
instance) which is to influence our seeming
destiny; and hence our gloomy forebodings, or
presentiments.
But as we presume the readerwho is doubtless
anxious for the conclusion of our storywill not
thank us for stopping to moralize or philosophize
here, we shall pass on, and leave a subject we might
otherwise be tempted to investigate farther.
Inez, as we have said, was reclining on a sofa,
in a mood of gloomy abstraction. Her eyes were
bent upon the ground, her features were pale and
very sad in expression, and there was a slight
quiver of some of the delicate muscles, as though
the mind was laboring with painful thought.
She had been sitting thus some quarter of an hour,
motionless and mute. Emily was also reclining
upon a sofa, but a little distance from her. Her
features, too, were pale, and somewhat care-worn;
but there was, notwithstanding, a more animated
and hopeful look than when we saw her lastand
yet, withal, the expression was sad. Under the
kind treatment received from Inez, Emily had
gradually recovered from the hardships she had
undergone
,
and although still weak, was fast
regaining
health and strength. At the moment
introduced
,
her eyes were resting enquiringly, but
sadly
,
upon Inez, as though she sympathized with,
and wished, yet almost feared to question her of
her sorrows. At length the strong promptings of
her gentle and grateful heart got the better of her
reserve, and approaching, she bent down, and
gently taking the soft, delicate hand of Inez in her
own, in a sweet, touching, musical voice, she
said:
You are sad, dear Inez?
There are words, and ways of saying them,
which at times, with a sudden and resistless
impulse
,
will stir up all the finer emotions of the
heart, and make the eye grow moist and dim.
Such was the effect of Emily's words upon Inez.
She started, a flush mantled her pale features, and
she looked up into the sweet countenance of
Emily
,
with tearful eyes. The next moment these
two gentle beings were locked in each other's
embrace
,
and the tears of both mingled.
Oh, will you not open your heart, dear Inez,
and tell me what makes you so sorrowful? asked
Emily, as, with an arm thrown around the others
waist, she seated herself by her side.
I hardly know myself, Emily, answered
Inez, with a sigh; but I feel as though there were
a weight upon my heart. I fear something has
happened to him--to Ronald--though why I cannot
tell; for he has often been away, sometimes for a
week, and yet I felt not so depressed as now. I
fear that dark man you spoke of will betray him,
perhaps has done so already, and he may now be
in prison, or dead. Oh, God! if such should be
the case, what, oh! what would become of me?
and Inez shuddered, and hid her face in her hands.
Do not borrow trouble, dear Inez, said
Emily
,
gently, and soothingly. All will turn out
for the best, rest assured. We are all in the
hands of a holy, omnipresent God, whose actions
cannot err.
But is not that God a God of justice? asked
Inez, solemnly. And will he not punish man
for his misdeeds, hishis Inez' voice
faltered
his
crimes?
Man will doubtless suffer for his misdoings,
answered Emily; but God will look into the heart
and judge him by the motive.
Oh, Emily, dear Emily, returned Inez,
weeping
,
to you I will say what I have never yet
said to human beingfor you seem so gentle and
pure, my heart yearns for your sympathy. You
know the occupation of my husband, and that it
is criminal in the eyes of the law. His heart is
good and noble; and yet, for his outward acts, I
have a long time feared, and of late more than
ever, that some terrible calamity, sooner or later,
will befal him.
It is strange, replied Emily, musingly, that
one who possesses so many good and generous
qualities as he, should lead such a wild, daring life
should associate with men so far inferior to
himself, both in intellect and education.
Yet judge him not too harshly, dear Emily,
returned Inez, sorrowfully, for circumstances
have made him what he is. He has told me his
early history; how he wept over the death of a
beloved mothera mother who was foully, most
foully wronged;how yourhow his own father
disowned, treated him with contempt, and
spurned
him from his presence, while society could do
nought less than point at him with the finger of
shame, because he was a bastard son. Oh, you
know not how such things can try a proud,
restless
spirit like hisa spirit that, turned into a
different
channel, had led him to honor and
renown
and
make him turn with venomed tooth
upon that society, as the viper upon the foot that
tramples it.
I doubt not there have been strong causes for
his deeds, rejoined Emily; yet methinks a
nature
like his should have paused, ere he brought
one so gentle and innocent as you seem to be,
into a career the laws of the land will hold most
criminal.
You do him wrong there, dear Emily. It is
of my own doing. He frankly and nobly told
me all; that we must never meet again; and yet
I married him, and gave up name and wealth,
knowing him to be an outlaw.
This is strange, very strange, Inez,
remarked
Emily, in surprise.
Does it seem strange to you?to me it is
simple. I
loved
him; and had it been to the
gallows
direct he would have led me, I cheerfully
had gone to die with him.
I understand, replied Emily. Oh, woman's
love! what will it not do? where can its bounds
be set? But strange that he did not then, does
not now, give up this wild, terrible life, and
retire
to some quiet, though humble spot, where
you would both be happy.
Alas! sighed Inez, his oath bound him
thenhis oath binds him yet.
Alas, indeed! sighed Emily; and for some
minutes both sat silent, buried in thought.
Suddenly
Inez started to her feet, and her but now
gloomy countenance became radiant with joy.
He comes! she cried, he comes! I hear
his step. I would know it from a millionand
now his voice! and tears of joy streamed from
her eyes.
The remark of Inez was correct; for Ronald
had already entered the Outer Cave, and was now
giving orders in a low, rapid tone.
Quick! he said, quick! Allall is lost.
If there are any here afraid to die, they may now
escape. We shall soon be attacked. Those of
you who are willing to stand the brunt of the
peril, will join Piketon, quickly as possible. You
will find him at the Entrance. He already has
his orders. You will obey to the letter his
commands
.
Go, men! I am wounded and faint.
Should we never meet again, farewell! and
Ronald
extended a hand to each of those bold
outlaws
,
who grasped it in silence, with tearful eyes.
Then seizing their weapons, they rushed forth,
while Bonardi immediately entered the Chieftain's
Chamber, where the bright light, as it fell upon
his features and form, exhibited a sight most sad
to behold, and where he was greeted with a wiid,
universal shriek of alarm.
His face was palein fact bloody, bloodless, and
ghastly. His features exhibited the expression
of great mental and bodily suffering. His eyes
were wild and blood-shothis hair dishevelled,
matted, and in some places stained with blood.
His dress was disordered, torn, and bloody also.
One hand, bloody likewise, was pressed upon his
side, where appeared to be a wound.
Ronald! My God, Ronald! screamed Inez,
who was springing forward to meet him; and
throwing up her hands, she staggered back and
fell to the ground.
Oh, sir, you are woundedare killed,
perhaps
!
cried Emily, in alarm.
I have my death wound, Emily, but heed it
not. You, Inez, Hetty and Cyntha, must escape!
We shall ere long be attacked. I have time to
explain
nothing. I shall die here. How is Inez,
Cyntha? enquired he, turning to the latter, who
with Hetty had rushed to her on her fall, and was
now placing her on a sofa.
Missus dying! She jus gasp um once,
massa
!
answered the terrified Cyntha.
Inez, dear Inez! cried Ronald, darting
forward
,
placing his arm under her head, and
supporting
her against his breast.
Inez opened her eyes, and looked up into his
face. Then she uttered a wild scream, and threw
her arms around his neck, where she clung as if
fearful of being torn away.
Oh, God! groaned Ronald, this is the most
trying moment of all. Inez, Inez,dear Inez
for God-sake, Inez, look up!awake!look
up!you must escape!
Escape! shrieked Inez, starting back her
head, and gazing into his face in terror.
Ay, escape! We shall soon be attacked, and
you must not be here to fall into the hands of
those accursed minions of the law!
And you, Ronald?
I cannot escape: I am wounded.
And could you think your Inez would leave
you thus, Ronald? Never, never, never! No,
no, no! if you die, Inez will die with you! and
again she threw her arms around his neck, and
clung to him wildly. Suddenly she started.
Oh, you are wounded! she cried. Oh, let me
see it! I will staunch the blood! It shall not,
shall not kill you, dear, dear Ronald!
'Tis vain, Inez, 'tis vain! groaned he,
straining
her to his heart. I know the wound is
mortal
.
But come, Inez, you must fly! If I know
you are safe, I can die content.
Never, never, never, Ronald! I will not
leave you!
But, Inezand Ronald whispered the
conclusion
of the sentence in her ear.
Inez trembled, and grew a shade more pale; but
still she answered firmly, I will remain.
Enough! and Ronald strained her to his heart
again in silence. Then easing her upon the sofa,
he sprang to his feet. Emily, he exclaimed,
you must fly this moment! Hetty and Cyntha
will go with you! and turning to the latter, he
placed in her hand a purse of gold. There, my
faithful Cyntha, go! and may you escape and be
happy.
And leave missus?
I will tend on her, Cyntha, so no more.
Emily
,
here, and he drew forth a letter. In this
you will find the explanation I promised you,
regarding
your parents. Do not open it until you
hear of my death, which will not be long. It is
brief, but comprehensive. I wrote it in haste,
since I saw you, for I feared we should never
meet again. At the mouth of the cave, a boat
awaits you, manned by three trusty followers,
who will conduct you to a place of safety. And
now, Emily, and his voice faltered, it only
remains
to bid you farewell! and taking her hand,
he pressed it to his lips, respectfully.
Oh, sir! exclaimed Emily, weeping bitterly,
how can I thank you for your generosity?
Nay, I need no thanks, Emily. You were a
woman, in the hands of a black-hearted villain,
and I did but my duty. You are saved, and that
villain has paid the penalty.
Then John is
Dead! said Ronald, solemnly, concluding the
sentence. But question no farther; you will
learn all in time. Oh haste, Emily, and away,
ere any thing happens to endanger you!
Inez! exclaimed Emily; and the next
moment
they were in each others arms, both
sobbing
bitterly. Inez, sweet lady, it wrings my
heart to leave you; but I will not urge you to
go, for I can understand your feelings. While
Emily Nevance lives, Inez and Ronald Bonardi
will never be forgotten. Farewell, dear Inez;
farewell, farewell! and straining her once more
to her heart, she pressed a kiss upon her lips,
sprang away, and disappeared into the Outer
Cave. Hetty and Cyntha took an affectionate
leave, and disappeared also, both weeping. In a
few minutes all three were seated in a boat
without
the cave.
Farewell, uttered Bonardi, who had followed
them to the top of the ladder, waiving his hand
solemnly: Farewell! The next moment the
boat shot away, and turning, Bonardi descended
the ladder with a quick step. Drawing forth a
key, attached to his person by a small gold chain,
he glided behind the ladder, and opened an iron
door, which concealed an aperture in the solid
rock.
It was the door of a powder magazine
.
Hastily taking thence some eight or ten casks,
he gazed on them a moment, with a singular
smile, and then proceeded to arrange them along
the wall, at certain distances from each other,
until
the two last came within the Inner Cave. He
then uncorked, and attached a train of towe,
soaked in turpentine, to each. This done, he
returned
to Inez, clasped her in his arms, cast
himself
upon a sofa, and whispered in her ear:
Now, dear Inez, let them come.
In the meantime, the boat, bearing Emily,
Hetty
and Cyntha, reached the Entrance, which
was the juncture of the creek and river Osage,
and so called from its being the only point whence
the cave could be approached. On either hand
was a high bluff, which gave the channel running
back to the cave an appearance of being artificial.
The bluff on the eastern bank of the Osage, and
immediately around the Entrance, was very steep
and rocky, covered with a stunted growth of
trees and underbrush, so that a large party might
be there concealed in ambush. It was here that
Emily, and the two females with her, were landed,
and then immediately conducted up the steep.
As she went up the winding path, she could
occasionally
perceive, on either hand, a dark figure,
crouched in the bushes, with a rifle either resting
against his shoulder, or poised and pointed toward
the river, whom she rightly conjectured to be of
Bonardi's band, and thatbut why she knew
notthey expected an attack from below. When
she reached the brow of the hill, she could
perceive the sun shining upon a beautiful and
variegated landscape, through a crimson
mellow
haze, within an hour of the horizon.
At another time perhaps, she would have paused
to admire the scenery, and contemplate the rich
beauty of light and shade, as, striking some high
point, with a golden sheen, the rays of Sol threw
a long line of shadow into the quiet valley at its
base, or glanced off from the smooth surface of
many a streamnot excepting the Osage, and the
great Missouri, the latter some several miles
distant
as
from a polished mirror; but now her
thoughts were sad and painful; and she turned
from this to her conductorwho here come to a
halt, and was looking eagerly in every direction
with an enquiring gaze.
You'll have to mount and fly, gal, said he,
at length, turning to her; for if I arn't mistaken,
it'll be no place for you here shortly. Thar's a
body of men coming by land, and another by
water
;
and he pointed to where the smoke of a
steamer indicated its advance up the Osage, some
three miles distant. It was this latter, by the
way, which Bonardi had discovered from one of
the bluffs, that had made him so apprehensive of a
sudden attack. Right round this ere rock,
continued the man, is four blooded horses; but
as thar' aint but three o' ye, I suppose the cap'en
overrated the number as was to ride 'em, or else
his wife 'scapes another way. As he spoke, the
party turned the angle of a huge rock, where
were found four fine horses, well caparisoned for
riders. Mount, gal, and ride hard to the east, and
you'll soon be out o' the way of a scrimmage.
In a few minutes all three were mounted, and
thanking him kindly for his services, Emily led
the way down the hill, with feelings better
imagined
than described, while her conductor,
turning
short around, speedily rejoined his
companions
.
The party in ambush was commanded by
Piketon
,
who had orders from Bonardi to annoy the
party attacking as much as possible, without
sacrificing
his own men; and, if pressed hard, to
escape
as best they might, and leave the rest to
him; but, under no consideration, to allow a man
of them to return to the cave. As soon as the
individual who conducted Emily up the hill
returned
,
he immediately sought the lieutenant,
whom he found leaning against a tree, rifle in
handfor since their return, the party, in
addition
to their other weapons, had armed themselves
with rifles and short swordsand gazing down
upon the dark waters of the Osage, with a gloomy
look and clouded brow.
How! exclaimed the lieutenant, suddenly
starting at a remark the other now whispered in
his ear. By land, too? Are you sure?
Sure! answered the other.
What distance from us?
About five miles, as near as I could reckon.
I jest catched a glimpse on 'em going behind a
hill.
I feared so, I feared so! returned the
lieutenant
,
biting his nether lip. There will be time
to give these others one good round, however, and
then we must escape. What ho! he shouted:
Listen all! Comrades, there are two parties
approaching to attack us. One comes by water,
the other by land. The one by water will
shortly
be here. We must manage to give the latter
one deadly round, and then fly to the Retreat,
where are horses in waiting, and thence along the
banks of the Osage, following the course of the
stream, far back into the country; by which means
we shall avoid the others, with whom our
numbers
are too few to engage in conflict, and where
we will remain until the excitement has died
away, when those who have wives and children
can return for them, and then quietly leave this
accursed country forever. Such are the orders of
our noble captain, Ronald Bonardi, who is
mortally
wounded; and who, for his own design,
chooses to remain in the cave.
After this, Piketon proceeded to dispose of his
men, so as for each to lie in perfect concealment
to those below, with orders that so soon as
practicable
,
each was to select his man, and, at the
word, to pour a terrible volley of death among
them, and then rush up the hill and escape. This
being done, all relapsed into silencea silence to
be shortly broken by the awful mandate of death.
The steamer which left St. Louis during the
night, was, in the meantime, slowly approaching.
The rendezvous of the banditti had been so
accurately
described by the traitor John, that there
was but little danger of those in command
mistaking
the place; still it required a careful
examination
of the shore, as they approached, and this
examination
they were now making. In about
twenty minutes she hove full in sight of the
concealed
bandits, who clasped their rifles with the
nervous grasp of determined and desperate men.
In ten more she had thrown off her steam, and
lay floating,
Like a thing of life,
on the dark bosom of the Osage below them.
This must be the place, said a deep voice on
board. Yonder is the inlet. Man the boats!
Instantly a dozen boats suspended to the
steamer
for the purpose, were lowered into the water,
and quickly filled with armed men. And here,
ere we proceed, let us give a word or two in
explanation
.
From the information conveyed by John, it
was gathered that the outlaws, who might chance
to escape the attack on the Mississippi, would
here rally as their stronghold, and doubtless here
make their last desperate resistance,
particularly
Bonardi, who, he stated, would return hither
to seek his wife, and, from his character, be little
likely to fly,consequently this was the place to
be immediately sought, to give the final blow of
extermination to the banditti. On this
information
the authorities had acted, and hence the
arrival
of the steamer for this purpose.
As soon as the boats were manned, a stout figure
sprang into the forward one, and stood erect in
the bow.
Six of you, he said, in a low, quick tone,
will remain behind to cover us, and prevent an
attack in the rear. The six with myself will now
forward to the cave, which we must enter at all
hazards. Row, men, row! Fifty dollars to him
who first enters the cave! An hundred to him
who captures the body of Bartonalias Bonardi
living or dead!
The words were scarcely out of the speaker's
mouth, when six boats shot out from the rest, and
entered the channel, each straining as for life to
be first at the cave.
Now then, comrades, whispered Piketon,
pick your men on the river, and do not waste
powder! One farewell volley, and then for our
horses, as the others must be near.
But our captain? said one, enquiringly.
Fear not for him, answered Piketon. He has
some deep design in view, doubtless, as this was
to me his last solemn injunction. Now then,
comrades,readyfire!
The last word was drowned in a roar of
musketry
,
that rolled heavily across the Osage, and
reverberated from cliff to cliff, echoing far away
into the solitary retreat of many a wild beast,
startling him from his lair, while groans, shrieks,
and curses, immediately resounded from the boats,
where all was consternation and confusionnot
less than twenty having fallen under the fire, most
of them dead, and the others, with but three
exceptions
,
mortally wounded.
Ho! pursue them! shouted a hoarse voice,
from one of the boats; and the speaker pointed
up the hill, where the bandits were seen making
their escape.
Scarcely a minute elapsed, ere the dead and
wounded were placed on the deck of the steamer,
and the boats touched the store. Leaping at once
upon the bank, they darted up the steep acelivity,
and some of them had reached within a few yards
of the summit, when suddenly all paused, as by
common consent, and their faces blanched with
absolute terror. The ground beneath them
trembled
,
as by the throes of an earthquake; and then
there came a tremendous, heavy, booming sound,
seemingly from the bowels of the earth below.
For a moment a dead silence ensued; and then
wild shrieks, from distant voices, rent the air.
The cave!the cave!they have blown up
the cave!
Horror stricken at this awful announcement,
they turned and rushed back to their boats, in
wild dismay, only to find, shortly after, this
terrible
intelligence confirmed by their own
observation
.
Of the party that entered the channel,
upwards of fifty in number, some thirty had
reached the cave and disappeared, while the
others were eagerly pressing forward, when
Bonardi
,
with Inez clasped to his heart, fired the
train, and himself, with every soul within, was,
in the twinkling of an eye, launched into
eternity
.
As the explosion took place, and the cries
ascended from those in the creek, who had
escaped
,
announcing the awful calamity, a voice
from the brow of the hill shrieked:
Oh God! oh God! she is lost! and Edward
Merton reeled to and fro, and finally sank to the
earth; while the tall, gaunt figure of Harvey
Bernard
stood over him, with a look of the most
intense
anguish depicted on his honest, open
features
.
Poor youth! he murmured. Alas! poor
Emily; and kneeling by Edward, he wrung his
horny hands, and gave vent to his grief in choking
sobs, that made his strong, muscular frame quiver.
A quick rustling among the bushes startled him.
On looking up, he instantly sprang to his feet,
staggered back several paces, and uttered a shout
of joy.
Emily! he shrieked, alive?
At the word Emily, Edward bounded to his feet,
and saw her, but a few paces distant, rushing
toward
him.
Emily! he gasped, scarcely crediting his
senses.
Edward! and the next moment they were
locked in each others embrace, and so overcome
with joy, that for a time all power of utterance
was lost; while Bernard, in a delirium of ecstacy,
fairly danced about them, and actually so far
forgot
himself as to kick several stones down the
hill, to the no small annoyance of some of the
party hurrying up from below.
It was a strange wild meeting, that of the
lovers, in that wild region, and at a moment too
so awfully terrible, when not less than forty
human
beings, without a second's warning, had just
been ushered into the presence of their Maker;
when groans and shrieks from the dying, on the
deck of the steamer, were mingling with the
hoarse shouts and cries of those who had escaped
their untimely fate. It was a strange wild
meeting
,
that of the lovers, and one that by them
would never be forgotten.
As the reader is aware, Merton and Bernard
had set out in the morning, with a party rising of
forty men, to seek the rendezvous of the banditti,
rescue Emily, and punish the offenders. We shall
not attempt to describe the thoughts and emotions,
the hopes and fears, agitating the breast of the
former, during that eventful day, (when his mind
ran on the perils seemingly surrounding her he
loved,) but leave these to the imagination of the
reader, for our space is already limited. Suffice,
that a hard day's ride of bodily fatigue and
mental
anxiety, had brought him to the spot where
we now find him. When within three miles of
the place, Edward had descried the steamer; and
divining at once her purpose, had become very
much alarmed, lest there should be a fight,
wherein
,
as he thought, Emily must necessarily become
involved. Whispering his fears to his
companion
Bernard, both instantly drove their spurs into
their horses' sides, and set rapidly forward, in
advance
of the others. When they arrived at the
foot of the hill, whereon they now stood, they
found it too steep for a speedy ascent with their
horses, which were already very much blown,
and leaping from their backs, they darted up on
foot. They had proceeded but a few paces, when
they heard the report of a volley of fire-arms,
which caused them to redouble their speed. On
their way, they caught a glimpse of the flying
bandits, some distance to the left; but heeding
them not, they still pressed on, and at length, pale
with excitement, and breathless with bodily
exertion
,
they reached the summit. As they came
in full view of the steamer, the awful explosion
at the cave took place; and Edward, thinking
Emily
was within, and now lost to him for ever,
uttered
the words recorded, and sank to the earth.
As to Emily herself, she had ridden, in
company
with Hetty and Cyntha, some two miles,
when she perceived a body of men, about a mile
to the right of her, rapidly advancing toward the
spot she had but lately quitted, and where she
knew the bandits were lying in ambush. Some
little distance in advance of the main body, she
descried two horsemen, whom her eyes and heart
at once told her were Edward and Bernard,
Fearful lest the one she loved, with his compan
ion, might heedlessly run into an ambush, that
would cost both of them their lives, she suddenly
wheeled her animal, and, without a word to the
others, darted away to intercept them. But in
laying out her line of interception, the angle was
too abruptly formed, and, in consequence, she
had fallen somewhat in the rear. Had they even
for a moment glanced to the right, they must
have seen her; but with their eyes intent upon
one point, she had escaped their observation.
When they sprang from their horses, at the base
of the hill, she was but a few rods distant. Ere
they arrived half way to the summit, she had
dismounted
and was struggling up after them, but
too much exhausted to gain their ears with her
voice. Their meeting the reader has already seen.
And now, leaving Edward and Emily to the
holy commune of love, and the relation of such
other matters as are already familiar to the reader,
with a few brief remarks we shall close this
chapter
.
The party of which Merton and Bernard
formed a portion, on seeing them ride forward in
such haste, increased their speed, and presently
joined them on the hill, where they received the
sad intelligence of what had taken place, and
also learned that the bandits had effected their
escape
,
without the loss of a man Of those who
were in the cave at the time of the explosion, not
one could be recognisedso mangled were they,
and torn, and blackened with powder. The cave
itself, though not utterly demolished, was so rent
and shatteredboth apartments being blown into
onethat those who may chance to view it at the
present day, will fail, doubtless, to recognise that
almost classic beauty belonging to it prior to and
at the date of our story; or, what is more, may
even fail to recognise the cave at all. For the
benefit of the curious, however, and lest some may
deem it a fabulous one, we will here assert that the
cave is still in existence, and can be seen by those
who may be disposed to seek it.
As the party just arrived soon discovered their
presence was no longer necessary, and as the sun
was already near the line of the western horizon,
they immediately set out upon their return,
accompanied
by Bernard, Edward and Emily.
Hetty
and Cyntha soon after joined them, both of
whom, to their no small surprise and terror, were
immediately taken into custody, to be conveyed
to St. Louis for examination; and particularly the
latter, who had no papers to show that she was
free. About five miles from the Osage, the party
found a convenient place, and quartered for the
night, during which Cyntha effected her escape,
and was never afterwards heard from,she
probably
having again joined the escaped outlaws.
At daylight on the following morning, each
resumed
their journey, much refreshed by a good
night's rest, and for some thirty miles traveled
in company, when they gradually began to
separate
,
as here and there one after another turned
off to seek their nearest course home. Some
three hours after nightfall, Bernard, Edward and
Emily arrived at Webber's, having traveled the
last five miles entirely by themselves.
The party on the steamer remained at the cave
during the night, and on the day following, after
having interred the remains of all those found in
the cave, started upon their return, with what
feelings we leave the reader to imagine.
Of the party of Piketon, we can only say they
were never again heard of in that country.
What became of them is unknown. Probably
they sought some remote place, and perhaps
settled
down, many of them, into peaceable citizens
who shall say? No little wonderment was
created among some of the oldest settlers, to find
that here and there an old neighbor had suddenly
and mysteriously disappearedin many cases
whole families alsoand for a long time it was a
difficult matter to reconcile their minds to the
fact, that in the persons of those neighbors had
existed many of the most formidable members of
the dread banditti.
On the night following the one in which
Bonardi
blew up the cavewherein Saxton and
Niles perishedin a miserable hoved, unfriended
and alone, the wretched outcast Curdish breathed
his last. The wound in his shoulder, given by
Bernard, having mortified, produced his death.
So perish the guilty.
Thus, one after one, in various ways, have we
seen our characters disappear, until but a few
remain
.
Well, like to them, one after one, shall
we also disappear, and perchance without a
friendly
hand being raised to record that we have been.
Let us now turn once more to the living of our
drama of life, take a farewell view, and then let
the curtain descend and shut them from our sight
forever.
CHAPTER V.
THE LOVERSTHE MYSTERY UNRAVELLEDTHE
LETTER
THE
FINALE.
It was a beautiful morning, about a week from
the return of Emily, and every thing in nature
looked bright and animated. A gentle rain had
fallen during the night, and the drops were still
lingering on leaf and blade and flower, and
sparkling
in the morning sunlight, like so many
diamonds
.
The air was clear, soft and invigorating;
and the light-footed Zephyrs sighed through the
forests, rustled the leaves, kissed the beautiful
flowers, and caught a thousand sweet sounds of
melody to bear away to their frolicsome meetings
in Fairy Land.
Before Webber's cottage, on the morning in
question, stood a gallant steed, foaming and
panting
from hard riding; while the rider himself,
having
entered the cottage, was now standing in the
apartment where the gentle Rufus had breathed
his last, with one arm thrown lightly around the
waist of the graceful Emily Nevance, who, with
her soft blue eyes turned sweetly upon him, was
gazing with a look of joy, somewhat saddened by
grief.
Oh, Edward, she exclaimed, with animation,
I joy that you have come! I have been
watching
for you since the first streak of morning
gilded
the east; for I knew you would select the cool
of the day, and ride long ere daylight. Oh, I
have been so sad since we buried poor Rufus!
and Emily turned away her head to conceal a tear.
Well, well, dearest, answered Edward,
drawing
her fondly to him, and pressing a kiss upon
her lips, let us not forget, while we grieve, that
Rufus is happy now. It is a fact that we are
prone to grieve too much for departed friends,
and thereby oppose our selfishness to the Divine
Will. Instead of grieving for the death of a friend,
we should rather rejoice that all his troubles are
at an end, and that he is now singing immortal
songs in the bright regions of glory. We know
that all must die, sooner or latethat we are all
wending to the Spirit Landthen wherefore
grieve that one we love has reached the bright
goal before us?
I admit your philosophy is good, rejoined
Emily, but still you will allow philosophy has but
little to do with the heart, with the affections.
Philosophy
is the cold emanation of the brainlove the
warm offspring of the heart; and the latter, as a
general thing, will triumph over the former.
Your remarks are true, returned Edward,
for such are the selfish propensities of human
nature. The heart will for a time gain
ascendency
over the head: love will triumph over
philosophy
:
such are facts; and yet, as I said before, we
should strive to give the latter the asceudency,
when we find the former can avail us nothing.
To this end I would fain bring philosophy to my
aid here; and yet withal I deeply, most deeply
grieve, that one so gentle, so noble as Rufus,
should be taken from among us, just in the bright
flower of manhood. For himself I deeply grieve,
and for his almost heart-broken parents, my heart
bleeds in sympathy; and Edward's voice
trembled
,
and tears filled his eyes.
Alas! sighed Emily; his mother, poor
woman, I fear will never recover from the shock.
Is she then no better? asked Edward.
Emily shook her head mournfully. No, she
sighed. As you saw her on the day of the
funeral
,
as you saw her on your departure, three days
since, you will find her now. She sits in a state
of torpor, twirling her fingers, but takes no heed
of what is said, or what is passing around her.
Alas! I fear she will soon follow him.
And Webber? asked Edward, with a sigh.
He bears up as well as can be expected under
the circumstances; but it was a hard blow, a very
hard blow, to be made childless in one night, and
one son, too, to be murdered before his own eyes,
in his own house, and then borne away no one
knows whither.
It was indeed, said Merton, solemnly. And
the body of John has never been found?
It has not. It is supposed to have been
devoured
by wild beasts, or thrown into some
stream.
Well, said Merton, somewhat sternly, he
at least deserved his fate. What a black hearted
villain!
Hush! exclaimed Emily; upbraid not the
dead! He is gone to be judged for the deeds done
in the body. He has suffered the penalty of his
misdeeds, has paid the last great debt of nature,
and so let us be charitable, and say, `
Requiescat in
pace
.' But come, I am detaining you, and you
must be faint with your long ride. Let us enter
the other apartment, where breakfast awaits us.
A moment, returned Edward, taking her
hand. I have some news, both good and bad.
With the steamer which exploded and went down
on the night of that terrible fight on the
Mississippi
,
went my father's fortune. He had
borrowed
on securities, a large amount of specie to
send to New Orleans. It was lost, and he is now
a ruined man. This is the bad news. The good
is, that he has given his consent to our union,
which I trust will ere long be consummated.
As he spoke, Emily bent down her eyes, and a
modest blush suffused her features.
It lightens my heart much, dear Edward,
she replied at length, to know that his consent is
gained; for somehow I have felt as though I were
doing wrong, in accepting your hand contrary to
his wishes. For his sake, dear Edward, I regret
the loss of his wealth; as it must be a severe blow
to one who has labored so long and steadfastly
to acquire it.
The lesson will be a hard, but doubtless
beneficial
one, returned Edward, by showing him
the mutability of the fabric on which he has
concentrated
time and talents that might have been
used more worthily, not only to the elevation of
himself, but of those around him. No one, dear
Emily, should set their heart upon gold. Man
has nobler duties to perform than the hoarding of
wealth. Wealth, properly used, I will admit is a
blessing, because by it so many poor human beings
can be made comfortable and happy; and yet how
few of the wealthy think of this, or act upon it, but,
on the contrary, use their gold to oppress, to grind
the faces of those who are dependent upon them,
and by such means make their wealth a curse.
Too truetoo true, said Emily, musingly;
and then looking up into Edward's face, after a
moment's pause, with a sweet expression, she
added: By your father's consent, dear Edward,
I feel the only barrier to our union removedfor
I have already learned who were my parents!
Indeed! exclaimed Edward: And pray who
are you? and how got you the information?
The latter I received from Ronald Bonardi.
Ronald Bonardi, Emily? you astonish me!
You will doubtless be more astonished, when
you peruse the letter he gave me. But come, to
breakfast now, and then you shall know all. By
the way, you remember the stranger you saw
here, whom my guardian found in the last stages
of starvation, in the vault of the Jew.
I do.
He stated to my guardian, on last evening,
that he had something important to communicate;
and wished all, but myself in particular, to be
present
.
As I had retired to rest, it was deferred
until
this morning. And now, dear Edward, said
Emily, playfully, who knows but what that
communication concerns me very particularly?
Who knows? returned Edward, and they
passed into the other apartment.
Some two hours from the foregoing
conversation
,
a group of six individuals were seated in the
same apartment where this conversation took
place. These consisted of Webber, Bernard and
Tyrone, Edward, Emily and the strangerMrs.
Webber not being present. The expressions on
the faces of each, were solemn, even mournful;
for the events of the last few days had been of a
nature to give a gloomy cast to their
countenances
,
not easily to be erased. The features of
Webber himself were pale, sad, and full of the
furrows of intense grief and care. Those of the
stranger were thin and pale also, but exhibited
nothing of that ghastliness so apparent on his
first introduction to the reader as the prisoner of
the Jew. The expression of his countenance
was naturally stern, and there were a few lines in
it of a sinister cast. He appeared like one who,
to use an old familiar phrase, had seen better days;
but one whose constitution had been somewhat
broken by irregular habits and dissipation. He
was a little turned the middle age of life, and his
hair was somewhat grey. After the party had
become seated, and a momentary silence elapsed,
the stranger, in a voice deep, clear, but slightly
faltering, said:
To do an act of justice, and thereby make a
partial atonement for my past crimes, I have
requested
each and all of you to be present, and
listen to my tale.
Every eye was turned upon him, with an
enquiring
gaze. The stranger noticed this, and
seemed for a moment not a little embarrassed;
but summoning all his resolution to his aid, he
proceeded:
My story I shall make as brief as possible, for
one likes not to dwell on ones misdeeds. My
name is Charles Waltonthe place of my
nativity
,
England. I was born richentered
college
at a proper age, with bright prospectsfell
into
bad companygambled muchdrank much
and was finally expelled. My parents shortly after
died, and I was left a wealthy heir. In
horse-racing
,
drinking, and petty gambling, I
squandered
my property; and at the age of thirty,
found myself a beggar, a vagabond, and a villain
ready to do almost any deed for money. In this
situation I was discovered by one who had known
me in better daysa villain who had helped to
fleece meand knowing my character, habits,
and desperate situation, he opened to me his
devilish
heart, offered me a large sum to carry out a
design he had in view, which I accepted, and
became
his tool. This design was no less than the
murder of the only daughter of Sir Walter
Langdon
,
for which I received in advance the sum of
ten thousand pounds.
At the mention of the name of Langdon,
Emily
started and grew pale, while her eyes, fastened
upon Walton, and her head bent a little forward,
exhibited the most intense eagerness for what was
to follow.
The girl, continued Walton, by bribing the
nurse, I managed to get in my possession. She
was a sweet little creature, of three yearsmy
conscience smote meI could not murder her
and I fled the country, bearing her with me. I
took passage for America, and fifteen years ago
landed in Boston. I immediately set forth on a
tour through the States, taking the child with me,
determined to abandon her, so soon as a suitable
opportunity presented, whereby she would be
bettered
by the change. Chance favored me. I
tarried one night at a farmer's house, the inmates
of which pleased me, and in the morning I
departed
,
leaving the child in their care, but stating
I would return in a few days. That farmer's
name was William Webberthe child bore that
of Emily Nevance.
Good heavens! exclaimed Webber, while
Merton sprang to his feet, and there was a look
of surprise on the faces of Bernard and Tyrone.
Emily, pale and trembling with excitement,
leaned
back in her chair, unable to speak. Go on
go on! said Webber, quickly; for I perceive the
deep mystery of fifteen years is being unravelled.
After leaving your house, resumed Walton,
addressing Webber, I came to the West, and for
ten years led a dissolute life. My conscience,
meantime, often upbraided me for the crime I had
been guilty of, and at length I resolved to make
at least some slight reparation. My money was
now nearly exhausted, but still I had some few
thousand dollars remaining, and I returned to the
East, with the intent of seeking Emily,
proceeding
to England, and restoring her to her rights;
for I had learned, withal, that her family were all
dead, and that the villain who employed me to
murder her, being next akin, was now reveling
in the halls of her father, rioting upon his own
ill-gotten gains. For this purpose, I say, I
returned
to the East; but alas! when there, my good
resolution failed me, and I faltered in my
purpose
.
It is hard, gentlemen, for one who has made
himself a villain, to come forward and
acknowledge
it to the world, and be the by-word of jeer
in the mouths of his associates. It was this which
deterred me, as it has deterred many a wretched
being before me, from returning to the paths of
honesty. It is a false pride, I will admit, but it is
human nature, nevertheless.
Determined, however, that my journey should
not be all in vainthat some good at least should
accrue from itI employed a trusty messenger to
convey you a package, (wherein was enclosed the
sum of one thousand dollars, and a note
explanatory
,)
with positive instructions to the bearer, that
it should be placed in no hands but yours, that he
should learn if the child was still living and doing
well, that he should answer no questions, and
return
as speedily as possible.
Ha! ejaculated Webber, this clears up
another
mysterious event. But go ongo on!
My main object in this was the education of
Emily; for still it was my intent at some future
day to do her justice. Again I returned to the
West, and during the four years following,
squandered
or made way with most of my money. At
the end of this period I found my health failing
rapidly; and fearful lest death might overtake me,
ere the grand error of my life should be repaired,
I sought a magistrate, in Cincinnati, and had
papers
drawn up, stating the full particulars
concerning
the abduction of the girl, how to prove
her identityin fact, everything essential to the
establishing of her in her rightswhich I swore to
and signed, in the presence of two respectable
witnesses, who, together with the magistrate,
signed the papers also. These I carried about my
person, superscribed to both Emily Nevance and
yourselfso that in the event of my dying
suddenly
,
you would probably receive them. After
this, I somewhat recovered, and made another
tour to the East, with the full determination, if
my life was spared long enough, to return with
Emily to England. To my surprise and regret, I
found you not, and learned you were now living
in the Far West. Resolved to see you at all
events, I returned again to the Westafter
having
received a full description of the part of the
country where you were locatedand had
actually
reached within a few miles of your residence,
when, it being just at dark, I was set upon by
some three or four ruffians, who seized, stabbed
me twice, and drew me aside into a rough cave,
where they proceeded to rifle my person; while
anotherno less a villain than that accursed Jew,
from whom you rescued meperceiving I was
still alive, deliberately, in cold blood, grinning
upon
me the while, stabbed me twice himself, and I
knew no more.
Ha! ejaculated Webber, breaking in upon
the speaker, this happened some four or five
months since?
As near as I am able to judge, answered
Walton, it did.
Then you were the stranger supposed to have
been murdered, and whose body had been sunk in
the Marameethe case alluded to in my remarks
a few mornings since, Tyrone. But proceed,
proceed
,
for I am anxious for the sequel.
What followed this, resumed Walton, I am
unable to say; for when consciousness returned,
I was in that loathsome dungeon, where you found
me, with the Jew standing over me, grinning
horribly
,
more like a thing of hell than earth. Why
my life had been spared, and wounds dressed, I
knew not then; but afterwards gathered, from
different
remarks dropped, and hints thrown out by
the Jew, that, after his perusal of those papers, the
strange and absurd idea of some day marrying
Emily, had taken possession of him; and that my
life was preserved to be a living witness in
enabling
him to recover her property and rights. In
this insane design I encouraged him, in the hope
of some day being released. What I suffered
until
that release, is beyond the power of language
to describe. I shall not attempt it. For some
days ere you found me, I had not tasted food, nor
seen a living being, save the hideous Jew, who
came down but a few hours before to murder me,
which something interrupted, and saved my life.
Such, friends, concluded Walton, for you all
seem like tried friends to me, is my sad, eventful
tale; and I throw myself entirely upon your
generosity
to pardon me the past, by pledging myself
to make all the atonement in my power for the
future.
Your punishment in my opinion, has
exceeded
your crimes, replied Webber, mildly;
and were this not the case, I am not one of
those selfish beings that can withold the right
hand of fellowship from him who repents and
seeks to atone for his past errors. Charles
Walton
,
there is my hand; and as he spoke, Webber
arose and extended his hand, which the other
grasped with warmth, while a tear sparkled in his
eye.
And there is mine, said Tyrone, coming
forward
.
And mine, said Merton, following his
example
.
Wal, old feller, said Bernard, approaching
also, I guess as how I'll have to gin ye a grip
on't tu; for darn me, if I don't think there's some
good streaks about ye anyhow, if they be a little
mixed up.
And Emily? asked Walton, deeply affected.
O, sir, answered Emily, with a sweet smile, I
am too happy in the present, to bewail the past.
If you have done me wrong, from my heart I
forgive
you, and trust that He who reigns above will
do likewise.
This is too much, said Walton, drawing his
hand across his eyes. I did at least expect
rebuke
from some of you.
He who can rebuke a repentant man, himself
needs a rebuke, rejoined Merton; for there must
be something wrong, if not base and cowardly in
his own heart.
Them's jest my sentiments! cried Bernard;
for the man that wont forgive a feller when he
up and acknowledges he's done wrong, aint no
man at all, whether he's dressed up in broadcloth
finery and talks pious or not.
How incomprehensible, how inscrutable are
the ways of Providence! remarked Webber,
musingly
,
after a pause. How intricately our web
of fate is woven with that of others; between
whom and ourselves, many times, there seems not
the slightest connection, until a strange order of
events reveals to us perhaps, that years agone,
and miles apart, unknown to each, each was
secretly
exercising an influence upon the destiny
of the other.
Most true, dear guardian, said Emily, in
reply
;
and in my own case, how strangely and
strongly this is verified! Read that, dear
guardian
;
9
and she placed in his hands the letter given
her by Bonardi.
Webber glanced over it hastily, and, as he did
so, there was a perceptible start of surprise on his
features. Strangestrange! said he, can it
be possible this is so? and he proceeded to read
aloud as follows:
Dear Emily:
Pardon the liberty I take in
thus addressing you, for it is perhaps the only
favor
I shall ever ask at the hands of one whom the
ties of consanguinity bid me hold most dear. I
fancy I see you start with surprise, at the idea
of the same blood flowing in the veins of both of
us. Such is the fact. Your father and mine
were one; but fortune placed a wide disparity
between
us. You were born to wealth and honor
I to poverty and disgrace. You were born to be
the courted of societyI to be the outcast. And
if we both had one father, what, you ask, made
this disparity? I answer, you were born legally
I illegally. Or, in other words, your mother was
married by the laws of the land, in the presence
of earthly witnessesmine, by the laws of honor,
in the presence of God only. But enough of this,
for my minutes are all numbered. Emily, I am
dying of a wound received from the hands of
the father of him whom I have punished for
turning
traitor to us, and attempting to wrong you.
John Webber is dead. But ha! I am wandering
from my subjectmy thoughts are almost
distracted
,
and so pardon me.
Some days since, in a conversation with the
father of John, I learned of you, and that your
birth was involved in mystery. Having learned
the whole particulars, and some slight
coincidences
recurring to my mind, a vague suspicion
crossed me that you might be the daughter of Sir
Walter Langdon,who, if living, must be of the
same age with yourself; and who, fifteen years
agoabout the period when you were brought to
Webber'smysteriously disappeared.
When I saw you first, in that wild retreat on
the mountains of the Osage, I felt my suspicion
at once made reality, from your strong
resemblance
to your father. Gods! Emily, what
feelings
came over me then! when I thought how
that father had spurned me, his own son, from his
presence, and was thus the indirect instrument in
making me the outlaw I am! But a terrible
retribution
followed, Emily. Your mother soon
after diedyour brother was murderedyou were
stolen away, and your father and mine died a
childless maniac, and his estates passed into the
hands of a villain. By those papers destroyed by
John, doubtless you might have proven your
identity, and gained possession of what is lawfully
your own. As matters are now, I fear this
cannot
be donestill I think it worth the trial; but,
at least, you may rest assured your birth is noble
and honorable; and this, to one as sensitive as
yourself on the subject, cannot but be joyful
tidings
.
And now, dear Emily, my sister, I must bid
you farewell,for time presses, and my wound
grows painful. I write this a few miles from the
cave, which I shall endeavor to reach alive, and
see my own loved Inez once again. If I succeed,
I shall probably hand you this myself,if not,
you will get it from the hands of another. There
are many things of which I wish to speak with
you,but it is now too late, too late. You will
doubtless hear my name a by-word of terror, and
my memory cursed; but you at least will be char
itable and not curse me; you at least will take
into
consideration the circumstances that have
made me what I am; you at least may feel the
poor despised outlaw was not so bad as he seemed.
If you never behold me again, and Inez survives
the loss, I pray you, dear Emily, be to her a friend
and sisterfor she at least is innocent of crime.
Farewell, farewell!
Ronald Bonardi
.
CHAPTER V.
How strangely wonderful! remarked
Webber
,
thoughtfully, as he concluded the letter.
Were facts like these detailed in a novel, they
would be considered wild fancies of the author's
brain. But reality often exceeds romance.
Well, said Tyrone, all at least seems
tending
to prove the hitherto unknown Emily
Nevance
,
is henceforth to be known as Lady
Langdon
;
this I am sure is a sweet romance of reality;
and he glanced at Emily, with a smile.
At least, returned Walton, if God spares
my life, I shall endeavor to make it so.
Nay, gentlemen, said Emily, archly, smiling
sweetly, rising and extending her hand to
Edward
:
Not
Lady
Langdon
, and so please you
all.
Ah! exclaimed Edward, rapturously,
pressing
her hand in his, have you forgotton, Emily,
that when I was rich you were about to refuse
me, because you were poor; and now that the
tables are turned, I
Hush! interrupted Emily, placing her hand
upon his mouth.
That's right, Emily, that's right! cried
Bernard
,
rubbing his hands and smiling Don't let
him make a fool o' himself now, jest at the
windup
like.
Edward made no reply, but drawing the
blushing
Emily aside, whispered something in her ear,
stole a kiss, and both were happy.
Six months from the foregoing events
produced
a great change in the positions of our
characters
.
Mrs. Webber had followed her son to the
grave. Bernard had returned to settle in the
East--where he afterwards married and lived a
happy life. Tyrone had set up in his profession
of lawyer, in St. Louisa profession in which he
afterwards distinguished himself. Edward had
been united to the lovely Emily; and
accompanied
by Webber,who, after the death of his
family, had disposed of his propertyand by Hetty,
who had been released, and who begged to
accompany
Emily in the capacity of a servantand by
Walton, who, true to his promise, determined to
restore Emily to her rights,they had set sail for
England, where the latter soon after obtained
possession of what was rightfully her own, and
where she and Edward lived in happy affluence,
to tell their children many a wild story of the
Backwoods of America, and of their own singular
connection with the
Bandits of the Osage
.
The End
.`My dear son, God be with you! I am dying,
and can never see you again on earth, but will in
the land of spirits. My strength is failingI
have but a few minutes to live, and will devote
them to you. You have often questioned me of
your father. I have delayed answering you,but
the time has now come when it is necessary you
should know all. God give me strength to pen,
and you to read the secret of my life!and
Ronald
,
dear Ronald, whatever you do, do not
reproach
,
do not curse my memory! I shall enter
but little into detail, for time and strength will
not permit. At the age of twelve I was left an
orphan, and was taken in charge of some distant
relatives of my mother, with whom I lived in
easy circumstances, until the age of sixteen.
They were not wealthy, and yet had enough
wherewithal to live independent. They treated
me with much affection, and life passed pleasantly
for four years. At the age of sixteen, I
accidentally
became acquainted with Walter
Langdon
,
only son of Sir Edgar Langdon, whose large
estate and residencefor he was very wealthy
was but a few miles distant. He found
opportunity
and declared his attachment, but at the
same time informed me that our relations on either
side would be opposed to our union, and begged
me to make no mention of it, but to prepare
myself
and elope with him; that when the ceremony
was over, and no alternative, all parties would
become reconciled. He was young, handsome, and
accomplishedhis powers of conversation
brilliant
.
He plead with a warmth of passion I could
not withstandfor know, Ronald, I loved him,
with the ardent first love of a girl of sixteen, and
I consented. Alas! Ronald, that I am forced to
tell you more: this rash act was my ruin!
`My strength is failing so rapidly I cannot
enter
into particulars, my son,and yet, why should
I?they would only pain you to read, and me to
write. Suffice, Ronald, that he deceived meI
became his victim--and you, Oh God! you are
the offspring of our guilt.
`Shortly after this I learned, to my horror, that
he had united himself with a lady of wealth. He
afterward saw me and offered me the reparation
of money:alas! what a reparation to one whose
hopes were ruined! Had it not been for you, my
son, I never would have lived to feel my disgrace.
As it was, I accepted his offer, on condition that
he would never see me more. To this he
reluctantly
consented, and gave me a life lease of the
place where you were reared, and settled on me
a certain annuity, which ceases at my death. By
economy I have been enabled to save a thousand
pounds, which is here enclosed. Take it,
Ronald
,
and may God enable you to live an honest
life. Poor boy! you are homelessfriendless,
for she who has watched over and loved you as
only a mother can, will, ere this reaches you, be
in her grave. God support you, dear Ronald!
But for the thought of your grief and suffering,
I could die contented. I have, save you, no
friend on earth,all have thrown me off and
treated me with contempt. Well, well, it is all
for the best; may God forgive them! It is a just
punishment for my sin; and yet it is hardvery,
very hard. Oh! Ronald--dear, dear Ronald!--
that I could see you once againcould clasp you
once more to this broken heartcould feel you
close my aching eyes!but no! no! it cannot
bedeath is upon me! I feel it in my palsying
limbsmy leaden eye-lids--my struggling breath.
I would advise you, but I cannot; I leave you to
act as you think proper; but, my son, do nothing
rash! Oh! Ronald, do not curse me!will you?
Oh! if I but knew you would forgive me!but
ah!God!I am going. Adieu! adieu!Ronald,
bear your mother's name, and drop a tear upon
the earth that covers her. Farewellfarewell!
Clarrisse Bonardi
.'