A 2
CHAPTER I.
Here
ended the narrative of Mervyn. Surely its
incidents
were of no common kind. During this season
of pestilence, my opportunities of observation had been
numerous, and I had not suffered them to pass
unimproved
.
The occurrences which fell within my own
experience bore a general resemblance to those which
had just been related, but they did not hinder the latter
from striking on my mind with all the force of novelty.
They served no end, but as vouchers for the truth of
the tale.
Surely the youth had displayed inimitable and heroic
qualities. His courage was the growth of benevolence
and reason, and not the child of insensibility and the
nursling of habit. He had been qualified for the
encounter
of gigantic dangers by no laborious education.
He stept forth upon the stage, unfurnished, by
anticipation
or experience, with the means of security against
fraud; and yet, by the aid of pure intentions, had
frustrated the wiles of an accomplished and veteran
deceiver.
I blessed the chance which placed the youth under
my protection. When I reflected on that tissue of
nice contingences which led him to my door, and
enabled
me to save from death a being of such rare
endowments
,
my heart overflowed with joy, not unmingled
with regrets and trepidation. How many have been
cut off by this disease, in their career of virtue and their
blossom-time of genius! How many deeds of heroism
and self-devotion are ravished from existence, and
consigned
to hopeless oblivion!
I had saved the life of this youth. This was not the
limit of my duty or my power. Could I not render
that life profitable to himself and to mankind? The
gains of my profession were slender; but these gains
were sufficient for his maintainance as well as my own.
By residing withme, partaking my instructions, and
reading
my books, he would, in a few years, be fitted for
the practice of physic. A science, whose truths are so
conducive to the welfare of mankind, and which
comprehends
the whole system of nature, could not but
gratify a mind so beneficent and strenuous as his.
This scheme occurred to me as soon as the
conclusion
of his tale allowed me to think. I did not
immediately
mention it; since the approbation of my wife,
of whose concurrence, however, I entertained no
doubt, was previously to be obtained. Dismissing it,
for the present, from my thoughts, I reverted to the
incidents of his tale.
The lady whom Welbeck had betrayed and deserted,
was not unknown to me. I was but too well
acquainted
with her fate. If she had been single in calamity,
her tale would have been listened to with insupportable
sympathy; but the frequency of the spectacle of
distress
,
seems to lessen the compassion with which it is
reviewed. Now that those scenes are only remembered,
my anguish is greater than when they were witnessed.
Then every new day was only a repetition of the
disasters
of the foregoing. My sensibility, if not
extinguished
,
was blunted; and I gazed upon the
complicated
ills of poverty and sickness with a degree of
unconcern
,
on which I should once have reflected with
astonishment.
The fate of Clemenza Lodi was not, perhaps, more
signal than many which have occurred. It threw
detestable
light upon the character of Welbeck, and
showed
A 3
him to be more inhuman than the tale of Mervyn
had evinced him to be. That man, indeed, was
hitherto
imperfectly seen. The time had not come which
should fully unfold the enormity of his transgressions and
the complexity of his frands.
There lived in a remote quarter of the city a woman, by
name Villars, who passed for the widow of an English
officer. Her manners and mode of living were specious.
She had three daughters, well trained in the school of
fashion, and elegant in person, manners and dress.
They had lately arrived from Europe, and for a time,
received from their neighbors that respect to which
their education and fortune appeared to lay claim.
The fallacy of their pretensions slowly appeared. It
began to be suspected that their subsistence was
derived
not from pension or patrimony, but from the wages
of pollution. Their habitation was clandestinely
frequented
by men who were unfaithful to their secret;
one of these was allied to me by ties, which authorized
me in watching his steps and detecting his errors, with
a view to his reformation. From him I obtained a
knowledge of the genuine character of these women.
A man like Welbeck, who was the slave of depraved
appetities, could not fail of being quickly satiated with
innocence and beauty. Some accident introduced him
to the knowledge of this family, and the youngest
daughter found him a proper subject on which to
exercise
her artifices. It was to the frequent demands
made upon his purse, by this woman, that part of the
embarrassments in which Mervyn found him involved,
are to be ascribed.
To this circumstance must likewise be imputed his
anxiety to transfer to some other the possession of the
unhappy stranger. Why he concealed from Mervyn
his connection with Lucy Villars, may be easily
imagined
.
His silence, with regard to Clemenza's asylum,
will not create surprise, when it it is told that she was
placed with Mrs. Villars. On what conditions she was
received under this roof, cannot be so readily
conjectured
.
It is obylons, however, to suppose, that advantage
was to be taken of her ignorance and weakness, and that
they hoped, in time, to make her an associate in their
profligate schemes.
The appearance of pestilence, mean wihle, threw them
into panick, and they hastened to remove from danger.
Mrs. Villars appears to have been a woman of no
ordinary
views. She stooped to the vilest means of
amassing
money; but this money was employed to secure to
herself and her daughters the benefits of independence.
She purchased the house which she occupied in the city,
and a mansion in the environs, well built and
splendidly
furnished. To the latter, she and her family, of
which the Italian girl was now a member, retired at
the close of July.
I have mentioned that the source of my intelligence
was a kinsman, who had been drawn from the paths of
sobriety and rectitude, by the impetuosity of youthful
passions. He had power to confess and deplore, but
none to repair his errors. One of these women held
him by a spell which he struggled in vain to dissolve,
and by which, in spite of resolutions and remorses, he
was drawn to her feet, and made to sacrifice to her
pleasure
,
his reputation and his fortune.
My house was his customary abode during those
intervals
in which he was persuaded to pursue his
profession
.
Some time before the infection began its
progress
,
he had disappeared. No tidings was received of
him, till a messenger arrived intreating my assistance.
I was conducted to the house of Mrs. Villars, in which
I found no one but my kinsman. Here it seems he had
immured himself from my enquiries, and on being seized
by the reigning malady, had been deserted by the family,
who, ere they departed, informed me by a messenger of
his condition.
Despondency combined with his disease to destroy
him. Before he died, he informed me fully of the
character of his betrayers. The late arrival, name
and personal condition of Clemenza Lodi were related.
Welbeck was not named, but was described in terms,
which, combined with the narrative of Mervyn, enabled
me to recognize the paramour of Lucy Villars in the
man whose crimes had been the principal theme of our
discourse.
Mervyn's curiosity was greatly roused when I
intimated
my acquaintance with the fate of Clemenza. In
answer to his eager interrogations, I related what I
knew. The tale plunged him into reverie.
Recovering
,
at length, from his thoughtfulness, he spoke.
Her condition is perilous. The poverty of Welbeck
will drive him far from her abode. Her profligate
protectors
will entice her or abandon her to ruin. Cannot she
be saved?
I know not, answered I, by what means.
The means are obvious. Let her remove to some
other dwelling. Let her be apprized of the vices of
those who surround her. Let her be intreated to fly.
The will need only be inspired, the danger need only
be shown, and she is safe, for she will remove beyond
its reach.
Thou art an adventurous youth. Who wilt thou
find to undertake the office? Who will be persuaded to
enter the house of a stranger, seck without an
introduction
the presence of this girl, tell her that the house
she inhabits is an house of prostitution, prevail on her
to believe the tale, and persuade her to accompany him?
Who will open his house to the fugitive? Whom will
you convince that her illicit intercourse with Welbeck,
of which the opprobrious tokens cannot be concealed,
has not fitted her for the company of prostitutes, and
made her unworthy of protection? Who will adopt
into their family, a stranger, whose conduct has
incurred
infamy, and whose present associates have, no
doubt, made her worthy of the curse?
True. These are difficulties which I did not foresee.
Must she then perish! Shall not something be done to
rescue her from infamy and guilt?
It is neither in your power nor in mine to do any
thing.
The lateness of the hour put an end to our
conversation
and summoned us to repose, I seized the first
opportunity of imparting to my wife the scheme which
had occurred, relative to our guest; with which, as I
expected, she readily concurred. In the morning, I
mentioned it to Mervyn. I dwelt upon the benefits
that adhered to the medical profession, the power which
it confers of lightening the distresses of our neighbors,
the dignity which popular opinion annexes to it, the
avenue which it opens to the acquisition of competence,
the freedom from servile cares which attends it, and
the means of intellectual gratification with which it
supplies us.
As I spoke, his eyes sparkled with joy. Yes, said
he with vehemence, I willingly embrace your offer. I
accept this benefit, because I know that if my pride
should refuse it, I should prove myself less worthy
than you think, and give you pain, instead of that
pleasure which I am bound to confer. I would enter
on the duties and studies of my new profession
immediately
,
but somewhat is due to Mr. Hadwin and his
daughters. I cannot vanquish my inquietudes
respecting
them, but by returning to Malverton and
ascertaining
their state with my own eyes. You know in
what circumstances I parted with Wallace and Mr.
Hadwin. I am not sure, that either of them ever
reached home, or that they did not carry the infection
along with them. I now find myself sufficiently strong
to perform the journey, and proposed to have acquainted
you, at this interview, with my intentions. An hour's
delay is superfluous, and I hope you will consent to my
setting our immediately. Rural exercise and air, for
a week or fortnight, will greatly contribute to my
health.
No objection could be made to this scheme.
Hisnarrative
had excited no common affection in our
bosoms
for the Hadwins. His visit could not only
inform
us of their true state, but would dispel that
anxiety
which they could not but entertain respecting our
guest. It was a topic of some surprize that neither
Wallace nor Hadwin had returned to the city, with a
view to obtain some tidings of their friend. It was
more easy to suppose them to have been detained by
some misfortune, than by insensibility or indolence.
In a few minutes Mervyn bade us adieu, and set out
upon his journey, promising to acquaint us with the
state of affairs, as soon as possible after his arrival.
We parted from him with reluctance, and found no
consolation but in the prospect of his speedy return.
During his absence, conversation naturally turned
upon those topics which were suggested by the
narrative
and deportment of this youth. Different
conclusions
were formed by his two auditors. They had both
contracted a deep interest in his welfare, and an ardent
curiosity as to those particulars which his unfinished
story had left in obscurity. The true character and
actual condition of Welbeck, were themes of much
speculation
.
Whether he were dead or alive, near or
distant
from his ancient abode, was a point on which neither
Mervyn, nor any of those with whom I had means of
intercourse, afforded any information. Whether he had
shared the common fate, and had been carried by the
collectors of the dead from the highway or the hovel to
the pits opened alike for the rich and the poor, the known
and the unknown; whether he had escaped to a foreign
shore, or were destined to re-appear upon this stage, were
questions involved in uncertainty.
The disappearance of Watson would, at a different
time, have excited much enquiry and suspicion; but as
this had taken place on the eve of the epidemic, his
kindred
and friends would acquiesce, without scruple, in
the belief that he had been involved in the general
calamity
,
and was to be numbered among the earliest
victims
.
Those of his profession usually resided in the
street where the infection began, and where its ravages
had been most destructive; and this circumstance would
corroborate the conclusions of his friends.
I did not perceive any immediate advantage to flow
from imparting the knowledge I had lately gained to
others. Shortly after Mervyn's departure to
Malverton
,
I was visited by Wortley. Enquiring for my guest,
I told him that, having recovered his health, he had left
my house. He repeated his invectives against the
villainy
of Welbeck, his suspicions of Mervyn, and his
wishes for another interview with the youth. Why
had I suffered him to depart, and whither had he gone?
He has gone for a short time into the country. I
expect
him to return in less than a week, when you will
meet with him here as often as you please, for I expect
him to take up his abode in this house.
Much astonishment and disapprobation were
expressed
by my friend. I hinted that the lad had made
disclosures
to me, which justified my confidence in his
integrity
.
These proofs of his honestry were not of a nature
to be indiscriminately unfolded. Mervyn had
authorized
me to communicate so much of his story to Wortley,
as would serve to vindicate him from the charge of being
Welbeck's copartner in fraud; but this end would only
be counteracted by an imperfect tale, and the full
recital
,
though it might exculpate Mervyn, might produce
inconveniences by which this advantage would be
outweighed
.
Wortley, as might be naturally expected, was by no
means satisfied with this statement. He suspected that
Mervyn was a wily imposter; that he had been trained
in the arts of fraud, under an accomplished teacher; that
the tale which he had told to me, was a tissue of
ingenious
and plausible lies; that the mere assertions,
however
plausible and solemn, of one like him, whose conduct
had incurred such strong suspicions, were unworthy of
the least credit.
It cannot be denied, continued my friend, that he
lived with Welbeck at the time of his elopement; that
they disappeared together; that they entered a boat, at
Pine-street wharf, at midnight; that this boat was
discovered
by the owner in the possession of a fisherman
at Red-bank, who affirmed that he had found it
stranded
near his door, the day succeeding that on which they
disappeared. Of all this, I can supply you with
incontestible
proof. If, after this proof, you can give credit
to his story, I shall think you made of very perverse and
credulous materials.
The proof you mention, said I, will only enhance his
credibility. All the facts which you have stated, have
been admitted by him. They constitute an essential
portion of his narrative.
What then is the inference? Are not these evidences
of a compact between them? Has he not acknowledged
this compact in confessing that he knew Welbeck was
my debtor; that he was apprized of his flight, but that,
(what matchless effrontery!) he had promised secrecy,
and would, by no means, betray him? You say he means
to return; but of that I doubt. You will never see his
face more. He is too wise to thrust himself again into
the noose: but I do not utterly despair of lighting upon
Welbeck. Old Thetford, Jamieson and I, have sworn
to hunt him through the world. I have strong hopes
that he has not strayed far. Some intelligence has
lately
been received, which has enabled us to place our
hounds upon the scent. He may double and skulk; but
if he does not fall into our toils at last, he will have the
agility and cunning, as well as the malignity of devils.
The vengeful disposition thus betrayed by Wortley,
was not without excuse. The vigor of his days had been
spent in acquiring a slender capital: his diligence and
honesty had succeeded, and he had lately thought his
situation such as to justify marriage with an excellent
woman, to whom he had for years been betrothed, but
from whom his poverty had hitherto compelled him to
live separate. Scarcely had this alliance taken place,
and the full career of nuptial enjoyments begun, when
his ill fate exposed him to the frauds of Welbeck, and
brought him, in one evil hour, to the brink of insolvency.
Jamieson and Thetford, however, were rich, and I
had not till now been informed that they had reasons
for pursuing Welbeck with peculiar animosity. The
latter was the uncle of him whose fate had been related
by Mervyn, and was one of those who employed money,
not as the medium of traffic, but as in itself a
commodity
.
He had neither wines nor cloths, to transmute into
silver. He thought it a tedious process to exchange to
day, one hundred dollars for a cask or bale, and
to-morrow
exchange the bale or cask for an hundred
and ten
dollars. It was better to give the hundred for a piece of
paper, which, carried forthwith to the money changers,
he could procure an hundred twenty-three and
three-fourths
.
In short, this man's coffers were supplied by
the despair of honest men and the stratagems of
rogues. I did not immediately suspect how this man's
prudence and indefatigable attention to his own interest
should allow him to become the dupe of Welbeck.
What, said I, is old Thetford's claim upon Welbeck?
It is a claim, he replied, that, if it ever be made good,
will doom Welbeck to imprisonment and wholsome
labor
for life.
How? Surely it is nothing more than debt.
Have you not heard? But that is no wonder.
Happily
you are a stranger to mercantile anxieties and
revolutions
.
Your fortune does not rest on a basis which
an untoward blast may sweep away, or four strokes of a
pen may demolish. That hoary dealer in suspicions
was persuaded to put his hand to three notes for eight
hundred dollars each. The
eight
was then dextrously
prolonged to eigh
teen;
they were duly deposited in time
and place, and the next day Welbeck was credited for
fifty-three hundred and seventy-three, which an hour
after, were
told out
to his messenger. Hard to say
whether
the old man's grief, shame or rage be uppermost.
He disdains all comfort but revenge, and that he will
procure at any price. Jamieson, who deals in the same
stuff
with Thetford, was outwitted in the same manner,
to the same amount, and on the same day.
This Welbeck must have powers above the common
rate of mortals. Grown grey in studying the follies and
the stratagems of men, these veterans were
overreached
.
No one pities them. 'Twere well if his artifices
had been limited to such, and he had spared the honest
and the poor. It is for his injuries to men who have
earned their scanty subsistence without forfeiting their
probity, that I hate him, and shall exult to see him
sutfer
all the rigors of the law. Here Wortley's
engagements
compelled him to take his leave.
B
CHAPTER II.
While
musing upon these facts, I could not but
reflect
with astonishment on the narrow escapes which
Mervyn's virtue had experienced. I was by no means
certain that his fame or his life was exempt from all
danger, or that the suspicions which had already been
formed respecting him, could possibly be wiped away.
Nothing but his own narrative, repeated with that
simple
but nervous eloquence, which we had witnessed,
could rescue him from the most heinous charges. Was
there any tribunal that would not acquit him on merely
hearing his defence?
Surely the youth was honest. His tale could not be
the fruit of invention; and yet, what are the bounds of
fraud? Nature has set no limits to the combinations of
fancy. A smooth exterior, a show of virtue, and a
specious
tale, are, a thousand times, exhibited in human
intercourse by craft and subtlety. Motives are endlessly
varied, while actions continue the same; and an acute
penetration may not find it hard to select and arrange
motives, suited to exempt from censure any action that
an human being can commit.
Had I heard Mervyn's story from another, or read it
in a book, I might, perhaps, have found it possible to
suspect the truth; but, as long as the impression, made
by his tones, gestures and looks, remained in my
memory
,
this suspicion was impossible. Wickedness may
sometimes be ambiguous, its mask may puzzle the
observer
;
our judgment may be made to faulter and
fluctuate
,
but the face of Mervyn is the index of an honest
mind. Calm or vehement, doubting or confident, it is
full of benevolence and candor. He that listens to his
words may question their truth, but he that looks upon
his countenance when speaking, cannot withhold his
faith.
It was possible, however, to find evidence, supporting
or confuting his story. I chanced to be acquainted with
a family, by name Althorpe, who were natives of that
part of the country where his father resided. I paid
them a visit, and, after a few preliminaries, mentioned,
as if by accident, the name of Mervyn. They
immediately
recognized this name as belonging to one of their
ancient neighbors. The death of the wife and sons, and
the seduction of the only daughter by Colvil, with many
pathetic incidents connected with the fate of this
daughter
,
were mentioned.
This intelligence induced me to inquire of Mrs.
Althorpe
,
a sensible and candid woman, if she were
acquainted
with the recent or present situation of this
family.
I cannot say much, she answered, of my own
knowledge
.
Since my marriage, I am used to spend a few
weeks of summer, at my father's, but am less inquisitive
than I once was into the concerns of my old neighbors.
I recollect, however, when there, last year, during
the
fever
, to have heard that Sawny Mervyn had taken a
second wife; that his only son, a youth of eighteen, had
thought proper to be highly offended with his father's
conduct, and treated the new mistress of the house with
insult and contempt. I should not much wonder at
this, seeing children are so apt to deem themselves
unjustly
treated by a second marriage of their parent, but
it was hinted that the boy's jealousy and discontent was
excited by no common cause. The new mother was
not much older than himself, had been a servant of
the family, and a criminal intimacy had subsisted
between
her, while in that condition, and the son. Her
B 2
marriage with his father was justly accounted by their
neighbors, a most profligate and odious transaction.
The son, perhaps, had, in such a case, a right to scold,
but he ought not to have carried his anger to such
extremes
as have been imputed to him. He is said to have
grinned upon her with contempt, and even to have
called
her
strumpet
in the presence of his father and of
strangers.
It was impossible for such a family to keep together.
Arthur took leave one night to possess himself of all
his father's cash, mount the best horse in his meadow,
and elope. For a time, no one knew whither he had
gone. At last, one was said to have met with him in
the streets of this city, metamorphosed from a rustic
lad into a fine gentleman. Nothing could be quicker
than this change, for he left the country on a Saturday
morning, and was seen in a French frock and silk
stockings
,
going into Christ's Church the next day. I
suppose
he kept it up with an high hand, as long as his
money lasted.
My father paid us a visit last week, and among other
country news, told us than Sawny Mervyn had sold his
place. His wife had persuaded him to try his fortune
in the Western Country. The price of his hundred
acres here would purchase a thousand there, and the man
being very gross and ignorant, and withall, quite a
simpleton
,
found no difficulty in perceiving that a thousand
are ten times more than an hundred. He was not aware
that a rood of ground upon Schuylkill is ten fold better
than an acre on the Tenessee.
The woman turned out to be an artful profligate.
Having sold his ground and gotten his money, he placed
it in her keeping, and she, to enjoy it with the more
security
,
ran away to the city; leaving him to prosecute
his journey to Kentucky, moneyless and alone.
Sometime
after, Mr. Althorpe and I were at the play, when
he pointed out to me a groupe of females in an upper box,
one of whom was no other than Betty Laurence. It
was not easy to recognize, in her present gaudy trim,
all flaunting with ribbons and shining with trinkets, the
same Betty who used to deal out pecks of potatoes and
superintend her basket of eantilopes in the Jersey
market
,
in paste-board bonnet and linsey petticoat. Her
companions were of the infamous class. If Arthur
were still in the city, there is no doubt that the mother
and son might renew the ancient terms of their
acquaintance
.
The old man, thus robbed and betrayed, sought
consolation
in the bottle, of which he had been at all times
overfond. He wandered from one tavern to another
till his credit was exhausted, and then was sent to jail,
where, I believe, he is likely to continue till his death.
Such, my friend, is the history of the Mervyns.
What proof, said I, have you of the immoral conduct
of the son? of his mistreatment of his mother, and
his elopement with his father's horse and money?
I have no proof but the unanimous report of Mervyn's
neighbors. Respectable and honest men have affirmed, in
my hearing, that they have been present when the boy
treated his mother in the way that I have described. I
was, besides, once in company with the old man, and
heard him bitterly inveigh against his son, and charge
him with the fact of stealing his horse and money. I
well remember that tears rolled from his eyes while
talking on the subject. As to his being seen in the
city the next day after his elopement, dressed in a most
costly and fashionable manner, I can doubt that as little
as the rest, for he that saw him was my father, and you
who know my father, know what credit is due to his
eyes and his word. He had seen Arthur often enough
not to be mistaken, and described his appearance with
great exactness. The boy is extremely handsome,
give him his due; has dark hazle eyes, auburn hair,
and very elegant proportions. His air and gate have
nothing of the clown in them. Take away his jacket
and trowsers, and you have as spruce a fellow as ever
came from dancing-school or college. He is the exact
picture of his mother, and the most perfect contrast to
the sturdy legs, squat figure, and broad, unthinking,
sheepish face of the father that can be imagined. You
B 3
must confess that his appearance here is a pretty strong
proof of the father's assertions. The money given for
these clothes could not possibly have been honestly
acquired
.
It is to be presumed that they were bought
or stolen, for how else should they have been gotten?
What was this lad's personal deportment during the
life of his mother, and before his father's second
marriage
?
Very little to the credit of his heart or his
intellects
.
Being the youngest son, the only one who
at length survived, and having a powerful resemblance
to herself, he became the mother's favorite. His
constitution
was feeble, and he loved to stroll in the woods
more than to plow or sow. This idleness was much
against the father's inclination and judgment; and,
indeed
,
it was the foundation of all his vices. When he
could be prevailed upon to do any thing it was in a
bungling manner, and so as to prove that his thoughts
were fixed on any thing except his business. When his
assistance was wanted he was never to be found at hand.
They were compelled to search for him among the rocks
and bushos, and he was generally discovered sauntering
along the bank of the river, or lolling in the shade of
a tree. This disposition to inactivity and laziness, in
so young a man, was very strange. Persons of his
age are rarely fond of work, but then they are addicted
to company, and sports, and exercises. They ride, or
shoot, or frolic; but this being moped away his time in
solitude, never associated with other young people,
never mounted an horse but when he could not help it,
and never fired a gun or angled for a fish in his life.
Some people supposed him to be half an idiot, or, at
least, not to be in his right mind; and, indeed, his
conduct was so very perverse and singular, that I do
not wonder at those who accounted forit in this way.
But, surely, said I, he had some object of
pursuit
.
Perhaps he was addicted to books.
Far from it. On the contrary, his aversion to school
was as great as his hatred of the plough. He never
could get his lessons or bear the least constraint. He
was so much indulged by his mother at home, that tasks
and discipline of any kind were intolerable. He was
a perpetual truant; till the master one day attempting
to strike him, he ran out of the room and never entered
it more. The mother excused and countenanced his
frowardness, and the foolish father was obligged to give
way. I do not believe he had two month's schooling in
his life.
Perhaps, said I, he preferred studying by
himself
,
and at liberty. I have known boys endowed with
great curiosity and aptitude to learning, who never
could endure set tasks, and spurned at the pedagogue
and his rod.
I have known such likewise, but this was not one of
them. I know not whence he could derive his love of
knowledge or the means of acquiring it. The family
were totally illiterate. The father was a Scotch
peasant
,
whose ignorance was so great that he could not
sign his name. His wife, I believe, could read, and
might sometimes decypher the figures in an almanac,
but that was all. I am apt to think, that the son's
ability was not much greater. You might as well look
for silver platters or marble tables in his house, as for
a book or a pen.
I remember calling at their house one evening in the
winter before last. It was intensely cold; and my
father, who rode with me, having business with
Sawney Mervyn, we stopped a minute at his gave;
and, while the two old men were engaged in
conversation
,
I begged leave to warm myself by the kitchen fire.
Here, in the chimney-corner, seated on a block, I
found Arthur busily engaged in knitting stockings!
I thought this a whimsical employment for a young
active
man. I told him so, for I wanted to put him to
the blush; but he smiled in my face, and answered,
without the least discomposure, just as whimsical a
business
for a young active woman. Pray, did you never
knit a stocking?
Yes; but that was from necessity. Were I of a
different sex, or did I possess the strength of a man, I
should rather work in my field or study my book.
Rejoice that you are a woman, then, and are at
liberty to pursue that which costs least labor and
demands
most skill. You see, though a man, I use your
privilege, and prefer knitting yarn to threshing my
brain with a book or the barn-floor with a flail.
I wonder, said I contemptuously, you do not
put on the petticoat as well as handle the needle.
Do not wonder, he replied: it is because I hate a
petticoat incumbrance as much as I love warm feet.
Look there (offering the stocking to my inspection) is
it not well done?
I did not touch it, but sneeringly said, excellent!
I wonder you do not apprentice yourself to a taylor.
He looked at me with an air of ridiculous simplicity
and said, how prone the woman is to
wonder
. You call
the work excellent, and yet
wonder
that I do not make
myself a slave to improve my skill! Did you learn
needle-work from seven year's squatting on a taylor's
board? Had you come to me, I would have taught
you in a day.
I was taught at school.
And paid your instructor?
To be sure.
'Twas liberty and money, thrown away. Send
your sister, if you have one, to me, and I will teach
her without either rod or wages. Will you?
You have an old and a violent antipathy, I believe,
to any thing like a school.
True. It was early and violent. Had not you?
No. I went to school with pleasure; for I thought
to read and write were accomplishments of some
value
.
Indeed? Then I misunderstood you just now. I
thought you said, that, had you the strength of a man,
you should prefer the plough and the book to the
needle
.
Whence, supposing you a female, I inferred that
you had a woman's love for the needle and a fool's
hatred
of books.
My father calling me from without, I now made a
motion to go. Stay, continued he with great
earnestness
,
throwing aside his knitting apparatus, and
beginning in great haste to pull off his stockings,
Draw these stockings over your shoes. They will
save your feet from the snow while walking to your
horse.
Half angry, and half laughing, I declined the offer.
He had drawn them off, however, and holding them
in his hand, be persuaded, said he; only lift your
feet, and I will slip them on in a trice.
Finding me positive in my refusal, he dropped the
stockings; and, without more ado, caught me up in
his arms, rushed out of the room, and, running
barefoot
through the snow, set me fairly on my horse. All
was done in a moment, and before I had time to reflect
on his intentions. He then seized my hand, and, kissing
it with great fervor, exclaimed, a thousand thanks to
you for not accepting my stockings. You have thereby
saved yourself and me the time and toil of
drawing
on and drawing off. Since you have taught me to
wonder, let me practice the lesson in wondering at
your folly, in wearing worsted shoes and silk stockings
at a season like this. Take my counsel, and turn your
silk to worsted and your worsted to leather. Then
may you hope for warm feet and dry. What! Leave
the gate without a blessing on your counsellor?
I spurred my horse into a gallop, glad to escape from
so strange a being. I could give you many instances
of behaviour equally singular, and which betrayed a
mixture of shrewdness and folly, of kindness and
impudence
,
which justified, perhaps, the common notion
that his intellects were unsound. Nothing was more
remarkable than his impenetrability to ridicule and
censure
.
You might revile him for hours, and he would
listen to you with invincible composure. To awaken
anger or shame in him was impossible. He would
answer
,
but in such a way as to show him totally unaware
of your true meaning. He would afterwards talk to
you with all the smiling affability and freedom of an
old friend. Every one despised him for his idleness
and folly, no less conspicuous in his words than his
actions
;
but no one feared him, and few were angry with
him, till after the detection of his commerce with
Betty, and his inhuman treatment of his father.
Have you good reasons for supposing him to have
been illicitly connected with that girl?
Yes. Such as cannot be discredited. It would not
be proper for me to state these proofs. Nay, he never
denied it. When reminded, on one occasion, of the
inference which every impartial person would draw
from appearances, he acknowledged, with his usual
placid effrontery, that the inference was unavoidable.
He even mentioned other concurring and contemporary
incidents, which had eluded the observation of his
censurer
,
and which added still more force to the
conclusion
.
He was studious to palliate the vices of this
woman
as long as he was her only paramour; but after
her marriage with his father, the tone was changed.
He confessed that she was tidy, notable, industrious;
but, then, she was a prostitute. When charged with
being instrumental in making her such, and when his
companions dwelt upon the depravity of reviling her
for vices which she owed to him: True, he would
say, there is depravity and folly in the conduct you
describe. Make me out, if you please, to be a villain.
What then? I was talking not of myself, but of
Betty. Still this woman is a prostitute. If it were
I that made her such, with more confidence may I make
the charge. But think not that I blame Betty. Place
me in her situation, and I should have acted just so.
I should have formed just such notions of my interest,
and pursued it by the same means. Still, say I, I
would fain have a different woman for my father's wife,
and the mistress of this family.
CHAPTER III.
This
conversation was interrupted by a messenger
from my wife, who desired my return immediately. I
had some hopes of meeting with Mervyn, some days
having now elapsed since his parting from us, and not
being conscious of any extraordinary motives for
delay
.
It was Wortley, however, and not Mervyn,
to whom I was called.
My friend came to share with me his suspicions and
inquietudes respecting Welbeck and Mervyn. An
accident
had newly happened which had awakened these
suspicions afresh. He desired a patient audience while
he explained them to me. These were his words.
To-day a person presented me a letter from a
mercantile
friend at Baltimore. I easily discerned the
bearer to be a sea captain. He was a man of sensible
and pleasing aspect, and was recommended to my
friendship and counsel in the letter which he brought.
The letter stated, that a man, by name Amos Watson,
by profession a mariner, and a resident at Baltimore,
had disappeared in the summer of last year, in a
mysterious
and incomprehensible manner. He was known
to have arrived in this city from Jamaica, and to have
intended an immediate journey to his family, who lived
at Baltimore; but he never arrived there, and no trace
of his existence has since been discovered. The
bearer
had come to investigate, if possible, the secret of
his fate, and I was earnestly intreated to afford him
all the assistance and advice in my power, in the
prosecution
of his search. I expressed my willingness to
serve the stranger, whose name was Williams; and,
after offering him entertainment at my house, which
was thankfully accepted, he proceeded to unfold to me
the particulars of this affair. His story was this.
On the 20th of last June, I arrived, said he, from the
West-Indies, in company with captain Watson. I
commanded the ship in which he came as a passenger,
his own ship being taken and confiscated by the
English
.
We had long lived in habits of strict friendship,
and I loved him for his own sake, as well as because he
had married my sister. We landed in the morning,
and went to dine with Mr. Keysler, since dead, but who
then lived in Water-street. He was extremely
anxious
to visit his family, and having a few commissions to
perform in the city, which would not demand more
than a couple of hours, he determined to set out next
morning in the stage. Meanwhile, I had
engagements
which required me to repair with the utmost
expedition
to New-York. I was scarcely less anxious
than my brother to reach Baltimore, where my friends
also reside, but there was an absolute necessity of
going
eastward. I expected, however, to return hither
in three days, and then to follow Watson home.
Shortly after dinner we parted; he to execute his
commissions
,
and I to embark in the mail-stage.
In the time prefixed I returned. I arrived early in
the morning, and prepared to depart again at noon.
Meanwhile, I called at Keysler's. This is an old
acquaintance
of Watson's and mine; and, in the course
of talk, he expressed some surprize that Watson had
so precipitately deserted his house. I stated the
necessity
there was for Watson's immediate departure
southward
, and added, that no doubt my brother had
explained this necessity.
Why, said Keysler, it is true, Captain Watson
mentioned
his intention of leaving town early next day;
but then he gave me reason to expect that he would
sup and lodge with me that night, whereas he has not
made his appearance since. Beside his trunk was
brought to my house. This, no doubt, he intended
to carry home with him, but here it remains still. It
is not likely that in the hurry of departure his baggage
was forgotten. Hence, I inferred that he was still in
town, and have been puzzling myself these three days
with conjectures, as to what is become of him. What
surprizes me more is, that, on enquiring among the
few friends which he has in this city, I find them as
ignorant of his motions as myself. I have not, indeed,
been wholly without apprehensions that some accident
or other has befallen him.
I was not a little alarmed by this intimation. I
went myself, agreeably to Keysler's directions, to
Watson's
friends, and made anxious enquiries, but none of
them had seen my brother since his arrival. I
endeavored
to recollect the commissions which he designed
to execute, and, if possible, to trace him to the spot
where he last appeared. He had several packets to
deliver
,
one of which was addressed to Walter
Thetford
.
Him, after some enquiry, I found out, but
unluckily
he chanced to be in the country. I found, by
questioning a clerk who transacted his business in his
absence, that a person, who answered the minute
description
which I gave of Watson, had been there on the
day on which I parted with him, and had left papers
relative
to the capture of one of Thetford's vessels by the
English. This was the sum of the information he
was able to afford me.
I then applied to three merchants for whom my
brother
had letters. They all acknowledged the receipt
of these letters, but they were delivered through the
medium of the post-office.
I was extremely anxious to reach home. Urgent
engagements compelled me to go on without delay. I
had already exhausted all the means of enquiry within
C
my reach, and was obliged to acquiesce in the belief,
that Watson had proceeded homeward at the time
appointed
,
and left, by forgetfulness or accident, his trunk
behind him. On examining the books kept at the
stage offices, his name no where appeared, and no
conveyance
by water had occurred during the last week.
Still the only conjecture I could form, was that he had
gone homeward.
Arriving at Baltimore, I found that Watson had not
yet made his appearance. His wife produced a letter,
which, by the post mark, appeared to have been put
into
the office at Philadelphia, on the morning after our
arrival, and on which he had designed to commence his
journey. This letter had been written by my brother,
in my presence, but I had dissuaded him from sending
it, since the same coach that should bear the letter, was
likewise to carry himself. I had seen him put it
unwafered
in his pocket-book, but this letter, unaltered in
any part, and containing money which he had at first
intended to enclose in it, was now conveyed to his wife's
hand. In this letter he mentioned his design of setting
out for Baltimore, on the
twenty-first
, yet, on that day
the letter itself had been put into the office.
We hoped that a short time would clear up this
mystery
,
and bring the fugitive home, but from that day till
the present, no atom of intelligence has been received
concerning him. The yellow-fever, which quickly
followed
,
in this city, and my own engagements, have
hindered
me, till now, from coming hither and resuming
the search.
My brother was one of the most excellent of men.
His wife loved him to distraction, and, together with
his children, depended for subsistence upon his efforts.
You will not, therefore, be surprized that his
disappearance
excited, in us, the deepest consternation and
distress
;
but I have other, and peculiar reasons for
wishing
to know his fate. I gave him several bills of
exchange
on merchants of Baltimore, which I had
received
in payment of my cargo, in order that they might, as
soon as possible, be presented and accepted. These
have disappeared with the bearer. There is likewise
another circumstance that makes his existence of no
small value.
There is an English family, who formerly resided in
Jamaica, and possessed an estate of great value, but
who, for some years, have lived in the neighborhood of
Baltimore. The head of this family died a year ago,
and left a widow and three daughters. The lady tho't
it eligible to sell her husband's property in Jamaica, the
Island becoming hourly more exposed to the chances of
war and revolution, and transfer it to the United States,
where she purposes henceforth to reside. Watson had
been her husband's friend, and his probity and
disinterestedness
being well known, she entrusted him with
legal
powers to sell this estate. This commission was
punctually performed, and the purchase money was
received
.
In order to confer on it the utmost possible
security
,
he rolled up four bills of exchange, drawn upon
opulent merchants of London, in a thin sheet of lead,
and depositing this roll in a leathern girdle, fastened it
round his waist, and under his clothes; a second set he
gave to me, and a third he dispatched to Mr. Keysler, by
a vessel which sailed a few days before him. On our
arrival
in this city, we found that Keysler had received
those transmitted to him, and which he had been
charged
to keep till our arrival. They were now produced,
and, together with those which I had carried, were
delivered
to Watson. By him they were joined to those
in the girdle, which he still wore, conceiving this method
of conveyance to be safer than any other, and, at the
same time, imagining it needless, in so short a journey
as remained to be performed, to resort to other
expedients
.
The sum which he thus bore about him, was no less
than ten thousand pounds sterling. It constituted the
whole patrimony of a worthy and excellent family, and
the loss of it reduces them to beggary. It is gone with
Watson, and whither Watson has gone, it is impossible
even to guess.
C 2
You may now easily conceive, Sir, the dreadful
disasters
which may be connected with this man's fate, and
with what immeasurable anxiety his family and friends
have regarded his disappearance. That he is alive, can
scarcely be believed, for in what situation could he be
placed in which he would not be able and willing to
communicate some tidings of his fate to his family?
Our grief has been unspeakably aggravated by the
suspicions which Mrs. Maurice and her friends have
allowed
themselves to admit. They do not scruple to
insinuate
,
that Watson, tempted by so great a prize, has
secretly embarked for England, in order to obtain
payment
for these bills, and retain the money for his own
use.
No man was more impatient of poverty than Watson,
but no man's honesty was more inflexible. He
murmured
at the destiny that compelled him to sacrifice his
ease, and risk his life upon the ocean in order to procure
the means of subsistence; and all the property which
he had spent the best part of his life in collecting, had
just been ravished away from him by the English; but
if he had yielded to this temptation at any time, it would
have been on receiving these bills at Jamaica. Instead
of coming hither, it would have been infinitely more
easy and convenient to have embarked directly for
London
;
but none, who thoroughly knew him, can, for a
moment
,
harbor a suspicion of his truth.
If he be dead, and if the bills are not to be recovered,
yet, to ascertain this, will, at last, serve to vindicate his
character. As long as his fate is unknown, his fame
will be loaded with the most flagrant imputations, and
if these bills be ever paid in London these imputations
will appear to be justified. If he has been robbed, the
robber will make haste to secure the payment, and the
Maurices may not unreasonably conclude that the
robber was Watson himself. Many other particulars
were added by the stranger, to show the extent of the
evils flowing from the death of his brother, and the loss
of the papers which he carried with him.
I was greatly at a loss, continued Wortley, what
directions or advice to afford this man. Keysler, as
you know, died early of the pestilence; but Keysler
was the only resident in this city with whom Williams
had any acquaintance. On mentioning the propriety of
preventing the sale of these bills in America, by some
public notice, he told me that this caution had been
early taken; and I now remembered seeing the
advertisement
,
in which the bills had been represented as
having
been lost or stolen in this city, and a reward of a
thousand dollars was offered to any one who should
restore
them. This caution had been published in
September
,
in all the trading towns from Portsmouth to
Savannah, but had produced no satisfaction.
I accompanied Williams to the mayor's office, in
hopes of finding in the records of his proceedings, during
the last six months, sometraces of Watson, but neither
these records nor the memory of the magistrate,
afforded
us any satisfaction. Watson's friends had drawn up,
likewise, a description of the person and dress of the
fugitive, an account of the incidents attending his
disappearance
,
and of the papers which he had in his
possession
,
with the manner in which these papers had been
secured. These had been already published in the
Southern newspapers, and have been just re-printed in
our own. As the former notice had availed nothing,
this second expedient was thought necessary to be
employed
.
After some reflection, it occurred to me that it might
be proper to renew the attempt which Williams had
made to trace the footsteps of his friend to the moment
of his final disappearance. He had pursued Watson
to Thetford's, but Thetford himself had not been seen,
and he had been contented with the vague information
of his clerk. Thetford and his family, including his
clerk, had perished, and it seemed as if this source of
information was dried up. It was possible, however,
that old Thetford might have some knowledge of his
nephew's transactions, by which some light might
chance to be thrown upon this obscurity. I therefore
C 3
called on him, but found him utterly unable to afford
me the light that I wished. My mention of the packet
which Watson had brought to Thetford, containing
documents respecting the capture of a certain ship,
reminded him of the injuries which he had received from
Welbeck, and excited him to renew his menaces and
imputations on that wretch. Having somewhat
exhausted
this rhetoric, he proceeded to tell me what
connection
there was between the remembrance of his
injuries
and the capture of this vessel.
This vessel and its cargo were, in fact, the property
of Welbeck. They had been sent to a good market and
had been secured by an adequate insurance. The value
of this ship and cargo, and the validity of the policy he
had taken care to ascertain by means of his two nephews,
one of whom had gone out supercargo. This had
formed
his inducement to lend his three notes to Welbeck,
in exchange for three other notes, the whole amount of
which included the
equitable interest
of
five per cent. per
month
on his own loan. For the payment of these notes,
he by no means relied, as the world foolishly imagined,
on the seeming opulence and secret funds of Welbeck.
These were illusions too gross to have any influence on
him. He was too old a bird to be decoyed into the net
by
such
chaff. No; his nephew, the supercargo,
would of course receive the produce of the voyage, and
so much of this produce as would pay his debt. He had
procured the owner's authority to intercept its passage
from the pocket of his nephew to that of
Welbeck
.
In case of loss, he had obtained a similar
security
upon the policy. Jamieson's proceedings had been
the same with his own, and no affair in which he had
ever engaged, had appeared to be more free from hazard
than this. Their calculations, however though
plausible
,
were defeated. The ship was taken and
condemned
,
for a cause which rendered the insurance
ineffectual
.
I bestowed no time in reflecting on this tissue of
extortions
and frauds, and on that course of events which
so often disconcerts the stratagems of cunning. The
names of Welbeck and Watson were thus associated
together, and filled my thoughts with restlessness and
suspicion. Welbeck was capable of any wickedness.
It was possible an interview had happened between
these men, and that the fugitive had been someway
instrumental
in Watson's fate. These thoughts were
mentioned to Williams, whom the name of Welbeck
threw into the utmost perturbation. On finding that
one of this name had dwelt in this city, and, that he
had proved a villain, he instantly admitted the most
dreary forebodings.
I have heard, said Williams, the history of this
Welbeck
a score of times from my brother. There formerly
subsisted a very intimate connection between them.
My brother had conferred upon one whom he thought
honest, innumerable benefit, but all his benefits had
been repaid by the blackest treachery. Welbeck's
character
and guilt had often been made the subject of
talk between us, but, on these occasions, my brother's
placid and patient temper forsook him. His grief for
the calamities which had sprung from this man, and his
desire of revenge, burst all bounds, and transported him
to a pitch of temporary frenzy. I often enquired in
what manner he intended to act, if a meeting should
take place between them. He answered, that doubtless
he should act like a maniac, in defiance of his sober
principles, and of the duty which he owed his family.
What, said I, would you stab or pistol him?
No! I was not born for an assassin. I would
upbraid
him in such terms as the furious moment might
suggest, and then challenge him to a meeting, from
which either he or I should not part with life. I
would allow time for him to make his peace with
Heaven, and for me to blast his reputatien upon earth,
and to make such provision for my possible death, as
duty and discretion would prescribe.
Now, nothing is more probable than that Welbeck
and my brother have met. Thetford would of course
mention his name and interest in the captured ships, and
hence the residence of this detested being in this city,
would be made known. Their meeting could not take
place without some dreadful consequence. I am
fearful
that to that meeting we must inpute the
disappearance
of my brother.
CHAPTER IV.
Here
was new light thrown upon the character of
Welbeck, and new food administered to my suspicions.
No conclusion could be more plausible than that which
Williams had drawn; but how should it be rendered
certain? Walter Thetford, or some of his family, had
possibly been witnesses of something, which, added to
our previous knowledge, might strengthen or prolong
that clue, one end of which seemed now to be put into
our hands; but Thetford's father-in-law was the only
one of his family who, by seasonable flight from the city,
had escaped the pestilence. To him, who still resided
in the country, I repaired with all speed, accompanied
by Williams.
The old man being reminded, by a variety of
circumstances
,
of the incidents of that eventful period, was, at
length, enabled to relate that he had been present at
the meeting which took place between Watson and
his son Walter, when certain packets were delivered by
the former, relative, as he quickly understood, to the
condemnation of a ship in which Thomas Thetford had
gone supercargo. He had noticed some emotion of the
stranger, occasioned by his son's mentioning the
concern
which Welbeck had in the vessel. He likewise
remembered the stranger's declaring his intention of
visiting Welbeck, and requesting Walter to afford him
directions to his house.
Next morning at the breakfast table, continued the
old man, I adverted to yesterday's incidents, and asked
my son how Welbeck had borne the news of the loss of
his ship. He bore it, says Walter, as a man of his
wealth ought to bear so trivial a loss. But there was
something very strange in his behaviour, says my son,
when I mentioned the name of the captain who brought
the papers; and when I mentioned the captain's design
of paying him a visit, he stared upon me, for a moment,
as if he were frighted out of his wits, and then,
snatching
up his hat, ran furiously out of the house. This
was all my son said upon that occasion; but, as I have
since heard, it was on that very night, that Welbeck
absconded from his creditors.
I have this moment returned from this interview
with old Thetford. I come to you, because I thought
it possible that Mervyn, agreeably to your expectations,
had returned, and I wanted to see the lad once more.
My suspicions with regard to him have been confirmed,
and a warrant was this day issued for apprehending him
as Welbeck's accomplice.
I was startled by this news. My friend, said I, be
cantious
how you act, I beseech you. You know not in
what evils you may involve the innocent. Mervyn I know
to be blameless; but Welbeck is indeed, a villain. The
latter I shall not be sorry to see brought to justice, but
the former, instead of meriting punishment is entitled
forewards.
So you believe, on the mere assertion of the boy,
perhaps, his plausible lies might produce the same
effect
upon me, but I must stay till he thinks proper to
exert his skill. The suspicions to which he is exposed
will not easily be obviated; but if he has any thing to
say in his defence, his judicial examination will afford
him the suitable opportunity. Why are you so much
afraid to subject his innocence to this test? It was
not till you heard his tale, that your own suspicions
were removed. Allow me the same privilege of
unbelief
.
But you do me wrong, in deeming me the cause of
his apprehension. It is Jamieson and Thetford's work,
and they have not proceeded on shadowy surmises and
the impulses of mere revenge. Facts have come to
light of which you are wholly unaware, and which,
when known to you, will conquer even your incredulity
as to the guilt of Mervyn.
Facts? Let me know them, I beseech you. If
Mervyn
has deceived me, there is an end to my confidence
in human nature. All limits to dissimulation, and all
distinctions between vice and virtue will be effaced.
No man's word, no force of collateral evidence shall
weigh with me an hair.
It was time, replied my friend, that your confidence
in smooth features and fluent accents should have ended
long ago. Till I gained from my present profession, some
knowledge of the world, a knowledge which was not
gained in a moment, and has not cost a trifle, I was
equally wise in my own conceit; and, in order to decide
upon the truth of any one's pretensions, needed only a
clear view of his face and a distinct hearing of his words.
My folly, in that respect, was only to be cured,
however
,
by my own experience, and I suppose your
credulity
will yield to no other remedy. These are the
facts.
Mrs. Wentworth, the proprietor of the house in
which Welbeck lived, has furnished some intelligence
respecting Mervyn, whose truth cannot be doubted,
and which furnishes the strongest evidence of a
conspiracy
between this lad and his employer. It seems,
that, some years since, a nephew of this lady left his
father's family clandestinely, and has not been heard of
since. This nephew was intended to inherit her
fortunes
,
and her anxieties and enquiries respecting him
have been endless and incessant. These, however,
have been fruitless. Welbeck, knowing these
circumstances
,
and being desirous of substituting a girl whom
he had moulded for his purpose, in place of the lost
youth, in the affections of the lady while living, and
in her testament when dead, endeavored to persuade
her that the youth had died in some foreign country.
For this end, Mervyn was to personate a kinsman of
Welbeck who had just arrived from Europe, and who
had been a witness of her nephew's death. A story
was, no doubt, to be contrived, where truth should be
copied with the most exquisite dexterity, and the lady,
being prevailed upon to believe the story, the way was
cleared for accomplishing the remainder of the plot.
In due time, and after the lady's mind had been
artfully
prepared by Welbeck, the pupil made his appearance;
and, in a conversation full of studied ambiguities,
assured
the lady, that her nephew was dead. For the
present he declined relating the particulars of his death,
and displayed a constancy and intrepidity in resisting
her intreaties, that would have been admirable in a
better cause. Before she had time to fathom this
painful mystery, Welbeck's frauds were in danger of
detection, and he and his pupil suddenly disappeared.
While the plot was going forward, there occurred an
incident which the plotters had not foreseen or
precluded
,
and which possibly might have created some
confusion
or impediment in their designs. A bundle was
found one night in the street, consisting of some coarse
clothes, and containing, in the midst of it, the
miniature
portrait of Mrs. Wentworth's nephew. It fell
into the hands of one of that lady's friends, who
immediately
dispatched the bundle to her. Mervyn, in
his interview with this lady, spied the portrait on the
mantle-piece. Led by some freak of fancy, or some
web of artifice, he introduced the talk respecting her
nephew, by boldly claiming it as his; but, when the
mode in which it had been found was mentioned, he
was disconcented and confounded, and precipitately
withdrew.
This conduct, and the subsequent flight of the lad,
afforded ground enough to question the truth of his
intelligence respecting her nephew; but it has since
been confuted, in a letter just received from her brother
in England. In this letter she is informed, that her
nephew had been seen by one who knew him well, in
charleston; that some intercourse took place between
the youth and the bearer of the news, in the course of
which the latter had persuaded the nephew to return to
his family, and that the youth had given some tokens
of compliance. The letter-writer, who was father to
the fugitive, had written to certain friends at
Charleston
,
intreating them to use their influence with the
runaway to the same end, and, at any rate, to cherish
and protect him. Thus, I hope you will admit that
the duplicity of Mervyn is demonstrated.
The facts which you have mentioned, said I, after
some pause, partly correspond with Mervyn's story;
but the last particular is irreconcileably repugnant to
it. Now, for the first time, I begin to feel that my
confidence is shaken. I feel my mind bewildered and
distracted by the multitude of new discoveries which
have just taken place. I want time to revolve them
slowly, to weigh them accurately, and to estimate their
consequences fully. I am afraid to speak; fearing,
that, in the present trouble of my thoughts, I may
say something which I may afterwards regret. I
want a counsellor; but you, Wortley, are unfit for
the office. Your judgment is unfurnished with the
same materials; your sufferings have soured your
humanity
and biassed your candor. The only one
qualified
to divide with me these cares, and aid in selecting
the best mode of action, is my wife. She is mistress of
Mervyn's history; an observer of his conduct during
his abode with us; and is hindered, by her education
and temper, from deviating into rigor and malevolence.
Will you pardon me, therefore, if I defer commenting
on your narrative till I have had an opportunity of
reviewing
it and comparing it with my knowledge of the
lad, collected from himself and from my own
observation
.
Wortley could not but admit the justice of my
request
,
and after some desultory conversation we parted.
I hastened to communicate to my wife the various
intelligence
which I had lately received. Mrs. Althorpe's
portrait of the mervyns contained lineaments which
D
the summary detail of Arthur did not enable us fully
to comprehend. The treatment which the youth is said
to have given to his father; the illicit commerce that
subsisted between him and his father's wife; the
pillage
of money and his father's horse, but ill accorded
with the tale which we had heard, and disquieted our
minds with doubts, though far from dictating our
belief
.
What, however, more deeply absorbed our attention,
was the testimony of Williams and of Mrs.
Wentworth
.
That which was mysterious and inscrutable to
Wortley and the friends of Watson, was luminous to
us. The coincidence between the vague hints,
labcriously
collected by these enquirers, and the narrative
of Mervyn, afforded the most cogent attestation of the
truth of that narrative.
Watson had vanished from all eyes, but the spot
where rested his remains was known to us. The girdie
spoken of by Williams, would not be suspected to exist
by his murderer. It was unmolested, and was
doubtless
buried with him. That which was so earnestly
sought, and which constituted the subsistence of the
Maurices, would probably be found adhering to his
body. What conduct was incumbent upon me who
possessed this knowledge?
It was just to restore these bills to their true owner;
but how could this be done without bazardous processes
and tedious disclosures? To whom ought these
disclosures
to be made? By what authority or agency
could these half-decayed limbs be dug up, and the lost
treasure be taken from amidst the horrible corruption
in which it was immersed?
This ought not to be the act of a single individual.
This act would entangle him in a maze of perils and
suspicions, of concealments and evasions, from which
he could not hope to escape with his reputation
inviolate
.
The proper method was through the agency of
the law. It is to this that Mervyn must submit his
conduct
.
The story which he told to me he must tell to
the world. Suspicions have fixed themselves upon
him, which allow him not the privilege of silence and
obscurity. While he continued unknown and
unthought
of, the publication of his story would only
give unnecessary birth to dangers; but now dangers
are incurred which it may probably contribute to lessen,
if not to remove.
Meanwhile the return of Mervyn to the city was
anxiously expected. Day after day passed and no
tidings
were received. I had business of an urgent
nature
which required my presence in Jersey, but which,
in the daily expectation of the return of my young
friend, I postponed a week longer than rigid discretion
allowed. At length I was obliged to comply with the
exigence, and left the city, but made such
arrangements
that I should be apprized by my wife of
Mervyn's
return with all practicable expedition.
These arrangements were superfluous, for my
business
was dispatched, and my absence at an end, before
the youth had given us any tokens of his approach. I
now remembered the warnings of Wortley, and his
assertions
that Mervyn had withdrawn himself forever
from our view. The event had hitherto unwelcomely
coincided with these predictions, and a thousand doubts
and misgivings were awakened.
One evening, while preparing to shake off gloomy
thoughts by a visit to a friend, some one knocked at
my door, and left a billet containing these words:
Dr. Stevens is requested to come immediately to
the Debtors' Apartments in Prune Street
.
This billet was without signature. The hand writing
was unknown, and the precipitate departure of the
bearer
,
left me wholly at a loss with respect to the person
of the writer, or the end for which my presence was
required. This uncertainty only hastened my
compliance
with the summons.
The evening was approachinga time when the
prison
doors are accustomed to be shut and strangers to
be excluded. This furnished an additional reason for
D 2
dispatch. As I walked swiftly along, I revolved the
possible motives that might have prompted this
message
.
A conjecture was soon formed, which led to
apprehension and inquietude.
One of my friends, by name Carlton, was
embarrassed
with debts which he was unable to discharge.
He had lately been menaced with arrest, by a creditor
not accustomed to remit any of his claims. I dreaded
that this catastrophe had now happened, and called to
mind the anguish with which this untoward incident
would overwhelm his family. I knew his incapacity
to take away the claim of his creditor by payment, or
to soothe him into clemency by supplication.
So prone is the human mind to create for itself
distress
,
that I was not aware of the uncertainty of this
evil till I arrived at the prison. I checked myself at
the moment when I opened my lips to utter the name of
my friend, and was admitted without particular
enquiries
.
I supposed that he by whom I had been
summoned
hither would meet me in the common room.
The apartment was filled with pale faces and
withered
forms. The marks of negligence and poverty were
visible in all; but few betrayed, in their features or
gestures, any symptoms of concern on account of their
condition. Ferocious gaiety, or stupid indifference,
seemed to sit upon every brow. The vapour from an
heated stove, mingled with the fumes of beer and
tallow
that were spilled upon it, and with the tainted
breath of so promiscuous a crowd, loaded the stagnant
atmosphere. At my first transition from the cold and
pure air without, to this noxious element, I found it
difficult to breathe. A moment, however, reconciled
me to my situation, and I looked anxiously round to
discover some face which I knew.
Almost every mouth was furnished with a segar, and
every hand with a glass of porter. Conversation,
carried
on with much emphasis of tone and gesture, was
not wanting. Sundry groupes, in different corners,
were beguiling the tedious hours at whist. Others,
unemployed, were strolling to and fro, and testified
their vacancy of thought and care by humming or
whistling a tune.
I fostered the hope, that my prognostics had
deceived
me. This hope was strengthened by reflecting that
the billet received was written in a different hand from
that of my friend. Meanwhile I continued my search.
Seated on a bench, silent and aloof from the crowd,
his eyes fixed upon the floor, and his face half
concealed
by his hand, a form was at length discovered which
verified all my conjectures and fears. Carlton was he.
My heart drooped, and my tongue faultered, at this
sight. I surveyed him for some minutes in silence.
At length, approaching the bench on which he sat, I
touched his hand and awakened him from his reverie.
He looked up. A momentary gleam of joy and
surprize
was succeeded by a gloom deeper than before.
It was plain that my friend needed consolation. He
was governed by an exquisite sensibility to disgrace.
He was impatient of constraint. He shrunk, with
fastidious abhorrence, from the contact of the vulgar
and the profligate. His constitution was declicate and
feeble. Impure airs, restraint from exercise, unusual
aliment, unwholesome or incommodious
accommodations
,
and perturbed thoughts, were, at any time,
sufficient
to generate disease and to deprive him of life.
To these evils he was now subjected. He had no
money wherewith to purchase food. He had been
dragged hither in the morning. He had not tasted a
a morsel since his entrance. He had not provided a
bed on which to lie; or enquired in what room, or with
what companions, the night was to be spent.
Fortitude was not among my friend's qualities. He
was more prone to shrink from danger than encounter
it, and to yield to the flood rather than sustain it; but
it is just to observe, that his anguish, on the present
occasion, arose not wholly from selfish considerations.
His parents were dead, and two sisters were dependent
on him for support. One of these was nearly of his own age. The other was starcely emerged from
childhood. There was an intellectual as well as a
personal
D 3
resemblance between my friend and his sisters.
They possessed his physical infirmities, his vehement
passions, and refinements of taste; and the misery of
his condition was tenfold increased, by reflecting on
the feelings which would be awakened in them by the
knowledge of his state, and the hardships to which the
loss of his succour would expose them.
CHAPTER V.
It
was not in my power to release my friend by the
payment of his debt; but, by contracting with the
keeper of the prison for his board, I could save him
from famine; and, by suitable exertions, could
procure
him lodging as convenient as the time would admit.
I could promise to console and protect his sisters, and,
by cheerful tones and frequent visits, dispel some part
of the evil which encompassed him.
After the first surprize had subsided, he enquired by
what accident this meeting had been produced.
Conscious
of my incapacity to do him any essential service,
and unwilling to make me a partaker in his miseries, he
had forborne to inform me of his condition.
This assurance was listened to with some wonder.
I showed him the billet. It had not been written by
him. He was a stranger to the penmanship. None
but the attorney and officer were apprized of his fate.
It was obvious to conclude, that this was the
interposition
of some friend, who, knowing my affection for
Carlton, had taken this mysterious method of calling
me to his succour.
Conjectures, as to the author and motives of this
interposition, were suspended by more urgent
considerations
.
I requested an interview with the keeper, and
enquired how Carlton could be best accommodated.
He said, that all his rooms were full but one, which,
in consequence of the dismission of three persons in
the morning, had at present but one ten nt. This
person had lately arrived, was sick, and had with him,
at this time, one of his friends. Carlton might divide
the chamber with this person. No doubt his consent
would be readily given; though this arrangement,
being
the best, must take place whether he consented or
not.
This consent I resolved immediately to seek, and,
for that purpose, desired to be led to the chamber.
The door of the apartment was shut. I knocked for
admission. It was instantly opened, and I entered.
The first person who met my view wasArthur
Mervyn
.
I started with astonishment. Mervyn's countenance
betrayed nothing but satisfaction at the interview.
The traces of fatigue and anxiety gave place to
tenderness
and joy. It readily occurred to me that
Mervyn
was the writer of the note which I had lately
received
.
To meet him within these walls, and at this
time, was the most remote and undesirable of all
contingences
.
The same hour had thus made me
acquainted
with the kindred and unwelcome fate of two beings
whom I most loved.
I had scarcely time to return his embrace, when,
taking my hand, he led me to a bed that stood in one
corner. There was stretched upon it one whom a
second
glance enabled me to call by his name, though I
had never before seen him. The vivid portrait which
Mervyn had drawn was conspicuous in the sunken and
baggard visage before me. This face had, indeed,
proportions and lines which could never be forgotten
or mistaken. Welbeck, when once seen or described,
was easily distinguished from the rest of mankind.
He had stronger motives than other men for abstaining
from guilt, the difficulty of concealment or disguise
being tenfold greater in him than in others, by reason
of the indelible and eye-attracting marks which nature
had set upon him.
He was pallid and emaciated. He did not open his
eyes on my entrance. He seemed to be asleep; but,
before I had time to exchange glances with Mervyn,
or to enquire into the nature of the scene, he awoke.
On seeing me he started, and cast a look of upbraiding
on my companion. The latter comprehended his
emotion
and endeavored to appease him.
This person, said he, is my friend. He is likewise
a physician; and, perceiving your state to require
medical
assistance, I ventured to send for him.
Welbeck replied, in a contemptuous and indignant
tone, thou mistakest my condition, boy. My disease lies
deeper than his scrutiny will ever reach. I had hoped
thou wert gone. Thy importunities are well meant,
but they aggravate my miseries.
He now rose from the bed, and continued, in a firm
and resolute tone, you are intruders into this apartment.
It is mine, and I desire to be left alone.
Mervyn returned, at first, no answer to this address.
He was immersed in perplexity. At length, raising
his eyes from the floor, he said, my intentions are
indeed
honest, and I am grieved that I want the power
of persuasion. To-morrow, perhaps, I may reason
more cogently with your despair, or your present mood
may be changed. To aid my own weakness I will
entreat
the assistance of this friend.
These words roused a new spirit in Welbeck. His
confusion and anger encressed. His tongue faultered
as he exclaimed, good God! what mean you?
Headlong
and rash as you are, you will not share with this
person your knowledge of me? Here he checked
himself
,
conscious that the words he had already uttered
tended to the very end which he dreaded. This
consciousness
,
added to the terror of more ample
disclosures
,
which the simplicity and rectitude of Mervyn
might prompt him to make, chained up his tongue, and
covered him with dismay.
Mervyn was not long in answeringI comprehend
your fears and your wishes. I am bound to tell you the
truth. To this person your story has already been told.
Whatever I have witnessed under your roof, whatever I
have heard from your lips, have been faithfully
disclosed
to him.
The countenance of Welbeck now betrayed a
mixture
of incredulity and horror. For a time his
utterance
was stifled by his complicated feelings.
It cannot be. So enormous a deed is beyond thy
power. Thy qualities are marvellous. Every new act
of thine outstrips the last, and belies the newest
calculations
.
But thisthis perfidy exceedsThis
outrage
upon promises, this violation of faith, this
blindness
to the future is incredible. There he stopped;
while his looks seemed to call upon Mervyn for a
contradiction
of his first assertion.
I know full well how inexpiably stupid or wicked my
act will appear to you, but I will not prevaricate or
lie. I repeat, that every thing is known to him.
Your birth; your early fortunes; the incidents at
Charleston and Wilmington; your treatment of the
brother and sister; your interview with Watson, and
the fatal issue of that interviewI have told him all,
just as it was told to me.
Here the shock that was felt by Welbeck
overpowered
his caution and his strength. He sunk upon the
side of the bed. His air was still incredulous, and he
continued to gaze upon Mervyn. He spoke in a tone
less vehement.
And hast thou then betrayed me? Hast thou shut
every avenue to my return to honor? Am I known to
be a seducer and assassin? To have meditated all
crimes, and to have perpetrated the worst?
Infamy and death are my portion. I know they are
reserved for me; but I did not think to receive them
at thy hands, that under that innocent guise there
lurked a heart treacherous and cruel. But go; leave
me to myself. This stroke has exterminated my
remnant
of hope. Leave me to prepare my neck for the
halter, and my lips for this last, and bitterest cup.
Mervyn struggled with his tears and replied, all this
was foreseen, and all this I was prepared to endure.
My friend and I will withdraw, as you wish; but
to-morrow
I return; not to vindicate my faith or my
humanity
;
not to make you recant your charges, or
forgive
the faults which I seem to have committed, but
to extricate you from your present evil, or to arm you
with fortitude.
So saying he led the way out of the room. I
followed
him in silence. The strangeness and abruptness
of this scene left me no power to assume a part in it.
I looked on with new and indescribable sensations. I
reached the street before my recollection was perfectly
recovered. I then reflected on the purpose that had
led me to Welbeck's chamber. This purpose was yet
unaccomplished. I desired Mervyn to linger a
moment
while I returned into the house. I once more
enquired
for the keeper, and told him I should leave to
him the province of acquainting Welbeck with the
necessity
of sharing his apartment with a stranger. I
speedily rejoined Mervyn in the street.
I lost no time in requiring an explanation of the
scene that I had witnessed. How became you once
more the companion of Welbeck? Why did you not
inform me by letter of your arrival at Malverton, and
of what occurred during your absence? What is the
fate of Mr. Hadwin and of Wallace?
Alas! said he, I perceive, that, though I have
written
,
you have never received my letters. The tale of
what has occurred since we parted is long and various.
I am not only willing but eager to communicate the
story, but this is no suitable place. Have patience till
we reach your house. I have involved myself in
perils
and embarrassments from which I depend upon
your counsel and aid to release me.
I had scarcely reached my own door, when I was
overtaken by a servant, whom I knew to belong to the
family in which Carlton and his sisters resided. Her
message, therefore, was readily guessed. She came,
as I expected, to enquire for my friend, who had left
his home in the morning with a stranger, and had not
yet returned. His absence had occasioned some
inquietude
,
and his sister had sent this message to me, to
procure what information respecting the cause of his
detention I was able to give.
My perplexity hindered me, for some time, from
answering
.
I was willing to communicate the painful
truth with my own month. I saw the necessity of
putting
an end to her suspence, and of preventing the
news from reaching her with fallacious aggravations or
at an unseasonable time.
I told the messenger, that I had just parted with
Mr. Carlton, that he was well, and that I would
speedily come and acquaint his sister with the cause of
his absence.
Though burning with curiosity respecting Mervyn
and Welbeck, I readily postponed its gratification till
my visit to Miss Carlton was performed. I had rarely
seen this lady; my friendship for her brother, though
ardent, having been lately formed, and chiefly matured
by interviews at my house. I had designed to
introduce
her to my wife, but various accidents had hindered
the execution of my purpose. Now consolation and
counsel was more needed than ever, and delay or
reluctance
in bestowing it would have been, in an high
degree, unpardonable.
I therefore parted with Mervyn, requesting him to
await my return, and promising to perform the
engagement
which compelled me to leave him with the utmost
dispatch. On entering Miss Carlton's apartment, I
assumed an air of as much tranqillity as possible. I
found the lady seated at a desk, with pen in hand and
parchment before her. She greeted me with
affectionate
dignity, and caught from my countenance that
cheerfulness of which on my entrance she was
destitute
.
You come, said she, to inform me what has made
my brother a truant to-day. Till your message was
received I was somewhat anxious. This day he usually
spends in rambling through the fields, but so bleak and
stormy an atmosphere I suppose would prevent his
excursion
.
I pray, sir, what is it detains him?
To conquer my embarrassment, and introduce the
subject by indirect and cautious means, I eluded her
question, and casting an eye at the parchment, how
now? said I; this is strange employment for a lady.
I knew that my friend pursued this trade, and lived by
binding fast the bargains which others made, but I
knew not that the pen was ever usurped by his sister.
The usurpation was prompted by necessity. My
brother's impatient temper and delicate frame unfitted
him for this trade. He pursued it with no less
reluctance
than diligence, devoting to the task three nights
in the week and the whole of each day. It would long
ago have killed him, if I had not bethought myself of
sharing his tasks. The pen was irksome and toilsome
at first, but use has made it easy, and far more eligible
than the needle, which was formerly my only tool.
This arrangement affords my brother opportunities
of exercise and recreation, without diminishing our
profits; and my time, though not less constantly, is
more agreeably, as well as more lucratively, employed
than formerly.
I admire your reasoning. By this means provision
is made against untoward accidents. If sickness should
disable him, you are qualified to pursue the same means
of support.
At these words the lady's countenance changed.
She put her hand on my arm, and said, in a fluttering
and hurried accent, is my brother sick?
No. He is in perfect health. My observation was
an harmless one. I am sorry to observe your readines
to draw alarming inferences. If I were to say, that
your scheme is useful to supply deficiencies, not only
when your brother is disabled by sickness, but when
thrown, by some inhuman creditor, into jail, no doubt
you would perversely and hastily infer that he is now in
prison.
E
I had scarcely ended the sentence, when the piercing
eyes of the lady were anxiously fixed upon mine.
After
a moment's pause, she exclaimedThe inference,
indeed, is too plain. I know his fate. It has long
been foreseen and expected, and I have summoned up
my equanimity to meet it. Would to Heaven he may
find the calamity as light as I should find it; but I fear
his too irritable spirit.
When her fears were confirmed, she started out into
no vehemence of exclamation. She quickly suppressed
a few tears which would not be withheld, and listened
to my narrative of what had lately occurred, with
tokens
of gratitude.
Formal consolation was superfluous. Her mind was
indeed more fertile than my own in those topics which
take away its keenest edge from affliction. She
observed
that it was far from being the henviest calamity
which might have happened. The creditor was
perhaps
vincible by arguments and supplications. If these
should succeed, the disaster would not only be removed,
but that security from future molestation, be gained, to
which they had for a long time been strangers.
Should he be obdurate, their state was far from being
hopeless. Carlton's situation allowed him to pursue
his profession. His gains would be equal, and his
expences
would not be augmented. By their mutual
industry
they might hope to amass sufficient to discharge
the debt at no very remote period.
What she chiefly dreaded was the pernicious
influence
of dejection and sedentary labor on her brother's
health. Yet this was not to be considered as
inevitable
.
Fortitude might be inspired by exhortation and
example, and no condition precluded us from every
species of bodily exertion. The less inclined he should
prove to cultivate the means of deliverance and
happiness
within his reach, the more necessary it became for
her to stimulate and fortify his resolution.
If I were captivated by the charms of this lady's
person and carriage, my reverence was excited by these
proofs of wisdom and energy. I zealously promised to
concur with her in every scheme she should adopt for
her own or her brother's advantage; and after spending
some hours with her, took my leave.
I now regretted the ignorance in which I had hitherto
remained respecting this lady. That she was, in an
eminent degree, feminine and lovely, was easily
discovered
;
but intellectual weakness had been rashly
inferred
from external frailty. She was accustomed to shrink
from observation, and reserve was mistaken for
timidity
.
I called on Carlton only when numerous
engagements
would allow, and when by some accident, his
customary
visits had been intermitted. On those
occasions
,
my stay was short, and my attention chiefly
confined
to her brother. I now resolved to atone for my
ancient negligence, not only by my own assiduities, but
by those of my wife.
On my return home, I found Mervyn and my wife
in earnest discourse. I anticipated the shock which
the sensibility of the latter would receive from the
tidings
which I had to communicate respecting Carlton.
I was unwilling, and yet perceived the necessity, of
disclosing
the truth. I desired to bring these women, as
soon as possible, to the knowledge of each other, but
the necessary prelude to this was an acquaintance with
the disaster that had happened.
Scarcely had I entered the room, when Mervyn
turned to me and said, with an air of anxiety and
impatience
Pray,
my friend, have you any knowledge of
Francis Carlton?
The mention of this name by Mervyn, produced
some surprize. I acknowledged my acquaintance with
him.
Do you know in what situation he now is?
In answer to this question, I stated by what singular
means his situation had been made known to me, and
the purpose, from the accomplishment of which, I
had just returned. I enquired, in my turn, whence
originated this question?
He had overheard the name of Carlton in the prison
Two persons were communing in a corner, and accident
E 2
enabled him to catch this name, though uttered by
them in an half whisper, and to discover that the person
talked about, had lately been conveyed thither.
This name was not now heard for the first time. It
was connected with remembrances that made him
anxious
for the fate of him to whom it belonged. In
discourse
with my wife, this name chanced to be again
mentioned, and his curiosity was roused afresh. I was
willing to communicate all that I knew, but Mervyn's
own destiny was too remarkable not to absorb all my
attention, and I refused to discuss any other theme till
that were fully explained. He postponed his own
gratification
to mine, and consented to relate the incidents
that had happened from the moment of our separation
till the present.
CHAPTER VI.
At
parting with you, my purpose was to reach the
abode of the Hadwins as speedily as possible. I
travelled
therefore with diligence. Setting out so early,
I expected, though on foot, to reach the end of my
journey before noon. The activity of muscles is no
obstacle to thought. So far from being inconsistent
with intense musing, it is, in my own case, propitious
to that state of mind.
Probably no one had stronger motives for ardent
meditation
than I. My second journey to the city was
prompted by reasons, and attended by incidents, that
seemed to have a present existence. To think upon
them, was to view, more deliberately and thoroughly,
objects and persons that still hovered in my sight.
Instead
of their attributes being already seen, and their
consequences at an end, it seemed as if a series of
numerous
years and unintermitted contemplation were
requisite
to comprehend them fully, and bring into
existence
their most momentous effects.
If men be chiefly distinguished from each other by
the modes in which attention is employed, either on
external and sensible objects, or merely on abstract
ideas and the creatures of reflection, I may justly claim
to be enrolled in the second class. My existence is a
E 3
series of thoughts rather than of motions.
Ratiocination
and deduction leave my senses unemployed. The
fulness of my fancy renders my eye vacant and
inactive
.
Sensations do not precede and suggest, but
follow
and are secondary to the acts of my mind.
There was one motive, however, which made me less
inattentive to the scene that was continually shifting
before and without me than I am wont to be. The
loveliest form which I had hitherto seen, was that of
Clemenza Lodi. I recalled her condition as I had
witnessed
it, as Welbeck had described, and as you had
painted it. The past was without remedy; but the
future was, in some degree, within our power to create
and to fashion. Her state was probably dangerous.
She might already be forlorn, beset with temptation
or with auguish; or danger might only be approaching
her, and the worst evils be impending ones.
I was ignorant of her state. Could I not remove
this ignorance? Would not some benefit redound to
her from beneficent and seasonable interposition?
You had mentioned that her abode had lately been
with Mrs. Villars, and that this lady still resided in
the country. The residence had been sufficiently
described
,
and I perceived that I was now approaching it.
In a short time I spied its painted roof and five
chimnies
through an avenue of catalpas.
When opposite the gate which led into this avenue, I
paused. It seemed as if this moment were to decide
upon the liberty and innocence of this being. In a
moment I might place myself before her, ascertain her
true condition, and point out to her the path of honor
and safety. This opportunity might be the last.
Longer
delay might render interposition fruitless.
But how was I to interpose? I was a stranger to
her language, and she was unacquainted with mine.
To obtain access to her, it was necessary only to
demand
it. But how should I explain my views and state
my wishes when an interview was gained? And what
expedient was it in my power to propose?
Now, said I, I perceive the value of that wealth
which I have been accustomed to despise. The power
of eating and drinking, the nature and limits of
existence
and physical enjoyment, are not changed or
enlarged
by the increase of wealth. Our corporeal and
intellectual wants are supplied at little expence; but
our own wants are the wants of others, and that which
remains, after our own necessities are obviated, it is
always easy and just to employ in relieving the
necessities
of others.
There are no superfluities in my store. It is not in
my power to supply this unfortunate girl with decent
rayment and honest bread. I have no house to which
to conduct her. I have no means of securing her from
famine and cold.
Yet, though indigent and feeble, I am not destitute
of friends and of home. Cannot she be admitted to
the same asylum to which I am now going? This
thought was sudden and new. The more it was
revolyed
,
the more plausible it seemed. This was not
merely the sole expedient, but the best that could have
been suggested.
The Hadwins were friendly, hospitable,
unsuspicious
.
Their board, though simple and uncouth, was
wholesome and plenteous. Their residence was
sequestered
and obscure, and not obnoxious to impertinent
enquiries and malignant animadversion. Their frank
and ingenuous temper would make them easy of
persuasion
,
and their sympathies were prompt and
overflowing
.
I am nearly certain, continued I, that they will
instantly
afford protection to this desolate girl. Why
shall I not anticipate their consent, and present myself
to their embraces and their welcomes in her company?
Slight reflection showed me, that this precipitation
was improper. Whether Wallace had ever arrived at
Maiverton? Whether Mr. Hadwin had escaped
infection
?
whether his house were the abode of security
and quiet, or a scene of desolation? were questions yet
to be determined. The obvious and best proceeding
was to hasten forward, to afford the Hadwins, if in
distress, the feeble consolations of my friendship; or,
if their state were happy, to procure their concurrence
to my scheme respecting Clemenza.
Actuated by these considerations, I resumed my
journey. Looking forward, I perceived a chaise and
horse standing by the left hand fence, at the distance
of some hundred yards. This object was not
uncommon
or strange, and, therefore, it was scarcely noticed.
When I came near, however, methought I recognized
in this carriage the same in which my importunities had
procured a seat for the languishing Wallace, in the
manner which I have formerly related.
It was a crazy vehicle and old fashioned. When
once seen it could scarcely be mistaken or forgotten.
The horse was held by his bridle to a post, but the seat
was empty. My solicitude with regard to Wallace's
destiny, of which he to whom the carriage belonged
might possibly afford me some knowledge, made me
stop and reflect on what measures it was proper to
pursue
.
The rider could not be at a great distance from this
spot. His absence would probably be short. By
lingering
a few minutes an interview might be gained, and
the uncertainty and suspence of some hours be thereby
precluded. I therefore waited, and the same person
whom I had formerly encountered made his appearance,
in a short time, from under a copse that skirted the
road.
He recognized me with more difficulty than attended
my recognition of him. The circumstances, however,
of our first meeting were easily recalled to his
remembrance
.
I eagerly enquired when and where he had
parted with the youth who had been, on that occasion,
entrusted to his care.
He answered, that, on leaving the city and inhaling
the purer air of the fields and woods, Wallace had been,
in a wonderful degree, invigorated and refreshed. An
instantaneous and total change appeared to have been
wrought in him. He no longer languished with fatigue
or fear, but became full of gaiety and talk.
The suddenness of this transition; the levity with
which he related and commented on his recent dangers
and evils, excited the astonishment of his companion,
to whom he not only communicated the history of his
disease, but imparted many anecdotes of a humorous
kind. Some of these my companion repeated. I heard
them with regret and dissatisfaction. They betokened
a mind vitiated by intercourse with the thoughtless and
depraved of both sexes, and particularly with infamous
and profligate women.
My companion proceeded to mention, that Wallace's
exhiliration lasted but for a short time, and disappeared
as suddenly as it had appeared. He was seized with
deadly sickness, and insisted upon leaving the carriage,
whose movements shocked his stomach and head to an
insupportable degree. His companion was not void of
apprehensions on his own account, but was unwilling
to desert him, and endeavored to encourage him. His
efforts were vain. Though the nearest house was at
the distance of some hundred yards, and though it was
probable that the inhabitants of this house would
refuse
to accommodate one in his condition, yet
Wallace
could not be prevailed on to proceed; and, in spite
of persuasion and remonstrance, left the carriage and
threw himself on the grassy bank beside the road.
This person was not unmindful of the hazard which
he incurred by contact with a sick man. He conceived
himself to have performed all that was consistent with
duty to himself and to his family; and Wallace,
persisting
in affirming that, by attempting to ride farther,
he should merely hasten his death, was at length left
to his own guidance.
These were unexpected and mournful tidings. I
had fondly imagined, that his safety was put beyond
the reach of untoward accidents. Now, however, there
was reason to suppose him to have perished by a
lingering
and painful disease, rendered fatal by the selfishness
of mankind, by the want of seasonable remedies, and
exposure to inclement airs. Some uncertainty,
however
,
rested on his fate. It was my duty to remove it,
and to carry to the Hadwins no mangled and defective
tale. Where, I asked, had Wallace and his companion
parted?
It was about three miles further onward. The spot
and the house within view from the spot, were accurately
described. In this house it was possible that Wallace
had sought an asylum, and some intelligence respecting
him might be gained from its inhabitants. My
informant
was journeying to the city, so that we were
obliged to separate.
In consequence of this man's description of
Wallace's
deportment, and the proofs of a dissolute and
thoughtless temper which he had given, I began to
regard his death as an event less deplorable. Such an
one was unworthy of a being so devoutly pure, so
ardent
in fidelity and tenderness as Susan Hadwin. If
he loved, it was probable that in defiance of his vows,
he would seek a different companion. If he adhered to
his first engagements, his motives would be sordid, and
the disclosure of his latent defects might produce more
exquisite misery to his wife, than his premature death or
treacherous desertion.
The preservation of this man, was my sole motive
for entering the infected city, and subjecting my own
life to the hazards, from which my escape may almost
be esteemed miraculous. Was not the end
disproportioned
to the means? Was there arrogance in believing
my life a price too great to be given for his?
I was not, indeed, sorry for the past. My purpose
was just, and the means which I selected, were the best
my limited knowledge applied. My happiness should
be drawn from reflection on the equity of my intentions.
That these intentions were frustrated by the ignorance
of others, or my own, was the consequence of human
frailty. Honest purposes, though they may not bestow
happiness on others, will, at least, secure it to him who
fosters them.
By these reflections my regrets were dissipated, and
I prepared to rejoice alike, whether Wallace should be
found to have escaped or to have perished. The house
to which I had been directed was speedily brought into
view. I enquired for the master or mistress of the
mansion, and was conducted to a lady of a plain and
housewifely appearance.
My curiosity was fully gratified. Wallace, whom
my description easily identified, had made his
appearance
at her door on the evening of the day on which he
left the city. Thedread of
the fever
was descanted on
with copious and rude eloquence. I supposed her
eloquence
on this theme to be designed to apologize to me
for her refusing entrance to the sick man. The
peroration
,
however, was different. Wallace was
admitted
,
and suitable attention paid to his wants.
Happily, the guest had nothing to struggle with
but extreme weakness. Repose, nourishing diet, and
salubrious airs restored him in a short time to health.
He lingered under this roof for three weeks, and then,
without any professions of gratitude, or offers of
pecuniary
remuneration, or information of the course which
he determined to take, he left them.
These facts, added to that which I had previously
known, threw no advantageous light upon the character
of Wallace. It was obvious to conclude, that he had
gone to Malverton, and thither there was nothing to
hinder me from following him.
Perhaps, one of my grossest defects is a precipitate
temper. I chuse my path suddenly, and pursue it
with impetuous expedition. In the present instance,
my resolution was conceived with unhesitating zeal,
and I walked the faster that I might the sooner execute
it. Miss Hadwin deserved to be happy. Love was
in her heart the all-absorbing sentiment. A
disappointment
there was a supreme calamity. Depravity
and folly must assume the guise of virtue before it
can claim her affection. This disguise might be
maintained
for a time, but its detection must inevitably
come, and the sooner this detection takes place the
more beneficial it must prove.
I resolved to unbosom myself, with equal and
unbounded
confidence, to Wallace and his mistress. I
would chuse for this end not the moment when they
were separate, but that in which they were together.
My knowledge, and the sources of my knowledge,
relative
to Wallace, should be unfolded to the lady with
simplicity and truth. The lover should be present, to
confute, to extenuate, or to verify the charges.
During the rest of the day these images occupied the
chief place in my thoughts. The road was miry and
dark, and my journey proved to be more tedious and
fatiguing than I expected. At length, just as the
evening
closed, the well-known habitation appeared in view.
Since my departure, winter had visited the world, and
the aspect of nature was desolate and dreary. All
around this house was vacant, negligent, forlorn. The
contrast between these appearances and those which I
had noticed on my first approach to it, when the ground
and the trees were decked with the luxuriance and
vivacity
of summer, was mournful, and seemed to
foretoken
ill. My spirits drooped as I noticed the general
inactivity and silence.
I entered, without warning, the door that led into
the parlour. No face was to be seen or voice heard.
The chimney was ornamented, as in summer, with
evergreen
shrubs. Though it was now the second month
of frost and snow, fire did not appear to have been
lately kindled on this hearth.
This was a circumstance from which nothing good
could be deduced. Had there been those to share its
comforts, who had shared them on former years, this
was the place and hour at which they commonly
assembled
.
A door on one side led, through a narrow
entry
,
into the kitchen. I opened this door, and passed
towards the kitchen.
No one was there but an old man, squatted in the
chimney-corner. His face, though wrinkled, denoted
undecayed health and an unbending spirit. An
homespun
coat, leathern breeches wrinkled with age, and
blue yarn hose, were well suited to his lean and
shrivelled
form. On his right knee was a wooden bowl,
which he had just replenished from a pipkin of
hasty-pudding
still smoaking on the coals; and in his left
hand a spoon, which he had, at that moment, plunged
into a bottle of molasses that stood beside him.
This action was suspended by my entrance. He
looked up and exclaimed, hey day! who's this that
comes into other people's houses without so much as
saying by your leave? What's thee business?
Who's thee want?
I had never seen this personage before. I supposed
it to be some new domestic, and enquired for Mr.
Hadwin
.
Ah! replied he with a sigh, William Hadwin. Is
it him thee wants? Poor man! He is gone to rest
many days since.
My heart sunk within me at these tidings. Dead,
said I, do you mean that he is dead?This
exclamation
was uttered in a tone of some vehemence. It
attracted
the attention of some one who was standing
without, who immediately entered the kitchen. It was
Eliza Hadwin. The moment she beheld me she
shrieked
aloud, and, rushing into my arms, fainted away.
The old man dropped his bowl; and, starting from
his seat, stared alternately at me and at the breathless
girl. My emotion, made up of joy, and sorrow, and
surprize, rendered me for a moment powerless as she.
At length, he said, I understand this. I know who
thee is, and will tell her thee's come. So saying he
hastily left the room.
F
CHAPTER VII.
In
a short time this gentle girl recovered her senses.
She did not withdraw herself from my sustaining arm,
but, leaning on my bosom, she resigned herself to
passionate
weeping. I did not endeavor to check this
effusion
,
believing that its influence would be salutary.
I had not forgotten the thrilling sensibility and
artless
graces of this girl. I had not forgotten the
scruples which had formerly made me check a passion
whose tendency was easily discovered. These new
proofs of her affection were, at once, mournful and
delightful. The untimely fate of her father and my
friend pressed with new force upon my heart, and my
tears, in spite of my fortitude, mingled with hers.
The attention of both was presently attracted by a
faint scream, which proceeded from above.
Immediately
tottering footsteps were heard in the passage, and
a figure rushed into the room, pale, emaciated,
haggard
,
and wild. She cast a piercing glance at me,
uttered
a feeble exclamation, and sunk upon the floor
without signs of life.
It was not difficult to comprehend this scene. I
now conjectured, what subsequent enquiry confirmed,
that the old man had mistaken me for Wallace, and
had carried to the elder sister the news of his return.
This fatal disappointment of hopes that had nearly
been extinct, and which were now so powerfully
revived
,
could not be endured by a frame verging to
dissolution
.
This object recalled all the energies of Eliza, and
engrossed all my solicitude. I lifted the fallen girl in
my arms; and, guided by her sister, carried her to her
chamber. I had now leisure to contemplate the changes
which a few months had made in this lovely frame. I
turned away from the spectacle with anguish, but my
wandering eyes were recalled by some potent
fascination
,
and fixed in horror upon a form which evinced the
last stage of decay. Eliza knelt on one side, and,
leaning her face upon the bed, endeavored in vain to
smother her sobs. I sat on the other motionless, and
holding the passive and withered hand of the sufferer.
I watched with ineffable solicitude the return of life.
It returned, at length, but merely to betray symptoms
that it would speedily depart forever. For a time my
faculties were palsied, and I was made an impotent
spectator of the ruin that environed me. This
pusillanimity
quickly gave way to resolutions and reflections
better suited to the exigencies of the time.
The first impulse was to summon a physician, but it
was evident that the patient had been sinking by slow
degrees to this state, and that the last struggle had
begun. Nothing remained but to watch her while
expiring
,
and perform for her, when dead, the rites of
interment. The survivor was capable of consolation
and of succour. I went to her and drew her gently
into another apartment. The old man, tremulous and
wonderstruck, seemed anxious to perform some service.
I directed him to kindle a fire in Eliza's chamber.
Meanwhile I persuaded my gentle friend to remain in
this chamber, and resign to me the performance of
every office which her sister's condition required. I sat
beside the bed of the dying till the mortal struggle
was past.
I perceived that the house had no inhabitant beside
the two females and the old man. I went in search of
F 2
the latter, and found him crouched as before, at the
kitchen fire, smoaking his pipe. I placed myself on the
same bench, and entered into conversation with him.
I gathered from him that he had, for many years,
been Mrs. Hadwin's servant. That lately he had
cultivated
a small farm in this neighborhood for his own
advantage. Stopping one day in October, at the
tavern
,
he heard that his old master had lately been in
the city, had caught
the fever
, and after his return
had died with it. The moment he became sick, his
servants fled from the house, and the neighbors refused
to approach it. The task of attending his sick bed,
was allotted to his daughters, and it was by their hands
that his grave was dug, and his body covered with
earth. The same terror of infection existed after his
death as before, and these hapless females were deserted
by all mankind.
Old Caleb was no sooner informed of these
particulars
,
than he hurried to the house, and had since
continued
in their service. His heart was kind, but it was
easily seen that his skill extended only to execute the
directions of another. Grief for the death of Wallace,
and her father, preyed upon the health of the elder
daughter. The younger became her nurse, and Caleb
was always at hand to execute any orders, the
performance
of which was on a level with his understanding.
Their neighbors had not withheld their good offices,
but they were still terrified and estranged by the
phantoms
of pestilence.
During the last week Susan had been too weak to
rise from her bed, yet such was the energy
communicated
by the tidings that Wallace was alive, and had
returned
,
that she leaped upon her feet and rushed down
stairs. How little did that man deserve so strennous
and immortal an affection.
I would not allow myself to ponder on the sufferings
of these women. I endeavored to think only of the
best expedients for putting an end to these calamities.
After a moment's deliberation, I determined to go to
an house at some miles distance; the dwelling of one,
who, though not exempt from the reigning panic, had
shewn more generosity towards these unhappy girls than
others. During my former abode in this district, I had
ascertained his character, and found him to be
compassionate
and liberal.
Overpowered by fatigue and watching, Susan was
no sooner relieved by my presence, of some portion of
her cares, than she sunk into profound slumber. I
directed Caleb to watch the house till my return, which
should be before midnight, and then set out for the
dwelling of Mr. Ellis.
The weather was temperate and moist, and rendered
the footing of the meadows extremely difficult. The
ground that had lately been frozen and covered with
snow, was now changed into gullies and pools, and this
was no time to be fastidious in the choice of paths. A
brook, swelled by the recent
thaw
, was likewise to be
passed. The rail which I had formerly placed over it by
way of bridge, had disappeared, and I was obliged to
wade through it. At length I approached the house to
which I was going.
At so late an hour, farmers and farmer's servants
are usually abed, and their threshold is entrusted to
their watch-dogs. Two belonged to Mr. Ellis, whose
ferocity and vigilance were truly formidable to a
stranger
,
but I hoped that in me they would recognize an old
acquaintance, and sufferme to approach. In this I was
not mistaken. Though my person could not be
distinctly
seen by star-light, they seemed to scent me from
afar, and met me with a thousand caresses.
Approaching the house, I perceived that its tenants
were retired to their repose. This I expected, and
hastened to awaken Mr. Ellis, by knocking briskly at
the door. Presently he looked out of a window above,
and in answer to his enquiries, in which impatience at
being so unseasonably disturbed, was mingled with
anxiety, I told him my name, and entreated him to
come down and allow me a few minutes conversation.
He speedily dressed himself, and opening the kitchen
door, we seated ourselves before the fire.
F 3
My appearance was sufficiently adapted to excite his
wonder; he had heard of my elopement from the house
of Mr. Hadwin, he was a stranger to the motives that
prompted my departure, and to the events that had
befallen
me, and no interview was more distant from his
expectations
than the present. His curiosity was written
in his features, but this was no time to gratify his
curiosity
.
The end that I now had in view, was to procure
accommodation for Eliza Hadwin in this man's house.
For this purpose it was my duty to describe with
simplicity
and truth, the inconveniences which at present
surrounded her, and to relate all that had happened
since my arrival.
I perceived that my tale excited his compassion, and
I continued with new zeal to paint to him the
helplessness
of this girl. The death of her father and sister
left her the property of this farm. Her sex and age
disqualified her for superintending the harvest-field and
the threshing-floor; and no expedient was left, but to
lease the land to another, and, taking up her abode in
the family of some kinsman or friend, to subsist, as she
might easily do, upon the rent. Meanwhile her
continuance
in this house was equally useless and dangerous,
and I insinuated to my companion the propriety of
immediately
removing her to his own.
Some hesitation and reluctance appeared in him,
which I immediately ascribed to an absurd dread of
infection
.
I endeavored, by appealing to his reason, as
well as to his pity, to conquer this dread. I pointed
cut the true cause of the death of the elder
daughter
,
and assured him the youngest knew no
indisposition
but that which arose from distress. I offered
to save him from any hazard that might attend his
approaching
the house, by accompanying her hither
myself
.
All that her safety required was that his doors
should not be shut against her when she presented
herself
before them.
Still he was fearful and reluctant; and, at length,
mentioned that her uncle resided not more than sixteen
miles farther; that he was her natural protector, and
he dared to say would find no difficulty in admitting
her into his house. For his part, there might be reason
in what I said, but he could not bring himself to think
but that there was still some danger of
the fever
. It
was right to assist people in distress, to be sure; but
to risk his own life he did not think to be his duty. He
was no relation of the family, and it was the duty of
relations to help each other. Her uncle was the
proper
person to assist her, and no doubt he would be as
willing as able.
The marks of dubiousness and indecision which
accompanied
these words, encouraged me in endeavoring
to subdue his scruples. The increase of his aversion
to my scheme kept pace with my remonstrances, and
he finally declared that he would, on no account,
consent
to it.
Ellis was by no means hard of heart. His
determination
did not prove the coldness of his charity, but
merely the strength of his fears. He was himself an
object more of compassion than of anger; and he acted
like the man, whose fear of death prompts him to push
his companion from the plank which saved him from
drowning, but which is unable to sustain both.
Finding
him invincible to my entreaties, I thought upon
the expedient which he suggested of seeking the
protection
of her uncle. It was true, that the loss of
parents
had rendered her uncle her legal protector. His
knowledge of the world; his house, and property, and
influence would, perhaps, fit him for this office in a
more eminent degree than I was fitted. To seek a
different
asylum might, indeed, be unjust to both, and,
after some reflection, I not only dismissed the regret
which Ellis's refusal had given me, but even thanked
him for the intelligence and counsel which he had
afforded
me. I took leave of him, and hastened back to
Hadwin's.
Eliza, by Caleb's report, was still asleep. There
was no urgent necessity for awakening her; but
something
was forthwith to be done with regard to the
unhappy
girl that was dead. The proceeding incumbent
on us was obvious. All that remained was to dig a
grave, and to deposit the remains with as much
solemnity
and decency as the time would permit. There
were two methods of doing this. I might wait till the
next day; till a coffin could be made and conveyed
hither
;
till the woman, whose trade it was to make and
put on the habiliments assigned by custom to the dead,
could be sought out and hired to attend; till
kindred
,
friends, and neighbors could be summoned to
the obsequies; till a carriage were provided to remove
the body to a burying-ground, belonging to a
meetinghouse
,
and five miles distant; till those, whose trade
it was to dig graves, had prepared one, within the
sacred
inclosure, for her reception; or, neglecting this
toilsome, tedious, and expensive ceremonial, I might
seek the grave of Hadwin, and lay the daughter by the
side of her parent.
Perhaps I was wrong in my preference of the latter
mode. The customs of burial may, in most cases, be
in themselves proper. If the customs be absurd, yet
it may be generally proper to adhere to them: but,
doubtless, there are cases in which it is our duty to omit
them. I conceived the present case to be such an
one.
The season was bleak and inclement. Much time,
labor, and expence would be required to go through
the customary rites. There was none but myself to
perform these, and I had not the suitable means. The
misery of Eliza would only be prolonged by adhering
to these forms; and her fortune be needlesly
diminished
;
by the expences unavoidably to be incurred.
After musing upon these ideas for some time, I rose
from my seat, and desired Caleb to follow me. We
proceeded to an outer shed where farmers' tools used to
be kept. I supplied him and myself with a spade, and
requested him to lead me to the spot where Mr.
Hadwin
was laid.
He betrayed some hesitation to comply, and
appeared
struck with some degree of alarm, as if my purpose
had been to molest, instead of securing, the repose of
the dead. I removed his doubts by explaining my
intentions
,
but he was scarcely less shocked, on
discovering
the truth, than he had been alarmed by his first suspicions. He stammered out his objections to my
scheme. There was but one mode of burial he thought
that was decent and proper, and he could not be free
to assist me in pursuing any other mode.
Perhaps Caleb's aversion to the scheme might have
been easily overcome, but I reflected that a mind like
his was at once flexible and obstinate. He might yield
to arguments and entreaties, and act by their
immediate
impulse; but the impulse passed away in a moment;
old and habitual convictions were resumed, and his
deviation
from the beaten track would be merely
productive
of compunction. His aid, on the present
occasion
,
though of some use, was by no means
indispensible
.
I forbore to solicit his concurrence, or even to
vanquish the scruples he entertained against directing
me to the grave of Hadwin. It was a groundless
superstition
that made one spot more suitable for this
purpose
than another. I desired Caleb, in a mild tone, to
return to the kitchen, and leave me to act as I thought
proper. I then proceeded to the orchard.
One corner of this field was somewhat above the
level
of the rest. The tallest tree of the groupe grew
there, and there I had formerly placed a bench, and
made it my retreat at periods of leisure. It had been
recommended by its sequestered situation, its luxuriant
verdure, and profound quiet. On one side was a
potatoe
field, on the other a
melon-patch;
and before me,
in rows, some hundreds of apple trees. Here I was
accustomed to seek the benefits of contemplation, and
study the manuscripts of Lodi. A few months had
passed since I had last visited this spot. What
revolutions
had since occurred, and how gloomily contrasted
was my present purpose with what had formerly led me
hither!
In this spot I had hastily determined to dig the grave
of Susan. The grave was dug. All that I desired
was a cavity of sufficient dimensions to receive her.
This being made, I returned to the house, lifted the
corpse in my arms, and bore it without delay to the
spot. Caleb seated in the kitchen, and Eliza asleep in
her chamber, were wholly unapprised of my motions.
The grave was covered, the spade reposited under the
shed, and my seat by the kitchen fire resumed in a time
apparently too short for so solemn and momentous a
transaction.
I look back upon this incident with emotions not
easily described. It seems as if I acted with too much
precipitation; as if insensibility, and not reason, had
occasioned that clearness of conceptions, and bestowed
that firmness of muscles, which I then experienced. I
neither trembled nor wavered in my purpose. I bore
in my arms the being whom I had known and loved,
through the whistling gale and intense darkness of a
winter's night; I heaped earth upon her limbs, and
covered
them from human observation, without
fluctuations
or tremors, though not without feelings that were
awful and sublime.
Perhaps some part of my stedfastness was owing to
my late experience, and some minds may be more easily
inured to perilous emergencies than others. If reason
acquires strength only by the diminution of sensibility,
perhaps it is just for sensibility to be diminished.
CHAPTER VIII.
The
safety of Eliza was the object that now
occupaied
my cares. To have slept, after her example, had
been most proper, but my uncertainty with regard to
her fate, and my desire to conduct her to some other
home, kept my thoughts in perpetual motion. I
waited
with impatience till she should awake and allow me
to consult with her on plans for futurity.
Her sleep terminated not till the next day had arisen.
Having recovered the remembrance of what had lately
happened, she enquired for her sister. She wanted to
view once more the face, and kiss the lips, of her
beloved
Susan. Some relief to her anguish she expected
to derive from this privilege.
When informed of the truth, when convinced that
Susan had disappeared forever, she broke forth into
fresh passion. It seemed as if her loss was not
hopeless
or compleat as long as she was suffered to behold
the face of her friend and to touch her lips. She
accused
me of acting without warrant and without
justice
;
of defrauding her of her dearest and only
consolation
;
and of treating her sister's sacred remains with
barbarous indifference and rudeness.
I explained in the gentlest terms the reasons of my
conduct. I was not surprized or vexed, that she, at
first, treated them as futile, and as heightening my
offence
.
Such was the impulse of a grief, which was
properly excited by her loss. To be tranquil and
stedfast
,
in the midst of the usual causes of impetuosity
and agony, is either the prerogative of wisdom that
sublimes itself above all selfish considerations, or the
badge of giddy and unfeeling folly.
The torrent was at length exhausted. Upbraiding
was at an end; and gratitude, and tenderness, and
implicit
acquiescence in any scheme which my prudence
should suggest, succeeded. I mentioned her uncle as
one to whom it would be proper, in her present distress,
to apply.
She started and betrayed uneasiness at this name.
It was evident that she by no means concurred with me
in my notions of propriety; that she thought with
aversion of seeking her uncle's protection. I requested
her to state her objections to this scheme, or to
mention
any other which she thought preferable.
She knew no body. She had not a friend in the
world but myself. She had never been out of her
father's
house. She had no relation but her uncle Philip,
and heshe could not live with him. I must not insist
upon her going to his house. It was not the place for
her. She should never be happy there.
I was, at first, inclined to suspect in my friend some
capricious and groundless antipathy. I desired her to
explain what in her uncle's character made him so
obnoxious
.
She refused to be more explicit, and
persisted
in thinking that his house was no suitable abode for
her.
Finding her, in this respect, invincible, I sought
for some other expedient. Might she not easily be
accommodated
as a boarder in the city, or some village,
or in a remote quarter of the country? Ellis, her
nearest and most opulent neighbor, had refused to
receive
her; but there were others who had not his fears.
There were others, within the compass of a day's
journney
,
who were strangers to the cause of Hadwin's
death; but would it not be culpable to take advantage
of that ignorance? Their compliance ought not to be
the result of deception.
While thus engaged, the incidents of my late
journey
recurred to my remembrance, and I asked, is not
the honest woman, who entertained Wallace, just
such a person as that of whom I am in search? Her
treatment of Wallace shews her to be exempt from
chimerical fears, proves that she has room in her house
for an occasional inmate.
Encouraged by these views, I told my weeping
companion
,
that I had recollected a family in which she would
be kindly treated; and that, if she chose, we would
not lose a moment in repairing thither. Horses,
belonging
to the farm, grazed in the meadows, and a
couple of these would carry us in a few hours to the
place which I had selected for her residence. On her
eagerly assenting to this proposal, I enquired in whose
care, and in what state, our present habitation should
be left.
The father's property now belonged to the daughter.
Eliza's mind was quick, active, and sagacious; but her
total inexperience gave her sometimes the appearance
of folly. She was eager to fly from this house, and to
resign herself and her property, without limitation or
condition, to my controul. Our intercourse had been
short, but she relied on my protection and counsel as
absolutely as she had been accustomed to do upon her
father's.
She knew not what answer to make to my enquiry.
Whatever I pleased to do was the best. What did I
think ought to be done?
Ah! thought I, sweet, artless, and simple girl! how
wouldst thou have fared, if Heaven had not sent me
to thy succour? There are beings in the world who
would make a selfish use of thy confidence; who would
beguile thee at once of innocence and property. Such
am not I. Thy welfare is a precious deposit, and no
father or brother could watch over it with more
solicitude
than I will do.
G
I was aware that Mr. Hadwin might have fixed the
destination of his property, and the guardianship of his
daughters, by will. On suggesting this to my friend,
it instantly reminded her of an incident that took place
after his last return from the city. He had drawn up
his will, and gave it into Susan's possession, who placed
it in a drawer, whence it was now taken by my friend.
By this will his property was now found to be
bequeathed
to his two daughters; and his brother, Philip
Hadwin, was named executor, and guardian to his
daughters
till they should be twenty years old. This name
was no sooner heard by my friend, than she exclaimed,
in a tone of affright, executor! My uncle! What
is that? What power does that give him?
I know not exactly the power of executors. He
will, doubtless, have possession of your property till
you are twenty years of age. Your person will
likewise
be under his care till that time.
Must he decide where I am to live?
He is vested with all the power of a father.
This assurance excited the deepest consternation.
She fixed her eyes on the ground, and was lost, for a
time, in the deepest reverie. Recovering, at length,
she said, with a sigh, what if my father had made no
will?
In that case, a guardian could not be dispensed with,
but the right of naming him would belong to yourself.
And my uncle would have nothing to do with my
affairs?
I am no lawyer, said I; but I presume all authority
over your person and property would devolve upon the
guardian of your own choice.
Then I am free. Saying this, with a sudden
motion
,
she tore in several pieces the will, which, during
this dialogue, she had held in her hand, and threw the
fragments into the fire.
No action was more unexpected to me than this.
My astonishment hindered me from attempting to
rescue
the paper from the flames. It was consumed in a
moment. I was at a loss in what manner to regard
this sacrifice. It denoted a force of mind little in
unison
with that simplicity and helplessness which this
girl had hitherto displayed. It argued the deepest
apprehensions
of mistreatment from her uncle.
Whether
his conduct had justified this violent antipathy, I
had no means of judging. Mr. Hadwin's choice of
him, as his executor, was certainly one proof of his
integrity
.
My abstraction was noticed by Eliza, with visible
anxiety. It was plain, that she dreaded the
impression
which this act of seeming temerity had made upon
me. Do not be angry with me, said she; perhaps I
have been wrong, but I could not help it. I will have
but one guardian and one protector.
The deed was irrevocable. In my present ignorance
of the domestic history of the Hadwins, I was
unqualified
to judge how far circumstances might extenuate
or justify the act. On both accounts, therefore, it
was improper to expatiate upon it.
It was concluded to leave the care of the house to
honest Caleb; to fasten closets and drawers, and,
carrying
away the money which was found in one of them,
and which amounted to no inconsiderable sum, to
repair
to the house formerly mentioned. The air was
cold; an heavy snow began to fall in the night; the
wind blew tempestuously; and we were compelled to
confront it.
In leaving her dwelling, in which she had spent her
whole life, the unhappy girl gave way afresh to her
sorrow. It made her feeble and helpless. When
placed upon the horse, she was scarcely able to
maintain
her seat. Already chilled by the cold, blinded by
the drifting snow, and cut by the blast, all my
remonstrances
were needed to inspire her with resolution.
I am not accustomed to regard the elements, or
suffer
them to retard or divert me from any design that I
have formed. I had overlooked the weak and delicate
frame of my companion, and made no account of her
being less able to support cold and fatigue than myself.
It was not till we had made some progress in our way,
G 2
that I began to view, in their true light, the obstacles
that were to be encountered. I conceived it,
however
,
too late to retreat, and endeavored to push on
with speed.
My companion was a skilful rider, but her steed was
refractory and unmanageable. She was able, however,
to curb his spirit till we had proceeded ten or twelve
miles from Malverton. The wind and the cold became
too violent to be longer endured, and I resolved to stop
at the first house which should present itself to my view,
for the sake of refreshment and warmth.
We now entered a wood of some extent, at the
termination
of which I remembered that a dwelling stood.
To pass this wood, therefore, with expedition, was all
that remained before we could reach an hospitable
asylum
.
I endeavored to sustain, by this information,
the sinking spirits of my companion. While busy in
conversing with her, a blast of irresistible force
twisted
off the highest branch of a tree before us. It fell
in the midst of the road, at the distance of a few feet
from her horse's head. Terrified by this accident, the
horse started from the path, and, rushing into the wood,
in a moment threw himself and his rider on the ground,
by encountering the rugged stock of an oak.
I dismounted and flew to her succour. The snow
was already dyed with the blood which flowed from
some wound in her head, and she lay without sense or
motion. My terrors did not hinder me from anxiously
searching for the hurt which was received, and
ascertaining
the extent of the injury. Her forehead was
considerably bruised; but; to my unspeakable joy, the
blood flowed from the nostrils, and was, therefore, to
be regarded as no mortal symptom.
I lifted her in my arms, and looked around me for
some means of relief. The house at which I proposed
to stop was upwards of a mile distant. I remembered
none that was nearer. To place the wounded girl on
my own horse, and proceed gently to the house in
question
,
was the sole expedient; but, at present, she was
senseless, and might, on recovering, be too feeble to
sustain her own weight.
To recall her to life was my first duty; but I was
powerless, or unacquainted with the means. I gazed
upon her features, and endeavored, by pressing her in
my arms, to inspire her with some warmth. I looked
towards the road, and listened for the wished-for sound
of some carriage that might be prevailed on to stop and
receive her. Nothing was more improbable than that
either pleasure or business would induce men to
encounter
so chilling and vehement a blast. To be
lighted
on by some traveller was, therefore, an hopeless
event.
Meanwhile, Eliza's swoon continued, and my alarm
increased. What effect her half-frozen blood would
have in prolonging this condition, or preventing her
return to life, awakened the deepest apprehensions. I
left the wood, still bearing her in my arms, and
re-entered
the road, from the desire of descrying, as soon as
possible, the coming passenger. I looked this way
and that, and again listened. Nothing but the
sweeping
blast, rent and falling branches, and snow that
filled
and obscured the air, were perceivable. Each
moment
retarded the course of my own blood and stiffened
my sinews, and made the state of my companion more
desperate. How was I to act? To perish myself or see
her perish, was an ignoble fate: courage and activity
were still able to avert it. My horse stood near, docile
and obsequious; to mount him and to proceed on my way,
holding my lifeless burthen in my arms, was all that
remained
.
At this moment my attention was called by several
voices, issuing from the wood. It was the note of
gaiety
and glee: presently a sleigh, with several persons of
both sexes, appeared, in a road which led through the
forest into that in which I stood. They moved at a
quick pace, but their voices were hushed and they
checked
the speed of their horses on discovering us. No
occurrence
was more auspicious than this; for I relied
with perfect confidence on the benevolence of these
persons, and as soon as they came near, claimed their
assistance.
G 3
My story was listened to with sympathy, and one of
the young men, leaping from the sleigh, assisted me in
placing Eliza in the place which he had left. A female,
of sweet aspect and engaging manners, insisted upon
turning back and hastening to the house, where it
seems her father resided, and which the party had just
left. I rode after the sleigh, which in a few minutes
arrived at the house.
The dwelling was spacious and neat, and a venerable
man and woman, alarmed by the quick return of the
young people, came forth to know the cause. They
received their guest with the utmost tenderness, and
provided her with all the accommodations which her
condition required. Their daughter relinquished the
scheme of pleasure in which she had been engaged,
and, compelling her companions to depart without her,
remained to nurse and console the sick.
A little time shewed that no lasting injury had been
suffered. Contusions, more troublesome than
dangerous
,
and easily curable by such applications as rural
and traditional wisdom has discovered, were the only
consequences of the fall. My mind, being relieved
from apprehensions on this score, had leisure to reflect
upon the use which might be made of the present state
of things.
When I marked the structure of this house, and
the features and deportment of its inhabitants,
methought
I discerned a powerful resemblance between
this family and Hadwin's. It seemed as if some
benignant
power had led us hither as to the most suitable
asylum that could be obtained; and in order to supply,
to the forlorn Eliza, the place of those parents and
that sister she had lost, I conceived, that, if their
concurrence could be gained, no abode was more
suitable
than this. No time was to be lost in gaining this
concurrence. The curiosity of our host and hostess,
whose name was Curling, speedily afforded me an
opportunity
to disclose the history and real situation of
my friend. There were no motives to reserve or
prevarication
.
There was nothing which I did not
faithfully
and circumstantially relate. I concluded with
stating my wishes that they would admit my friend as a
boarder into their house.
The old man was warm in his concurrence. His
wife betrayed some scruples; which, however, her
husband's
arguments and mine removed. I did not even
suppress the tenor and destruction of the will, and the
antipathy which Eliza had conceived for her uncle, and
which I declared myself unable to explain. It presently
appeared that Mr. Curling had some knowledge of
Philip
Hadwin, and that the latter had acquired the repute
of being obdurate and profligate. He employed all
means to accomplish his selfish ends, and would
probably
endeavor to usurp the property which his brother
had left. To provide against his power and his malice
would be particularly incumbent on us, and my new
friend readily promised his assistance in the measures
which we should take to that end.
CHAPTER IX.
The
state of my feelings may be easily conceived to
consist of mixed, but on the whole, of agreeable
sensations
.
The death of Hadwin and his elder daughter
could not be thought upon without keen regrets. These
it were useless to indulge, and were outweighed by
reflections
on the personal security in which the survivor
was now placed. It was hurtful to expend my
unprofitable
cares upon the dead, while there existed one to
whom they could be of essential benefit, and in whose
happiness they would find an ample compensation.
This happiness, however, was still incomplete. It
was still exposed to hazard, and much remained to be
done before adequate provision was made against the
worst of evils, poverty. I now found that Eliza, being
only fifteen years old, stood in need of a guardian, and
that the forms of law required that some one should make
himself her father's administrator. Mr. Curling being
tolerably conversant with these subjects, pointed out
the mode to be pursued, and engaged to act on this
occasion
as Eliza's friend.
There was another topic on which my happiness, as well
as that of my friend, required us to form some decision. I
formerly mentioned, that during my abode at
Malverton
,
I had not been insensible to the attractions of this
girl. An affection had stolen upon me, for which, it
was easily discovered, that I should not have been
denied
a suitable return. My reasons for stifling these
emotions, at that time, have been mentioned. It may
now be asked, what effect subsequent events had
produced
on my feelings, and how far partaking and relieving her distresses, had revived a passion which may readily be supposed to have been, at no time, entirely
extinguished
.
The impediments which then existed, were removed.
Our union would no longer risk the resentment or
sorrow of her excellent parent. She had no longer a
sister to divide with her the property of the farm, and
make what was sufficient for both, when living
together, too little for either separately. Her youth
and simplicity required, beyond most others, a legal
protector, and her happiness was involved in the
success
of those hopes which she took no pains to conceal.
As to me, it seemed at first view, as if every incident
conspired to determine my choice. Omitting all regard
to the happiness of others, my own interest could not
fail to recommend a scheme by which the precious
benefits
of competence and independence might be
honestly
obtained. The excurions of my fancy had
sometimes
carried me beyond the bounds prescribed by my
situation, but they were, nevertheless, limited to that
field to which I had once some prospect of acquiring a
title. All I wanted for the basis of my gaudiest and
most dazzling structures, was an hundred acres of
plough-land and meadow. Here my spirit of
improvement
,
my zeal to invent and apply new maxims of
household luxury and convenience, new modes and
instruments
of tillage, new arts connected with orchard,
garden and cornfield, were supplied with abundant
scope. Though the want of these would not benumb
my activity, or take away content, the possession
would confer exquisite and permanent enjoyments.
My thoughts have ever hovered over the images of
wife and children with more delight than over any other
images. My fancy was always active on this theme,
and its reveries sufficiently extatic and glowing; but
since my intercourse with this girl, my scattered visions
were collected and concentered. I had now a form and
features before me, a sweet and melodious voice vibrated
in my ear, my soul was filled, as it were, with her
lineaments
and gestures, actions and looks. All ideas,
possessing
any relation to beauty or sex, appeared to
assume
this shape. They kept an immoveable place in
my mind, they diffused around them an ineffable
complacency
.
Love is merely of value as a prelude to a
more tender, intimate and sacred union. Was I not in
love, and did I not pant after the irrevocable bonds, the
boundless privileges of wedlock?
The question which others might ask, I have asked
myself. Was I not in love? I am really at a loss for an
answer. There seemed to be irresistible weight in the
reasons why I should refuse to marry, and even forbear
to foster love in my friend. I considered my youth,
my defective education and my limited views. I had
passed from my cottage into the world. I had acquired
even in my transient sojourn among the busy haunts of
men, more knowledge than the lucubrations and
employments
of all my previous years had conferred.
Hence I might infer the childlike immaturity of my
understanding
,
and the rapid progress I was still capable of
making. Was this an age to form an irrevocable
contract
;
to chuse the companion of my future life, the
associate of my schemes of intellectual and benevolent
activity?
I had reason to contemn my own acquisitions; but were
not those of Eliza still more slender? Could I rely upon
the permanence of her equanimity and her docility to
my instructions? What qualities might not time
unfold
,
and how little was I qualified to estimate the
character
of one, whom no vicissitude or hardship had
approached
before the death of her father? Whose
ignorance
was, indeed, great, when it could justly be said
even to exceed my own.
Should I mix with the world, enrol myself in
different
classes of society; be a witness to new scenes;
might not my modes of judging undergo essential
variations
?
Might I not gain the knowledge of beings
whose virtue was the gift of experience and the growth
of knowledge? Who joined to the modesty and charms
of woman, the benefits of education, the maturity and
steadfastness of age, and with whose character and
sertiments
my own would be much more congenial than
they could possibly be with the extreme youth, rustic
simplicity and mental imperfections of Eliza Hadwin?
To say truth, I was now conscious of a revolution in
my mind. I can scarcely assign its true cause. No
tokens of it appeared during my late retreat to
Malverton
.
Subsequent incidents, perhaps, joined with the
influence of meditation, had generated new views. On
my first visit to the city, I had met with nothing but
scenes of folly, depravity and cunning. No wonder
that the images connected with the city, were disastrous
and gloomy; but my second visit procuced somewhat
different impressions. Maravigli, Estwick, Medlicote
and you, were beings who inspired veneration and love.
Your residence appeared to beautify and consecrate this
spot, and gave birth to an opinion that if cities are the
chosen seats of misery and vice, they are likewise the
soil of all the laudable and strenuous productions of
mind.
My curiosity and thirst of knowledge had likewise
received a new direction. Books and inanimate nature
were cold and lifeless instructors. Men, and the works
of men, were the objects of rational study, and our
own eyes only could communicate just conceptions of
human performances. The influence of manners,
professions
and social institutions, could be thoroughly
known only by direct inspection.
Competence, fixed property and a settled abode,
rural
occupations and conjugal pleasures, were justly to be
prized; but their value could be known, and their
benefits
fully enjoyed only by those who have tried all
scenes; who have mixed with all classes and ranks;
who have partaken of all conditions; and who have
visited
different hemispheres and climates and nations.
The next five or eight years of my life, should be
devoted
to activity and change: it should be a period of
hardship, danger and privation: it should be my
apprenticeship
to fortitude and wisdom, and be employed to fit
me for the tranquil pleasures and steadfast exertions of
the remainder of my life.
In consequence of these reflections, I determined to
suppress that tenderness which the company of Miss
Hadwin produced, to remove any mistakes into which
she had fallen, and to put it out of my power to claim
from her more than the dues of friendship. All
ambiguities
,
in a case like this, and all delays were hurtful. She
was not exempt from passion, but this passion I thought
was young, and easily extinguished.
In a short time her health was restored, and her
grief melted down into a tender melancholy. I chose a
suitable moment, when not embarrassed by the presence
of others, to reveal my thoughts. My disclosure
was ingenuous and perfect. I laid before her the whole
train of my thoughts, nearly in the order, though in
different
and more copious terms than those in which I
have just explained them to you. I concealed nothing.
The impression which her artless lovelines had made
upon me at Malverton; my motives for estranging
myself from her society; the nature of my present
feelings
with regard to her, and my belief of the state of
her heart; the reasonings into which I had entered; the
advantages of wedlock and its inconveniences; and,
finally, the resolution I had formed of seeking the city,
and perhaps, of crossing the ocean, were minutely
detailed
.
She interrupted me not, but changing looks, blushes,
flutterings and sighs, shewed her to be deeply and
variously
affected by my discourse. I paused for some
observation
or comment. She seemed conscious of my
expectation
,
but had no power to speak. Overpowered, at
length, by her emotions, she burst into tears.
I was at a loss in what manner to construe these
symptoms. I waited till her vehemence was
somewhat
subsided, and then saidwhat think you of
my schemes? Your approbation is of some moment:
do you approve of them or not?
This question excited some little resentment, and
she answeredyou have left me nothing to say. Go
and be happy: no matter what becomes of me. I hope
I shall be able to take care of myself.
The tone in which this was said, had something in it
of upbraiding. Your happiness, said I, is too dear to
me to leave it in danger. In this house you will not
need my protection, but I shall never be so far from you,
as to be disabled from hearing how you fared, by letter,
and of being active for your good. You have some
money
which you must husband well. Any rent from
your farm cannot be soon expected; but what you have
got, if you remain with Mr. Curling, will pay your
board and all other expences for two years: but you
must be a good economist. I shall expect, continued
I, with a serious smile, a punctual account of all your
sayings and doings. I must know how every minute is
employed, and every penny is expended, and if I find
you erring, I must tell you so in good round terms.
These words did not dissipate the sullenness which
her looks had betrayed. She still forebore to look at me,
and saidI do not know how I should tell you every
thing. You care so little about me thatI should only
be troublesome. I am old enough to think and act for
myself, and shall advise with no body but myself.
That is true, said I. I shall rejoice to see you
independent
and free. Consult your own understanding,
and act according to its dictates. Nothing more is
wanting to make you useful and happy. I am anxious
to return to the city; but, if you will allow me, will
go first to Malverton, see that things are in due order,
and that old Caleb is well. From thence, if you please,
I will call at your uncle's, and tell him what has
happened
.
He may, otherwise, entertain pretensions and
form views, erroneous in themselves and injurious to
you. He may think himself entitled to manage your
estate. He may either suppose a will to have been
made, or may actually have heard from your father, or
from others, of that which you burnt, and in which he
was named executor. His boisterous and sordid
temper
H
may prompt him to seize your house and goods,
unless
seasonably apprised of the truth; and, when he
knows the truth, he may start into rage, which I shall
be more fitted to encounter than you. I am told that
anger transforms him into a ferocious madman. Shall
I call upon him?
She shuddered at the picture which I had drawn of
her uncle's character; but this emotion quickly gave place to self-upbraiding, for the manner in which she
had repelled my proffers of service. She melted once
more into tears and exclaimed:
I am not worthy of the pains you take for me. I
am unfeeling and ungrateful. Why should I think ill
of you for despising me, when I despise myself?
You do yourself injustice, my friend. I think I see
your most secret thoughts; and these, instead of
exciting
anger or contempt, only awaken compassion and
tenderness. You love; and must, therefore, conceive
my conduct to be perverse and cruel. I counted on
your harboring such thoughts. Time only and
reflection
will enable you to see my motives in their true
light. Hereafter you will recollect my words, and
find them sufficient to justify my conduct. You will
acknowledge the propriety of my engaging in the cares
of the world, before I sit down in retirement and
ease.
Ah! how much you mistake me! I admire and
approve of your schemes. What angers and distresses
me is, that you think me unworthy to partake of your
cares and labors; that you regard my company as an
obstacle and incumbrance; that assistance and counsel
must all proceed from you; and that no scene is fit for
me, but what you regard as slothful and inglorious.
Have I not the same claims to be wise, and active,
and courageous as you? If I am ignorant and weak, do
I not owe it to the same cause that has made you so; and
will not the same means which promote your
improvement
be likewise useful to me? You desire to obtain
knowledge, by travelling and conversing with many
persons, and studying many sciences; but you desire
it for yourself alone. Me, you think poor, weak, and
contemptible; fit for nothing but to spin and churn.
Provided I exist, am screened from the weather, have
enough to eat and drink, you are satisfied. As to
strengthening my mind and enlarging my knowledge,
these things are valuable to you, but on me they are
thrown away. I deserve not the gift.
This strain, simple and just as it was, was wholly
unexpected. I was surprized and disconcerted. In
my previous reasonings I had certainly considered her
sex as utterly unfitting her for those scenes and
pursuits
,
to which I had destined myself. Not a doubt of
the validity of my conclusion had insinuated itself;
but now my belief was shaken, though it was not
subverted
.
I could not deny, that human ignorance was
curable by the same means in one sex as in the other;
that fortitude and skill was of no less value to one than
to the other.
Questionless, my friend was rendered, by her age
and inexperience, if not by sex, more helpless and
dependent
than I; but had I not been prone to overrate
the difficulties which I should encounter? Had I not
deemed unjustly of her constancy and force of mind?
Marriage would render her property joint, and would
not compel me to take up my abode in the woods, to
abide forever in one spot, to shackle my curiosity, or
limit my excursions.
But marriage was a contract awful and irrevocable.
Was this the woman with whom my reason enjoined
me to blend my fate, without the power of dissolution?
Would no time unfold qualities in her which I did not
at present suspect, and which would evince an incurable
difference in our minds? Would not time lead me to
the feet of one who more nearly approached that
standard
of ideal excellence which poets and romancers had
exhibited to my view?
These considerations were powerful and delicate. I
knew not in what terms to state them to my
companion
,
so as to preclude the imputation of arrogance or
indecorum. It became me, however, to be explicit,
H 2
and to excite her resentment rather than mislead her
judgment. She collected my meaning from a few
words, and, interrupting me, said:
How very low is the poor Eliza in your opinion!
We are, indeed, both too young to be married. May I
not see you, and talk with you, without being your
wife? May I not share your knowledge, relieve your
cares, and enjoy your confidence, as a sister might do?
May I not accompany you in your journeys and
studies
,
as one friend accompanies another? My
property
may be yours; you may employ it for your benefit
and mine; not because you are my husband, but my
friend. You are going to the city. Let me go along
with you. Let me live where you live. The house
that is large enough to hold you, will hold me. The
fare that is good enough for you will be luxury to me.
Oh! let it be so, will you? You cannot think how
studious, how thoughtful, how inquisitive I will be.
How tenderly I will nurse you when sick: it is
possible
you may be sick, you know, and no one in the
world will be half so watchful and affectionate as I
shall be. Will you let me?
In saying this, her earnestness gave new pathos to
her voice. Insensibly she put her face close to mine,
and, transported beyond the usual bounds of reserve,
by the charms of that picture which her fancy
contemplated
,
she put her lips to my cheek, and repeated,
in a melting accent, will you let me?
You, my friends, who have not seen Eliza Hadwin,
cannot conceive what effect this entreaty was adapted to produce in me. She has surely the sweetest voice,
the most speaking features, and most delicate
symetry
,
that ever woman possessed. Her guileless
simplicity
and tenderness made her more enchanting. To
be the object of devotion to an heart so fervent and
pure, was, surely, no common privilege. Thus did she
tender me herself; and was not the gift to be received
with eagerness and gratitude?
No. I was not so much a stranger to mankind as
to acquiesce in this scheme. As my sister or my wife,
the world would suffer us to reside under the same roof;
to apply, to common use, the same property; and daily
to enjoy the company of each other: but she was not
my sister, and marriage would be an act of the grossest
indiscretion. I explained to her, in few words, the
objections to which her project was liable.
Well, then, said she, let me live in the next house,
in the neighborhood, or, at least, in the same city.
Let me be where I may see you once a day, or once a
week, or once a month. Shut me not wholly from
your society, and the means of becoming, in time, less
ignorant and foolish than I now am.
After a pause, I replied, I love you too well not to
comply with this request. Perhaps the city will be as
suitable a residence as any other for you, as it will, for
some time, be most convenient to me. I shall be
better
able to watch over your welfare, and supply you
with the means of improvement, when you are within
a small distance. At present, you must consent to
remain
here, while I visit your uncle, and afterwards go
to the city. I shall look out for you a suitable
lodging
,
and inform you when it is found. If you then
continue in the same mind, I will come, and, having
gained the approbation of Mr. Curling, will conduct
you to town. Here ended our dialogue.
H 3
CHAPTER X.
Though
I had consented to this scheme, I was
conscious
that some hazards attended it. I was afraid of
calumny, which might trouble the peace or destroy the
reputation of my friend. I was afraid of my own
weakness, which might be seduced into an indiscreet
marriage, by the charms or sufferings of this
bewitching
creature. I felt that there was no price too dear
to save her from slander. A fair fame is of the
highest
importance to a young female, and the loss of it
but poorly supplied by the testimony of her own
conscience
.
I had reason for tenfold solicitude on this
account
,
since I was her only protector and friend.
Hence, I cherished some hopes, that time might change
her views, and suggest less dangerous schemes. Mean
while, I was to lose no time in visiting Malverton and
Philip Hadwin.
About ten days had elapsed since we had deserted
Malverton. These were days of successive storms,
and travelling had been rendered inconvenient. The
weather was now calm and clear, and, early in the
morning that ensued the dialogue which I have just
related, I set out on horseback.
Honest Caleb was found, eating his breakfast,
nearly
in the spot where he had been first discovered.
He answered my enquiries by saying, that, two days
after our departure, several men had come to the house,
one of whom was Philip Hadwin. They had
interrogated
him as to the condition of the farm, and the
purpose
of his remaining on it. William Hadwin they
knew to have been sometime dead, but where were the
girls, his daughters?
Caleb answered that Susy, the eldest, was likewise
dead.
These tidings excited astonishment. When died
she, and how, and where was she buried?
It happened two days before, and she was buried, he
believed, but could not tell where.
Not tell where? By whom then was she buried?
Really, he could not tell. Some strange man came
there just as she was dying. He went to the room, and
when she was dead, took her away, but what he did
with the body, was more than he could say, but he had
a notion that he buried it. The man staid till the
morning, and then went off with Lizzy, leaving him to
keep house by himself. He had not seen either of
them, nor indeed, a single soul since.
This was all the information that Caleb could afford
the visitants. It was so lame and incredible, that they
began to charge the man with falsehood, and to threaten
him with legal animadversion. Just then, Mr.
Ellisentered
the house, and being made acquainted with the subject
of discourse, told all that he himself knew. He related
the midnight visit which I had paid him, explained my
former situation in the family, and my disappearance in
September. He stated the advice he had given me to
carry Eliza to her uncle's, and my promise to comply
with his counsel. The uncle declared he had seen
nothing
of his niece, and Caleb added, that when she set
out, she took the road that led to town.
These hints afforded grounds for much conjecture
and suspicion. Ellis now mentioned some intelligence
that he had gathered respecting me in a late journey to
_____. It seems I was the son of an honest
farmer in that quarter, who married a tidy girl of a
milk maid, that lived with him. My father had
detected
me in making some atrocious advances to my
mother-in-law
,
and had turned me out of doors. I did not
go off, however, without rifling his drawer of some
hundreds of dollars, which he had laid up against a rainy
day. I was noted for such pranks, and was hated by
all the neighbors for my pride and laziness. It was
easy by comparison of circumstances, for Ellis to
ascertain
that Hadwin's servant Mervyn, was the same
against whom such hearty charges were laid.
Previously to this journey, he had heard of me from
Hadwin, who was loud in praise of my diligence,
sobriety
and modesty. For his part, he had always been
cautious of giving countenance to vagrants, that came
from nobody knew where, and worked their way with a
plausible tongue. He was not surprised to hear it
whispered that Betsey Hadwin had fallen in love
with the youth, and now, no doubt, he had
persuaded
her to run away with him. The heiress of a fine
farm was a prize not to be met with every day.
Philip broke into rage at this news; swore that if it
turned out so, his niece should starve upon the town,
and that he would take good care to baulk the lad.
His brother he well knew had left a will, to which he
was executor, and that this will, would in good time,
be forth coming. After much talk and ransacking the
house, and swearing at his truant niece, he and his
company
departed, charging Caleb to keep the house and
its contents for his use. This was all that Caleb's
memory
had retained of that day's proceedings.
Curling had lately commented on the character of
Philip Hadwin. This man was totally unlike his
brother, was a noted brawler and bully, a tyrant to his
children, a plague to his neighbors, and kept a
rendezvous
for drunkards and idlers, at the sign of the Bull's
Head, at_____. He was not destitute of parts,
and was no less dreaded for cunning than malignity.
He was covetous, and never missed an opportunity of
overreaching his neighbor. There was no doubt that
his niece's property would be embezzled, should it ever
come into his hands, and any power which he might
obtain
over her person, would be exercised to her
destruction
.
His children were tainted with the dissoluteness
of their father, and marriage had not repaired the
reputation
of his daughters, or cured them of depravity:
this was the man whom I now proposed to visit.
I scarcely need to say that the calumny of Betty
Lawrence gave me no uneasiness. My father had no doubt
been deceived, as well as my father's neighbors, by the
artifices of this woman. I passed among them for a
thief and a profligate, but their error had hitherto been
harmless to me. The time might come which should
confute the tale, without my efforts. Betty, sooner or
later would drop her mask, and afford the antidote to
her own poisons, unless some new incident should occur
to make me hasten the catastrophe.
I arrived at Hadwin's house. I was received with
some attention as a guest. I looked among the pimpled
visages that filled the piazza, for that of the landlord,
but found him in an inner apartment with two or three
more, seated round a table. On intimating my wish to
speak with him alone, the others withdrew.
Hadwin's visage had some traces of resemblance to
his brother; but the meek, placid air, pale cheeks and
slender form of the latter, were powerfully contrasted
with the bloated arrogance, imperious brow and robust
limbs of the former. This man's rage was awakened
by a straw; it impelled him in an instant to oaths and
buffetings, and made his life an eternal brawl. The
sooner my interview with such a personage should be at
an end, the better. I therefore explained the purpose
of my coming as fully and in as few words as possible.
Your name, Sir, is Philip Hadwin. Your brother
William, of Malverton, died lately and left two
daughters
.
The youngest only is now alive, and I come,
commissioned from her, to inform you, that as no will
of her father's is extant, she is preparing to administer
to his estate. As her father's brother, she thought you
entitled to this information.
The change which took place in the countenance of
this man, during this address, was remarkable, but not
easily described. His cheeks contracted a deeper
crimson
,
his eyes sparkled, and his face assumed an
expression
in which curiosity was mingled with rage. He
bent forwards and said, in an hoarse and contemptuous
tone, pray, is your name Mervyn?
I answered, without hesitation, and as if the
question
were wholly unimportant, yes: my name is
Mervyn
.
God damn it! You then are the damn'd rascal(but
permit me to repeat his speech without the oaths, with
which it was plentifully interlarded. Not three words
were uttered without being garnished with aGod
damn it! damnation! I'll be damn'd to hell ifand
the like energetic expletives.) You then are the
rascal
that robbed Billy's house; that ran away with the
fool his daughter; persuaded her to burn her father's
will, and have the hellish impudence to come into this
house! But I thank you for it. I was going to look
for youyouv'e saved me trouble. I'll settle all
accounts
with you here. Fair and softly, my good lad!
If I don't bring you to the gallowsIf I let you escape
without such a dressing! Damned impudence!
Fellow
!
I've been at Malverton. I've heard of your
tricks: so! finding the will not quite to your mind,
knowing that the executor would baulk your schemes,
you threw the will into the fire; you robbed the house
of all the cash, and made off with the girl!The old
fellow saw it all, and will swear to the truth.
These words created some surprize. I meant not to
conceal from this man the tenor and destruction of the
will, nor even the measures which his niece had taken
or intended to take. What I supposed to be unknown
to him, appeared to have been communicated by the
talkative Caleb, whose mind was more inquisitive and
less sluggish than first appearances had led me to
imagine
.
Instead of moping by the kitchen fire, when
Eliza and I were conversing in an upper room, it now
appeared that he had reconnoitred our proceedings
through some key hole or crevice, and had related what
he had seen to Hadwin.
Hadwin proceeded to exhaust his rage in oaths and
menaces. He frequently clenched his fist, and thrust
it in my face, drew it back as if to render his blow more
deadly; ran over the same series of exclamations on my
impudence and villainy, and talked of the gallows and
the whipping-post; enforced each word by the epithets
damnable
and
hellish
closed each sentence withand
be curst to you!
There was but one mode for me to pursue: all
forcible
opposition to a man of his strength was absurd. It
was my province to make his anger confine itself to
words, and patiently to wait till the paroxism should
end or subside of itself. To effect this purpose, I kept
my seat, and carefully excluded from my countenance
every indication of timidity and panick on the one hand,
and of scorn and defiance on the other. My look and
attitude were those of a man who expected harsh
words, but who entertained no suspicion that blows
would be inflicted.
I was indebted for my safety to an inflexible adherence
to this medium. To have strayed, for a moment, to
either
side, would have brought upon me his blows.
That he did not instantly resort to violence, inspired me
with courage, since it depended on myself whether food
should be supplied to his passion. Rage must
either
progress or decline, and since it was in total want
of provocation, it could not fail of gradually subsiding.
My demeanor was calculated to damp the flame, not
only by its direct influence but by diverting his
attention
from the wrongs which he had received, to the
novelty
of my behaviour. The disparity in size and
strength between us, was too evident to make him
believe
that I confided in my sinews for my defence; and
since I betrayed neither contempt nor fear; he could
not but conclude that I trusted to my own integrity or
to his moderation. I seized the first pause in his
rhetorick
to enforce this sentiment.
You are angry, Mr. Hadwin, and are loud in your
threats, but they do not frighten me. They excite no
apprehension or alarm, because I know myself able to
convince you that I have not injured you. This is an
inn, and I am your guest. I am sure I shall find
better
entertainment than blows. Come, continued I,
smiling, it is possible that I am not so mischievous a
wretch as your fancy paints me. I have no claims
upon
your niece but that of friendship, and she is now in
the house of an honest man, Mr. Curling, where she
proposes to continue as long as is convenient.
It is true that your brother left a will, which his
daughter burnt in my presence, because she dreaded
the authority which that will gave you, not only over
her property, but person. It is true that on leaving the
house, she took away the money which was now her
own, and which was necessary to subsistence. It is
true that I bore her company, and have left her in an
honest man's keeping. I am answerable for nothing
more. As to you, I meant not to injure you; I
advised
not the burning of the will. I was a stranger till
after
that event, to your character. I knew neither
good nor ill of you. I came to tell you all this,
because
,
as Eliza's uncle, you had a right to the
information
.
So! you come to tell me that she burnt the will,
and is going to administerto what, I beseech you?
To her father's property? Aye, I warrant you; but
take this along with you, that property is mine; land,
house, stock, every thing. All is safe and snug under
cover of a mortgage, to which Billy was kind enough
to add a bond. One was sued, and the other
entered
up
, a week ago. So that all is safe under my thumb,
and the girl may whistle or starve for me. I shall
give myself no concern about the strumpet. You
thought to get a prize; but, damn me, you've met
with your match in me. Phil. Haddin's not so easily
choused, I promise you. I intended to give you this
news, and a drubbing into the bargain; but you may
go, and make haste. She burnt the will, did she;
because
I was named in itand sent you to tell me so?
Good souls! It was kind of you, and I am bound to
be thankful. Take her back news of the mortgage;
and, as for you, leave my house. You may go scot
free this time; but I pledge my word for a sound
beating
when you next enter these doors. I'll pay it you
with interest. Leave my house, I say!
A mortgage, said I, in a low voice, and affecting
not to hear his commands, that will be sad news for
my friend. Why, sir, you are a fortunate man.
Malverton
is an excellent spot; well watered and
manured
;
newly and completely fenced: not a larger barn
in the county: oxen, and horses, and cows in the best
order: I never sat eyes on a finer orchard. By my
faith, sir, you are a fortunate man. But, pray, what
have you for dinner? I am hungry as a wolf. Order
me a beef-steak, and some potation or other. The
bottle
thereit is cyder, I take it; pray, push it to this
side. Saying this, I stretched out my hand towards
the bottle which stood before him.
I confided in the power of a fearless and sedate
manner
.
Methought that as anger was the food of anger,
it must unavoidably subside in a contest with equability.
This opinion was intuitive, rather than the product of
experience, and perhaps, I gave no proof of my sagacity
in hazarding my safety on its truth. Hadwin's
character
made him dreaded and obeyed by all. He had
been accustomed to ready and tremulous submission
from men far more brawny and robust than I was, and
to find his most vehement menaces and gestures,
totally
ineffectual on a being so slender and diminutive, at
once wound up his rage and excited his astonishment.
One motion counteracted and suspended the other.
He lifted his hand, but delayed to strike. One blow,
applied with his usual dexterity, was sufficient to
destroy
me. Though seemingly careless, I was watchful
of his motions, and prepared to elude the stroke by
shrinking or stooping. Meanwhile, I stretched my hand
far enough to seize the bottle, and pouring its contents
into a tumbler, put it to my lips.
I
Come, sir, I drink your health, and wish you speedy
possession of Malverton. I have some interest with
Eliza, and will prevail on her to forbear all opposition
and complaint. Why should she complain? While I
live, she shall not be a beggar. No doubt, your claim
is legal, and therefore ought to be admitted. What
the law gave, the law has taken away. Blessed be the
dispensers of lawexcellent cyder! open another
bottle
,
will you, and I beseech hasten dinner, if you would
not see me devour the table.
It was just, perhaps, to conjure up the demon avarice to
fight with the demon anger. Reason alone, would, in
such a contest, be powerless, but, in truth, I spoke
without artifice or disguise. If his claim were legal,
opposition would be absurd and pernicious. I meant
not to rely upon his own assertions, and would not
acknowledge
the validity of his claim, till I had inspected
the deed. Having instituted suits, this was now in a
public office, and there the inspection should be made.
Meanwhile, no reason could be urged why I should part
from him in anger, while his kindred to Eliza, and his
title to her property, made it useful to secure his favor.
It was possible to obtain a remission of his claims, even
when the law enforced them: it would be imprudent at
least to diminish the chances of remission by festering
his wrath and provoking his enmity.
What, he exclaimed, in a transport of fury, a'n't I
master of my own house? Out, I say!
These were harsh terms, but they were not
accompanied
by gestures and tones so menacing as those
which had before been used. It was plain that the
tide, which so lately threatened my destruction, had
oegun to recede. This encouraged me to persist.
Be not alarmed, my good friend, said I,
placidly
and smiling. A man of your bone need not
fear a pigmy like me. I shall scarcely be able to
dethrone
you in your own castle, with an army of
hostlers
,
tapsters, and cooks at your beck. You shall still
be master here, provided you use your influence to
procure
me a dinner.
His acquiescence in a pacific system, was extremely
reluctant and gradual. He laid aside one sullen tone
and wrathful look after the other; and, at length,
consented not only to supply me with a dinner, but to
partake of it with me. Nothing was more a topic of
surprize to himself, than his forbearance. He knew
not how it was. He had never been treated so before.
He was not proof against entreaty and submission; but
I had neither supplicated nor submitted. The stuff
that I was made of was at once damnably tough and
devilishly pliant. When he thought of my impudence,
in staying in his house after he had bade me leave it, he
was tempted to resume his passion. When he reflected
on my courage, in making light of his anger,
notwithstanding
his known impetuosity and my personal
inferiority
,
he could not withhold his esteem. But my
patience
under his rebukes, my unalterable equanimity,
and my ready consent to the validity of his claims,
scothed and propitiated him.
An exemption from blows and abuse was all that I
could gain from this man. I told him the truth, with
regard to my own history, so far as it was connected
with the Hadwins. I exhibited, in affecting colours,
the helpless condition of Eliza; but could extort from
him nothing but his consent, that, if she chose, she
might come and live with him. He would give her
victuals and clothes for so much house-work as she was
able to do. If she chose to leve elsewhere, he
promised
not to molest her, or intermeddle in her concerns.
The house and land were his by law, and he would
have them.
It was not my province to revile, or expostulate with
him. I stated what measures would be adopted by a
man who regarded the interest of others more than his
own; who was anxious for the welfare of an innocent
girl, connected with him so closely by the ties of
kindred
,
and who was destitute of what is called natural
friends. If he did not cancel, for her sake, his bond
and mortgage, he would, at least, afford her a frugal
maintainance. He would extend to her, in all
emergences
,
his counsel and protection.
I 2
All that, he said, was sheer nonsense. He could
not sufficiently wonder at my folly, in proposing to him
to make a free gift of an hundred rich acres, to a girl
too who scarcely knew her right hand from her left;
whom the first cunning young rogue, like myself, would
chouse
out of the whole, and take herself into the
bargain
.
But my folly was even surpassed by my
impudence
,
since, as the
friend
of this girl, I was merely
petitioning on my own account. I had come to him,
whom I never saw before, on whom I had no claim,
and who, as I well knew, had reason to think me a
sharper, and modestly saidHere's a girl who has
no fortune. I am greatly in want of one. Pray, give
her such an estate that you have in your possession.
If you do,I'll marry her, and take it into my own hands.
I might be thankful that he did not answer such a
petition
with an horse-whipping. But if he did not give
her his estate, he might extend to her, forsooth, his
counsel and protection. That I've offered to do,
continued
he. She may come and live in my house, if she
will. She may do some of the family work. I'll
discharge
the chamber-maid to make room for her.
Lizzy
,
if I remember right, has a pretty face. She can't
have a better market for it than as chamber-maid to an
inn. If she minds her p's and q's she may make up a
handsome sum at the year's end.
I thought it time to break off the conference; and,
my dinner being finished, took my leave; leaving
behind
me the character of
a queer sort of chap
. I
speeded
to the prothonotary's office, which was kept in the
village, and quickly ascertained the truth of Hadwin's
pretensions. There existed a mortgage, with bond and
warrant of attorney, to so great an amount as would
swallow up every thing at Malverton. Furnished with
these tidings, I prepared, with a drooping heart, to
return to Mr. Curling's.
CHAPTER XI.
This
incident necessarily produced a change in my
views with regard to my friend. Her fortune
consisted
of a few hundreds of dollars, which, frugally
administered
,
might procure decent accommodation in the
country. When this was consumed, she must find
subsistence
in tending the big-wheel or the milk-pail,
unless
fortune should enable me to place her in a more
favorable
situation. This state was, in some respects,
but little different from that in which she had spent the
former part of her life; but, in her father's house,
these employments were dignified by being, in some
degree
,
voluntary, and relieved by frequent intervals of
recreation and leisure. Now they were likely to prove
irksome and servile, in consequence of being performed
for hire, and imposed by necessity. Equality, parental
solicitudes, and sisterly endearments would be wanting
to lighten the yoke.
These inconveniences, however, were imaginary. This
was the school in which fortitude and independence were
to be learned. Habit, and the purity of rural
manners
,
would, likewise, create a-new those ties which
death had dissolved. The affections of parent and
sister
would be supplied by the fonder and more rational
attachments of friendship. These toils were not
detrimental
to beauty or health. What was to be
dreaded
1 3
from them, was, their tendency to quench the spirit
of liberal curiosity; to habituate the person to bodily,
rather than intellectual, exertions; to supersede, and
create indifference or aversion to the only instruments
of rational improvement, the pen and the book.
This evil, however, was at some distance from
Eliza
.
Her present abode was quiet and serene. Here
she might enjoy domestic pleasures and opportunities
of mental improvement, for the coming twelvemonth
at least. This period would, perhaps, be sufficient for
the formation of studious habits. What schemes
should be adopted, for this end, would be determined
by the destiny to which I myself should be reserved.
My path was already chalked out, and my fancy
now pursued it with uncommon pleasure. To reside
in your family; to study your profession; to pursue
some subordinate or casual mode of industry, by
which I might purchase leisure for medical pursuits,
for social recreations, and for the study of
mankind
on your busy and thronged stage, was the scope
of my wishes. This destiny would not hinder punctual
correspondence and occasional visits to Eliza. Her
pen might be called into action, and her mind be
awakened
by books, and every hour be made to add to her
stores of knowledge and enlarge the bounds of her
capacity
.
I was spiritless and gloomy when I left ,
but reflections on my future lot, and just views of the
situation of my friend, insensibly restored my
cheerfulness
.
I arrived at Mr. Curling's in the evening,
and hastened to impart to Eliza the issue of my
commission. It gave her uneasiness, merely as it
frustrated the design, on which she had fondly mused,
of residing in the city. She was somewhat consoled
by my promises of being her constant correspondent and
occasional visitor.
Next morning I set out on my journey hither, on
foot. The way was not long; the weather, though
cold, was wholesome and serene. My spirits were
high, and I saw nothing in the world before me but
sunshine and prosperity. I was conscious that my
happiness
depended not on the revolutions of nature or the
caprice of man. All without was, indeed, vicissitude
and uncertainty; but within my bosom was a centre
not to be shaken or removed. My purposes were
honest
and steadfast. Every sense was the inlet of
pleasure
,
because it was the avenue to knowledge; and
my soul brooded over the world of ideas, and glowed
with exultation at the grandeur and beauty of its own
creations.
This felicity was too rapturous to be of long
duration
.
I gradually descended from these heights; and
the remembrance of past incidents, connected with the
images of your family, to which I was returning, led
my thoughts into a different channel. Welbeck and
the unhappy girl whom he had betrayed; Mrs. Villars
and Wallace were recollected a-new. The views which
I had formed, for determining the fate and affording
assistance to Clemenza, were recalled. My former
resolutions, with regard to her, had been suspended by
the uncertainty in which the fate of the Hadwins was,
at that time, wrapped. Had it not become necessary
wholly to lay aside these resolutions?
That, indeed, was an irksome conclusion. No
wonder
that I struggled to repel it: that I fostered the
doubt whether money was the only instrument of
benefit: whether caution, and fortitude, and
knowledge
were not the genuine preservatives from evil.
Had I not the means in my hands of dispelling her
fatal ignorance of Welbeck and of those with whom
she resided? Was I not authorized by my previous,
though slender, intercourse, to seek her presence?
Suppose I should enter Mrs. Villars' house, desire to
be introduced to the lady, accost her with affectionate
simplicity, and tell her the truth? Why be anxious to
smooth the way; why deal in apologies, circuities and
inuendoes? All these are feeble and perverse
refinements
,
unworthy of an honest purpose and an erect
spirit. To believe her inaccessible to my visit, was
absurd. To wait for the permission of those whose
interest
it might be to shut out visitants, was cowardice.
This was an infringement of her liberty, which equity and
law equally condemned. By what right could she be
restrained from intercourse with others? Doors and
passages may be between her and me. With a purpose
such as mine, no one had a right to close the one or
obstruct
the other. Away with cowardly reluctances
and clownish scruples, and let me hasten this moment
to her dwelling.
Mrs. Villars is the portress of the mansion. She
will probably present herself before me, and demand the
reason of my visit. What shall I say to her? The
truth. To faulter, or equivocate, or dissemble to this
woman, would be wicked. Perhaps her character has
been misunderstood and maligned. Can I render her a
greater service than to apprize her of the aspersions that
have rested on it, and afford her the opportunity of
vindication
?
Perhaps she is indeed selfish and profligate;
the betrayer of youth and the agent of laciviousness.
Does she not deserve to know the extent of her errors
and the ignominy of her trade? Does she not merit the
compassion of the good and the rebukes of the wise?
To shrink from the task, would prove me cowardly and
unfirm. Thus far, at least, let my courage extend.
Alas! Clemenza is unacquainted with my language.
My thoughts cannot make themselves apparent but by
words, and to my words she will be able to affix no
meaning. Yet is not that an hasty decision? The
vension
from the dramas of Zeno which I found in her
toilet
,
was probably hers, and proves her to have a
speculative
knowledge of our tongue. Near half a year has
since elapsed, during which she has dwelt with talkers
of English, and consequently could not fail to have
acquired
it. This conclusion is somewhat dubious, but
experiment will give it certainty.
Hitherto I had strolled along the path at a lingering
pace. Time enough, methought, to reach your
threshold
between sun-rise and moonlight, if my way had been
three times longer than it was. Yon were the pleasing
phantoms that hovered before me, and beckoned me
forward
.
What a total revolution had occurred in the
course of a few seconds, for thus long did my reasonings
with regard to Clemenza and the Villars require to pass
through my understanding, and escape, in half muttered
soliloquy, from my lips. My muscles trembled with
eagerness, and I bounded forward with impetuosity. I
saw nothing but a visto of catalpas, leafless, loaded
with icicles, and terminating in four chimneys and a
painted roof. My fancy outstripped my footsteps, and
was busy in picturing faces and rehearsing dialogues.
Presently I reached this new object of my pursuit,
darted through the avenue, noticed that some windows
of the house were unclosed, drew thence an hasty
inference
that the house was not without inhabitants, and
knocked, quickly and loudly, for admission.
Some one within crept to the door, opened it with
seeming caution, and just far enough to allow the face
to be seen. It was the timid, pale and unwashed face
of a girl who was readily supposed to be a servant,
taken
from a cottage, and turned into a bringer of wood
and water, and a scourer of tubs and trenchers. She
waited in timorous silence the delivery of my message.
Was Mrs. Villars at home?
No: she was gone to town.
Were any of her daughters within?
She could not tell; she believedshe thought
which did I want? Miss Hetty or Miss Sally?
Let me see Miss Hetty. Saying this, I pushed
gently
against the door. The girl, half reluctant, yielded
way: I entered the passage, and putting my hand on the
lock of a door that seemed to lead into a parlouris
Miss Hetty in this room?
No: there was nobody there.
Go call her then. Tell her there is one who wishes
to see her on important business. I will wait for her
coming in this room. So saying, I opened the door,
and entered the apartment, while the girl withdrew to
perform my message.
The parlour was spacious and expensively furnished,
but an air of negligence and disorder was every where
visible. The carpet was wrinkled and unswept; a
clock on the table, in a glass frame, so streaked and
spotted with dust as scarcely to be transparent, and the
index motionless, and pointing at four instead of nine;
embers scattered on the marble hearth, and tongs lying
on the fender with the handle in the ashes; an
harpsicord
,
uncovered, one end loaded with
scores
, tumbled
together in a heap, and the other with volumes of
novels
and plays, some on their edges, some on their backs,
gaping open by the scorching of their covers; rent;
blurred; stained; blotted; dog-eared; tables awry;
chairs crouding each other; in short, no object but
indicated
the neglect or ignorance of domestic neatness
and economy.
My leisure was employed in surveying these objects,
and in listening for the approach of Miss Hetty. Some
minutes elapsed, and no one came. A reason for
delay
was easily imagined, and I summoned patience to
wait. I opened a book; touched the instrument;
surveyed the vases on the mantle-tree; the figures on
the hangings, and the print of Apollo and the Sybil,
taken from Salvator, and hung over the chimney. I
eyed my own shape and garb in the mirror, and asked
how my rustic appearance would be regarded by that
supercilious and voluptuous being, to whom I was
about to present myself.
Presently the latch of the door was softly moved, it
opened, and the simpleton, before described, appeared.
She spoke, but her voice was so full of hesitation, and so
near a whisper, that much attention was needed to
make out her words: Miss Hetty was not at home
she was gone to town with her
mistiss
.
This was a tale not to be credited. How was I to
act? She persisted in maintaining the truth of it.
Well then, said I, at length, tell Miss Sally that I wish
to speak with her. She will answer my purpose just as
well.
Miss Sally was not at home neither. She had gone
to town too. They would not be back, she did not know
when: not till night, she supposed. It was so indeed,
none of them wasn't at home: none but she and Nanny
in the kitchenindeed'n there wasn't.
Go tell Nanny to come hereI will leave my
message
with her. She withdrew, but Nanny did not
receive
the summons, or thought proper not to obey it.
All was vacant and still.
My state was singular and critical. It was absurd
to prolong it; but to leave the house with my errand
unexecuted, would argue imbecility and folly. To
ascertain
Clemenza's presence in this house, and to gain an
interview, were yet in my power. Had I not boasted
of my intrepidity in braving denials and commands,
when they endeavored to obstruct my passage to this
woman? But here were no obstacles nor prohibitions.
Suppose the girl had said truth, that the matron and
her daughters were absent, and that Nanny and
herself
were the only guardians of the mansion. So much
the better. My design will not be opposed. I have
only to mount the stair, and go from one room to
another
,
till I find what I seek.
There was hazard, as well as plausibility, in this
scheme. I thought it best once more to endeavor to
extort information from the girl, and persuade her to be
my guide to whomsoever the house contained. I put
my hand to the bell and rung a brisk peal. No one
come. I passed into the entry, to the foot of a
staircase
,
and to a back window. Nobody was within
hearing
or sight.
Once more I reflected on the rectitude of my
intentions
,
on the possibility that the girl's assertions might
be true, on the benefits of expedition, and of gaining
access to the object of my visit without interruption or
delay. To these considerations was added a sort of
charm, not easily explained, and by no means
justifiable
,
produced by the very temerity and hazardness
accompanying
this attempt. I thought, with scornful
emotions, on the bars and hindrances which pride and
caprice, and delusive maxims of decorum, raise in the
way of human intercourse. I spurned at these
semblances
and substitutes of honesty, and delighted to
shake such fetters into air, and trample such
impediments
to dust. I wanted to see an human being, in
order to promote her happiness. It was doubtful
whether
she was within twenty paces of the spot where I
stood. The doubt was to be solved. How? By
examining
the space. I forthwith proceeded to examine it.
I reached the second story. I approached a door that
was closed I knocked: after a pause, a soft voice
said, who is there?
The accents were as musical as those of Clemenza,
but were in other respects, different. I had no topic
to discuss with this person. I answered not, yet
hesitated
to withdraw. Presently the same voice was
again heard: what is it you want? Why don't you
answer
?
Come in!I complied with the command, and
entered the room.
It was deliberation and foresight that led me hither,
and not chance or caprice. Hence, instead of being
disconcerted or vanquished by the objects that I saw, I
was tranquil and firm. My curiosity, however, made
me a vigilant observer. Two females, arrayed with
voluptuous negligence, in a manner adapted to the
utmost
seclusion, and seated in a careless attitude, on a
sofa, were now discovered.
Both darted glances at the door. One, who
appeared
to be the youngest, no sooner saw me, than
she shrieked, and starting from her seat, betrayed, in
the looks which she successively cast upon me, on
herself
and on the chamber, whose apparatus was in no
less confusion than that of the apartment below, her
consciousness of the unseasonableness of this meeting.
The other shrieked likewise, but on her it seemed to
be the token of surprize, rather than that of terror.
There was, probably, somewhat in my aspect and garb
that suggested an apology for this instrusion, as arising
from simplicity and mistake. She thought proper,
however
,
to assume the air of one offended, and looking
sternelyHow now, fellow, said she, what is this?
Why come you hither?
This questioner was of mature age, but had not
passed
the period of attractiveness and grace. All the
beauty that nature had bestowed was still retained, but
the portion had never been great. What the possessed
was so modelled and embellished by such a carriage and
dress, as to give it most power over the senses of the
gazer. In proportion, however, as it was intended
and adapted to captivate those, who know none but
physical pleasures, it was qualified to breed distaste and
aversion in me.
I am sensible how much error may have lurked in
this decision. I had brought with me the belief of
their being unchaste; and seized, perhaps, with too
much avidity, any appearance that coincided with my
prepossessions. Yet the younger by no means inspired
the same disgust; though I had no reason to suppose
her more unblemished than the elder. Her modesty
seemed unaffected, and was by no means satisfied, like
that of the elder, with defeating future curiosity. The
consciousness of what had already been exposed filled
her with confusion, and she would have flown away, if
her companion had not detained her by some degree of
force. What ails the girl? There's nothing to be
frightened at. Fellow! she repeated, what brings
you here?
I advanced and stood before them. I looked
steadfastly
,
but, I believe, with neither effrontery nor
anger
,
on the one who addressed me. I spoke in a tone
serious and emphatical. I come for the sake of
speaking
to a woman, who formerly resided in this house,
and probably resides here still. Her name is Clemenza
Lodi. If she be here, I request you to conduct me to
her instantly.
Methought I perceived some inquietude, a less
imperious
and more inquisitive air, in this woman, on
hearing
the name of Clemenza. It was momentary, and
gave way to peremptory looks. What is your
business
with her? And why did you adopt this mode of
enquiry? A very extraordinary intrusion! Be good
enough to leave the chamber. Any questions proper
to be answered, will be answered below.
K
I meant not to intrude or offend. It was not an idle
or impertinent motive that led me hither. I waited
below
for some time after soliciting an audience of you,
through the servant. She assured me you were absent,
and laid me under the necessity of searching for
Clemenza
Lodi myself, and without a guide. I am
anxious
to withdraw, and request merely to be directed to
the room which she occupies.
I direct you, replied she in a more resolute tone, to
quit the room and the house.
Impossible, madam, I replied, still looking at her
earnestly, leave the house without seeing her! You
might as well enjoin me to pull the Andes on my head!
To walk barefoot to Peking! Impossible!
Some solicitude was now mingled with her anger.
This is strange insolence! unaccountable behaviour! be gone from my room! will you compel me to call the
gentlemen?
Be not alarmed, said I, with augmented mildness.
There was indeed compassion and sorrow at my heart,
and these must have somewhat influenced my looks.
Be not alarmedI came to confer a benefit, not to
perpetrate
an injury. I came not to censure or expostulate
with you, but merely to counsel and aid a being that
needs both: all I want is to see her. In this chamber
I sought not you, but her. Only lead me to her, or tell
me where she is. I will then rid you of my presence.
Will you compel me to call those who will punish
this insolence as it deserves?
Dearest madam! I compel you to nothing. I
merely supplicate. I would ask you to lead me to
these gentlemen, if I did not know that there are none
but females in the house. It is you who must receive and
comply with my petition. Allow me a moment's
interview
with Clemenza Lodi. Compliance will harm
you not, but will benefit her. What is your
objection
?
This is the strangest proceeding! the most singular
conduct! Is this a place fit to parley with you? I
warn you of the consequence of staying a moment
longer
.
Depend upon it, you will sorely repent it.
You are obdurate, said I, and turned towards the
younger, who listened to this discourse in tremors
and panick. I took her hand with an air of humility
and reverence. Here, said I, there seems to be purity,
innocence and condescension. I took this house to be
the temple of voluptuousness. Females, I expected to
find in it, but such only as traded in licentious
pleasures
:
specious, perhaps not destitute of talents,
beauty
and address, but dissolute and wanton; sensual and
avaricious; yet, in this countenance and carriage there
are tokens of virtue. I am born to be deceived, and
the semblance of modesty is readily assumed. Under
this veil, perhaps, lurk a tainted heart and depraved
appetites. Is it so?
She made me no answer, but somewhat in her looks
seemed to evince that my favorable prepossessions were
just. I noticed likewise that the alarm of the elder
was greatly increased by this address to her
companion
.
The thought suddenly occurred that this girl
might be in circumstances not unlike those of
Clemenza
Lodi; that she was not apprized of the character
of her associates, and might by this meeting be rescued
from similar evils.
This suspicion filled me with tumultuous feelings.
Clemenza was for a time forgotten. I paid no
attention
to the looks or demeanor of the elder, but was
wholly occupied in gazing on the younger. My
anxiety
to know the truth, gave pathos and energy to my
tones, while I spoke:
Who, where, what are you? Do you reside in this
house? Are you a sister or daughter in this family, or
merely a visitant? Do you know the character,
profession
and views of your companions? Do you deem
them virtuous, or know them to be profligate? Speak!
tell me, I beseech you!
The maiden confusion which had just appeared in
the countenance of this person, now somewhat abated.
She lifted her eyes, and glanced by turns at me and at
her who sat by her side. An air of serious
astonishment
overspread her features, and she seemed anxious
K 2
for me to proceed. The elder, meanwhile, betrayed
the utmost alarm, again upbraided my audacity,
commanded
me to withdraw, and admonished me of the
danger I incurred by lingering.
I noticed not her interference, but again entreated to
know of the younger her true state. She had no time to
answer me, supposing her not to want the inclination,
for every pause was filled by the clamorous
importunities
and menaces of the other. I began to perceive
that my attempts were useless to this end, but the
chief, and most estimable purpose, was attainable. It
was in my power to state the knowledge I possessed,
through your means, of Mrs. Villars and her
daughters
.
This information might be superfluous, since she
to whom it was given, might be one of this licentious
family. The contrary, however, was not improbable,
and my tidings, therefore, might be of the utmost
moment
to her safety.
A resolute, and even impetuous manner, reduced my
incessant interruptor to silence. What I had to say
I compressed in a few words, and adhered to perspicuity
and candor with the utmost care. I still held the
hand that I had taken, and fixed my eyes upon her
countenance with a steadfastness that hindered her
from lifting her eyes.
I know you not; whether you be dissolute or chaste,
I cannot tell. In either case, however, what I am
going
to say will be useful. Let me faithfully repeat
what I have heard. It is mere rumor, and I vouch
not for its truth. Rumor as it is, I submit it to your
judgment, and hope that it may guide you into paths
of innocence and honor.
Mrs. Villars and her three daughters are English
women, who supported for a time an unblemished
reputation
,
but who, at length, were suspected of
carrying
on the trade of prostitution. This secret could not
be concealed forever. The profligates who frequented
their house, betrayed them. One of them who died under
their roof, after they had withdrawn from it into the
country, disclosed to his kinsman, who attended his
death bed, their genuine character.
The dying man likewise related incidents in which I
am deeply concerned. I have been connected with one
by name Welbeck. In his house I met an unfortunate
girl, who was afterwards removed to Mrs. Villars's.
Her name was Clemenza Lodi. Residence in this
house, under the controul of a woman like Mrs.
Villars
and her daughters, must be injurious to her
innocence
,
and from this controul I now come to rescue
her.
I turned to the elder, and continued: By all that is
sacred, I adjure you to tell me whether Clemenza Lodi
be under this roof! if she be not, whither has she gone?
To know this, I came hither, and any difficulty or
reluctance
in answering, will be useless; till an answer
be obtained, I will not go hence.
During this speech, anger had been kindling in the
bosom of this woman. It now burst upon me in a torrent
of opprobrious epithets. I was a villain, a calumniator,
a thief. I had lurked about the house, till those whose
sex and strength enabled them to cope with me, had
gone. I had entered these doors by fraud. I was a
wretch, guilty of the last excesses of insolence and
insult.
To repel these reproaches, or endure them, was
equally useless. The satisfaction that I sought was
only to be gained by searching the house. I left the
room without speaking. Did I act illegally in passing
from one story and one room to another? Did I really
deserve
the imputations of rashness and insolence? My
behaviour, I well know, was ambiguous and hazardous,
and perhaps wanting in discretion, but my motives
were unquestionably pure. I aimed at nothing but the
rescue of an human creature from distress and
dishonor
.
I pretend not to the wisdom of experience and age;
to the praise of forethought or subtlety. I chuse the
obvious path, and pursue it with headlong expedition.
Good intentions, unaided by knowledge, will, perhaps,
produce more injury than benefit, and therefore,
knowledge
must be gained, but the acquisition is not
momentary
;
K 3
is not bestowed unasked and untoil'd for:
meanwhile
,
we must not be unactive because we are
ignorant
.
Our good purposes must hurry to performance,
whether our knowledge be greater or less.
CHAPTER XII.
To explore the house in this manner was so contrary
to ordinary rules, that the design was probably wholly
unsuspected by the women whom I had just left. My
silence, at parting, might have been ascribed by them to
the intimidating influence of invectives and threats.
Hence I proceeded in my search without interruption.
Presently I reached a front chamber in the third story.
The door was ajar. I entered it on tiptoe. Sitting on a
low chair by the fire, I beheld a female figure, dressed in
a negligent, but not indecent manner. Her face in the
posture in which she sat was only half seen. Its hues were
sickly and pale, and in mournful unison with a feeble
and emaciated form. Her eyes were fixed upon a babe,
that lay stretched upon a pillow at her feet. The
child, like its mother, for such she was readily imagined
to be, was meagre and cadaverous. Either it was
dead, or could not be very distant from death.
The features of Clemenza were easily recognized,
though no contrast could be greater, in habit and
shape, and complexion, than that which her present
bore to her former appearance. All her roses had
faded
,
and her brilliances vanished. Still, however, there
was somewhat fitted to awaken the tenderest emotions.
There were tokens of inconsolable distress.
Her attention was wholly absorbed by the child.
She lifted not her eyes, till I came close to her, and
stood before her. When she discovered me, a faint
start was perceived. She looked at me for a moment,
then putting one spread hand before her eyes, she
stretched out the other towards the door, and waving it
in silence, as if to admonish me to depart.
This motion, however emphatical, I could not obey.
I wished to obtain her attention, but knew not in what
words to claim it. I was silent. In a moment she
removed her hand from her eyes, and looked at me with
new eagerness. Her features bespoke emotions, which,
perhaps, flowed from my likeness to her brother, joined
with the memory of my connection with Welbeck.
My situation was full of embarrassment. I was by
no means certain that my language would be
understood
.
I knew not in what light the policy and
dissimulation
of Welbeck might have taught her to regard
me. What proposal, conductive to her comfort and her
safety, could I make to her?
Once more she covered her eyes, and exclaimed in a
feeble voice, go away! be gone!
As if satisfied with this effort, she resumed her
attention
to her child. She stooped and lifted it in her
arms, gazing, meanwhile, on its almost lifeless features
with intense anxiety. She crushed it to her bosom, and
again looking at me, repeated, go away! go away! be
gone!
There was somewhat in the lines of her face, in her
tones and gestures, that pierced to my heart. Added
to this, was my knowledge of her condition; her
friendlessness
;
her poverty; the pangs of unrequited love;
and her expiring infant. I felt my utterance choaked,
and my tears struggling for passage. I turned to the
window, and endeavored to regain my tranquillity.
What was it, said I, that brought me hither? The
perfidy of Welbeck must surely have long since been
discovered. What can I tell her of the Villars which
she does not already know, or of which the knowledge
will be useful? If their treatment has been just, why
should I detract from their merit? If it has been
otherwise
,
their own conduct will have disclosed their
genuine
character. Though voluptuous themselves, it does
not follow that they have labored to debase this creature.
Though wanton, they may not be inhuman.
I can propose no change in her condition for the
better
.
Should she be willing to leave this house, whither
is it in my power to conduct her? O that I were rich
enough to provide food for the hungry, shelter for the
houseless, and raiment for the naked.
I was roused from these fruitless reflections by the
lady, whom some sudden thought induced to place the
child in its bed, and rising to come towards me. The
utter dejection which her features lately betrayed, was
now changed for an air of anxious curiosity. Where,
said she, in her broken English, where is Signior
Welbeck
?
Alas! returned I, I know not. That question might,
I thought, with more propriety be put to you than me.
I know where he be; I fear where he be.
So saying, the deepest sighs burst from her heart.
She turned from me, and going to the child, took it
again into her lap. Its pale and sunken cheek was
quickly wet with the mother's tears, which, as she
silently
hung over it, dropped fast from her eyes.
This demeanor could not but awaken curiosity,
while it gave a new turn to my thoughts. I began to
suspect that in the tokens which I saw, there was not
only distress for her child, but concern for the fate of
Welbeck. Know you, said I, where Mr. Welbeck is?
Is he alive? Is he near? Is he in calamity?
I do not know if he be alive. He be sick. He
be in prison. They will not let me go to him. And
Here her attention and mine was attracted by the
infant
,
whose frame, till now motionless, began to be
tremulous. Its features sunk into a more ghastly
expression
.
Its breathings were difficult, and every effort
to respire produced a convulsion harder than the last.
The mother easily interpreted these tokens. The
same mortal struggle seemed to take place in her feature
as in those of her child. At length her agony found
way in a piercing shriek. The struggle in the infant
was past. Hope looked in vain for a new motion in
its heart or its eyelids. The lips were closed, and its
breath was gone, forever!
The grief which overwhelmed the unhappy parent,
was of that outrageous and desperate kind which is
wholly incompatible with thinking. A few incoherent
motions and screams, that rent the soul, were followed
by a deep swoon. She sunk upon the floor, pale and
lifeless as her babe.
I need not describe the pangs which such a scene was
adapted to produce in me. These were rendered more
acute by the helpless and ambiguous situation in which
I was placed. I was eager to bestow consolation and
succour, but was destitute of all means. I was plunged
into uncertainties and doubts. I gazed alternately at
the infant and its mother. I sighed. I wept. I even
sobbed. I stooped down and took the lifeless hand of
the sufferer. I bathed it with my tears, and
exclaimed
,
Ill-fated woman! unhappy mother! what shall I
do for thy relief? How shall I blunt the edge of this
calamity, and rescue thee from new evils?
At this moment the door of the apartment was
opened
,
and the youngest of the women whom I had seen
below
,
entered. Her looks betrayed the deepest
consternation
and anxiety. Her eyes in a moment were fixed by
the decayed form and the sad features of Clemenza. She
shuddered at this spectacle, but was silent. She stood
in the midst of the floor, fluctuating and bewildered. I
dropped the hand that I was holding, and approached
her.
You have come, said I, in good season. I know you
not, but will believe you to be good. You have an heart,
it may be, not free from corruption, but it is still
capable
of pity for the miseries of others. You have an hand
that refuses not its aid to the unhappy. See; there is
an infant dead. There is a mother whom grief has, for
a time, deprived of life. She has been oppressed and
betrayed
;
been robbed of property and reputationbut
not of innocence. She is worthy of relief. Have you
arms to receive her? Have you sympathy, protection,
and a home to bestow upon a forlorn, betrayed and
unhappy
stranger? I know not what this house is; I
suspect
it to be no better than a brothel. I know not what
treatment this woman has received. If, when her
situation
and wants are ascertained, will you supply lier
wants? Will you rescue her from evils that may attend
her continuance here?
She was disconcerted and bewildered by this address.
At length she saidAll that has happened, all that I
have heard and seen is so unexpected, so strange, that I
am amazed and distracted. Your behaviour I cannot
comprehend, nor your motive for making this address to
me. I cannot answer you, except in one respect. If
this woman has suffered injury, I have had no part in it.
I knew not of her existence, nor her situation till this
moment; and whatever protection or assistance she may
justly claim, I am both able and willing to bestow. I
do not live here, but in the city. I am only an occasional
visitant in this house.
What then, I exclaimed, with sparkling eyes and a
rapturous accent, you are not profligate; are a
stranger
to the manners of this house, and a detester of these
manners? Be not a deceiver, I entreat you. I
depend
only on your looks and professions, and these may
be dissembled.
These questions, which indeed argued a childish
simplicity
,
excited her surprize. She looked at me,
uncertain
whether I was in earnest or in jest. At length
she said, your language is so singular, that I am at a
loss how to answer it. I shall take no pains to find
out its meaning, but leave you to form conjectures at
leisure. Who is this woman, and how can I serve
her? After a pause, she continuedI cannot afford
her any immediate assistance, and shall not stay a
moment longer in this house. There (putting a card
in my hand) is my name and place of abode. If you
shall have any proposals to make, respecting this woman,
I shall be ready to receive them in my own house. So
saying, she withdrew.
I looked wistfully after her, but could not but
assent
to her assertion, that her presence here would be
more injurious to her than beneficial to Clemenza. She
had scarcely gone, when the elder woman entered.
There was rage, sullenness, and disappointment in her
aspect. These, however, were suspended by the
situation
in which she discovered the mother and child. It
was plain that all the sentiments of woman were not
extinguished in her heart. She summoned the servants
and seemed preparing to take such measures as the
occasion
prescribed. I now saw the folly of supposing
that these measures would be neglected, and that my
presence could not essentially contribute to the benefit
of the sufferer. Still, however, I lingered in the
room, till the infant was covered with a cloth, and the
still senseless parent was conveyed into an adjoining
chamber. The woman then, as if she had not seen
me before, fixed scowling eyes upon me, and
exclaimed
,
thief! villiam! why do you stay here?
I mean to go, said I, but not till I express my
gratitude
and pleasure, at the sight of your attention to
this sufferer. You deem me insolent and perverse, but
I am not such; and hope that the day will come when
I shall convince you of my good intentions.
Begone! interrupted she, in a more angry tone.
Begone
this moment, or I will treat you as a thief. She
now drew forth her hand from under her gown, and
shewed a pistol. You shall see, she continued, that I
will not be insulted with impunity. If you do not
vanish
,
I will shoot you as a robber.
This woman was far from wanting a force and
intrepidity
worthy of a different sex. Her gestures and
tones were full of energy. They denoted an haughty
and indignant spirit. It was plain that she conceived
herself deeply injured by my conduct; and was it
absolutely
certain that her anger was without reason? I
had loaded her house with atrocious imputations, and
these imputations might be false. I had conceived
them upon such evidence as chance had provided, but
this evidence, intricate and dubious as human actions
and motives are, might be void of truth.
Perhaps, said I, in a sedate tone, I have injured
you; I have mistaken your character. You shall not
find me less ready to repair, than to perpetrate, this
injury
.
My error was without malice, and
I had not time to finish the sentence, when this rash
and enraged woman thrust the pistol close to my head
and fired it. I was wholly unaware that her fury
would lead her to this excess. It was a sort of
mechanical
impulse that made me raise my hand, and attempt
to turn aside the weapon. I did this deliberately and
tranquilly, and without conceiving that any thing more
was intended by her movement than to intimidate me.
To this precaution, however, I was indebted for life.
The bullet was diverted from my forehead to my left
ear, and made a slight wound upon the surface, from
which the blood gushed in a stream.
The loudness of this explosion, and the shock which
the ball produced in my brain, sunk me into a
momentary
stupor. I reeled backward, and should have
fallen
had not I supported myself against the wall. The
sight of my blood instantly restored her reason. Her
rage disappeared, and was succeeded by terror and
remorse
.
She clasped her hands, and exclaimedOh!
what, what have I done? My frantic passion has
destroyed
me.
I needed no long time to shew me the full extent of
the injury which I had suffered and the conduct which
it became me to adopt. For a moment I was
bewildened
and alarmed, but presently perceived that this was
an incident more productive of good than of evil. It
would teach me caution in contending with the
passions
of another, and shewed me that there is a limit
which the impetuosities of anger will sometimes
overstep
.
Instead of reviling my companion, I addressed
myself to her thus:
Be not frighted. You have done me no injury, and
I hope will derive instruction from this event. You
rashness had like to have sacrificed the life of one who
is your friend, and to have exposed yourself to infamy
and death, or, at least, to the pangs of eternal
remorse
.
L
Learn, from hence, to curb your passions,
and especially to keep at a distance from every
murderous
weapon, on occasions when rage is likely to take
place of reason.
I repeat that my motives in entering this house were
connected with your happiness as well as that of
Clemenza
Lodi. If I have erred, in supposing you the
member of a vile and pernicious trade, that error was
worthy of being rectified, but violence and invective
tend only to confirm it. I am incapable of any
purpose
that is not beneficent; but, in the means that I
use and in the evidence on which I proceed, I am
liable
to a thousand mistakes. Point out to me the road
by which I can do you good, and I will cheerfully
pursue
it.
Finding that her fears had been groundless, as to
the consequences of her rashness, she renewed, though
with less vehemence than before, her imprecations on
my intermeddling and audacious folly. I listened till
the storm was nearly exhausted, and then, declaring
my intention to re-visit the house, if the interest of
Clemenza should require it, I resumed my way to the
city.
CHAPTER XIII.
Why
, said I, as I hasted forward, is my fortune so
abundant in unforeseen occurrences? Is every man,
who leaves his cottage and the impressions of his
infancy
behind him, ushered into such a world of
revolutions
and perils as have trammelled my steps? or, is
my scene indebted for variety and change to my
propensity
to look into other people's concern, and to make
their sorrows and their joys mine?
To indulge an adventurous spirit, I left the precincts
of the barn-door, enlisted in the service of a stranger
and encountered a thousand dangers to my virtue
under
the disastrous influence of Welbeck. Afterward
my life was set at hazard in the cause of Wallace, and
now am I loaded with the province of protecting the
helpless Eliza Hadwin and the unfortunate Clemenza.
My wishes are fervent, and my powers shall not be
inactive in their defence, but how slender are these
powers!
In the offers of the unknown lady there is, indeed,
some consolation for Clemenza. It must be my
business
to lay before my friend Stevens the particulars of
what has befallen me, and to entreat his directions how
this disconsolate girl may be most effectually
succoured
.
It may be wise to take her from her present abode,
L 2
and place her under some chaste and humane
guardianship
,
where she may gradually lose remembrance of
her dead infant and her specious betrayer. The
barrier
that severs her from Welbeck must be high as
heaven and insuperable as necessity.
But, soft! Talked she not of Welbeck? Said she
not that he was in prison and was sick? Poor wretch!
I thought thy course was at an end; that the penalty
of guilt no longer weighed down thy heart. That
thy misdeeds and thy remorses were buried in a
common
and obscure grave; but it seems thou art still
alive.
Is it rational to cherish the hope of thy restoration
to innocence and peace? Thou art no obdurate
criminal
;
hadst thou less virtue, thy compunctions would
be less keen. Wert thou deaf to the voice of duty,
thy wanderings into guilt and folly would be less
fertile
of anguish. The time will perhaps come, when
the measure of thy transgressions and calamities will
overflow, and the folly of thy choice will be too
conspicuous
to escape thy discernment. Surely, even for
such transgressors as thou, there is a salutary power in
the precepts of truth and the lessons of experience.
But, thou art imprisoned and art sick. This,
perhaps
,
is the crisis of thy destiny. Indigence and
dishonour
were the evils, to shun which thy integrity and
peace of mind have been lightly forfeited. Thou hast
found that the price was given in vain; that the
hollow
and deceitful enjoyments of opulence and dignity
were not worth the purchase; and that, frivolous and
unsubstantial as they are, the only path that leads to
them is that of honesty and diligence. Thou art in
prison and art sick; and there is none to cheer thy
hour with offices of kindness, or uphold thy fainting
courage by the suggestions of good counsel. For
such as thou the world has no compassion. Mankind
will pursue thee to the grave with execrations. Their
cruelty will be justified or palliated, since they know
thee not. They are unacquainted with the goadings
of thy conscience and the bitter retributions which
thou art daily suffering: they are full of their own
wrongs, and think only of those tokens of exultation
and complacency which thou wast studious of assuming
in thy intercourse with them. It is I only that
thoroughly
know thee, and can rightly estimate thy claims
to compassion.
I have somewhat partaken of thy kindness, and thou
meritest some gratitude at my hands. Shall I not
visit
and endeavor to console thee in thy distress? Let
me, at least, ascertain thy condition, and be the
instrument
in repairing the wrongs which thou hast
inflicted
.
Let me gain, from contemplation of thy
misery
,
new motives to sincerity and rectitude.
While occupied by these reflections, I entered the
city. The thoughts which engrossed my mind related
to Welbeck. It is not my custom to defer till
tomorrow
what can be done to-day. The destiny of
man frequently hangs upon the lapse of a minute. I
will stop, said I, at the prison; and, since the
moment
of my arrival may not be indifferent, I will go
thither with all possible haste. I did not content
myself
with walking, but, regardless of the comments of
passengers, hurried along the way at full speed.
Having enquired for Welbeck, I was conducted
through a dark room, crouded with beds, to a
staircase
.
Never before had I been in a prison. Never
had I smelt so noisome an odour, or surveyed faces so
begrimed with filth and misery. The walls and floors
were alike squallid and detestable. It seemed that in
this house existence would be bereaved of all its
attractions
;
and yet those faces, which could be seen
through the obscurity that encompassed them, were
either void of care or distorted with mirth.
This, said I, as I followed my conductor, is the
residence
of Welbeck. What contrasts are these to the
repose and splendor, pictured walls, glossy hangings,
gilded sofas, mirrors that occupied from cieling to floor,
carpets of Tauris, and the spotless and transcendent
brilliancy of coverlets and napkins, in thy former
dwelling? Here brawling and the shuffling of rude
L 3
feet are eternal. The air is loaded with the
exhalations
of disease and the fumes of debauchery. Thou
art cooped up in airless space, and, perhaps, compelled
to share thy narrow cell with some stupid ruffian.
Formerly, the breezes were courted by thy lofty
windows
.
Aromatic shrubs were scattered on thy hearth.
Menials, splendid in apparel, shewed their faces with
diffidence in they apartment, trod lightly on thy marble
floor, and suffered not the sanctity of silence to be
troubled by a whisper. Thy lamp shot its rays through
the transparency of alabaster, and thy fragrant lymph
flowed from vases of porcelain. Such were formerly
the decorations of thy hall, the embellishments of thy
existence; but nowalas!
We reached a chamber in the second story. My
conductor knocked at the door. No one answered.
Repeated knocks were unheard or unnoticed by the
person within. At length, lifting a latch, we entered
together.
The prisoner lay upon the bed, with his face turned
from the door. I advanced softly, making a sign to
the keeper to withdraw. Welbeck was not asleep, but
merely buried in reverie. I was unwilling to disturb
his musing, and stood with my eyes fixed upon his
form. He appeared unconscious that any one had
entered
.
At length, uttering a deep sigh, he changed his
posture
,
and perceived me in my motionless and gazing
attitude. Recollect in what circumstances we had last
parted. Welbeck had, no doubt, carried away with
him, from that interview, a firm belief, that I should
speedily die. His prognostic, however, was fated to
be contradicted.
His first emotions were those of surprize. These
gave place to mortification and rage. After eyeing
me for some time, he averted his glances, and that
effort
which is made to dissipate some obstacle to
breathing
,
shewed me that his sensations were of the most
excruciating kind. He laid his head upon the pillow,
and sunk into his former musing. He disdained, or
was unable, to utter a syllable of welcome or
contempt
.
In the opportunity that had been afforded me to view
his countenance, I had observed tokens of a kind very
different from those which used to be visible. The
gloomy and malignant were more conspicuous. Health
had forsaken his cheeks, and taken along with it those
flexible parts, which formerly enabled him to cover his
secret torments and insidious purposes, beneath a veil
of benevolence and cheerfulness. Alas! said I, loud
enough for him to hear me, here is a monument of
ruin. Despair and mischievous passions are too deeply
rooted in this heart for me to tear them away.
These expressions did not escape his notice. He
turned once more and cast sullen looks upon me.
There was somewhat in his eyes that made me shudder.
They denoted that his reverie was not that of grief,
but of madness. I continued, in a less steadfast voice
than before:
Unhappy Clemenza! I have performed thy message.
I have visited him that is sick and in prison. Thou
hadst cause for anguish and terror, even greater cause
than thou imaginedst. Would to God that thou
wouldst be contented with the report which I shall
make; that thy misguided tenderness would consent to
leave him to his destiny, would suffer him to die alone;
but that is a forbearance which no eloquence that I
possess will induce thee to practise. Thou must come,
and witness for thyself.
In speaking thus, I was far from foreseeing the effects
which would be produced on the mind of Welbeck. I
was far from intending to instil into him a belief that
Glemenza was near at hand, and was preparing to
enter
his apartment: yet no other images but these would,
perhaps, have roused him from his lethargy, and
awakened
that attention which I wished to awaken. He
started up, and gazed fearfully at the door.
What! he cried. What! Is she here? Ye
powers
,
that have scattered woes in my path, spare me the
sight of her! But from this agony I will rescue
myself
.
The moment she appears I will pluck out these
eyes and dash them at her feet.
So saying, he gazed with augmented eagerness upon
the door. His hands were lifted to his head, as if
ready
to execute his frantic purpose. I seized his arm,
and besought him to lay aside his terror, for that
Clemenza
was far distant. She had no intention, and
besides
was unable, to visit him.
Then I am respited. I breathe again. No; keep
her from a prison. Drag her to the wheel or to the
scaffold; mangle her with stripes; torture her with
famine; strangle her child before her face, and cast it
to the hungry dogs that are howling at the gate; but
keep her from a prison. Never let her enter these
doors.There he stopped; his eyes being fixed on the
floor, and his thoughts once more buried in reverie. I
resumed:
She is occupied with other griefs than those
connected
with the fate of Welbeck. She is not
unmindful
of you: she knows you to be sick and in prison;
and I came to do for you whatever office your
condition
might require, and I came at her suggestion. She,
alas! has full employment for her tears in watering
the grave of her child.
He started. What! dead? Say you that the child
is dead?
It is dead. I witnessed its death. I saw it expire
in the arms of its mother; that mother whom I
formerly
met under your roof blooming and gay, but
whom calamity has tarnished and withered. I saw her
in the rayment of poverty, under an accursed roof;
desolate; alone; unsolaced by the countenance or
sympathy
of human beings; approached only by those who
mock at her distress, set snares for her innocence, and
push her to infamy. I saw her leaning over the face
of her dying babe.
Welbeck put his hands to his head and exclaimed:
curses on thy lips, infernal messenger! Chant
elsewhere
thy rueful ditty! Vanish! if thou wouldst not
feel in thy heart fangs red with blood less guilty than
thine.
Till this moment the uproar in Welbeck's mind
appeared
to hinder him from distinctly recognizing his
visitant. Now it seemed as if the incidents of our
last interview suddenly sprung up in his remembrance.
What! This is the villain that rifled my cabinet,
the maker of my poverty and of all the evils which it
has since engendered! That has led me to a prison!
Execrable fool! you are the author of the scene that
you describe, and of horrors without number and name.
To whatever crimes I have been urged since that
interview
,
and the fit of madness that made you destroy
my property, they spring from your act; they flowed
from necessity, which, had you held your hand at that
fateful moment, would never have existed.
How dare you thrust yourself upon my privacy?
Why am I not alone? Fly! and let my miseries want,
at least, the aggravation of beholding their author.
My eyes loathe the sight of thee! My heart would
suffocate thee with its own bitterness! Begone!
I know not, I answered, why innocence should
tremble at the ravings of a lunatic; why it should be
overwhelmed by unmerited reproaches! Why it should
not deplore the errors of its foe, labor to correct those
errors, and
Thank thy fate, youth, that my hands are tied up
by my scorn; thank thy fate that no weapon is within
reach. Much has passed since I saw thee, and I am
a new man. I am no longer inconstant and cowardly.
I have no motives but contempt to hinder me from
expiating
the wrongs which thou hast done me in thy
blood. I disdain to take thy life. Go; and let thy
fidelity, at least, to the confidence which I have placed
in thee, be inviolate. Thou hast done me harm enough,
but canst do, if thou wilt, still more. Thou canst
betray
the secrets that are lodged in thy bosom, and rob
me of the comfort of reflecting that my guilt is known
but to one among the living.
This suggestion made me pause, and look back upon
the past. I had confided this man's tale to you. The
secrecy, on which he so fondly Ieaned, was at an end.
Had I acted culpably or not?
But why should I ruminate, with anguish and doubt,
upon the past? The future was within my power, and
the road of my duty was too plain to be mistaken. I
would disclose to Welbeck the truth, and cheerfully
encounter every consequence. I would summon my
friend to my aid, and take his counsel in the critical
emergency in which I was placed. I ought not to rely
upon myself alone in my efforts to benefit this being,
when another was so near whose discernment, and
benevolence
,
and knowledge of mankind, and power of
affording relief were far superior to mine.
Influenced by these thoughts, I left the apartment
without speaking; and, procuring pen and paper,
dispatched
to you the billet which brought about our
meeting
.
CHAPTER XIV.
Mervyn's
auditors allowed no pause in their
attention
to this story. Having ended, a deep silence took
place. The clock which stood upon the mantle, had
sounded twice the customary
larum
, but had not been
heard by us. It was now struck a third time. It was
one
. Our guest appeared somewhat startled at this
signal
,
and looked, with a mournful sort of earnestness, at
the clock. There was an air of inquietude about him,
which I had never observed in an equal degree before.
I was not without much curiosity respecting other
incidents than those which had just been related by
him; but after so much fatigue as he had undergone, I
thought it improper to prolong the conversation.
Come, said I, my friend, let us to bed. This is a
drowsy time, and after so much exercise of mind and
body, you cannot but need some repose. Much has
happened in your absence, which is proper to be known
to you, but our discourse will be best deferred till
tomorrow
.
I will come into your chamber by day-dawn,
and unfold to you my particular.
Nay, said he, withdraw not on my account. If I
go to my chamber, it will not be to sleep, but to
meditate
,
especially after your assurance that something of
moment has occurred in my absence. My thoughts,
independently of any cause of sorrow or fear, have
received
an impulse which solitude and darkness will not
stop. It is impossible to know too much for our safety
and integrity, or to know it too soon. What has
happened
?
I did not hesitate to comply with his request, for it
was not difficult to conceive that, however tired the
limbs might be, the adventures of this day would not
be easily expelled from the memory at night. I told
him the substance of the conversation with Mrs.
Althorpe
.
He smiled at these parts of the narrative
which related to himself; but when his father's
depravity
and poverty were mentioned, he melted into tears.
Poor wretch! I that knew thee in thy better days,
might have easily divined this consequence. I foresaw
thy poverty and degradation in the same hour that I
left thy roof. My soul drooped at the prospect, but I
said, it cannot be prevented, and this reflection was an
antidote to grief, but now that thy ruin is complete, it
seems as if some of it were imputable to me, who
forsook
thee when the succour and counsel of a son were
most needed. Thou art ignorant and vicious, but thou
art my father still. I see that the sufferings of a
better
man than thou art would less afflict me than thine.
Perhaps it is still in my power to restore thy liberty and
good name, and yetthat is a fond wish. Thou art
past the age when the ignorance and groveling habits of
a human being are susceptible of cureThere he
stopt, and after a gloomy pause, continued:
I am not surprized or afflicted at the misconceptions
of my neighbors, with relation to my own character.
Men must judge from what they see: they must build
their conclusions on their knowledge. I never saw in
the rebukes of my neighbors, any thing but laudable
abhorrence of vice. They were not eager to blame,
to collect materials of censure rather than of praise.
It was not me whom they hated and despised. It was
the phantom that passed under my name, which existed
only in their imagination, and which was worthy of
all their scorn and all their enmity.
What I appeared to be in their eyes, was as much
the object of my own disapprobation as of theirs. Their
reproaches only evidence the rectitude of their decisions,
as well as of my own. I drew from them new motives
to complacency. They fortified my perseverance in
the path which I had chosen as best; they raised me
higher in my own esteem; they hightened the claims
of the reproachers themselves to my respect and my
gratitude.
They thought me slothful, incurious, destitute of
knowledge, and of all thirst of knowledge, insolent and
profligate. They say that in the treatment of my
father
,
I have been ungrateful and inhuman. I have
stolen his property, and deserted him in his calamity.
Therefore they hate and revile me. It is well: I love
them for these proofs of their discernment and
integrity
.
Their indignation at wrong is the truest test of
their virtue.
It is true that they mistake me, but that arises from,
the circumstances of our mutual situation. They
examined
what was exposed to their view: they grasped
at what was placed within their reach. To decide
contrary
to appearances; to judge from what they know
not, would prove them to be brutish and not rational,
would make their decision of no worth, and render
them, in their turn, objects of neglect and
contempt
.
It is true that I hated school; that I sought
occasions
of absence, and finally, on being struck by the
master, determined to enter his presence no more. I
loved to leap, to run, to swim, to climb trees, and to
clamber up rocks, to shroud myself in thickets, and
stroll among woods, to obey the impulse of the moment,
and to prate or be silent, just as my humor prompted
me. All this I loved more than to go to and fro in the
same path, and at stated hours, to look off and on a
book, to read just as much, and of such a kind, to stand
up and be seated, just as another thought proper to
direct
.
I hated to be classed, cribbed, rebuked and
feruled
at the pleasure of one, who, as it seemed to me,
M
knew no guide in his rewards but caprice, and no
prompter in his punishments but passion.
It is true that I took up the spade and the hoe as
rarely, and for as short a time, as possible. I
preferred
to ramble in the forest and loiter on the hill:
perpetually
to change the scene; to scrutinize the endless
variety of objects; to compare one leaf and pebble
with another; to pursue those trains of thought which
their resemblances and differences suggested; to
enquire
what it was that gave them this place, structure,
and form, were more agreeable employments than
plowing and threshing.
My father could well afford to hire labor. What
my age and my constitution enabled me to do could be
done by a sturdy boy, in half the time, with half the
toil, and with none of the reluctance. The boy was
a bond servant, and the cost of his clothing and food
was next to nothing. True it is, that my service
would have saved him even this expence, but my
motives
for declining the effort were not hastily weighed
or superficially examined. These were my motives:
My frame was delicate and feeble. Exposure to
wet blasts and vertical suns was sure to make me sick.
My father was insensible to this consequence; and no
degree of diligence would please him, but that which
would destroy my health. My health was dearer to my
mother than to me. She was more anxious to exempt
me from possible injuries than reason justified; but
anxions she was, and I could not save her from
anxiety
,
but by almost wholly abstaining from labor. I
thought her peace of mind was of some value, and
that, if the inclination of either of my parents must
be gratified at the expence of the other, the preference
was due to the woman who bore me; who nursed me
in disease; who watched over my safety with incessant
tenderness; whose life and whose peace were involved
in mine. I should have deemed myself brutish and
obdurately wicked to have loaded her with fears and
cares merely to smooth the brow of a froward old man,
whose avarice called on me to sacrifice my ease and my
health, and who shifted to other shoulders the province
of sustaining me when sick, and of mourning for me
when dead.
I likewise believed, that it became me to reflect
upon
the influence of my decision on my own happiness;
and to weigh the profits flowing to my father from my
labor, against the benefits of mental exercise, the
pleasures of the woods and streams, healthful
sensations
,
and the luxury of musing. The pecuniary
profit
was petty and contemptible. It obviated no
necessity
.
It purchased no rational enjoyment. It merely
provoked, by furnishing the means of indulgence, an
appetite from which my father was not exempt. It
cherished the seeds of depravity in him, and lessened
the little stock of happiness belonging to my mother.
I did not detain you long, my friends, in
pourtraying
my parents, and recounting domestic incidents,
when I first told you my story. What had noc onnection
with the history of Welbeck and with the part that I
have acted upon this stage, I thought it proper to omit.
My omission was likewise prompted by other reasons.
My mind is ennervated and feeble like my body. I
cannot look upon the sufferings of those I love
without
exquisite pain. I cannot steel my heart by the
force of reason, and by submission to necessity; and,
therefore, too frequently employ the cowardly
expedient
of endeavoring to forget what I cannot
remember
without agony.
I told you that my father was sober and industrious
by habit, but habit is not uniform. There were
intervals
when his plodding and tame spirit gave place to
the malice and fury of a demon. Liquors were not
sought by him, but he could not withstand entreaty,
and a potion that produced no effect upon others
changed
him into a maniac.
I told you that I had a sister, whom the arts of a
villain destroyed. Alas! the work of her destruction
was left unfinished by him. The blows and
contumelies
of a misjudging and implacable parent, who
scrupled
not to thrust her, with her new-born infant, out
M 2
of doors; the curses and taunts of unnatural brothers
left her no alternative but deathBut I must not
think of this; I must not think of the wrongs which
my mother endured in the person of her only and
darling
daughter.
My brothers were the copyists of the father, whom
they resembled in temper and person. My mother
doated on her own image in her daughter and in me.
This daughter was ravished from her by self-violence,
and her other children by disease. I only remained to
appropriate her affections and fulfil her hopes. This
alone had furnished a sufficient reason why I should be
careful of my health and my life, but my father's
character
supplied me with a motive infinitely more cogent.
It is almost incredible, but, nevertheless, true, that
the only being whose presence presence and remonstrances had
any influence on my father, at moments when his
reason
was extinct, was myself. As to my personal strength, it was nothing; yet my mother's person was
rescued from brutal violence: he was checked, in the
midst of his ferocious career, by a single look or
exclamation
from me. The fear of my rebukes had even
some influence in enabling him to resist temptation.
If I entered the tavern, at the moment when he was
lifting the glass to his lips, I never weighed the
injunctions
of decorum, but, snatching the vessel from his
hand, I threw it on the ground. I was not deterred by
the presence of others; and their censures, on my want
of filial respect and duty, were listened to with
unconcern
.
I chose not to justify myself by expatiating on
domestic miseries, and by calling down that pity on my
mother, which I knew would only have increased her
distress.
The world regarded my deportment as insolent and
perverse to a degree of insanity. To deny my father
an indulgence which they thought harmless, and which,
indeed, was harmless in its influence on other men;
to interfere thus publicly with his social enjoyments,
and expose him to mortification and shame, was loudly
condemned; but my duty to my mother debarred me
from eluding this censure on the only terms on which
it could have been eluded. Now it has ceased to be
necessary
to conceal what passed in domestic retirements,
and I should willingly confess the truth before any
audience.
At first my father imagined, that threats and blows
would intimidate his monitor. In this he was
mistaken
,
and the detection of this mistake impressed him
with an involuntary reverence for me, which set bounds
to those excesses which disdained any other controul.
Hence, I derived new motives for cherishing a life
which was useful, in so many ways, to my mother.
My condition is now changed. I am no longer on
that field to which the law, as well as reason, must
acknowledge
that I had some right, while there was any
in my father. I must hazard my life, if need be, in
the pursuit of the means of honest subsistence. I
never
spared myself while in the service of Mr. Hadwin;
and, at a more inclement season, should probably have
incurred some hazard by my diligence.
These were the motives of my
idleness
for, my
abstaining from the common toils of the farm passed
by that name among my neighbors; though, in truth,
my time was far from being wholly unoccupied by
manual
employments, but these required less exertion of
body or mind, or were more connected with
intellectual
efforts. They were pursued in the seclusion of
my chamber or the recesses of a wood. I did not
labor
to conceal them, but neither was I anxious to
attract
notice. It was sufficient that the censure of my
neighbors was unmerited, to make me regard it with
indifference.
I sought not the society of persons of my own age,
not from sullen or unsociable habits, but merely
because
those around me were totally unlike myself.
Their tastes and occupations were incompatible with
mine. In my few books, in my pen, in the
vegetable
and animal existences around me, I found
companions
who adapted their visits and intercourse to my
convenience
M 3
and caprice, and with whom I was never
tired of communing.
I was not unaware of the opinion which my
neighbors
had formed of my being improperly connected with
Betty Lawrence. I am not sorry that I fell into
company
with that girl. Her intercourse has instructed
me in what some would think impossible to be
attained
by one who had never haunted the impure recesses
of licentiousness in a city. The knowledge, which
residence
in this town for ten years gave her audacious
and inquisitive spirit, she imparted to me. Her
character
,
profligate and artful, libidinous and impudent,
and made up of the impressions which a city life had
produced on her coarse but active mind, was open to
my study, and I studied it.
I scarcely know how to repel the charge of illicit
conduct, and to depict the exact species of intercourse
subsisting between us. I always treated her with
freedom
,
and sometimes with gaiety. I had no motives to
reserve. I was so formed that a creature like her had
no power over my senses. That species of temptation
adapted to entice me from the true path, was widely
different from the artifices of Betty. There was no
point at which it was possible for her to get possession
of my fancy. I watched her while she practised all
her tricks and blandishments, just as I regarded a
similar
deportment in the
animal salax ignavumque
who
inhabits the stye. I made efforts to pursue my
observations
unembarrassed; but my efforts were made, not
to restrain desire, but to suppress disgust. The
difficulty
lay, not in withholding my caresses, but in
forbearing
to repulse her with rage.
Decorum, indeed, was not outraged, and all limits
were not overstept, at once. Dubious advances were
employed; but, when found unavailing, were
displaced
by more shameless and direct proceedings. She was
too little versed in human nature to see that her last
expedient was always worse than the preceding; and
that, in proportion as she lost sight of decency, she
multiplied the obstacles to her success.
Betty had many enticements in person and air. She
was ruddy, smooth, and plump. To these she added
I must not say what, for it is strange to what lengths
a woman destitute of modesty will sometimes go. But
all her artifices availing her not at all in the contest
with my insensibilities, she resorted to extremes which
it would serve no good purpose to describe in this
audience
.
They produced not the consequences she
wished
,
but they produced another which was by no means
displeasing to her. An incident one night occurred,
from which a sagacious observer deduced the existence
of an intrigue. It was useless to attempt to rectify
his mistake, by explaining appearances, in a manner
consistent with my innocence. This mode of
explication
implied a
continence
in me which he denied to be
possible. The standard of possibilities, especially in
vice and virtue, is fashioned by most men after their
own character. A temptation which this judge of
human nature knew that
he
was unable to resist, he
sagely concluded to be irresistible by any other man,
and quickly established the belief among my neighbors,
that the woman who married the father had been
prostituted
to the son. Though I never admitted the
truth of this aspersion, I believe it useless to deny,
because no one would credit my denial, and because I
had no power to disprove it.
CHAPTER XV.
What
other enquiries were to be resolved by our
young friend, we were now, at this late hour, obliged
to postpone till the morrow. I shall pass over the
reflections
which a story like this would naturally suggest,
and hasten to our next interview.
After breakfast next morning, the subject of last
night's conversation was renewed. I told him that
something had occurred in his absence, in relation to
Mrs. Wentworth and her nephew, that had perplexed
us not a little. My information is obtained,
continued
I, from Wortley; and it is nothing less, than that
young Clavering, Mrs. Wentworth's nephew, is, at
this time, actually alive.
Surprise, but none of the embarrassment of guilt,
appeared in his countenance at these tidings. He looked
at me as if desirous that I should proceed.
It seems, added I, that a letter was lately received
by this lady from the father of Clavering, who is now
in Europe. This latter reports that this son was lately
met with in Charleston, and relates the means which
old Mr. Clavering had used to prevail upon his son to
return home; means, of the success of which he
entertained
well grounded hopes. What think you?
I can only reject it, said he, after some pause, as
untrue
.
The father's correspondent may have been
deceived
.
The father may have been deceived, or the
father
may conceive it necessary to deceive the aunt, or
some other supposition, as to the source of the error,
may be true; but an error it surely is. Clavering is not
alive. I know the chamber where he died, and the
withered pine under which he lies buried.
If she be deceived, said I, it will be impossible to
rectify her error.
I hope not. An honest front and a straight story
will be sufficient.
How do you mean to act?
Visit her without doubt, and tell her the truth.
My tale will be too circumstantial and consistent to
permit her to disbelieve.
She will not hearken to you. She is too strongly
prepossessed against you to admit you even to an
hearing
.
She cannot help it. Unless she lock her door against
me, or stuff her ears with wool, she must hear me.
Her prepossessions are reasonable, but are easily
removed
by telling the truth. Why does she suspect
me of artifice? Because I seemed to be allied to
Welbeck
,
and because I disguised the truth. That she
thinks ill of me is not her fault, but my misfortune;
and, happily for me, a misfortune easily removed.
Then you will try to see her.
I will see her, and the sooner the better. I will see
her to-day; this morning; as soon as I have seen
Welbeck, whom I shall immediately visit in his
prison
.
There are other embarrassments and dangers of
which you are not aware. Welbeck is pursued by
many persons whom he has defrauded of large sums.
By these persons you are deemed an accomplice in his
guilt, and a warrant is already in the hands of officers
for arresting you wherever you are found.
In what way, said Mervyn, sedately, do they
imagine
me a partaker of his crime?
I know not. You lived with him. You fled with
him. You aided and connived at his escape.
Are these crimes?
I believe not, but they subject you to suspicion.
To arrest and to punishment?
To detention for a while, perhaps. But these alone
cannot expose you to punishment.
I thought so. Then I have nothing to fear.
You have imprisonment and obloquy, at least, to
dread.
True; but they cannot be avoided but by my exile
and skulking out of sightevils infinitely more
formidable
.
I shall, therefore, not avoid them. The
sooner
my conduct be subjected to scrutiny, the better.
Will you go with me to Welbeck?
I will go with you.
Enquiring for Welbeck of the keeper of the prison,
we were informed that he was in his own apartment
very sick. The physician, attending the prison, had
been called, but the prisoner had preserved an
obstinate
and scornful silence; and had neither explained his
condition, nor consented to accept any aid.
We now went, alone, into his apartment. His
sensibility seemed fast ebbing, yet an emotion of joy
was visible in his eyes at the appearance of Mervyn.
He seemed likewise to recognize in me his late
visitant
,
and made no objection to my entrance.
How are you this morning? said Arthur, seating
himself on the bed-side, and taking his hand. The sick
man was scarcely able to articulate his replyI shall
soon be well. I have longed to see you. I want to
leave with you a few words. He now cast his languid
eyes on me. You are his friend, he continued. You
know all. You may stay.
There now succeeded a long pause, during which he
closed his eyes, and resigned himself as if to an oblivion
of all thought. His pulse under my hand was scarcely
perceptible. From this in some minutes he recovered,
and fixing his eyes on Mervyn, resumed, in a broken
and feeble accent:
Clemenza! You have seen her. Weeks ago, I left
her in an accursed house: yet she has not been
mistreated
.
Neglected and abandoned indeed, but not
mistreated. Save her Mervyn. Comfort her.
Awaken
charity for her sake.
I cannot tell you what has happened. The tale
would be too longtoo mournful. Yet, in justice to
the living, I must tell you something. My woes and
my crimes will be buried with me. Some of them, but
not all.
Ere this, I should have been many leagues upon the
ocean, had not a newspaper fallen into my hands while
on the eve of embarkation. By that I learned that a
treasure was buried with the remains of the ill-fated
Watson. I was destitute. I was unjust enough to
wish to make this treasure my own. Prone to think I
was forgotten, or numbered with the victims of
pestilence
,
I ventured to return under a careless disguise.
I penetrated to the vaults of that deserted dwelling by
night. I dug up the bones of my friend, and found the
girdle and its valuable contents, according to the
accurate
description that I had read.
I hastened back with my prize to Baltimore, but my
evil destiny overtook me at last. I was recognized by
emissaries of Jamieson, arrested and brought hither, and
here shall I consummate my fate and defeat the rage of
my creditors by death. But first
Here Welbeck stretched out his left hand to
Mervyn
,
and, after some reluctance, shewed a roll of lead.
Receive this, said he. In the use of it, be guided by
your honesty and by the same advertisement that
furnished
me the clue by which to recover it. That
being secured, the world and I will part forever.
Withdraw, for your presence can help me nothing.
We were unwilling to comply with his injunction,
and continued some longer time in his chamber, but our
kind intent availed nothing. He quickly relapsed into
insensibility, from which he recovered not again, but
next day expired. Such, in the flower of his age, was
the fate of Thomas Welbeck.
Whatever interest I might feel in accompanying the
progress of my young friend, a sudden and unforeseen
emergency compelled me again to leave the city. A
kinsman, to whom I was bound by many obligations,
was suffering a lingering disease, and imagining, with
some reason, his dissolution to be not far distant, he
besought
my company and my assistance, to sooth, at
least, the agonies of his last hour. I was anxious to
clear up the mysteries which Arthur's conduct had
produced, and to shield him, if possible, from the evils
which I feared awaited him. It was impossible,
however
,
to decline the invitation of my kinsman, as his
residence
was not a day's journey from the city. I was
obliged to content myself with occasional information,
imparted by Mervyn's letters, or those of my wife.
Meanwhile, on leaving the prison, I hasted to inform
Mervyn of the true nature of the scene which had just
passed. By this extraordinary occurrence, the
property
of the Maurices was now in honest hands.
Welbeck, stimulated by selfish motives, had done that
which any other person would have found encompassed
with formidable dangers and difficulties. How this
attempt
was suggested or executed, he had not informed
us, nor was it desirable to know. It was sufficient
that the means of restoring their own to a destitute
and meritorious family, were now in our possession.
Having returned home, I unfolded to Mervyn all the
particulars respecting Williams and the Maurices,
which I had lately learned from Wortley. He listened
with deep attention, and my story being finished, he
said: In this small compass, then, is the patrimony and
subsistence of a numerous family. To restore it to
them is the obvious proceedingbut how? Where do
they abide?
Williams and Watson's wife live in Baltimore, and
the Maurices live near that town. The advertisements
alluded to by Wortley, and which are to be found in any
newspaper, will inform us; but first, are we sure that
any or all of these bills are contained in this covering?
The lead was now unrolled, and the bills which
Williams
had described, were found inclosed. Nothing
appeared
to be deficient. Of this, however, we were
scarcely qualified to judge. Those that were the
property
of Williams might not be entire, and what would
be the consequence of presenting them to him, if any
had been embezzled by Welbeck?
This difficulty was obviated by Mervyn, who
observed
that the advertisement, describing these bills, would
afford us ample information on this head. Having found
out where the Maurices and Mrs. Watson live, nothing
remains but to visit them, and put an end, as far as lies
in my power, to their inquietudes.
What! Would you go to Baltimore?
Certainly. Can any other expedient be proper? How shall I otherwise insure the safe conveyance of
these papers?
You may send them by post.
But why not go myself?
I can hardly tell, unless your appearance on such an
errand, may be suspected likely to involve you in
embarrassments
.
What embarrassments? If they receive their own,
ought they not to be satisfied?
The enquiry will naturally be made as to the manner
of gaining possession of these papers. They were
lately in the hands of Watson, but Watson has
disappeared
.
Suspicions are awake respecting the cause of
his disappearance. These suspicions are connected
with Welbeck, and Welbeck's connection with you is
not unknown.
These are evils, but I see not how an ingenuous and
open conduct is adapted to increase these evils. If
they come, I must endure them.
I believe your decision is right. No one is so
skilful an advocate in a cause, as he whose cause it is.
I rely upon your skill and address, and shall leave you
to pursue your own way. I must leave you for a time,
but shall expect to be punctually informed of all that
passes. With this agreement we parted, and I hastened
to perform my intended journey.
N
CHAPTER XVI.
I am
glad, my friend, thy nimble pen has got so far
upon its journey. What remains of my story may be
dispatched in a trice. I have just now some vacant
hours, which might possibly be more usefully
employed
,
but not in an easier manner or more pleasant. So,
let me carry on thy thread.
First, let me mention the resolutions I had formed
at the time I parted with my friend. I had several
objects
in view. One was a conference with Mrs.
Wentworth
:
another was an interview with her whom I met
with at Villars's. My heart melted when I thought
upon the desolate condition of Clemenza, and
determined
me to direct my first efforts for her relief. For
this end I was to visit the female who had given me a
direction to her house. The name of this person is
Achsa Fielding, and she lived, according to her own
direction, at No. 40, Walnut-street.
I went thither without delay. She was not at
home-Having
gained information from the servant, as to
when she might be found, I proceeded to Mrs.
Wentworth's
.
In going thither my mind was deeply
occupied
in meditation; and, with my usual carelessness of
forms, I entered the house and made my way to the
parlour, where an interview had formerly taken place
between us.
Having arrived, I began, though somewhat
unseasonably
,
to reflect upon the topics with which I should
introduce my conversation, and particularly the
manner
in which I should introduce myself. I had opened
doors without warning, and traversed passages without
being noticed. This had arisen from my
thoughtlessness
.
There was no one within hearing or sight.
What was next to be done? Should I not return
softly to the outer door, and summon the servant by
knocking?
Preparing to do this, I heard a footstep in the
entry
which suspended my design. I stood in the
middle
of the floor, attentive to these movements, when
presently the door opened, and there entered the
apartment
Mrs. Wentworth herself! She came, as it
seemed
,
without expectation of finding any one there.
When, therefore, the figure of a man caught her
vagrant
attention, she started and cast an hasty look
towards
me.
Pray! (in a peremptory tone) how came you here,
sir? and what is your business?
Neither arrogance, on the one hand; nor humility,
upon the other, had any part in modelling my
deportment
.
I came not to deprecate anger, or exult over
distress. I answered, therefore, distinctly, firmly, and
erectly.
I came to see you, madam, and converse with you;
but, being busy with other thoughts, I forgot to knock
at the door. No evil was intended by my negligence,
though propriety has certainly not been observed.
Will you pardon this intrusion, and condescend to
grant me your attention?
To what? What have you to say to me? I know
you only as the accomplice of a villain in an attempt to
deceive me. There is nothing to justify your coming
hither, and I desire you to leave the house with as
little
ceremony as you entered it.
N 2
My eyes were lowered at this rebuke, yet I did not
obey the command. Your treatment of me, madam,
is such as I appear to you to deserve. Appearances
are unfavorable to me, but those appearances are false.
I have concurred in no plot against your reputation or
your fortune. I have told you nothing but the truth.
I came hither to promote no selfish or sinister purpose.
I have no favor to entreat, and no pecition to offer,
but that you will suffer me to clear up those mistakes
which you have harbored respecting me.
I am poor. I am destitute of fame and of kindred.
I have nothing to console me in obscurity and
indigence
,
but the approbation of my own heart and the
good opinion of those who know me as I am. The
good may be led to despise and condemn me. Their
aversion and scorn shall not make me unhappy; but it
is my interest and my duty to rectify their error if I
can. I regard your character with esteem. You
have been mistaken in condemning me as a liar and
impostor, and I came to remove this mistake. I came,
if not to procure your esteem, at least, to take away
hatred and suspicion.
But this is not all my purpose. You are in an error
in relation not only to my character, but to the
situation
of your nephew Clavering. I formerly told you,
that I saw him die; that I assisted at his burial; but
my tale was incoherent and imperfect, and you have
since received intelligence to which you think proper
to trust, and which assures you that he is still living.
All I now ask is your attention, while I relate the
particulars
of my knowledge.
Proof of my veracity or innocence may be of no
value
in your eyes, but the fate of your nephew ought to
be known to you. Certainty, on this head, may be
of much importance to your happiness, and to the
regulation
of your future conduct. To hear me
patiently
can do you no injury, and may benefit you much.
Will you permit me to go on?
During this address, little abatement of resentment
and scorn was visible in my companion.
I will hear you, she replied. Your invention may
amuse if it does not edify. But, I pray you, let your
story be short.
I was obliged to be content with this ungraceful
concession, and proceeded to begin my narration. I
described the situation of my father's dwelling. I
mentioned the year, month, day, and hour of her
nephew's
appearance among us. I expatiated minutely
on his form, features, dress, sound of his voice, and
repeated his words. His favorite gestures and
attitudes
were faithfully described.
I had gone but a little way in my story, when the
effects were visible in her demeanor which I expected
from it. Her knowledge of the youth, and of the
time and manner of his disappearance, made it
impossible
for me, with so minute a narrative, to impose
upon her credulity. Every word, every incident
related
,
attested my truth, by their agreement with
what she herself previously knew.
Her suspicions and angry watchfulness was quickly
exchanged for downcast looks, and stealing tears, and
sighs difficultly repressed. Meanwhile, I did not pause,
but described the treatment he received from my
mother's
tenderness, his occupations, the freaks of his
insanity, and, finally, the circumstances of his death
and funeral.
Thence I hastened to the circumstances which
brought me to the city; which placed me in the
service
of Welbeck, and obliged me to perform so
ambiguous
a part in her presence. I left no difficulty to
be solved and no question unanticipated.
I have now finished my story, I continued, and
accomplished
my design in coming hither. Whether I
have vindicated my integrity from your suspicions, I
know not. I have done what in me lay to remove
your error; and, in that, have done my duty.
What more remains? Any enquiries you are pleased
to make, I am ready to answer. If there be none to
make, I will comply with your former commands, and
leave the house with as little ceremony as I entered it.
N 3
Your story, she replied, has been unexpected. I
believe
it fully, and am sorry for the hard thoughts which
past appearances have made me entertain concerning
you.
Here she sunk into mournful silence. The
information
,
she at length resumed, which I have received from
another quarter respecting that unfortunate youth,
astonishes
and perplexes me. It is inconsistent with your
story, but it must be founded on some mistake, which I
am, at present, unable to unravel. Welbeck, whose
connection has been so unfortunate to you
Unfortunate! Dear Madam! How unfortunate?
It has done away a part of my ignorance of the world
in which I live. It has led me to the situation in which
I am now placed. It has introduced me to the
knowledge
of many good people. It has made me the
witness
and the subject of many acts of beneficence and
generosity. My knowledge of Welbeck has been
useful
to me. It has enabled me to be useful to others. I
look back upon that allotment of my destiny which first
led me to his door, with gratitude and pleasure.
Would to Heaven, continued I, somewhat changing
my tone, intercourse with Welbeck had been as
harmless
to all others as it has been to me: that no injury
to fortune and fame, and innocence and life, had been
incurred by others greater than has fallen upon my head.
There is one being, whose connection with him has not
been utterly dissimilar in its origin and circumstances
to mine, though the catastrophe has, indeed, been widely
and mournfully different.
And yet, within this moment, a thought has
occurred
from which I derive some consolation and some
hope. You, dear madam, are rich. These spacious
apartments, this plentiful accommodation are yours.
You have enough for your own gratification and
convenience
,
and somewhat to spare. Will you take to your
protecting arms, to your hospitable roof, an unhappy
girl whom the arts of Welbeck have robbed of fortune,
reputation and honor, who is now languishing in
poverty
,
weeping over the lifeless remains of her babe,
surrounded by the agents of vice, and trembling on the
verge of infamy?
What can this mean? replied the lady. Of whom
do you speak?
You shall know her. You shall be apprized of her
claims to your compassion. Her story, as far as is
known to me, I will faithfully repeat to you. She is a
stranger; an Italian; her name is Clemenza Lodi.
Clemenza Lodi! Good Heaven! exclaimed Mrs.
Wentworth; why, surelyit cannot be. And yet
Is it possible that you are that person?
I do not comprehend you, madam.
A friend has related a transaction of a strange sort.
It is scarcely an hour since she told it me. The name
of Clemenza Lodi was mentioned in it, and a young man
of most singular deportment was described.But tell
me how you were engaged on Thursday morning?
I was coming to this city from a distance. I stopped
ten minutes at the house of
Mrs. Villars?
The same. Perhaps you know her and her character.
Perhaps you can confirm or rectify my present opinions
concerning her. It is there that the unfortunate
Clemenza
abides. It is thence that I wish her to be
speedily
removed.
I have heard of you; of your conduct upon that
occasion
.
Of me? answered I eagerly. Do you know that
woman? So saying, I produced the card which I had
received from her, and in which her name was written.
I know her well. She is my countrywoman and my
friend.
Your friend? Then she is goodshe is innocent
she is generous. Will she be a sister, a protectress to
Clemenza? Will you exhort her to a deed of charity?
Will you be, yourself, an example of beneficence?
Direct
me to Miss Fielding, I beseech you. I have called
on her already, but in vain, and there is no time to be
lost.
Why are you so precipitate? What would you do?
Take her away from that house instantlybring her
hitherplace her under your protectiongive her Mrs.
Wentworth for a counsellora frienda mother.
Shall I do this? Shall I hie thither to-day, this very
hournow? Give me your consent, and she shall be
with you before noon.
By no means, replied she, with earnestness. You
are too hasty. An affair of so much importance
cannot
be dispatched in a moment. There are many
difficulties
and doubts to be first removed.
Let them be reserved for the future. Withhold not
your helping hand till the struggler has disappeared
forever
.
Think on the gulph that is already gaping to
swallow her. This is no time to hesitate and faulter.
I will tell you her story, but not now; we will
postpone
it till to-morrow; and first secure her from
impending
evils. She shall tell it you herself. In an
hour I will bring her hither, and she herself shall recount
to you her sorrows. Will you let me?
Your behaviour is extraordinary. I can scarcely tell
whether this simplicity be real or affected. One would
think that your common sense would shew you the
impropriety
of your request. To admit under my roof a
woman, notoriously dishonoured, and from an infamous
house
My dearest madam! How can you reflect upon the
situation without irresistible pity? I see that you are
thoroughly aware of her past calamity and her present
danger. Do not these urge you to make haste to her
relief? Can any lot be more deplorable than hers? Can
any state be more perilous? Poverty is not the only evil
that oppresses, or that threatens her. The scorn of the
world, and her own compunction, the death of the fruit
of her error and the witness of her shame, are not the
worst. She is exposed to the temptations of the
profligate
;
while she remains with Mrs. Villars, her infamy
accumulates; her further debasement is facilitated;
her return to reputation and to virtue is obstructed by
new bars.
How know I that her debasement is not already
complete
and irremidable? She is a mother but not a wife.
How came she thus? Is her being Welbeck's prostitute
no proof of her guilt?
Alas! I know not. I believe her not very culpable;
I know her to be unfortunate; to have been robbed
and betrayed. You are a stranger to her history. I
am myself imperfectly acquainted with it.
But let me tell you the little that I know. Perhaps
my narrative may cause you to think of her as I do.
She did not object to this proposal, and I
immediately
recounted all that I had gained from my own
observations
,
or from Welbeck himself, respecting this
forlorn
girl. Having finished my narrative, I proceeded
thus:
Can you hesitate to employ that power which was
given
you for good ends, to rescue this sufferer? Take
her to your home; to your bosom; to your confidence.
Keep aloof those temptations which beset her in her
present situation. Restore her to that purity which her
desolate condition, her ignorance; her misplaced
gratitude
and the artifices of a skilful dissembler, have
destroyed
,
if it be destroyed; for how know we under
what circumstances her ruin was accomplished? With
what pretences or appearances, or promises she was won
to compliance?
True. I confess my ignorance; but ought not that
ignorance to be removed before she makes a part of my
family?
O no! It may be afterwards removed. It cannot be
removed before. By bringing her hither you shield
her, at least, from future and possible evils. Here you
can watch her conduct and sift her sentiments
conveniently
and at leisure. Should she prove worthy of your
charity, how justly may you congratulate yourself on
your seasonable efforts in her cause? If she prove
unworthy
,
you may then demean yourself according to her
demerits.
I must reflect upon it.To-morrow
Let me prevail on you to admit her at once, and
without delay. This very moment may be the critical
one. To-day, we may exert ourselves with success,
but to-morrow, all our efforts may be fruitless. Why
fluctuate, why linger, when so much good may be done,
and no evil can possibly be incurred? It requires but a
word from you; you need not move a finger. Your
house is large. You have chambers vacant and
convenient
.
Consent only that your door shall not be barred
against her; that you will treat her with civility; to
carry your kindness into effect; to persuade her to
attend
me hither and to place herself in your care, shall be
my province.
These, and many similar entreaties and reasonings,
were ineffectual. Her general disposition was kind,
but she was unaccustomed to strenuous or sudden
exertions. To admit the persuasions of such an
advocate
to so uncommon a scheme as that of sharing her
house with a creature, thus previously unknown to her,
thus loaded with suspicion and with obloquy, was not
possible.
I at last forbore importunity, and requested her to
tell me when I might expect to meet with Miss
Fielding
at her lodgings? Enquiry was made to what end I
sought an interview? I made no secret of my purpose.
Are you mad, young man? she exclaimed. Mrs.
Fielding has already been egregiously imprudent. On
the faith of an ancient slight acquaintance with Mrs.
Villars in Europe, she suffered herself to be decoyed
into a visit. Instead of taking warning by numerous
tokens of the real character of that woman, in her
behaviour
,
and in that of her visitants, she consented to
remain there one night. The next morning took place
that astonishing interview with you which she has since
described to me. She is now warned against the like
indiscretion
.
And pray, what benevolent scheme would
you propose to her?
Has she property? Is she rich?
She is. Unhappily, perhaps, for her, she is absolute
mistress of her fortune, and has neither guardian nor
parent to controul her in the use of it.
Has she virtue? Does she know the value of affluence
and a fair fame? And will not she devote a few dollars
to rescue a fellow-creature from indigence and infamy
and vice? Surely she will. She will hazard nothing by the
boon. I will be her almoner. I will provide the
wretched
stranger with food and raiment and dwelling, I will
pay for all, if Miss Fielding, from her superfluity will
supply
the means. Clemenza shall owe life and honor to
your friend, till I am able to supply the needful sum from
my own stock.
While thus speaking, my companion gazed at me
with steadfastnessI know not what to make of you.
Your language and ideas are those of a lunatic. Are
you acquainted with Mrs. Fielding?
Yes. I have seen her two days ago, and she has
invited
me to see her again.
And on the strength of this acquaintance, you expect
to be her almoner? To be the medium of her charity?
I desire to save her trouble; to make charity as light
and easy as possible. 'Twill be better if she perform
those offices herself. 'Twill redound more to the credit
of her reason and her virtue. But I solicit her
benignity
only in the cause of Clemenza. For her only do I
wish at present to call forth her generosity and pity.
And do you imagine she will entrust her money to
one of your age and sex, whom she knows so
imperfectly
,
to administer to the wants of one whom she found in
such an house as Mrs. Villars's? She never will. She
mentioned her imprudent engagement to meet you, but
she is now warned against the folly of such confidence.
You have told me plausible stories of yourself and of
this Clemenza. I cannot say that I disbelieve them,
but I know the ways of the world too well to bestow
implicit
faith so easily. You are an extraordinary young
man. You may possibly be honest. Such an one as
you, with your education and address, may possibly
have passed all your life in an hovel; but it is scarcely
credible, let me tell you. I believe most of the facts
respecting my nephew, because my knowledge of him
before his flight, would enable me to detect your
falsehood
;
but there must be other proofs besides an
innocent brow and a voluble tongue, to make me give
full credit to your pretensions.
I have no claim upon Welbeck which can embarrass
you. On that score, you are free from any molestation
from me or my friends. I have suspected you of being an
accomplice in some vile plot, and am now inclined to
acquit you, but that is all that you must expect from me,
till your character be established by other means than
your own assertions. I am egaged at present, and must
therefore request you to put an end to your visit.
This strain was much unlike the strain which
preceded
it. I imagined, by the mildness of her tone and
manners, that her unfavorable prepossessions were
removed
,
but they seemed to have suddenly regained their
pristine force. I was somewhat disconcerted by this
unexpected change. I stood for a minute silent and
irresolute
.
Just then a knock was heard at the door, and
presently
entered that very female whom I had met with at
Villars's. I caught her figure as I glanced through
the window. Mrs. Wentworth darted at me many
significant glances, which commanded me to withdraw;
but with this object in view, it was impossible.
As soon as she entered, her eyes were fixed upon me.
Certain recollections naturally occurred at that
moment
,
and made her cheeks glow. Some confusion
regined for a moment, but was quickly dissipated. She
did not notice me, but exchanged salutations with her
friend.
All this while I stood near the window, in a situation
not a little painful. Certain tremors which I had not
been accustomed to feel, and which seemed to possess a
mystical relation to the visitant, disabled me at once
from taking my leave, or from performing any useful
purpose by staying. At length, struggling for
composure
,
I approached her, and shewing her the card she
had given me, said:
Agreeably to this direction, I called, an hour ago, at
your lodgings. I found you not. I hope you will
permit
me to call once more. When shall I expect to
meet you at home?
Her eyes were cast on the floor. A kind of indirect
attention was fixed on Mrs. Wentworth, serving to
intimidate
and check her. At length she said, in an
irresolute
voice, I shall be at home this evening.
And this evening, replied I, I will call to see you.
So saying, I left the house.
This interval was tedious; but was to be endured
with equanimity. I was impatient to be gone to
Baltimore
,
and hoped to be able to set out by the dawn of next
day. Meanwhile, I was necessarily to perform
something
with respect to Clemenza.
After dinner I accompanied Mrs. Stevens to visit
Miss Carlton. I was eager to see a woman who could
bear adversity in the manner which my friend had
described
.
She met us at the door of her apartment. Her
seriousness
was not abated by her smiles of affability and
welcome.My friend! whispered I, How truly
lovely is this Miss Carlton! Are the heart and the
intelligence
within worthy of these features?
Yes, they are. Your account of her employments;
of her resignation to the ill fate of the brother whom
she loves, proves that they are.
My eyes were rivetted to her countenance and person,
I felt uncontroulable eagerness to speak to her, and to
gain her good opinion.
You must know this young man, my dear Miss
Carlton
,
said my friend, looking at me: He is my husband's
friend, and professes a great desire to be yours. You
must not treat him as a mere stranger, for he knows
your character and situation already, as well as that of
your brother.
She looked at me with benignity.I accept his
friendship
willingly and gratefully, and shall endeavor to
convince him that his good opinion is not misplaced.
There now ensued a conversation somewhat general,
in which this young woman shewed a mind vigorous
from exercise and unembarrassed by care. She affected
O
no concealment of her own condition, of her wants, or
her comforts. She laid no stress upon misfortunes, but
contrived to deduce some beneficial consequence to
herself
,
and some motive for gratitude to Heaven, from
every way ward incident that had befallen her.
This demeanor emboldened me, at length, to enquire
into the cause of her brother's imprisonment, and the
nature of his debt.
She answered frankly and without hesitation. It is
a debt of his father's, for which he made himself
responsible
during his father's life. The act was
generous
but imprudent, as the event has shewn; though,
at the time, the unhappy effects could not be foreseen.
My father, continued she, was arrested by his
creditor
,
at a time when the calmness and comforts of his
own dwelling were necessary to his health. The
creditor
was obdurate, and would release him upon no
condition but that of receiving a bond from my
brother
,
by which he engaged to pay the debt at several
successive times and in small portions. All these
instalments
were discharged with great difficulty indeed,
but with sufficient punctuality, except the last, to which
my brother's earnings were not adequate.
How much is the debt?
Four hundred dollars.
And is the state of the creditor such as to make the
loss of four hundred dollars of more importance to him
than the loss of liberty to your brother?
She answered, smiling, that is a very abstract view
of things. On such a question, you and I might,
perhaps
,
easily decide in favor of my brother; but would
there not be some danger of deciding partially? His
conduct is a proof of his decision, and there is no
power
to change it.
Will not argument change it? Methinks in so
plain a case I should be able to convince him. You
say he is rich and childless. His annual income is ten
times more than this sum. Your brother cannot pay
the debt while in prison; whereas, if at liberty, he
might slowly and finally discharge it. If his humanity
would not yield, his avarice might be brought to
acquiesce
.
But there is another passion which you would find it
somewhat harder to subdue, and that is his vengenance.
He thinks himself wronged, and imprisons my brother,
not to enforce payment, but to inflict misery. If you
could persuade him, that there is no hardship in
imprisonment
,
you would speedily gain the victory; but
that could not be attempted consistently with truth.
In proportion to my brother's suffering is his
gratification
.
You draw an odious and almost incredible portrait.
And yet such an one as would serve for the likeness
of almost every second man we meet.
And is such your opinion of mankind? Your
experience
must surely have been of a rueful tenor to
justify
such hard thoughts of the rest of your species.
By no means. It has been what those whose
situation
disables them from looking further than the
sun-face
of things, would regard as unfortunate; but if
my goods and evils were equitably balanced, the
former
would be the weightiest. I have found kindness
and goodness in great numbers, but have likewise met
prejudice and rancor in many. My opinion of
Farquhar
is not lightly taken up. I have seen him
yesterday
,
and the nature of his motives in the treatment of
my brother was plain enough.
Here this topic was succeeded by others, and the
conversation ceased not till the hour had arrived on
which I had preconcerted to visit Mrs. Fielding. I
left my two friends for this purpose.
I was admitted to Mrs. Fielding's presence without
scruple or difficulty. There were two females in her
company, and one of the other sex, well dressed,
elderly
,
and sedate persons. Their discourse turned
upon
political topics, with which, as you know, I have
but slight acquaintance. They talked of fleets and
armies
,
of Robespierre and Pitt, of whom I had only a
paper
knowledge.
O 2
In a short time the women rose, and, huddling on
their cloaks, disappeared, in company with the
gentleman
.
Being thus left alone with Mrs. Fielding, some
embarrassment was mutually betrayed. With much
hesitation, which, however, gradually disappeared, my
companion, at length, began the conversation.
You met me lately, in a situation, sir, on which I
look back with trembling and shame, but not with any
self-condemnation. I was led into it without any
fault, unless a too hasty confidence may be stiled a
fault. I had known Mrs. Villars in England, where
she lived with an untainted reputation, at least; and
the sight of my countrywoman, in a foreign land,
awakened
emotions, in the indulgence of which I did not
imagine there was either any guilt or any danger. She
invited me to see her at her house with so much
urgency
and warmth, and solicited me to take a place
immediately
in a chaise in which she had come to the city,
that I too incautiously complied.
You are a stranger to me, and I am unacqainted with
your character. What little I have seen of your
deportment
,
and what little I have lately heard concerning you
from Mrs. Wentworth, do not produce unfavorable
impressions; but the apology I have made was due to
my own reputation, and should have been offered to
you whatever your character had been. There she
stopped.
I came not hither, said I, to receive an apology.
Your demeanor, on our first interview, shielded you
sufficiently from any suspicions or surmises that I could
form. What you have now mentioned was likewise
mentioned by your friend, and was fully believed upon
her authority. My purpose, in coming, related not
to you but to another. I desired merely to
interest
your generosity and justice on behalf of one, whose
destitute and dangerous condition may lay claim to
your compassion and your succour.
I comprehend you, said she, with an air of some
perplexity. I know the claims of that person.
And will you comply with them?
In what manner can I serve her?
By giving her the means of living.
Does she not possess them already?
She is destitute. Her dependence was wholly placed
upon one that is dead, by whom her person was
dishonored
and her fortune embezzled.
But she still lives. She is not turned into the street.
She is not destitute of home.
But what an home?
Such as she may chuse to remain in.
She cannot chuse it. She must not chuse it. She
remains through ignorance, or through the incapacity
of leaving it.
But how shall she be persuaded to a change?
I will persuade her. I will fully explain her
situation
.
I will supply her with a new home.
You would persuade her to go with you, and to live
at a home of your providing, and on your bounty?
Certainly.
Would that change be worthy of a cautious person?
Would it benefit her reputation? Would it prove her
love of independence?
My purposes are good. I know not why she should
suspect them. But I am only anxious to be the
instrument
.
Let her be indebted to one of her own sex,
of unquestionable reputation. Admit her into this
house. Invite her to your arms. Cherish and console
her as your sister.
Before I am convinced that she deserves it? And
even then, what regard shall I, young, unmarried,
independent
,
affuent, pay to my own reputation in
harboring
a woman in these circumstances?
But you need not act yourself. Make me your agent
and almoner. Only supply her with the means of
subsistence
through me.
Would you have me act a clandestine part? Hold
meetings with one of your sex, and give him money
for a purpose which I must hide from the world? Is
it worth while to be a dissembler and impostor? And
will not such conduct incur more dangerous surmises
O 3
and suspicions, than would arise from acting openly
and directly? You will forgive me for reminding you
like wise, that it is particularly incumbent upon those
in my situation, to be circumspect in their intercourse
with men and with strangers. This is the second time
that I have seen you. My knowledge of you is
extremely
dubious and imperfect, and such as would make
the conduct you prescribe to me, in an high degree,
rash and culpable. You must not, therefore, expect
me to pursue it.
These words were delivered with an air of firmness
and dignity. I was not insensible to the truth of her
representations. I confess, said I, what you have
said makes me doubt the propriety of my proposal:
yet I would fain be of service to her. Cannot you
point out some practicable method?
She was silent and thoughtful, and seemed indisposed
to answer my question.
I had set my heart upon success in this negociation,
continued I, and could not imagine any obstacle to its
success; but I find my ignorance of the world's ways
much greater than I had previously expected. You
defraud
yourself of all the happiness redounding from the
act of making others happy. You sacrifice substance to
shew, and are more anxious to prevent unjust
aspersions
from lighting on yourself, than to rescue a
fellow-creature
from guilt and infamy.
You are rich, and abound in all the conveniences and
luxuries of life. A small portion of your superfluity
would obviate the wants of a being not less worthy
than yourself. It is not avarice or aversion to labor
that makes you withhold your hand. It is dread of the
sneers and surmises of malevolence and ignorance.
I will not urge you further at present. Your
determination
to be wise should not be hasty. Think upon
the subject calmly and sedately, and form your
resolution
in the course of three days. At the end of
that period I will visit you again. So saying, and
without waiting for comment or answer, I withdrew.
CHAPTER XVII.
I Mounted
the stage-coach at day-break the next
day, in company with a sallow Frenchman from Saint
Domingo, his fiddle-case, an ape, and two female
blacks. The Frenchman, after passing the suburbs,
took out his violin and amused himself with humming
to his own
tweedle-tweedle
. The monkey now and
then mounched an apple, which was given to him from
a basket by the blacks, who gazed with stupid wonder,
and an exclamatory
La! La!
upon the passing
scenery
;
or chattered to each other in a sort of
open-mouthed
,
half-articulate, monotonous, and sing-song jargon.
The man looked seldom either on this side or that;
and spoke only to rebuke the frolicks of the monkey,
with a Tenez! Dominique! Prenez garde! Diable
noir!
As to me my thought was busy in a thousand ways.
I sometimes gazed at the faces of my
four
companions,
and endeavored to discern the differences and
samenesses
between them. I took an exact account of the
features, proportions, looks, and gestures of the
monkey
,
the Congolese, and the Creole-Gaul. I compared
them together, and examined them apart. I looked
at them in a thousand different points of view, and
pursued, untired and unsatiated, those trains of
reflections
which began at each change of tone, feature, and
attitude.
I marked the country as it successively arose before
me, and found endless employment in examining the
shape and substance of the fence, the barn and the
cottage, the aspect of earth and of heaven. How
great are the pleasures of health and of mental
activity
.
My chief occupation, however, related to the scenes
into which I was about to enter. My imaginations
were, of course, crude and inadequate; and I found
an uncommon gratification in comparing realities, as
they successively occurred, with the pictures which my
wayward fancy had depicted.
I will not describe my dreams. My proper task is
to relate the truth. Neither shall I dwell upon the
images suggested by the condition of the country
through which I passed. I will confine myself to
mentioning the transactions connected with the purpose
of my journey.
I reached Baltimore at night. I was not so
fatigued
,
but that I could ramble through the town. I
intended, at present, merely the gratification of a
stranger's curiosity. My visit to Mrs. Watson and
her brother I designed should take place on the
morrow
.
The evening of my arrival I deemed an
unseasonable
time.
While roving about, however, it occurred to me,
that it might not be impolitic to find the way to their
habitation even now. My purposes of general
curiosity
would equally be served whichever way my steps
were bent; and, to trace the path to their dwelling,
would save me the trouble of enquiries and
interrogations
to-morrow.
When I looked forward to an interview with the wife
of Watson, and to the subject which would be
necessarily
discussed at that interview, I felt a trembling and
misgiving at my heart. Surely, thought I, it will
become
me to exercise immeasurable circumspection and
address; and yet how little are these adapted to the
impetuosity and candor of my nature.
How am I to introduce myself? What am I to tell
her? That I was a sort of witness to the murder of
her husband? That I received from the hand of his
assassin the letter which I afterwards transmitted to
her? and, from the same hands, the bills contained in
his girdle?
How will she start and look aghast? What
suspicions
will she harbor? What enquiries shall be made
of me? How shall they be disarmed and eluded, or
answered? Deep consideration will be necessary
befor
I trust myself to such an interview. The coming
night shall be devoted to reflection upon this subject.
From these thoughts I proceeded to enquiries for the
street mentioned in the advertisement, where Mrs.
Watson was said to reside. The street, and, at length,
the habitation, was found. Having reached a station
opposite, I paused and surveyed the mansion. It was
a wooden edifice of two stories; humble, but neat.
You ascended to the door by several stone steps. Of
the two lower windows, the shutters of one were closed,
but those of the other were open. Though late in the
evening, there was no appearance of light or fire
within.
Beside the house was a painted fence, through which
was a gate leading to the back of the building.
Guided
by the impulse of the moment, I crossed the street
to the gate, and, lifting the latch, entered the paved
alley, on one side of which was a paled fence, and on
the other the house, looking through two windows
into
the alley.
The first window was dark like those in front;
but at the second a light was discernible. I
approached
it, and, looking through, beheld a plain but neat
apartment, in which parlour, kitchen, and nursery
seemed to be united. A fire burnt cheerfully in the
chimney, over which was a tea-kettle. On the hearth
sat a smiling and playful cherub of a boy, tossing
something to a black girl who sat opposite, and whose
innocent and regular features wanted only a different
bue to make them beautiful. Near it, in a
rockingchair
,
with a sleeping babe in her lap, sat a female
figure in plain but neat and becoming attire. Her
posture
permitted half her face to be seen, and saved me
from any danger of being observed.
This countenance was full of sweetness and
benignity
,
but the sadness that veiled its lustre was
profound
.
Her eyes were now fixed upon the fire and
were moist with the tears of remembrance, while she sung,
in low and scarcely audible strains, an artless lullaby.
This spectacle exercised a strange power over my
feelings. While occupied in meditating on the
features
of the mother, I was unaware of my
conspicuous
situation. The black girl having occasion to change
her situation, in order to reach the ball which was
thrown at her, unluckily caught a glance of my figure
through the glass. In a tone of half surprize and half
terror she cried outO! see dare! a man!
I was tempted to draw suddenly back, but a second
thought shewed me the impropriety of departing thus
abruptly, and leaving behind me some alarm. I felt
a sort of necessity for apologizing for my intrusion into
these precincts, and hastened to a door that led into
the same apartment. I knocked. A voice somewhat
confused bade me enter. It was not till I opened the
door and entered the room, that I fully saw in what
embarrassments I had incautiously involved myself.
I could scarcely obtain sufficient courage to speak,
and gave a confused assent to the question Have
you business with me, sir? She offered me a chair,
and I sat down. She put the child, not yet awakened,
into the arms of the black, who kissed it and rocked it
in her arms with great satisfaction, and, resuming her
seat, looked at me with inquisitiveness mingled with
complacency.
After a moment's pause, I saidI was directed to
this house as the abode of Mr. Ephraim Williams.
Can he be seen, madam?
He is not in town at present. If you will leave a
message with me, I will punctually deliver it.
The thought suddenly occurred, whether any more
was needful than merely to leave the bills suitably
enclosed
,
as they already were, in a pacquet. Thus all
painful explanations might be avoided, and I might
have reason to congratulate myself on his seasonable
absence. Actuated by these thoughts, I drew forth
the pacquet, and put it into her hand, saying, I will
leave this in your possession, and must earnestly
request
you to keep it safe until you can deliver it into
his own hands.
Scarcely had I said this before new suggestions
occurred
.
Was it right to act in this clandestine and
mysterious manner? Should I leave these persons in
uncertainty respecting the fate of an husband and a
brother? What perplexities, misunderstandings, and
suspences might not grow out of this uncertainty; and
ought they not to be precluded at any hazard to my
own safety or good name?
These sentiments made me involuntarily stretch
forth my hand to retake the pacquet. This gesture,
and other significances in my manners, joined to a
trembling consciousness in herself, filled my
companion
with all the tokens of confusion and fear. She
alternately looked at me and at the paper. Her
trepidation
increased, and she grew pale. These emotions
were counteracted by a strong effort.
At length she said faulteringly, I will take good
care of them, and will give them to my brother.
She rose and placed them in a drawer, after which
she resumed her seat.
On this occasion all my wariness forsook me. I
cannot explain why my perplexity and the trouble of my
thot's were greater upon this than upon similar occasions.
However it be, I was incapable of speaking, and fixed
my eyes upon the floor. A sort of electrical
sympathy
pervaded my companion, and terror and anguish
were strongly manifested in the glances which she
sometimes stole at me. We seemed fully to
undersstand
each other without the aid of words.
This imbecility could not last long. I gradually
recovered my composure and collected my scattered
thoughts. I looked at her with seriousness, and
steadfastly
spokeAre you the wife of Amos Watson?
She started.I am, indeed. Why do you ask?
Do you know any thing of ? There her voice
failed.
I replied with quickness, yes. I am fully
acquainted
with his destiny.
Good God! she exclaimed in a paroxysm of surprize,
and bending eagerly forward, my husband is then alive.
This pacquet is from him. Where is he? When have
you seen him?
'Tis a long time since.
But where, where is he now? Is he well? Will
he return to me?
Never.
Merciful Heaven! looking upwards and clasping her
hands, I thank thee at least for his life! But why
has he forsaken me? Why will he not return?
For a good reason, said I with augmented
solemnity
,
he will never return to thee. Long ago was he
laid in the cold grave.
She shrieked; and, at the next moment, sunk in a swoon
upon the floor. I was alarmed. The two children
shrieked, and ran about the room terrified and
unknowing
what they did. I was overwhelmed with
somewhat like terror, yet I involuntarily raised the
mother in my arms, and cast about for the means of
recalling her from this fit.
Time to effect this had not elapsed, when several
persons, apparently Mrs. Watson's neighbors, and
raised by the outcries of the girls, hastily entered the
room. They looked at me with mingled surprize and
suspicion; but my attitude, being that not of an
injurer
but helper; my countenance, which shewed
the pleasure their entrance, at this critical moment,
afforded
me; and my words, in which I besought their
assistance, and explained, in some degree, and briefly,
the cause of those appearances, removed their ill
thoughts.
Presently, the unhappy woman, being carried by the
new-comers into a bed-room adjoining, recovered her
sensibility. I only waited for this. I had done my
part. More information would be useless to her, and
not to be given by me, at least, in the present
audience
,
without embarrassment and peril. I suddenly
determined to withdraw, and this, the attention of the
company being otherwise engaged, I did without
notice
.
I returned to my inn, and shut myself up in
my chamber. Such was the change which,
undesigned
,
unforeseen, an half an hour had wrought in my
situation
.
My cautious projects had perished in their
conception
.
That which I had deemed so arduous, to
require
such circumspect approaches, such well
concerted
speeches, was done.
I had started up before this woman as if from the
pores of the ground. I had vanished with the same
celerity, but had left her in possession of proofs
sufficient
that I was neither spectre nor demon. I will
visit her, said I, again. I will see her brother, and
know the full effect of my disclosure. I will tell
them all that I myself know. Ignorance would be no
less injurious to them than to myself; but, first, I will
see the Maurices.
P
CHAPTER XVIII.
Next
morning I arose betimes, and equipped myself
without delay. I had eight or ten miles to walk, so
far from the town being the residence of these people;
and I forthwith repaired to their dwelling. The
persons
whom I desired to see were known to me only by
name, and by their place of abode. It was a mother
and her three daughters to whom I now carried the
means not only of competence but riches; means
which they, no doubt, had long ago despaired of
regaining
,
and which, among all possible messengers,
one of my age and guise would be the least suspected
of being able to restore.
I arrived, through intricate ways, at eleven o'clock,
at the house of Mrs. Maurice. It was a neat
dwelling
,
in a very fanciful and rustic style, in the bosom of a
valley, which, when decorated by the verdure and
blossoms
of the coming season, must possess many charms.
At present it was naked and dreary.
As I approached it, through a long avenue, I
observed
two female figures, walking arm-in-arm and
slowly to and fro, in the path in which I now was.
These, said I, are daughters of the family. Graceful,
well-dressed, fashionable girls they seem at this
distance. May they be deserving of the good tidings
which I bring.Seeing them turn towards the house,
I mended my pace, that I might overtake them and
request
their introduction of me to their mother.
As I more nearly approached, they again turned;
and, perceiving me, they stood as if in expectation of
my message. I went up to them.
A single glance, cast at each, made me suspect that
they were not sisters; but, somewhat to my
disappointment
,
there was nothing highly prepossessing in
the countenance of either. They were what is every
day met with, though less embellished by brilliant
drapery and turban, in markets and streets. An air,
somewhat haughty, somewhat supercilious, lessened
still more their attractions. These defects, however,
were nothing to me.
I enquired, of her that seemed to be the elder of the
two, for Mrs. Maurice.
She is indisposed, was the cold reply.
That is unfortunate. Is it not possible to see her?
Nowith still more gravity.
I was somewhat at a loss how to proceed. A pause
ensued. At length, the same lady resumedWhat's
your business? You can leave your message with
me.
With no body but her. If she be not
very
indisposed
She is very indiposed, interrupted she peevishly. If
you cannot leave your message, you may take it back
again, for she must not be disturbed.
This was a singular reception. I was disconcerted
and silent. I knew not what to say. Perhaps, I at
last observed, some other time
No, with increasing heat, no other time. She is
more likely to be worse than better. Come, Betsy,
said she, taking hold of her companion's arm; and,
hieing into the house, shut the door after her, and
disappeared
.
I stood, at the bottom of the steps,
confounded
at such strange and unexpected treatment. I
could not withdraw till my purpose was accomplished.
After a moment's pause, I stepped to the door, and
P 2
pulled the bell. A Negro came, of a very
unpropitious
aspect, and opening the door, looked at me in
silence
.
To my question, was Mrs. Maurice to be
seen? he made some answer, in a jargon which I could
not understand; but his words were immediately
followed
by an unseen person within the houseMrs.
Maurice can't be seen by any body. Come in, Cato,
and shut the door. This injunction was obeyed by
Cato without ceremony.
Here was a dilemma! I came with ten thousand
pounds in my hands, to bestow freely on these people,
and such was the treatment I received. I must adopt,
said I, a new mode.
I lifted the latch, without a second warning, and,
Cato having disappeared, went into a room, the door
of which chanced to be open, on my right hand. I
found within the two females whom I had accosted in
the portico. I now addressed myself to the younger
This intrusion, when I have explained the reason of it,
will, I hope, be forgiven. I come, madam
Yes, interrupted the other, with a countenance
suffused
by indignation, I know very well whom you
come from, and what it is that prompts this insolence,
but your employer shall see that we have not sunk so
low as he imagines. Cato! Bob! I say.
My employer, madam! I see you labor under
some great mistake. I have no employer. I come
from a great distance. I come to bring intelligence
of the utmost importance to your family. I come to
benefit and not to injure you.
By this time, Bob and Cato, two sturdy blacks,
entered
the room. Turn this person, said the imperious
lady, regardless of my explanations, out of the house.
Don't you hear me? she continued, observing that
they looked one upon the other and hesitated.
Surely, madam, said I, you are precipitate. You
are treating like an enemy one who will prove himself
your mother's best friend.
Will you leave the house? she exclaimed, quite
beside
herself with anger. Villains! why don't you do
as I bid you?
The blacks looked upon each other, as if waiting
for an example. Their habitual deference for every
thing
white
, no doubt, held their hands from what
they regarded as a profanation. At last Bob said, in
a whining, beseeohing toneWhy, missee, massa
buckra
wanna go for doo, dan he wanna go fo' wee.
The lady now burst into tears of rage. She held
out her hand, menacingly. Will you leave the house?
Not willingly, said I, in a mild tone. I came too
far to return with the business that brought me
unperformed
.
I am persuaded, madam, you mistake my
character and my views. I have a message to deliver
your mother which deeply concerns her and your
happiness
,
if you are her daughter. I merely wished to
see her, and leave with her a piece of important news;
news in which her fortune is deeply interested.
These words had a wonderful effeot upon the young
lady. Her anger was checked. Good God! she
exclaimed
,
are you Watson?
No: I am only Watson's representative, and come
to do all that Watson could do if he were present.
She was now importunate to know my business.
My business lies with Mrs. Maurice.
Advertisements
,
which I have seen, direct me to her, and to
this house, and to her only shall I deliver my
message
.
Perhaps, said she, with a face of apology, I have
mistaken you. Mrs. Maurice is my mother. She is
really indisposed, but I can stand in her place on this
occasion.
You cannot represent her in this instance. If I
cannot have access to her now, I must go; and shall
return when you are willing to grant it.
Nay, replied she, she is not, perhaps, so very sick
but thatI will go, and see if she will admit you.
So saying, she left me for three minutes; and
returning
said, her mother wished to see me.
I followed up stairs, at her request; and, entering
an ill-furnished chamber, found, seated in an
armchain
,
a lady seemingly in years, pale and visibly
infirm
.
P 3
The lines of her countenance were far from
laying claim to my reverence. It was too much like
the daughter's
She looked at me, at my entrance, with great
eagerness
,
and said, in a sharp tone, pray, friend, what is
it you want with me? Make haste; tell your story,
and begone.
My story is a short one, and easily told. Amos
Watson was your agent in Jamaica. He sold an
estate
belonging to you, and received the money.
He did, said she, attempting ineffectually to rise
from her seat, and her eyes beaming with a
significance
that shocked meHe did, the villain, and
purloined
the money, to the ruin of me and my daughters.
But if there be justice on earth it will overtake him.
I trust, I shall have the pleasure one dayI hope to
hear he's hanged. Well, but go on, friend. He
did
sell it, I tell you.
He sold it for ten thousand pounds, I resumed, and
invested this sum in bills of exchange. Watson is
dead. These bills came into my hands. I was lately
informed, by the public papers, who were the real
owners, and have come from Philadelphia with no
other view than to restore them to you. There they
are, continued I, placing them in her lap, entire and
untouched.
She seized the papers, and looked at me and at her
daughter, by turns, with an air of one suddenly
bewildered
.
She seemed speechless, and growing
suddenly
more ghastly pale, leaned her head back upon the
chair. The daughter screamed, and hastened to
support
the languid parent, who difficultly articulated
O! I am sick; sick to death. Put me on the bed.
I was astonished and affrighted at this scene. Some
of the domestics, of both colours, entered, and gazed
at me with suprize. Involuntarily I withdrew, and
returned to the room below into which I had first
entered
,
and which I now found deserted.
I was for some time at a loss to guess at the cause
of these appearances. At length it occurred to me,
that joy was the source of the sickness that had seized
Mrs. Maurice. The abrupt recovery of what had
probably been deemed irretrievable, would naturally
produce this effect upon a mind of a certain texture.
I was deliberating, whether to stay or go, when
the daughter entered the room, and, after expressing
some surprize at seeing me, whom she supposed to
have retired, told me that her mother wished to see me
again before my departure. In this request there was
no kindness. All was cold, supercilious, and sullen.
I obeyed the summons without speaking.
I found Mrs. Maurice seated in her arm-chair,
much in her former guise. Without desiring me to
be seated, or relaxing ought in her asperity of looks
and tonesPray, friend, how did you
come by
these
papers
?
I assure you, madam, they were honestly
come by
,
answered I, sedately and with half a smile; but, if
the whole is there that was missing, the mode and time
in which they came to me is matter of concern only to
myself. Is there any deficiency?
I'm not sure. I don't know much of these matters.
There may be less. I dare say there is. I shall know
that soon. I expect a friend of mine every minute
who will look them over. I don't doubt you can give
a good account of yourself.
I doubt not but I canto those who have a right to
demand it. In this case, curiosity must be very urgent
indeed, before I shall consent to gratify it.
You must know this is a suspicious case. Watson;
to be sure, embezzled the money: to be sure, you are
his accomplice.
Certainly, said I, my conduct, on this occasion,
proves that. What I have brought to you, of my own
accord; what I have restored to you, fully and
unconditionally
,
it is plain Watson embezzled, and that I
was aiding in the fraud. To restore what was never
stolen always betrays the thief. To give what might
be kept without suspicion, is, without doubt, arrant
knavery.To be serious, madam, in coming thus far,
for this purpose, I have done enough; and must now
bid you farewel.
Nay, don't go yet. I have something more to say
to you. My friend I'm sure will be here presently.
There he is, noticing a peal upon the bell. Polly, go
down, and see if that's Mr. Somers. If it is, bring
him up. The daughter went.
I walked to the window absorbed in my own
reflections
.
I was disappointed and dejected. The scene
before me was the unpleasing reverse of all that my
fancy, while coming hither, had foreboded. I
expected
to find virtuous indigence and sorrow lifted, by
my means, to affluence and exultation. I expected to
witness the tears of gratitude and the caresses of
affection
.
What had I found? Nothing but
sordidness
,
stupidity, and illiberal suspicion.
The daughter staid much longer than the mother's
patience could endure. She knocked against the floor
with her heel. A servant came up.Where's Polly,
you slut? It was not you, hussey, that I wanted. It
was her.
She is talking in the parlour with a gentleman.
Mr. Somers, I suppose; hay! fool! Run with my
compliments to him, wench. Tell him, please walk
up.
It is not Mr. Somers, ma'am.
No! Who then, saucebox? What gentleman can
have any thing to do with Polly?
I don't know, ma'am.
Who said you did, impertinence? Run, and tell her
I want her this instant.
The summons was not delivered, or Polly did not
think proper to obey it. Full ten minutes of
thoughtful
silence on my part, and of muttered vexation and
impatience on that of the old lady, elapsed before
Polly's
entrance. As soon as she appeared, the mother
began to complain bitterly of her inattention and
neglect
;
but Polly, taking no notice of her, addressed
herself to me, and told me, that a gentleman below
wished to see me. I hastened down, and found a
stranger
,
of a plain appearance, in the parlour. His aspect,
was liberal and ingenuous; and I quickly collected
from his discourse, that this was the brother-in-law of,
Watson, and the companion of his last voyage.
CHAPTER XIX.
My
eyes sparkled with pleasure at this unexpected
interview, and I willingly confessed my desire to
communicate
all the knowledge of his brother's destiny
which I possessed. He told me, that, returning late
to Baltimore on the last evening, he found his sister in
much agitation and distress, which, after a time, she
explained to him. She likewise put the pacquets I had
left into his hands.
I leave you to imagine, continued he, my surprize
and curiosity at this discovery. I was, of course,
impatient
to see the bearer of such extraordinary tidings.
This morning, enquiring for one of your appearance at
the taverns, I was, at length, informed of your arrival
yesterday in the stage; of your going out alone in the
evening; of your subsequent return; and of your
early departure this morning. Accidentally I lighted
on your footsteps; and, by suitable enquiries on the
road, have finally traced you hither.
You told my sister her husband was dead. You left
with her papers that were probably in his possession at
the time of his death. I understand from Miss
Maurice
that the bills belonging to her mother, have just
been delivered to her. I presume you have no
objection
to clear up this mystery.
To you I am anxious to unfold every thing. At this
moment, or at any time, but the sooner, the more
agreeable
to me, I will do it.
This, said he, looking around him, is no place; there
is an inn not an hundred yards from this gate, where
I have left my horse; will you go thither? I readily
consented, and calling for a private apartment, I laid
before this man every incident of my life connected
with Welbeck and Watson; my full, circumstantial and
explicit story, appeared to remove every doubt which he
might have entertained of my integrity.
In Williams, I found a plain good man, of a temper
confiding and affectionate. My narration being finished,
he expressed, by unaffected tokens, his wonder and his
grief on account of Watson's destiny. To my
enquiries
,
which were made with frankness and fervor,
respecting
his own and his sister's condition, he said,
that the situation of both was deplorable till the
recovery
of this property. They had been saved from
utter
ruin, from beggary and a jail, only by the
generosity
and lenity of his creditors, who did not suffer the
suspicious circumstances attending Watson's
disappearance
to outweigh former proofs of his probity. They
had never relinquished the hopes of receiving some
tidings
of their kinsman.
I related what had just passed in the house of Mrs.
Maurice, and requested to know from him the history
and character of this family.
They have treated you, he answered, exactly as any
one who knew them would have predicted. The
mother
is narrow, ignorant, bigotted, and avaricious.
The eldest daughter, whom you saw, resembles the
old lady in many things. Age, indeed, may render
the similitude complete. At present, pride and
illhumor
are her chief characteristics.
The youngest daughter has nothing in mind or
person
in common with her family. Where they are
irrascible
,
she is patient; where they are imperious, she
is humble; where they are covetous, she is liberal;
where they are ignorant and indolent, she is studious
and skilful. It is rare, indeed, to find a young lady
more amiable than Miss Fanny Maurice, or who has
had more crosses and afflictions to sustain.
The eldest daughter always extorted the supply of
her wants, from her parents, by threats and
importunities
;
but the younger could never be prevailed upon
to employ the same means, and, hence, she suffered
inconveniences which, to any other girl, born to an
equal rank, would have been, to the last degree,
humiliating
and vexatious. To her they only afforded
new opportunities for the display of her most shining
virtuesfortitude and charity. No instance of their
sordidness or tyranny ever stole a murmur from her.
For what they had given, existence and a virtuous
education, she said they were entitled to gratitude.
What they withheld was their own, in the use of which
they were not accountable to her. She was not
ashamed
to owe her subsistence to her own industry, and was
only held, by the pride of her familyin this instance
their pride was equal to their avaricefrom seeking out
some lucrative kind of employment. Since the shock
which their fortune sustained, by Watson's
disappearance
,
she has been permitted to pursue this plan, and
she now teaches music in Baltimore for a living. No
one, however, in the highest rank, can be more
generally
respected and caressed than she is.
But will not the recovery of this money make a
favorable
change in her condition?
I can hardly tell; but I am inclined to think it will
not. It will not change her mother's character. Her
pride may be awakened anew, and she may oblige Miss
Fanny to relinquish her new profession, and that will
be a change to be deplored.
What good has been done, then, by restoring this
money?
If pleasure be good, you must have conferred a
great deal on the Maurices; upon the mother and two
of the daughters, at least. The only pleasure, indeed,
which their natures can receive. It is less than if you
had raised them from absolute indigence, which has
not been the case, since they had wherewithal to live
upon beside their Jamaica property. But how,
continued
Williams, suddenly recollecting himself, have
you claimed the reward promised to him who should
restore
these bills?
What reward?
No less than a thousand dollars. It was publicly
promised under the hands of Mrs. Maurice and of
Hemming
,
her husband's executor.
Really, said I, that circumstance escaped my
attention
,
and I wonder that it did; but is it too late to
repair the evil?
Then you have no scruple to accept the reward?
Certainly not. Could you suspect me of so strange
a punctilio as that?
Yes; but I know not why. The story you have
just finished taught me to expect some unreasonable
refinement
upon that head.To be hired, to be bribed
to do our duty is supposed by some to be degrading.
This is no such bribe to me. I should have acted
just as I have done, had no recompence been promised.
In truth, this has been my conduct, for I never once
thought of the reward; but now that you remind me
of it, I would gladly see it bestowed. To fulfil their
engagements, in this respect, is no more than justice
in the Maurices. To one, in my condition, the
money
will be highly useful. If these people were poor,
or generous and worthy, or if I myself were already
rich, I might less repine at their withholding it; but,
things being as they are with them and with me, it
would, I think, be gross injustice in them to withhold,
and in me to refuse.
That injustice, said Williams, will, on their part, I
fear, be committed. 'Tis pity you first applied to Mrs.
Maurice. Nothing can be expected from her avarice,
unless it be wrested from her by a lawsuit.
That is a force which I shall never apply.
Had you gone first to Hemming's, you might, I
think, have looked for payment. He is not a mean
Q
man. A thousand dollars he must know is not much
to give for forty thousand. Perhaps, indeed, it may not
yet be too late. I am well known to him, and if you
please, will attend you to him in the evening, and state
your claim.
I thankfully accepted this offer, and went with him
accordingly. I found that Hemmings had been with
Mrs. Maurice in the course of the day; had received
from her intelligence of this transaction, and had
entertained
the expectation of a visit from me for this very
purpose.
While Williams explained to him the nature of my
claim, he scanned me with great intentness. His
austere
and inflexible brow, afforded me little room to hope
for success, and this hopelessness was confirmed by his
silence and perplexity, when Williams had made an
end.
To be sure, said he, after some pause, the contract
was explicit. To be sure, the conditions on Mr.
Mervyn's
side have been performed. Certain it is, the bills
are entire and complete, but Mrs. Maurice will not
consent to do her part, and Mrs. Maurice, to whom
the papers were presented, is the person, by whom,
according
to the terms of the contract, the reward must
be paid.
But Mrs. Maurice, you know, sir, may be legally
compelled to pay, said Williams.
Perhaps she may; but I tell you plainly, that she
never
will do the thing without compulsion. Legal
process
,
however, in this case, will have other
inconveniences
besides delay. Some curiosity will naturally be
excited, as to the history of these papers. Watson
disappeared a twelve month ago. Who can avoid
asking, where have these papers been deposited all this
while, and how came this person in possession of them?
That kind of curiosity, said I, is natural and
laudable
,
and gladly would I gratify it. Disclosure or
concealment
in that case, however, would no wise affect
my present claim. Whether a bond, legally executed,
shall be paid, does not depend upon determining whether
the payer is fondest of boiled mutton or roast beef.
Truth, in the first case, has no connection with truth
in the second. So far from eluding this curiosity; so
far from studying concealment, I am anxious to
publish
the truth.
You are right, to be sure, said Hemmings.
Curiosity
is a natural, but only an incidental consequence in
this case. I have no reason for desiring that it should
be an unpleasant consequence to you.
Well, sir, said Williams, you think that Arthur
Mervyn has no remedy in this case but the law.
Mrs. Maurice, to be sure, will never pay but on
compulsion. Mervyn should have known his own
interest
better. While his left hand was stretched out to
give, his right should have been held forth to receive.
As it is, he must be contented with the aid of law.
Any attorney will prosecute on condition of receiving
half the sum
when recovered.
We now rose to take our leave, when, Hemmings
desiring us to pause a moment, said, to be sure, in the
utmost strictness of the terms of our promise, the
reward
was to be paid by the person who received the
papers
;
but it must be owned that your claim, at any
rate, is equitable. I have money of the deceased Mr.
Maurice in my hands. These very bills are now in my
possession. I will therefore pay you your due, and
take the consequences of an act of justice on myself.
I was prepared for you. Sign that receipt, and there is
a
check
for the amount.
Q 2
CHAPTER XX.
This
unexpected and agreeable decision was
accompanied
by an invitation to supper, at which we were
treated by our host with much affability and kindness.
Finding me the author of Williams's good fortune, as
well as Mrs. Maurice's, and being assured by the
former
of his entire conviction of the rectitude of my
conduct, he laid aside all reserve and distance with
regard
to me. He enquired into my prospects and
wishes
,
and professed his willingness to serve me.
I dealt with equal unreserve and frankness. I am
poor, said I. Money for my very expences hither, I
have borrowed from a friend, to whom I am, in other
respects, much indebted, and whom I expect to
compensate
only by gratitude and future services.
In coming hither, I expected only an increase of my
debts; to sink still deeper into poverty; but happily the
issue has made me rich. This hour has given me
competence
,
at least.
What! call you a thousand dollars competence?
More than competence. I call it an abundance.
My own ingenuity, while I enjoy health, will enable
me to live. This I regard as a fund, first to pay my
debts, and next to supply deficiencies occasioned by
untoward
accidents or ill health, during the ensuing three
or four years, at least.
We parted with this new acquaintance at a late hour,
and I accepted Williams's invitation to pass the time I
should spend at Baltimore, under his sister's roof.
There were several motives for prolonging this stay.
What I had heard of Miss Fanny Maurice, excited
strong wishes to be personally acquainted with her.
This young lady was affectionately attached to Mrs.
Watson, by whose means my wishes were easily
accomplished
.
I never was in habits of reserve, even with those
whom I had no reason to esteem. With those who
claimed my admiration and affection, it was impossible
to be incommunicative. Before the end of my second
interview, both these women were mistresses of every
momentous incident of my life, and of the whole chain
of my feelings and opinions, in relation to every
subject
,
and particularly in relation to themselves. Every
topic disconnected with these, is comparatively lifeless
and inert.
I found it easy to win their attention, and to render
them communicative in their turn. As full disclosures
as I had made without condition or request, my
enquiries
and example easily obtained from Mrs. Watson and
Miss Maurice. The former related every event of her
youth, and the circumstances leading to her marriage.
She depicted the character of her husband, and the
whole train of suspences and inquietudes occasioned by
his disappearance. The latter did not hide from me her
opinions upon any important subject, and made me
thoroughly acquainted with her actual situation.
This intercourse was strangely fascinating. My heart
was buoyed up by a kind of intoxication. I now found
myself exalted to my genial element, and began to
taste the delights of existence. In the intercourse of
ingenious and sympathetic minds, I found a pleasure
which I had not previously conceived.
The time flew swiftly away, and a fortnight passed
almost before I was aware that a day had gone by. I
did not forget the friends whom I had left behind, but
maintained a punctual correspondence with Stevens, to
whom I imparted all occurrences.
O 3
The recovery of my friend's kinsman, allowed him in
a few days to return home. His first object was the
consolation and relief of Carlton, whom, with much
difficulty, he persuaded to take advantage of the laws
in favor of insolvent debtors. Carlton's only debt was
owing to his uncle, and by rendering up every species
of property, except his clothes and the implements of
his trade, he obtained a full discharge. In conjunction
with his sister, he once more assumed the pen, and
being
no longer burthened with debts he was unable to
discharge, he resumed, together with his pen, his
cheerfulness. Their mutual industry was sufficient for
their decent and moderate subsistence.
The chief reason for my hasty return, was my
anxiety
respecting Clemenza Lodi. This reason was
removed
by the activity and benevolence of my friend. He
paid this unfortunate stranger a visit at Mrs. Villars's.
Access was easily obtained, and he found her sunk
into
the deepest melancholy. The recent loss of her
child, the death of Welbeck, of which she was soon
apprized, her total dependence upon those with whom
she was placed, who, however, had always treated her
without barbarity or indecorum, were the calamities
that weighed down her spirit.
My friend easily engaged her confidence and
gratitude
,
and prevailed upon her to take refuge under his
own roof. Mrs. Wentworth's scruples, as well as
those of Mrs. Fielding, were removed by his
arguments
and entreaties, and they consented to take upon
themselves, and divide between them, the care of her
subsistence and happiness. They condescended to
express
much curiosity respecting me, and some interest
in my welfare, and promised to receive me on my
return
,
on the footing of a friend.
With some reluctance, I at length bade my new
friends farewel, and returned to Philadelphia.
Nothing
remained, before I should enter on my projected
scheme of study and employment, under the guidance
of Stephens, but to examine the situation of Eliza
Hadwin with my own eyes, and if possible, to
extricate
my father from his unfortunate situation.
My father's state had given me the deepest concern.
I figured to myself his condition, besotted by brutal
appetites
,
reduced to beggary, shut up in a noisome prison,
and condemned to that society which must foster all his
depraved propensities. I revolved various schemes for
his relief. A few hundreds would take him from
prison
,
but how should he be afterwards disposed of? How
should he be cured of his indolent habits? How should
he be screened from the contagion of vicious society?
By what means, consistently with my own wants, and
the claims of others, should I secure to him an
acceptable
subsistence?
Exhortation and example were vain. Nothing but
restraint would keep him at a distance from the haunts
of brawling and debauchery. The want of money
would be no obstacle to prodigality and waste. Credit
would be resorted to as long as it would answer his
demand
.
When that failed, he would once more be
thrown into a prison; the same means to extricate him
would be to be repeated, and money be thus put into
the pockets of the most worthless of mankind, the
agents of drunkenness and blasphemy, without any
permanent advantage to my father, the principal object of my charity.
Though unable to fix on any plausible mode of
proceeding
,
I determined, at least, to discover his present
condition. Perhaps, something might suggest itself,
upon the spot, suited to my purpose. Without delay I
proceeded to the village of Newtown, and alighting at
the door of the prison, enquired for my father.
Sawny Mervyn you want, I suppose, said the keeper.
Poor fellow! He came into limbo in a crazy condition,
and has been a burthen on my hands ever since. After lingering along for some time, he was at last kind
enough to give us the slip. It is just a week since he
drank his last pintand
died
.
I was greatly shocked at this intelligence. It was
some time before my reason came to my aid, and
shewed
me that this was an event, on the whole, and on a
disinterested and dispassionate view, not unfortunate.
The keeper knew not my relation to the deceased, and
readily recounted the behaviour of the prisoner and the
circumstances of his last hours.
I shall not repeat the narrative. It is useless to keep
alive the sad remembrance. He was now beyond the
reach of my charity or pity; and since reflection could
answer no beneficial end to him, it was my duty to
divert
my thoughts into different channels, and live
henceforth
for my own happiness and that of those who were
within the sphere of my influence.
I was now alone in the world, so far as the total want
of kindred creates solitude. Not one of my blood, nor
even of my name, were to be found in this quarter of the
world. Of my mother's kindred I knew nothing. So
far as friendship or service might be claimed from them,
to me they had no existence. I was destitute of all
those benefits which flow from kindred, in relation to
protection, advice or property. My inheritance was
nothing. Not a single relique or trinket in my
possession
constituted a memorial of my family. The scenes
of my childish and juvenile days were dreary and
desolate
.
The fields which I was wont to traverse, the room
in which I was born, retained no traces of the past.
They were the property and residence of strangers, who
knew nothing of the former tenants, and who, as I was
now told, had hastened to new-model and transform
every thing within and without the habitation.
These images filled me with melancholy, which,
however
,
disappeared in proportion as I approached the abode
of my beloved girl. Absence had endeared the image
of my
Bess
I loved to call her soto my soul. I
could not think of her without a melting softness at my
heart, and tears in which pain and pleasure were
unaccountably
mingled. As I approached Curling's house,
I strained my sight, in hopes of distinguishing her form
through the evening dusk.
I had told her of my purpose, by letter. She
expected
my approach at this hour, and was stationed, with a
heart throbbing with impatience, at the road side, near
the gate. As soon as I alighted, she rushed into my
arms.
I found my sweet friend less blithsome and contented
than I wished. Her situation, in spite of the parental
and sisterly regards which she received from the
Curlings
,
was mournful and dreary to her imagination.
Rural
business was irk some, and insufficient to fill up her
time. Her life was tiresome, and uniform and heavy.
I ventured to blame her discontent, and pointed out
the advantages of her situation. Whence, said I, can
these dissatisfactions and repinings arise?
I cannot tell, said she; I don't know how it is with
me. I am always sorrowful and thoughtful. Perhaps,
I think too much of my poor father and of Susan, and
yet that can't be it neither, for I think of them but
seldom
;
not half as much as I ought, perhaps. I think
of nobody almost, but you. Instead of minding my
business, or chatting and laughing with Peggy Curling,
I love to get by myselfto read, over and over, your
letters, or to think how you are employed just then, and
how happy I should be if I were in Fanny Maurice's
place.
But it is all over now; this visit rewards me for every
thing. I wonder how I could ever be sullen or mopeful.
I will behave better, indeed I will, and be always, as
now, a most happy girl.
The greater part of three days was spent in the
society
of my friend, in listening to her relation of all
that had happened during my absence, and in
ommunicating
,
in my turn, every incident which had befallen
myself. After this I once more returned to the city.
CHAPTER XXI.
I now
set about carrying my plan of life into effect.
I began with ardent zeal and un wearied diligence the
career of medical study. I bespoke the counsels and
instructions of my friend; attended him on his
professional
visits, and acted, in all practicable cases, as his
substitute. I found this application of time more
pleasurable than I had imagined. My mind gladly
expanded
itself, as it were, for the reception of new ideas.
My curiosity grew more eager, in proportion as it was
supplied with food, and every day added strength to the
assurance that I was no insignificant and worthless
being
;
that I was destined to be
something
in this scene
of existence, and might sometime lay claim to the
gratitude
and homage of my fellow-men.
I was far from being, however, monopolized by
these pursuits. I was formed on purpose for the
gratification
of social intercourse. To love and to be
loved; to exchange hearts, and mingle sentiments
with all the virtuous and amiable, whom my good
fortune
had placed within the circuit of my knowledge,
I always esteemed my highest enjoyment and my chief
duty.
Carlton and his sister, Mrs. Wentworth and Achsa
Fielding, were my most valuable associates beyond
my own family. With all these my correspondence
was frequent and unreserved, but chiefly with the
lattar
.
This lady had dignity and independence, a
generous
and enlightened spirit beyond what her education
had taught me to expect. She was circumspect and
cautious
in her deportment, and was not prompt to make
advances
or accept them. She withheld her esteem and
confidence until she had full proof of their being
deserved
.
I am not sure that her treatment of me was fully
conformable
to her rules. My manners, indeed, as she once
told me, she had never met with in another. Ordinary
rules were so totally overlooked in my behaviour, that
it seemed impossible for any one who knew me to
adhere
to them. No option was left but to admit my
claims to friendship and confidence, instantly, or to
reject
them altogether.
I was not conscious of this singularity. The
internal
and undiscovered character of another, weighed
nothing
with me in the question, whether they should be
treated with frankness or reserve. I felt no scruple on
any occasion, to disclose every feeling and every event.
Any one who could listen, found me willing to talk.
Every talker found me willing to listen. Every one had
my sympathy and kindness,
without
claiming it, but I
claimed
the kindness and sympathy of every one.
Achsa Fielding's countenance bespoke, I thought, a
mind worthy to be known and to be loved. The first
moment I engaged her attention, I told her so. I
related
the little story of my family, spread out before her
all my reasonings and determinations, my notions of
right and wrong, my fears and wishes. All this was
done with sincerity and fervor, with gestures, actions
and looks, in which I felt as if my whole soul was visible.
Her superior age, sedateness and prudence, gave my
deportment
a filial freedom and affection, and I was fond
of calling her
mamma
.
I particularly dwelt upon the history of my dear
country girl; painted her form and countenance;
recounted
our dialogues, and related all my schemes for
making her wise and good and happy. On these
occasions
my friend would listen to me with the mutest
attention
.
I shewed her the letters I received, and
offered
her for her perusal, those which I wrote in answer,
before
they were sealed and sent.
On these occasions she would look by turns on my
face and away from me. A varying hue would play
upon her cheek, and her eyes were fuller than was
common
of meaning.
Such and such, I once said, are my notions; now
what do
you
think?
Think!
emphatically, and turning somewhat aside,
she answered, that you are the most
strange
of human
creatures.
But tell me, I resumed, following and searching her
averted eyes, am I right; would you do thus? Can you
help me to improve my girl? I wish you knew the
bewitching
little creature. How would that heart
overflow
with affection and with gratitude towards you.
She should be your daughter. Noyou are too
nearly
of an age for that. A sister: her
elder
sister you
should be.
That
, when there is no other relation,
includes them all. Fond sisters you would be, and I the
fond brother of you both.
My eyes glistened as I spoke. In truth, I am in that
respect, a mere woman. My friend was more
powerfully
moved. After a momentary struggle, she burst
into tears.
Good Heaven! said I, what ails you? Are you not
well?
Her looks betrayed an unaccountable confusion, from
which she quickly recoveredit was folly to be thus
affected. Something ailed me I believe, but it is past
But come; you want some lines of finishing the
description
of the
Boa
in La Cepide.
True. And I have twenty minutes to spare. Poor
Franks is very ill indeed, but he cannot be seen till
nine. We'll read till then.
Thus on the wings of pleasure and improvement past
my time; not without some hues, occasionally of a
darker tinct. My heart was now and then detected in
sighing. This occurred when my thoughts glanced at
the poor Eliza, and measured, as it were, the
interval
between us. We are too
too
far apart, thought I.
The best solace on these occasions was the company
of Mrs. Fielding; her music, her discourse, or some
book which she set me to rehearsing to her. One
evening
,
when preparing to pay her a visit, I received the
following letter from my Bess.
TO A. MERVYN.
Curling's
,
May
6, 1794.
Where
does this letter you promised me, stay all
this while? Indeed, Arthur, you torment me more
than I deserve, and more than I could ever find it in
my heart to do you. You treat me cruelly. I must
say so, though I offend you. I must write, though
you do not deserve that I should, and though I fear
I am in a humor not very fit for writing. I had
better
go to my chamber and weep: weep at your
unkindness
,
I was going to say; but, perhaps, it is only
forgetfulness: and yet what can be more unkind than
forgetfulness? I am sure I have never forgotten you.
Sleep itself, which wraps all other images in
forgetfulness
,
only brings you nearer, and makes me see you
more distinctly.
But where can this letter stay?O! thathush!
foolish girl! If a word of that kind escape thy lips,
Arthur will be angry with thee; and then, indeed,
thou mightst weep in earnest.
Then
thou wouldst
have some cause for thy tears. More than once
already
has he almost broken thy heart with his reproaches.
Sore and weak as it now is, any new reproaches would
assuredly break it quite.
R
I
will
be content. I will be as good an housewife
and dairy-woman, stir about as briskly, and sing as
merrily as Peggy Curling. Why not? I am as
young, as innocent, and enjoy as good health.
Alas! she has reason to be merry. She has father,
mother, brothers; but I have none.And he that was
all these, and more than all these, to me, has
forgotten
me.
But, perhaps, it is some accident that hinders.
Perhaps
Oliver left the market earlier than he used to do;
or you mistook the house; or, perhaps, some poor
creature was sick, was taken suddenly ill, and you were
busy in chafing his clay-cold limbs; it fell to you to
wipe the clammy drops from his brow. Such things
often
happen; don't they, Arthur, to people of your
trade, and some such thing has happened now; and
that was the reason you did not write.
And if so, shall I repine at your silence? O no! At
such a time the poor Bess might easily be, and ought to
be forgotten. She would not deserve your love, if she
could repine at a silence brought about this way.
And O! May it be so! May there be nothing worse
than this. If the sick mansee, Arthur, how my
hand trembles. Can you read this scrawl? What is
always bad, my fears make worse than ever.
I must not think that. And yet, if it be so, if my
friend himself be sick, what will become of me? Of me,
that ought to cherish you and comfort you; that ought
to be your nurse. Endure for you your sickness, when
she cannot remove it.
O! thatI
will
speak outO! that this strange
scruple had never possessed you. Why should I
not
be
with you? Who can love you and serve you as well as
I? In sickness and health, I will console and assist you.
Why will you deprive yourself of such a comforter,
and such an aid as I would be to you?
Dear Arthur, think better of it. Let me leave this
dreary spot, where, indeed, as long as I am thus alone,
I can enjoy no comfort. Let me come to you. I will
put up with any thing for the sake of seeing you, tho
it be but once a day. Any garret or cellar in the
dirtiest
lane or darkest alley, will be good enough for me.
I will think it a palace, so that I can
but
see you now
and then.
Do not refusedo not argue with me, so fond you
always are of arguing! My heart is set upon your
compliance
.
And yet, dearly as I prize your company, I
would not ask it, if I thought there was any thing
improper
.
You say there is, and you talk about it in a
way that I do not understand. For my sake, you tell me,
you refuse, but let me entreat you to comply for my sake.
Your pen cannot teach me like your tongue. You
write me long letters, and tell me a great deal in them,
but my soul droops when I call to mind your voice and
your looks, and think how long a time must pass before
I see you and hear you again. I have no spirit to think
upon the words and paper before me. My eye and
my thought wander far away.
I bethink me how many questions I might ask you;
how many doubts you might clear up if you were but
within hearing. If you were but close to me; but I
cannot ask them here. I am too poor a creature at
the pen, and, some how or another, it always happens,
I can only write about myself or about you. By the
time I have said all this, I have tired my fingers, and
when I set about telling you how this poem and that
story have affected me, I am at a loss for words; I am
bewildered and bemazed as it were.
It is not so when we talk to one another. With your
arm about me, and your sweet face close to mine, I can
prattle forever. Then my heart overflows at my lips.
After hours thus spent, it seems as if there were a
thousand things still to be said. Then I can tell you
what the book has told me. I can repeat scores of
verses
by heart, though I heard them only once read, but
it is because
you
have read them to me.
Then there is nobody here to answer my questions.
They never look into books. They hate books. They
think it waste of time to read. Even Peggy, who you
say has naturally a strong mind, wonders what I can
find to amuse myself in a book. In her playful mood,
she is always teazing me to lay it aside.
I do not mind her, for I like to read; but if I did not
like it before, I could not help doing so ever since you
told me that nobody could gain your love who was not
fond of books. And yet, though I like it on that
account
,
more than I did, I don't read somehow so
earnestly
,
and understand so well as I use to do, when my
mind was all at ease; always frolicksome, and ever
upon
tiptoe
, as I may say.
How strangely, (have you not observed it?) I am
altered
of late; I that was ever light of heart, the very
soul of gaiety, brim full of gleeam now, demure as
our old
tabby
and not half as wise. Tabby had wit
enough to keep her paws out of the coals, whereas poor
I havebut no matter what. It will never come to
pass, I see that. So many reasons for every thing!
Such looking forward! Arthur, are not men
sometimes
too
wise
to be happy?
I am now
so
grave. Not one smile can Peggy
sometimes
get from me, though she tries for it the whole day.
But I know how it comes. Strange, indeed, if losing
father and sister, and thrown upon the wide world,
pennyless
and
friendless
too, now that
you
forget me; I
should continue to smile. No. I never shall smile
again
.
At least while I stay here, I never shall, I
believe
.
If a certain somebody suffer me to live with him
near
him, I mean: perhaps the sight of him as he
enters
the door, perhaps the sound of his voice, asking
where is my Bess?might produce a smile. Such
a one as the very thought produces nowyet not, I
hope, so transient, and so quickly followed by a tear.
Women are born, they say, to trouble, and tears are
given them for their relief. 'Tis all very true.
Let it be as I wish, will you? If Oliver bring not
back good tidings, if he bring not a letter from thee,
or thy letter still refuses my requestI don't know
what may happen. Consent, if you love your poor
girl.
E. H.
CHAPTER XXII.
The
reading of this letter, though it made me
mournful
,
did not hinder me from paying the visit I intended.
My friend noticed my discomposure.
What, Arthur, thou are quite the penseroso to
night. Come, let me cheer thee with a song. Thou
shalt have thy favorite ditty:She stepped to the
instrument
,
and with more than airy lightness, touched
and sung:
Now knit hands and beat the ground
In a light, fantastic round,
Till the tell-tale sun descry
Our conceal'd solemnity.
Her music, though blithsome and aerial, was not
sufficient for the end. My cheerfulness would not
return
even at her bidding. She again noticed my
sedateness
,
and enquired into the cause.
This girl of mine, said I, has infected me with her
own sadness. There is a letter I have just received
she took it and began to read.
Meanwhile, I placed myself before her, and fixed my
eyes steadfastly upon her features. There is no book
in which I read with more pleasure, than the face of
woman.
That
is generally more full of meaning, and
of better meaning too, than the hard and inflexible
lineaments
of man, and
this
woman's face has no parallel.
R 3
She read it with visible emotion. Having gone
through it, she did not lift her eye from the paper, but
continued silent, as if buried in thought. After some
time, for I would not interrupt the pause, she
addressed
me thus:
This girl seems to be very anxious to be with you.
As much as I am that she should be so.My friend's
countenance betrayed some perplexity. As soon as I
perceived it, I said, why are you thus grave? Some
little confusion appeared as if she would not have her
gravity discovered. There again, said I, new tokens
in your face, my good mamma, of something which you
will not mention. Yet, sooth to say, this is not your
first perplexity. I have noticed it before, and
wondered
.
It happens only when my
Bess
is introduced.
Something in relation to her it must be, but what I
cannot imagine. Why does
her
name, particularly,
make you thoughtful; disturbed; dejected?There
nowbut I must know the reason. You don't agree
with me in my notions of this girl, I fear, and you
will not disclose your thoughts.
By this time, she had gained her usual composure,
and without noticing my comments on her looks, said:
Since you are both of one mind, why does she not leave
the country?
That cannot be, I believe. Mrs. Stevens says it
would be disreputable. I am no proficient in etiquette,
and must, therefore, in affairs of this kind, be guided
by those who are. But would to Heaven, I were truly
her father or brother. Then all difficulties would be
done away.
Can you seriously wish that?
Why no. I believe it would be more rational to
wish that the world would suffer me to act the fatherly
or brotherly part, without the relationship.
And is that the only part you wish to act towards
this girl?
Certainly, the only part.
You surprize me. Have you not confessed your
love for her?
I
do
love her. There is nothing upon earth more
dear to me than my
Bess
.
But love is of different kinds. She was loved by her
father
Less than by me. He was a good man, but not of
lively feelings. Besides, he had another daughter, and
they shared his love between them, but she has no
sister
to share
my
love. Calamity too, has endeared her
to me; I am all her consolation, dependence and hope,
and nothing, surely, can induce me to abandon her.
Her reliance upon you, for happiness, replied my
friend, with a sigh, is plain enough.
It is: but why that sigh? And yet I understand it.
It remonstrates with me on my incapacity for her
support
.
I know it well, but it is wrong to be cast down.
I have youth, health and spirits, and ought not to
despair
of living for my own benefit and hers; but you
sigh again, and it is impossible to keep my courage
when
you
sigh. Do tell me what you mean by it?
You partly guessed the cause. She trusts to you for
happiness, but I somewhat suspect she trusts in vain.
In vain! I beseech you tell me why you think so.
You say you love herwhy then not make her your
wife?
My wife! Surely her extreme youth, and my
destitute
condition, will account for that.
She is fifteen: the age of delicate fervor; of
inartificial
love, and suitable enough for marriage. As to
your condition, you may live more easily together than
apart. She has no false taste or perverse desires to
gratify. She has been trained in simple modes and
habits
.
Besides, that objection can be removed another
way. But are these all your objections?
Her youth I object to, merely in connection with her
mind. She is too little improved to be my wife. She
wants that solidity of mind; that maturity of
intelligence
which ten years more may possibly give her, but
which she cannot have at this age.
You are a very prudential youth; then you are
willing
to wait ten years for a wife?
Does that follow? Because my Bess will not be
qualified
for wedlock, in less time, does it follow that I
must wait for her?
I spoke on the supposition that you loved her.
And that is true; but love is satisfied with studying
her happiness as her father or brother. Some years
hence, perhaps in half a year, for this passion, called
wedded, or
marriage-wishing
love, is of sudden growth,
my mind may change, and nothing may content me but
to have Bess for my wife. Yet I do not expect it.
Then you are determined against marriage with this
girl.
Of course; until that love comes which I feel not
now; but which, no doubt, will come, when Bess has
had the benefit of five or eight years more, unless
previously
excited by another.
All this is strange, Arthur. I have heretofore
supposed
that you actually loved (I mean with the
marririage-seeking
passion) your
Bess
.
I believe I once did; but it happened at a time when
marriage was improper; in the life of her father and
sister, and when I had never known in what female
excellence
consisted. Since that time my happier lot has
cast me among women so far above Eliza Hadwin; so
far above, and so widely different from any thing which
time is likely to make her, that I own, nothing appears
more unlikely than that I shall ever love her.
Are you not a little capricious in that respect, my
good friend? You have praised your
Bess
as rich in
natural
endowments; as having an artless purity and
rectitude
of mind, which somewhat supersedes the use of
formal education; as being full of sweetness and
tenderness
,
and in her person a very angel of loveliness.
All that is true. I never saw features and shape so
delicately beautiful; I never knew so young a mind so
quick sighted and so firm; but, nevertheless, she is
not the creature whom I would call my
wife
. My
bosom
slave; counsellor; friend; the mother; the
pattern
;
the tutress of my children must be a different
creature.
But what are the attributes of this
desirable
which
Bess wants?
Every thing she wants. Age, capacity,
acquirements
,
person, features, hair, complexion, all, all are
different from this girl's.
And pray of what kind may they be?
I cannot pourtray them in wordsbut yes, I can:
The creature whom I shall worship:it sounds oddly,
but, I verily believe, the sentiment which I shall feel
for my wife, will be more a kin to worship than any
thing else. I shall never love, but such a creature as
I now image to myself, and
such
a creature will
deserve
,
or almost deserve, worshipbut this creature, I
was going to say, must be the exact counterpart, my
good mammaof
yourself
.
This was said very earnestly, and with eyes and
manners
that fully expressed my earnestness: perhaps my
expressions were unwittingly strong and emphatic, for
she started and blushed, but the cause of her
discomposure
,
whatever it was, was quickly removed, and she
said:
Poor Bess! This will be sad news to thee!
Heaven forbid! said I, of what moment can my
opinions be to her?
Strange questioner that thou art. Thou knowest
that her gentle heart is touched with love. See how it
shews itself in the tender and inimitable strain of this
epistle. Does not this sweet ingenuousness bewitch
you?
It does so, and I love, beyond expression, the sweet
girl; but my love is in some inconceivable way,
different
from the passion which that
other
creature will
produce
.
She is no stranger to my thoughts. I will
impart
every thought over and over to her. I question
not but I shall make her happy without forfeiting my
own.
Would marriage with her, be a forfeiture of your
happiness?
Not absolutely, or forever, I believe. I love her
company. Her absence for a long time is irksome. I
cannot express the delight with which I see and hear
her. To mark her features, beaming with vivacity;
playful in her pleasures; to hold her in my arms, and
listen to her prattle; always musically voluble;
always
sweetly tender, or artlessly intelligentand this
you will say is the dearest privilege of marriage: and so
it is; and dearly should I prize it; and yet, I fear my
heart would droop as often as that
other
image should
occur to my fancy. For then, you know, it would
occur
as something never to be possessed by me.
Now this image might, indeed, seldom occur. The
intervals, at least, would be serene. It would be my
interest to prolong these intervals as much as possible,
and my endeavors to this end, would, no doubt, have
some effect. Besides, the bitterness of this reflection
would be lessened by contemplating, at the same time,
the happiness of my beloved girl.
I should likewise have to remember, that to continue
unmarried, would not necessarily secure me the
possession
of the
other
good
But these reflections, my friend (broke she in upon
me) are of as much force to induce you to marry, as to
reconcile you to marriage already contracted.
Perhaps they Assuredly, I have not a hope that
the
fancied
excellence will ever be mine. Such
happiness
is not the lot of humanity, and is, least of all,
within my reach.
Your diffidence, replied my friend, in a timorous
accent
,
has not many examples; but your character,
without doubt, is all your own, possessing all and
disclaiming all, is, in few words, your picture.
I scarcely understand you. Do you think I ever
shall be happy to that degree which I have imagined.
Think you I shall ever meet with an exact copy of
yourself!
Unfortunate you will be, if you do not meet with
many better. Your Bess, in personals, is, beyond
measure
,
my
superior, and in mind, allowing for difference
in years, quite as much so.
But that, returned I, with quickness and fervor, is
not the object. The very counterpart of
you
I want;
neither worse nor better, nor different in any thing.
Just such form, such features, such hues. Just that
melting voice, and above all, the same habits of
thinking
and conversing. In thought, word and deed;
gesture, look and form, that rare and precious creature
whom I shall love, must be your resemblance. Your
Have done with these comparisons, interrupted she,
in some hurry, and let us return to the country girl,
thy Bess.
You once, my friend, wished me to treat this girl of
yours as my sister. Do you know what the duties of a
sister are?
They imply no more kindness or affection than you
already feel toward my Bess. Are you not her sister?
I ought to have been so. I ought to have been proud
of the relation you ascribe to me, but I have not
performed any of its duties. I blush to think upon
the coldness and perverseness of my heart. With such
means as I possess, of giving happiness to others, I
have been thoughtless and inactive to a strange degree;
perhaps, however, it is not yet too late. Are you still
willing to invest me with all the rights of an elder
sister
over this girl? And will she consent, think you?
Certainly, she will; she has.
Then the first act of sistership, will be to take her
from the country; from persons on whose kindness she
has no natural claim, whose manners and characters are
unlike her own, and with whom no improvement can be
expected, and bring her back to her sister's house and
bosom, to provide for her subsistence and education,
and watch over her happiness.
I will not be a nominal sister. I will not be a sister
by halves.
All
the rights of that relation I will have,
or none. As for you, you have claims upon her, on
which I must be permitted to judge, as becomes the
elder
sister, who, by the loss of all other relations,
must occupy the place, possess the rights, and fulfil the
duties of father, mother and brother.
She has now arrived at an age, when longer to remain
in a cold and churlish soil, will stunt her growth and
wither her blossoms. We must hasten to transplant her
to a genial element, and a garden well enclosed.
Having
so long neglected this charming plant, it becomes
me henceforth to take her wholly to myself.
And now, for it is no longer in her or your power to
take back the gift, since she is fully mine, I will charge
you with the office of conducting her hither. I grant
it to you as a favor. Will you go?
Go! I will fly! I exclaimed, in an extacy of joy,
on pinions swifter than the wind. Not the lingering of
an instant will I bear. Look! one, two, threethirty
minutes after nine. I will reach Curling's gate by the
morn's dawn. I will put my girl into a chaise, and by
noon, she shall throw herself into the arms of her
sister
.
But first, shall I not, in some way, manifest my
gratitude?
My senses were bewildered, and I knew not what I
did. I intended to kneel, as to my mother or my
deity
,
but, instead of that, I clasped her in my arms, and
kissed her lips fervently. I staid not to discover the
effects of this insanity, but left the room and the house,
and calling for a moment at Stevens's, left word with
the servant, my friend being gone abroad, that I
should not return till the morrow.
Never was a lighter heart, a gaiety more
overflowing
,
and more buoyant than mine. All cold from a
boisterous night, at a chilly season, all weariness from a
rugged and miry road, were charmed away. I might
have ridden, but I could not brook delay, even the
delay
of enquiring for and equipping an horse. I might
thus have saved myself fatigue, and have lost no time,
but my mind was in too great a tumult for deliberation
and forecast. I saw nothing but the image of my girl,
whom my tidings would render happy.
The way was longer than my fond imagination had
foreseen. I did not reach Curling's till an hour after
sun-rise. The distance was full thirty-five miles. As
I hastened up the green lane leading to the house, I
spied my Bess passing through a covered way, between
the dwelling and kitchen. I caught her eye. She
stopped and held up her hands, and then ran into my
arms.
What means my girl? Why this catching of the
breath? Why this sobbing? Look at me my love. It
is Arthur, he who has treated you with forgetfulness,
neglect and cruelty.
O! do not, she replied, hiding her face with her
hand. One single reproach, added to my own, will kill
me. That foolish, wicked letterI could tear my
fingers for writing it.
But, said I, I will kiss themand put them to my
lips. They have told me the wishes of my girl. They
have enabled me to gratify her wishes. I have come to
carry thee this very moment to town.
Lord bless me, Arthursaid she, lost in a sweet
confusion, and her cheeks, always glowing, glowing
still more deeplyindeed, I did not meanI meant
onlyI will stay hereI would rather stay
It grieves me to hear that, said I, with earnestness,
I thought I was studying our mutual happiness.
It grieves you? Don't say so. I would not grieve
you for the worldbut, indeed, indeed, it is too soon.
Such a girl as I, am not yet fit tolive in your city.
Again she hid her glowing face in my bosom.
Sweet consciousness! Heavenly innocence! thought
I; may Achsa's conjectures prove false!You have
mistaken my design, for I do not intend to carry you
to town with such a view as you have hintedbut
merely to place you with a beloved friend; with
Achsa
Fielding, of whom already you know so much,
where we shall enjoy each other's company without
restraint
or intermission.
I then proceeded to disclose to her the plan
suggested
by my friend, and to explain all the consequences
that would flow from it. I need not say that she
assented
to the scheme. She was all rapture and
gratitude
.
Preparations for departure were easily and
speedily
made. I hired a chaise of a neighboring farmer,
S
and, according to my promise, by noon the same day,
delivered the timid and bashful girl into the arms of her
new sister.
She was received with the utmost tenderness, not
only
by Mrs. Fielding, but by all my friends. Her
affectionate
heart was encouraged to pour forth all its
feeling as into the bosom of a mother. She was
reinspired
with confidence. Her want of experience was
supplied by the gentlest admonitions and instructions.
In every plan for her improvement, suggested by her
new
mamma
, for she never called her by any other
name, she engaged with docility and eagerness; and
her behaviour and her progress exceeded the most
sanguine
hopes that I had formed, as to the softness of her
temper and the acuteness of her genius.
Those graces which a polished education, and
intercourse
with the better classes of society, are adapted
to give, my girl possessed, in some degree, by a native
and intuitive refinement and sagacity of mind. All
that was to be obtained from actual observation and
instruction
,
was obtained without difficulty; and in a
short time, nothing but the affectionate simplicity and
unperverted feelings of the country girl, bespoke the
original condition.
What art so busy about, Arthur? Always at thy
pen of late. Come, I must know the fruit of all this
toil and all this meditation. I am determined to scrape
acquaintance with Haller and Lineus. I will begin
this very day. All one's friends you know should be
our's. Love has made many a patient, and let me see
if it cannot, in my case, make a physician. But first,
what is all this writing about?
Mrs. Wentworth has put me upon a strange task
not disagreeable, however, but such as I should,
perhaps
,
have declined, had not the absence of my Bess,
and her mamma, made the time hang somewhat
heavy. I have, oftener than once, and far more
circumstantially
than now, told her my adventures, but
she is not satisfied. She wants a written narrative, for
some purpose which she tells me she will disclose to me
hereafter.
Luckily, my friend Stevens has saved me more than
half the trouble. He has done me the favor to
compile
much of my history with his own hand. I cannot
imagine what could prompt him to so wearisome an
undertaking
;
but he says that adventures and a destiny so
singular
as mine, ought not to be abandoned to forgetfulness
like any vulgar and
every-day
existence. Besides, when
he wrote it, he suspected that it might be necessary to
the safety of my reputation and my life, from the
consequences
of my connection with Welbeck. Time has
annihilated that danger. All enmities and all
suspicions
are buried with that ill-fated wretch. Wortley
has been won by my behaviour, and confides in my
integrity
now as much as he formerly suspected it. I am
glad, however, that the task was performed. It has
saved me a world of writing. I had only to take up
the broken thread, and bring it down to the period of
my present happiness, and this was done, just as you
tripped along the entry this morning.
To bed, my friend, it is late, and this delicate frame
is not half so able to encounter fatigue as a youth spent
in the hay-field and the dairy might have been expected
to be.
I will, but let me take these sheets along with me.
I will read them, that I am determined, before I sleep,
and watch if you have told the whole truth.
Do so, if you please; but remember one thing. Mrs.
Wentworth requested me to write not as if it were
designed
for her perusal, but for those who have no
previous
knowledge of her or of me. 'Twas an odd
request
.
I cannot imagine what she means by it, but
she never acts without good reason, and I have done
so. And now withdraw, my dear, and farewel.
S 2
CHAPTER XXIII.
Move
on, my quill! wait not for my guidance.
Reanimated
with thy master's spirit, all-airy light! An
hey day rapture! A mounting impulse sways him: lifts
him from the earth.
I must, cost what it will, rein in this
upward-pulling
,
forward-urgingwhat shall I call it? But there
are times, and now is one of them, when words are
poor.
It will not doDown this hill, up that steep; thro'
this thicket, over that hedgeI have
labored
to
fatigue
myself: To reconcile me to repose; to lolling on
a sofa; to poring over a book, to any thing that might
win for my heart a respite from these throbs; to deceive
me into a few
tolerable
moments of forgetfulness.
Let me see: they tell me this is Monday night.
Only three days yet to come! If thus restless to day;
if my heart thus bounds till its mansion scarcely can
hold it, what must be my state to morrow! What next
day! What as the hour hastens on; as the sun
descends
;
as my hand touches her in sign of wedded
unity, of love without interval; of concord without
end.
I must quell these tumults. They will disable me
else. They will wear out all my strength. They will
drain away life itself. But who could have thought!
So soon! Not three months since I first set eyes upon
her. Not three weeks since our plighted love, and only
three days to terminate suspense and give me
all
.
I must compel myself to quiet: to sleep. I must
find some refuge from anticipations so excruciating.
All extremes are agonies. A joy like this is too big
for this narrow tenement. I must thrust it forth; I
must bar and bolt it out for a time, or these frail walls
will burst asunder. The pen is a pacifyer. It checks
the mind's career; it circumscribes her wanderings.
It traces out, and compels us to adhere to one path.
It ever was my friend. Often it has blunted my
vexations
;
hushed my stormy passions; turned my
peevishness
to soothing; my fierce revenge to
heart-dissolving
pity.
Perhaps it will befriend me now. It may temper my
impetuous wishes; lull my intoxication: and render
my happiness supportable: And, indeed, it has
produced
partly this effect already. My blood, within
the few minutes thus employed, flows with less
destructive
rapidity. My thoughts range themselves in less
disorderAnd now that the conquest is effected, what
shall I say? I must continue at the pen, or shall
immediately
relapse.
What shall I say? Let me look back upon the steps
that led me hither. Let me recount preliminaries. I
cannot do better.
And first as to Achsa Fieldingto describe this
woman.
To recount, in brief, so much of her history as has
come to my knowledge, will best account for that zeal,
almost to idolatry, with which she has, ever since I
thoroughly knew her, been regarded by me.
Never saw I one to whom the term
lovely
more truly
belonged: And yet, in stature she is too low; in
complection
,
dark and almost sallow; and her eyes, though
black and of piercing lustre, has a cast, which I cannot
well explain. It lessens without destroying their lustre
and their force to charm; but all personal defects are
S 3
outweighed by her heart and her intellect. There is
the secret of her power to entrance the soul of the
listener
and beholder. It is not only when she sings that
her utterance is musical. It is not only when the
occasion
is urgent and the topic momentous that her
eloquence
is rich and flowing. They are always so.
I had vowed to love her and serve her, and been her
frequent visitant, long before I was acquainted with
her past life. I had casually picked up some
intelligence
,
from others, or from her own remarks. I knew
very soon that she was English by birth, and had been
only a year and an half in America; that she had
scarcely passed her twenty-fifth year, and was still
embellished
with all the graces of youth; that she had
been a wife; but was uninformed whether the knot
had been untied by death or divorce: That she
possessed
considerable, and even splendid fortune; but the
exact amount, and all beside these particulars, were
unknown to me till some time after our acquaintance
was begun.
One evening, she had been talking very earnestly on
the influence annexed, in Great Britain, to birth, and
had given me some examples of this influence.
Meanwhile
,
my eyes were fixed steadfastly on hers. The
peculiarity in their expression never before affected me
so strongly. A vague resemblance to something seen
elsewhere, on the same day, occurred, and occasioned
me to exclaim, suddenly in a pause of her discourse
As I live, my good mamma, those eyes of yours have
told me a secret. I almost think they spoke to me;
and I am not less amazed at the strangeness than at the
distinctness of their story.
And pry'thee what have they said?
Perhaps I was mistaken. I might have been deceived
by a fancied voice, or have confounded one word with
another near akin to it; but let me die, if I did not
think they said that you were
a few
.
At this sound, her features were instantly veiled with
the deepest sorrow and confusion. She put her hand to
her eyes, the tears started and she sobbed. My
surprise
at this effect of my words, was equal to my
contrition
.
I besought her to pardon me, for having thus
unknowingly, alarmed and grieved her.
After she had regained some composure, she said,
you have not offended, Arthur. Your surmise was just
and natural, and could not always have escaped you.
Connected with that word are many sources of anguish,
which time has not, and never will, dry up; and the less
I think of past events, the less will my peace be
disturbed
.
I was desirous that you should know nothing
of me, but what you see; nothing but the present and
the future, merely that no allusions might occur in our
conversation, which will call up sorrows and regrets
that will avail nothing.
I now perceive the folly of endeavoring to keep you
in ignorance, and shall therefore, once for all, inform
you of what has befallen me, that your enquiries and
suggestions may be made, and fully satisfied at once,
and your curiosity have no motive for calling back
my thoughts to what I ardently desire to bury in
oblivion
.
My father was indeed a
jew
, and one of the most
opulent of his nation in London. A Portuguese by
birth, but came to London when a boy. He had few
of the moral or external qualities of jews. For I
suppose
there is some justice in the obloquy that follows
them so closely. He was frugal without meanness, and
cautious in his dealings, without extortion. I need not
fear to say this, for it was the general voice.
Me, an only child, and of course, the darling of my
parents, they trained up in the most liberal manner.
My education was purely English. I learned the same
things and of the same masters with my neighbors.
Except
frequenting their church and repeating their creed,
and partaking of the same food, I saw no difference
between
them and me. Hence I grew more indifferent,
perhaps, than was proper to the distinctions of religion.
They were never enforced upon me. No pains were
taken to fill me with scruples and antipathies. They
never stood, as I may say, upon the threshold: They
were often thought upon but were vague, and easily
eluded or forgotten.
Hence it was that my heart too readily admitted
impressions
,
that more zeal and more parental caution
would have saved me from. They could scarcely be
avoided, as my society was wholly English; and my
youth, my education and my father's wealth made me
an object of much attention. And the same causes
that lulled to sleep my own watchfulness, had the same
effect upon that of others. To regret or to praise this
remissness, is now too late. Certain it is, that my
destiny
,
and not a happy destiny, was fixed by it.
The fruit of this remissness was a passion for one,
who fully returned it. Almost as young as I, who was
only sixteen; he knew as little as myself, what
obstacles
the difference of our births was likely to raise
between
us. His father, Sir Ralph Fielding, a man
nobly
born, high in office, splendidly allied, could not be
expected to consent to the marriage of his eldest son,
in such green youth, to the daughter of an alien, a
Portuguese
,
a Jew; but these impediments were not seen
by my ignorance, and were overlooked by the youth's
passion.
But strange to tell, what common prudence would
have so confidently predicted, did not happen. Sir
Ralph had a numerous family, likely to be still more
so; had but slender patrimony: the income of his
offices
nearly made up his all. The young man was
headstrong
,
impetuous, and would probably disregard the
inclinations of his family. Yet the father would not
consent but on one condition, that of my admission to
the English church.
No very strenuous opposition to these terms could be
expected from me. At so thoughtless an age, with an
education so unfavorable to religious impressions;
swayed
likewise, by the strongest of human passions; made
somewhat impatient by the company I kept, of the
disrepute
and scorn to which the Jewish nation are every
where condemned, I could not be expected to be very
averse to the scheme.
My fears, as to what my father's decision would be,
were soon at an end. He loved his child too well to
thwart her wishes in so essential a point. Finding in
me no scruples, no unwillingness, he thought it absurd
to be scrupulous for me. My own heart having abjured
my religion, it was absurd to make any difficulty about
a formal renunciation. These were his avowed reasons
for concurrence, but time shewed that he had probably
other reasons, founded, indeed, in his regard for my
happiness, but such, as if they had been known, would
probably have strengthened into invincible, the
reluctance
of my lover's family.
No marriage was ever attended with happier
presages
.
The numerous relations of my husband,
admitted
me with the utmost cordiality, among them. My
father's tenderness was unabated by this change, and
those humiliations to which I had before been exposed,
were now no more; and every tie was strengthened, at
the end of a year, by the feelings of a
mother
. I had
need, indeed, to know a season of happiness, that I
might be fitted to endure the sad reverses that
succeeded
.
One after the other my disasters came, each one
more heavy than the last, and in such swift succession,
that they hardly left me time to breathe.
I had scarcely left my chamber, I had scarcely
recovered
my usual health, and was able to press with true
fervor, the new and precious gift to my bosom, when
melancholy tidings cameI was in the country, at the
seat of my father-in-law, when the messenger arrived.
A shocking tale it was! and told abruptly, with
every unpitying aggravation. I hinted to you once, my
father's death. The
kind
of deathO! my friend! It
was horrible. He was then a placid venerable old man;
though many symptoms of disquiet had long before
been discovered by my mother's watchful tenderness.
Yet none could suspect him capable of such a deed;
for none, so carefully had he conducted his affairs,
suspected
the havock that mischance had made of his
property
.
I, that had so much reason to love my fatherI will
leave you to imagine how I was affected by a
catastrophe
so dreadful, so unlooked-for. Much less could I
suspect the cause of his despair; yet he had foreseen
his ruin before my marriage; had resolved to defer it
for his daughter's and his wife's sake, as long as
possible
,
but had still determined not to survive the day
that should reduce him to indigence. The desperate
act was thus preconcertedthus deliberate.
The true state of his affairs was laid open by his
death. The failure of great mercantile houses at
Frankfort and Liege was the cause of his disasters.
Thus were my prospects shut in. That wealth, which
no doubt, furnished the chief inducement with my
husband's
family to concur in his choice, was now suddenly
exchanged for poverty.
Bred up, as I had been, in pomp and luxury;
conscious
that my wealth was my chief security from the
contempt of the proud and bigotted, and my chief title
to the station to which I had been raised, and which I
the more delighted in because it enabled me to confer
so great obligations on my husband. What reverse
could be harder than this, and how much bitterness
was added by it to the grief, occasioned by the violent
end of my father!
Yet, loss of fortune, though it mortified my pride,
did not prove my worst calamity. Perhaps it was
scarcely to be ranked with evils, since it furnished a
touchstone by which my husband's affections were to
be tried; especially as the issue of the trial was
auspicious
;
for my misfortune seemed only to heighten the
interest which my character had made for me in the
hearts of all that knew me. The paternal regards of
Sir Ralph had always been tender, but that tenderness
seemed now to be redoubled.
New events made this consolation still more
necessary
.
My unhappy mother!She was nearer to the
dreadful scene when it happened. Had no surviving
object to beguile her sorrow; was rendered, by long
habit, more dependent upon fortune than her child.
A melancholy always mute was the first effect upon
my mother. Nothing could charm her eye, or her ear.
Sweet sounds that she once loved, and especially when
her darling child was the warbler, were heard no longer.
How, with streaming eyes, have I sat and watched the
dear lady, and endeavored to catch her eye, to rouse
her attention!But I must not think of these things.
But even this distress was little in comparison with
what was to come. A frenzy thus mute, motionless
and vacant, was succeeded by fits, talkative,
outrageous
,
requiring incessant superintendance, restraint, and
even violence.
Why led you me thus back to my sad remembrances?
Excuse me for the present. I will tell you the rest
some other time; to-morrow.
To-morrow, accordingly, my friend resumed her
story.
Let me now make an end, said she, of my mournful
narrative, and never, I charge you, do any thing to
revive
it again.
Deep as was my despondency, occasioned by these
calamities, I was not destitute of some joy. My
husband
and my child were lovely and affectionate. In
their caresses, in their welfare, I found peace; and
might still have found it, had there not beenBut
why should I open afresh, wounds which time has
imperfectly
closed? But the story must have sometime been
told to you, and the sooner it is told and dismissed to
forgetfulness, the better.
My ill fate led me into company with a woman too
well known in the idle and dissipated circles. Her
character was not unknown to me. There was
nothing
in her features or air to obviate disadvantageous
prepossessions. I sought not her intercourse; I rather
shunned it, as unpleasing and discreditable, but she
would not be repulsed. Self invited, she made herself
my frequent guest; took unsolicited part in my
concerns
;
did me many kind offices; and, at length, in
spite of my counter inclination, won upon my
sympathy
and gratitude.
No one in the world, did I fondly think, had I less
reason to fear than Mrs. Waring. Her character
excited
not the slightest apprehension for my own safety.
She was upwards of forty, no wise remarkable for
grace or beauty; tawdry in her dress; accustomed to
render more conspicuous the traces of age by her
attempts
to hide them; the mother of a numerous
family
,
with a mind but slenderly cultivated; always
careful
too to save appearances; studiously preserving
distance
with my husband, and he, like myself, enduring,
rather than wishing her society. What could I fear
from the arts of such an one?
But alas! the woman had consummate address.
Patience too, that nothing could tire. Watchfulness
that none could detect. Insinuation the wiliest and
most subtle. Thus wound she herself into my
affections
,
by an unexampled perseverance in seeming
kindness
;
by tender confidence; by artful glosses of past
misconduct; by self-rebukes and feigned contritions.
Never were stratagems so intricate, dissimulation so
profound! But still, that such an one should seduce my
husband; young; generous; ambitious; impatient
of contumely and reproach, and surely not indifferent;
before this fatal intercourse, not indifferent to his wife
and child!Yet, so it was!
I saw his discontents; his struggles; I heard him
curse this woman, and the more deeply for my attempts,
unconscious as I was of her machinations, to reconcile
them to each other, to do away what seemed a
causeless
indignation, or antipathy against her. How little I
suspected the nature of the conflict in his heart,
between
a new passion and the claims of pride; of
conscience
and of humanity; the claims of a child and a
wife; a wife already in affliction, and placing all that
yet remained of happiness, in the firmness of his
virtue
;
in the continuance of his love; a wife, at the
very hour of his meditated flight, full of terrors at the
near approach of an event, whose agonies demand a
double share of an husband's supporting; encouraging
love
Good Heaven! For what evils are some of thy
creatures
reserved! Resignation to thy decree, in the last,
and most cruel distress, was, indeed, an hard task.
He was gone. Some unavoidable engagement
calling
him to Hamburgh was pleaded. Yet to leave me
at such an hour! I dared not upbraid, nor object. The
tale was so specious! The fortunes of a friend depended
on his punctual journey. The falsehood of his story
too soon made itself known. He was gone, in
company
with his detested paramour!
Yet, though my vigilance was easily deceived, it
was not so with others. A creditor, who had his bond
for three thousand pounds, pursued, and arrested him at
Harwich. He was thrown into prison, but his
companion
,
let me, at least, say that in her praise, would
not desert him. She took lodging near the place of his
confinement, and saw him daily. That, had she not
done it, and had my personal condition allowed, should
have been my province.
Indignation and grief hastened the painful crisis with
me. I did not weep that the second fruit of this
unhappy
union saw not the light. I wept only that this
hour of agony, was not, to its unfortunate mother, the
last.
I felt not anger; I had nothing but compassion for
Fielding. Gladly would I have recalled him to my
arms and to virtue: I wrote, adjuring him by all our
past joys, to return; vowing only gratitude for his
new affection, and claiming only the recompence of
seeing
him restored to his family; to liberty; to
reputation
.
But alas! Fielding had a good, but a proud, heart.
He looked upon his error with remorse; with
self-detestation
,
and with the fatal belief that it could not be
retrieved; shame made him withstand all my
reasonings
and persuasions, and in the hurry of his feelings,
he made solemn vows that he would, in the moment of
restored liberty, abjure his country and his family
forever
.
He bore indignantly the yoke of his new
attachment
,
but he strove in vain to shake it off. Her
T
behaviour, always yielding, doating, supplicative,
preserved
him in her fetters. Though upbraided, spurned
and banished from his presence, she would not leave
him, but by new efforts and new artifices, soothed,
appeased
,
and won again, and kept his tenderness.
What my entreaties were unable to effect, his father
could not hope to accomplish. He offered to take him
from prison; the creditor offered to cancel the bond,
if he would return to me; but this condition he
refused
.
All his kindred, and one who had been his bosom
friend from childhood, joined in beseeching his
compliance
with these conditions; but his pride, his dread of
my merited reproaches; the merits and dissuasions of
his new companion, whose sacrifices for his sake had
not been small, were obstacles which nothing could
subdue.
Far, indeed, was I from imposing these conditions.
I waited only till, by certain arrangements, I could
gather enough to pay his debts, to enable him to execute
his vow; empty would have been my claims to his
affection
,
if I could have suffered, with the means of his
deliverance in my hands, my husband to remain a
moment
in prison.
The remains of my father's vast fortune, was a
jointure
of a thousand pounds a year, settled on my mother,
and after her death, on me. My mother's helpless
condition
put this revenue into my disposal. By this
means was I enabled, without the knowledge of my
father-in-law, or my husband, to purchase the debt,
and dismiss him from prison. He set out instantly, in
company with his paramour, to France.
When somewhat recovered from the shock of this
calamity, I took up my abode with my mother. What
she had was enough, as you, perhaps, will think, for
plentiful subsistence, but to us, with habits of a
different
kind, it was little better than poverty. That
reflection, my father's memory, my mother's deplorable
state, which every year grew worse, and the late
misfortune
,
were the chief companions of my thoughts.
The dear child, whose smiles were uninterrupted by
his mother's afflictions, was some consolation in my
solitude
.
To his instruction and to my mother's wants, all my
hours were devoted. I was sometimes not without the
hope of better days. Full as my mind was of
Fielding's
merits, convinced by former proofs of his ardent
and generous spirit, I trusted that time and
reflection
would destroy that spell by which he was now
bound.
For some time, the progress of these reflections was
not known. In leaving England, Fielding dropped all
correspondence and connection with his native country.
He parted with the woman at Rouen, leaving no trace
behind him by which she might follow him, as she
wished to do. She never returned to England, but
died
a twelve month afterwards in Switzerland.
As to me, I had only to muse day and night upon
the possible destiny of this beloved fugitive. His
incensed
father cared not for him. He had cast him out
of his paternal affections, ceased to make enquiries
respecting
him, and even wished never to hear of him
again. My boy succeeded to my husband's place in his
grand-father's affections, and in the hopes and views of
the family; and his mother wanted nothing which their
compassionate and respectful love could bestow.
Three long and tedious years passed away, and no
tidings were received. Whether he were living or
dead, nobody could tell. At length, an English
traveller
,
going out of the customary road from Italy, met
with Fielding, in a town in the Venaissin. His
manners
,
habit and language, had become French. He
seemed unwilling to be recognized by an old
acquaintance
,
but not being able to avoid this, and becoming
gradually familiar, he informed the traveller of many
particulars in his present situation. It appeared that
he had made himself useful to a neighboring
Seigneur
,
in whose
chateau
he had long lived on the footing of a
brother. France he had resolved to make his future
country, and among other changes for that end, he had
laid aside his English name, and taken that of his
patron
,
T 2
which was
Perrin
. He had endeavored to
compensate
himself for all other privations, by devoting
himself to rural amusements and to study.
He carefully shunned all enquiries respecting me,
but when my name was mentioned by his friend, who
knew well all that had happened, and my general
welfare
,
together with that of his son, asserted, he shewed
deep sensibility, and even consented that I should be
made acquainted with his situation.
I cannot describe the effect of this intelligence on
me. My hopes of bringing him back to me, were
suddenly
revived. I wrote him a letter, in which I poured
forth my whole heart; but his answer contained
avowals
of all his former resolutions, to which time had only
made his adherence more easy. A second and third
letter were written, and an offer made to follow him to
his retreat, and share his exile; but all my efforts
availed nothing. He solemnly and repeatedly
renounced
all the claims of an husband over me, and
absolved
me from every obligation as a wife.
His part in this correspondence, was performed
without
harshness or contempt. A strange mixture there
was of pathos and indifference; of tenderness and
resolution
.
Hence I continually derived hope, which
time, however, brought no nearer to certainty.
At the opening of the revolution, the name of Perrin
appeared among the deputies to the constituent
assembly
,
for the district in which he resided. He had thus
succeeded in gaining all the rights of a French citizen;
and the hopes of his return became almost extinct; but
that, and every other hope, respecting him, has since
been totally extinguished by his marriage with
Marguerite
D'Almont, a young lady of great merit and
fortune, and a native of Avignon.
A long period of suspence was now at an end, and
left me in a state almost as full of anguish as that which
our first separation produced. My sorrows were
increased
by my mother's death, and this incident freeing
me from those restraints upon my motions which before
existed, I determined to come to America.
My son was now eight years old, and his
grandfather
claiming the province of his instruction, I was
persuaded to part with him, that he might be sent to a
distant school. Thus was another tie removed, and in
spite of the well meant importunities of my friends, I
persisted in my scheme of crossing the ocean.
I could not help, at this part of her narration,
expressing
my surprise, that any motives were strong
enough to recommend this scheme.
It was certainly a freak of despair. A few months
would, perhaps, have allayed the fresh grief, and
reconciled
me to my situation; but I would not pause or
deliberate
.
My scheme was opposed by my friends, with
great earnestness. During my voyage, affrighted by
the dangers which surrounded me, and to which I was
wholly unused, I heartily repented of my resolution;
but now, methinks, I have reason to rejoice at my
perseverance
.
I have come into a scene and society so
new, I have had so many claims made upon my
ingenuity
and fortitude, that my mind has been diverted in
some degree from former sorrows. There are even
times when I wholly forget them, and catch myself
indulging
in cheerful reveries.
I have often reflected with surprise on the nature of
my own mind. It is eight years since my father's
violent
death. How few of my hours since that period,
have been blessed with serenity! How many nights
and days, in hateful and lingering succession, have been
bathed in tears and tormented with regrets! That I
am still alive with so many causes of death, and with
such a slow consuming malady, is surely to be
wondered
at.
I believe the worst foes of man, at least of men in
grief, are solitude and idleness. The same eternally
occurring round of objects, feeds his disease, and the
effects of mere vacancy and uniformity, is sometimes
mistaken for those of grief. Yes, I am glad I came to
America. My relations are importunate for my return,
and till lately, I had some thoughts of it; but I think
now, I shall stay where I am, for the rest of my days.
T 3
Since I arrived, I am become more of a student than
I used to be. I always loved literature, but never, till
of late, had a mind enough at ease, to read with
advantage
.
I now find pleasure in the occupation which I
never expected to find.
You see in what manner I live. The letters which I
brought secured me a flattering reception from the best
people in your country; but scenes of gay resort had
nothing to attract me, and I quickly withdrew to that
seclusion in which you now find me. Here, always at
leisure, and mistress of every laudable means of
gratification
,
I am not without the belief of serene days yet
to come.
I now ventured to enquire what were her latest
tidings
of her husband.
At the opening of the revolution, I told you he
became
a champion of the people. By his zeal and his
efforts
he acquired such importance as to be deputed to
the National Assembly. In this post he was the
adherent
of violent measures, till the subversion of
monarchy
;
and then, when too late for his safety, he checked
his career.
And what has since become of him?
She sighed deeply. You were yesterday reading a
list of the proscribed under Robespierre. I checked
you. I had good reason. But this subject grows too
painful, let us change it.
Some time after I ventured to renew this topic;
and discovered that Fielding, under his new name of
Perrin d'Almont, was among the outlawed deputies of
last year
[1]
[1]
1793.
, and had been slain in resisting the officers,
sent to arrest him. My friend had been informed that
his
wife
Philippine d'Almont, whom she had reason to
believe, a woman of great merit, had eluded
persecution
,
and taken refuge in some part of America. She
had made various attempts, but in vain, to find out her
retreat. Ah! said I, you must commission me to find
her. I will hunt her through the continent from
Penobscot
to Savanna. I will not leave a nook
unsearched
.
CHAPTER XXIV.
None
will be surprized, that to a woman thus
unfortunate
and thus deserving, my heart willingly
rendered
up all its sympathies; that as I partook of all her
grief, I hailed, with equal delight, those omens of
felicity
which now, at length, seemed to play in her fancy.
I saw her often, as often as my engagements would
permit, and oftener than I allowed myself to visit any
other. In this I was partly selfish. So much
entertainment
,
so much of the best instruction did her
conversation
afford me, that I never had enough of it.
Her experience had been so much larger than mine, and
so wholly different, and she possessed such unbounded
facility of recounting all she had seen and felt, and
absolute
sincerity and unreserve in this respect, were so
fully established between us, that I can imagine nothing
equally instructive and delightful with her conversation.
Books are cold, jejune, vexatious in their sparingness
of information at one time, and their impertinent
loquacity
at another. Besides, all they chuse to give,
they give at once; they allow no questions; offer no
further explanations, and bend not to the caprices of
our curiosity. They talk to us behind a screen. Their
tone is lifeless and monotonous. They charm not our
attention by mute significances of gesture and looks;
They spread no light upon their meaning by cadences
and emphasis and pause.
How different was Mrs. Fielding's discourse! So
versatile; so bending to the changes of occasion; so
obsequious to my curiosity, and so abundant in that very
knowledge in which I was most deficient, and on which
I set the most value, the knowledge of the human
heart; of society as it existed in another world, more
abundant in the varieties of customs and characters,
than I had ever had the power to witness.
Partly selfish I have said my motives were, but not
wholly so, as long as I saw that my friend derived
pleasure
,
in her turn, from my company. Not that I
could add directly to her knowledge or pleasure, but
that expansion of heart, that ease of utterance and
flow of ideas which always were occasioned by my
approach
,
were sources of true pleasure of which she had
been long deprived, and for which her privation had
given
her a higher relish than ever.
She lived in great affluence and independence, but
made use of her privileges of fortune chiefly to secure
to herself the command of her own time. She had been
long ago tired and disgusted with the dull and fulsome
uniformity and parade of the play-house and ball-room.
Formal visits were endured as mortifications and
penances
,
by which the delights of privacy and friendly
intercourse were by contrast increased. Music she
loved, but never sought it in place of public resort, or
from the skill of mercenary performers, and books
were not the least of her pleasures.
As to me, I was wax in her hand. Without design
and without effort, I was always of that form she
wished me to assume. My own happiness became a
secondary passion, and her gratification the great end of
my being. When with her, I thought not of myself.
I had scarcely a separate or independent existence,
since my senses were occupied by her, and my mind was
full of those ideas which her discourse communicated.
To meditate on her looks and words, and to pursue the
means suggested by my own thoughts, or by her,
conducive
,
in any way, to her good, was all my business.
What a fate, said I, at the conclusion of one of our
interviews, has been yours. But, thank Heaven, the
storm has disappeared before the age of sensibility has
gone past, and without drying up every source of
happiness
.
You are still young: all your powers
unimpaired
;
rich in the compassion and esteem of the world;
wholly independent of the claims and caprices of
others
;
amply supplied with that mean of usefulness,
called money; wise in that experience which only
adversity
can give. Past evils and sufferings, if
incurred
and endured without guilt, if called to view
without
remorse, make up the materials of present joy.
They cheer our most dreary hours with the whispered
accents of well done, and they heighten our
pleasures
into somewhat of celestial brilliancy, by
furnishing
a deep, a ruefully deep contrast.
From this moment, I will cease to weep for you. I
will call you the happiest of women. I will share with
you your happiness by witnessing itbut that shall not
content me. I must someway contribute to it. Tell
me how I shall serve you? What can I do to make you
happier? Poor am I in every thing but zeal, but still I
may do something. Whatpray tell me what can I
do?
She looked at me with sweet and solemn significance.
What it was exactly, I could not divine, yet I was
strangely affected by it. It was but a glance, instantly
withdrawn. She made me no answer.
You must not be silent; you
must
tell me what I
can do for you. Hitherto I have done nothing. All
the service is on your side. Your conversation has
been my study, a delightful study, but the profit has
only been mine. Tell me how I can be gratefulmy
voice and manner, I believe, seldom belye my feelings.
At this time, I had almost done what a second thought
made me suspect to be unauthorized. Yet I cannot
tell why. My heart had nothing in it but reverence
and admiration. Was she not the substitute of my
lost mamma. Would I not have clasped that beloved
shade? Yet the two beings were not just the same, or
I should not, as now, have checked myself, and only
pressed her hand to my lips.
Tell me, repeated I, what can I do to serve you? I
read to you a little now, and you are pleased with my
reading. I copy for you when you want the time. I
guide the reins for you when you chuse to ride.
Humble
offices, indeed, though, perhaps, all that a raw
youth like me can do for you; but I can be still more
assiduous. I can read several hours in the day, instead
of one. I can write ten times as much as now.
Are you not my lost mamma come back again? And
yet, not
exactly
her, I think. Something different;
something better, I believe, if that be possible. At
any rate, methinks I would be wholly yours. I shall
be impatient and uneasy till every act, every thought,
every minute, someway does you good.
How! said Iher eye stil averted, seemed to hold
back the tear with difficulty, and she made a motion
as if to risehave I grieved you? Have I been
importunate
?
Forgive me if I have offended you.
Her eyes now overflowed without restraint. She
articulated
with difficultyTears are too prompt with
me of late; but they did not upbraid you. Pain has
often caused them to flow, but now itis
pleasure
.
What an heart must yours be, I resumed. When
susceptible
of such pleasures, what pangs must formerly
have rent it!But you are not displeased, you say,
with my importunate zeal. You will accept me as your
own in every thing. Direct me: prescribe to me.
There must be
something
in which I can be of still
more use to you: some way in which I can be wholly
yours
Wholly mine!
she repeated, in a smothered voice,
and risingleave me, Arthur. It is too late for you
to be here. It was wrong to stay so late.
I have been wrong, but how too late! I entered but
this moment. It is twilight still: Is it not?
Noit is almost twelve. You have been here a
long four hours; short ones, I would rather saybut
indeed you must go.
What made me so thoughtless of the time! But I
will go, yet not till you forgive me. I approached her
with a confidence, and for a purpose at which, upon
reflection
,
I am not a little surprized, but the being
called
Mervyn is not the same in her company and in that
of another. What is the difference, and whence comes
it? Her words and looks engross me. My mind wants
room for any other object. But why enquire whence
the difference? The superiority of her merits and
attractions
to all those whom I knew, would surely account
for my fervor. Indifference, if I felt it, would be the
only just occasion of wonder.
The hour was, indeed too late, and I hastened home.
Stevens was waiting my return with some anxiety. I
apologized for my delay, and recounted to him what had
just passed. He listened with more than usual
interest
.
When I had finished,
Mervyn, said he, you seem not to be aware of your
present situation. From what you now tell me, and
from what you have formerly told me, one thing seems
very plain to me.
Pry'thee, what is it?
Eliza Hadwindo you wishcould you bear to see
her the wife of another?
Five years hence I will answer you. Then my
answer
may beNo: I wish her only to he mine.
Till then, I wish her only to be my pupil, my ward,
my sister.
But these are remote considerations: they are bars
to marriage, but not to love. Would it not molest and
disquiet you to observe in her a passion for another?
It would, but only on her own account: not on mine. At
a suitable age it is very likely I may love her, because,
it is likely, if she holds on in her present career, she will
then be worthy, but, at present, though I would die
to ensure her happiness, I have no wish to ensure it by
marriage with her.
Is there no other whom you love?
No. There is one worthier than all others: one
whom I wish the woman who shall be my wife to
resemble
in all things.
And who is this model?
You know I can only mean Achsa Fielding.
If you love her likeness, why not love herself?
I felt my heart leap.What a thougt is that! Love
her I
do
as I love my God; as I love virtue. To love
her in another sense, would brand me for a lunatic.
To love her as a woman, then, appears to you an act
of folly.
In me it would be worse than folly. 'Twould be
frenzy.
And why?
Why? Really, my friend, you astonish me. Nay,
you startle mefor a question like that implies a doubt
in you whether I have not actually harbored the tho't.
No, said he, smiling, presumtuous though you be,
you have not, to be sure, reached so high a pitch.
But still, though I think you innocent of so heinous an
offence, there is no harm in asking why you might not
love her, and even seek her for a wife.
Achsa Fielding
my wife!
Good Heaven!The very
sound threw my soul into unconquerable tumults.
Take care, my friend, continued I, in beseeching
accents
,
you may do me more injury than you conceive, by
even starting such a thought.
True, said he, as long as such obstacles exist to your
success; so many incurable objections; for instance,
she is six years older than you
That is an advantage. Her age is what it ought to
be.
But she has been a wife and mother already.
That is likewise an advantage. She has wisdom,
because she has experience. Her sensibilities are
stronger
,
because they have been exercised and chastened.
Her first marriage was unfortunate. The purer is the
felicity she will taste in a second! If her second choice
be propitious, the greater her tenderness and gratitude.
But she is a foreigner: independent of controul, and
rich.
All which, are blessings to herself and to him for
whom her hand is reserved; especially if like me, he is
indigent.
But then she is unsightly as a
night-hag,
tawney as
a moor, the eye of a gypsey, low in stature,
contemptibly
diminutive, scarcely bulk enough to cast a
shadow
as she walks, less luxuriance than a charred log,
fewer elasticities than a sheet pebble.
Hush! hush! blasphemer!and I put my hand
before
his mouthhave I not told you that in mind,
person
and condition, she is the type after which my
enamored
fancy has modelled my wife.
O ho! Then the objection does not lie with you.
It lies with her, it seems. She can find nothing in you
to esteem! And pray, for what faults do you think
she would reject you?
I cannot tell. That she can ever balance for a
moment
,
on such a question, is incredible.
Me! me!
That Achsa Fielding should think of me!
Incredible, indeed! You who are loathsome in your
person, an ideot in your understanding, a villain in your
morals! deformed! withered! vain, stupid and
malignant
.
That such an one should chuse
you
for an idol!
Pray, my friend, said I, anxiously, jest not. What
mean you by an hint of this kind?
I will not jest then, but will soberly enquire, what
faults are they which make this lady's choice of you so
incredible? You are younger than she, though no one,
who merely observed your manners, and heard you talk,
would take you to be under thirty. You are poor; are
these impediments?
I should think not. I have heard her reason with
admirable eloquence, against the vain distinctions of
property and nation and rank. They were once of
moment
in her eyes; but the sufferings, humiliations and
reflections of years, have cured her of the folly. Her
nation has suffered too much by the inhuman
antipathies
of religious and political faction; she, herself, has
felt so often the contumelies of the rich, the high-born,
and the bigotted, that
Pry'thee then, what dost imagine her objections to
be?
U
WhyI don't know. The thought was so
aspiring
;
to call her
my wife
, was an height of bliss; the
very far-off view of which made my head dizzy.
An height, however, to attain which you suppose
only her consent, her love, to be necessary?
Without doubt, her love is indispensible.
Sit down, Arthur, and let us no longer treat this
matter lightly. I clearly see the importance of this
moment to this lady's happiness and yours. It is plain
that you love this woman. How could you help it?
A brilliant skin is not her's; nor elegant proportions;
nor majestic stature; yet no creature had ever more
power to bewitch. Her manners have grace and
dignity
that flow from exquisite feeling, delicate taste,
and the quickest and keenest penetration. She has the
wisdom of men and of books. Her sympathies are
enforced
by reason, and her charities regulated by
knowledge
.
She has a woman's age, fortune more than you
wish, and a spotless fame. How could you fail to love
her?
You
, who are her chosen friend, who partake her
pleasures, and share her employments, on whom she
almost exclusively bestows her society and confidence,
and to whom she thus affords the strongest of all
indirect
proofs of impassioned esteem. How could you,
with all that firmness to love, joined with all that
discernment
of her excellence, how could you escape the
enchantment?
You have not thought of marriage. You have
not suspected your love. From the purity of your mind,
from the idolatry with which this woman has inspired
you, you have imaged no delight beyond that of
enjoying
her society as you now do, and have never fostered
an hope beyond this privilege.
How quickly would this tranquillity vanish, and the
true state of your heart be evinced, if a rival should
enter
the scene and be entertained with preference; then
would the seal be removed, the spell be broken, and you
would awaken to terror and to anguish.
Of this, however, there is no danger. Your passion
is not felt by you alone. From her treatment of you,
your diffidence disables you from seeing, but nothing
can be clearer to me than, that she loves you.
I started on my feet. A flush of scorching heat
flowed to every part of my frame. My temples began
to throb like my heart. I was half delirious, and my
delirium was strangely compounded of fear and hope,
of delight and of terror.
What have you done, my friend? You have
overturned
my peace of mind. Till now the image of this
woman has been followed by complacency and sober
rapture; but your words have dashed the scene with
disinay and confusion. You have raised up wishes and
dreams and doubts, which possess me in spite of my
reason
,
in spite of a thousand proofs.
Good God! You say she loves; loves
me!
me, a boy
in age; bred in clownish ignorance; scarcely ushered
into the world; more than childishly unlearned and
raw; a barn-door simpleton; a plow-tail,
kitchen-hearth
,
turnip-hoeing novice! She, thus splendidly
endowed; thus allied to nobles; thus gifted with arts,
and adorned with graces; that she should chuse me,
me for the partner of her fortune; her affections; and
her life! It cannot be. Yet, if it were; if your
guesses
shouldproveOaf! madman! To indulge so
fatal
a chimera! So rash a dream!
My friend! my friend! I feel that you have done
me an irreparable injury. I can never more look her
in the face. I can never more frequent her society.
These new thoughts will beset and torment me. My
disquiet will chain up my tongue. That overflowing
gratitude; that innocent joy, unconscious of offence,
and knowing no restraint, which have hitherto been
my titles to her favor, will fly from my features and
manners. I shall be anxious, vacant and unhappy in
her presence. I shall dread to look at her, or to open
my lips lest my mad and unhallowed ambition should
betray itself.
U 2
Well, replied Stevens, this scene is quite new. I
could almost find it in my heart to pity you. I did not
expect this; and yet from my knowledge of your
character
,
I ought, perhaps, to have foressen it. This is
a necessary part of the drama. A joyous certainty, on
these occasions, must always be preceded by suspenses
and doubts, and the close will be joyous in proportion
as the preludes are excruciating. Go to bed, my good
friend, and think of this. Time and a few more
interviews
with Mrs. Fielding, will, I doubt not, set all to
rights.
CHAPTER XXV.
I
went
to my chamber, but what different sensations
did I carry into it, from those with which I had left it
a few hours before. I stretched myself on the mattress
and put out the light; but the swarm of new images
that rushed on my mind, set me again instantly in
motion
.
All was rapid, vague and undefined, wearying
and distracting my attention. I was roused as by a
divine
voice, that said:Sleep no more: Mervyn
shall sleep no more.
What chiefly occupied me was a nameless sort of
terror. What shall I compare it to? Methinks, that
one falling from a tree, overhanging a torrent, plunged
into the whirling eddy, and gasping and struggling
while he sinks to rise no more, would feel just as I did
then. Nay, some such image actually possessed me.
Such was one of my reveries, in which suddenly I
stretched my hand, and caught the arm of a chair.
This act called me back to reason, or rather gave my
soul opportunity to roam into a new track equally
wild.
Was it the abruptness of this vision that thus
confounded
me! was it a latent error in my moral
constitution
,
which this new conjuncture drew forth into
influence
?
These were all the tokens of a mind lost to
U 3
itself; bewildered; unhinged; plunged into a drear
insanity.
Nothing less could have prompted so phantastically
for midnight as it was, my chamber's solitude was
not to be supported. After a few turns across the
floor, I left the room, and the house. I walked
without
design and in an hurried pace. I posted straight
to the house of Mrs. Fielding. I lifted the latch, but
the door did not open. It was, no doubt, locked.
How comes this, said I, and looked around me.
The hour and occasion were unthought of.
Habituated
to this path, I had taken it spontaneously. How
comes this? repeated I. Locked upon
me!
but I will
summon them, I warrant meand rung the bell, not
timidly or slightly, but with violence. Some one
hastened
from above. I saw the glimmer of a candle
through the key-hole.
Strange, thought I, a candle at noon day!The
door was opened, and my poor Bess, robed in a careless
and a hasty manner, appeared. She started at sight of
me, but merely because she did not, in a moment,
recognize
me.Ah! Arthur, is it you? Come in. My
mamma has wanted you these two hours. I was just
going to dispatch Philip to tell you to come.
Lead me to her, said I.
She led the way into the parlor.Wait a moment
here: I will tell her you are comeand she tripped
away.
Presently a step was heard. The door opened again,
and then entered a man. He was tall, elegant, sedate
to a degree of sadness: Something in his dress and
aspect
that bespoke the foreigner; the Frenchman.
What, said he, mildly, is your business with my
wife? She cannot see you instantly, and has sent me to
receive your commands.
Your
wife!
I want Mrs. Fielding.
True; and Mrs. Fielding is my wife. Thank
Heaven
I have come in time to discover her, and claim her
as such.
I started back. I shuddered. My joints slackened,
and I stretched my hand to catch something by which
I might be saved from sinking on the floor. Meanwhile,
Fielding changed his countenance into rage and fury.
He called me villain! bad me avaunt! and drew a
shining steel from his bosom, with which he stabbed
me to the heart. I sunk upon the floor, and all, for a
time, was darkness and oblivion! At length, I
returned
as it were to life. I opened my eyes. The
mists disappeared, and I found myself stretched upon
the bed in my own chamber. I remembered the fatal
blow I had received. I put my hand upon my breast;
the spot where the dagger entered. There were no
traces of a wound. All was perfect and entire. Some
miracle had made me whole.
I raised myself up. I re-examined my body. All
around me was hushed, till a voice from the pavement
below, proclaimed that it was past three o'clock.
What, said I, has all this miserable pageantry, this
midnight wandering, and this ominous interview, been
no more than
a dream!
It may be proper to mention, in explanation of this
scene, and to shew the thorough perturbation of my
mind, during this night, intelligence gained some days
after from Eliza. She said, that about two o'clock, on
this night, she was roused by a violent ringing of the
bell. She was startled by so unseasonable a summons.
She slept in a chamber adjoining Mrs. Fielding's, and
hesitated whether she should alarm her friend, but the
summons not being repeated, she had determined to
forbear.
Added to this, was the report of Mrs. Stevens, who,
on the same night, about half an hour after I and her
husband had retired, imagined that she heard the
street-door
opened and shut, but this being followed by no
other consequence, she supposed herself mistaken. I
have little doubt, that, in my feverish and troubled
sleep, I actually went forth, posted to the house of
Mrs. Fielding, rung for admission, and shortly after,
returned to my own apartment.
This confusion of mind was somewhat allayed by the
return of light. It gave way to more uniform, but not
less rueful and despondent perceptions. The image of
Achsa filled my fancy, but it was the harbinger of
nothing but humiliation and sorrow. To outroot the
conviction of my own unworthiness, to persuade myself
that I was regarded with the tenderness that Stevens
had ascribed to her, that the discovery of my thoughts
would not excite her anger and grief, I felt to be
impossible
.
In this state of mind, I could not see her. To
declare
my feelings would produce indignation and
anguish
;
to hide them from her scrutiny was not in my
power: yet, what would she think of my estranging
myself from her society? What expedient could I
honestly
adopt to justify my absence, and what
employments
could I substitute for those precious hours
hitherto devoted to her.
This
afternoon, thougth I, she has been invited to
spend at Stedman's country house on Schuylkill. She
consented to go, and I was to accompany her. I am
fit only for solitude. My behaviour, in her presence,
will be enigmatical, capricious and morose. I must
not go: Yet, what will she think of my failure? Not
to go will be injurious and suspicious.
I was undetermined. The appointed hour arrived.
I stood at my chamber window, torn by variety of
purposes
,
and swayed alternately by repugnant arguments.
I several times went to the door of my apartment, and
put my foot upon the first step of the stair-case, but as
often paused, reconsidered and returned to my room.
In these fluctuations the hour passed. No
messenger
arrived from Mrs. Fielding, enquiring into the cause
of my delay. Was she offended at my negligence?
Was she sick and disabled from going, or had she
changed her mind? I now remember her parting
words at our last interview. Were they not
susceptible
of two constructions? She said my visit was too
long, and bad me begone. Did she suspect my
presumption
,
and is she determined thus to punish me?
This terror added anew to all my former anxieties.
It was impossible to rest in this suspense. I would go
to her. I would lay before her all the anguish of my
heart: I would not spare myself. She shall not
reproach
me more severely than I will reproach myself.
I will hear my sentence from her own lips, and promise
unlimited submission to the doom of separation and
exile
,
which she will pronounce.
I went forthwith to her house. The drawing-room
and summer-house was empty. I summoned Philip the
footmanhis mistress was gone to Mr. Sedman's.
How?To Stedman's?In whose company?
Miss Stedman and her brother called for her in the
carriage, and persuaded her to go with them.
Now my heart sunk, indeed! Miss Stedman's
brother
!
A youth, forward, gallant and gay! Flushed
with prosperity, and just returned from Europe, with
all the confidence of age, and all the ornaments of
education
!
She has gone with him, though pre-engaged
to me! Poor Arthur, how art thou despised!
This information only heightened my impatience. I
went away, but returned in the evening. I waited
till eleven, but she came not back. I cannot justly
paint the interval that passed till next morning. It
was void of sleep. On leaving her house, I wandered
into the fields. Every moment increased my impatience.
She will probably spend the morrow at Stedman's, said
I, and possibly the next day. Why should I wait
for her return? Why not seek her there, and rid myself
at once of this agonizing suspense? Why not go thither
now? This night, wherever I spend it, will be
unacquainted
with repose. I will go, it is already near
twelve, and the distance is more than eight miles. I
will hover near the house till morning, and then, as
early as possible, demand an interview.
I was well acquainted with Stedman's Villa, having
formerly been there with Mrs. Fielding. I quickly
entered
its precincts. I went close to the house; looked
mournfully at every window. At one of them a light
was to be seen, and I took various stations to discover,
if possible, the persons within. Methought once I
caught a glimpse of a female, whom my fancy easily
imagined to be Achsa. I sat down upon the lawn,
some hundred feet from the house, and opposite the
window whence the light proceeded. I watched it, till
at length some one came to the window, lifted it, and
leaning on her arms, continued to look out.
The preceding day had been a very sultry one; the
night, as usual after such a day, and the fall of a
violent
shower, was delightfully serene and pleasant.
Where I stood, was enlightened by the moon.
Whether
she saw me or not, I could hardly tell, or whether
she distinguished any thing but a human figure.
Without reflecting on what was due to decorum and
punctilio, I immediately drew near the house. I
quickly
perceived that her attention was fixed. Neither of
us spoke, till I had placed myself directly under her; I
then opened my lips, without knowing in what manner
to address her. She spoke first, and in a startled and
anxious voice
Who is that?
Arthur Mervyn: he that was two days ago your
friend.
Mervyn! What is it that brings you here at this
hour? What is the matter? What has happened? Is
any body sick?
All is safeall are in good health.
What then do you come hither for at such an hour?
I meant not to disturb you: I meant not to be seen.
Good Heavens! How you frighten me. What can
be the reason of so strange
Be not alarmed. I meant to hover near the house
till morning, that I might see you as early as
possible
.
For what purpose?
I will tell you when we meet, and let that be at five
o'clock; the sun will then be risen; in the cedar grove
under the bank; till when, farewel.
Having said this, I prevented all expostulation, by
turning the angle of the house, and hastening towards
the shore of the river. I roved about the grove that I
have mentioned. In one part of it is a rustic seat and
table, shrouded by trees and shrubs, and an intervening
eminence, from the view of those in the house. This
I designed to be the closing scene of my destiny.
Presently, I left this spot and wandered upward
through embarrassed and obscure paths, starting
forward or checking my pace, according as my
wayward
meditations governed me. Shall I describe my
thoughts?Impossible! It was certainly a
temporary
loss of reason; nothing less than madness could
lead into such devious tracts, drag me down to so
hopeless
,
helpless, panickful a depth, and drag me down so
suddenly; lay waste, as at a signal, all my flourishing
structures, and reduce them in a moment to a scene of
confusion and horror.
What did I fear? What did I hope? What did I
design
?
I cannot tell; my glooms were to retire with
the night. The point to which every tumultuous
feeling
was linked, was the coming interview with Achsa.
That was the boundary of fluctuation and suspense.
Here was the sealing and ratification of my doom.
I rent a passage through the thicket, and struggled
upward till I reached the edge of a considerable
precipice
;
I laid me down at my length upon the rock, whose
cold and hard surface I pressed with my bared and
throbbing
breast. I leaned over the edge; fixed my eyes upon
the water and weptplentifully; but why?
May
this
be my heart's last beat, if I can tell why.
I had wandered so far from Stedman's, that when
roused by the light, I had some miles to walk before I
could reach the place of meeting. Achsa was already
there. I slid down the rock above, and appeared before
her. Well might she be startled at my wild and abrupt
appearance.
I placed myself, without uttering a word, upon a
seat opposite to her, the table between, and crossing
my arms upon the table, leaned my head upon them,
while my face was turned towards and my eyes fixed
upon
hers, I seemed to have lost the power and the
inclination
to speak.
She regarded me, at first, with anxious curiosity;
after examining my looks, every emotion was swallowed
up in terrified sorrow. For God's sake!what does all
this mean? Why am I called to this place? What
tidings
,
what fearful tidings do you bring?
I did not change my posture or speak. What, she
resumed, could inspire all this woe? Keep me not in
this suspense, Arthur; these looks and this silence
shocks and afflicts me too much.
Afflict you? said I, at last: Icome to tell you, what,
now that I am here, I cannot tellthere I stopped.
Say what, I entreat you. You seem to be very
unhappy
such
a changefrom yesterday!
Yes! From yesterday: all then was a joyous calm,
and now all isbut then I knew not my infamy, my
guilt
What words are these, and from you Arthur? Guilt
is to you impossible. If purity is to be found on earth, it
is lodged in your heart. What have you done?
I have daredhow little you expect the extent of my
daring. That such as I should look upwards with this
ambition.
I now stood up, and taking her hands in mine, as she
sat, looked earnestly in her faceI come only to
beseech
your pardon. To tell you my crime, and then
disappear forever; but first let me see if there be any
omen of forgiveness. Your looksthey are kind;
heavenly; compassionate still. I will trust them, I
believe: and yetletting go her hands, and turning
away.This offence is beyond the reach even of
your
mercy.
How beyond measure these words and this
deportment
distress me! Let me know the worst; I cannot
bear to be thus perplexed.
Why, said I, turning quickly round, and again
taking
her hands, that Mervyn, whom you have honored
and confided in, and blessed with your sweet regards,
has been
What has he been? Divinely amiable, heroic in his
virtue, I am sure. What else has he been?
This Mervyn has imagined, has daredWill you
forgive him?
Forgive you what? Why don't you speak? Keep
not my soul in this suspense.
He has daredBut do not think that I am he.
Continue
to look as now, and reserve your killing glances,
the vengeance of those eyes as for one that is absent.
Why, whatYou weep, then, at last. That is
a propitious sign. When pity drops from the eyes of
our judge, then should the suppliant approach. Now,
in confidence of pardon, I will tell you: This Mervyn,
not content with all you have hitherto granted him, has
daredto
love
you; nay, to think of you, as of
his
wife!
Her eye sunk beneath mine, and disengaging her
hands, covered her face with them.
I see my fate, said I, in a tone of despair. Too well
did I predict the effect of this confession; but I will
go
and unforgiven
.
She now partly uncovered her face. The hand
withdrawn
from her cheek, was stretched towards me.
She looked at me.
Arthur! I
do
forgive thee.With what accents was
this uttered! With what looks! The cheek that was
before pale with terror, was now crimsoned over by a
different emotion, and delight swam in her eye.
Could I mistake? My doubts, my new-born fears
made me tremble, while I took the offered hand.
Surelyfaultered I, I am notI cannot beso
blessed.
There was no need of words. The hand that I held,
was sufficiently eloquent. She was still silent.
Surely, said I, my senses deceive me. A bliss like
this cannot be reserved for me. Tell me, once more
set my doubting heart at rest.
She now gave herself to my armsI have not words
Let your own heart tell you, you have made your
Achsa
At this moment, a voice from without, it was Miss
Stedman's, calledMrs. Fielding! where are you?
X
My friend started up, and in a hasty voice, bade me
begone! You must not be seen by this giddy girl.
Come hither this evening, as if by my appointment,
and I will return with you.She left me in a kind of
trance. I was immoveable. My reverie was too
delicious
;but
let me not attempt the picture. If I can
convey no image of my state, previous to this
interview
,
my subsequent feelings are still more beyond the
reach of my powers to describe.
Agreeably to the commands of my mistress, I
hastened
away, evading paths which might expose me to
observation. I speedily made my friends partake of my
joy, and passed the day in a state of solemn but
confused
rapture. I did not accurately pourtray the
various
parts of my felicity. The whole rushed upon my
soul at once. My conceptions were too rapid, and too
comprehensive to be distinct.
I went to Stedman's in the evening. I found in
the accents and looks of my Achsa new assurances that
all which had lately past, was more than a dream.
She made excuses for leaving the Stedmans sooner
than ordinary, and was accompanied to the city by her
friend. We dropped Mrs. Fielding at her own house,
and thither, after accompanying Miss Stedman to her
own home, I returned, upon the wings of tremulous
impatience.
Now could I repeat every word of every
conversation
that has since taken place between us; but why
should I do that on paper? Indeed it could not be done.
All is of equal value, and all could not be comprized
but in many volumes. There needs nothing more
deeply to imprint it on my memory; and while thus
reviewing the past, I should be iniquitously neglecting
the present. What is given to the pen, would be taken
from her; and that, indeed, would bebut no need
of saying what it would be, since it is impossible.
I merely write to allay these tumults which our
necessary
separation produces; to aid me in calling up a
little patience, till the time arrives, when our persons,
like our minds, shall be united forever. That time
may nothing happen to preventbut nothing can
happen
.
But why this ominous misgiving just now? My
love has infected me with these unworthy terrors, for
she has them too.
This morning I was relating my dream to her. She
started, and grew pale. A sad silence ensued the
cheerfulness that had reigned beforewhy thus
dejected
,
my friend?
I hate your dream. It is a horrid thought. Would
to God it had never occurred to you.
Why surely place no confidence in dreams.
I know not where to place confidence; not in my
present promises of joyand she wept. I endeavored
to soothe or console her. Why, I asked, did she
weep.
My heart is sore. Former disappointments were so
heavy; the hopes which were blasted, were so like my
present ones, that the dread of a like result, will
intrude
upon my thoughts. And now your dream!
Indeed
,
I know not what to do. I believe I ought still
to retractought, at least, to postpone an act so
irrevocable
.
Now was I obliged again to go over in my catalogue
of arguments to induce her to confirm her propitious
resolution to be mine within the week. I, at last,
succeeded
,
even in restoring her serenity and beguiling her
fears by dwelling on our future happiness.
Our houshold, while we staid in AmericaIn a year
or two we hie to Europeshould be
thus
composed.
Fidelity and skill and pure morals, should be sought out,
and enticed, by generous recompences, into our
domestic
service. Duties should be light and regular.Such
and such should be our amusements and employments
abroad and at home, and would not this be true
happiness
?
O yesIf it may be so.
It shall be so; but this is but the humble outline of
the scene; something is still to be added to complete
our felicity.
What more can be added?
What more? Can Achsa ask what more? She who
has not been
only
a wife
But why am I indulging this pen-prattle? The hour
she fixed for my return to her is come, and now take
thyself away, quill. Lie there, snug in thy leathern
case, till I call for thee, and that will not be very soon.
I believe I will abjure thy company till all is settled
with my love. Yes: I
will
abjure thee, so let
this
be
thy last office, till Mervyn has been made the happiest
of men.
THE END.TO A. MERVYN.
Curling's
,
May
6, 1794.
Where
does this letter you promised me, stay all
this while? Indeed, Arthur, you torment me more
than I deserve, and more than I could ever find it in
my heart to do you. You treat me cruelly. I must
say so, though I offend you. I must write, though
you do not deserve that I should, and though I fear
I am in a humor not very fit for writing. I had
better
go to my chamber and weep: weep at your
unkindness
,
I was going to say; but, perhaps, it is only
forgetfulness: and yet what can be more unkind than
forgetfulness? I am sure I have never forgotten you.
Sleep itself, which wraps all other images in
forgetfulness
,
only brings you nearer, and makes me see you
more distinctly.
But where can this letter stay?O! thathush!
foolish girl! If a word of that kind escape thy lips,
Arthur will be angry with thee; and then, indeed,
thou mightst weep in earnest.
Then
thou wouldst
have some cause for thy tears. More than once
already
has he almost broken thy heart with his reproaches.
Sore and weak as it now is, any new reproaches would
assuredly break it quite.
R
I
will
be content. I will be as good an housewife
and dairy-woman, stir about as briskly, and sing as
merrily as Peggy Curling. Why not? I am as
young, as innocent, and enjoy as good health.
Alas! she has reason to be merry. She has father,
mother, brothers; but I have none.And he that was
all these, and more than all these, to me, has
forgotten
me.
But, perhaps, it is some accident that hinders.
Perhaps
Oliver left the market earlier than he used to do;
or you mistook the house; or, perhaps, some poor
creature was sick, was taken suddenly ill, and you were
busy in chafing his clay-cold limbs; it fell to you to
wipe the clammy drops from his brow. Such things
often
happen; don't they, Arthur, to people of your
trade, and some such thing has happened now; and
that was the reason you did not write.
And if so, shall I repine at your silence? O no! At
such a time the poor Bess might easily be, and ought to
be forgotten. She would not deserve your love, if she
could repine at a silence brought about this way.
And O! May it be so! May there be nothing worse
than this. If the sick mansee, Arthur, how my
hand trembles. Can you read this scrawl? What is
always bad, my fears make worse than ever.
I must not think that. And yet, if it be so, if my
friend himself be sick, what will become of me? Of me,
that ought to cherish you and comfort you; that ought
to be your nurse. Endure for you your sickness, when
she cannot remove it.
O! thatI
will
speak outO! that this strange
scruple had never possessed you. Why should I
not
be
with you? Who can love you and serve you as well as
I? In sickness and health, I will console and assist you.
Why will you deprive yourself of such a comforter,
and such an aid as I would be to you?
Dear Arthur, think better of it. Let me leave this
dreary spot, where, indeed, as long as I am thus alone,
I can enjoy no comfort. Let me come to you. I will
put up with any thing for the sake of seeing you, tho
it be but once a day. Any garret or cellar in the
dirtiest
lane or darkest alley, will be good enough for me.
I will think it a palace, so that I can
but
see you now
and then.
Do not refusedo not argue with me, so fond you
always are of arguing! My heart is set upon your
compliance
.
And yet, dearly as I prize your company, I
would not ask it, if I thought there was any thing
improper
.
You say there is, and you talk about it in a
way that I do not understand. For my sake, you tell me,
you refuse, but let me entreat you to comply for my sake.
Your pen cannot teach me like your tongue. You
write me long letters, and tell me a great deal in them,
but my soul droops when I call to mind your voice and
your looks, and think how long a time must pass before
I see you and hear you again. I have no spirit to think
upon the words and paper before me. My eye and
my thought wander far away.
I bethink me how many questions I might ask you;
how many doubts you might clear up if you were but
within hearing. If you were but close to me; but I
cannot ask them here. I am too poor a creature at
the pen, and, some how or another, it always happens,
I can only write about myself or about you. By the
time I have said all this, I have tired my fingers, and
when I set about telling you how this poem and that
story have affected me, I am at a loss for words; I am
bewildered and bemazed as it were.
It is not so when we talk to one another. With your
arm about me, and your sweet face close to mine, I can
prattle forever. Then my heart overflows at my lips.
After hours thus spent, it seems as if there were a
thousand things still to be said. Then I can tell you
what the book has told me. I can repeat scores of
verses
by heart, though I heard them only once read, but
it is because
you
have read them to me.
Then there is nobody here to answer my questions.
They never look into books. They hate books. They
think it waste of time to read. Even Peggy, who you
say has naturally a strong mind, wonders what I can
find to amuse myself in a book. In her playful mood,
she is always teazing me to lay it aside.
I do not mind her, for I like to read; but if I did not
like it before, I could not help doing so ever since you
told me that nobody could gain your love who was not
fond of books. And yet, though I like it on that
account
,
more than I did, I don't read somehow so
earnestly
,
and understand so well as I use to do, when my
mind was all at ease; always frolicksome, and ever
upon
tiptoe
, as I may say.
How strangely, (have you not observed it?) I am
altered
of late; I that was ever light of heart, the very
soul of gaiety, brim full of gleeam now, demure as
our old
tabby
and not half as wise. Tabby had wit
enough to keep her paws out of the coals, whereas poor
I havebut no matter what. It will never come to
pass, I see that. So many reasons for every thing!
Such looking forward! Arthur, are not men
sometimes
too
wise
to be happy?
I am now
so
grave. Not one smile can Peggy
sometimes
get from me, though she tries for it the whole day.
But I know how it comes. Strange, indeed, if losing
father and sister, and thrown upon the wide world,
pennyless
and
friendless
too, now that
you
forget me; I
should continue to smile. No. I never shall smile
again
.
At least while I stay here, I never shall, I
believe
.
If a certain somebody suffer me to live with him
near
him, I mean: perhaps the sight of him as he
enters
the door, perhaps the sound of his voice, asking
where is my Bess?might produce a smile. Such
a one as the very thought produces nowyet not, I
hope, so transient, and so quickly followed by a tear.
Women are born, they say, to trouble, and tears are
given them for their relief. 'Tis all very true.
Let it be as I wish, will you? If Oliver bring not
back good tidings, if he bring not a letter from thee,
or thy letter still refuses my requestI don't know
what may happen. Consent, if you love your poor
girl.
E. H.