CHAPTER IX.
O'er that sweet vale there now was seen
A bluer sky, and brighter green;
There was a milder azure spread
Around the distant mountain's head;
And every hue of that fair bow,
Whose beauteous arch had risen there,
Now sunk beneath a brighter glow,
And melted into ambient air.
The tempest, which had just gone by,
Still hung along the eastern sky,
And threatened, as it rolled away.
The birds from every dripping spray,
Were pouring forth their joyous mirth.
The torrent, with its waters brown,
From rock to rock came rushing down.
M. P. F.
At Length
the south breeze began once more to
whisper along the valley, bringing bland airs, spring
birds, sea fowls, the deep trembling roar of unchained
mountain streams, a clear blue sky, magpies and
orioles
,
cutting the ethereal space, as they sped with
their peculiar business note, on the great instinct
errand
of their Creator to the budding groves. The
snipe whistled. The pheasant drummed on the
fallen
trunks in the deep forest. The thrasher and the
robin sang; and every thing, wild and tame, that had
life, felt the renovating power, and rejoiced in the
retraced
footsteps of the great Parent of nature. The
inmates of William Weldon's dwelling once more
walked forth, in the brightness of a spring morning,
choosing their path where the returning warmth had
already dried the ground on the south slopes of the
hills. The blue and the white violet had already
raised their fair faces under the shelter of the fallen
tree, or beneath the covert of rocks. The red bud
and the cornel decked the wilderness in blossoms; and
in the meadows, from which the ice had scarcely
disappeared
,
the cowslips threw up their yellow cups
from the water. As they remarked upon the beauty
of the day, the cheering notes of the birds, the deep
hum of a hundred mountain water-falls, and the
exhilarating
influence of the renovation of spring,
William
Weldon observed in a voice, that showed
awakened
remembrances`dear friends, you have,
perhaps
,
none of you such associations with this season,
as now press upon my thoughts, in remembrances
partly of joy and sadness. Hear you those million
mingled sounds of the undescribed dwellers in the
spring-formed waters? How keenly they call up the
fresh recollections of the spring of my youth, and my
own country! The winter there, too, is long and
severe
.
What a train of remembrances press upon me!
I have walked abroad in the first days of spring.
When yet a child, I was sent to gather the earliest
cowslips. I remember my thoughts, when I first
dipped
my feet in the water, and heard these
numberless
peeps, croaks, and cries; and thought of the
countless
millions of living things in the water, which
seemed
to have been germinated by spring; and which
appeared
to be emulating each other in the chatter of
their ceaseless song. How ye return upon my
thoughts, ye bright morning visions! What a fairy
creation was life, in such a spring prospect! How
changed is the picture, and the hue of the dark brown
years, as my eye now traces them in retrospect.
These mingled sounds, this beautiful morning, these
starting cowslips, the whole present scene brings back
1*
the entire past. Ah! there must be happier worlds
beyond the grave, where it is always spring, or the
thoughts, that now spring in my bosom, had not been
planted there.'
During this walk, in which the parties visited
successively
all the favorite haunts of the former
summer
,
the blue lake, Jessy's bower, the deep dells,
where the first breath of spring flushed the red bud,
and the violet, and the crocus, and still heard the
oriole
,
the thrasher and red bird, Ellswatta discussed the
plans of the coming summer. The nation was to be
divided into two classes, the one to remain with the
greater portion of the women, to pursue the salmon
fishery, and tend the fields; and the other, comprising
the select warriors of each nation, to cross the
eastern
mountains, equally prepared to hunt the buffalo,
and avenge the injuries of the preceding autumn
inflicted
by the Black-feet. `It was necessary,' he said,
`that the uneasy and fierce spirits of his people should
have scope. It would try, and, perhaps, retain the
loyalty of Nelesho and his Shienne. If they met the
Black-feet, it would give them an opportunity, to
measure
back the just retribution of punishment for
injuries
inflicted. The disaffected chief could have no
pretext, as in the autumn, to demur against the
enrolment
of his warriors under the common standard.
The question was, would William Weldon and his
family join such a distant, and, it might be, dangerous
expedition?' It may be imagined with what intense
interest Frederic and the young chief awaited the
issue of this discussion. William Weldon had the
wandering protuberance marked in unalterable
characters
upon his skull. He had never crossed these
barriers of naturenever seen the prairies, through
which the Missouri winds its interminable course to
the sea. `I will go,' he said, `if my wife and daughter
and friends are cheerfully content to follow me. My
spirit burns to explore these sublime mountains, and
the seas of verdure beyond.' Elder Wood held
himself
determined by his duty to follow his
distinguished
catechumen, now between darkness and light;
and that there were chances of doing more good in
the expedition, than with the stationary remnant of
the more undistinguished people. A real element in
determining him was, that the blood of a Kentucky
hunter was in his veins; and that his deepest bosom
warmed at the adventurous and spirit-stirring
prospect
.
Yensi and her daughter declared for following
the choice of the husband and father, without
expressing
a preference for either the one course, or the
other. It would have been indecorous, in the
circumstances
of the case, that Frederic should remain,
even if William Weldon's family had staid. He was
the more rejoiced to learn, that the family had
decided
to join the expedition.
The deliberation was not closed, however, without
a study of days. But there were rumors, that their
enemies, the Black-feet, united with roving bands,
who hunt and fish near the Arctic sea, and the
Muscovite
clans, meditated a descent from the mountains
on the Shoshonee valley. In such case the greater
danger would be to remain. Various elements may
naturally be supposed to have influenced the mind of
Jessy, and through her that of her mother, to follow
the expedition.
Every thing now wore the aspect of preparation.
The beautiful spring days were passed in
arrangements
.
The warriors refitted their yagers and pistols,
and sharpened their dirks. The quivers, bows and
arrows were in readiness. The provisions were laid
in store. The sumpter mules and horses were put in
requisition. The litters were refitted by Josepha,
Yensi and Jessy. Every eye was bright with
anticipation
,
and every hand busy in getting all things in
readiness. Pleased anticipations, and forecasting of
the pleasures and events of the expedition, gave added
fragrance to the evening tea. When they spoke of
the seeming frailty and inability to endure fatigue of
the daughter and the mother, Jessy presaged, that
she would show herself the worthy daughter of a
storn-beaten mariner; and that she would not be the
first to shrink from danger, or complain of fatigue.
She adverted to emergencies, when her fortitude had
been tested to the utmost, and had sustained her.
Only show her new flowers, new rivers, new
mountains
,
new plains, new views of nature, and, more than
all, the grand slope of the Missouri, and she would
encounter toil and danger with the best of them. She
was in that happy period of existence, when the mind
is not apt to dip its pencil in colors of gloom, and the
future showed to her radiant and sunny; and all the
toil, fatigue, and hunger and thirst and danger and
misgiving of mind, from mere corporeal exhaustion,
which must, in the most favorable circumstances,
make a part of such an expedition, were wholly laid
out of view.
A thousand arrangements of benevolent and wise
forecast were heeded by Ellswatta, for those who were
to remain behind. The proper distribution of
subordination
and command was assigned to a chief, who
was appointed absolute in command in his absence.
A pallisade of considerable strength was raised, as a
garrison fortress, to which they were to fly, in case a
greater force, than they could cope with, should assail
them. All necessary details of direction, touching
summer duties, were carefully prescribed. The
expedition
comprised eight hundred warriors, beside
nearly a hundred women. The Shienne, satisfied
with the prospect of an expedition, and fighting,
marched cheerfully under Nelesho. Nor would the
chief have dared, even had he wished, to retain the
services of his warriors from the expedition.
The morning of array for departure had come, and
the whole force assembled near the council house.
The leaves were half formed; and spring had now
reached the glory of its prime. A more faithful
picture
of the mixing of joy and sorrow, in all that
pertains
to earth, could not where have been found, than
in the circumstances of this departure. Husbands
and wives, parents and children separated, some to
remain for the inglorious pursuits of fishing, and
tilling
the ground, and exposed, moreover, to dangers of
invasion, which showed more formidable, as the elect
of the tribe were departing on an expedition of four
hundred leagues. Here it might have been seen, that
the red men not only have hearts, but that their
affections
and sympathies are of intense keenness. Amidst
the tears and wailing and parting words and charges
of the masters, even the village dogs, that were to
remain, showed their full measure of grief, by
whining
and howling and striving to bite in sunder the
cords that bound them. While the departing dogs
evinced as clearly, in their baying and frisking and
short, joyous yelps, that they were quite as much
delighted
with the thought of the expedition, as their
masters. Great quantities of dried vension, salmon,
and kinnicanick, were packed on horses. A more
grotesque object, than a sumpter mule, arrayed for
this march, could not be furnished in the vagaries of
the imagination of a Flemish painter. The large
wooden stirrups, the bridles and harnessing of ropes,
of buffalo hair, the prodigious protuberance, which
the back of the dogged and ruminating animal
showed
,
on which were lashed a whole stack of blankets,
bottles, tin cups, venison bags, salt, sugar, rum,
hatchets
,
rackets and balls for play, and the Indian
apparatus
for gambling; in short, the uncouth and
nameless
trumpery of an Indian's wants, displayed, instead
of a mule, a moving lumber room. Four hundred
marching humps of this sort formed the centre. A
most glorious and full bray, by way of parting flourish
and serenade, arose from every donkey enlisted in the
service. Two litters were arranged between two
trained mules to each litter. These were for William
Weldon's and Ellswatta's family. They were of
scarlet
cloth, firmly harnessed to the two mules by thongs.
Nor would any process, but trial, have given adequate
ideas of Indian ingenuity, in inventions of comfort for
travelling, and perfect security in crossing the
mountains
on these conveyances.
The warriors were admirably dressed for the
service
,
with tanned leather dresses, upon which thorns
and bushes could get no hold, and which, by
closeness
and pliancy, were wonderfully adapted both to
service and expedition. The tomahawks and dirks
and pistols were all carefully prepared, of the best
temper and the highest polish. The powder and lead
were packed with a caution for security, which noted,
that they were regarded as medicine dependencies;
the yagers glistened, and Ellswatta declared that all
things were ready. The medicine men prayed, in
the customary strain, for pleasant skies and success in
battle, and in hunting, from the Master of Life. In
another phrase, and in another fashion, Elder Wood
had besought similar issues from the God of Israel, in
the dwelling of William Weldon. All attempts to
paint in words would be utterly in vain, to give the
details of thrilling interest, that belonged to the
departure
of such an expedition.
A gentle south-west breeze, charged with
fragrance
,
came delightfully on the senses, just rustling
the leaves, and waving the grass. A fleet of periogues
were ready to convey the women and the infirm, who
belonged to the expedition, as far as the Sewasserna
was boatable. A large and roomy periogue, fitted
up within with buffalo and elk skins, and covered
with an awning of scarlet cloth, surmounted with eagle
and wakon feathers, emblems of chieftainship,
received
Josepha, Yensi, Jessy, and two waiting girls.
Elder Wood, though offered the same indulgence,
chose rather the more hardy conveyance of a Spanish
poney. Baptiste, though since he had received the
Wistongah a despised thing, as an excellent wood and
water man, accompanied the expedition, being
considered
in the suit of Nelesho, though, on this
occasion
,
he showed eager desires, by officious civility, to
regain the good will of William Weldon.
The drums beat for the march to commence. A
volley was fired, and the moment the smoke had
cleared away, the bells tinkled on the moving horses
and kine. The dogs bayed again. Parents and
children, husbands and wives embraced for the last
time. The measured trample commenced in a
profound
silence of all other sounds. The periogues
hoisted their sails; the procession all moved together,
and the might of the nation moved up the Sewasserna.
Full many a thoughtful Indian turned his face back,
as he moved on, to look at the peaceful smokes of the
town, the dear friends, the loved relatives, the severed
connections, and reflected that many of them perhaps
were never to meet again on this side the grave.
While the two mothers conversed together, Jessy
had her pencil and her drawing paper before her, as
they steadily moved up the rippling stream, now
marking the influence from the breeze, and the lights
and shadows of the sun and the passing clouds upon
the grass and the foliage; or the new configurations
of the serpentine line of mountains, that still converged
the narrow valley of river, as they ascended; or the
fish seen beneath them, scared from their retreats by
such an unwonted array; or the venerable form of
Ellswatta, or the noble figures of the young chief and
his friend, the undistinguished mass of red men,
keeping
their course in silence, or the army of dogs and
the driven herds of kine and horses, that followed the
train. The group furnished too much food for varied
thought, a variety too distracting, to be subject to the
grouping of the pencil. She threw it aside, and gave
herself up to the full inspiration of the love of nature.
Who can number the glad and tender thoughts, that
such a scene inspired? Every moment presented a
new aspect of the endless and never satiating variety.
`Oh nature,' she said within herself, `I admire thee
for the impress of thine Author upon thee. My first
and purest joys have been from thee. Thou hast
proved to me, thus far in life, an unfailing fountain of
satisfaction.' As they moved up between the still
converging piles, that bounded their prospect on
either hand, and marked the clumps of trees in the
prairies, and forest opening beyond forest, and
mountain
beyond mountain, the wild fowls in infinite
numbers
and varieties, hovering above them, and uttering
their cries, the gay song birds welcoming them from
point to point, she sat and mused with that fullness of
heart, and that vague, dreaming and yet delicious
sentiment
of joy, that none but a true lover of nature can
understand.
A halt of a few moments gave them time to take
their warrior fare at noon. The expedition
afterwards
moved steadily on, till the sun was withdrawn,
and the solemn twilight and the darting of fire flies
admonished them to halt for the night. There is
something delightful to every unsophisticated mind in
the meeting of such friends, in such a beautiful desert,
after a pleasant and fortunate day. The periogues
came to land. A reskoui and Frederic held each a
hand to Jessy and the mothers, as they trod once more
on the flower-fringed borders of the stream. A
singular
harbor, indented, like the section of a circle,
and faced with the red pipe stone, which now first
became visible in the banks at this point of the river,
formed a basin sufficiently capacious, to hold all the
periogues. It was alive with fishes. The hook and
line soon covered the grass with them. The reports
of numerous yagers, fired at the geese and swans,
wakened
the echoes. Some pitched the tents. Some
brought water, and were detailed for the services of
cookery. The deep song cheo wana he-aw-aw! was
heard on every side. A few children were shooting
the arrow at a target; and the little cheerful town
looked more bright and domestic, in contrast with the
boundless range of forests and mountains in view on
every side. Never was trip commenced with happier
auspices. The tea and coffee smoked in William
Weldon's tent. The cakes and pies were displayed.
Fish, fowl, and venison, the fruit of hunting, were
spread, to which the customary inmates sat down.
All the scene, not only there, but on every side,
showed content, quiet and abundance, a humble but
delightful assemblage of happy pastoral existence.
Nor could any one have imagined, that these same
people, apparently so mild, peaceful and affectionate,
stretched on the grass in the midst of their kine,
horses
,
dogs and families, might have been excited in a
moment, by the approach of an enemy, to mortal fray,
in which the hatchet would fly with unpitying and
unsparing fury; and in which the only contest would
be, who should spill the most blood, and inflict the
most misery. Such a scene and such a supper were
wonderfully calculated to bring the hearts of the
inmates
to a delightful understanding. After they had
supped, and talked over the past, and sketched the
probable future, by permission of Ellswatta and his
family, who were their guests, the bible and psalm
VOL. II. 2
book were produced, and the evening was closed with
hymns of praise to the God of Israel, in which the
voice of the aged and the young chief, the Spanish and
the Chinese mother, chimed in with the sweet notes
of Jessy.
The next day and the next afforded marches and
voyages of the same charactercharming spring
days, mild suns, and fair sky, the singing of birds,
the cry of countless flocks of sea fowl over head, the
distant murmur of snow-nursed spring-fountains
leaping
down the crags, and all the illimitable variety of
a wild, verdant and beautiful nature, smiling upon
them at every moment with a new face. Thus they
ascended the meanders of the Sewasserna for six
days. Here the mountains had converged to a vale,
which afforded little more than a passage for the
stream; which was becoming both too shallow, and
rapid, to be longer stemmed by the periogues. The
views were every hour becoming at once more
sublime
,
rugged and desolate; and instead of the cry of
the innumerable sea fowl, the bald eagle, screaming
in the blue, gave the predominant note in the stillness
of nature, and the mountains excluded the sun,
except
for an hour or two at noon-day. At this point
spread out from the stream a quiet, deep, circular
pond of a few hundred yards in circumference, into
which the periogues were towed, drawn ashore and
made fast by permanent mooring. The encampment
of this day was on a terrace plain, on the side of a
mountain, on the east bank of the stream, which rose
almost from its shore above the clouds. The
cheerful
encampment reared once more the little social
town in the wilderness. The confidential evening
conversations were resumed over the smoking repast;
and the two lovers, every day drinking deeper draughts,
retired at night to meditate upon the wonder-stirring
sight of such a beautiful vision, joined to an Indian
expedition over these unnamed mountains.
Next day was one of scramble and fatigue in
ascending
rough and precipitous heights. It was
matter
of unceasing surprise to Frederic, to see what
sureness of foot, and unerring clearness of instinct the
mules, and even horses displayed, in this apparently
impracticable ascent. They could see, that a road
had been marked out, by former travel, that the pass
had been ascended before; and, that these animals,
when their fore feet were raised almost
perpendicular
,
somehow continued to scramble safely up; though
the females of the party chose not to avail themselves
of the aid of their litters; notwithstanding they were
assured, and had occasionally occular proof, that they
were safe. All the day they continued slowly to
ascend
,
winding along the crevices of the rocks and the
chasms of mountain-gullies. Here was ample
occasion
for a tender and necessary species of useful
courtesy
,
and not uncalled for gallantry, in aiding the
mothers
and Jessy up these steep and sometimes painful
ascents. Nor did either Areskoui or Frederic
complain
of the lovely burden, as they lifted the sylphid
form of the latter up eminences too high for her
strength to mount; and saw her face suffused with
the flush of exertion, and heard the quick throbbings
of her bosom. But still, the difficulty surmounted,
she was the first to laugh at her own weakness; and
held out her hands to aid her mother and Josepha up
the same ascent. When they had attained an
eminence
,
it was an imposing spectacle, to see the horses,
mules, and kine scrambling up the same heights
below
them, and to note the brawny warriors springing
from rock to rock, as if the crevices of the cliffs threw
up a constant supply of men from their chasms. Nor
was it the least impressive part of the foreground;
that Elder Wood, still in advance of all, was seen with
his grey curls canonically sweeping over his broad
shoulders, his psalm book or bible in his hand, and his
rapt eye still looking at the new heights rising above,
admiring and adoring the Eternal Architect of these
ancient piles.
For two days they continued to ascend, the last
part of the second day being over glaciers and snows,
that had been accumulating for ages. Here they
encamped, in the painful predicament of having no
food for their horses, mules and cattle. But this
provident
people had prepared bark, and bundles of
gathered
grass for the emergency; and appeared to enjoy
the spectacle of the extreme greediness, with which
the fatigued and hungry animals devoured whatever
was presented them in the form of food. Here they
encamped, kindling such fires as they might, from the
moss and the billets of wood with which they had
charged their mules from lower wooded points of the
mountain. The air was sharp, and freezing. But
cheerful lights were kindled in these icy and desolate
regions; and the parties, warmly clad, and the front
of the tent closed, and warned, beside, that here was
the test of heroic endurance, they passed the evening
in these bleak domains of frost not less cheerfully,
than in positions naturally more comfortable.
Next morning they saw the sun rise on the summit
of the highest range, called by the Shoshonee, `The
Manitou peak.' What a sublime position! What an
imposing spectacle! Great and marvellous are thy
works, Lord God Almighty! was the exclamation of
Elder Wood. `I feel,' exclaimed Jessy, `as if I had
ascended to another sphere, and had already shaken
off the grossness and the burden of mortality.' The
sun, far away on the eastern plains, was struggling
through an ocean of mist. Where they stood was in
clear empyrean blue. To the north, the eye ran
along interminable ridges stretching towards the
dreary regions of the Arctic sea. To the south, the
same line was lost in the blue of the horizon. To
the west was their own sweet valley, and the eye
could readily recognize known peaks, which they had
left behind them eight days ago. How tiny showed
the strides and efforts of man, amidst the grandeur of
a prospect, in which distance was lost! To the east
were the innumerable sources of the Missouri,
welling
with their snow dissolved tribute to the common
parent channel, from the southern line of Red river
of the south, to the most northern branch of the
Maria
of the north. William Weldon's eye kindled, as
he surveyed the scene, with former passions. `
Yonder
,
my daughter,' said he, `yonder, but six hundred
leagues away, is my dear native, ungrateful and
forsaken
country! But always, always dear; and God
do so to me and more, in Elder Wood's phrase, if I
ever forget thee, my country.' He held out his arms
towards the immeasurable plains; and in his heart
was the keen sentiment of regret, that he had ever
forsaken that country.
Before mid-day, they tasted the spring sources of
the Missouri; and to a benevolent mind it was a treat,
to see the cattle riot in the abundant and fresh
herbage
,
which had sprung up, quickened by the nitrous
influence of the recently melted snows. Here they
encamped, and found abundance of game; and here
they contemplated the appalling spectacle of a
conflict
between two Shienne warriors and a grizzly bear,
who assailed them, as they crossed his lair. The
struggle was one of terrific interest. The powerful
and enraged animal only fought fiercer for the shots
he received. Other warriors rushed to their
assistance
.
When the savage monster had been at length
dispatched, three of the warriors were found to be
severely
wounded in the combat. In this encampment,
2*
they had once more come down to the warm
influences
of spring. There was wood, water, game; and
all their wants were abundantly supplied. This
evening was marked by a circumstance of rare
interest
;
for Nelesho himself shared in the supper in
Ellswatta's tent, said kind things to Jessy, and
congratulated
the party upon this uncommonly easy and
pleasant descent to the buffalo-plains.
It was two days before they reached the subjacent
plain, and encamped on the prairie at the mountain's
foot. After a careful reconnoisance, they selected a
strong encampment, guarded on three sides by those
impregnable barriers; and on the greater portion of
the fourth, by the rapid and turbid Missouri, which
rolled along full to the brim, between its banks,
shaded
with cotton trees, with leaves half formed, and
emitting their peculiar and delightful fragrance. The
unguarded point of the camp was secured by strong
pallisades. The tents were pitched. The mules and
horses were packed with loads of fresh peeled bark.
Large and comfortable cabins were erected, and
covered
with turf and bark; and in the course of two
days an Indian town had sprung up, in these remote
plains, affording all necessary shelter from the
elements
;
and, viewed with its cheerful accompaniments
of life, the incessant hum of busy movement, and the
natural evaporation of inward glee and animal mirth
in songs and laughter, and rising from a green sward,
abundantly dotted with periwinkles, columbines and
ladies' slippers, showed neither unpleasantly to the
eye, nor the imagination.
The time of arrival was opportune. The hunters,
from the first hour of their reaching the plains, had
brought down enough straggling buffaloes,
abundantly
to supply the expedition with fresh provisions.
But they learned, that the countless droves of the
south, ranging over all the upper area of the vast
plain, in numbers like the migrating sea-fowls,
following
the teaching of instinct, were moving towards
the tender and more recently sprung grass of the
north.
Here might have been witnessed the keen
excitement
of a hunter's thoughts, in view of this most
noble and useful species of game, and highest
reward
of all the varieties of hunting. Ellswatta, in
view of it, was seen, as if growing young again. The
eyes of the women glistened, as they surveyed at a
distance at first dark atoms, only visible by the
mirage
of the plains, but enlarging every moment; and
soon assuming, by the same mirage, preternatural
dimensions
,
like marching castles, until the whole
surface
for miles seemed a black and moving mass of
animals
.
`There are the buffaloes! there are the
buffaloes
!'
they cried; and it was useless to think, or speak
of aught else. Elder Wood merged for the time the
minister in the Kentuckian. Every body was alive.
Every eye glistened. The buffaloes! The buffaloes!
No other cry was heard. William Weldon, all
philosopher
as he was, was not less keen for the sport
than the rest. Indeed, as Yensi and Josepha and
Jessy surveyed the hunt, could they have forgotten
that it was purchased at the expense of life, it would
have been a glorious sight even to them. The yagers
were discharged. The animals fell. In various points
they were seen turning upon their tormentors, and
doing dangerous battle. But a party of relief was
observed wheeling, and flying to the aid of the
pursued
.
There were not wanting instances of extreme
danger, of being borne down, man and horse. Two
or three hunters actually suffered this fate, and were
severely wounded. The joyous yell, the cry of
danger
,
of retreat and pursuit, the barking of the dogs,
the enraged, or terrified snorting of the numberless
animals, the manifest indications that the whole souls
of the attacking party were in the assault, threw over
the hunt every imaginable degree of excitement and
interest. It was full three hours before the main
moving
sweep of life had passed by, and the hunt was
still surveyed, diminishing gradually, as the straggling
and wounded animals disappeared in the distance,
until it was wholly invisible.
It would be difficult to find a happier collection of
human beings, than these hunters, when they returned
at night, to recount the fortunes of the day. The
chase had been uncommonly successful.
Hundreds
of the animals had been slaughtered, and the
`hewers of wood and drawers of water,' were
designated
;
for it was their business to take the skins from
the animals, and preserve them, and such parts of the
flesh, as were either to be pickled, or dried. From
this time, this portion of the expedition was constantly
and laboriously employed.
And now the feast was spread; and the story went
round; and the Indian forgot his customary
taciturnity
.
Shouts of laughter arose. The warriors
pointed
out from their number those, who had showed
peculiar
prowess and intrepidity; not forgetting those
who had shrunk from the furious animals that turned
upon them in wrath; nor, through any delicacy of
forbearance, refraining the hearty laugh at all those
who had shown an undue concern for their own
persons
.
So engrossing and entire was the interest of
the hunt, even at the table of the chief, that Jessy,
accustomed
to see herself an absorbing object of
attention
,
found, for a day or two, that there was no
subject
of conversation to come in competition with a
buffalo hunt. It was natural to expect this of
Areskoui
,
of Elder Wood and the rest. But it almost
stirred her usually tranquil bosom, to find, that she
could not gain the attention of even Frederic for a
moment; that questions proposed by her, to distract
the conversation from that all engrossing theme, fell
unanswered upon his ear, while his eye glistened, and
his high forehead was lighted up with interest, as he
and Elder Wood were discussing together their
mutual
assault upon a prodigious buffalo-bull, who turned,
and gave them battle. `I admire,' thought Jessy, as
as she laid down for repose at night, `if this is the
civility
,
that favored lovers would show to their
mistresses
.'
Nor did she fail at breakfast to ask him, if
he had dreamed through the night of his dear friends,
the buffaloes.
Ellswatta had not a little business, as judge, in
deciding
many bitter disputes, who had been the
fortunate
slayer, where many arrows or balls had pierced
the same animal. Never had expedition been more
busy, or more laboriously occupied. Here they were
laying in supplies of their most savoury food for a
year, and buffalo skins for many a year. The chief
business consisted in tanning, coloring, jerking, and in
every way preparing the various parts of the buffalo
for use; and a buffalo contains in his skin, flesh, fat
and sinew, some material for the supply of almost the
whole circle of Indian emergencies. Probably the
world contained not for the time in its whole cope a
more industrious and happy community, than the
dwellers in this little town at the foot of the mountains.
`Let them hunt,' thought Jessy. `Let them imagine,
that the fate of nations depends on the killing of a
buffalo
.
For me, I can amuse myself as much in
character
,
as Frederic;' and she put herself to exploring
the botany, examining the flowers, and classing the
flora, unexampled for its variety and richness, at the
sources of the Missouri. Her port folio, too,
contained
the commencement and the rudiments of a most
impressive landscape, taking in the sublime and varied
scenery of the mountains, the interminable plain, the
buffaloes, a buffalo hunt, the perfectly clear and mild
azure of the sky in this mountain atmosphere; and
the Missouri, winding amidst its groves; and
commencing
its long way to pay its final tribute to the
Father of Waters. When, at length, repetition
began
to abate the intensity of interest connected with
buffalo hunting, Frederic once more returned to the
original and far deeper excitement of an attachment,
which had lost none of its influence, by being for a
short time suspended in its manifestations. He saw,
after much entreaty, this commenced sketch of the
grand scenery around them. His eye kindled. `How
much more worthily have you been employed than
we,' he cried! `Ah! you are determined always to
show your superiority.' A colloquy, thus commenced,
evinced to her that she did infinite injustice to him,
when she deemed that his interest in the concerns of
the mind and the heart, had in any degree abated. He
once more almost trenched on the interdicted
ground. She was soothed, and satisfied with
demonstrations
,
which she felt herself under the necessity
once more of treating with external severity,
reminding
him of the terms of a former treaty upon the
subject
.
An occasional glance from Areskoui taught
her but too well, that though the pursuit in which
he was now engaged had an all absorbing interest, the
original, unchangeable fire was burning deep in his
bosom, with a devouring intensity, in no degree
diminished
by this temporary distraction.
A matter of still deeper interest, than the buffalo
hunt, now presented. An exploring party, which had
pursued the buffalo along the foot of the mountains a
considerable distance to the north, returned in
breathless
haste and excitement, to inform them, that a large
and exploring party of the Black-feet, like themselves
prepared either for war or hunting, were encamped
at distance of eight or ten leagues from them. Here
was matter of another sort of importance in the
discussion
.
All concern for the pursuit of buffaloes was
brought to a dead close. A reconnoitering party was
sent out to examine the number and probable
intentions
of their enemies, with the most strict charges to
be cautious and circumspect; and by no means to
give notice of their presence. But on their return,
all necessity of painful lurking in concealment was
proved to be abortive. The enemy were clearly
apprised
of the vicinity of their foe; for, like them, they
suffered the buffaloes to pass near them unmolested;
and every thing in their camp gave fearful note of
preparation.
Nor were Ellswatta and his people either
improvident
,
or indolent. Areskoui explained to his mother
and Yensi, that no fear for the result put them on
fortifying
their camp; but tender concern for personages
so dear to them, and a fixed purpose, to leave no
danger
,
that could be provided against, to contingency.
Hence double pallisades were raised; and every
precaution
adopted against all accident within the cope
of Indian experience. The voice of the females
would have been, to commence a return over the
mountains
.
But Ellswatta convinced them, that such
return
was both inexpedient and impracticable, without
having previously settled the controversy with the
Black-feet. It would only bring upon them a certain
attack in the mountains, at a chosen point of
disadvantage
to them, by a foe who would assail them with
the fierceness of assured victory, as deeming them
flying in fear. `No,' he said. `They have murdered
our people. They merit vengeance at our hands.
They are our implacable enemies. We came over
the mountains to seek them. We will fight them,
and let the Master of Life decide.'
It may well be thought, this night was one of
thoughtfulness
,
and a solicitude, that called forth all the
powers
and affections of the heart. In the morning they
were to assault a brave, prepared and equally
numerous
foe; and no one could calculate, who of them
would fall, and who return. Frederic, for the first
time in his life, was begirt for battle; and there was
in the camp one heart at least, that throbbed fearfully
in view of the impending danger for him. Elder
Wood this evening resumed the Christian minister;
and was wrestling with the God of battles for success
to the righteous cause. Areskoui kindly chided
Jessy
for the paleness of apprehension on her cheek.
`Wakona,' he said firmly and calmly, `we can beat
the Black-feet at any time, and under any
circumstances
.
That we have proved. Do you suppose, there
can be any doubt of the issue, when we have in our
camp our parents and Wakona, beside the necessity
of avenging injury, and retaining for ourselves, and
those, who come after us, the reputation of braves,
without which life would not be worth possessing?'
It was to no purpose, that she told him, `that the death
of her father and friends would be poorly
compensated
by the empty laurels of victory, which would
wither
at the end of the song of war and triumph, while
the friends would never return.' `We will fight them,'
was the reply; `fight them, goaded to the battle, not
only by all the motives, which you cannot be supposed
to feel, but by knowing, that a victory is necessary to
our secure and happy return over the mountains.'
The expedition had breakfasted next morning,
before
sun rise; and tears, that could not be repressed,
rushed alike to the eye of Yensi and Jessy, as they saw
William Weldon girt with pistols, hatchet, yager and
dirk, and the venerable figure of Elder Wood
equally
caparisoned in a style seemingly so little befitting
his peaceful vocation; and all the Kentuckian
evidently
stirring in his blood. Ellswatta would have
detained
him for the equally important duty of
remaining
for the defence of the garrison. But it
comported
not with his purposes. `God do so to me and more,'
he answered to Ellswatta, `if I do not go forth, and
fight openly, like a Christian and a Kentuckian, for
what I believe to be the righteous cause, and for
the people who have protected me, and who
contain
all my charities.' `Give me,' said Frederic, in
an under tone to Jessy, `give me a little ringlet, as
an amulet, to wear next my bosom.' Though he
requested
sportively, and she answered, as if the request
were jest, there was that in his eye, when he made
it, that went to her heart; and full gladly would she
have given the young warrior, clad in weapons to the
teeth, and going forth to the fierce encounter with
such terrible enemies, the fairest curl that wantoned
on her neck. But she said, with a pale face and an
upward cast of the eye, and folded hands, `God in his
mercy preserve all, that are dear to me, and return
them in safety and triumph to the camp.'
It was soon ascertained, that there was no need of
a long march, to meet the enemy. The expedition
had scarcely formed, outside the camp, on the plain,
before they descried at a distance a moving mass,
which might have been at first mistaken for an
advancing
herd of buffaloes. But the mirage and
brightness
of a June morning soon gave distinct intimations
of a different character. The telescope assured
Frederic and Areskoui, that the Black-feet were
advancing
upon them. The plumes in the hair of the
riders could be distinctly seen. Deceived, and
animated
by false intelligence, touching the numbers of
the Shoshonee, they had come to meet them, in the
sanguine confidence of an easy victory.
Ellswatta's eyes flashed once more the fire of youth;
and Jessy felt a natural, deep and feminine respect
for the young chief, as she saw the fearless
countenance
,
the noble port and excited eye of the warrior
spirit going to do battle for his parents and his nation.
VOL. II. 3
Away they sped upon the foe, and Elder Wood by
no means in the rear. The combatants were soon
engaged in mortal struggle; and in Indian battle,
more than in any other, a fight of an army is an
aggregate
of individual combats. The loud and fierce
Indian yell arose from either force. Hatchets and
arrows flew, and the deadly yager rang; and full
many
powerful pairs of Indians were struggling to throw
each other to the earth, and disengage an arm, to
plunge the murderous knife to the heart of his
antagonist
.
But, such is the unconquerable and dogged
sullenness of the dying warrior, that the sharp death
groan of other battle fields is never heard in their
mortal strifes. The expiring only gave forth the dull
and heavy note, the claim of nature in mere
unconscious
moanings of the departing spirit. Elder Wood
showed indubitable testimony, that he knew how to
wield other weapons, than `the sword of the spirit,'
to fatal effect. He was in the thickest of the fight,
and laying on his stoutest blows, as though his
brawny
arms had been beating upon the anvil. Frederic,
too, fought, as if the eyes of his mistress had been
upon
him; but a fierce Black-foot warrior would have
given the last account of him, had not Areskoui
opportunely
arrived, to despatch his antagonist, when
he was ready to let fall the fatal blow on the young
man's skull. The dogs yelled. The women
screamed
.
Even the donkies in the garrison brayed loudly,
to increase the uproar. No equal amount of human
power of lungs could have raised a more infernal din.
The battle raged long and fearfully. But the
arrangements
of Ellswatta were too wise, and his
forces
too intrepid and well trained, to leave the victory
long doubtful. He had retained a fresh reserve, and
when the Black-feet already wavered, this reserve
charged through them, fell upon their rear, and
shortly
afterwards the victory was decided, by the rapid
flight of the foe. As their horses were not as fresh
as those of the Shoshonee, this flight was fatal to the
greater portion of their force. Comparatively, but a
few had been previously slain; but now they were
cut down without mercy. Nor would the smallest
remnant have been spared, but for the interposition
of a deep and muddy ravine full of water. The
retreating
force knew the ford, plunged in, and
escaped
,
through the ignorance of the pursuing foe,
touching
the bottom, and the chances of return. The
pursuers
halted on the shore of the gully, firing upon
those who were so unfortunate as to get their horses
fast in the mud. Those who got fairly through,
turned
on the opposite shore, and raised the scream of
defiance, which the Shoshonee answered by a shower
of unavailing balls. The field of battle was
examined
.
More than a hundred of the Black-feet had
fallen. A single warrior only had been taken
prisoner
.
Every wounded Black-foot had been
despatched
,
as a Shoshonee came upon him. Eight of the
victor force had been slain, five Shoshonee and three
Shienne; and a considerable number had been
severely
wounded, who had been saved, only because
they were immediately moved out of the reach of
their foe. The prisoner warrior was early warned,
that his fate was, to be offered on the morrow, an
expiatory
sacrifice to the shades of the victor warriors
that had fallen.
A great amount of plunder fell into the hands of
the victors; horses, mules, and a considerable amount
of silver, which, it appeared, they had recently taken
from an American trading expedition. There were
clothes, powder, lead, provisions, and various articles,
of which the Shoshonee were in pressing want.
Fifty women had followed in the rear of their
husbands
and fathers, and had fallen into the hands of
the victors. Among the captives was one taken by
Frederic. It was a Spanish girl of thirteen, who lay
mourning on the ground, beside an aged fallen
Black-foot
warrior. Her face was bathed in tears; and the
agony of her grief seemed to have rendered her wholly
insensible to personal fear or danger. She was
kissing
the yet warm cheek, and wiping away the blood,
that flowed from the death wound of the hoary chief.
`Viva'she cried. `Oh viva, mio carissimo padre!'
and then she repeated the same words, in the speech
of the Black-feet, in the ear of the fallen Indian,
insensible
in death. When Frederic discovered her,
it was with difficulty he aroused her to a sense of her
forlorn condition, as a captive. `Child,' said he,
availing
himself of the little Spanish he knew, `you must
go with me.' `Oh no, no!'she cried, sobbing
piteously
.
`What, leave my poor old father! No, I
cannot
.'
Then she begged him piteously, `por l'amor de
Dios,' to aid her to turn him over, and help him to
arise; while she still continued to wipe away the
flowing
blood. `He will bleed forever,' she said, `and will
die, unless we help him to get up.' `My dear child,'
said the compassionate Frederic, `the warrior is dead
already. Come, follow meI will be to you instead
of your father.' `Oh!' she replied, `that is
impossible
.
You are young, and a bad Shoshonee. My
poor dear old father, you cannot be dead. You would
never leave Katrina so desolate and alone.'
Frederic
,
moved to compassion by the touching simplicity
of her frantic grief and filial piety, and it may be,
too, by the tones of a voice, uncommonly sweet and
interesting, dismounted, turned the warrior, and
showed
his ghastly face. `See you not,' he said, `that he
is dead? That you can never restore him to life?'
`I see now, Shoshonee,' she replied, `that he is dead,
and that he will never again take care of Katrina.
Well, I will remain, and die with him. Kill me, bad
Shoshonee, if you please; for there is now no one to
care for Katrina. He brought me behind him. He
fed me, and clothed, and helped me over the
mountains
and streams. He was always the kindest of
fathers
,
and intended me for his young son, who
remained
at the Black-foot town. Go, bad Shoshonee.
What can you want of a poor orphan girl? Go, and
leave me.' He approached close to the girl, and said
to her, `that he was not a Shoshonee, but one of her
own race; and that he would see her father buried,
and her taken care of, and in due time sent to the
Black-foot town, to marry the son of her dead father.'
This soothing language, and this assurance, that he
was not a Shoshonee, tranquilized her, and seemed
to gain her confidence. She looked full in his face.
`Your words are sweet,' she said, `and now I see, that
you are a pale face, and a fair one, and not a bad
Shoshonee. Look there at my poor dear old father.
How can I go away, and leave him?' At length,
however, she was almost torn away from the body of
the fallen warrior, which she left with such an agony
of distress and tears, as almost unmanned the heart of
him who carried her away. From that moment, she
seemed to have transferred from the warrior to
Frederic
her affection and her sense of filial dependence
and obligation; and she held fast to his dress, as she
followed him into the victorious camp, which rung
with every sound of frantic triumph and rejoicing.
`Welcome back a thousand times,' cried the guests
of Ellswatta's tent, and for this time Jessy hesitated
not to hold out to him her hand. `I have brought
you a present,' said Frederic, as he grasped the
offered
hand; and he presented the captive Spanish girl.
`She is of your nation, Josepha,' he said. Josepha
addressed the sobbing girl, who answered her in
Spanish
,
but still clung to Frederic. Josepha called her
to her, and strove to reassure her. `Take her,
Wakona
,'
said she. `She will be an acquisition to you.'
3*
Jessy held her hand to her, and asked her to come,
and sit by her. `Oh! no,' cried the trembling girl.
`They have killed my old father, and now would
separate
me from my young father.' `Poor thing, said
Jessy; `her heart is full, as well it may be, and she
clearly takes more to you, Frederic, than to me.'
Frederic assured her, `that she should be his little
sister, and that, in committing her to Jessy, and her
parents, he only put her into the hands of those, who
could take a thousand times better care of her, than
he could;' and, he added, to Jessy, `you will soon
teach her, what you so easily succeed in learning
every
one, to love you.'
The prisoners were distributed after the usual
canons
of Indian equity. The wounded had their
wounds managed with all the extent and tenderness
of Indian skill. The money and silver were
awarded
,
after a few appropriations, called for by
particular
circumstances, by lot. Among the articles of the
plunder was a considerable quantity of tea, coffee
and sugar, probably obtained from the same quarter
from which they had plundered their silver. Rum
and spirits unhappily were among the acquisitions.
The rejoicing song and dance of that evening had,
therefore, every conceivable circumstance of joyful
excitement. Many a young warrior was supplied
with a wife, who, according to the usages of the red
people, received her new husband, perhaps the slayer
of her former one, with perfect docility and
submission
.
The drums beat. The bright fires blazed. The
spirits were distributed, though Ellswatta heeded,
that no one should receive enough to produce
intoxication
.
`We certainly ought to be happy this evening,' said
Jessy, as the wonted circle once more assembled round
the tea and coffee at Ellswatta's table. `We are all
safe. Our foes have supplied us with these luxuries,
just as our own were exhausted; and we now expect
the history of this eventful battle.' At the same time
she beckoned the timid Spanish girl to take a seat by
her side. `Let Baptiste give it,' said Elder Wood;
for on this evening of rejoicing, the Canadian had
taken
a draught of the plundered spirits, and had found
courage, once more to appear at this place. Baptiste
turned pale, and begged, that Messieurs would excuse
him, as he had seen but part of the affair. `Let
Elder
Wood say,' added he, `if Baptiste be not one
clever
garcon for de trap, and for des betes sauvages, and
des belles demoiselles!' `But,' he rejoined with his
most significant shrug, `me no love de dem cold knife,
and lead, sacre, no!' Truth is, Baptiste had been
ordered
into the battle, but had repaired, as they were
moving toward the enemy, to Ellswatta, begging,
pour l'amour de Dieu, to send him back to guard les
dames. `Sacre,' said he, `my teeth chatter, and I
frissonne, like de dem ague.' Ellswatta laughed
heartily at this sudden attack of the ague, and sent
him back, aware of the annoyance that might result
from the presence of a single coward.
The tale then went round. Areskoui had not
discredited
his blood or birth, and Frederic at the table
made his public acknowledgements to him, as the
preserver
of his life. Elder Wood, too, had fought like
an enraged giant. His clothes had been pierced, and
blood had flowed from two or three slight wounds.
It was remarked to be a very uncommon circumstance,
that each had been wounded, but neither beyond a
superficial scratch, or in a degree to require dressing,
or be painful. Even the pain and death, by which
this delightful supper was purchased, were less
repulsive
in the review, from the circumstance of the
known and terrible ferocity of their murderous foe.
Never were happier faces, perhaps never gladder
hearts, than surrounded this table. They could now
resume their hunting in security; and could carry
back trophies of their valor, and of the ample
retribution
of vengeance inflicted upon their great
national
foe. It was not until midnight, that Elder Wood
reminded them of the lateness of the hour; and opened
his bible and psalm book, and sang the hymn `Thou
shepherd of Israel and mine,' accompanied by the
sweet note of Jessy, the flute of Frederic, and the deep
tones of Ellswatta's and Areskoui's voice. He then
fell on his knees, and in the speech of the Shoshonee
returned thanks to the Lord of Hosts for the great
victory vouchsafed them over their enemies.
The following morning was signalized by the
offering
up the captive Black-foot warrior to the shades
of the Shoshonee who had fallen in the battle of the
former day. The terrible spectacle was of course
unwitnessed by Yensi and Jessy. It was associations
with these horrid traits in Indian character, which,
unconsciously, always mixed with Jessy's thoughts of
Areskoui, that had caused revulsion at the idea of a
more intimate union with him. Josepha, Areskoui,
even the young prisoner Katrina, she knew, would
behold
this scene of ineffable horror with the eager
interest
of a show.
The prisoner had been pinioned, and closely
guarded
through the night; and his keepers related, their
eyes glistening with respect, that he had sung his
death song at eve, spoken calmly of his wife and little
ones, smoked his calumet, and laid him down in all
the straightness of his pinions, and two warriors resting
on either extremity of the cord, to a sleep as profound,
as that of an infant at the mother's breast. The pile
was made, and the stake fixed in the centre of the
battle ground. The unburied bodies of his Black-feet
countrymen were lying, as they fell, about him. The
warriors who had guarded him led him up the pile,
and fastened him firmly to the stake. He smiled
disdainfully
at these precautions to bind him. `Vile old
women,' he said, `the Shoshonee feel, that they would
cry like women, and run like cowards. But a
Black-foot
needs no bands, when he has to show such old
women how a true warrior knows to suffer.' Thus
saying, he drew his kinnakinnick from his pouch, and
sat down, calmly smoking his pipe. Occasionally
singing, in the red man's peculiar intonation, a verse,
the import of which was,
`I will go to the land, where my fathers have gone;
Their shades will rejoice in the fame of their son.'
It would be too horrible, to give the details of the
tortures of this heroic sufferer. The fire reached him.
A mere physical and spasmodic recoil gave evidence
at the moment, that the nerves revolted from the
agony. It was seen but once. He smoked. He
smiled. He sometimes derided his tormentors as
ignorant
,
and novices in the science of tormenting. He
boasted of having acted a conspicuous part in the
recent
burning of the Shoshonee cabins and the murder
of their tenants. Not a groan escaped him; nor a
movement, evincing the subsequent triumph of
sensation
over his dogged and invincible resolution. The
last sentence which he was heard to utter, in words
feeble, and inarticulate, was, `shades of my fathers,
acknowledge the stainless spirit of your son.' Some
days after the event, Frederic presented Jessy a
measured
version of the scene, as she casually adverted to
the subject.
THE WARRIOR'S EXECUTION.
`
I will go to the land, where my fathers have gone;
Their shades will rejoice in the fame of their son
.'
Beside the stake, in fetters bound,
A captive warrior lay,
And slept a sleep as sweetly sound,
As children's after play;
Although the morrow's sun would come,
To light him to his martyrdom.
And as he slept, a cheering dream
His flitting hours beguiled:
He stood beside his native stream,
And clasped his first born child.
The wife, that drest his hunter fare,
And all his little ones, were there.
The buried feelings of past years
With that sweet vision sprung,
'Till his closed lids were moist with tears,
That anguish had not wrung;
But they were kindly tearsnot weak,
That coursed each other down his cheek.
Again he heard those accents dear
No'twas the savage yell,
That burst upon his sleeping ear,
And broke the magic spell.
A momentand his waken'd eye
Had scorch'd its lingering moisture dry.
The sun sprang up the morning sky,
And roll'd the mists away;
But he was nerved to sufferance high,
And saw without dismay
That cheerful sun in glory rise,
As though to mock his agonies.
Amid the flames, proud to the last,
His warrior-spirit rose,
And looks of scorn, unblenching cast,
Upon his circling foes.
`Think ye I feel these harmless fires?
Noby the spirits of my sires!
`I that have made your wigwams red,
Your women captive borne,
And from your bravest chieftain's head,
The badge of triumph torn:
Think ye I feel these harmless fires?
Noby the spirits of my sires!
`This frame to ashes ye may burn,
And give the winds in vain;
I know, ye cannot thus return
Your friends, these hands have slain:
Think ye I feel these harmless fires?
Noby the spirits of my sires!
`Shades of my fathers'Oh, draw near,
And greet me from the flame;
My foes have drawn no coward-tear,
To stain my warrior fame;
Nor wrung one plaint amid these fires,
To shame the spirits of my sires.
`They come; on yonder fleecy cloud
Slow sails the shadowy throng;
They bend them from their misty shroud,
And catch my dying song:
I mount in triumph from these fires,
To join the spirits of my sires.'
The next day, and the next, parties sent out in
different directions could discover no buffaloes, or
even other game of importance, within the compass
of vision. The uproar of the battle, and the
destructive
hunting of two such numerous parties, as had
recently
been assailing these noble animals, had driven
them all far away. After a council debate, it was
determined to leave their present encampment, and
march to the mouth of the Yellow Stone, on the
Missouri. The march was commenced with all
practicable
speed. Travelling on these level plains was
perfectly easy; and they were abundantly supplied
with beasts of burden. Every person of the
expedition
was mounted; and as they proposed to return to
their encampment, their kine were left behind them,
and every thing that would tend to impede the
rapidity
of their march. It was delightful to Jessy, for
the first few hours, to move over a dead level, green
and flowering prairie. But the wearying monotony
and uniformity of the scene were soon felt to be
painful
.
To avoid following the meanders of the river,
they had set forth into the open and boundless plain.
The day was sultry; and the scorching sun smote
upon
them, without the shelter of a tree within the
compass
of vision. They shortly suffered for want of
water
.
To increase the difficulty, a thick, dim mist, like
the deepest smoke of Indian summer, drove up from
the east, attended by a furious wind, which scorched,
like the Sirocco. To crown their suffering and
perplexity
,
they had advanced into a region of driving
sand, of which there are tracts in that range of the
desert scarcely less extensive than the African
Sahara
.
The sand not only covered in a moment the
tracks of their beasts, but threatened to bury the whole
expedition in wind-formed sepulchres. A pocket
compass would now have been more to them, than the
gold of both the Indies. But the Indians themselves,
with all their instinctive tact, and almost superhuman
sagacity, were utterly at fault. No one could divine
the point of compass, or the right direction. Then
was heard the groan of nature. Here was a
predicament
of trial, beyond even the patient endurance of
the Indians. Not only the intolerable appetite of
burning thirst invaded all the rational part of the
expedition
;
but it was painful to see the operation of
this last and most tormenting craving of nature upon
the brutes. The dogs howled, and even the neighings
of the horses and the cries of the patient asses were
appalling. The wisest knew not whether to encamp
or advance; nor whether, in advancing, they were
plunging deeper in the burning solitude, or making
back for their camp, to which it was their purpose to
bend their course.
In this terrible emergency, which was not the less
so, for falling upon them in the hour of recent mirth
and triumph, and in which perfect equality of
suffering
was imposed in common upon the brutes, and
every
individual of the expedition indiscriminately, Jessy
found alleviation for the distress of her own thirst, in
witnessing the docility and uncomplaining patience
of her recent acquisition, Katrina. She spoke of the
kindness of her Black-foot father, shed tears, and
related
how earnest he had always showed himself to
relieve all her little wants. She related the history
of her captivity by the Black-feet, who had taken her
away from the Spanish settlements on the Rio del
Norte, four years since. She had almost lost the
remembrance
of the names of her parents, though she
still retained her native language, probably, from the
circumstance, that her master himself spoke it, in a
considerable degree. He had proved a father to her,
had adopted her into his family, had intended her for
his son; and had conducted towards her, in every
way, with so much kindness, that she became in
feeling
an Indian; and in affection a child of her master's.
She, poor thing, had been used to hardship and
suffering
,
and complained not, though she looked wistfully
towards the heavens, crossed herself, and said her
pater noster for rain. Elder Wood, too, subdued by
thirst and terror, fasted, and prayed, loud and
earnestly
,
for rain. It was, indeed, a spectacle to chill the
heart, to see the looks, which this mighty group of
life, bewildered in the burning sands of the desert,
cast upon each other and the sky, as they moved in
this direction and in that, like troubled spirits;
seeking
a direction, and rest, and water, and finding none.
The night, which they spent in this position, was
one never to be forgotten. The wind still blew
fiercely
;
and the mists seemed to be condensed into a
compact
atmosphere from earth to sky. Their kindled
lights were in a moment extinguished by the wind;
and the whole camp was involved in an absolute
and rayless darkness, `which might be felt.' In the
general moan of excruciating thirst, no one remained
still, but each wandered abroad, to catch in their
clothes, and to imbibe on their surface any portion of
mist, that might be dispensed in the form of dew, or
humidity. In this predicament, individuals and
families
wandered from their place, and were confounded;
and could find each other no more, through that dark
night; and the inmates with William Weldon kept
together, only by holding to each other's hand, or
dress. The powerful voice of Elder Wood, in earnest
VOL. II. 4
cries for the compassion of the Almighty, was heard
through that long night. Hope returned to the bosoms
of this forlorn people once more, a little after
midnight
;
for flashes of lightning were seen in various
quarters of the sky. `God will have compassion upon
us,' cried the minister, `and will be gracious to give
us rain, that we perish not.' At the same time every
one of the whole camp was feeling in the dark for
whatever in the form of vessel, or rounded skin, or
contrivance of any sort, that could be moulded to hold
water; and stood forth in the open air, looking
earnestly
towards the sky, and catching new impulse of
hope from the more frequent flashes of lightning, and
the distant muttering of thunder. But, though these
harbingers of rain inspired courage, the rain came
not; and a faint and almost imperceptible change of
crimson and dusky light announced the twilight of
dawn, without any signs of immediate relief. But
when light enough was in the sky to show the grey
sand at the bottom of the crimson gloom, Ellswatta
seemed to be listening intently, as though to catch
some other sound, than the distant muttering of the
thunder. At length he cried joyfully, `Master of
Life, we thank thee. Wahcondah, we thank thee.
Hearken! Hearken! There is hope and relief.' All
listened in the eagerness of parching thirst, and the
natural desire of life. A faint cry in the air was first
scarcely perceptible. Soon the sound of swans and
geese and ducks and water fowl was heard careering
by. A general shout at the same moment rose from
the whole camp. These children of the solitude
instinctively
felt, that they were near some river, and
that the peculiar atmosphere and storm, that had
arrested
the flight of the water fowl, was passing away.
`Up, march, strike the tents,' was the general cry,
and in the shortest possible time, the whole body was
in motion in the direction of the movements of the
flocks of sea fowls, whose cry sounded in their ears,
as they phrased it, `come to the waters.'
In truth they saw, as they advanced, first single
tufts of green grass in the sand; next tall weeds and
flowers, and soon the continued green sward, which
indicated the vicinity of water. At nine in the
morning
,
a cool elastic breeze arose from the direction of
the mountains, bringing life, and elasticity on its wings.
The mists seemed to be rolled up, as if they were
immense folds of crimson, moving gradually down the
plains. The blue of the sky showed; and the sun
came forth. The Missouri, with its skirt of trees,
and its bosom indicated by the steaming ascent of
white mist, showed in its meanders up and down the
plain, as far as the eye could reach. The horses and
asses and dogs all raised their peculiar notes of joy;
and in a few moments the whole mass of life was
quaffing the nectar of the stream.
The Indians returned thanks to the Master of Life;
and William Weldon's family and friends in solemn
thanksgivings, as usual, ascribed all to the God of
Israel. The tents were pitched; and the hunters,
with renovated strength and cheerfulness, shortly
after
supplied the camp with fresh game. They found
themselves once more surrounded by ranges of
buffaloes
;
and the sport was resumed, with as much
reckless
excitement and hilarity, as though, a few hours
before, the thought of every one had not been the
immediate
and appalling apprehension of the dreadful
death of thirst.
Such success attended the hunting here, that in a
short time, as many buffaloes had been slain, as were
necessary to furnish skins, sinew, fat, tongues, and
jerked flesh, to as great an amount, as they deemed,
they had any means of conveying back over the
mountains
.
To hunt further, would be for destruction,
and not for use; a clear violation of the simple, but
righteous morality of the red men. Besides, in
many
other hearts, beside Jessy's, arose the dear
associations
,
that excite the desire of homeof a country,
identified with all that charms in the morning of life,
so sheltered, so delightful, so cherished, in
comparison
of these unsheltered and illimitable prairies,
mocking the eye with a level carpet of grass and
flowers, without wood or water; and tempting the
traveller, for a straighter direction, to plunge into
sandy deserts of scorching aridity, where myriads
might perish, and no accident again throw a
wandering
traveller upon the discovery of their bones.
Their last evening of eastward advance on the
plains had been spent; and the next morning, like
the primeval march of patriarchal tribes on the plains
of Mamre, the Shoshonee, with all their plunder, and
the proceeds of their hunt, were moving up the banks
of the Missouri, determined not to be again enticed,
for a straighter direction, to desert its course,
however
sinuous and indirect. Again they reached their
first camp, and released their kine, that manifested
the clearest marks of welcome to their well known
masters.
Their return over the mountains was with a far
greater number of horses and mules, than they had
brought; and every thing, that could bear burdens,
was loaded to the utmost extent of its powers of
marching
under its load. It was now high summer, and
the influence of July was seen in every sheltered dell
on their way. In points of elevation as high as the
common flights of the clouds, there were scooped out
strange basins of black soil, of verdure, of mountain
cedars, of the most splendid alpine plants, unfolding
in the pure and elemental air, foliage and flowers of
a brightness and ambrosial aroma, never to be found
in the less pure and oxygenated atmosphere of the
common level. In these basins pure springs gurgled.
The fire-flies gilded the foliage by night. Bats
fluttered
athwart their narrow space. In the morning
there was seen the strange form and the uncouth
wildness
of the mountain sheep, bounding on the high
cliffs; and the petal of almost every flower was borne
down by the incessant flapping of the hum-bird's
wing.
Encamped in a valley of this sort, and near the
summit of the central ridge, Frederic was gratified
with a spectacle, which was novel; and which he had
often expressed a strong desire to beholda thunder
storm in the mountains; a spectacle of such grandeur,
that whoever has not seen it, has one scene of interest
yet to desire below the sun. It is seldom, that these
magnificent atmospheric phenomena find their way
to these empyrean heights, and this cool, pure air.
When the magazines of thunder are put in operation
in these upper regions, their display is magnificent,
in proportion to its unfrequency.
It was midnight, when they were aroused from
their slumbers by such repeated bursts of thunder, as
seemed a general explosion of the artillery of the
skies. The sleepers in Ellswatta's tent awakened, and
arose, and looked forth into the dark sky, every
moment
brightened by the vivid glare of lightning. Then
might be seen the ancient cedars twisting in the wind,
or yielding their branches, as the lightning streamed
down their trunks. Then might be seen, in
indescribable
majesty, the black peaks far above them, lifted
by the evanescent glare to full and high perspective,
from the chaos into which they sunk the moment after.
The whole party sat, awe-struck, in contemplation.
`It is the dread voice of God,' said Elder Wood. `The
Wahcondah is mighty in his wrath,' responded
Ellswatta
.
`It is too full of terror,' said Jessy, as she made
her way between her father and Elder Wood. `Fear
not, Wakona,' said Areskoui, interposing his form
between
4*
her and the glare of lightning, that flashed in at
the tent door. Frederic repeated the verses of the
noble poet.
`The sky is changed! And such a change! Oh night,
And storm and darkness, ye are wond'rous strong;
Yet lovely in your strength, as is the light
Of a dark eye in woman! Far along
From peak to peak, the rattling crags among
Leaps the live thunder! Not from one lone cloud,
But every mountain now hath found a tongue;
And Jura answers through her misty shroud,
Back to the joyous Alps, who call to her aloud.
`And this is in the night! Most glorious night!
Thou wert not sent for slumber! Let me be
A sharer in thy fierce and far delight,
A portion of the tempest and of thee!
How the lit vale shines, as a bright phosphoric sea,
And the big rain comes dancing to the earth!
And now again 'tis black; and now the glee
Of the big hills shakes with its mountain mirth,
As if they did rejoice o'er a young earthquake's birth.'
Nothing of interest, to find a place in these annals,
occurred in their laborious crossing of the mountains.
The young chief and Frederic, as in the outward
traverse
sought, it may be presumed, rather than
avoided
occasions to aid Jessy when wearied and
exhausted
;
and the mothers, by gay chiding, reminded the
young men that the same offices were equally due
to them, though neither young nor beautiful. As
before, there was frolic and laughter, and keen
hunger
,
and fatigue, and some painful falls, and some
pleasant
conversations amidst the mountains over the
fragrant
steam of the coffee and venison. They had
labored
up the last eminence, and the crySewasserna!
Sewasserna! home! home! arose; and the return
Indian
song swelled loud at the sight. `There is the
vale. There the wild fowl. There the sweet stream;
and there our little ones, our wives, and the bones of
our forefathers.' The wild chorus cheowanna,
haw-haw-hum
,
as it swelled and died away among the
mountains, intonated with such tender and natural
sentiments, sounded pleasantly even in the ear of
Jessy
.
The little secluded pond still retained their
periogues
,
and the relief and the change from the
incessant
fatigue of clambering up precipices and
mountains
,
to the luxurious repose of reclining in a
periogue
,
as the current gently wafted it down the
stream, completely screened from the sun by
over-shadowing
trees, was delightful.
They arrived at the towns, on a pleasant summer's
sunset. Every thing seemed, at a distance, as when
they left it. The wind still breezed in the pines, and
the smokes still streamed from the habitations. `How
charming,' cried Jessy, embracing her mother, `to
return
once more to the natal spot.' By this time, every
individual of the two nations, left behind, that could
move, had met the returning triumphal procession. A
few mothers and wives raised the death-wail, amidst
the general shout of welcome and joy, mourning for
their dead sons and husbands. `See,' cried Elder
Wood, `how nearly sorrow is found to joy, in all that
pertains to earth.' The drums beat, and the two
nations
formed one grand triumphal procession to the
council house. There the council-fire was kindled.
Ellswatta, in simple, but strong and expressive phrase,
related the events of the expedition; the ample
vengeance
they had taken of their enemies, and the
number
they had slain of them; and as he mentioned the
names of his own warriors, that had fallen, the lament
of the wives, mothers and relatives was renewed. In
sympathy, the chiefs smoked in silence; and waited,
till the burst of their grief had subsided. `They are
gone,' said the chief. `They have descended to the
sunless valley. But their spirits departed in the joy
of victory, and surrounded with the brightness of
glory
.
Mothers ought not to wail for their sons that
have fallen gloriously.' Then the exploits of those
warriors, who had gained distinction, were recounted;
and as they rose at the calling of their names, the eyes
of their relatives glistened; and the shouts of applause
showed how greedy the red people were of glory.
How glad was the heart of Jessy, when all this
noisy ceremonial was finished; and when the course
of former things was quietly resumed in this valley.
Those, left in care of the charming grounds around
her father's dwelling, had diligently heeded their
charge; and the plants, flowers and fruits, left in
the springing freshness of May, were now nurtured
to the luxuriance, maturity and promise of August.
A day's overlooking and care restored every thing,
within and without, to its wonted order. Again she
visited her bower, shivering, indeed, at the
recollections
inspired by the place, but entering once more
with full heart into the pleasure of contemplating the
calm and lovely nature before her. Again Elder
Wood, with undiminished earnestness and solemnity,
resumed his missionary duties, relating the wonders
and deliverances of his covenant God in their recent
expedition. Again Frederic and Areskoui failed not
to share in the pleasures of the evening circle at
William
Weldon's. The captive Black-feet women had
all quietly fallen into the niches, assigned to them by
immemorial Shoshonee usage.
In the presence and training of Katrina, Jessy
found a new source of amusement and satisfaction, of
a high and even generous kind. Her shining black
locks, clubbed after the Indian fashion, were trained
to float in luxuriant curls upon her neck. The smoke
and dust, inwrought into her skin in the Black-feet
wigwams, had been gradually washed away. Yensi
and Jessy clothed her gracefully in the European
fashion. A fine, smooth, clear olive complection
returned
to her cheek. Her new and plentiful diet had
a visibly transforming effect to the same issue.
Graceful manners and a higher example, as a
standard
of thought and action, opened a new world, to
inspire
different aims and a nobler purpose. In a short
period of training, she began to emerge not only
graceful, in native elegance of form and movement,
but Yensi and Josepha pronounced her beautiful;
while, to the heart of Jessy, the forming, and training
this interesting girl, not only opened a new
employment
,
yielding self complacency in the exercise,
but the circumstances, under which she was acquired,
and, unconsciously, the person, from whom she was
acquired, rendered her dear as a child, or a sister.
Every day disclosed new intelligence, worth and grace
in the protege; and, when put to her first lessons, her
quickness of apprehension outran the indications of
her teacher. Both Frederic and Areskoui
complained
,
that this new pursuit of teaching the favorite
Katrina
,
robbed them of many of those happy hours,
which had formerly been shared with them. `
Certainly
,'
replied Jessy, `you are neither of you persons,
to speak slightly of the pleasure of doing our duty.
For me, I never was, and I have no idea, that I can
be more happy, than in teaching this dear girl,
tending
my flowers, receiving and reciprocating the smiles
of my parents, economizing the pleasure of
intercourse
with you, my good friends, and holding
communion
with my Maker. Would, that I were sure
of being always, as now, while I live.'
It scarcely needed the gift of prophecy, to foretell,
that these times of joy and tranquility were not to
last. Baptiste had accompanied a Shienne
expedition
down to Astoria; and there were whispers, that
Nelesho and his tribe were resuming their treasonable
purposes. He was once more observed in ominous
communion with Hatch; and parties came and went
between Astoria and the valley, as though a mail had
been established. Areskoui, too, no longer excited
by the arousing anticipations of a command and an
expedition, no longer meeting Jessy, except in the
regulated intercourse of ceremony, and then always
seeing her with one, in whose esteem, he was fearful,
she must continually have an increasing interest,
again became sad. His vivacity vanished. His father
and mother again alternately pitied, chided, and
encouraged
him; and his growing and marked dejection
once more awakened the painful sympathy and fears
of Jessy.
Pentanona, or the Eaglet, had commanded the
united
nation, during the absence of the young chief on
the recent expedition. Pentanona was his totem, or
sworn brother; and they were mutually and
indissolubly
attached. He was charged by Ellswatta, to
bring his son to confession, touching the renewal of a
depression, which seemed to have disappeared
during
the late tour, and to urge motives, if he might, to
arouse him from his marked and growing
despondency
,
by operating upon his pride and his shame.
Pentanona
found his opportunity, and accosted him, `why
art thou gloomy and sad, brother of my heart, my
chief? Knowest thou not, that the black hearted and
accursed Nelesho is raising an interest, adverse to
thy succeeding to the chieftainship? That he speaks
tauntingly, and deridingly of thee, as a pale face, a
woman, a sick, and weak girl, unfit to govern a nation
of braves?' `All this I know, brother, and what then?'
`Why, I cannot but allow, that thou seemest sad, and
growest thin, and wantest something of that spirit,
which ought to swell the bosom of a chief. Brother
of my heart, dost thou succeed in gaining the love of
Wakona?' `No, Pentanona, no. Thou knowest well
the source of my sorrows. Thou knowest, that the
inexorable Master of Life has determined, that she
can never be mine. The Wahcondah has fixed our
destiny from our birth. Mine is to consume away,
and shame myself and my nation in this hopeless
passion
.'
`Areskoui, hearken to the brother of thy heart.
Thou hast forgotten thyself. Wilt thou see Nelesho
triumph; and degrade thyself to settle down under his
authority in quiet submission?' The eye of Areskoui
flashed. `Hold, Pentanona,' he cried, `I will not
allow
thee such language.'
`Areskoui, I will speak my mind plainly; and tell
thee the thing, that is, in the truth of real friendship,
and thou mayest shut thine ears, if thou wilt. It
makes an old woman even of me, to see thy head droop,
and thine eye quail. In a short time thou wilt cause
all the Shoshonee to feel shame in the presence of the
Shienne, in the same way. Rumors floatagainst thee
among that bad people. There are not wanting those,
who say the thing, that is not, among thine own
people
.
Nelesho, the while, looks more proudly, walks
more crect; and at every meeting of the warriors, he
exerts more the spirit of a chief. Oh! brother of my
heart, hear the truth. The buz of the nation is like
that of bees, when you strike the hatchet against the
hollow tree, where they dwell. Brother, my chief,
by the Master of Life I conjure thee rise above the
weakness of the medicine spell of Wakona. Yes, I
grant you, there is a fair skin, fine curls, a bright eye.
But what then? Shall my chief be the slave of things,
like these? She ought to love thee, and be proud to
do it. But thou knowest, that love is settled by the
Master of Life. After all, how soon will Wakona be
as another woman? Does not thy white medicine man
say, that love is a disease, a madness, a folly.'
`Yes,' answered Areskoui, with some bitterness.
`he says all that, and loved the Song Sparrow as
foolishly
,
and as madly, as I love Wakona. Ah!
Pentanona
,
it is easy to talk, as thou talkest; but hard to
suffer, as I suffer.' `After all,' he replied, `the skin
only is beautiful; and thou doest shame to thy people,
in loving the white more than the red. Who are
best, the daughters of the red, or the pale people?
Let the two wives of Hatch answer. Who can best
bring water, cook venison, and grind the maize? Who
loves, and follows most faithfully the husband and the
children? Will not Wakona's beauty soon fade; and
when old, will she not look still uglier, than an old
red woman? Below the skin, one is as fair as the
other, even now. Fie! brother! Offer her thy love.
If she accept it, good. If not, drive the accursed,
bewitching
race from thy nation. Raise a wall to the
heavens at the entrance of our valley against them,
and let them all go, and dwell in the midst of their
own people. Send away this Wakona. She hath
been in the very abode of the little mischievous white
men, and witchery is in her eye. Seest thou not,
that the pale faced young man is spell bound, and lost
to manhood in the same way, as thou art? They tell
me, that thine eyes shone, like those of the Manitou,
when thou lately assailedst the Blackfoot. Would,
that spirit might abide with thee! Areskoui, I honor
thee, as the Wahcondah. I cannot endure to see
thee bowed down, and to hear thy soft and maiden
toned voice. The Master of Life send the
Black-feet
into our valley, and make thee a man again.'
`Ah! Pentanona, I know, that thou speakest
bitterly
in love; else I would rebuke thee. Sayest thou,
that the spell of Wakona is in the fairness of her skin?
Ah! if it were only beauty, Areskoui could conquer
that, were she fairer than the daughters of the sun.
But, Pentanona, it is neither the fair skin, nor the
form, nor the curls, nor the eye of Wakona. Ah!
seest thou not a divine something, which belongs to
none of the daughters of the red people? It is the
noble spirit, that flashes in the eye. It is the heaven,
that I seem to behold beyond; as I see the trees and
the sky painted in the depths of the blue lake.
Pentanona
,
thou hast given friendly counsels; but it is on
a point, which thou dost not and canst not
understand
.
I would have fled from this spell, when I
found the poison burning in my bosom at first. It
might then have availed to my cure. But my resolve
was too late. Thinkest thou, that I have not
struggled
with the sorcery? Ah! then thou little knowest
thy chief. Alas! thou understandest not, that my
veins are half filled with the blood of the pale face.
The Master of Life has so formed me, that, asleep or
awake, her image pursues me, like my shadow. My
heart declares, that she is as much wiser, kinder, and
better, than the rest, as she is fairer. Who has not
heard, that she ministers to all in distress, like the
Master of Life! Thou canst say nothing to me, that
I have not thought a hundred times. Pentanona, do
not vex me, by thy well intended but officious
counsels
.
I should love on, if my people, and this whole
world were in one scale, and Wakona in the other.
It is the will of the Master of Life. We may not
fight with our destiny. It were far better,
Pentanona
,
if thou wouldst instruct me, how to win her love
in return. But my thoughts incessantly say,
Areskoui
,
she can never belong to thee. Thou art a wild,
red man; and the red bird might as well wed with
the eagle. Teach my bosom not to burn, when I see
the mysterious looks of tenderness, which she casts
by stealth on the pale face, who, like me, loves, and
despairs, and dreams not, that she returns his
tenderness
.
Wakona is kind, and has compassion upon me;
and, perhaps, knows not herself the wishes of her
own heart. Pentanona, there is no resource for me,
but to die; none but to go to that unknown country,
of which Elder Wood preaches to us. Pentanona,
his deep words strangely move my heart. I feel
shame, as I perceive tears moistening my eyes. The
Master of Life could not have formed us merely for
VOL. II. 5
disappointment and sorrow. When I see, what there
is on the brow and in the eye of Wakona, surely
there must be that happy country, after death, of
which the medicine man speaks to us. I wake only
to imagine plans, in which to win her favor. I dream,
to fancy myself of the race of the pale face,
powerful
,
wise, beautiful, and altogether such, as could not
but charm Wakona. I have imagined every
conceivable
project, to reach her affections; and end by the sad
conviction of sinking back into myself, and realizing,
that the Wahcondah has rendered every thing
unchanging
.
My better judgment tells me, that there
is no device, no charm, no medicine of potency, to
give the wild red man, noble though he may be, a
place in the thoughts of Wakona, so long as the fair
brow of the pale face is beside him. My heart
acknowledges
,
at the same time, that he is good, and
true, and every way worthy of her. Why should she
not prefer such a son of her own people? Areskoui,
there is nothing for thee, but to die. Ah! but for
my parents, how soon would I be at rest!'
On the other hand, Frederic had his jealousies, his
persuasions, that the eye of Jessy was averted from
him, and turned with favor upon the young chief.
`And upon what do you build this presumption?'
asked
Elder Wood, as he heard him express this
opinion
.
`Upon the facts,' he replied, `that since her
return
from the expedition, she has uniformly conducted
towards me with distance and coldness. I could
almost
have sworn at times, when I bore her in my
arms down the cliffs of the mountains, and saw her eyes
averted from mine, with a peculiar expression, that
she returned my love. The illusion is all banished.
The other day, as the subject of removal to society
was discussed, she assured me, that even were there
no other impediments, the idea of renouncing forever
the society of Ellswatta's family would be a source of
bitter regret to her.'
`And is it for this, Frederic, that your cheek glows,
and your eyes flash, and you almost speak of the
maiden with temper? Ah! you will convince me,
that Areskoui is the nobler of the two; for with far
better reason, he never speaks of her, or of you, in
this way.'
`Indeed, Elder Wood, I am aware, that he is the
nobler of the two; and hence my shame and grief;
hence the torturing conviction, that he most deserves
her.'
`Ah! Frederic, you convince me, that all young
men are alike fools and unjust. Here have I been
wishing, and praying, and managing my enginery, to
place such motives before this girl, as would induce
her to regard with favor, and marry my catechumen,
that her influence might influence him, to the
civilization
and christianization of the people; and that I
might act upon both, as the instrument of converting
them to Christianity, and through them the whole
nation
.
God only knows, what day dreams I have had
upon this subject. But she loves him not. She
never
will love him. Without believing in fate, I
believe
that. He is gloomy. Love and despair are
maddening his brain. I might as well, in his present
frame of mind, preach to the wild winds and waves of
the sea. He meditates suicide. Oh God! what a
world is this! What a volcano of passions is forever
kindling the fires of wrath and ruin in the human
bosom
!
All my schemes are blown to the winds; and I,
in my sorrow and disappointment, of age and gray
hairs, have the poor consolation, to see the noble
young chief wasting away, like the winter ice in the
suns of spring; to realize that my fond scheme of
converting
the Indians was more than half reared on my
own pride; and that, had I achieved the good work,
instead of giving all the glory to God, I should have
walked amidst my air-castles of pride, and said, `is
not this great Babylon, which I have built?' Last of
all, here are you, Frederic, whom I had begun to
love, as a son, jealous of the noble young chief,
himself
the victim of love and despair; and speaking with
temper of Jessy Weldon, of whom it is only common
justice to say, that closely as I have watched her,
intently
as I have studied her, I have never detected
in her a censurable word or action, or, apparently, an
improper thought. To increase the gloom of my
thoughts, I am convinced, you may say it is
superstitious
,
but I am forewarned, that Hatch and Baptiste
and Nelesho, and, perhaps enemies at Astoria, are
meditating some black and tragic purpose, in respect
to us. Intimations have come to my dreams, that
trouble and darkness are at hand, and that the
guardian
angels of those I love in this vale, where I have
been so happy, and I hope I may humbly say, not
useless, have been heard whispering, as in the city of
God's chosen people, `let us go hence. Let us go
hence.' Of one thing let me assure you. If Jessy
Weldon could love any one, it would be you; and this
ought to satisfy you. With all, that charms in frail
woman, there is in her the wisdom, the
disinterestedness
of angelic nature. She sees, and pities the
sufferings
of the young chief. She understands his
character
,
and righteously estimates his worth. She has
been with him from a child. A feeling towards him,
warmer than friendship, and yet not love, colors all
her views, motives and conduct, in reference to him.
Even were she firmly and indissolubly attached to
you, she would never inflict on her brother, as she
calls him, the torture, of declaring such a preference.
There you have the whole clue to her conduct.'
`And you have convinced me,' cried the young man,
grasping his hand, `that every body is noble, but
myself
.
You have cured me. But you shall see, how
differently I will conduct in future.'
CHAPTER X.
Farewell; and may you still in peace repose,
Still o'er you may the flowers untrodden bloom,
And gently wave to every wind that blows,
Breathing their fragrance o'er each lowly tomb.
M. P. F.
The
union of the Shoshonee and Shienne had long
been suspended on points so nearly balanced, that the
slightest circumstance was sufficient to turn the scale.
A single spark was enough to create an explosion.
An elk of unusual size passed down the vale, and drew
out all the hunters of the nation in the pursuit. The
honor of the tribes became involved in the question,
who of them should bring the animal down. It
afterwards
involved a deeper dispute, whether a
Shienne
or Shoshonee had inflicted the fatal shot. The
event occurred on the autumnal maize feast, when
both parties had been drinking. A crowd gathered
about the fallen animal. Loud altercation and fierce
words ensued. The quarrel soon grew to blows; and
a perfect melee ensued, a most murderous and
vindictive
fight, in which the parties were too close to use
yagers, and availed themselves only of knives, dirks
and tomahawks. The loud yell of struggle, revenge
and death arose; and the blood of the tribes mingled
in rivulets. None can tell, how far the battle would
have extended, had not the shrieks of the children,
wives and mothers of the parties, apprized Ellswatta
and Areskoui, who happened not to be present. They
rallied all the disengaged and sober Shoshonee, for a
reserve; rushed upon the mass, and being fresh, and,
5*
as lookers on, capable of availing themselves of all
advantages
,
they directly turned the scale, separated
the combatants, and terminated the fray for the time.
Any one could see by the looks, and understand by
the words of either party, that this would not be the
end of the fray. The Shienne commenced the use
of the knife, and were more numerous than the
Shoshonee
.
Eight of the former had fallen, and nine of
the latter, a sanguinary and fatal issue of such a
quarrel. A few only were wounded; for such was
the envenomed rage of the combat, that each of the
slain had fallen pierced by numerous mortal thrusts.
While Ellswatta reasoned, expostulated, and
inflicted
blows, knocking down more than one
refractory
Indian, who wished to renew the fight, Areskoui
beckoned Nelesho aside. `Follow me, Shienne,' he
said, `far enough from this accursed fray, that it shall
want thy presence and countenance; and it will cease
of itself.' `Let them command, who have power to
enforce obedience,' fiercely rejoined the other. `I
have that power,' calmly replied the half breed chief,
`and, unless thou compliest, I will instantly shoot thee
on the spot.' Nelesho knew both the truth and spirit
of the chief; and instantly copying his self command,
doggedly followed him. The eyes of the combatants
were too intently turned upon Ellswatta and their
bleeding friends, to remark the retiring chiefs. They
were a considerable distance from the fray, before
their absence was perceived. A clump of pawpaws
screened them from observation; and they halted
behind
it. `What wouldst thou with me, half breed
Shoshonee,' fiercely cried Nelesho? `I would fain
ask of thee, Shienne, whether thou intendest rebellion
or not? Blood has flowed already; and more is like
to flow. Do not I know that thou, that thy hate and
intrigue, and that thy dark and brooding purpose is at
the bottom of the whole?' `Ah, babbler!' replied
the Shienne, `thou hast learned this war of words and
abuse from the pale face.' `Base and bad Shienne,'
retorted the chief, `thou art too vindictive, too much
of an old woman, to fight thyself; and thou urgest these
simple, honest, ignorant hunters, to spill each other's
blood, because thou hatest me. Thou hast in thee
the living spirit of the bad Maniton. Hearken,
Shienne
.
Thou whisperest, like a base coward, among
thy own people and the traitors of mine, that Wakona
hath medicined me, and that I am melted down to the
spirit of an old woman. Thus hast thou fostered a
contumacious, revengeful and bloody spirit between
the two people, encouraged by the hope of anarchy.
All yonder blood is of thy spilling. Hearken; to prove
to thee, that thou hast said the thing, that is not, and
that I am still, and will be thy liege chief, and a full
and sufficient man for thee, I here defy thee to single
and mortal combat. Here is my dirk. There is thine;
and the time is opportune. See, if I am an old
woman
.
Weak and melted down and medicined as I
may be, there is enough of me left for thee, base
Shienne
!'
Nelesho was as cunning, as he was vindictive; and
relied more on a secret, than an open revenge. He
paused a few moments, as if in deep mental
deliberation
.
Assuming then a coolness, as of perfect
self-possession
,
he advanced to the chief, with the
gesture
and the look of peace. `Chief,' he said, `thou
art in wrath; but thou hast spoken right words. Thou
knowest, that I value the lives of the red people as
much as thyself. I will not fight thee now, Areskoui;
and thou mayest put it to fear of thee, if thou wilt.
Thou knowest, that I hate thee. Does not Wakona
love thee; and will not I hate whatever she loves?
May the Master of Life grant, that the accursed pale
face may be her choice. Curse on that dastard pale
face. Julius, who babbled all my secrets to her. I
would love thee, and join hands, if thou wouldst
institute
a war of extermination of the accursed pale-face.
But I will not fight thee now. Let us return to our
people. Whatever rights of treaty thy father
claimeth
,
I will execute. This is a fray of drunkenness,
and not of my seeking, as thou sayest. One more of
thy people has fallen than mine. Let the balance of
retribution be settled by lot. Mayest thou not show
the old woman, as much, by letting forth the fury of
thy rage, as by flying the fight? I am calm, as thou
seest, and for peace. Let us return, and keep peace
between our people.' So saying, Nelesho turned, and
left him, walking back to his people.
Ellswatta had stayed the fight. The young chiefs
returned with inveterate, but composed indignation
in their countenances. A dead stillness pervaded
the crowd; while Areskoui whispered his father, and
Nelesho some of his confidential sub-chiefs. `Art thou
for war with us, Nelesho,' sternly asked Ellswatta;
`or wilt thou choose, that the blood of this quarrel be
enquired into in council.' `In council, chief,' replied
the Shienne, with dogged composure. While the
wives and mothers were washing the slain warriors,
and wailing their dirge, the council drums beat, and
the council was convoked in the council house. The
same men, who but a few moments before, had been
rushing upon each other, like exasperated demons,
now calmly took their places with murky tranquility
in the council house, most impressively demonstrating
the silent, but irresistible influence of Indian usage.
The circumstances of the recent bloody affray were
carefully scrutinized. Various warriors made
speeches
on the occasion; and among the rest, the plausible
orator Tutsaugee. His judgment was to bury the
horrible transaction in oblivion, calling up, as little as
might be, the babble, feuds, and hatreds of the two
tribes. `Blood has been shed,' said he. `But each
fallen warrior has a shade to accompany his spirit to
the sunless valley, save one. One Shoshonee shade
would go, mourning and alone to the land of souls;
and they would deride our people for sending down to
the sunless valley a Shoshonee, without a Shienne
for his companion. But, to find that companion in
this way of enquiring, would call up all the
circumstances
of the fight anew; and embitter a hundred
fold all the existing animosities. Let us resort to the
ancient way of our people. Let the Shienne spirit,
to accompany the slain Shoshonee, be settled by lot;
and then the Master of Life will determine.' This
counsel almost unanimously prevailed. The voices
of the nation being taken, a great majority, even
among the Shienne, were for the lot. Nelesho, in a
single remark, gave his voice to the same effect.
Three hundred rods, black, and of the same size
and dimensions, were immediately prepared,
corresponding
to the number of Shienne who acknowledged
themselves to have been at the affray. Among the
rods was a single white one. Whoever drew that
rod was to be offered up by a hatchet blow on the
head, to appease the spirit of the unavenged
Shoshonee
.
The eldest medicine man prayed to the
Wahcondah
,
to give a decision according to equity. The
drums beat. Each of the three hundred Shienne was
to be blindfolded, and in turn walk by the rods, draw
one, and pass on, until the doomed Shienne should
take the white rod. Fifty had already passed, when
an aged woman, a widow, who had crowded to the
fight in extreme anxiety for her only son, drew the
fatal white rod. The drawing was followed by a
general groan; for every one was aware, that no
dispositions
to join in the fight had mixed her with the
combatants. `It is thus,' murmured the fierce
warriors
,
`that the Master of Life rewards parental
affection
!'
Though the issue of this tragic transaction
may be viewed as an episode in these annals, it is
an impressive illustration of the energetic influence
of the unwritten laws of opinion, and prescription, and
immemorial usage among this interesting people.
This episode is given, as it was written in verse by
Frederic, who witnessed the impressive spectacle;
and on their subsequent voyage together, showed his
version to Jessy.
THE MARTYR SON.
In Sewasserna's greenest dell,
Beside its clear and winding stream,
The Shoshonee at evening tell
A tale of truth, that well might seem
A poet's wild and baseless dream,
If many an eye, that saw the sight,
Were not as yet undimm'd and bright,
And many an ear, that heard it all,
Still startled by the sear leaf's fall.
For years the tribe had dwelt in peace,
Amidst the free and full increase,
That Nature in luxuriance yields,
From their almost uncultur'd fields;
Without one scene of passing strife,
To mar their peaceful village life.
The buried hatchet cased in rust,
Had almost moulder'd into dust;
And o'er the spot, where it was laid,
The peace-tree threw a broadening shade,
On whose green turf the Warriors met,
And smok'd the circling calumet.
At length Discord, the Fury, came,
Waving her murd'rous torch of flame,
And kindled that intestine fire,
In which the virtues all expire;
Which like the lightning-flame, burns on
More fierce, for being rained upon
By showers of tears, which vainly drench
A fire, that blood alone can quench.
Two chieftain brothers met in pride;
While kindred warr'd on either side,
And kindred hands, that clasp'd before,
Were deeply dyed in kindred gore.
How many fought; how many fell;
It boots not now to pause, and tell:
Besides, that tale may be another's
I never lov'd the strife of brothers.
On a smooth plain, of living green,
Their mingled monuments are seen,
In turf-crown'd hillocks, circling round
The fallen chieftain's central mound;
And yearly on that fatal plain
Their kindred meet and mourn the slain,
Wat'ring their humble graves anew,
With fond affection's hallow'd dew.
When time and truce at length subdued
The fierceness of that fatal feud,
The Chieftain sent his council call,
And every Warrior sought the hall,
To smoke the pipe, and chase away
The memory of that fatal fray.
But Justice claims another life
Another victim to that strife;
And her stern law must not be changed.
One Warrior slumbers unreveng'd.
Some one must die; for life alone
Can for another life atone.
It was at length agreed, to take
A victim for atonement's sake,
By lot, from those against whom lay
The fearful balance of that day.
The solemn trial now had come,
And, slowly, to the measur'd drum,
March, one by one, the victim band,
To where two aged Warriors stand
Beside a vase, whose ample womb
Contains the fatal lot of doom.
That fatal rod, prepared with care,
Lies with three hundred others there;
And each in turn, his fate must try
With beating heart and blindfold eye.
Woe to the hand, that lifts it high!
The owner of that hand must die.
Could I in words of power indite,
I would in thrilling verse recite,
How many came, and tried, and past,
Ere the dread lot was drawn at last,
By a lone widow, whose last son
Follow'd her steps, and saw it done.
I would, in magic strains essay
To paint the passions in their play,
And all their deep wrought movements trace.
Upon that son's and mother's face.
Yes,I would picture even now,
The paleness of her care-worn brow,
The tearless marble of her cheek,
The tender voice, that cried, though weak,
In tones, that seem'd almost of joy,
`At least it is not thine, my boy!'
I would describe his frantic cry,
When the dark symbol caught his eye;
The look of fixt and settled gloom,
With which he heard the fatal doom;
And the flush'd cheek and kindling glance,
Which from the high and holy trance
Of filial inspiration, caught
The brightness of his glorious thought,
When through their circling ranks he prest,
And thus the wondering crowd addrest:
`Hear me, ye Warriors. I am young;
But feelings, such as prompt my tongue,
Might, even to a child, impart
That living language of the heart,
Which needs no rules, of age, nor art,
To recommend its warm appeal
To every bosom, that can feel.
Oh! let my grief-worn mother live,
And for her life, I'll freely give
This life of mine, whose youthful prime
Is yet unworn by toil or time.
An offering, such as this, will please
The ghost, whose manes ye would appease,
More, than the last few days of one,
Whose course on earth is almost run.
Her aged head is gray with years;
Her cheeks are channel'd deep with tears;
While every lock is raven, now,
Upon my smooth unfurrow'd brow,
And, in my veins, the purple flood
Of my brave father's warrior blood
Is swelling, in the deep, full tide
Of youthful strength and youthful pride.
Her trembling steps can scarce explore
The paths, she trod so light of yore;
While I can match the wild deer's flight,
On level plain, or mountain height,
And chase, untired, from day to day,
The flying bison, on their way.
`Oh! ye are sons, and once were prest
In fondness to a mother's breast.
Think of her soft voice, that carest;
Her arms, where ye were lull'd to rest;
Her quivering kiss, that was imprest
So fondly on your sicken'd brow;
Oh! think of these, and tell me, now,
If ye, as sons, can here deny
A son the privilege to die
For her, who thus wak'd, watch'd, and wept,
While in her cradling arms he slept.
Ye cannot. No,there is not one,
That can refuse the victim son.
Warriors, the young man's talk is done.'
Th' approving shout, that burst aloud
From all that wild, untutor'd crowd,
Was proof, that even they, the rude,
Free dwellers of the solitude,
Had hearts, that inly thrill'd to view
The meed to filial virtue due.
I will not waste my time, nor oil,
Upon a scene, that I should spoil;
Nor labor to describe that pair,
Striving in fond contention there,
The darling son, and cherished mother,
Who should die to save the other.
Ere long, there was a gathered throng,
Whence rose a wild and solemn song,
The death-song of that martyr son;
And thus his plaintive descant run:
`I fear not the silence, nor gloom of the grave;
'Tis a pathway of shade and gay flowers to the Brave,
For it leads him to plains, where the gleams of the sun
Kindle spring in their path, that will never be done.
`Groves, valleys and mountains, bright streamlet and dell,
Sweet haunts of my youth, take my parting farewell;
Ye Braves of my kindred, and thou, Mother, adieu;
Great shades of my Fathers, I hasten to you.'
He fell. The verdant mound that prest
Upon his young, heroic breast,
By warrior hands was rear'd and drest.
The mother, too, ere the rude breeze
Of Winter's wind had stripp'd the trees,
Had bow'd her head in grief, and died,
And there she slumbers at his side.
Hard by the village, on the shore,
Their mounds are seen, all studded o'er
With various wild flowers, by the care
Of sons and mothers, planted there;
And, to this day, they tell their tale,
In Sewasserna's dark green vale.
VOL. II. 6
The vengeance of Nelesho, not yet fully matured,
was gathering venom and consistency in secret,
through this whole winter. Again the storms
poured
,
and the sleet and snow drave down the valley.
Again the evening passed cheerfully in the dwelling
of William Weldon. Again Areskoui sat, and
listened
in silent sadness, as the song and the tale and
the delightful conversation pervaded the circle,
assembled
round the domestic hearth. Jessy would
have pronounced it the happiest winter that had yet
passed over her head, but for the increasing gloom of
the young chief, and a dejection, amounting at times
to visible illness, which manifestly preyed scarcely
less deeply on the bosoms of his parents. In the
docile
and charming Katrina she had found not only a
pupil who met all her instructions, but a companion,
who loved her with all the affection of a sister, and
reverenced, and listened to her, as a superior being,
with unlimited respect and devotedness.
`Why might not Katrina wed the chief?' one day
asked Frederic, blushing deeply. The thought
flashed
,
like a ray of light, across her mind. `It is the
very thing,' she answered. `The child has been
brought up among the Indians. She has not an
association
with the white race, except such, as she has
recently
formed among us. I thank you, Frederic, for
the hint. She is young, docile, intelligent, beautiful
and good.' From that time, she exerted all honest
management, to inspire a mutual affection between
them. To her pupil she uttered her own true and
inmost thoughts concerning the worth, honor, and
nobleness of the young chief; and to him she showed
off the charms, and the intelligence and amiability of
the blooming Spanish girl. The heart of Katrina
was full of tenderness, and she soon began to tremble
at her own success. `When you speak of him with
so much warmth, and in such high praise,' asked
Katrina
,
`do you not love him yourself? Would I win
him from my dear sister, if I might? Is it thus, that
you estimate the tenderness and truth of your
Katrina
?
Beside, I am both too young, and utterly
unworthy
to wed so great and noble a chief.' `For the first,
Katrina,' replied Jessy, smiling, `it is a defect, of
which you are curing every day; and I much mistake,
if the heart of my Katrina says, that she is too young.
Make yourself perfectly easy on my account. Be
assured, that nothing would give me so much
pleasure
,
as to see you wife of the chief; and my dear
Katrina,' she added, kissing both her cheeks, `the
girl, that I love, is not unworthy of Areskoui.' It
was easy to inspire in the artless and ardent bosom of
the Spanish orphan, who would have loved
whomsoever
her adopted sister recommended to her, an
evanescent
,
but strong liking for the chief; but all her
management was utterly lost on the other party.
Sometimes the chief seemed to be conscious of the
wishes of Jessy, as she played with the glossy curls of
her protege; for he impatiently arose, and left her,
murmuring to himself, as he went, `it is cruel in
Wakona
,
not only to shut her own heart against me, but
to attempt to engage that worn heart for another.'
The fatal effects of the influence of money, avarice,
intemperance and the general bearings of the
cupidity
of the whites upon the untrained and lawless
nature
of the red men, were becoming every day more
conspicuous. Hatch had grown to be rich, and
replaced
his exhausted stores of spirits with wicked
activity
.
About his store the brutified and drunken
Indians
were continually congregated, and wallowing.
There were drunkenness and low debauchery, and
gambling; and the horses and peltries and furs and
salmon and disposables of the Indians, went for a
song; and every time the unfortunate beings were
cheated, he acquired more capital, and accumulated
power to cheat them again, and to accelerate their
ruin. A fixed dislike existed between him and
Ellswatta
;
for neither he or his son ever tasted spirits;
and they were the persevering heads of a temperate
party, opposers of the introduction of ardent spirits in
every form. His remonstrances and example,
together
with the preaching of Elder Wood, had
hitherto
restrained drunkenness to certain bounds; and
stayed the plague to a degree among the Shoshonee.
But every convert to ardent spirits went over to the
standard of Nelesho; and became refractory, and a
partizan against his chief. Many a sad conversation
had Ellswatta with Elder Wood upon the subject.
`The accursed medicine drink,' said the hoary chief,
`will destroy my nation.' Elder Wood mourned in
concert, declaring, `that the influence was still more
fatal to all his purposes; and that he was painfully
admonished, that the detestable church of Hatch
received
,
and was like to receive, much more
numerous
converts than his.' But no plan, that they could
devise, promised to strike at the root of the mischief,
except to expel Hatch from the nation, and interdict
all intercourse with Astoria. Indeed Elder Wood
warned the chief, that unless decisive measures of
that sort were taken, to prevent the growing evil, it
would soon be too late. From the frequent journies,
back and forward, of Baptiste, from his ample and
unwonted supply of money; and more than all, from
the mysterious intelligence which appeared to exist
between Nelesho and Astoria, he was satisfied some
dark and fatal plot was in agitation. `Be it so,' said
the hoary chief. `My joints are becoming stiff; and
the blood creeps slowly in my veins; and Areskoui,
who was once as the sun in his brightness, and as the
bald eagle in his courses on the mountain tops, has
become sad and discouraged. Alas! I fear, the
Master
of Life has destined me to see much sorrow, before
I go down to the sunless valley. Ask the
Wahcondah
of the pale face to aid me; for I am in perplexity
and sorrow; and know not which way to turn for
light.'
The sweet Spring came once more from the south
sea, renewing the deep music of the unchained
mountain
torrents,
`Leaving her robe on the trees and her breath on the gale;'
and Jessy, as she once more saw nature in verdure
and blossoms, felt the delicious reverie of the season,
as she respired the balmy air, and heard the
croaking
of the numberless dwellers in the water; and the
more cheerful songs of the tenants of the air, the plains
and forests. A dark presentiment, as she afterwards
mentioned, continually dwelt on her mind. `Alas!'
she sighed to herself, `it is my last happy spring;' and
she more than once declared to Frederic, `that she
felt a kind of internal upbraiding, when she relaxed
her mind to the cheerfulness of the season, and the
gaiety of health and youth.'
It was a most charming Spring afternoon, when the
red bud and the cornel were just beginning to be in
full blossom, when this conversation took place.
Frederic remarked, with unwonted vivacity, `that he
had not supposed such a mind, as hers, could suffer
from superstitious credulity in presentiment.' He
observed with extreme pain, that her eyes filled with
tears. Ellswatta and his son, and Elder Wood, with
a select party of Shoshonee, had been absent some
time up the Sewasserna, on an expedition to trap the
last Spring beaver. The Shienne had determined,
in council, to hunt this season by themselves, on the
plains of the Missouri. Preparatory for this
expedition
,
they had been down to Astoria, to procure the
requisite supplies. They came back with Nelesho at
their head; having been abusive and cruel on the
way to the lower Shoshonee out settlers. Arrived
6*
at the store of Hatch, probably by design, they were
furnished with a sufficiency of rum to create half
intoxication
,
and inspire a maddening appetite for more.
They loudly called on him to furnish it. The Trader
insisted, that he had none; and made a semblance of
rating them for their quarrelsome and drunken
deportment
.
`Give us rum,' said they, `or we will
enter
your cellar, and burst your barrels.' Apparently
to get rid of them, he told them to `go to William
Weldon's, for that he had whole pipes of brandy and
wine stored in his house.' `What, the hater of rum,
the supporter of the medicine man, the great friend
of our tyrant, he sup brandy in secret, like a red man!'
`Certainly,' cried Nelesho, `he has more money and
more brandy, than all the rest of the nation together.'
`It is a good time,' they shouted, `to empty some of
his casks. Ellswatta and Areskoui and our
oppressors
are away. Let us to the house!' `Ay,' muttered
Nelesho to himself; `and now let the disdainful pale
face and her paramour beware of the little white men
of the mountains, and the sign of the Wahcondah at
the salmon fishery.' At the same time he said to
Baptiste, `if any harm comes of drinking the white
man's brandy, we will be over the mountains with
Wakona, before the return of the chief. If he comes
to attack us, we can fight him, or join ourselves to
the Black-feet. One master is as good as another.'
Away they all went, shouting, and whooping, and
yelling and following out the accursed plan, that had
been preconcerted for them. `Ah!' said Hatch to
Baptiste, as the rear of them cleared out from his
premises, `they will play hl with the old fellow and
his pretty daughter, and that dd Frederic, this
time. They are perfect infernals. An angel of God
could not save them. I wish the Kentuckian were
there too. I shall never have peace, or a free
running
trade, till the whole nest is smoked out. Look
you, Baptiste. Keep our counsels. Your own
bacon
depends on it, you know. The old devil is as
rich as a Jew. I will be his administrator, which, it
is three to one, will be an office called for in a couple
of hours. Who will cage the bird, Julius, or
Nelesho
?
Remember, Baptiste, if the affair goes wrong,
I scolded them, as drunkards, and bade them not go
near William Weldon's.' `Ah! sacre,' cried the
Canadian
,
`me dem sharp. Me know two ting. Me
put all straight;' and away he followed, like a
cowardly
wolf in the rear, to scent the carnage at a
distance
.
The grey of evening twilight had come; and
William
and Yensi, Frederic, Jessy and Katrina had just
sat down to their evening tea. The yells and shouts
and whoopings of the infuriated and drunken Shienne
were heard advancing upon the dwelling. `There
they come from Astoria,' cried Yensi. `Jessy and
Katrina, I bid you go into the other room, and fasten
the bolt.' `For God's sake,' said William Weldon,
`Frederic, have our arms in readiness; and bolt the
door. The chief promised me, he would be back two
days since. There is murder in their note. If we
cannot keep them out, we are undone.' The fearful
suspense was of but short duration. In a moment
the fore front of the mob was at the door, yelling for
admittance. What was the palpitation of the poor
young tremblers in the inner apartment, as they heard
the door burst open with a crash, and perceived, that
the apartment was full of savages, yelling for brandy.
`Oh Tien! Oh God!' cried Yensi, `this is what I have
so long dreaded. The fearful hour is come. My
dear William,' she continued, kissing both his cheeks,
`give them all they demand. It is our only chance.'
`What is that, she says?' cried Nelesho fiercely.
`Give it in our speech, old man. Where is thy
daughter
?'
At the same time a rush of Indians burst open
the inner door, and exposed the trembling girls to
view, both on their knees in prayer. By this time
William Weldon had handed bottles of wine to a
number of the savages, who were loudly singing the
war song, and swilling the wine. Nelesho poured a
quantity into a pitcher, and insisted, that Jessy should
pledge him. `Drink to me, Wakona,' he said, `after
the fashion of the pale face.' As she shrunk back
in faintness, he grasped her flowing curls. `
Remember
,'
said he, `the salmon fishery, and my curse!' At
the same time he began to drag her towards the door.
Frederic and William Weldon, almost at the same
moment, dealt him a blow with their yangers, which
nearly felled him. In an instant the fate of the
family
was sealed. Frederic was trodden under foot.
`Nelesho,' shrieked Jessy, `spare my parents; and do
with me what thou wilt! I implore thee by the
Master
of Life, only spare my parents!' She held up
her hands in the attitude of earnest and humble
enfreaty
.
But it availed not. A number of hatchets
fell at once upon the head of Yensi. The blood
streamed down her face. She grasped the extended
hand of her husband. `Dear William,' she said, `
rescue
Jessy.' `Yensi! Yensi!' he cried, `these are the
fiends, that I have madly loved, and trusted, as friends.
Forgive me, dear Yensi!' As he uttered these words,
holding his bleeding wife in his arms, a drunken
Shienne
fired a yager upon him, the ball of which passed
through the bodies of both, and they fell, embracing
each other in the strong grasp of spasm, and were still
in death. Frederic had arisen amidst the confusion,
had borne Jessy through the struggling crowd, that
had fortunately extinguished the lights, and had
extricated
her from the mass, and had borne her out of
the door. The fierce and drunken savages within
were dealing blows in the darkness upon each other;
crying out `kill Wakona!kill the pale face
Frederic
!'
Yells and shrieks issued from the place, as from
an infernal pandemonium. At this moment, a long
and loud Shoshonee cry was heard. The whole
uproar
within hushed in a moment to the stillness of
death. Areskoui and his father, and the whole party
had arrived. `Vengeance! Vengeance!' cried
Areskoui
,
in a voice of thunder. The lights of the
returned
party presented a full view of the work of death,
that was going on. Frederic was chafing the temples
of Jessy, whose face, cold as marble, and fair hair
were all covered with blood, and who, in
insensibility
,
had lost for a moment the consciousness of all the
horrors about her. The dwelling was in flames, and
the bright blaze burst forth from the windows and the
doors. The drunken Shienne were reeling forth
from their work of death, to avoid the conflagration.
As Frederic continued solely engrossed with the
effort
to recover Jessy from her faintness, he could only
explain, as far as he understood it, the horrible deed
that had been perpetrated within.
Some of the Shienne sprang away, and escaped.
But Areskoui raised his war cry; and his devoted
friends and followers immediately formed such a
compact
mass around the conflagration, that none could
escape. The Shoshonee hatchet and knife were then
exerted with fatal effect upon the confused and
intoxicated
Shienne, astonished with the suddenness of
this unexpected retribution; and reeling out in
dismay
,
and unprepared for the combat. Pentanona,
and some of the more devoted followers of Areskoui,
had penetrated the dwelling, notwithstanding the
fierceness of the flames. The bleeding bodies of
William
and Yensi were dragged from amidst the fire.
`That,' cried Frederic, as he turned his eyes for a
moment from the still insensible Jessy, `that is the
work of the accursed Nelesho.' As he said it, the
fierce young savage, in his gigantic dimensions and
foaming with rage, rushed towards Areskoui. All
other deeds of vengeance were suspended for the
moment, to watch these rivals in mortal combat. It
was the struggle of Hercules and Cacus. They
grasped each other. They strained their muscles,
to throw each other to the earth. Nelesho had more
strengththe other more nimbleness of movement.
Each had disengaged his knife, and each had inflicted
wounds. At one moment, one party seemed about to
clear himself, and be able to dispatch the other. Then
the other, by a sudden and fortunate effort, reversed the
chances. Areskoui apparently had the worst of the
conflict, and fell beneath his foe; but almost, as he fell,
the other gave a demoniac yell, and bounding from
his victim, sprang up in the air, and instantly
afterwards
tumbled upon his face, the blood gurgling from
his mouth and breast. He had received a thrust to
the heart from the knife of his foe, as he threw him
down. Instantly commenced an indiscriminate
slaughter of the Shienne. A hundred of these
intoxicated
fiends were offered up in a few moments to
expiate
the murder of the husband and wife. Elder
Wood laid about him like a fury; and the tomahawk
of Ellswatta was once more plied with the energy of
his earlier years. Resistance soon ceased. The
remaining
Shienne threw down their arms, proffered the
humblest submission, and even Areskoui bade his
followers spare the blood of the unresisting. Some,
who were pointed out, as ringleaders, were still
dispatched
on the spot. Many Shienne voices
proclaimed
aloud, that Baptiste and Hatch had been
guilty of planning this affair, and orders were sent to
have them arrested and forthcoming. But, on the
first news of the return of the Shoshonee, aware of
their chances, they left all, jumped into a periogue,
and began to descend the Sewasserna. In the
confusion
of the moment, no one thought of pursuing them.
Two Shienne, who were indicated as having been the
principal agents in commencing the work of blood,
were reserved for the flames; and the remainder, not
only humbled, and in despair at the fall of their leader,
but absolutely enfeebled by the issue of this bloody
encounter, proffered, in the most abject terms,
unreserved
submission to Ellswatta. They were the more
readily believed, pardoned and dismissed to their
homes, as knowing, that but for Nelesho, they would
never have committed this work of death.
After long efforts, Jessy was restored to
consciousness
,
only to learn by degrees the full extent of her
misery. She awakened to remembrance on a
mattress
in Ellswatta's dwelling. Frederic and Elder
Wood, Ellswatta and Areskoui hung over her.
Katrina
,
who had fortunately disengaged herself, and
fled at the commencement of the fray, held one hand,
and Josepha held the other. `Tell me,' she said, in
a faint and feeble voice, `if they are both murdered?'
`They are both, as I trust,' responded Elder Wood, `in
the presence of God; and I would, dear orphan, that
thou couldst say, `the will of God be done'.' `I can
say it,' she replied. She folded her hands, looked
upwards, and with a long drawn sigh, she uttered,
`Thy will be done!' But her heavy eye indicated,
that the sense of misery and death was too intense
and revolting, to be as yet felt in all its real
bitterness
.
The thunder-stroke seemed to have produced
a benumbing torpor. She was weak, and exhausted;
and readily sunk into broken though often interrupted
slumbers through the night.
The house of William Weldon was burned. The
bodies were carried to the nearest unoccupied
dwelling
,
the deserted house of Hatch. Elder Wood had
taken charge to see, that the bodies were washed, and
robed for their last sleep. The light of the returning
morning opened to the pale and desolate orphan a full
survey and sense of her misery. `Carry me,' she said
to Elder Wood, `to the bodies of my parents.' The
family of the chief and many sympathising Shoshonee
followed. Supported on one side by Elder Wood, and
on the other by Katrina, she was led out of the house of
the chief. The smouldering ruins of her father's house
still sent up smoke and sparks. The road, over
which she passed, still reeked with the crimson of the
fallen Shienne. She gave no tears, and apparently
little consideration to this spectacle; and even when
she entered the large apartment of the house of
Hatch, and saw the bodies of her father and mother,
robed in white, and in the impressive stillness of death,
side by side, did she give way to the cries and
demonstrations
of the superficial grief of common minds,
easily
excited, loudly expressed, and soon passing away.
The orphan fell on her knees, kissed their cold cheeks
again and again, folded her hands, looked upwards,
and for some moments said not a word. Then a short
convulsive sob was the prelude to tears, that fell
silently
and seemed to yield relief. The stern face of
Ellswatta was bedewed with answering tears; and all,
that were present, wept with her. `Wakona,' said
the aged chief, `thy parents have gone down to the
sunless valley; and thou shalt be the child of
Ellswatta
and Josepha.' `Ye are kind,' she answered.
`Ye have always been so; but Elder Wood, thou art
my father, if thou wilt own a friendless orphan, who
has now none left her, to consider as relatives, but
thou and her heavenly Father.' The venerable man
arose, and folded her in his arms; and repeated in an
often interrupted voice, `thou art my child, Jessy. I
have loved thee, as a father from the first. As a
Kentuckian
,
much more as a Christian, and most of all as
an orphan, I assume all the duties of a father; and
`God do so to me and more,' if I ever desert thee;
only break not my heart by continuing to weep.'
They would then have persuaded her to retire, and
remain at Ellswatta's habitation, until the funeral was
over. But she immediately and resolutely insisted upon
watching with the bodies of her parents, the
remainder
of the day alone. They left her to the sad
communion
of her choice; and none knew the thoughts
of the lonely one, as she sat by the silent remains,
feeding upon remembrances, and meditations, but that
Being, who knoweth the unutterable words of the
heart.
A strange and fearful curiosity induced her to
remove
the grave clothes, and examine the ghastly
wounds, by which they fell. `It is too certain,' she
said, `that ye can never, never return to your orphan,
whom you have left to struggle behind. Ah! that ye
could reverse the unchangeable decree, and either
revisit me, or take your daughter with you; that
where you are, she also might be.' Then she cried
in the bitterness of her spirit, `O most merciful,
wherefore
broughtest thou me into life, gavest me such good
and dear parents, and then removedst them from me
by death, to leave me thus alone? Ah! that no eye
had seen me; that I had been carried from my birth
to my grave. Then the insupportable agony of this
heart would have been still, as yours; and I should
have slept, and been at rest with the great and small of
the earth, with tenants of cabins, and them, that filled
houses with gold and silver; that as an infant, that
never saw the light, I had not been. Why was light
given to them that long for death, and seek for it, as
for hid treasure?' Thus in the same strains, which
the heart dictates to the last degrees of human misery,
in every age, the orphan poured her lament, in the
words of the man of Uz.
But are the day was spent, better and more
befitting
thoughts came with the returning dictates of
reason
and religion to her bosom. `Dear ones,' she said,
VOL. II. 7
`your debt is paid. Your trial is over. I ought
rather
to rejoice, that you have weathered the storm, and
have entered the haven, `where the prisoner and the
weary rest together, and where the wicked cease
from troubling, and the oppressed hear not the voice
of their master. Blessed are the dead, who die in
the Lord; who rest from their labors, and whose works
do follow them.'
These lamentations of the heart, in its own
language
,
have power to sooth it at such an hour, and
on such occasions. `Why should I mourn,' she said,
`for them? It is rather for myself, left among the
same people, and exposed to the same doom, that I
ought to mourn.'
Elder Wood had consented, in her stead, to take
charge of the sad solemnities of preparing for a
funeral
of such rites and such decency, as circumstances
would admit. But, much as he urged it, with the
added entreaties of Frederic and Areskoui, no
persuasion
would induce her to leave the apartment, or
desert the remains of her parents, or allow any one to
remain with her, to share in the sacred privacy of
her griefs. She tarried there alone, through the
long night, evincing thoughts, and a spirit, utterly
unlike what is usually manifested by persons of her
sex, under the flattering unction, that delicacy and
sensibility ought not to be shocked by such sights.
But when the light of the morning had chased away
the stars, she saw, that nature had written her
inexorable
doom on these countenances, so dear to her;
and that it became her duty, to yield the changing
elements back to their common origin.
The funeral was for the evening of that day.
Ellswatta
had loved William Weldon. A thousand
circumstances
of common disposition, age, and
fellow-feeling
had brought them into the strictest intimacy
of tried friendship. The heart of Ellswatta was
deeply
smitten by this event. His grief, though less deep,
was not less sincere, than the orphan's. He was the
favorite of the Shoshonee; and Jessy was their pride
and their idol. Every circumstance concurred to
give grief and solemnity to the funeral. Elder Wood
could not pronounce the names of his departed friends,
except with starting tears. Frederic and Areskoui
again found a bond of union in the reality and
sacredness
of their love and sorrow, and were chiefly
anxious
to detach the orphan from the bodies of her
parents
,
and to put her under the influence of time, to
moderate a sorrow which threatened to deprive her
of life, or unsettle her reason. It was with difficulty,
under the peculiar excitements and aggravations of
this scene, that the Shoshonee were restrained from
prosecuting their revenge still further upon the
Shienne
.
But, as a punishment, every one, that was
ascertained to have been at the massacre, was ordered
to be present at the funeral, wearing a badge of
disgrace
,
that they might behold and feel the misery,
which their base treachery had inflicted, and the
respect
and veneration of the Shoshonee for the
memory
of the deceased. They were painted in blue.
Their totem was reversed; and the Shienne, who
were not at the massacre, now that it had not
prospered
,
with the common impulse of human nature,
joined
themselves proudly to the Shoshonee, and looked
askance and with derision upon their disgraced
countrymen
.
Under the sycamore, and near the grave of
Lenahah
,
the bodies were put down in coffins made under
the direction of Elder Wood, and painted black. A
more ample congregation of Shoshonee had been
as-sembled
on no occasion; nor could a more interesting
object any where be seen, than Jessy robed in black,
as she sat on the rustic bench, beside the bodies.
Opposite her was Frederic in mourning, and
Areskoui
,
thin, pale, and evidently in affliction only less
deep than hers. Elder Wood was still more
over-come
with emotion, than at the funeral of his own
Lenahah. He attempted to commence, twice or
thrice; and an irrepressible burst of emotion from the
heart cut short the effort. For some time, after he
commenced, his words were slow and often
interrupted
.
He briefly descanted upon the solemnity of the
occasion, that had called them together; saying as
little, as might be said, upon the guilt of the
perpetrators
of the massacre. `It was of no use,' he said,
`to recur to the past, except for instruction for the
future. Thoughts on purposes of revenge would not
awaken the sleep of the tomb. Though the deceased
had not professed religion,' he continued, `they had
lived it. He had no reason to doubt, and he did not
doubt, that they were happy with their Saviour. He
wished therefore to sing the hymn,
`Happy souls, your days are ended,
All your mourning days below.'
Nor was the music less impressive, than that, which
was called forth at the burial of the Song Sparrow.
There could not be imagined a spectacle of more
solemn and affecting interest, than that of this
venerable
Apostle among the Shoshonee, holding his hands
towards heaven, in prayer over these remains of
friends, `who,' he said, `had been dear to him as the
light of his eyes.' `If my griefs are great,' said he,
`what must be hers, who sits beside the remains of her
parents?' Every eye was turned on the mourner,
her disheveled curls, floating over her crape, looking
steadily on the coffins with a tearless eye, that spoke
deeper grief than that which is loud and overflowing
in tears. `The tomb,' continued the Apostle, `closes
over them; and there is an end of their sojourn in
this vale, which is to all a vale of tears. A
Christian
burial is a sublime spectacle every where. It
is peculiarly so here. These ancient mountains stand
silent witnesses of our sorrow. In an hour nothing
of these dear ones will be seen, but two heaps of fresh
earth. The red men, I doubt not, will long bear
testimony
to the worth of the departed, and the
dreadful
circumstances, under which they died. But it
matters not to them, that no sumptuous monument
marks their humble place of rest. It is of no
consequence
to them, that these awful barriers of nature
rise, to keep all but red men from this secluded abode.
When they were born, a light was kindled within
them, which shall burn on to all eternity. How it
will fare with that eternal being, inhabiting this
tenement of clay, is the only point worth a moment's
serious concern. Our friends, we have all reason to
believe, rest with the Redeemer. As inheritors of
such hopes, we call upon our dear orphan, to mourn
not as those, `who have no hope.' My text is I am
the resurrection and the life. He became
gradually
warmed with his sublime subject; and as he
waxed
into power, he disengaged himself from that part
of his dress, that encumbered him, and gave a funeral
sermon, with no audience but red men in the midst
of those sublime piles of nature, that would have
touched the hearts of the most polished audience in
a temple of marble. `Daughter of sorrow,' he said,
in conclusion, `arouse thyself from the dust.
Remember
their nobler nature and thine. Let it be
good for thee, that thou hast been thus terribly
afflicted
.
Thou hast now seen things in the light of
Divine truth. Every film of youthful illusion is
rudely
removed from thine eye, that thou mayest see this
earth as it is. Look upon these enduring and
sublime
mountains. They are not everlasting, and
they shall fade. But a little while, and thy parents
would have gone to their everlasting home, in
the gradual decay and death of nature. Thine own
7*
beauty will fade, wither and decay, like a leaf. All,
that thou seest about thee, shall vanish and pass
away. But, daughter of sorrow, thy parents live,
and greatly live, as we trust, with Jesus, among his
own redeemed in the eternal mansions. What is
before thee is only terrible to the natural eye. Thou
must learn to see it all, as I trust I do, with an eye of
faith. But a little, and all this evanescent show will
vanish in smoke; and we shall meet, where there are
no more tears, no sin, nor groans, in the utter
assurance
of the peace of our Saviour. Thou shalt hold
out thine arms, and embrace the spirits of these loved
ones in the secure and eternal rest of heaven.' With
such themes he sought to arouse the faith, and cheer
the gloom of the mourning orphan.
The Shoshonee then commenced their own
appropriate
rites. The medicine men beat their drums;
and the elder chiefs chimed in with the death song
of Ellswatta. `My head is hoary, and my friends are
going before me into the sunless valley. Master of
Life, I mourn for my friends. May they find their
dark way to the hills of paradise.' The bodies were
both deposited in the same grave. Elder Wood gave
his arm to the orphan mourner, who returned to the
habitation of Ellswatta, to pass the night.
For the two or three succeeding days, Jessy
remained
in a situation of passive and gloomy repose;
as one who had been bewildered by an overwhelming
calamity, and retaining but an indistinct
consciousness
of what had happened. Frederic she saw, and
spoke mournfully to him about her plans for the
future
,
without any recurrence to the past. In the
same way she received the efforts of Areskoui to
offer
her condolence. Ellswatta and Josepha had been
the intimates of her parents, and their words of
affection
and counsel aroused her, and she listened sadly,
and showed grateful and affectionate confidence.
But with none of them, in the nature of things, could
there be deep filial reliance and intimacy. It was
only towards Elder Wood, that such feelings existed
in full force; and with him she entered into long and
confidential discussions, touching her course of duty
and propriety for the future. To remain in the
family
of Ellswatta was every way improper. To
occupy
the house of Hatch, who had absconded, indeed,
and left it vacant, was a thing not to be thought of.
`I must return to the world,' she said meekly, and as
if enquiring his thoughts. `It will be hard for me,'
he replied, `to leave these people, where I yet hoped
to be useful, or to obtain the crown of martyrdom.
These mountains, this valley, and this secluded spot,
these people and their ways, the yager, the fishing
spear, and traps, I confess, are dear to me. I have
been so long from society, that I have lost all taste
for its pleasures and occupations. I should be out of
place, and not at home in it, and here it is otherwise.
Besides, I love to sit by the grave of Lenahah.'
Jessy
answered, only by raising to him eyes swimming
in tears. As if in reply to the appeal, he continued,
`but I see no future security for you in this place. I
confess, I feel, as if propriety called for your return
to society; unless, indeed' `That is out of the
question
,'
she answered, `even to be a matter of a
moment's
thought at this time. I must leave the
Shoshonee
,
leave' and she burst into tears, and could
not proceed. `Jessy,' he answered, `you are right
I am rejoiced to see, that the power to form right
resolutions
still remains to you.' `My duty,' she replied,
`remains, though they are gone.' `My adopted child,
`God do so to me and more,' if I do not follow you,
hunter and almost Shoshonee, as I am. I have not
forgotten the man and the Christian in the forester
and Kentuckian. It will be right, too, on another
account
.
These young men ought to be left to the
influence
of absence, reflection and time. These are
the only remedies for cases like theirs. If you are
determined, so also am I, and the sooner we are away
the better.'
This resolution produced various and strong
sensations
,
as soon as it was made known. The Shoshonee
generally murmured, for Elder Wood had become
popular, and Wakona was an object of idolatrous
fondness
.
Different and varying expressions of grief,
anger
and gloom were visible in every countenance.
They said, `if the medicine man and Wakona wish
to leave us, because the Shienne have proved wolves,
we cannot help it. We have defended them. We
will defend them. But the Master of Life would be
angry with us, if we strove to control their wish to
leave us.' Ellswatta and Josepha said to each other,
`Wakona is a fair flower to behold; but if she will not
wed our son, the sooner she is removed from his sight,
the sooner we may hope he will forget her, and
resume
the spirit of a chief.' Frederic was decided in
a moment to leave the vale at the same time.
Areskoui had sufficient combination of thought, and
forecast of the ways of thinking, and being influenced
among the whites, not to have foreseen, that this would
be the probable issue of the position in which Jessy was
placed. But, when Elder Wood announced the
approaching
event to him, a paleness of deeper gloom
came over his countenance. `I have expected it,' he
said, `and am prepared; and this, medicine man, is the
end of your medicine talks. The salvation of all these
red men is of less account, after all, it appears, in your
eye, than the temporal happiness of Wakona. There
is an end, then, of all our huntings, and trappings and
long talks together. Oh! medicine man, this
memory
is forever hidden in my heart. Will all thought
of the young chief pass from thy mind, when thou
seest him no more? And WakonaMaster of Life!
But she shall see, that Areskoui is neither an old
woman
,
nor a child; and that he knows, as well to be
silent, and to die, as he has done to slay the murderer
of her parents. Oh! may she find better friends;
those, who love her more, she can never find. She
cannot but remember these mountains, this stream,
these trees, this spot of her birth, our sports of
infancy
.
Something, of what I have been to her, and done
for her, must remain. All cannot vanish. I have
said. The Master of Life forbid, that we should wish
to control Wakona. Say to her, that Areskoui will
follow her with his young warriors, as far as the town
of the pale face; that he will return, as an eagle to
his mountains, to hallow, and protect the grave of her
parents. He will wish to die; that his spirit may fly
beyond the mountains and the sea, to be present
unseen
with Wakona.'
The arrangements of Jessy were not long in
completing
.
She had seen the last brand of her paternal
home cease to smoke. She had seen the bodies of
her parents washed from their stains of blood, and
decently
deposited in the earth, with all the impressive
rites of Christian sepulture. She had passed much
of her time since, beside the narrow mound of fresh
mould, with all the ineffable emotions of an orphan
with a heart of the keenest and most profound
sensibility
.
`They are gone! They are gone!' she
incessantly
repeated. `This is but unconscious dust; and
I must now seek for them in other worlds.' For some
days she had been an inmate of the house, which had
been built for Elder Wood and Lenahah; and it was
there, that the solemn and confidential conversations
between her and her adopted father took place.
With him she read the scriptures; and conversed
about the way of salvation and the home of departed
spirits, the arguments and probabilities for their
recognition
of each other, and carrying to the unknown
and eternal country the affections and the thoughts of
earth. `Oh!' she said, `may I but only see them and
know them again! May the wants of this bleeding
heart only be once more felt by them! May I once
more witness that sacred and home-felt smile of
parental
tenderness! Let us only meet above sin, tears
and death!' She delighted to discuss the treasured
wisdom, the forbearing disinterestedness, the ever
watchful and studious tenderness of her father; the
glowing and fathomless affection of her mother,
always
ending with the sad reflection`allall is past.'
It was painful to both to reflect, that calculations
of an entirely different character, and little
harmonizing
with these profound sentiments, must be made.
Such calculations, however necessary, had been alike
foreign to the habits of both. Nor could Jessy
refrain
from adverting to a new proof of the wise and
reflecting love of her father, little as he seemed to
think of money himself, in his having made such
ample provision for her on that head. His papers
were all found in a trunk in a passage in the cliff, which
the fire had not reached, and in the most perfect order.
All the requisite documents, that touched his annual
income, and her future inheritance, were drawn with
the most minute and orderly precision of legal
exactness
.
The original sum, deposited with `Swarts & Co.'
at Canton, with the annual addition of the interest to
the principal from the birth of Jessy, had swelled the
amount to a fortune, that abundantly met all her
necessities
and wishes on that score. A statement of
the funds had been annually remitted from Canton,
with the most detailed and minute particularity. As
these tedious and voluminous reports had occasionally
met her eye, during the lifetime of her father, she
had almost blushed at these proofs of worldly wisdom.
Now the considerate forecast and kindness of these
precautions appeared in their proper light. Even these
provident provisions of parental solicitude for her
future
welfare only proved more keenly the extent of
her loss. A full supply of ready money for all their
present exigencies, and for their contemplated voyage
to China, was found in the desk of her father. Every
thing evinced that this silent and meditative father
had calculated contingencies, and had arranged all
the future resources of his daughter.
Elder Wood at first expressed reluctance at the
idea of being attached to her fortunes, as a burden.
`I am strong,' he said, `and in full health. All the
mysteries of the spear and the trap, and all the skill
of a hunter, touching the value of the avails of his
industry
and craft, are mine. With these I had neither
wants, nor fears for the future, as regards subsistence.
But, with respect to all the ways of living among
those people of ledgers and accounts current, I have
no more knowledge, than a Shoshonee.' But when
he saw, that Jessy considered such jealousies of
independent
feeling, as originating in reluctance to assume
a parental charge and responsibility in relation to her,
he forebore. `I know,' he said, `that there is enough
for us both. I will no more distress thee, my child.
We will eat of the same bread, and drink of the same
cup; and I will never vex thee more in this view of
considering myself a burden.'
They were painfully aware, that a scene had
occurred
in the habitation of the chief. Areskoui had
long and manfully struggled with his passion. But,
accustomed from his birth to give, rather than receive
the law, and having for so many years fostered this
overwhelming sentiment, it triumphed over him in
this instance; and for the first time in his life induced
him to show head-strong resolutions, that gave
distress
,
and almost anger to his parents. When the
time of Jessy's departure drew near, his original
purpose
,
to accompany her to Manitouna, or Astoria, and
then return, failed him. He gave fearful
demonstrations
,
that he had thoughts of forever leaving his
parents
,
his hereditary expectations, his tribe, his
country
,
and of following the steps of Jessy. This
determination
,
as might be expected, excited horror in his
parents. Ellswatta lost his wonted firmness, and
scattered
his aged locks to the winds. `This, then,' said
he, `is the way in which the Wahcondah punishes
us, for holding out a fatherly hand to these pale faces.
There was truth even in Nelesho, who forewarned
me of this. He told me, that intercourse with them
would cause the hearts of our warriors to become
soft, and melt away; that our children would cease to
be strong red men, without gaining the character of
the whites. Thou wilt leave thy father, and thy
mother, then, Areskoui? Thou wilt leave thy rank
and expections, to follow Wakona for her fair face
and tresses? And what is worse, leave us for a pale
face, that despises and rejects thy love, and that flies
from us, as soon as her parents are no longer with
us! When thou leavest us, Areskoui, unless thou
wilt promise to return to be chief, after thy father
goes down to the sunless valley, I swear to thee by
the Wahcondah, by the shades of thy brave
forefather
chiefs, that I will die. I will not survive thy
desertion. Undutiful son! Thou shalt kill thy father
and mother, for a fair face and flowing curls!'
Josepha
meanwhile held him to her bosom. `Thy
father
,'
she cried, `speaks harshly. But thou canst
never
desert the fond mother, that bore thee in her
bosom
.
I cheerfully renounced my father and my
people
,
and the joys and hopes of their way of life, that
I might nurse the pride of my spirit, in rearing a chief
for this noble people. Shall I see my son, the sole
hope of my heart, become a woman, to follow a pale
faced girl, that despises him, to go and be the slave of
the proud white people?'
Jessy was aroused from the torpor of her own grief,
by hearing of these agonizing conflicts in the family
of the chief. Disinterested generosity prevailed over
her own sorrows. She entreated Elder Wood to
accompany
her to the habitation of the chief. She
entered
upon them in the height of their discussion.
Josepha
left the embrace of her son for that of the still
loved Jessy. `Wakona! Wakona!' she said, `thou
hast come at the right moment. Thou wilt not see
the hearts of the friends of thy parents broken. Thou
wilt learn our son to know, and to fulfil his duty.
Thou wilt either remain with us, and turn him from
his mad purposes; or in leaving us, thou wilt persuade
him to promise, that he will not basely renounce his
duties, to follow thee.' The clear and disciplined
mind of Jessy, immediately manifested the
ascendency
of its powers. The terrible shock, which she had
recently experienced, had borne away all the little
minded restraints of supposed decorum and womanly
holding back. In earnest and full development of
her views and thoughts and her sense of duty, she
brought conviction of duty to the heart of the young
chief. `Wakona,' he said, `I have always regarded
thy words, as wisdom and truth. Thou hast
conquered
.
Parents, forgive the madness of your son. I
will go with thee to the place of the great periogues
of the white people. I will see thee borne away on
the illimitable salt lake, where the sun hides himself.
I will then hold up my hands to the Wahcondah, and
implore him to send thee his pleasantest breezes, and
to put his purest joy in thy heart. I will bless thee,
and love thee to my last hour; and will return, as
thou counselest, and thou shalt hear, if haply thou
shouldst ever ask to know what is passing in these
vallies
,
that I had courage, like thee, to encounter that
terrible medicine word,
duty
, to the last.'
VOL. II. 8
The time of her departure was appointed. Before
it arrived, Frederic solicited a confidential interview.
He told her, `that it was wholly unnecessary for him
to declare, that he had no longer interest, or pursuit
among the Shoshonee, when she should have left
them. His course, too, was to China; and he
assured
her, that whatever his feelings were, no disclosure
of them, or allusion to them, should be made. He
hoped, that it would not be considered a draw-back
upon her anticipations, that he, who had seen,
enjoyed
,
and suffered many things, in common with her,
was to accompany her voyage.' In the most cordial
tones, she assured him, `that so far from its being a
draw-back, the society of a friend, a gentleman, in
whose true and honorable character she had entire
confidence, and who had seen, and been endeared to
her parents, must necessarily be an alleviation of her
sorrows.' Frederic saw, that he was not indifferent
to her; and that he shared, as her manner intimated,
all the sentiments, that a heart, so worn and
horror-stricken
,
had to bestow.
The evening before the day of her departure, the
moon shone brightly, and the white clouds slept in
the firmament. She sat forth to pay her last visit to
the graves of her parents. None knew her words or
thoughts, on this sad and sacred and parting
pilgrimage
,
for she again insisted on performing this last
duty
entirely alone.
Elder Wood and Frederic were ready. Three
hundred young Shoshonee warriors were ready. To
Manitouna it was proposed, that they should go
on horseback; and thence in a periogue to the Falls
of the Oregon; and thence in another periogue to
Astoria. When the hour had come, at once solemn
and dreaded, for her to leave forever her native vale,
and the place of her youthful joys, and the graves of
her parents, she shrunk back. A revulsion came over
her. `It seems,' she said, `impossible for me to take
a final departure from this sweet valley.' The
thought presents itself to me, as of an unpractised,
and too confident child, that recklessly leaves the
sheltering arms and the affectionate counsels of
parents
.'
Areskoui had recovered his calmness, as she
had lost hers. `Go not away from us in sadness,
Wakona
,'
he said. `Thy medicine man is good; and he
saith the thing, that is good, when he saith, that for
those, who have confidence to go down to the sunless
valley, it is better to die, than to live. There the
heart no longer agonizes. Wouldst thou call back from
the land of souls the shades of thy good father and
mother, to have them in terror for thee, as when
carried
off by the accursed pale face? Wouldst thou
have them again exposed to the hatchets of the
murderous
Shienne? Hast thou not seen thy father wipe
away the sweat of weariness, from trapping the
beaver
,
or pursuing the deer? Wouldst thou once more
behold his face grow pale, through anxiety for thee?
See, Wakona, how well I have learned, and how
faithfully
I remember the words of thy medicine man.
Areskoui has but too much need for those hopes
himself
.
Oh! no. If thou believest the words of thy
medicine man, thou wilt rather rejoice, that their
innocent
shades have gone to the hills of paradise, that
they behold the ever gracious face of the Master of
Life, listen forever to the sweetest medicine songs,
and feel the kindly influence of an eternal spring.'
Of the thousands, that were there assembled to
witness their departure, every one pressed forward, to
grasp the hands of Wakona and Elder Wood. Their
resentments expired in the real sorrow of parting.
`Go, good man,' said they, `go with the blessings of
the Shoshonee. Go in peace. Go, valley flower; go,
bird of paradise. The Master of Life clear your path;
shine upon you in the sun; blow on you in the breeze,
and fill your hearts with joy. Remember the
Shoshonee
;
and when you and we meet in the land of souls,
may we meet in love and peace, as we now part.'
Ellswatta embraced, and kissed her cheek. `I swear,
Wakona,' said he, `that no one shall outrage thy
parents'
grave, except over the old body of Ellswatta.
I shall soon see thy good father again, in the land of
souls; and I will tell him, that I loved, and cherished
Wakona to the last.' Josepha embraced her, and
shed the genuine tears of female tenderness. She
took from her bosom a crucifix, sparkling with gems.
`Thy mother, Jessy,' she said, `gives thee at parting
the emblem of a Christian; beseeching thee to wear
it in remembrance of thy mother's friend, and the
mother of my unhappy Areskoui.'
All the tribe accompanied the sad and weeping
procession to the foot of the mountains. Then the
medicine men, as usual, beat their drums, and when
they ceased, Elder Wood fell on his knees, and
committed
the Shoshonee `to God and the word of his
grace;' and prayed earnestly, `that another and a
better
and a more favored missionary might come among
them; and bring them all into the fold of the great
Shepherd.' With such earnest, humble and
affectionate
tenderness he commended the remaining and
the departing to God, as produced an impression and
solemnity which was long remembered among that
people, after they were gone. `The mother of God
have the care of you,' said Josepha, and threw her
arms round her neck for the last time; and embraces
and tears and solemn partings were interchanged to
the final moment. Ellswatta turned away from
his son and Jessy. The young warriors moved
onwards
,
in ascending the hill; and Jessy, unwilling to
trust her eyes, or look back, heard the wail of
returning
Indians, as the horse, upon which she rode, in the
midst of the long procession, began to scramble up the
sides of the mountain.
All the ceremonies of departure were not
accomplished
,
until late in the day. The escort encamped
on the side of the mountain, just as the last gleams of
the setting sun poured a mellow lustre up the
subjacent
vale. The evening kindled smokes of the
Shoshonee
town curled peacefully from their dwellings,
and the culminating shadows fell in long columns upon
the scenery below. The tears rolled down the cheeks
of the orphan, as she here lingered, looking intently
on the scene, that she might so paint it on her
memory
,
as to be able at any future time, by a fixed attention
to recal it. `Farewell, sweet home,' she cried. `Natal
spot, dear valley, breezy pines, forever consecrated
to remembrance, graves of my parents, farewell!
Look down, dear and sainted shades, and be with me
in this wide and unknown world, upon which I am
entering.' She continued to gaze upon the scene,
until the increasing shade of twilight obscured it from
view; and the last prospect was of the Shoshonee
smokes lying horizontally above the valley, and drawn
from habitation to habitation, as of long muslin
drapery
spread in the air.
The accompanying Shoshonee, to whom the
sadness
not only of the departing emigrants, but even
that of their chief was a hidden history, who
regarded
,
and cared only for that, which appeared on the
external face of their journey, plied their hatchets to
the trees, kindled their camp-fires, cooked, smoked,
sung, and chaunted their tales, as though such thoughts
of mourning and sadness had never entered human
heart. They occasionally spoke, it is true, of the sad
countenance of their chief. They wondered at the
rejection of his suit by Wakona; but admitted, that
no maiden, white or red, could control her affections;
8 *
and they expressed a sincerity and depth of regret
for the departure of Wakona and Elder Wood, that
ought forever to have redeemed them from the
reproachful
estimation of being insensible savages.
No event, of a character to belong to these annals,
marked their way over the mountains to Manitouna.
At this point, great part of the warriors, that had
come thus far on horseback, returned, taking a solemn
and affecting leave of the emigrants; and neither
party
expecting to meet again on the earth. The
remainder
,
twenty five in number, stopped, and
entered
that strange position, to spend the night. A
thousand
painful recollections were connected with this
place in the mind of the departing orphan. She
could not but painfully remember the joy of
deliverance
,
with which she had emerged from this prison of
nature, to return to endeared and longing parents.
Her face was now towards the sea. She had no
parents
,
no expecting friends, no home. The world
was all before her, and providence alone her guide.
A chill of horror once more came over her, when the
terrible figure of Maniteewah, so strongly engraven
on her memory, stood again before her, in all her
original deformity, chattering her strange chapter of
exclamations, and ambiguous declarations, like the
general form of such responses, capable of receiving
such a construction, as suited the event, come what
might. Frederic and Elder Wood remarked, that
the great burden of her gibberish was to admonish
Wakona, that she had forewarned her of the
dreadful
events, that had driven her from the valley; and
the chief import of her predictions for the future was
couched in the strain of prophecies of some terrible
impending evil. Although Jessy did not appear much
to heed her wild snatches of poetry and song; yet
fearful, that some impressions, tending to strengthen
her gloom, might fasten on her mind, they hurried
her away. This priestess of the little white men of
the mountains continued to howl presages of evil for
the fair orphan, until she was removed from her
hearing
,
by letting down the curtains of her tent.
Next morning they set forth in their periogues for
the Falls of the Oregon. During this descent, the
mind of Jessy was more than once occupied, and her
melancholy thoughts for a moment fixed by the
sublimity
of the grand scenery about her. In the
earnest
and affectionate cheerfulness, in the unwearied
assiduity of kindness, manifested by Katrina, she found,
also, occasional alleviation of her sufferings. Elder
Wood, Frederic and Areskoui, were alike lavish of
their efforts to soothe the lovely mourner. She saw,
how much happiness she imparted, whenever she
seemed for a moment cheerful, and disposed to
resume
her wonted manner of former days. Her
instinctive
disposition to render others happy, aroused
her to great efforts, to show herself still capable of
emotions of resigned quietness.
At the great Falls, all the escort, but six favorite
and confidential friends of the young chief, left
them on their return. They took leave of Elder
Wood with a degree of respect, bordering on
veneration
.
They earnestly requested him to bestow on
them a benediction, and something of the medicine
charm of the pale face, that might guard them from
the witching influence of the little white men of the
mountains, over whose peculiar domain they were to
return. He waved his hand solemnly over their heads,
by way of parting benediction, praying God with an
earnestness, that started tears down his own cheek,
that He would have mercy upon these poor benighted
pagans, dwelling in the regions of the setting sun and
the valley of the shadow of death; that He would
bring them out of darkness into His marvellous light,
and fill all their valley with vision, by some instrument
more worthy and more favored, than himself. They
showed strong marks of affectionate feeling, as they
parted from Frederic; and particularly Katrina, who
had been remarkably successful, in ingratiating
herself
in the affections of the Shoshonee, during her
short residence among them. `Farewell,' said they,
`kind and beloved pale faces. The Master of Life
keep you, give you a blue sky and a bright sun, clear all
evils from your path, and bring us to see you in the
land of souls, on the green hills of paradise. We will
take care of the graves;' and as they uttered this last
affecting promise, these kind hearted red men of the
desert turned, and left them; suggesting to Jessy the
obvious reflection, that these successive partings from
their friends, and their diminishing number, was like
the incidents of the journey of life; where the
commencing
guests of the journey are continually
deserting
the traveller, leaving him to finish the course alone,
which was commenced in the society of multitudes.
Although the season was early spring, the weather
was of the mildness of autumn; or rather it was a
continuation
of the season of Indian summer. They
were now floating on the mighty Oregon. The noble
and majestic stream, its banks skirted with boundless
prairies, opened a spectacle equally new and exciting
to Jessy. Her periogue was covered with soft skins;
and an awning of tanned buffaloe robe screened her
both from the sun and the cold. Areskoui, unwilling
to increase the gloom of the emigrant mourner, made
generous efforts to seem cheerful, and exhausted his
ingenuity to render the voyage as pleasing as it might
be. A painful restraint was imposed on Frederic,
both in his resolution to betray no manifestations of
the sentiments that were preying upon him, and in
anticipating the time, when the chief should be away,
and when he should be left alone with her.
At length, from an elevation on the shore, on which
they stopped, the blue sea, stretching away in its
boundlessness, was visible for the first time to Jessy.
It was the element, on which the heroism, the
philosophic
and peculiar character of her dear father had
been cradled. It was the element over which her
tenderly loved mother had come, to fall by the hand
of savages, and to lay her ashes in the remote valleys
of the mountains. It was a spectacle suggesting
grand and impressive images of infinity and eternity;
and as she felt the humid breeze, and saw the broad,
flat, illimitable, cerulean space, thought arose,
crowding
upon thought; and the felt conviction rushed on
her mind, that the spirit, to which such a spectacle
presented such emotions, must itself be infinite and
immortal.
Shortly afterwards the little town of Astoria was
in view; and though offering externally little more of
show, than a collection of Indian cabins, and
presenting
precisely the appearance of the primitive
beginnings
of a new settlement in the forest, as being the
first town built, and inhabited by whites, that Jessy
had seen, it offered her a spectacle of intense interest.
Three or four ships showed their tall masts and
complicated
rigging at anchor in the river. This most
imposing sample of the ultimate attainment of the
social
state, produced in the freshness of her mind a
sentiment of profound meditation upon that unvisited
race of men, that had invented for themselves such
conveyances, in which to traverse the fathomless
billows
,
and to hold on their confident way amidst
darkness
,
storms and clouds. `Who would waste
existence
,'
she thought, `among the rude Shoshonee, when
such spectacles of the triumphs of art opened at the
very verge of civilization?'
Areskoui, being well known at Astoria, was
received
with a distinction accurately adjusted, by the
calculating
inhabitants, to his known power and
influence
in the region, whence they collected those furs,
the trade in which was the chief staple of the place.
A space, in which to encamp, was assigned him
within
the limits of the town, and he received the rude
ceremonial of a king of the North West coast.
Elder
Wood, Frederic and Jessy were equally known
by report; and, as generally happens, a thousand
additions
of imagination, and an exaggerating spirit of
curiosity were appended to the gossip story of her
beauty, wealth, abduction, and future intended course.
Hence, it may be easily imagined, with what an
eager and annoying stare of attention her steps were
watched.
Elder Wood immediately took lodgings for Jessy,
Frederic and himself, in the best house, which the
town afforded; and as it was unusually crowded and
busy, proper apartments were found difficult to
obtain
.
These preliminaries settled, the next step was
to enquire, how soon a passage could be obtained to
China. On enquiry, they learned, that a vessel, a
little way below the town, was at anchor in the river,
which had nearly completed her lading, and was to
sail in two or three days at farthest. They all agreed
to take a walk together, along the banks of the
Oregon
,
in order to survey, and board the vessel, and
satisfy
themselves, as to the chances of getting a passage.
It was a delightfully bright and sunny day, and one
of the first of decided Spring. The early vernal
flowers
had already disclosed their modest and fragrant
petals, and the prairie surface, in some places brown
and sear from the frosts of winter, was in others
already
carpeted with a verdure as soft and smooth as
velvet. Innumerable flocks of sea fowl of every shape
and plumage, size and note, careering on the wings
of the wind towards the interior, constituted an
impressive
circumstance in the scenery. They were
dimly descried sailing landward in every direction
from the wastes of sea, growing on the eye, and
tending
towards the interior, like a flight of innumerable
arrows. `There they fly,' remarked Jessy, `towards
the sweet retreats we have left. There they meet in
the forsaken bowers of the past years, where spring
has repainted their haunts, and provided their food.
But I shall visit the dear shades no more.'
Arrived abreast of the ship, they made signals,
which soon brought a boat to the shore. There were
fine accommodations for passengers; and the outlines
of a contract for the passage of the party were
directly
settled. But it was deemed proper, that the ladies
should return; and that the gentlemen, accompanied
by Areskoui and his Shoshonee, should go on board,
and inspect the ship with their own eyes. The little
village was in full view; the road direct, the sun
brightly
shining, and sailors and inhabitants seen at intervals
between them and the town. Strange infatuation!
Although they had but an hour before discussed the
possibility, that their enemies might be there, and had
mutually promised not to separate from each other,
although the paleness of death had marked the cheek
of Jessy, as the bare possibility of coming once more
in the power of Julius had been hinted at, so full were
the hearts and thoughts of each one of the party of
the arrangements and separations at hand, that not an
apprehension of danger crossed the mind of either, as
Jessy and Katrina moved back towards their lodgings;
and as the rest of the party were rowed on board the
ship, promising to rejoin them in a short time.
According to their promise, in a few minutes Elder
Wood, Frederic, and Areskoui, with the Shoshonee,
were on the return, remarking with some surprize,
that Jessy and Katrina were already out of sight.
They satisfied their rising apprehensions by
concluding
,
that their stay on board the ship had been longer,
than their calculations, and not doubting, that they
should find their beloved charge at their lodgings.
Thither they quickened their steps; and their
consternation
and horror may be imagined, when they found,
that neither had returned. The information fell on
them, as it had been a thunder-stroke. Areskoui on
this occasion forgot all the stoicism and endurance,
which he could sometimes command. In transports
of fury and despair he scattered his black locks to the
winds, and was with difficulty restrained from
throwing
himself in the river. Frederic, in view of his
agony
,
became comparatively calm, reminding him, that
even if they were not found, which he trusted, they
would be, it was only anticipating the intended
separation
from him by a day or two. He nobly
answered
,
that in the present case, as in all her former
misfortunes
,
it was for her, and not for himself he
suffered
;
and that no joy could now be so great for him, as
to see her bounding on her way over the billows in the
great canoe towards her destined country. Elder
Wood, scarcely more self-possessed, than the young
chief, beat his breast, and seemed for a moment bereft
at once of reason and his confidence in heaven. The
bitterness of self reproach came in, to increase his
torment
.
`This, then, is my prudence and my care of
you, my dear children,' cried the minister. `Thus
have I fulfilled the first duties of guardian. Would
God I had died for thee, my daughter Jessy.'
While this party were thus giving utterance to their
grief and distraction, and running in different
directions
to collect information, to solicit aid in the search,
rumor soon communicated what had happened to the
people of the town. As is customary in such cases,
all the respectable people joined in the search. The
cause of their absence was soon but too clearly
ascertained
.
Two sailors had marked the young ladies
moving towards the village, as they were returning
from it to their ship. They had noted two persons
ascending the bank, and instantly disappearing with
the two ladies below the bank again. Their
attention
had been arrested, by seeing young ladies alone,
aud fashionably dressed in that place. But with the
reckless spirit of men, who were accustomed to
consider
nothing a novelty, they had spent no conjectures,
in enquiring, who they were, or whether this sudden
skipping down the bank might not be matter of sport,
or concert with the men, who disappeared with them.
Other information was soon imparted, which threw
ample illustration upon the whole affair. A fur ship,
which had been lying at anchor many days, had just
descended the river under a press of sail and the
current
of the Oregon, for the isle of Ostroklotz, two
hundred
leagues north of the Oregon, and five leagues
from the main land. It was a place of surpassing fame
in the annals of nautical romance, about which tales
were told as wild, as those of the Arabian Nights.
These tales described it, as the grand harem of the
adventurers in those remote seas, as a kind of Calypso's
enchanted isle of Russian pleasure and debauchery.
It was equally famed as the resort of seals and sea
lions.
The ship, that had just sailed for that noted island,
had been moored for some time a little below the
town. From various quarters, the party in search of
the lost ones learned, that Julius Landino had been
hanging about Astoria, ever since his expulsion from
the Shoshonee; that Baptiste and Hatch had been
seen in company with him. With the vessel, that
had just sailed, all three had disappeared. So many
corroborating circumstances were collected in
concurrent
evidence, as to leave no doubt upon the subject.
Jessy and Katrina had been watched. The moment
they were left by their friends, to return unprotected,
they were carried down the bank, forced on board the
VOL. II. 9
departing ship, and carried away in her. There had
been previous evidence that the massacre of William
Weldon and Yensi had been plotted here, and that
Julius had furnished the rum and money, requisite to
bribe the perpetration. He had foreseen, that a
natural
result of this would be, that Jessy would leave the
country by way of Astoria. Spider-like, he had here
woven his accursed web, and waited for his prey. In
the moment of unsuspicious and unguarded
confidence
,
the protectors of the orphan girls had left
them, and Jessy was once more in the power of Julius.
The full conviction of this fact offered new
incitements
to arouse the dejected party to pursuit and
vengeance. Like a lion chafed from his lair,
Areskoui
raised himself above his recent despondency.
`The Wahcondah hath struck us again,' he said; `but
Jessy yet lives. We have saved her from the vile
pale face once before. Who knows, but we may do
it again? In any case, while she lives, and is in his
bad power, we will not sit down, and wail like
women
.
I have led my warriors to the shore, which
looks upon Ostroklotz. Follow me, and we will away
for that place again. Long and spirit-stirring
marches
over the mountains, in dangers and adventures, are
the natural medicines of spirits afflicted as ours. We
shall find our sorrow diminished, as we press strange
countries with our feet. The Wahcondah will aid
us, and we shall bring Wakona back in triumph, as
before. Taught by this second disaster, she will
never
think of leaving our valley again. We will
always
be to her as brothers, and she will share her
kindness between us, as a sister.'
`He speaks,' cried Elder Wood, embracing
Frederic
,
`as when he descended to the vale of Manitouna,
like an angel of the Lord. Let us arise, and follow
him. God would not have given him such a spirit
and such a confidence, except as an omen of His
gracious
interposition for deliverance.' `I feel with you,'
said Frederic, `that the occasion calls not for
dejection
,
or effeminate tears. I follow you to the ends of
the earth, and not a moment is to be lost.'
Every information instructed them, that the ship,
which carried away the two orphan girls, was seen
descending the river under a press of sail, the
current
and a favoring breeze. From the heights it
could already be descried, just emerging from the
river upon the blue water beyond. The only part,
that remained, was the severe and doubtful one of a
return first up the river, and then a march of two
hundred leagues from the Shoshonee valley, to reach
the shore opposite Ostroklotz. Should they reach
that point, an island, reputed to be inaccessible from
enchantment, and the incessant fury of a most terrific
surf always bursting upon it, would shield the objects
of their pursuit from their power. It was, beside, a
known abode of the most worthless and abandoned
of the lawless rovers in these stormy and
unfrequented
seas. Surrounded by the wild ocean, enclosed in
a fortification represented impregnable, in the
keeping
of such abandoned villains, the honor and the
recovery
of the orphan girls seemed equally hopeless.
But the noble maxim of the three friends was never to
despair; and Areskoui, with the feeling congenial to
his race, aroused to its utmost point of excitement,
declared, that vengeance alone ought to push them
to the expedition, even if the recovery of Jessy and
Katrina were hopeless.
Before the dawn of the following morning they
were ascending the Oregon, with every appliance of
oar and sail. Incessant rowing and silent sadness
marked their desolate ascent; though, when the sole
engrossing object of their thoughts became matter of
discussion, Areskoui failed not to remind them, how
weak and erroneous had been the judgment of the
pale face, in procuring the pardon of Julius for his
first crime. `Did I not warn you,' he asked, `that you
would live to repent the effeminate forbearance of
saving him from the flames? Confess, that the stern,
prompt and inexorable law of the red men is both
wiser and better, than the feeble and womanish policy
of your race.' `Not so,' mildly answered Elder
Wood. `Every other consideration should always
yield to the interests of the soul and eternity. She
spared the abandoned wretch for repentance. Should
her temporal ruin by his hand be the consequence,
if she should rejoice through the ceaseless ages of
eternity for that act of mercy and forbearance, will
it not be, on the whole, an infinite gain to her? Her
first deliverance was a divine reward for the purity
and sanctity of her life. The divine justice and truth
are our guarantee, that she will be delivered again,
however hopeless the prospect to the mere eye of
carnal reason. The cries of innocence and despair
will ascend to the ear of the God of Sabaoth. My
trust in the living God is strong and confident, that
we shall deliver her unharmed from the power of the
oppressor.'
Areskoui clasped the minister in his arms; `and if
we do,' he cried in transport, `I swear to thee,
medicine
man, that I will follow thee into the Sewasserna,
and I will embrace thy faith, and call on my people
to imitate my example.'
`Wilt thou in very deed do this!' exclaimed the
sanguine son of Kentucky. `Then I know by this
token
,
that my prayers will prevail. Now shall we be
brothers in the baptism of immersion, and I shall
present
the converted nation of the Shoshonee, as my
humble offering in the day of the Lord.'
Similar bursts of enthusiasm, and the confidential
affection of their holy partnership, threw incidental
gleams of joy over the fatiguing and discouraging
ascent. But for the greater part of the way, the
ruminating
warriors caught the silence and sadness of their
chief; and words of confidence and gladness were
few and far between. Imagination alone can take
hold of the complicated train of feelings, with which
the party presented themselves in sadness and
discouragement
before Ellswatta and the Shoshonee. The
father saw, that the son had still a motive to vigorous
action, saw that enthusiasm, and hope, and the spirit
of former days, kindled in his eye; and this was so
different from the countenance, which he had
expected
to see him wear on his return, that he welcomed
him with words of applause and encouragement.
`Go, my son,' he said, `with thy friends of the pale
face, and our chosen warriors, in pursuit of our two
lost children. Thy father is proud to see thee look
as formerly. Such should be a chief of the red men
always strong and confident; never disheartened or
doubting; never the slave of his passions or fears.
Go, and take with thee such warriors, and such
supplies
,
as thou shalt choose, and our means will
furnish
.'
A distant expedition to the habitations of the
Russ, vengeance and plunder were the watchwords.
An appetite for an expedition spread among the young
and restless warriors, by the contagion of sympathy.
It was the prime of May, and the season was
opportune
;
and the arrangements for the expedition were
pushed with unparalleled celerity. More volunteers
offered for this distant, fatiguing, and hazardous
enterprize
,
than could be spared from the necessary
labors
of cultivation. Therefore, such men only were
selected, as had gained distinction, as intelligent,
daring
,
and capable of every endurance. All feelings
of anger, on account of the voluntary departure of
Jessy from among them, were merged in the strong
impulses of revenge, and a returning remembrance of
their former affection for her. The whole
abandoned
9*
property of Hatch had hitherto, by Indian usage,
remained interdicted, and untouched. A peculiar
religious ceremony, on this occasion, devoted the
whole to the fitting out this expedition; and no one
had ever yet set forth from the vale so amply
furnished
with every thing, which the country and the stores
of Hatch could supply.
Blessed by the chiefs and the medicine men, and
Ellswatta, who remained in the vale, and by the
earnest
public and private prayers of Elder Wood, the
expedition, all mounted, and prepared for an
immediate
departure from the Sewasserna, set forth by
the most rapid and direct route over the lofty
mountains
,
for those immense prairies, which sloped
towards
the Russian settlements.
They soon cleared the verdant vale, outstripped
the progress of Spring, and were among the icy and
precipitous mountains. Sometimes they descended
into dark vales of ever green firs and hemlocks.
Forests, morasses, swamps, glens, deserts, rivers and
mountains stretched out before them in the
untrodden
and immeasurable space. Hungry and weary,
and their horses falling under them, they now waded
through a sand plain, which the eye could not
measure
,
and then scrambled up the ices and rocks of a
mountain, that elevated them above the regions of
perpetual congelation. But the enduring and
impassible
race, sometimes full, and sometimes fasting,
sometimes amidst droves of elk or buffaloes, and then
subsisting on the bark of trees, still put in requisition
their exhaustless patience, and their mysterious desert
lore; and followed with unabating enthusiasm and
unmurmuring heroism a chief, and white people, in
whose sympathies, on this occasion, they could be
supposed
to have but a moderate share. In plenty or in
want, on the icy mountains or in the green vallies,
they sang their deep guttural song, kindled their night
fires, talked of the Master of Life, or the little white
men of the mountains, and still found themselves at
home in the desert.
Their most trying position was in passing two
entire
days without food, except the flesh of their lean
and worn out horses, as they waded through an ocean
of little conical sand hills, of thirty leagues extent.
A rock served as a nucleus, around which the
sweeping
winds of the desert raised these innumerable sand
mounds, which every moment interposed in their path;
and in which the warriors and horses sunk to their
knees. One might have fancied these countless
cone-shaped
knolls, altars to the grim divinities of the
desert
,
hunger, thirst, and exhaustion from toil; and
here any other expedition, but one composed of the
red men, would have fallen in hopeless
discouragement
.
But the chief still cried, `courage! beyond
these deserts we shall cross a river abounding in
salmon
,
meadows waving with grass, and woods, where
is abundance of game.' `Shall I,' responded Elder
Wood, `who trust in the living God, and am a
Kentuckian
,
have less faith, and less firmness, than this
heathen and untrained child of the desert. Courage,
Frederic! Let us on to our purpose.'
As the chief had predicted, at the end of the
second
day, as the physical powers of the expedition
were sinking in absolute exhaustion, a waving line of
woods was dimly descried in the verge of the sky.
The sight seemed to impart, as it were, life to the
dead. The horses neighed, and renewed their
exertions
.
The warriors, encouraged by the near
prospect
of relief, pressed onwards. The evening saw
their camp fires blazing amidst a beautiful wood, on
the banks of a wide and flush salmon stream. The
vernal leaves were formed. Innumerable water
dwellers croaked around. The whippoorwills were
pouring forth their monotonous song. Fire flies
gleamed
in the grass and on the branches. The happy
horses
,
turned loose, were rioting in the fresh grass. The
warriors with their blazing torches rushed into the
stream; and with shouts and peals of laughter, as
reckless
,
as though they had never experienced other
sensations
than those of abundance and joy, were
throwing
the salmon on shore. Other warriors were
industriously
turning up the soil for prairie potatoes.
It would be difficult to imagine a happier assemblage
of human beings, than these young and hungry red
men, delivered from the heart-wearing toil of the sea
of sand hills, now exulting around their bright fires,
feasting high upon salmon, a ration of corn cakes,
distributed
on this joyous occasion, roasted prairie
potatoes
,
and a reasonable allowance of spirits. When
they paused for the merry tale, or shouts of laughter,
in the intervals, the pleasant sound was heard of their
horses, advancing step by step upon the grass, and
greadily biting it off to its roots.
When their hunger was at length appeased, Elder
Wood failed not, at this epoch of deliverance and joy,
to call the expedition to prayers and thanksgivings;
nor was it an unimpressive spectacle, to see the
docility
,
with which these pagan dwellers of the desert
gathered round him in reverent stillness, as he poured
forth his acknowledgements to Him, who had thus so
graciously spread their table in the wilderness; and
as he earnestly prayed for the desolate orphans, and a
successful issue in their deliverance from the hand of
their oppressor.
To feed, and refresh their horses and mules, and to
supply themselves with salmon and game, they were
obliged, however impatient to advance, to remain
stationary
one day. Part of the warriors, under the
direction
of the chief, speared salmon. Another part,
accompanied by Elder Wood and Frederic, hunted
buffaloes and elk, which they found in considerable
numbers, feeding in the open woods. Areskoui soon
joined them, to share a sport more congenial and
spirit-stirring, than spearing salmon. The two white
men and the young chief, at considerable intervals,
dashed into a thicket, tangled with laurels, in pursuit
of a herd of buffaloes. Here occurred an incident,
which had well nigh been the last in the annals of
Elder
Wood. Even the buffaloes were incapable of
plunging through the matted and stiff branches of the
laurel clumps, now in full flower. The three
dismounted
at the same moment, and fastened their
horses
,
to pursue the animals on foot. Scarce had Elder
Wood stirred the first clump, when a terrific growl
caused him to recoil; and, roused from his lair, the
next moment a grizzly bear, of prodigious size,
rushed
upon him. To fly was adverse to the maxims of
the Kentucky hunter, if not impracticable, from his
age and the stiffness of his limbs. The huge and
powerful
animal brushed him from his path by a stroke of
his paw, which felled the minister among the bushes;
and advanced upon Areskoui. The enraged
monster
,
with open jaws, disclosing his long and terrible
teeth, reached and held him in his grapple. The
chief could avail himself of no weapons but his knife.
He plied this with equal coolness, intrepidity and
skill. But though the animal received numerous
thrusts, from which the blood streamed, the chief had
also received wounds; and, it was evident, would soon
sink under the talons of the infuriated animal. Elder
Wood recovered, and pressed to his relief. Frederic,
too, leapt over the brush, and was at hand, but could
not fire on the beast, through fear of killing the chief
at the same time. The dogs also made a diversion
in favor of their master, snapping and tearing the
animal
,
wherever they could fix their jaws. Elder Wood
was hacking at the bear with his knife; and all this
aid notwithstanding, the intrepid and athletic chief
was falling under the efforts of the bear. To fall was
to be torn in pieces. As he was half sinking in
exhaustion
,
a timely shot from Frederic, and a thrust to
the heart from Elder Wood, laid the animal at his
length, and delivered Areskoui, torn and covered with
blood. `Tell us only,' cried the deliverers, `that you
feel no mortal hurts.' `Not at all,' he answered in a
calm and assured voice. `You have returned former
obligations in kind; and it is thus, that the hunters of
the desert learn to pay their debts of kindness.' None,
but such hunters, can adequately imagine the extent
of the companionship of friendship created by sharing
such adventures; nor what a theme of interest the
narrative of this fight furnished the warriors
assembled
round their evening camp fires, as they gazed
upon the terrible animal lying before them, and
measured
his talons, teeth and huge dimensions.
After a long and toilsome march, of more than a
month in these inhospitable wilds, from the table
summit
of a mountain, composed of huge piles of sand
stone, they obtained a full view of the blue and
boundless
sea, whitened at intervals by the fresh breeze.
Far to the left, between two elevated stony peaks,
surmounted with low and shrubby evergreens, they
descried the smokes and the log houses of the Russian
village on the main land, opposite Ostroklotz.
Beyond
the houses was visible a ship, on whose masts
fluttered the Russian pennons; and below it a
number
of coasting crafts. A dark, dim speck in the sea,
just discernible by the naked eye, showed distinctly
by the telescope, as an island. It was the isle of
Ostroklotz
.
As the chief announced it, the Indians
raised their loudest rejoicing song. Elder Wood,
Frederic, and the chief embraced, and congratulated
each other, that they had at least accomplished one
point. They saw the prison of the captives. They
gazed long and intently upon the prospect before
them. `There,' cried Areskoui, `is our dear
Wakona
;'
and his eye filled, as he waved his hand
toward
the sky, and invoked the aid of the
Wahcondah
.
Nor did Elder Wood fail to fall on his knees,
and address still more earnest prayers to the God of
Israel for counsel and strength from on high.
Their next thoughts were devoted to the
arrangement
of the best concerted plans, to be devised for the
deliverance of the captives. Where the instinct and
lore of desert knowledge were not concerned, it was
agreed, that the advice of Elder Wood should
prevail
.
In all matters, that concerned the direction of
the warriors, Areskoui best knew what was to be
done. In points relating to acquaintance with the
ways of the whites, and whatever intercourse with
them might be necessary, Frederic had an admitted
superiority of knowledge. Each was to command in
his appropriate sphere. Each covenanted implicit
obedience, and a perseverance even to death, in the
course prescribed by the other. Few enterprizes of
more interest, or of more doubtful and dangerous
aspect
,
than that, which lay before them, can be
imagined
;
and the sacramental oath, by which they pledged
themselves to each other, was one of no common
solemnity.
A main point in their plan was, not to be so
discovered
in mass, as to raise any suspicion of their object.
They were to disperse by day in small companies,
assuming
the employment and appearance of ordinary
bands of Indians, hunting and trapping in the
vicinity
of the Russian settlements. Frederic, speaking
Spanish, a language more or less understood along all
that coast, personating a trapper in dress and
appearance
,
was to visit the village in view, with the
ostensible
object of purchasing powder, lead, and supplies.
To gain every possible information, in relation to the
captives, without exciting any suspicion, was his real
business. A small creek skirted with enormous firs
entered the sea at their left. Regular detachments
of the Shoshonee were appointed to work in rotation,
to build two large periogues; and the rest were
dispersed
in the prairie valleys, to hunt and trap,
keeping
up a constant intercourse by runners.
The dress, the deportment, the stern and yet
reckless
manner, the language and habits of a trapper,
were no new parts to be enacted by Frederic. Even
among the Shoshonee he had but few rivals in this
vocation
.
His character, uniting intrepidity,
concentration
and a clear and discriminating judgment,
admirably
fitted him to avail himself of such advantages
as might offer; and to accommodate himself to
whatever
emergencies might present. He set forth
immediately
to execute his assigned mission, suppressing,
as he might, the palpitations of his heart, as he drew
near the village. Two trappers, on their way to the
town, from another direction, came up with him. He
judged them by their appearance to be Canadians;
and to his inexpressible joy, they proved to be so,
answering
his questions in French. They were
infinitely
communicative, being, as is common to the race,
much more ready to impart, than to ask information;
much more prompt to tell their own story, than
curious
to enquire that of another. It was only necessary
to give a direction to their tongues, to obtain all the
knowledge upon every subject, which they had to
bestow
.
They told him, that the establishment before
them was considered within the territorial limits of
the British fur company of the North West coast; but
at present chiefly occupied by Russians. It bore
their flag; but contained an assemblage of outlaws
from all nations.
Frederic cut short their irrelevant discussion of
matters, that little concerned him, by asking them
about the ship, whose tall masts and streaming
pennons
formed the most conspicuous object in their
view. They immediately commenced a voluble
narrative
upon points, of which every particular went
straight to his heart, and told directly upon the objects
of his enquiry. That vessel, they informed him, had
arrived some twenty nights ago from the Oregon.
The captain and supercargo were profligate and rich
Russians, who had, according to the report, brought
with them two of the most beautiful young ladies, that
had ever been seen. Rumor differed in regard to
their characters; some representing them as
abandoned
and voluntary partners; and others as innocent
captives. Be that as it might, they had been
immediately
conveyed to Ostroklotz, and, no doubt, added
to the members of the harem there. To replenish
this establishment, they sometimes brought young
ladies
from the Spanish settlements on the western coast
of America; sometimes from Kamtschatka; and in
short, from all points visited by Russian ships.
Wherever they could find a beautiful young lady,
who could be tempted by love or money, seduced by
sophistical representations, entangled by intrigue, or
blinded by her passions, she was added to the number
of the victims. It was fully believed, that if these
means were found inefficient, to accomplish their
purposes
,
there was no restraint of honor or conscience
on the tenants of that island, to withhold them from
violence, or even murder.
They proceeded to relate a thousand wild and
incredible
traditions, touching the inaccessible
character
of the island, the impregnable strength of the
fortified
residence of its inhabitants and possessors; and
tales of beautiful apartments, furnished with oriental
splendor and luxury, of the sounds of carouse, music
and dancing always heard within; that an
enchantment
hung over the isle, under the influence of which,
whoever entered this Mahometan paradise, never
VOL. II. 10
could be persuaded to leave it again; with
innumerable
legends of boats dashed in pieces against the rocks,
in attempting to approach it, adduced as proofs, that
it was an enchanted island, which none might
approach
in safety but those who had propitiated its
invisible
guardian powers. Such, in substance, was the
compend of the tale, told by these loquacious
Canadian
trappers. It was easy for Frederic to separate
from their narrative what was fanciful and incredible;
and to retain what was corroborated by
circumstances
,
and coincident with facts previously known to
him. the only point of any material interest in his
thoughts was conclusively settled. That the two
captives
were in durance on the island was put beyond
all doubt. He entered the village, and made as many
enquiries as could be proposed, and satisfied, without
exciting suspicion, touching the holders of the island,
their modes of intercourse with the main land, and
their pursuits on the island. It was easy to perceive,
that the inhabitants of the village were, in a measure,
the vassals of the haughty, powerful and abandoned
residents of the island. No dependence could be
placed
upon any effort to create a party here, who would
aid them in their purpose to regain the captives.
Satisfied, therefore, to have gained so much
information
,
without exciting suspicion, and to have
ascertained
the practicability of entering the village, and
departing from it unquestioned, he returned to his
friends, who exulted in his acquired information, as
invaluable, although it induced a long, and
perplexing
consultation.
The alternatives were successively examined. One
was, to attack, and destroy the settlement on the
main land by surprize, for which the three hundred
followers of Areskoui might be deemed an adequate
force. They could in this case retain a sufficient
number of the inhabitants, as hostages, and compel
them to pilot their force to the island, the fortified
place of which they might either storm, or induce the
possessors to capitulate. But the intercourse
between
the main land and the island was so regular
and rapid, that the former could not be carried,
without
giving the alarm to the latter, and allowing the
holders of the captives sufficient time, either to
destroy
them, or escape with them, at their pleasure.
Besides, the number of armed men in the two places,
united, considerably exceeded theirs. All accounts
concurred, in representing the fortification, as of
impregnable
strength, and amply supplied with the
means of sustaining a long siege.
It was, therefore, deemed more practicable to
commence
their purpose by stratagem, and the attempt
to interweave in their project different and
unconscious
agents; and in particular, as soon as their
periogues
should be built, to land, if it might be,
unobserved
on the island, and reconnoitre the fortification,
during the night. This plan being adopted, nothing
further could be done, until the periogues should be
finished, and equipped. All the warriors, who were
not occupied in this labor, were dispersed to hunt
buffaloes
and elk, and others to pursue seals, sea otters,
and sea lions. In short, their employments studiously
wore the aspect of being such, as the inhabitants of
the village and the island were accustomed to
witness
,
as the ordinary face of things, without
enquiring
the nation or views of the Indian hordes about
them, with all of whom at this time they cultivated
relations of peace.
As many of the most expert periogue builders, as
could work to advantage together upon the two
intended
crafts, were designated for that purpose; to
be relieved, when weary, by another party; and they
were aided by Areskoui, and the two white friends,
to accelerate the work in every possible way.
Meanwhile
the order of these annals requires, that we
should return to consider the causes and the mode of
this second abduction of Jessy; and the events, that
befel the unhappy prisoners, up to the time of the
arrival
of the Shoshonee opposite Ostroklotz.
Subsequent
events will sufficiently explain the sources of
this information.
It is necessary, to preserve the thread of events, to
recur to the point of time, when Julius Landino, as
has been seen, was banished, by a Shoshonee council,
from the valley. To a select number of warriors it
was assigned to report, that they had seen him below
the falls of the Oregon. This commission, who were
charged with his deportation, there put him into a
small canoe, pushed him into the stream, and with the
heaviest Indian curse informed him, that if he was
ever seen again in their country, every Shoshonee
would feel himself bound by their immemorial usage,
to kill him. The abandoned convict paddled his
canoe
in safety to Astoria. Money and concealment
were at his command; and the rumor of what had
transpired among the Shoshonee, in relation to him,
produced no other general impression, than that an
idle young man had practised debaucheries
offensively
among them. The shame, danger and disgrace of
his adventure were very imperfectly known. His
residence there was little more noted, than that of
any other individual; and he had thus every
opportunity
to renew his intercourse with his friends and the
disaffected among the Shoshonee. He diligently
applied
himself to weave his web anew. Rage,
disappointed
lust, revenge, every burning and diabolical
passion, excited to tenfold intensity by a deep felt sense
of humiliation, festered in his dark bosom. He swore
an oath on his soul, that rather than fail in his
determination
to obtain possession of Jessy Weldon, he
would endure every pain and privation, even were it
the annihilation of his soul. To gratify this desire, he
put down henceforward as the chief purpose of his
existence. Among such a collection of adventurers,
as was always to be found at Astoria, an unprincipled
young man of fine appearance and money at command,
could never want coadjutors and instruments, ready
to institute any partnership for the furtherance of his
designs. It has been seen, that a radical hatred, on
the score of interest, existed between Hatch and
Areskoui
.
An ample bribe and a letter privately
conveyed
to the trader, amalgamated his interests with
those of Julius; and secured in him a crafty, still,
sulky, inveterate and utterly unprincipled agent,
whose seeming recklessness and indifference to every
object, but gain, threw over his agency a covert of
apparent incapability of meditating any other
thoughts. It need not be said, that the co-operation
of Nelesho was certain, from similarity of character,
from hatred towards Areskoui, and meditated lust
and revenge in reference to Jessy.
The Shienne chief, with some of his confidential
Indians, accompanied by Hatch and Baptiste,
descended
to Astoria. In one of its secluded cabins
these dark spirits were in conclave and cabinet
council
,
plotting the ruin of the family of William
Weldon
.
While their project was ripening, Nelesho
ordered
down the greater part of his warriors and
partizans
,
who were instructed to descend in successive
detachments
,
to give their descent the appearance of
being in the regular course of their habits. The
result
of their counsels was to distribute large portions
of rum to the Shienne, to keep them in a constant state
of semi-intoxication, that their brain might be steadily
inflamed to a state of indifference to consequences,
and a degree of frenzy and madness, which would
render them the easy and certain instruments of the
cool and crafty master spirits, who should be with
10*
them, to give their fury any requisite direction. In
this state they were to be conducted home from
Astoria
.
When this habit has been induced for a length
of time, it is well known, that the first hours of
withdrawing
from them their accustomed means of
intoxication
,
create in them such a rabid appetite for rum,
as will convert them into demons to obtain it. For a
short time before their arrival in their native valley,
it was arranged, that their rations of rum should
wholly cease; and Hatch was to be at hand to avail
himself of that state of frenzy, which it was foreseen,
would follow from this privation.
With such a prescribed plan, the Shienne chief
ascended
to the Shoshonee valley. Some hours before
reaching home, the Shienne were informed, that their
rum was exhausted. Hatch, as has been seen, put
them on the scent, that William Weldon hoarded
immense
quantities, swallowing it in solitary and
niggardly
enjoyment, and at the same time, constantly
joining with Elder Wood and Ellswatta to declaim
against the brutality of Indian drunkenness. Nelesho
was in his place, and perfectly cool, to let loose upon
the objects of their intended vengeance, the terrific
fury of their rabid appetites. It was foreseen, that
the massacre of William Weldon and Yensi would
be a natural result of the infernal passions, thus
unchained
.
It was intended, that Jessy and Katrina
should have been brought down in the first instance
to Astoria, to have remained in the power of Julius
and his friends, as long as they should minister to
their guilty passions; and when they had kept them
to satiety, they were to be transferred to Nelesho,
who was to join the Black-feet with all his adherents,
in a league of exterminating hostility towards the
Shoshonee.
It has been seen, how different a termination
Providence
gave the diabolical project. One of the
guilty
instruments fell by the unexpected return of
Areskoui
and his warriors. The return, which retaliated
such ample measures of vengeance, was unexpected,
because, to try the fidelity of Nelesho, Ellswatta had
announced in public a longer hunt, than was really
intended. One of the calculated results happened
according to the wish of Julius. Hatch and Baptiste,
flying the disclosures, they too well knew the
Shienne
would make, escaped for their lives to Astoria,
leaving every thing behind to confiscation and ruin;
and were now united to Julius by the tie of absolute
dependence upon him for subsistence. They
anticipated
,
as a natural consequence of what had
happened
,
that Jessy and the Kentucky minister would leave
the country by the route of Astoria. All parties
were thus premonished, to make sure of the
emigrants
by the first opportunity, that should offer,
after
their arrival at Astoria. The steps of the
emigrants
were watched by agents, who kept invisible.
It was a discouraging circumstance to find, that
Areskoui
,
Elder Wood and Frederic were well armed,
surrounded
with Shoshonee, and apparently determined
not to lose sight of their orphan proteges.
The Russian ship Czarina, commanded by Captain
Orlow, with a person, whom he called Colonel
Davidow
,
for Lieutenant, had been sometime at Astoria,
and was about to sail for the Russian settlement
opposite
Ostroklotz. The captain was son of a
Russian
nobleman, irreligious, and abandoned to every
species of dissipation and debauchery. He had
squandered his patrimony in Iicentiousness, and was
compelled to accept the command of a Russian fur
ship, as the only mode of subsistence, that offered to
his ruined fortunes. He had obtained the additional
appointment of commandant of Ostroklotz. Its far
famed harem came in this way naturally under his
power. To cater for this establishment, by
supplying
it with new victims, was an episode in the rough
and hazardous functions of a sea captain in those
inclement
and boisterous seas, peculiarly congenial to
such a man. In Davidow he found a fit coadjutor.
He had been a colonel in the Russian service, who
had been cashiered for cowardice. But he had
relatives
in power, who for their own sake, and on
account
of his relationship, procured a mitigation of the
customary punishment in such cases. He had been
simply dismissed the service.
Julius became acquainted with these personages.
Community of principles and pursuits ripened their
acquaintance at once to an intimacy. To provide
two such recruits for the harem of Ostroklotz, as the
two fair orphans, from the Shoshonee valley, was a
service precisely in their line of pursuit. The
preliminaries
of an engagement between them and
Julius
were not difficult to settle. The pretext for
carrying
off Jessy was to be, that she was a distant
connexion
of Julius, who had misbehaved, and eloped
from Macoa to Astoria, and thence to the Shoshonee
with Frederic; that he had been there in pursuit of
her, and had now found her, and was reclaiming her,
in virtue of a charge to that effect from her friends.
With regard to Katrina, being just advanced beyond
childhood, and incapable of making out her own case,
in opposition to any plea, they might assign, they took
no measures.
Hatch and Baptiste watched every movement of
the emigrants, from the moment of their arrival.
Foreseeing, that their first object would be to obtain
a passage in the ship anchored just below the
Czarina
,
then about to sail for Canton, they were lying in
wait under the river's bank. The moment, in which
the orphans were left by their protectors, who went
on board the China ship, anchored but twenty
fathoms
from the shore, was seen to be the critical one of
their fate. They sprang up the bank. The terrified
orphans in faintness uttered but a single scream, when
they were seized. Handkerchiefs were pressed into
their mouths, and the two wretches scrambled down
the bank with them, as the tiger carries off its prey.
The Czarina was ready to cast off her fasts.
Julius
was on board, and every thing waiting. The
captives were secured in the inner cabin, and
rendered
incapable of cries for help, until the vessel was so
far from the danger of a rescue, as to leave no
apprehensions
on that score. Nor did a presentiment of
danger come to the thoughts of their friends, as they
saw the Czarina pass them, scudding under the weight
of the current and the wind.
CHAPTER XI.
Darkness and clouds surround thy righteous throne,
Eternal King! And thy mysterious steps
Are o'er the trackless deep. Oh, might I ask,
Why thou hast stored such fountains fathomless
Of love? why woven countless thrilling ties
Of exquisite and unnamed tenderness,
Within a heart ordained to break in death!
M. P. F.
The
Czarina had already made some leagues down
the Oregon, and the ships and Astoria were out of
sight, when the captives were delivered from the
suffocating
torment, inflicted by two brutal sailors, who
held handkerchiefs in their mouths, so as only to
allow
them respiration, while two others held them fast
in their arms. The ruffians disappeared, left them
in a little interior cabin, and bolted the door behind
them.
Jessy comprehended in a moment, that wailing, and
struggle with their destiny, and frantic grief, would
be alike unavailing to mitigate their disaster.
Beside
,
her heart had been exhausted by her recent
agonies
to such a degree, as to blunt her keener
perceptions
,
in view of this new source of wretchedness.
Through a kind provision of our nature, we can
neither
enjoy, or suffer beyond a certain degree. All
farther is insensibility. Her recent cup of grief had
been so full, that it could contain no new measures of
sorrow. Despair first brought supine submission; and
the ship had already touched the tumultuous billows
beyond the mouth of the Oregon, before either of the
orphans had uttered a word. Clasped in each other's
arms, their grief had the character of mute and
inexpressible
agony. The sensation of tossing on the sea,
though never experienced by either before, told them
but too plainly what was their position. The dim
light from their little window and sky light panes was
waning; and the heavy roll of the sea and entire
darkness came upon them together. The fortitude
of despair, and the indignant energy of a strong mind,
slowly returning to a full consciousness of the new
outrage practised upon her, began to supply Jessy
with thoughts and words. She gently unlocked the
embracing arms of Katrina, and placed the sobbing
girl on the plank seat by her side. She kissed her
repeatedly, and spoke to her in an assumed tone of
soothing calmness. `My dear companion in sorrow,'
she said, `all is not yet lost, so long as we are
innocent
,
and can place our confidence in our
ever-present
heavenly Father. Grief and weeping will avail
us nothing. God has appeared for me, and brought
deliverance in a case, apparently as hopeless as this.
Let us be wise, and call into exercise all our powers,
while we invoke the aid of the Almighty. I charge
you to imitate my example, to be as sparing as
possible
of conversation, when we are overlooked; and,
above all, let us never be separated a moment from
each other, while we have life.'
The affectionate Katrina threw her arms anew
round her neck, watering it with a shower of tears.
For a few moments her grief was boisterous and
irrepressible
.
But the soothing persuasions of Jessy
calmed her. She gradually restrained her sobbing,
crossed herself, told the beads of her rosary, looked
upwards in the darkness, and promised to act
implicitly
according to these directions. Both again fed
in silence upon their gloomy reflections.
They had been at sea, perhaps, an hour, when the
cabin door was unbolted; and Baptiste, with insolent
satisfaction upon his countenance, presented himself
before them, with a lamp and a tray, on which were
various refreshments. He had not forgotten his usual
obsequious politeness. He wished them
bon voyage
,
and felt himself
infiniment hereux
, that he was
appointed
to attend them. He proceeded in his usual
jargon of mixed French and English, to instruct them,
what a happy condition awaited them. They were
bound, he told them, to a paradise.
Messieurs
, the
officers, were most charming gentlemen. Their old
friends, Julius and Hatch, were on board. They had
plenty of stores. They must enjoy themselves in
another
fashion here, from what was possible among the
savages. He hoped to have the infinite satisfaction
of seeing them happy. To this end he had brought
them supper. As he said this, he sat his tray on a
little circular table, manifestly disconcerted at the
contemptuous silence, which Jessy maintained
towards
him. A slight suffusion colored his sallow and
impudent face, as he stood bowing to persons, who
deigned not the slightest mark of recognition in
reply
.
After a few moments of awkward hesitation,
he retired, muttering `
sacre bleu!
You are
dem
forouche
et hautaine pour le present. N'importe;
you
find your tongue again, after leet time,
sacre!
'
Tea, meats, fish, bread and wine were before them;
but beside, that they began sensibly to feel the motion
of the sea, it may be readily imagined, that they had
little inclination for supper. It remained untouched;
and the desolate captives relapsed into a sad silence,
interrupted only by an ejaculation interpreted by
starting tears. An interval of some time ensued,
before
their cabin was again entered. Captain Orlow
then introduced himself. His manner was that of
affected
and proud humility. He mentioned his name,
and that of his ship, and explained some of the
circumstances
of the intended voyage. His
conversation
was in French, which he spoke with ease and
fluency. He regretted, that a voyage in those seas
must be unpleasant to ladies, notwithstanding all his
efforts to render them comfortable. If any were
wanting, which his means could supply, he hoped,
they would so far honor, and oblige him, as to let him
know their wishes. He feared, from seeing their
supper untouched, that they were suffering from sea
sickness, a circumstance of discomfort, that would soon
pass away, with much more unmeaning commonplace
of the same sort.
During this tedious harangue, Jessy had leisure to
take a general survey of him, on whom, apparently,
her destiny depended. His appearance was not
destitute
of nobleness. In society he would have been
called handsome; and she remarked with a gleam of
joy, that traces of feeling and humanity were not
wholly obliterated from his countenance.
Alternations
of suffusion and paleness passed over it,
indicating
,
that shame, in the consciousness of his outrages
and base purposes, had not been entirely overcome.
It was enough in their forlorn case to banish absolute
despair. Perhaps he might be inspired with
relentings
.
Perhaps his feelings might be enlisted, to
protect
them from the ultimate purposes of Julius.
She summoned all her energy of self-possession, to
answer him with calmness and discretion. She told
him, that she was not wholly bereft of hope, in
finding
herself addressed by a person, who seemed to have
known the manners of a gentleman, instead of
receiving
the greeting of a ruffian, which she expected, and
for which they had prepared themselves.
Pride and wrath flashed in his eye. It was equally
unexpected by him, he said, to receive the language
of contumely and superiority, instead of the subdued
and more befitting address of persons completely in
his power.
`Why are we in your power?' retorted Jessy. `By
what authority have you torn us from our friends and
protectors, and imprisoned us here, as if we were
seized
to be sold beyond the sea, as slaves?'
`By the authority,' he rejoined, `which a natural
guardian, an authorized relative has over a recreant
fugitive, bringing disgrace upon herself and her
friends. With such views, I understand, M.
Landino
has crossed the sea, and pursued you to your
retreat
among the savages of the interior. I am thrice
happy, to serve such a highly respectable gentleman;
and be in any way instrumental in restoring to honor
and her friends a lady, at once so beautiful, and lost
to a sense of reputation.'
She must have been more or less than woman, if
such a speech had not roused her indignation beyond
the measured terms of prudence and calculation. She
dashed the burning tear from her eye. Her face
glowed; and she made him feel in the powerful
painting
,
which she drew of him, of Julius, and this
outrage
,
what he was, what they considered Julius, and
in what light they regarded the whole transaction.
There was no power in human speech, to probe an
VOL. II. 11
unblushing reprobate's heart more deeply. A deadly
pale came over his face, as she continued her cutting
and humiliating view of his infamy; as she
expatiated
upon her sorrows, her destitution, and her claims
upon pity and forbearance from being so recently and
terribly made an orphan. `The dastardly and
abandoned
wretch,' she concluded, `of whom you are the
vile instrument, no doubt, procured the murder of my
parents. Condemned to the stake by the Shoshonee
for a former outrage, I forgave him, and saved his
infamous life; and this is my return! You, too, must
be a fiend in the form of man, if, when you have
learned the entire truth of these charges, you do not
immediately release me from his bad power, and
subject
him to condign and deserved punishment.'
Her eloquent appeal, made with the invincible
truth and severity of outraged youth, beauty and
forlornness
,
appeared to produce the faltering feeling of
transient compunction, pity and shame. Long habits
of abandoned conscience, and loss of self respect soon
resumed their accustomed sway. He waited,
however
,
with decorous observance, until she had come
to a finish. He then resumed, with the semblance of
subdued and gentlemanly forbearance. His good
fortune, he said, had thrown the beautiful in his path
before. He was well aware, that ladies of her
appearance
were every where privileged, to say
whatever
came into their thoughts. She could not but
know, that indignation infinitely became her, and
added to her charms. It was a stratagem wholly
unnecessary
on this occasion, since she was but too
irresistible
without the necessity of resorting to any such
arts. It was matter of infinite regret to him, that
she considered herself, in his ship, in durance. Still
he could not help thinking, that his accommodations
might compare with those of the Shoshonee; and his
protection, and that of M. Landino, with that of a
savage chief, or a vagabond American. The very
circumstance of finding ladies, so young and
beautiful
,
in such company and under such circumstances,
was of itself sufficient warrant for conveying them,
either voluntarily, or by compulsion, to more befitting
society. He should consider it a proud circumstance
in his life, that he might be in any way subservient
to such a restoration of them to society. The
testimony
of the respectable merchant and the intelligent
Frenchman on board, who had amused him with many
passages of their residence among the Shoshonee,
corroborated the narrative of M. Landino, if it had
needed additional confirmation, which, however, he
begged to assure her, it did not. Notwithstanding
her harsh statements and severe remarks, he felt
bound to continue resolutely to act on the
presumption
of the truth of M. Landino's statement, and to
serve her against her will. He was willing to resort
to measures as painful to him, as they appeared to be
severe to her, to remove her at once and forever from
such unworthy intimacies and predilections, as she
seemed to have established. For the rest, he added,
that very unfortunately, M. Landino had been ill
from the moment of coming on board. The motion
of the ship had rendered his illness severe, and had
precluded him from the power of visiting them in
person
.
He hoped, that this obstacle would soon be
removed
,
and that he should be able to resign the
temporary
guardianship, which circumstances had
imposed
upon him, to the hand of their worthy and
respectable
relative.
This addition of insult to injury, under this show of
gentlemanly and decorous views, added the ultimate
finish to the outrage of their case; and by arousing
indignation, and inspiring the elastic purpose, either
to countervail their base intents, or to resist them to
death, furnished them excitement and motive to
action
.
A ray of hope, too, beamed on the darkness
of their prospects, in the information that Julius was
sick. The intelligence fell upon Jessy's mind, as
light from heaven. She hailed it, as an omen, that
He, who had so wonderfully interposed for her
deliverance
before, would not forsake her now, in this her
utmost need.
She replied, with a composure inspired by such
purposes and hopes, that `conference with a man,
who, under the semblance of the manners and
pretexts
of a gentleman, could allow himself in such acts,
and cloak them with such professed motives, was
wholly useless and unavailing. You cannot but know,'
she concluded, `that we both equally feel, that your
whole conversation, in relation to this abominable
transaction, is one tissue of falsehoods from
commencement
to close. I have but too much reason to fear,
that words are lost on such as you. Yet your
countenance
and manners cannot belong to a person, who
will wholly forget, that I am a mourner, that in
tearing
us from those, whom you are pleased to call
vagabonds
and savages, you have removed us from every
thing dear to our hearts. This poor child is, like
myself
,
an orphan. The only favor you can render us,
so long as we are compelled to remain in your ship,
is to spare us the agony of your presence, and to leave
us to ourselves. As to the food before us, we would
willingly partake of it. But we know this
respectable
M. Landino, and we fear poison.' As she said
this, the burst of indignation passed away. She sat
down pale, and faint, to hide the trickling tears, which
the affectionate Katrina kissed away, as they formed.
Nothing, that wears the form of man, could be so
hardened
,
as to see these innocent and lovely mourners
in this predicament, wholly unmoved. The
purposes
of the captain seemed for a moment undecided.
He hesitated, and was visibly touched with pity. He
murmured a half articulated curse to himself, that
this was altogether a new business; and that these
belles demoiselles
, in his phrase, were
trop talentees pour
lui;
and, with a smile compounded of shame, vexation
and embarrassment, he began to taste of the
different
articles on the tray. `It is enough,' said Jessy.
`Now have the goodness to leave me. You ask me,
what you can do to render me comfortable, while on
board your ship? I answer again, you can relieve
me from the presence of any one, but this dear
companion
of my sorrows. It is all I ask of you.' He
withdrew in visible embarrassment; and, in giving an
account of the interview, he swore, that `he had never
been so completely thrown out of his reckoning in his
life.'
When left to themselves, the debilitating and
disheartening
sensation of sea sickness, the feeling of
utter desertion, the gloominess of their little lonely
cabin, dimly lighted by a single lamp, their narrow
and uncomfortable births, the difficulty of respiration,
from the close air, and the various nauseating odors,
all pressed upon them together. Katrina lost all
fortitude, wrung her hands, wept like a child, and
insisted
,
that she could not survive the night.
Whatever
discouragement was in the heart of Jessy, she
felt that the emergency demanded a different spirit.
She talked in a tone of courage and even
cheerfulness
.
She expressed a firm conviction, that these
circumstances
of gloom would all pass away, that they
should be delivered, and again see happy days. She
rapidly presented soothing and encouraging images
to the imagination of the dejected orphan, called
upon her to take refreshments, and set the example,
by making an effort over herself, assuring her that to
avail themselves of the chances of deliverance, they
must economize, and preserve all their strength and
courage. The example of real magnanimity is, more
11*
than any other, communicated by sympathy. They
took refreshment, and assumed an air of resigned
cheerfulness, embraced each other, recited their
prayers with pious earnestness, and laid themselves
down in their narrow births, without throwing off any
portion of their dress, to such sleep and such dreams,
as such a condition and circumstances may be
naturally
imagined to bring.
Next morning the sea was more calm. The ruddy
beams of a bright sun fell upon their sky lights.
Baptiste entered with his usual obsequious bow, and
national shrug, sat down his tray, wished them
bon
jour
, and, though visibly disconcerted by their
accustomed
dead silence, which marked the contempt of
not appearing even to note his presence, he put forth
his usual loquacity, apparently from the habit of being
unable to restrain his tongue. `The news,' he said,
`were
fort mauvaises
. Julius had one
dem fort fievre
,
and cursed, like a madman. It would do him infinite
good, if the demoiselles would condescend to go, and
see himsacre!' `It is a token for good,' exclaimed
Jessy, folding her hands; `heaven be praised for this!'
`It is one
dem villain priere ca
'cried Baptiste,
shrugging
as usual. But, encouraged, by having obtained
a single word of reply, he continued to publish his
budget of news, from which Jessy learned, that the
wretch was in fact seriously ill in his birth, feeling,
that the hand of God was upon him, and his mind
alternating
between the coward terrors of conscience,
and blaspheming rage, in being thus a second time
precluded the indulgence of his projects and desires.
His was a condition of horror and rage, that no words
could adequately express. It seemed to have wrought
a salutary effect on the officers of the ship. His
terrific
execrations and blasphemies had appalled them
with mental misgiving, and a certain superstitious
shrinking from their purpose; which produced in their
favor a transient forbearance and respect. At least
they were annoyed by no visits, but those of Baptiste,
bringing in their regular meals. They felt, that this
avoidance of dreaded evils, could they have forgotten
the past, would almost have amounted to enjoyment.
When the ship was still, they could occasionally hear
the cries and blasphemies of Julius, even when their
cabin door was closed.
At every visit Baptiste became more familiar,
impudent
and communicative. By the third day, he
kept no measures of scruple or restraint of delicacy.
Aware, that they could not silence his
communications
,
and conscious, too, that it was of infinite
importance
to them, to be forewarned, and forearmed, in
reference to whatever was in agitation respecting
their fate, they drew up, and affected to receive his
voluble narratives, as a disagreeable penance, which
they could not avoid, and which they uniformly
treated
with silent contempt. They did not, however, the
less hear, and perpend, that the two officers of the
ship expected, that Julius would die; that they were
already involved in an angry dispute, in relation to
the appropriation of the captives. Each claimed
Jessy, and each was pertinacious. The version of
Baptiste not only taught them this; but, so
vociferously
and unscrupulously were these claims urged, that
they occasionally reached the ears of the captives over
the usual noises of the ship, and the delirious ravings
of Julius.
To complete this composition of Hecate's cauldron,
it was only necessary, that Julius should learn these
kind prophecies and intentions of his co-partners, in
regard to his case and the disposal of the captives.
He did learn this, and, united to his delirium and
terrors
,
it taught him the agonies of a fiend. Not only
so, but Baptiste had more than once heard the
captives
express a decided comparative confidence in the
captain, over all other persons on board. Baptiste
neither concealed, nor diminished the magnitude of
his secrets. He attempted to win favor with the
captain, by assuring him, that both the demoiselles
were in love with him, and talked of him incessantly.
In the same manner he furnished food to the
inordinate
jealousy of Julius, in his calmer intervals. `The
demoiselles,' he said, `were certainly much taken with
the
joli capitaine
, while, in regard to the lieutenant,
and Julius, Hatch and himself, they were
farouches
comme diables
. The best word, which they got, was
a curse, sacre!' Such views tended not at all to
lessen
the distance between the captain and lieutenant,
nor to soothe the troubled spirit of Julius.
During one night the death of Julius was expected.
Every thing on board was in uproar; and it seemed,
as if even the ship was left to plow its undirected
course. In the extremity of his mental horror,
Julius
despatched Baptiste to implore Jessy to visit him,
and receive his confession of his purposes and his
penitence
.
Jessy deigned not to notice the request even
by a change of countenance. The officious Baptiste
soon returned again. `His master,' (so he called
Julius
)
was disposed to make all the reparation, for the
injuries he had done them, now in his power. In
case of his death, he intended to bequeath all his
hereditary
estate, and the blessing and protection of his
parents, to Jessy.'
For once she departed from her wonted silence.
`Say to your master,' she replied, `that had I the
slightest persuasion of his penitence, much and
irreparably
,
as he has wronged me, I would visit, and
forgive
him; but I am confident, his repentance is the
coward horror of guilt, deprived of its purpose. With
his health, all his vileness would return. May he see
in his present condition the righteous reaction of an
avenging Providence. He will not see me.'
As Baptiste reported this stern message to his
apparently
dying master, he added, that he had seen
much of
demoiselles
, but never such
dem farouches,
impitoyables
sujets
before. Their hearts were hard,
comme des roches
, sacre!' Julius died not, neither did
he convalesce. The passage was rather boisterous,
and the ship made slow headway. The captain and
lieutenant seemed to be withheld from outrage only
by their mutual jealousies, which often found vent in
such loud words and fierce menaces, as were
over-heard
by the parties concerned, notwithstanding the
frequent exclamation, `
hist! They will hear us
.' The
tossing of the large, but mismanaged ship, the cries
of the numerous and awkward crew, the intolerable
odor of the skins on board, the rolling of a rough sea,
narrow and uncomfortable births, and the cramping
confinement, for more than a fortnight, to an area but
a few feet square, such, along with their dark and
foreboding anticipations for the future, were some of
the circumstances, under which the captives made
this voyage. One cheering point of view presented
itself, from which Jessy failed not to derive strength
and support. It was nothing new, that such men
should be sick, or jealous of each other. But she
could not but regard the singular coincidence of the
sickness of Julius, and the abominable question of
claims between the two officers, as providential
arrangements
,
a wonderful neutralizing of one element
by another, in virtue of which they had been hitherto
left unmolested and to themselves.
After a fortnight's beating through these
tempestuous
seas, the prisoners perceived by the cries of the
sailors, by the reports of cannon, and by the sudden
quietness of the ship, that they had entered a haven.
Through the narrow window above their birth, they
descried a rugged and rocky shore, and log houses
scattered here and there. The faint hum of
population
and business, the blows of axes and the baying of
dogs, the cheerful and shrill note of the chanticleer,
and the associated sounds of human habitancy, would
have been the sweetest music in their ears, could they
have hoped to find a single protector and liberty.
But to their dark thoughts, all showed as the home of
their enemies, and the increased number and strength
of the league against them. Night, too, the dark and
foggy night of these northern regions, was settling
upon the scene.
As the evening came on, they could easily
distinguish
the voices of the inhabitants of the village, in
bustling communication with the officers and crew of
the ship. How the heart of Jessy throbbed, as she
could now and then distinguish a conversation carried
on in English by an interpreter. `Suppose,' said
Jessy
to Katrina, suddenly seizing the thought, `we
should cry for help, and throw ourselves on the
protection
of these people. Do you, Katrina, open the
cabin door, and see, if there are any chances of
escape
.'
The affectionate trembler implicitly obeyed;
and for the first time, since their captivity, opened
the cabin door, and advanced into the larger common
cabin. A moment afterwards, the rough and fierce
voice of Davidow was heard in loud expostulation.
He caught the shrieking girl in his arms, brought her
back to her narrow prison, and set her down beside
Jessy with a curse, affirming, that if she was found
moving from her place again, it would be on the
penalty
of being thrown overboard. `Desist, monster,'
cried Jessy, her face glowing with indignation. `You
could do us no greater favor, than to deliver us from
your power, by plunging us both in the sea.' `Ah!
lady,' he replied, with a tone of irony and sneering,
`yonder is your delightful home. Such a spirit
renders
beauty more piquant. That place has tamed
many a spirit, as haughty as yours. We will soon
learn you, like the numerous, and happy inmates of
that place, to love your keepers, and embrace your
chains.'
Every thing was now in the bustle of busy
movement
.
Captain Orlow presented himself. `Ladies,'
he said, `we are at the end of our present voyage.
Your relative and guardian, M. Landino, is too ill at
this time to proceed for China; and we know of no
vessel, that will sail for that country, perhaps for
months. In the interval, and during the
convalescence
of M. Landino, we purpose to place you where
you will be more pleasantly situated, than at this
miserable town, without any befitting
accommodations
.
The place, to which we transfer you, is a
paradise
.
To reach it, we have to embark on a small
coasting vessel, which sails immediately. The wind
serves, and the vessel is ready. Your sick relative
and your friends from the Shoshonee country are
already
on board. Allow me to aid you to join them.'
The name of the place of their destination had
already
reached her ear, and the terrible notoriety of
that place had been the theme of conversation even
among the Shoshonee. Her heart sunk within her,
at the idea of being forced to that impregnable
prison
in the midst of the sea. Resistance was the first
thought, and the purpose to yield her life, rather than
be carried there. Her countenance and manner
evinced
the struggle within. `Please to be speedy in your
choice, ladies,' the captain resumed. `We will die,
rather than go,' she rejoined, as Katrina clung fast to
her. The captain blew a whistle. Three or four
horrid looking beings, dressed in seal-skins, and of a
form and physiognomy unlike any she had seen
before
,
appeared. The captain uttered a few words,
which she comprehended only by the result. In a
twinkling, they were carried by main force; and
almost
before they recovered breath, down a ladder on
board a small vessel, and through the common cabin,
crowded to overflowing, in which a passing glance
discovered to them Hatch, Baptiste, and Julius,
haggard
,
and showing like the ghost of what he had been,
and sustained in his birth by persons holding volatiles
to his nostrils. On the deck and in the cabin by the
glare of torches were visible a great number of strange
faces, requiring little fancy to transform them in the
eyes of the captives to demons. They had no time
for more detailed survey. They were deposited in a
little dark place beyond the main cabin, lighted only
by the uncertain glimmer of a miserable lamp.
Compared
with this, their former cabin had been spacious
and agreeable. In a few moments, they again felt
the rolling of the sea, rendered more irksome by the
pitching of the little crazy vessel, and a space too
narrow to allow them the liberty of extending their
limbs.
The second voyage, though excessively
disagreeable
,
was short. The anchor was cast. The same
uncouth
beings in the seal-skin dresses clutched them
again, and carried them on deck. A number of skiffs
surrounded the vessel, and were successively filled
with passengers, and immediately rowed towards an
island, which began to be dimly visible through the
uncertain light of morning dawn. Baptiste seemed
to be deputed to superintend their transfer to their
new destination. He asked them, if they would
descend
,
volontiers
, into the skiff, that waited for them;
or if they desired the aid of their friends, the
jolis
garcons
in seal-skin dresses? He could tell them, that in
a few minutes, they would now see one
dem superbe
place
, where there were great numbers of
jolies et
riantes
femmes
, and where there were
divertisemens
,
like those of Paris, every day. Seeing that force
was at hand, and that opposition would be
unavailing
,
Jessy said, with an upward look, `my dear
Katrina
,
let us go without being compelled, and as
lambs to the slaughter. The time for resistance has
not yet come. Let us enter the boat, and God be
our guide.' With an air of resignation, they both
stepped down the ladder to the skiff. Their uncouth
keepers followed them, and took their oars.
Baptiste
closed the rear, and they sped away towards the
island.
The isle of Ostroklotz, which they were
approaching
,
is situated a few leagues from the main land, and
rises with a high and bold front of rocks, on which a
prodigious surf is always whitening, and bursting.
When southern storms sweep over unimpeded wastes
of sea for two thousand leagues, a sublimer spectacle
can scarcely be imagined, than the surge, that breaks
upon this front of cliffs, rising five hundred feet above
the common level of the water. A moment after the
blow is struck, the whole height is laved with the
dashing brine from the base to the summit. When
the wave retires, it seems to disclose the fathomless
bases of the isle. The mighty mass, in its advance
and recoil, shows, as if urged by Omnipotence acting
upon the wrathful and heaving element. The
incessant
alternation of afflux and reflux, and the deep and
hollow roar, and the irresistible sweep of the onward
course of the wave, present that sublime spectacle,
which can only be felt in its grandeur, when some
immovable object opposes its power.
From the strength and mass of the current, which
always sets towards this isle, mariners have a
tradition
,
that, at fathomless depths, its bases are
perforated
;
and that the ocean current rushes under it. A
mile from it, there is firm anchorage, from which it is
accessible only by small crafts, that can be chiefly
guided by oars; and that only in one narrow channel.
Whatever vessel, large or small, should attempt to
approach it, in any other direction, would experience
VOL. II. 12
the inevitable fate of being impelled towards it by an
irresistible power, and shivered against the cliffs, like
a potter's vessel. This constituted a very material
part of its fancied impregnable security. From
circumstances
unknown, this strange isle was frequented
by immense numbers of sea monsters, of all the
uncouth
and unwieldy classes of those seas. They alone
can venture to sport beneath the tremendous surges,
that break upon the shore. Here they resort for sun
and repose in calm weather. During storms, even
these expert water dwellers are wrecked, in such
numbers as to have offered the inducements to the
first settlement of the island.
From the bar of anchorage, about a mile from the
shore, commences the narrow current, by which the
small crafts are carried to the island. This current
is as a rapid river, still much swifter, than the
general
current that sets towards the shore. On each
side of it is an eddy. Those wishing to land on the
isle, and initiated into the secret of this narrow and
rapid ocean stream, commit their skiff to it. Oars
are of little use. The skiff is borne passively and
irresistibly
onward. It sweeps them beneath the
over-hanging
and moss-covered cliffs, for the distance of
a quarter of a mile, during which transit they are in
almost rayless darkness. They again emerge to the
light of heaven, and view themselves still borne
onward
between parallel walls of stone, rising, as it
were, to the sky. From the fury of the current, the
stream is of a foamy whiteness. At the landing, it
disparts from a cliff rising in its centre, and rushes on
to unknown distances beyond in two branches. An
eddy is formed by this rock, which becomes a natural
harbor for the boats. Round a high point of this
cliff they throw their fasts. Failure to seize this eddy
would merge the boat in one or the other of the
disparting
currents beyond. To the experienced it is a
work of no difficulty to make the harbor. To all
others
,
it would be destruction. Departure from the
island is by either of the eddies on each side of the
stream. Committed to either, the boat is swept
almost
as rapidly to sea, as the current brought it to
land. Such are the peculiar circumstances of
approach
to this singular island, and departure from it.
They have no parallel in any other known portion of
the seas; and in the imaginative and superstitious
thoughts of sailors might well pass for the work of
enchantment.
The skiff, which conveyed the captives, was put
into this current. It sped away, like an arrow
towards
the isle. The morning sun at the same
moment
emerged from the orient wave, and threw its
own glory upon the blue and illimitable expanse.
Before them was the terrific burst of the full ocean
upon the cliffs. The deafening roar, the surges
swelling
aloft, the dizzying swiftness of their motion, every
thing about them would have inspired awe and terror
in minds less painfully occupied with other thoughts.
They had scarcely time to view their position, before
they were swept into the dark chasm. Again the
light of heaven opened on them from above. They,
who managed the skiff, dexterously threw their fast
around the point of rock. The skiffs, which had left
the small vessel at anchor, had apparently just
arrived
before them. The rock spread out a broad table
surface, on which Baptiste bade them land.
Violence
,
they knew, was at hand if they did not. They
stepped on the rock. `
Montez volontiers, s'il vous
plaise
,' cried the Frenchman, in a tone of command,
while one of their conductors preceded them.
Natural
blocks of sand stone formed commodious stairs of
ascent for the greater part of the height to the level
of the isle. Where they failed, stairs had been
carefully
wrought in the solid stone. The ascent of
between
four and five hundred feet was wearying, and
would have exhausted the captives, had not the
tension
of their minds precluded the consciousness of the
sensation of fatigue.
When they reached the level of the island, they
discovered an armed guard, at a point, where two
could defend the pass against any numbers, that might
approach abreast. Words of intelligence passed
between
the guards and the conductor, who preceded
them. The former clubbed their arms, and
motioned
the captives to move past them. The orphans
pressed their feet once more on the stable earth, and
on grass and flowers. What a grateful change,
under
other circumstances, it would have been, from the
roll of the sea, the deafening roar, and the awful
spectacle
of the swelling billows in their wrath threatening
instant destruction. Ancient forests of larch and the
most beautiful white birches, with their pensile
branches, imitating the forms of the weeping willow,
overshadowed a turf of the softest verdure. The
fragrance
came upon their senses like the breath of
paradise
.
The fully developed vernal foliage trembled
above them. Ginseng, the beautiful May-apple,
innumerable
columbines, vocal with the hum of bees,
ladies' slippers, and purple violets decorated the
sward. Strange birds flitted, and sang around them,
and unknown animals skipped from their path. Here
and there, a cone shaped hill arose, like the dome of
a noble temple, from the forest, charmingly
surmounted
with spruces and cedars, and showing, in the
uncovered
intervals, gigantic piles of square blocks of
stone of dazzling whiteness. Nature seemed to have
exhausted her efforts, in giving to this remote northern
isle the flaunty gaiety, the aromatic atmosphere and
the rich vegetation of the south. Wretched as they
were, their eyes still saw, their senses still conversed
with this cheering nature. `It is a beautiful spot,' said
Jessy, with an encouraging look to Katrina. `You
see, that the Author of beauty, and the Father of
mercies has been here before us. Let neither our
trust, nor our courage fail us.'
Their pioneer was before them, and signed them to
advance, with a look, that required no explanation.
Baptiste and the other conductors brought up the
rear. The captives moved on, already warned by
bursts of cannon, and the reports of small arms, and
repeated huzzas in the intervals, that some peculiar
festivity was enacting, but a short distance from them
in the forest. They passed onward, at every step
pressing
down the strawberry blossoms, and their path
was at the declivity of one of the curious, cone-shaped
hills, that might easily have been mistaken for an
artificial
cupola of five hundred feet in height. Fifty
paces carried them past this hill, when a circular
plain of cleared ground opened upon their eye. All
the varieties of domestic animals were moving about
in seeming terror over this verdant plain, apparently
frightened from their peaceful ruminations by the
bursts of the cannon, the smoke of which arose, like
a cloud, from a magnificent square and high
fortification
in the centre of the cleared plain. From its
highest tower the Russian standard, with its proud
national emblazoning, fluttered in the breeze. To
persons, like the captives, who had never seen such
works of art before, the fortification had an aspect of
the most imposing grandeur. It was evidently
composed
of the massive blocks of white stone from the
singular hills, that arose in its vicinity. Covered on
the roof, as it was, with the bark of the white birch,
it shone in the morning sun with a dazzling
whiteness
,
forming a strong contrast with the deep and
funereal
green of the larches, that surrounded the open
space. Arrived in front of this formidable place, the
captives shrunk back, and turned, apparently with
12*
the purpose to fly. A massive gate opened. Their
conductors dragged them, faint and almost
unconscious
,
within the walls. Soldiers surrounded them.
The gate recoiled on its hinges. The roar of cannon
was repeated. They felt, that they were shut up in
the fortification. Overcame by terror, fatigue, and
emotion, the whole scene swam for a moment before
the eyes of Jessy, and she sank in unconsciousness.
When she recovered, she opened her eyes upon
a spacious dining hall, carpeted richly, and
gorgeously
fitted up in the style of a sumptuous military
saloon
.
She was on a mattrass. The hall was full of
people, many of whom were ladies flauntily tricked
out for show, and the rest were chiefly officers in
uniform
,
or servants. At no great distance from her lay
Julius on a settee, in the sallowness of extreme and
haggard debility, snuffing volatiles, and fanned by
Hatch. Ladies were tendering him officious services.
Over her own mattrass hung the captain and
lieutenant
.
Women at her head and her feet were
proffering
aid, and bathing her temples. Katrina held
to her by an immovable grasp, and a flow of tears
announced her joy at being again recognized. `Dear
Jessy,' she exclaimed, `I entreat you not to die just
now, and leave me alone in this dreadful place.' `I
desire to live,' she answered, `my dear companion,
for thy sake, for the sake of my friends, and the
confusion
of these our cruel oppressors.'
This heroic manifestation, and the color again
mantling
her pale cheek, renewed the merriment and joy
which rung in the hall at their entering, and which
had evidently been suspended by the alarm,
occasioned
by her faintness. `You are exhausted with
fatigue
and the discomfort of your voyage,' said captain
Orlow. `Rest and refreshments will soon, we hope,
restore you. You are welcome a thousand times to
Fort Ostroklotz, or, as we more familiarly call it, the
Northern Paradise. I have the honor to be
commander-in-chief
in this place. All its comforts are at
your command, and its inhabitants your servants.'
`Thanks for your infinite condescension,' replied Jessy,
summoning spirit to sustain her, and striving to
disguise
her palpitation and terror. `Our thanks are
the rather due, as we receive all this kindness
involunatarily
.
You proffer kindness. I take you at your
word. I even ask it of you. I am feeble and faint.
I am a woman, a captive and a mourner. You have
availed of brute power to bring us to this detested
den. Enjoy your triumph over two unprotected
orphans
.
But, I supplicate, I implore of you one favor.
The spectacle of what I here behold, in my present
state of health, would shortly kill me. You cannot
doubt it. Dispose of us in any way, so that we be
by ourselves. Remove us from these hated sights.
Allow us repose, and time to recover our thoughts,
and reconcile ourselves to our hard condition.'
She folded her hands, and uttered these requests
in the form of a suppliant, and with almost frenzied
earnestness. Fearful that her faintiness would
return
,
and apparently moved alike by alarm and some
remains of humanity, captain Orlow assured her, that
her request should be granted. He whispered a lady,
who seemed to be a personage in authority among
the women of the establishment. Whatever he had
said to her, she received it with a laugh of derision.
However, she disposed herself to execute his charge,
and came to the bed. She said, that she would have
the honor to aid her and her young friend to their
apartment, and she offered her arm. Jessy
immediately
arose, and indignantly refusing her aid, begged
her to lead the way. The female inmates of the
place surveyed them meanwhile with intense
interest
,
whispering in groups. The view of sin-worn
beauty in gaudy finery, and in unblushing
dissoluteness
,
contemplating them as a spectacle, nerved the
faint mourner to firmness and dignity as she
withdrew
,
casting upon them a look of withering scorn.
The authoritative personage, who preceded the
captives
,
before she left the hall, laughingly said to
captain
Orlow, `why count,' (such was his title) `you have
brought to us queens of tragedy. Did I enact the
virtuous and forlorn damsel as well, when I first came
among you?' `Indeed you did,' he replied; `and I
hope, she will be as docile, and as ready to lay aside
the buskin, as you were.' `No doubt of it,' was the
answer from a dozen voices.
Their conductor led the way out of the hall, and
the captives followed into a long entry, which led
between
two suits of apartments, apparently sleeping
rooms. `You,' she said to Jessy, `will occupy this
apartment;' `and you,' to Katrina, `that,' pointing to
one, a considerable distance onward in the entry. A
look passed between them. Katrina embraced Jessy.
`Be assured,' she exclaimed with resolute firmness,
`that death alone shall separate us.' `It is the express
command of the count,' said the woman, `that you each
occupy her assigned apartment. Each room is
supplied
with but one bed, and is intended for but one
person.' `We two, however,' rejoined Jessy, `will
occupy the same or none.' The boisterous tone of
the conductor soon brought the captain and
lieutenant
,
Baptiste and Hatch into the entry. A whistle
summoned the uncouth beings in seal skins before
them. `Will you have the kindness,' said the
captain
,
`to repair quietly to your assigned apartments.'
`We will not,' replied Jessy, `nor to any other,
except
together.' He nodded to the lieutenant, and,
as if ashamed of what was to ensue, returned to the
hall. `Take them,' said the lieutenant to the
persons
in seal skins, `to their separate apartments.'
They attempted to separate them. But Katrina held
convulsively to Jessy, in a grasp which yielded not
even to their force; and the abode was in the
meantime
filled with shrieks of such agony, as appalled
even the callous and abandoned inmates of the place.
A cry from the hall summoned Hatch and Baptiste
thither. It was that of Julius, increasing the din by
his execrations. `I positively forbid you,' he
exclaimed
,
`on penalty of being abandoned, and disowned by
me, from allowing any disposal to be made of the two
girls, until I shall have regained my health, and shall
be able to take my own measures in the case. In the
mean time see to it, that they have one apartment,
and are not separated. Let none carry them food,
but yourselves. You are answerable, that they are
shielded from all intrusion unauthorized by me.'
His determined tone brought on a violent
altercation
between him and the two Russians. Each talked
of his claims. Each began to recur to threats of
violence
.
Curses and recriminations ensued. Each
one of the females took some part in the fray. The
mercenaries of Julius were ranged on one side, and
those of the Russians on the other. Dirks were drawn,
and the place was filled with shrieks; and Hatch
and Baptiste stood beside Julius, who was gasping
with rage and weakness; while his champions, though
armed to the teeth, were pale with affright. The
doors were thrown open. Some of the inmates had
already escaped to the esplanade, and the soldiers on
duty hearing the infernal din, were advancing
towards
the hall.
The captain stamped on the floor, and ordered
silence
in a voice of thunder. The soldiers were
ordered
back to their posts. He conversed a few
moments
,
in a low and confidential tone, with Julius. At
the close of the parley, he gave new orders to the
woman
,
to allow the young ladies, since such was their
pleasure, to occupy the same apartment. `Quiet
yourselves,' said he to the trembling captives. `You
shall be together, and no one shall intrude upon you,
unbidden by yourselves, until M. Landino shall be
able to decide upon future arrangements.' The
woman
led the way, and they followed her into a
spacious
apartment, at the end of the entry. The
hangings
were of glaring colors, covered with landscapes,
figures and scenes, appropriate to the character and
pursuits of the place. The bed was voluptuously
curtained in the same style. `This is the state room,
and the apartment of honor in the castle,' said the
woman, with a knowing glance at the style of the
hangings and the curtains. `The taste must be
fastidious
,
that will not be gratified with the fitting up of
this room.' Every part of the furniture was in
perfect
keeping; and the first movement of the captives
was to examine every nook, corner and concealment
of the apartment, to see that nothing dangerous was
covered from view in it. The woman had thrown
herself into a lolling chair, and laughed aloud, while
they proceeded in the survey, as if unconscious of her
presence. `You will search in vain for a lover in
this desolate place,' she said. `You might have found
better fortune in separate rooms.' The captives
continued
their search, and when finished, Jessy replied,
`you will perceive, that your presence is no longer
desired.' At the same time she moved towards the
door, to take possession of the key. The woman
anticipated
her. `I am commanded,' she said, `to hold
this at my own disposal.' She dropped them a
contemptuous
courtesy, assuring them, she had no
doubt, that they would soon be as ready to solicit other
society, as they now seemed so outrageously desirous
to avoid it. She wished them a good morning, and
fiercely closing the door behind her, was heard
locking
it upon the outside.
The precious moments, after they were thus left to
themselves, were spent in conversations,
arrangements
and counsels; and in sacramental promises in
relation to the conduct, which they mutually pledged
to each other in certain specified cases of trial. Nor
did they fail to invoke the aid and guidance of the
Almighty, to sustain them in whatever might befal
them. They then threw themselves on the bed, and
reposed themselves, as they might.
Baptiste, as on ship-board, seemed to have been
deputed to serve them with refreshments; and at once
in his new position resumed his familiar and annoying
habits of loquacity, being not less desirous, than
formerly
,
to communicate all the news of the castle. `It
was a thing
dem strange
,' he was in the habit of
remarking
frequently, `that Julius should be so much
sick, just at the time, when he had such a particular
desire to be well.' He was eloquent in praise of the
place. Every one was happy to a charm. He
admired
at their taste to coop themselves up in that
single
dull room, like owls in a hollow tree. He
constantly
ended by averring, that the people there,
though happy as angels, were
dem farouche
. We
sleep, he added, shrugging, upon gunpowder.
Il fait
grand peur
. To all this Jessy would sometimes say,
`were you not a happier man, Baptiste, when you
were honest and industrious among the Shoshonee?'
To this question, Baptiste would answer with his
shrug, `dem Spotted Panther non bon.'
It is foreign to the intentional brevity of these
annals
to give a detailed journal of the daily incidents
of the captives during the many days of their
imprisonment
.
Baptiste regularly supplied them with
food. After the second day, the female inmates of
the place seemed to have it in charge to visit their
apartment in companies, with the professed object of
being desirous to amuse their solitude. Nor did
their frequent and pointed assurance, that these visits
were odious, tend in the slightest degree to shield
them from the annoyance. They were soon made
aware, that it was a persecution, for which they had
no other remedy, than to submit in silence and
patience
.
The insolence and immodesty of these
visitants
were neither to be avoided, worn out, or
abashed. When the captives talked of other subjects,
they still pursued their detestable theme at the same
time. Nor could they, so completely was their moral
sense destroyed, be brought to realize, that themes of
such extreme interest to them could be disgusting to
their victims.
It was manifest from their own account of their
condition, that their want of understanding, and their
unblushing destitution of modesty, had long deprived
them of any interest even for their abandoned
keepers
.
Some of the inmates, in weariness with life, put
an end to their existence. Others went off
voluntarily
with the Aleutians, that inhabited the island, and
became more filthy and disgusting, than even the
native
females. The loud and forced gaiety of brandy
and revel made up the sum total of their joys. Their
only mental pleasure seemed to be to beguile other
unhackneyed victims to the same condition with
themselves
.
Though such had been their envy, in regard
to newly acquired favorites, that while they had
labored
with all their arts and powers to seduce the
victims to their own level, the moment they had
achieved their abominable success, they were known
to have mixed poison for them.
It appeared from their tales of occasional
confession
,
that they were natives of various countries; that
some of them had arrived there to a certain degree
innocent, as most of them had once been beautiful. It
was the maxim of the establishment, always to prefer
seduction to violence. The victims were mentally
and physically drugged. Each one, that had fallen,
became an instrument, prompt and efficient, to drag
the innocent down. Their principles were assailed.
Their moral sense was weakened by gradual
development
of such views, as shocked less and less, every time
they were contemplated. They were plied with
company
,
or solitude, as was judged best to subserve the
designs upon them. Their wants, their hopes and
fears were all tried in turn. It was constantly
sounded
in their ears, that there was no escape from the
castle. Sometimes it was hinted to them, that
compulsion
extenuated, if it did not destroy the guilt. It
was the triumphant declaration of the inmates, that
no one had ever yet resisted the seductions of the place.
The male partners of this establishment united in
one reckoning business, pleasure and military defence.
It was always in times of alarm garrisoned with one
company of soldiers, who were for the most part
supplied
with wives from the abandoned inmates of the
officers' harem. The present was a time of profound
peace, and the soldiers scarcely exceeded twenty in
number. It was a great depot of the furs taken in
those seas, and the rivers, that emptied into them. A
certain number of Aleutians always belonged to the
establishment. The most rigid military discipline
was sustained. Every instance of detection in any
attempt, to enter or depart from the castle, except in
the authorized form, had been most severely
punished
,
and generally with death. The regular roll of the
drum, and noise of arms and shouts of the
bacchanalian
inmates in their orgies, became familiar sounds to
the ears of Jessy and Katrina; and they were the
rather
indulged in their wish to be to themselves, as
regarded
male visitants, inasmuch as it gratified Julius,
who was now daily convalescing; and as solitude had
been found by former experience the most effectual
mean of bringing over the victims to the purposes of
their seducers.
VOL. II. 13
These callous debauchees measuring, as is their
custom, the character of the species by their own
amount of experience, found it difficult to doubt, that
the same measures, which had proved successful in
every other case, should fail in that of their recent
subjects. Hence they were the more ready to
practise
the accustomed policy with their habitual
forbearance
;
as they were at the same time avoiding the
chances
of a new rupture, and fulfilling their stipulated
engagements with Julius, who, adroit and practised
at intrigue, and with money at command, they soon
found, had half the garrison in his interests.
The female instruments of their policy were,
therefore
,
enjoined to show no temper, and to make no
return
in kind to the contempt and disdain manifested
towards them by the captives. But they were bidden
systematically to practise all their accustomed arts of
seduction. Nor were these vile beings destitute of
either ingenuity, or experience in plying their
vocation
.
They knew well, could they find, where the
slumbering passions were, to drop among them the
kindling spark. They were acquainted with all the
modes, by which the foundation of virtuous thought
and feeling are sapped. At one time they uttered
eulogies
upon the master spirits of the castle. At other
times they painted the pleasure of converse with new
and unsubdued guests, and described with a
voluptuous
minuteness the downward course, by which they
became as themselves. They were eloquent in
describing
the ever varying pleasures, and constantly
appealing to their own example of reckless and
exhaustless
gaiety, as a proof that they were really
happy
.
The island, they affirmed, was like the grave.
No female, at least, ever escaped from it. Cut off at
once, and forever, from all future communication with
any portion of the world, except the inmates of this
delightful island, what was the world, or reputation,
or opinion, or the slavish conventional law of society
to them?
The master spirits of the castle, weary and
impatient
in view of their slow progress, would, no doubt,
gladly have plied mechanical aid, and drugged their
food or drink; auxiliaries, which had been called to their
aid on other occasions. But the wary and
unsleeping
vigilance of the captives, in insisting upon
partaking
of nothing, which Baptiste had not first tasted,
precluded their availing themselves of these
measures
.
Their female visitants, they remarked, began
to be less scrupulous of keeping measures of decorum
in their presence. Baptiste, too, in his prolix
babblings
,
darkly hinted, that more decisive measures in
relation to them were ripening. Contrary to the
practice
of their first days of confinement, their door was
purposely thrown open, and the entry guarded by
soldiers. The door of the hall, communicating with
the entry, was also opened. Hence the revelry of
their hours of feasting, drinking and evening
debauchery
could not but reach the ears of the terrified
captives
.
Not unfrequently they were obliged to hear
their own case and character a subject of discussion
by these vile men and abandoned women. What
ludicrous
,
obscene, and shocking descriptions met their
ears! Nor was it the least humiliating part of their
penance, that the females generally transcended the
men in these disgusting and detailed narratives.
Sometimes Hatch gave caricatured passages of their
history among the Shoshonee, in his peculiar Dutch
English, which Baptiste, with his own emendations
and additions, translated into French. Next the
preaching of Elder Wood and his amours with the
Song Sparrow were travestied. His own adventure
with his red skin wife furnished him merriment at his
own proper expense. Then the hall would echo with
long and reiterated peals of laughter. Every day,
as if in studied calculation, some additional outrage
of this sort fell upon their ears. That no uncertainty
might be left upon the objects of this course of
discipline
,
if they closed their door, to avoid the annoyance
of hearing, an Aleutian or a soldier was at hand to
retain it in its place.
Their mental anguish may be imagined, and their
horror calculated, when they ascertained, not only by
the testimony of Baptiste, but by hearing the firm
voice of Julius, that he was actually so far recovered,
as to come to the table of the hall. He could be even
heard urging his natural and bargained claims upon
Jessy. Nor could she fail to have collected from
different sources the state of party and the progress
of future purpose in the castle. Julius had his
devoted
partizans; and although the Russian commanded,
such was the character of the establishment on the
main land, and the people of so many other flags were
concerned in the interests of Ostroklotz, that policy
had kept his passions in check. One motive had so
mysteriously hitherto balanced another, that the
innocent
had remained unmolested. True, the
Russians
had, more than once, meditated despatching
Julius
by poison or assassination, and settling the
captives
upon themselves. With the instinctive
keenness
of native villany he had suspected, and
anticipated
such designs, and had always been so guarded,
as to render such practices difficult, if there had been
no danger in them.
Not only so, but when these wretches should even
have disposed of Julius, they were aware, that they
had their own appropriate difficulties in regard to
themselves. The captain insisted upon Jessy. The
lieutenant, though subordinate in the present
command
,
failed not to remark, that he had held higher
rank than his captain, in another sphere; and he
pertinaciously
insisted upon their settling their claims by
lot. Julius, by his own peculiar adroitness, and by
access through his emissaries to the privacy of each,
dexterously fomented this jealousy, which was
rapidly
ripening to a serious quarrel, when the decided
convalescence of Julius put another face upon the
aspect of things.
Such continued to be the order of events, until
Julius
felt himself completely recovered. His passions
awoke, invigorated by returning health, and by their
long slumber. The remembrance of his failure in his
purposes at Manitouna, and of his humiliation among
the Shoshonee, began again to kindle volcanic fires
in his bosom. The beauty and innocence of Jessy,
and the long and singular disappointment of his
purposes
,
in relation to a victim so completely in his
power
,
added fuel to his internal fires. As soon as he
was in perfect health, he was immediately seen
assuming
that ascendency among the master spirits of
the castle, that superior always exercises over
inferior
intellect. It was soon discovered, that his will
was the ruling star of this establishment. A conclave
council was held. The parties came forth from it
apparently agreed. His claims upon Jessy were
formally acknowledged, with an understanding, that
after a certain time, he should resign in favor of the
captain. The two rivals drew lots for Katrina, and
she fell to the share of the lieutenant. However
indignant
and chagrined, the affair had been settled
upon
stipulated premises; what was called honor in the
castle, required the acquiescence of the commander.
Departure from the terms of the treaty would be
sufficient
to generate a mortal fray. He gave his
pledged
word, that each was at liberty, the evening after
the ratification, to take possession of his prize, or bride,
as the phrase was with them. He swore his heaviest
curse, that the parties should be unmolested by
interference
from any quarter.
13*
The terms of compact were promulgated early in
the afternoon. With an infernal promptitude
Baptiste
sped to the captives with the intelligence. `It
be only one marriage, after all,' said he. `I marry
T'sellenee, rather than be burnt to death. Surely it
be one
plaisir infini
, to go out of this dem dull room,
to marry such noble gentilhommes as Julius and the
colonelfor the lieutenant was once a colonel, and a
very big man. N'importe. Marriage firstlove
come in the suite. We shall have one dem fine
wedding
this evening after supper. We are to drink
wine, and dance. I shall be so happy, sacre. One
of the demoiselles takes to Baptiste, too.' Having
published his bulletin, he sat down his refreshments,
and capered away with a joy which apparently
amounted to intoxication.
The orphans were alone, and the direct and
earnest
appeal of Jessy on her knees was to the Strength of
Israel. It was that wrestling of the heart with strong
entreaties and cries, which by seers and the holy of
the bygone years was called the prayer of faith. She
then conversed with Katrina on their immediate
expectations
.
`The hour is apparently come,' she
said. `How feel you, my dear companion, in view of
what is before us?' As she went into a clear and
unshrinking
annunciation of their pledged course, she
observed with inexpressible anguish, that the danger
seen at hand, and measured in its palpable
dimensions
,
affected Katrina far differently from its distant
and indistinct contemplation. Tears of feminine
terror
and attachment to life rolled down her fair cheek.
Brought up in view of frequent marriages, effected
by Indian violence, that had afterwards proved as
happy as others, she could not view, what their
persecutors
affected to call marriage, in the same
horrible
light with Jessy. Her mind had probably been
enervated by confinement and terror. Possibly the
seductive blandishments, the lascivious appeals, the
sophistical arguments of the female visitants, daily
and hourly repeated, might have imperceptibly and
unconsciously relaxed the strength of her principles.
Youthful love of life and fear of death came in, as
formidable temptations. `Oh!' she said, as she wrung
her hands, `it is such a dreadful thing to dieand to
die so young! Is there no escape? Is there no right
way, but to die?'
`Dear Katrina,' replied the other, `it is too late to
inculcate new principles now. Follow the dictates
of your own heart. For myself, I am determined.'
Katrina threw her arms around her neck, `and so,'
she sobbed, `am I. Think not, that I will survive
alone, and in disgrace. I vow,' she cried, crossing
herself, and looking upward, `by the immaculate
Mother of God, that I will in all things imitate thy
example.' High resolve and unshaken purpose, of
an aspect in her glowing countenance, which could
neither be assumed, nor mistaken, reassured the
confidence
of Jessy. The manner, in which they passed
the remaining hours, until the sun was below the
horizon
,
must be left to the imagination.
The roar of cannon, the crash of small arms, the
hurrahs of the soldiers, the howl of the drunken
Aleutians
,
witnessed, that a bacchanalian fete was at
hand, and that brandy had already been distributed
unsparingly. The passing footsteps were, as of
persons
treading on air. Every door was thrown wide.
The glare of torches filled the esplanade. Women
dizened in tinsel flauntiness, and glittering in false
jewels, and their faces rouged high, paced the entry,
and repaired to the hall. The clatter of plates and
vessels and of all sorts of preparation for supper
succeeded
.
During the repast, their own supper was
brought in by Baptiste, as usual. But this time it
was deposited before them without a word. It may
be imagined, that it remained untouched.
Meanwhile
,
riot and revelry grew louder every moment at
the table. The clatter, the toasts, the noisy and
incessant
babble, mixed all tongues in the ancient
confusion
of Babel. Another burst of cannon
succeeded
;
a rocket streamed aloft; and in a moment the
hall was hushed, as in death. A marriage service,
after the rites of the Greek church, was celebrated.
A wag, with a voice of well imitated solemnity,
enacted
the Greek papa. Two of the harlot hags were
god-mothers, and gave away the two orphans by
proxy. The husband's vow was pronounced, first by
Julius, then by the lieutenant; and that this part of
the service might be intelligible, the vows were
repeated
,
in French, Spanish and English. Two
females
,
as proxies, for the captives, in like manner,
pronounced the vows
to love, honor, and obey till death
,
in the same languages. Cannon were fired anew.
Rockets went up. Hurrahs and shouts rent the air,
and reiterated peals of laughter shook the castle to
its foundation. A full band then commenced glees
and dances, and the revellers began to dance. The
voice of captain Orlow was heard, meanwhile, above
all the other din. `Now to unflinching business,' was
his order.
The captives were on their knees in prayer, and
clasped in each other's arms. Six of the painted hags
entered upon the privacy of their devotions. Half
intoxicated, and their faces inflamed even above their
rouge, they danced towards their victims. `
Abominable
affectation!' said their leader, when she saw
their occupation. `I swear to you, my sisters, that
they are returning thanks, that they are at last like
to have husbands. Sweet ones, you are married,
married with all the rites of the church Handsomer
husbands, you could not have found, the world over.
We congratulate you, thrice lovely brides, and envy
you, at the same time. What a noble fellow is this
Julius! What a gallant figure, the martial colonel!
Poor dear count Orlow, he curses like a fiend; and
we are obliged to keep him drunk, and treat him like
a petted child, to prevent murder. Poor count! we
must provide for him. Ah! girls, this crying, and
sobbing is all for joy, and we understand it. Come
now, have done with this nonsense. Dear girls, we
have a trick, in these cases, of examining the brides.
Please to humor us in this ceremony of the castle.'
At the word they fell upon the victims. Part held
them in a smothering grasp. Part proceeded to
examine
their dress. `Aha! here is a knife, and here
are scissors. You are delicate brides in truth, to
meditate murder, before the close of the honey moon.'
Another and another weapon was discovered. `Why
these girls,' they cried, `have carried the deception
farther than we did.' Their victims, exhausted with
struggling, had ceased to resist. The hags
proceeded
to undress them, and to dress them again in
night-clothes
,
which, having also examined, they appeared
to consider harmless; for they exclaimed, when their
work was finished, and their victims were allowed to
rise`There, girls, you are no longer dangerous.
Heaven defend us, what ideas you must have had of
marriage!' They then compelled them to endure the
odious ceremony of their kisses, and with the
customary
wishes and peals of laughter, they left them.
Scarcely had they resumed their former attitude
of supplication, when Julius and Davidow entered.
In a composed, and business-like tone, Julius
proceeded
to announce the articles of the late agreement.
He talked much of the honor of both. `They meant
kindness, protection, and inviolable fidelity. At any
rate, the arrangement was inevitable. Cries, defence,
entreaties, struggle, resistance, would be equally
unwise
and injurious. They should both infinitely
prefer
an affectionate union.' He then offered his arm
to Jessy, and begged her to follow him, a ceremony
which Davidow repeated to Katrina. Seeing, that
they did not relax their embrace, he said, `come
colonel
,
the time is fast spending.' Jessy fell on her
knees before him, crying, `Julius, you cannot intend
to separate us from each other. Pity me for the sake
of my murdered parents! Pity me by your hopes of
heaven.' Katrina seemed inspired with a frenzy of
heroic enthusiasm, as she heard the imploring words
of Jessy, in tones, which might have softened a tiger.
`Jesu-Maria!'she cried, `monsters, you shall not
harm her!' and she held her in a fast embrace, and
filled the place with her shrieks. But Davidow
seized
her rudely, and tore her from the grasp of Jessy.
Her cries, her resistance, and even her force were
appalling
.
She held to the curtains of the bed, which
were torn from their rods. Chairs, the table, and
every thing in her way were overturned. Jessy made
less resistance, for her physical strength was more
exhausted
.
`Wakona,' cried Julius, as he dragged her
into the entry, `the first, last purpose of my soul will
now be accomplished. Thou hast my love. I care
not, whether thou accept it, or not.' Screams
mingled
with peals of laughter, as the lights were
extinguished
,
and the victims dragged away.
A different and a louder cry was heard. It was
the majestic voice of Elder Wood, `The sword of the
Lord and Gideon! The sword of the Lord and
Gideon
!'
he exclaimed in a voice, that was heard to the
remotest recess of the den. Cheowanna-ha! shouted
the Shoshonee. The flash of guns glared upon the
darkness. The war cry of Areskoui rang loud and
terrible. Lights were rekindled. Areskoui
appeared
like a minister of the divine vengeance; and the
glare of the sword of Frederic gleamed among the
half intoxicated rioters. Elder Wood continued to
lay about him like a giant. `Purge the accursed den,'
he cried. `Wash out the stains of lust and violence
with blood. Accursed be he, who holdeth back his
hand from slaying. Make Kentucky work of it.'
Davidow was cut down with the war hatchet of
Areskoui
.
Frederic with the hilt of his sword felled Julius
to the floor. The Shoshonee bound him in a moment.
The half drunk, astounded, wounded and knocked
down captain was also bound. Straggling
discharges
of fire arms and the war shouts of the Shoshonee
gave evidence, that the soldiers were attacked on the
esplanade. But victory soon proclaimed aloud for the
invaders, and the triumphant war song of the red men
rung long and loud over the plain. The soldiers and
Aleutians had chiefly escaped by the open gate, and
had dispersed in the woods. Two faithful Shoshonee
were charged not to allow the escape of Baptiste and
Hatch, whom they observed cowering behind the
flying Aleutians. They groped along, ignorant of
the way, until they also cleared the gate. The spies
had anticipated them; and as they arrived in
breathless
trepidation at the flight of stairs, and were about
to descend to the boats, each Shoshonee seized his
victim at the same moment. Whirling them round
with their whole force, they precipitated both into the
dark and bottomless gulf below. A fiendish yell of
horror noted their descent, and a hollow dash their
final plunge into the fearful abyss. `Cheowanna
ha-ha
!'
cried the red men. `Go, cowards, to the land of
souls, and be tormented by old women.' At the same
time, their peculiar and indescribable note, as they
drew their fingers over their mouths, broken into
countless fragments of their exulting scream, as usual,
raised the howl of the dogs in chorus.
A number of captive Aleutians were retained, as
pilots, and hostages; and the passage to the boats was
guarded by some of the most brave and trusty
Shoshonee
.
Lights were rekindled in all directions; and
something like a report of what had been transacted
was made to the reunited friends in the hall. As no
words could at all reach the circumstances of
rapture
,
in which the delivered captives were once more
made free, and pressed to the bosom of their friends,
the whole transaction must be left to the imagination.
They were soon rehabited, and one at the right hand,
and the other at the left of Frederic, were receiving
wine and water at the table, to restore their strength,
which had sunk under the united influence of agony
and inanition. Their emotions were as yet too
tumultuous
and mighty for words, or even tears.
Elder Wood and Areskoui were still busy in the
important business of trial and retribution. The
women
were all collected in the state room, which the
captives had occupied. Shrieks and hysterics and
cries for mercy, though they knew not to whom to
address them, made the room a bedlam. Elder
Wood heard some of their stories, as a kind of state's
evidence. He came to some general and strong
conclusions
.
`I think,' said he, `they would expound the
law after this fashion in Kentucky;' and he entered
into his views of justice in the case. `Be it as you
please,' said Areskoui. `You know the medicine rules
of the pale faces.' The captain was brought into the
presence of the women. The Shoshonee gathered
bundles of rods, after their fashion of preparing a
victim
to run the gauntlet. The women, who had used
violence towards the captives, received a severe
drubbing
from members of their own fraternity who proved
themselves not to have participated in the actual
outrage
.
Others in the same predicament were
compelled
to whip the captain; and, if in either case,
these extempore lictors showed the least lenity, or
disposition to be sparing and unfaithful, the
Shoshonee
instructed them in the right manner of
application
,
by giving them a taste of the rod themselves.
Meanwhile, their capers and cries were such a treat
to these red men, that they danced, and shook their
heads, and wept for very laughter. Elder Wood
stood by, guiding the discipline, according to his
notions
of even-handed and retributive justice, as it was
understood in the earlier periods of his native state.
The rod of justice was first stayed over the executive
hags; but not until they were in a condition, to carry
durable memorials of this exercise, which, Elder
Wood prayed the Lord, might do them good, and
lead them to repentance. The captain received a
discipline considerably more severe, and protracted,
Elder Wood preaching all the while to him in
English
,
not a word of which he understood. At length,
seeing him exhausted, `let the son of Belial alone,' he
cried. He, Areskoui and the Shoshonee retired,
locking the door upon the outside, and leaving them
to comfort each other.
`We have done much, and fought valiantly the
battles
of the Lord,' cried Elder Wood; `and now let me
again embrace our dear lost children.' Jessy and
Katrina were pressed to his bosom, while paternal
tears streamed down his venerable cheeks. `It is
enough,' he said. `I have seen enough. This second
time in my life, I might repeat the words of the ancient
Simeon, `Now, Lord, lettest thou thy servant depart
in peace.' But my children,' he cried, as embrace
succeeded to embrace, and as Frederic and Areskoui
joined the rescued, to solicit a share in the tender
greetings, `let us away. Let us cross the sea, and go
forth into the wilderness. I shall hardly feel liberty
to pour out the fulness of my heart to the Almighty,
till I am in the sanctuary of a Kentuckian, the free
and wide forest. Let us reassemble all our friends,
and report `what has been done, and take counsel,
what remains to do.' Areskoui uttered his peculiar
VOL. II. 14
ery, and his warriors soon thronged round him.
There lay the miserable Julius, once more bound and
a prisoner. `What shall be done with this wretch,'
cried Elder Wood. `It were meet, it seems to me,
that we punish him condignly, where he lies, and in
view of the victims of his outrages.' `Not so,' cried
Areskoui. `We have medicine rules, that apply to
his case, and we are unwilling, that the pale face
should pass upon him again.'
The council was short, for the business was urgent.
`We have to pass over a wide waste of wilderness,'
said Elder Wood. `We owe it to our necessities, and
still more to avenging injured innocence, to do, what
in us lies, to destroy the means of repeating such
injuries
,
to plunder this den of lust, and these
habitations
of cruelty. Let us utterly spoil the tents of the
Philistines.' `The easiest and shortest way to this,'
cried one of the young chiefs, `would be to burn the
wigwam and its inhabitants together. This would
be a purification by fire, as well as blood.' `Shall
we so avenge ourselves?' asked Areskoui. `God
forbid
,'
replied Elder Wood. `Many of these
abandoned
women may have been brought here by violence,
like our rescued ones. Let us leave them a space for
repentance. The more guilty are slain. Baptiste
and Hatch are justly sent to their everlasting account.
Julius is in our hands. Our triumph is complete.
We will not stain it with cruelty. But this hinders
not, that we should carry with us, for our own proper
use, every thing, that will comfort us on our way, or
be useful to the red people at their own homes.'
They, who had acted as guides, in conducting the
Shoshonee rescue to Ostroklotz, felt, that residence in
that region would no longer be safe to them; and they
requested permission to return with the Shoshonee,
and dwell among them. The plunder was collected,
and such parts as were deemed worth bearing away,
were conveyed successively down to the boats by
relays
of Shoshonee, and the aid of the prisoners. The
case was felt to demand despatch; and the most
decisive
promptitude marked all their movements.
Many
hands and extreme and hurried exertion soon
completed
their arrangements for departure. The
prisoners
and the stupid Aleutians, who had taken no
share in the outrages, and who were not required as
pilots from the island, were dismissed. The pilots
advanced to the shore under a strong guard. Julius
was in the keeping of four Shoshonee, who distinctly
warned him, that the least movement towards escape
would be punished with instant death. The rescue
party took up their line of march for the shore,
Areskoui
at the head of his warriors, and Elder Wood
leading Jessy, and Frederic Katrina. `We leave the
accursed abode to the malediction of God,' cried
Elder
Wood, as they cleared the gate, advancing
onward
by the glare of torches. The whole party
rapidly
bestowed themselves in their boats, with a pilot
in the bow of each, who answered for the safe
pilotage
of his boat with his life. To increase the
difficulties
of pursuit, and of despatching tidings from the
island, all the crafts, that were not filled with the
expedition
,
and the plunder, were turned adrift, pushed
into the eddies, and carried away to sea. But the
expedition, the plunder, and the prisoners occupied
the greater portion, that lay at the landing. `Now
may He,' cried Elder Wood, `who
holds the waves in
the hollow of his palms, and the winds in his fists
, guide
us through this dreadful passage.' Eight boats, four
on each eddy, cast off their fasts in succession. The
heavy and eternal roar again sounded in their ears.
The moon and stars, dimly shining amidst the leaden
clouds, seemed to rest on the summit of the awful
chasm; and they rose, and sank with fearful and
dizzying
movements. The glare of their torch lights
presented the chasm and the whole scene in all its
terrific grandeur; and the poised and intense
earnestness
of the pilots, sufficiently instructed the crews that
it was felt, that a single false dip of the oar would
merge them in the angry brine. The lapse of a few
moments showed them, in the brightness of their
lights, the sublimity and terror of the subterranean
passage; and by noting the strata of spar, two
hundred
feet above them, they could accurately measure
the swell, which at one moment brought them so near
it, that it seemed as if they could reach it. Plunging
down the next moment, its phosphoric and gem-like
radiance faded in their eye, resembling a shooting
star. A dead silence, as of those who held in their
breath, gave all its distinctness in their ear to the
Ocean dash without, which sounded along this
passage
,
like the angry howl of the monsters of the seas.
If the passage was terrible, it was short. Almost
before they were aware, the eddy had shot them past
the anchorage. A favoring and fresh breeze blew
towards the main land. They erected their sails.
The moon emerged from the clouds, and the lights of
the camp fires of those Shoshonee, who had been left
on the main land,could be distinctly descried,
glimmering
in the distance, and affording the most unerring
direction to their course. The joyful Shoshonee
raised
themselves in the boats at the sight; and the loudest
and gayest
Cheowanna ha-ha
was sung in the most
triumphant style of the red men, sounding more
impressively
in the stillness of night, and on the swelling
bosom of the sea, a scene to them so strange and
unaccustomed
,
than in their natural haunts in the desert.
The spirit of music and enthusiasm and religious joy
was stirred in the bosom of Elder Wood. The little
fleet was speeding beautifully onward by the
moonlight
;
and each craft within a few oars' length. Jessy
was resting on the arm of her beloved protector, and
Frederic was sitting beside Katrina. `It were better,'
cried the excited minister, `that those of us, that are
Christians, sing our triumph in a song of Zion, than
in these heathen and wild notes of the desert. Let
us sing.'
They, that in ships, with courage bold,
O'er swelling waves their trade pursue,
Do God's amazing works behold,
And in the deep His wonders view.
The Indians all joined in the strain, and louder
music
has not been heard on the sea, than that of the
Kentucky minister leading the Shoshonee through the
strains of that hymn, which so delightfully celebrates
the wonderful works and deliverances of the
Almighty
.
They had scarcely struck the third stanza of the
hymn, when the deep bursts of cannon from
Ostroklotz
notified them, that the dispersed inhabitants of
the castle had reassembled, and were striving to make
known their disaster. `Let them pursue,' cried
Areskoui
.
`We shall shortly press the firm soil with our
feet, and rejoin our brothers. Then let them come;
and, so that we can safely dispose of our rescued ones,
it would delight me to meet them in battle.'
A brief and happy passage landed the boats in the
little cove, where the Shoshonee periogues had been
built. What triumphant joy can be imagined more
complete, what meeting, at the same time delightful
and indescribable, more grateful to the heart, than
that of the once more united Shoshonee! The
warriors
from the shore, in their impatience, sprang into
the water to embrace their friends. Elder Wood
raised his fair charge, who had fallen asleep from
complete exhaustion, on his shoulder, and lifted her
gently ashore. Katrina, too, slumbering as deeply as
an infant babe, was gently laid on a mattrass. The
considerate Indians spared their accustomed
Cheowanna
,
that they might not awaken the rescued ones.
14*
Prudence equally dictated quietness and silence, that
their position might not be betrayed to their enemies.
And though united, armed and under the invigorating
impulse of triumph, they might now have defied
whatever forces their foe might bring against them,
yet it was remarked in the hasty council, which they
held, that nothing but revenge could be gained by a
fight; and, as their retribution had been ample, that
was no longer desired even by the Shoshonee.
The note of packing and preparation for departure
was heard through the camp. The bright morning
sun of summer shone upon this bleak coast, before
their marching arrangements had been completed.
A breakfast was prepared under Areskoui's tent.
Luxurious refreshments from the castle were spread
before the guests. The finest fresh fish, taken by the
Indians, who had kept the camp, and abundance of
game, hardly required their long abstinence and their
voracious appetites to be rendered sumptuous. The
rescued sleepers were awakened, to renew the scene
of tears, embraces, thanksgivings and unutterable
joy. The imperious wants of nature were
acknowledged
even by them, for they had taken no
sustaining
refreshment for days. Sleep and food and joy
soon restored their exhausted strength; and they were
the first to rise, and call for that commencement of
their return march, which prudence so imperiously
dictated. The Shoshonee, their hunger appeased,
and moderate quantities of brandy from the castle
distributed among them, speedily loaded their horses
and mules. Jessy and Katrina were mounted upon
the surest and easiest horses. The general word to
mount was given. The prisoner pilots were ordered
to accompany them one day's march, that they might
not guide the forces of the Russian establishment
upon
them. Julius was pinioned to a horse incapable
of speed, and placed between two Shoshonee, who
rode fine horses by his side, and who were selected
for their vigilance and trustiness. They gave him
well to understand, that he could not move, except
by their direction, and that death would be the
instant
penalty of any effort to escape.
The dogs raised the marching yell of delight. The
Indians beat their drums. The horses neighed with
pleasure, as if unconscious of the immense march,
and the whole expedition set forth from the sea, with
their faces towards their green retreats in the interior.
Many of the details of this return march are
pretermitted
,
and left to be filled out in thought. The
march was rapid; for until beyond the first range of
mountains, they could not feel secure from the
assaults
of their foes. It was fortunate, for the season
was delightful; the horses were fresh; provisions and
even bread, wine and brandy abundant. It was a
triumphant expedition, loaded with plunder and
peltries
.
Even Jessy, in the joy of recent deliverance,
and the transition from terror and outrage to security
and friendship, was as cheerful as returning
remembrances
,
associated with her native valley, would
allow
.
Hence the expedition encountered with
cheerfulness
the ocean of sand-hills. On its skirt, they
dismissed
all those prisoners, who did not prefer to
remain
with them, to return to the Russian settlement,
as aware that they were now sufficiently secure
against the chances of soon rallying, and directing
forces
in pursuit. Most of the prisoners voluntarily
preferred
to accompany them; but three only chose to
return, and they were despatched towards their
homes on horseback.
The expedition returned by a route different from
that on which they came out, longer, but deemed
more practicable and abundant in game. Beyond
the first range of mountains they found it necessary
to halt in order to rest their horses, and allow them
pasturage free from their burdens. Their
encampment
was in the verge of a beautiful wood, on the
margin of a stream abounding in fish. Illimitable
prairies, dotted with wooded isles, and with herds of
buffaloes and elk quietly feeding on the grass, were
in view. Their tents were pitched. The little
extempore
Shoshonee town sprung up in the wood,
showing in its domestic hum, its streaming smokes,
and its busy inhabitants, that a city of bark
habitations
can be as social and as cheerful as one of marble
mansions.
The first business of such an encampment, after
witnessing the horses luxuriating in the tender grass,
was to take fish and hunt buffaloes. Supplies as
ample
,
as their wants, were obtained with facility in a
stream, which had seldom been rippled by a hook or
a spear; and on prairies, whose buffaloes and elk
rarely
snuffed the scent of human footstep.
Around the abundant and cheerful supper of that
evening in the tent of Areskoui were assembled his
domestic guests. Katrina had resumed all her
former
freshness and buoyancy. Her raven curls hung in
her neck in their former luxuriance; and whilst gaiety,
delight, and feelings kindled from the sun beamed on
her cheek and in her eye, she affirmed, that all, that
was requisite to render her the happiest being in the
world, was to see every trace of gloom removed from
the countenance of Jessy; while she, aware how
many
more of the circle felt this want, as the only
draw-back
to their hilarity, suppressed her deep
remembrances
,
as she might, and made an effort to seem as
happy as the rest.
It may well be imagined, how eager was the
curiosity
of the rescued to hear the whole story of their
deliverance
,
a chronicle not a circumstance of which had
yet transpired. `Come then,' said Elder Wood, `since
God has again spread our table in the wilderness,
since the moon and stars look quietly upon us, since
all, but the pleasant sounds of the whippoorwill, and
the rippling leaves, and the murmur of the stream are
still, since this is an evening of rest and jubilee, let
us relate to these, my dear rescued children, the story
of their deliverance.
Not unto us; not unto us, but to
their Almighty deliverer be the gratitude and the glory
.'
A white stranger, whom the rescued had already
noticed, as a member of the expedition, was
introduced
by the name of Jablinski, a Pole by birth, who, if
his enormous mustachios had been shorn, and his seal
skin dress replaced by that of a civilized being, might
well have been called handsome. Tall, strong-built,
and erect, dogged self-will and good nature sat on his
countenance, which showed a certain amount of
fairness
through the varnish of smoke and the tanning of
exposure to the inclement elements, which had been
superinduced by time. He was requested to relate
his agency in the deliverance, in his own way. He
gave it in French, and it was to the following effect.
He had been a soldier in the Russian army, and had
served in Germany and France. Indignant at not
obtaining
promotion, he deserted, and escaped to
Kamtschatka
.
There chance brought him in contact with
the crew of a fur ship bound to the Russio-American
settlements. He proved himself to possess
capabilities
of uncommon adroitness in taking seals and sea
otters. These qualifications procured him the
command
of the Aleutian seal takers on the isle of
Ostroklotz
.
Some hundreds of these people resided on the
island, who were found useful subjects by the
Russians
,
as being simple, incapable of resistance,
perfectly
docile and subservient to their purposes, and
withal excellent fishermen and seal takers. Thither
Jablinski had been removed. He took an Aleutian
wife, and soon mastered their language. His
superior
intelligence, and this intimate amalgamation with
them, gave him a patriarchal influence over them.
Conversing frequently with the officers of the castle,
he strove to win their confidence, and to obtain some
appointment within its walls, where his imagination
had fixed the abode of all possible enjoyment. But
he had too bright an eye, and was seen with a scrutiny
too jealous, to be admitted into that place. He had
even solicited some petty office in the castle, and had
been roughly and peremptorily refused. The affront
rankled in his bosom, and stimulated him to revenge.
Curiosity, imagination, and a licentious temperament,
sharpened his purposes. His whole study, while
guiding
his Aleutians to their pursuits, centered upon
the desire of gaining illicit ingress to the castle. His
dreams constantly ran upon the delights of that
interdicted
place.
On pleasant summer nights he often traversed the
exterior of the quadrangle in the darkness, pausing
from time to time to catch the softened sounds of
music
and revelry, that came on his ear from within.
He had often climbed the nearest cone-shaped hill,
from the summit of which he could look down upon
the illuminated interior space, and see the officers and
the gaily dressed women promenading the esplanade
in couples. Oh! thought Jablinski, could I but once
place myself in fair competition with these happy
officers
.
He had meditated the expedient, (for
Jablinski
had read romances) of carrier pigeons,
paper-kites
,
and the other conveyances of amatory verses and
assignation billets over envious walls and into such
guarded recesses. But pigeons, kites, conveyances
of the sort he had none. Even had he the
conveyances
,
it was quite doubtful, if the fair ones could
read. He had had no chance of captivating them by
the exhibition of his person and mustachios. There
would have been a most disheartening vagueness, in
making love to a fair one, that had never seen him.
Even could he have gained an epistolary promise of
responding sigh for sigh, the most formidable
difficulty
was, that `she could not get out at all, and he could
not get in.' One of the favored servants of the
establishment
,
the confidential pilot, was an Aleutian.
He might, perhaps, be bribed to procure his
admission
.
But this kind of eunuch was a dull fool, and
was in confidence, because known to be brave, a good
pilot, and so stupid, as to be unable to practise
concealment
.
Jablinski feared detection, if he should
be found tampering with such an one. He knew, that
death would be the inevitable consequence.
Earnest desire is probably the phrenological organ,
where originates invention. The winter of
Ostroklotz
is excessive for its severity. Most of the
Aleutians
had their winter habitations in the caves, with
which the island abounded. It was a country of that
class of formation, which is every where perforated
with long subterranean passages, and hollow caverns.
Jablinski knew one of these, the entrance of which
was a quarter of a mile from the walls of the castle,
and its labyrinths tended towards that establishment.
As an experienced trapper, he knew well, that even
the animals had the discretion to burrow towards
their objects. `Have I not as much sense,' said he to
himself, `and industry, as an oppossum?' Forthwith
Jablinski was in the habit, whenever he had a spare
day, or night, and the latter case often occurred, of
repairing to this subterranean cave, of exploring it by
torch light, of enlarging its passages, in the direction,
where they tended towards the castle. He finally
discovered one labyrinth, which had so many
windings
and zigzags, that it might have required a less
acute or adventurous general lover to make his way
by the clue of a thread. He was no geometrician;
but his invincible desire to obtain an admission stood
him instead of the sciences and inspiration. He
satisfied
himself, in one of his explorations, that he was
perpendicularly under the castle, and that portion of
it occupied by the female apartments. But there
might be ten feet of earth and rock between them.
Forthwith he began to burrow, like a ground squirrel,
or muskrat. Rocks and earth were detached from
above, sometimes not without the risk of breaking his
head, or burying him alive. In the employment of
every spare interval, he had labored for some months,
not without exciting, more than once, the suspicions of
his honest Aleutian wife, in view of his long absences.
At length he had fairly wrought a practicable
burrow
quite to the surface of a female apartment. It
happened to be the loose plank floor of a closet. The
candle of the fair occupant shone through the
crevices
!
Here, his heart throbbing with the triumph of
successful invention and industry, and with
voluptuous
anticipations, he often heard confidential
narratives
and adventures, which would not be worth
relating
,
and which the parties dreamed not, that they
were shared by any ears, but their own.
To be brief, Jablinski emerged from his sepulchral
den. The fair occupant screamed; but her curiosity
outran her terrors. She was not long inexorable, or
either loth, or slow to aid him, in removing a plank or
two, that gave him admission. It was easy, when he
chose to retire, to replace the plank by which he
entered
.
He disappeared in his cavern, when the
interview
terminated; and every thing showed as before.
While he was thus exulting in the success of this
clandestine intercourse with the interior, the two
captives
were brought there. Such parts of their story,
as were known, became a subject of frequent
discussion
between him and his fair one. Her highly
colored
painting of their beauty aroused his curiosity.
Her story of their persecutions and wrongs stirred up
his indignation; for Jablinski had a heart,
notwithstanding
his propensities in the direction of gallantry.
It happened, that he had been ordered, about that
time, with his Aleutians, to the continent, to pursue
a prodigious herd of sea lions, that had been
discovered
haunting that part of the shore. They passed
the mouth of the cove, where the Shoshonee were
preparing their periogues. Circumstances brought
Frederic and him in contact. They both spoke
French, and he was from innumerable sympathies
much more likely to become a friend to Frederic,
than the Russian officers. Frederic comprehended
at a glance all the importance of gaining such a
confederate
.
He was introduced to Elder Wood and
Areskoui. After satisfying themselves as to his
capacity
and fidelity, they disclosed to him their
position
and their object. He was the more ready to
participate
in it, from the circumstance, that he had been
made fearfully aware, that his female friend was
already
excessively jealous of him, having in fact
discovered
him to be on terms of intimacy with another
inmate of the castle. It was not without difficulty,
and after the most earnest protestations of breaking
off all other acquaintance in the castle, except with
her, that she had hitherto been withheld from
disclosing
the secret of his subterranean access. Carrying,
as he was well assured, he did, his life in his hand,
every time he thus visited the castle, and promised
protection, reward, and citizenship among the
Shoshonee
on the other hand, he was prepared to enter
with his whole heart into their plans. A more fit
instrument
could not have been found. Visiting the
island frequently, and repairing by night to his castle
confidant, he was made acquainted with the state of
things within, and taught his new confederates, that
no time was to be lost, in making the effort to rescue
the captives. Perfectly experienced in the secret of
safe approach to the island, he bribed the Aleutian
VOL. II. 15
pilot to conduct one boat from Ostroklotz, while he
steered another. They landed at the mouth of the
cove, near the working camp of Areskoui. His two
periogues were now finished. They would
conveniently
contain fifteen persons each, beside the pilots.
He had procured two Aleutian pilots, already on the
continent pursuing seals, to steer the periogues of the
Shoshonee. Before sunset the squadron of periogues,
with sixty select warriors, among whom were
Areskoui
,
Frederic and Elder Wood, piloted by three
Aleutians and Jablinski, hoisted sail from the mouth
of the cove for the anchorage ground near the island.
There they waited till dusk began to conceal their
approach. They landed safely. The Aleutian
pilot
ascended the steps in the first instance, and drew
the guards from their position, by pretending to have
something of great moment to communicate. It was,
beside, an evening of holiday; and they were already
nearly drunk. Areskoui and three of his friends
sprang up the steps, seized the guards, and made
sure of the pass, without giving an alarm. Areskoui
and his friends and warriors made the circuit of the
woods, to avoid discovery, from which they were also
shielded at once by the darkness, and the universal
occupation of every thought in the revelry of the
castle. They followed Jablinski, darkling, through
his labyrinth. His fair one was occupied with the
rest in the festivities of the mockery of marriage.
Her room was filled with the confederates, one
mounting
through the subterranean avenue after another.
They examined their arms, and took counsel for a
moment together. Elder Wood was preluding to
give them an harangue on the occasion, when the
increasing din, and now the shricks of the victims, met
their ears. The door was thrown open, and the
armed
mass rushed into the entry, at the moment, that
the lights were extinguished, and the victims dragged
out of their apartment. They had at first so
surveyed
the two principal villains in the light, as to make
sure of them in the dark. The orgies of the evening
precluded, on the part of the inmates, and the soldiers
without, any chance of effectual resistance. All were
occupied in some way in preparation for the
expected
festivities. The inmate of the apartment, which
they entered, made one of the detestable company,
who searched the captives for weapons. The
expedition
passed, a part into the hall, and a part into the
esplanade. The soldiers, drunk, paralyzed, and
thunderstruck
with terror, were either knocked down,
disarmed
,
or disposed to escape through the gate, which
was at once thrown open. With the subsequent
transactions all parties present had been acquainted,
by being themselves actors in it.
With her quick and instinctive sense of propriety,
Jessy made such acknowledgments, and expressed
such gratitude to the Pole, as the case called for; and
as might be rendered, without trenching upon
self-respect
.
It would be to no purpose, to think of
presenting
the joy and renewed congratulations of this
group of friends, bound to each other by such
peculiar
ties, as they resumed their march, with restored
cheerfulness and vigor, along the desert. The chief
passed them at the head of his warriors, his
countenance
rendered more interesting by the sallow and
pale cast of fixed melancholy worn into it by habit,
and contrasted by the intense brilliance of his eye,
kindled by recent triumph, and the consciousness, that
Jessy was once more with him in the care of her
friends. In passing, he paused, and enquired with
considerate kindness, `if the march could be rendered
less fatiguing to them, by change of horses, or any of
the circumstances, under which they journeyed?'
`Sister of my soul,' said Katrina, in a low voice, as he
passed beyond hearing`what a chief is this! How
noble and kind! Wonder not, that I, who have been
reared in the desert, and among the red people,
should look at him, as I do. Admire not, that to me
he is nobler and more beautiful, than even our
Frederic
.
There is something in his sad countenance and
bright eye, that soften me to pity and almost to tears'
and her innocent and ardent spirit continued to
dictate
the most enthusiastic praise of every thing in the
chief, that is naturally the subject of female
admiration
.
Jessy sighed with the sad presentiment, that
she had succeeded but too effectually, in inspiring her
young bosom with love; and her mind immediately
began to ruminate the ways and means of undoing
the web, which she had so recently woven. Hence
her thoughts strayed away to forecast the uncertain
future, and meditate, how she ought hereafter to
dispose
of herself and her time. One sacrifice would
probably restore the chief to all his former energy
and cheerfulness. The Shienne were subdued
beyond
the power of working future mischief. Hope
and joy would at once restore to Areskoui all that
manner and appearance, the want of which had
produced
murmurs among the disaffected, that they
loved
not a chief with the spirit of a woman. She would
ensure permanent protection. In fixing her destiny
beside the graves of her parents, she would probably
fulfil, what had been the most settled plan and desire
of her father. The Shoshonee might be civilized,
and Christianized; and the heart of her venerable
adopted father, in view of becoming the Apostle of
the nation, made as happy, as human heart could be.
She could not but trace her double deliverance to the
chief, as the prime moving agent. In looking back
to the first remembered period of her life, every act
of his had been so considerate, disinterested, and of
such unmixed purity, heroism and self denial, that she
chided herself for allowing the dreadful associations
with the word
savage
to mix with her thoughts.
`Have I not said,' she asked herself, `a thousand times,
that beauty is of the mind; and what mind can show
more beauty and nobleness?' In this way she would
cancel, by the only mode in her power, her infinite
obligations
.
Here was the beautiful, innocent and
warm hearted Katrina, who saw all his worth,
without
a thousandth part of her sense of obligation. Why
had she not a similar feeling? What was love, but a
specious and deceptive word, an apology for the
caprices
of the passions in opposition to reason,
expedience
and duty? But alas! there was no mistake. The
more deeply and faithfully she probed her heart, the
more clearly she discovered, that truth and sincerity
and an invincible repugnance forbade the idea; and
at the same time, afflicting and terrible disclosures of
another kind began to be manifest to her search.
How unjust and capricious, she thought with
self-abasement
,
is the human heart! How little is it
swayed by a sense of right and duty!
At noon they halted among rocks and cliffs, on the
lofty table summit of the second range of mountains,
they had to pass. `There,' cried Areskoui, as they
dismounted, and prepared for dinner, `there is our
country. We may now defy the pursuit of the Russ.
Wakona, never to unbend thy brow to cheerfulness,
is to be ungrateful to the Master of Life. Thy
parents
are in the sunny plains of joy, in the land of souls.
If thy brother has deserved aught in thy rescue, let
me be repaid by once more seeing the smile of the
early days of thy life.'
At the foot of the mountains was the most northern
hunting range of the Shoshonee. A salmon stream
laved their base. Beyond were intermixed woods, and
prairies, and a wide plain abounding in game. They
crossed the stream by a natural bridge of fallen trees,
and encamped in this region of abundance, to hunt,
15*
refresh their horses, and spend the festival of green
corn.
Julius had been brought on thus far, pinioned after
the Indian fashion, and guarded with such
unremitting
vigilance, that the thought of escaping from the
tried Pentanona on one side, and Dembea on the
other, had scarcely occurred to him. His horse, he
knew, was purposely of inferior speed; and he felt,
that the first movement to escape would be met by
cutting him down. Bitter, it may be imagined, was
the theme of his reflections, as he moved onwards,
fatigued
,
despised, and shivering with anticipation at
every halt, that there his fate would be decided. It
tended not to mitigate the anguish of his dark
thoughts, to see the affectionate courtesies of
Frederic
and Areskoui to Jessy, and the smile of gratitude,
with which they were received. Every redoubled
effort to soothe, and cheer her on their part, carried
a new pang to his heart. Her murdered parents
sometimes come over his mind, like a dark cloud.
He felt within himself the strange enigma of the
tormenting
fury of his base appetites still unmitigated,
and unsatisfied. `There they go,' he reflected, `
loving
and happy as angels; and what am I, and what
soon to be!' Dark and interminable views of the
dreadful future would then scorch his brain, as though
it were pierced with a stream of lightning. Hopes
of rescue or escape alike relinquished, his last
reliance
was a new appeal to the shrinking tenderness
of Jessy. Horror thrilled from his heart to his
remotest
nerves, as he remembered the position, in
which the weapon of Frederic had felled him, and
the improbability, that Elder Wood and Frederic,
and much less the Indians, would relax from their
firmness, even if Jessy should ask his release.
Whenever
he contemplated the chances of his trial, the
clammy sweat of death instantly started on his
forehead
.
A stronger image of the tortures of the
damned
could no where be imagined, than in his case.
The Indians, who passed him, deigned no reply to his
questions, and looked at him as a thing that no longer
had a sensitive existence. A hundred messages had
been requested by him to Elder Wood. Areskoui,
Frederic, Jessy, and even the more influential of the
warriors. Not the slightest recognition or reply was
manifested by either.
When his thoughts wandered, as they sometimes
would, during his long and silent marches, from the
horrible reality of the present to the dreamy
remembrances
of the past, there rose his magnificent home,
in its oriental splendor and voluptuousness. There
were the soothings, the indulgent fondness, the
unlimited
homage from numerous dependents, of his
early years. There were his long revelries and the
blandishments of riches, art, and the unlimited scope
of his passions in the bowers of pleasure in Europe.
He remembered the fawning obsequiousness of the
victims, he had betrayed. He remembered in how
many circles of the fair, titled, and distinguished, he
had seen mothers stealthily pointing him out to their
daughters; and he comprehended by the
interpretation
of vanity, the flattering portraits of these
experienced
instructers, as they described his wealth and
amiability and beauty to their daughters.
What was he now? An abhorred, pinioned
captive
,
a wretch in the midst of the American deserts,
an object of abhorrence even to the meanest retainer
of an Indian camp. The twice outraged, and rescued
object of his guilty passions, passed in her loveliness,
every day in his sight, and the vision of her beauty
not rendered less interesting by the unalterable
sadness
of mourning occasioned by assassination of his
procuring, and conscious that the fact must now be
known to her. Yet, on her relenting, all his hopes
of mercy must rest.
He had often striven to call up the hardihood
necessary
to suicide. When riding, as he had often
done, on this long march, on the verge of precipices,
whence a single plunge of his horse would have
dashed
him in pieces on the rugged rocks below, he had
looked fearfully, and wistfully down the dizzy depths,
and attempted to imagine the momentary mortal
agony of the quiver and recoil, which would precede,
what he hoped would be the extinction of his being.
His head whirled, and he became faint at the thought.
Then he meditated the death, which he could
procure
from his guards, by attempting to escape; and
his coward heart shrunk at the imagination of feeling
the cold hatchet's edge in his cleft brain. `
Not now.
Not now. To-morrow. Another time
. Hereafter I
may feel nerved to an unshrinking fortitude to die.'
Such were his mental soliloquies. Once he thought
he might strangle himself in such a way, as not to
feel himself die. He seized his throat with his right
hand, and held fast, till his effeminate dread of pain
convinced him, that he could no way beguile himself
out of life, without feeling the transit. Not
unfrequently
,
the most torturing thought of all was, the
fast snatch of his broken slumbers, when a disturbed
dream presented Jessy once more struggling in his
arms. The contrast of his waking consciousness was
a darkness of the soul, like that of Egypt,
to be felt
.
Areskoui informed his guests, as they halted on the
opposite side of the stream, that he had promised his
warriors to remain there for the maize festival; and
that he should repose his horses and the expedition by
a rest of three days. Preparations were instantly
commenced for an encampment of more than
ordinary
consequence. The thicket sounded with frequent
strokes of the hatchet, and bark cabins, of
considerable
size, and even neatness, rose in the green wood
shade. It is one of the joyous circumstances
append-ed
to the condition of these free commoners of
nature
,
that wherever their feet press the soil, wherever
there are streams, woods, grass, game, fish and fowl,
and the circumambient blue above, they instantly find,
in the language of the bible,
their city of habitation
.
Their moral world surrounds them, like the
atmosphere
,
wherever they pitch their tents. Towns,
mansions
,
spires, towers, the fastidious creations of art, the
complicated wants and aspirations of civilized pride,
ostentation and ambition, are not requisite to supply
every association, that belongs to the universally
sacred
word,
home
. In a remote desert, with desolate
mountains, which they had scrambled over, on one
hand, in a wood, by a stream, and with an ocean
prairie, where elk and buffaloes were feeding on the
other hand, they were cheerfully trampling down the
grass, to form the lanes and alleys of communication
between the habitations, which had been the work of
but a few hours. Jessy and Katrina had already
decked their little abode with evergreens and
fragrant
flowers; and had sauntered with Frederic on
the banks of this desert stream, unknown to song,
sketching the outlines of the landscape, as they
paused
,
to survey the lonely grandeur of the scenery about
them more attentively. Conversations in such a
place, and between persons so situated, could scarcely
fail to arouse from their deep places the long
repressed
sentiments of their hearts. These walks and these
conversations, uninterrupted by the presence of either
Elder Wood, or Areskoui, whose whole thoughts and
energies had been given to fishing and hunting, had
already occupied two days of their sojourn.
During these two days, they had procured as
ample
a supply of fish, fowl and game, as the exigencies
of the expedition required. On the third, the
Indians
showed in their countenances, that some
ceremonial
of solemn import, and of a more stern
character
,
than the maize festival, was to be consummated.
A deep and murky gravity and thoughtfulness dwelt
upon every face; and they answered the questions of
their civilized guests with the shortest economy of
speech. Areskoui breakfasted with his guests in
unwonted
silence. His voice faltered, as he addressed
them on rising from their food; and an unusual
paleness
and melancholy marked his countenance. `My
sisters,' he said, `medicine man, and you, younger pale
faces,' pointing to Frederic and Jablinski, who at this
moment entered the tent, `we have a great medicine
solemnity to keep this day, which can be duly
celebrated
only by an unmixed assembly of red men. You
will bear me witness, that this is the first time I have
ever intimated to you, that we wish to be alone. In
yonder pleasant point of wood, at the foot of the
river's
bend, you will find a tent prepared for you of the
pale face. You will perceive, that it is supplied
with the best of our stores, and the medicine drink
from the grape. You will meet there two servants of
the Spanish race, that your food may be prepared for
you, according to your pleasure. It is the day sacred
to your Wahcondah, as we keep that, which is
hallowed
to ours. It is right, that your medicine man
should sometimes perform his more sacred rites,
undisturbed
by the presence of the unbelieving red
men. When to-morrow's sun shall have walked forth
above the mountains, we will unite again and resume
our march in peace.'
Elder Wood and his friends, ruminating the import
of this solemn prelude, arose to depart. They
comprehended
,
that this separation was enjoined, chiefly,
that the Shoshonee might proceed to the decision of
the fate of Julius, uncensured and uninterrupted;
without being diverted from their purpose by
entreaties
;
and without having to exercise the harshness of
refusing to listen to them. They perceived, too, that
Areskoui would feel reluctant to witness the horror,
which such a spectacle would excite in their minds.
In this view, the requested separation rather evinced
considerate delicacy than harshness. `Are they
intending
to sacrifice that man with the name not to be
uttered,' asked Jessy, as paleness crossed the transient
crimson of her cheek. `Oh! were it not better, that
we entreat his life once more?' `The entreaty will
not be mine,' gravely responded Elder Wood. `I
know not, that we ought to wish forbearance. I should
feel no reluctance to hear, that he were punished with
a quick and merciful death. We must leave him to
that God, who is righteous and terrible in his
judgments
.
I well know the ways of this people.
Areskoui
himself could as easily turn the sun from its path,
as this people from their ways, even if he would. I
am well assured, he would not make the trial. Let
us refrain from intermeddling with their usages, which
would not swerve their purpose, and might injure us?'
They arrived at their assigned tent, and were struck
with the extreme beauty of the position, and the taste,
with which it was fitted up. It was large, and cone
shaped, and covered with buffalo robes, brightly
stained, and neatly disposed upon long poles, bent over
each other in an elliptical curve. Every part was
decked with the gayest desert flowers; and, as they
had been notified, abundant provision had been made
for food and refreshment. The day was the Christian
Sabbath, a solemnity, on which Jablinski placed no
particular value. He felt, beside, that his presence
would be no addition to the pleasure of their
confidential
privacy. He begged to be allowed to amuse
himself
with his yager in his own way. Elder Wood, after
a short remonstrance touching the violation of the
Sabbath, added, `that a compelled observance of the
holy season was not that incense of the heart, called
for by the God of the Sabbath.' Thus the little
endeared
circle were left to themselves. Elder Wood
immediately drew forth his pocket bible and hymn
book. He read that beautiful psalm, in which the
various deliverances of the Almighty, from the
different
calamities of human life, by land and by sea, are
celebrated; and at the close of each strain of which
it is added,
O praise the Lord for his goodness, and for
his wonderful works to the children of men
. He prayed,
and touched with a tenderness, that filled his own
eyes, and those of his hearers, upon the merciful and
wonder working providence, which had been so
conspicuously
manifested in the rescue of his dear
children
there in the presence of God. Scarce had he
risen from prayer, and given out the hymn which they
commenced singing, than another song, the death song
of three hundred Shoshonee, was heard coming in
broken
peals, and in its appalling energy over the plain.
When the chorus sunk, its deep and guttural notes
might be best likened to the hollow and distant
murmur
of a full mountain torrent.
The song of Zion was broken off in the midst. No
one had the heart to sound another note. `Let us
away,' cried Jessy, `before the sound shall be so in my
ears, as that it can never be blotted from memory.'
Giving, therefore, a hasty charge to have supper
ready
at the accustomed hour, and taking refreshments
with them for dinner, they set forth towards a
spectacle
,
which showed at the distance of more than a
league to the east of their tent. It presented the
appearance
of an immense temple, separated a few
paces
from the perpendicular face of a high mountain.
Even seen at that distance, the columns would have
been estimated six hundred feet in height, and the
magnitude of the whole in every respect
corresponding
.
Compared to this desert temple, the pyramids
were the erections of children. The morning sun
shone upon its purple color, changing it to the most
splendid crimson. `Let us visit this mansion of the
Manitou,' (for such was the import of its name in
Shoshonee
)
said Elder Wood, `and in admiring the
grandeur
of the works of God, let us forget the angry and
unrighteous passions of man.' The servants
preceded
them, bearing refreshments; and they hurried their
steps over the flowering prairie, solicitous, as soon as
might be, to get beyond the increasing fury of the
Indian death song.
Before they reached the magnificent pile, every
moment swelling its dimensions in their eye, they had
ceased to hear the death song, except in some of the
softened notes dying away on the breeze.
The
temple
of nature
, as Jessy named it, although at a distance
it had the semblance of being scarcely separated from
the mountain, when reached, measured a distance of
at least fifty paces from it. The mountain rose in
mid air between two and three thousand feet in
perpendicular
height from the level of the prairie. It
was all of purple colored stone. Its naked front
showed
,
as if it had been hewed, and polished. A
considerable
stream above, just before its leap separated
into numerous channels, and streamed down this
surface
,
like ribbands of lustring let down from the sky.
The most splendid rainbows were painted upon them;
and when they united at the mountain's base, they
formed a beautiful transparent stream, skirted with
innumerable wild flowers, surmounted with humming
birds and bees. Turtles, orioles and song sparrows
emulated each other's notes, in the beautiful shrubs
that fringed the stream. The temple's roof was
supported
on more than a hundred columns. Its circular
dome showed of Grecian proportions, and it rested
upon circular ranges of columns. Near it rose tall
pillars of the same purple and polished stone, showing
like obelisks. Beyond were structures resembling
pyramids. If all this magnificent show were really
VOL. II. 16
the sport of nature, which its prodigious dimensions,
and its indescribable grandeur showed it to be,
nothing
could more resemble the works of art. The
party long contemplated this stupendous work in
silent
admiration and amazement, interrupted only by
the devout ejaculation of Elder Wood, `
great and
marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; in
wisdom
hast Thou made them all. The earth is full of
thy riches
.'
To render the resemblance of this wonder of the
solitude to a temple still more striking, the falling
waters
generated a breeze between the mountain side
and the temple, which in rushing along the columns,
and under the vaulted dome, formed a kind of
Eolian
harp of a hundred chords, and a power, like that
of the deeper notes of the Harlem organ. Here they
all joined in Elder Wood's favorite hymn, almost
deafened
,
and alarmed at the extent and power of the
echoes; and ceasing at intervals, only to listen to the
incessant voluntary of the house of nature.
Between the mountains and the columns was an
area of some acres, beaten perfectly smooth, and of a
polished purple surface. It was one of those places,
so common in the western portions of this continent,
called a
Lick
. When they concealed themselves
within
the temple, in a direction not to be scented by the
desert animals, it was covered with antelopes,
buffaloes
and elk, who came there to lap the saline
particles
,
which nature had mixed with the earth. It was
only to show themselves, and these free dwellers of
the wilderness sped away, evincing how little
grateful
was the sight of man.
In listening to this music, in surveying this
magnificent
pile, in noting these habits of the larger
animals
of those regions, and in such conversations, as
the day, the scene and their peculiar state of feeling
elicited, they forgot the dreadful ceremony, and the
death song, which had driven them from their tent.
Beneath a sugar-maple, where they heard on one
hand the song of a hundred birds, and on the other
the incessant swell of this magnificent Eolian harp,
they brought forth their refreshments. They refused
not the wine cup, dashed with the cold and limpid
element, which fell from the mountain. When they
had temperately partaken, Elder Wood bade them
enjoy themselves in that beautiful place, while he
retired
to his solitary devotions in the interior of the
temple of nature. One of those conversations ensued,
which are chiefly interesting in the ear of the young,
and which brought smiles even on the sad
countenance
of Jessy. It is only necessary to indicate, that
Frederic became eloquent and most enthusiastically
poetical, in expatiating upon the beauties of that
place, and the perfect happiness, which he felt
conscious
,
he could there enjoy with only the selected of
his heartof the world forgetting, and forgotten
worshipping with the beloved one in that temple, with
its unceasing music, drinking from that transparent
stream, sheltered in that beautiful wood, and feeding
from the wild fruits and beasts of the desert, and the
feathered tenants of the woods and the streams, as
fearless of them, as the primitive races were of the
first pair in Paradise, before sin had brought terror
of man among them. `You would almost make me
curious to hear the name of the Eve, who would share
your Eden,' said Jessy. `That name,' he answered,
`must rest ever unrevealed.'
That day, so passed, and in the calm delight of the
confidential intercourse of the heart, each of the three
felt to have been one of the happiest of their lives.
The slant rays of the sun were already falling in
sober
majesty upon the verdure of the prairie,
imparting
a rainbow tinge of gold to its green, when Elder
Wood, having finished his private devotions, called
upon them to return to supper. `I wish so deeply,'
cried Frederic, `to impress this scene upon my
memory
,
that hereafter, by intense recollection, and by
closing
my eyes, I can recall it again.' `And I,' said
Jessy, `have taken a method more consonant to our
gross material structure, to preserve the vivid
remembrance
of this scene. She unrolled her port
folio
.
There were the sleeping mountains. There
was the polished and perpendicular surface of that,
which impended them. There was the temple of
nature
,
to which St. Peter's was but the erection of
pygmies. There were the buffaloes and elksready
to bound along the prairie, and the birds reposing in
the firmament, and the ducks seemingly pattering in
the stream. There was Frederic electing his Eve, and
apparently about to build his bower;in short, a bold
and spirited outline of all, that was before them
with much of moral grandeur and sentiment which
the sketch spoke to the imagination. `To how much
better purpose you have occupied your time, than
we,' exclaimed Frederic;and all this the work of
but an hour;for we have scarcely noted the
operations
of your pencil. You have grasped every thing,
but the music;and when I look on those columns,
I shall easily imagine that also sounding in my ear.'
`It is for you,' she said, `if you will accept it;'and
as she presented it, he cried in classical enthusiasm,
Feriam sidera sublimi vertice
, and felt, that this was
the happiest moment of his life.
They returned. Supper was prepared. Elder
Wood renewed the worship and thanksgivings. The
evening hymn was sung, and the parties sat at the
door of their tent in delighted silence, listening to the
blended cries of the desert, in which no voice of
human
being mingled, and in watching the appearance
of the countless gems sparkling on the grass and
flowers
from the fire-flies. Pentanona entered the tent,
bearing, as he said, two letters, one to Elder Wood,
the other to Jessy. Torches were lighted, and the
latter turned pale, as she recognized the autograph
of Julius. In other times, it had been one of extreme
beauty. It was now with difficulty legible. Her
hand trembled, as she essayed to make out the
contents
.
She passed it to Elder Wood, requesting him
to read. Though superscribed to her, the contents
were addressed to him.
Minister of JesusA wretch in agony implores you
by Him, who suffered for mankind, to have mercy
upon him. He extenuates nothing. The vilest
outrage
and abandonment were his purpose. He
confesses
,
that he deserves the worst. His only plea is,
that he was ruined by the doting indulgence of his
parents. Luxury and pleasure have enervated him,
and he has not the courage to bear pain. Death is
horror to him, and Oh, God! Oh, God!the terrible
death of a slow fire. Christ pitied his tormentors.
Oh! let Jessy pity me. The agony is greater, than
human nature can bear. Oh! Elder Wood, come,
and pray with, and for
Julius
.'
The other paper, addressed to Elder Wood, was a
full and accurately drawn will, conveying his whole
inheritance, in the amplest form, to Jessy, or her
assigns
,
as some inadequate reparation for insults
intended
,
or inflicted. Annexed to it was a line to his
parents, confessing his repeated outrages to Jessy,
and begging them to regard her, as their child in his
place, and assuring them, that his only consolation in
death was the firm persuasion, that they would
regard
that, as the last will and testament of their
dying
son. Of this will Elder Wood and Frederic were
named witnesses and executors.
The whole was enclosed in an unsealed envelope,
and it had evidently been prepared, as a last
expedient
,
with a view to soften the heart of Jessy. The
envelope was scrawled with these words.
16 *
`They have unbound my hands, and furnished me
with the means of writing this. They are dancing
round the pile, on which I am to suffer by fire. My
oath, that I would possess thee, at the expense of
death and hell, rings in my ears, as a knell, that would
awaken the dead. Oh God! have mercy. Every
thing whirls before my eyes, and I can only pray, that
you may forget, if you cannot forgive
Julius
.'
The countenances of the readers and hearers were
equally pale, as they studied out these expressions,
word by word. Katrina supported Jessy, bathing
her temples, and holding her volatiles. Pentanona,
the while, calmly smoked his calumet, appearing not
to notice the successive changes of their
countenances
.
When the reading was finished, he stood up,
and said, `I am charged to inform you, that the bad
pale face, who made these medicine marks, has gone
to the land of souls. We have accomplished the
most solemn sacrifice of the red men. We have sent
the spirit of the bad pale face, with that of Nelesho,
to minister to the parents of Wakona, and others slain
in that fray, in the country of shadows. Tomorrow
we resume our march. If the medicine man would
know the particulars of this sacrifice, let him come
forth, and I will relate them to him apart.'
Elder Wood followed him from the tent, and heard
the appalling story. It was a recital to create
horror
and curdle the blood. When the Indians expire,
in these terrible sacrifices, the hardened endurance,
the seeming insensibility, the invincible apparent
apathy
,
show, that there is training, that there are
resources
of firmness, that there are motives, under the
influence of which, the moral exhibits a striking
triumph
over the physical naturethat, fear and every
form of pain and death can be completely vanquished.
The martyrs of all time, under certain circumstances
the most sensitive and delicate women, and
universally
the red men of the desert, exemplify this fact.
The sufferer of the latter class smokes, chaunts his
death song, defies his enemies, and by every
movement
evinces that self-possession, which is the
strongest
testimony, that the mind has the mastery of the
bodya most impressive proof, that man is not all
clay, and that this elastic and invincible spirit, which
quails not in the endurance of agony, has a
presentiment
,
that it cannot be touched by death.
In this case there were none of these circumstances
tending to mitigate the horror of the scene. The
enervated
coward, libertine, voluptuous, effeminate, and
pampered from his cradle, united the most masculine
fierceness of inordinate passions, the most unshrinking
conceptions of cruel enormity to the nervous timidity
of a weak and hysterical female, spoiled by affluence.
When he meditated crime, mercy, consequences,
heaven
and hell, the present and the future, were alike
laid out of the case. When his projects miscarried,
and the righteous reaction of his guilt returned on his
own head, his dastard spirit quailed, and the meanness
of his humiliation was as extreme, as the cruel
enormity
of his purposes. `Who could doubt,' Pentanona
asked, `that notwithstanding all his show of penitence,
and his crouching submissiveness of supplication, to
save his vile life, that, had he been spared, he would
have renewed his purposes the first day of his freedom.'
There is a peculiar excitement operating upon the
red men in cases of burning, which renders the
beholders
as inaccessible to feeling, and as inexorable
to pity, as the sufferer seems to be incapable of pain.
The preparations were all executed under his eye.
He saw the warriors eagerly adding faggot to faggot,
and mixing green billets with dry. He heard them
carelessly discussing all the circumstances of torment,
they were preparing. The medicine men, hideously
painted, stood apart, beating their drums, and at
intervals
starting the death song, in which the rest joined
in those horrible strains, which had so rung in their
ears at the tent in the morning. He saw these
warriors
,
so peaceful in their repose, so shepherd-like,
when reclining in the shade of their camp in the
slumber
of their passions, apparently transformed by this
scene and singing to the rage and fury of demons.
They yelled, leapt aloft in the air, and danced; and
when they paused for a moment, it was to resume the
fearful chaunt of their death song. An insatiable
delight
in the groans and agony of the victim had been
created by the spectacle. He made his last effort to
operate upon their obdurate natures, in thrilling
entreaties
,
uttered in screams of terror, that they would
not fire the pile, until they had a return to his
messages
to their friends. He struggled with his pinions,
till his unheeded cries to the young chief for mercy
sunk away from exhaustion. The serious and calm
indifference of the chief might have been taken for
the result of deafness. Not so the rest. Their shouts
of laughter, and the energy of their dancing were
increased
to tenfold vehemence. `The fair pale face
cries, like an old woman,' they shouted amidst their
peals of merriment. The medicine men, meanwhile,
beat their drums with a seriousness as inflexible, and
an industry as uninterrupted, as though the ceremony
could not proceed, if they were for a moment to remit
their beating. They occasionally chaunted, `we hear
their spirits cry for vengeance. Wait till the sun
casts no shadow, and the debt shall be paid.'
The stake was a sapling shaft, stripped of its bark,
of fifty feet in height, and planted perpendicularly.
The moment to fire the pile was, when that stake
should cast no shadow; and the fearful shortening of
that shadow was noted by the quailing eye of the
victim
,
who was bound fast to it. A human hand might
now have spanned the shadow. The whooping and
the Cheowanna-ha! ha! at that moment could only
have been aptly imaged by that impressive figure,
the
sound of many waters
. The young chief raised his
hand. `The eye of the Master of Life is now
directly
upon us,' he said; and as his hand fell, a few low
notes upon the drums, and the death song sinking
almost
under the breath of the warriors, and an
imitation
of the cry of one in the last struggles of
dissolution
,
was the signal to fire the pile. The oldest
warrior
of the expedition seized a flaming brand from a
fire in the centre of the camp, kindled on purpose.
He flourished it swiftly three times over his head. He
then calmly applied it to the pile, amidst shrieks from
the victim, which none but a red man's heart could
have endured.
As the fire streamed aloft, `I saw,' said Pentanona,
`big drops rise on the forehead of the base squaw. You
know, that Pentanona, cannot say the thing that is not.
I saw the hairs on his head become white, before they
kindled in the blaze. After all, our warriors, who
suspended their dancing, and their songs, to feast on
the groans of the squaw, were robbed of their joy.
The green wood hissed with the steam of a hot, but
slow fire; and we intended to have danced, and sung
to his cries, till the setting sun. But, as the fire began
to scorch his locks, we saw him fall lifeless and
motionless
.'
With the morrow's dawn, the Shoshonee
expedition
was in order for marching. The averted eyes,
with which Areskoui met, when he presented himself
in Elder Wood's tent, had been expected. `I am
aware,' he said calmly, `that your thoughts utter,
this it is to be a savage
. Be it so. I bear the spirit
of a red chief. The shades of the parents of
Wakona
,
and of my slain warriors have visited my
dreams. Their cry for vengeance has been in my
ears. Their shades are now appeased; the bad
Shienne chief has company in the land of souls, and
my bosom is lighter. The timorous shrinking of the
pale face, which invites the repetition of crime, is
with you mercy and civilization. Our stern and
inflexible
justice, which measures blood for blood, and
life for life, is with you abhorrent savage cruelty.
Had I once more released this pale face, I might say,
that I should have been able no longer to control my
warriors, who would have viewed me, as an old
woman
.
But I will not endeavor to win your opinion
by any insincerity. From the moment he came in
my power, I laid myself under an interdict, that he
should die. I would have preferred, that he should
have fallen, as your men of war fallpierced by the
instant death of the yager. But, remember, our
customs
.
They come down to us with the sanction of
ten thousand moons. How barbarous would many
of the ways of the pale face appear, deprived of this
sanction.' `There is ample truth in all that,' said the
Kentucky minister, in whose bosom the calm
sternness
of the young chief found palliation, if not a
kindred
feeling.
`Sister of my heart,' said Katrina to Jessy, as their
horses ambled side by side, `how could you look so
coldly on the chief, as he entered our tent this
morning
?
Were my heart in thy bosom, he would no
longer
despair, though he has allowed his warriors to
punish Julius;' and as usual, she continued to
expatiate
in the ear of her musing companion the praises of
Areskoui.
Much of this return march was over mountains,
unfrequented even by the Shoshonee. They were
found to be of the most rugged and precipitous
character
;
and opposing an uncommon distance of snowy
summits, where sterile and inhospitable nature offered
nothing to man or beast. Everlasting storm and frost
reigned among these desolate and appalling peaks.
Their horses and mules died, in numbers, from
hunger
and fatigue. Here the expedition would have
fallen, without a record of their catastrophe, had not
Areskoui, as a pioneer, discovered a pleasant valley
among the central mountains, which yielded grass,
service berries, mountain sheep, antelopes and other
game. The cold and ice formed torrents, also, were
alive with the speckled trout. They reposed in this
charming vale, called in Shoshonee the Valley of
Deliverance, two days; and recommenced their
march. The indefatigable young chief, although
lean, sallow, and apparently in decay, alone seemed
unwearied, undismayed, and alike impassible to
hunger
or fatigue. Even the Kentucky minister felt his
limbs stiffened with toil. Jablinski was little more
than a rough and unpolished voluptuary, and rather
required aid, than felt disposed to yield it. Frederic,
though he had the spirit of a lover and a hero, had
the habits of endurance only of a common man. Jessy
and Katrina were, in some passes of peculiar
difficulty
,
physically exhausted beyond the possibility of
further exertion. The capabilities of Areskoui were
new even to them. It would have furnished a
subject
for the pencil, to see the son of Ellswatta bearing
one of these fair girls, as incapable of further
exertions
as an infant, from rock to rock, and from cliff to
cliff; and depositing her on a level spot, and
returning
for the other.
Pleasure and pain, toil and repose all have their
assigned limits in the ever varying vicissitudes of
human
things. Areskoui no longer had the pleasure of
leaping down the mountains, carrying Jessy in his
arms, as the mother bears her infant. The green
vallies, and the wood fringed and winding course of
the Sewasserna were once more visible from the
declivities
of the last mountain. The spirit of repose
rested upon it, in the form of beautiful wreathings of
morning mist. The advanced warriors had already
reached this view, before it had become visible to the
household of Elder Wood. But they were cheered
with the warrior's rejoicing song. `We have come
in triumph from the foiled Russ. We have come
from the wigwam of ice. We have redeemed the
captives. Thanks to the Master of Life, we see once
more our own valewhere are our babes, and the
bones of our fathers.'
Soon they were on the pleasant banks of the
Sewasserna
,
feeling once more the bland south breeze,
under the shade of branching sugar-maples. A short
distance below was the deposit of their periogues.
The horses were unpacked, and the crafts laden with
their burdens. The conscious and joyful animals
neighed for gladness, and commenced a return course,
parallel to that of their riders, in a brisk pace, and
guided by the unerring precision of instinct towards
their homes. The dogs whined awhile for admission
to the boats with their masters. A few favorites only
were indulged. The rest raised a joyful yelp, and
started away in the rear of the horses. The
warriors
forthwith, and Elder Wood's friends, were
reposing
in the cool shade of the over arching sycamores
and peecans, as they floated down the sinuous bends
of the beautiful stream.
The domestic smokes of these primitive valley
dwellers were once more seen, rising in the quietness
and repose of the setting sun. The thronging of
congregated
and reunited wives, fathers, children, friends,
lovers, the joyful garrulity of clusters of
acquaintances
,
endeared by habit, furnished that picture of the
union of half a nation, that had been long over the
hills, and far away, with the stationary half, which
had remained to guard the sepulchres of the rude
forefathers of the nation, which must be dear to the
heart to contemplate. `Welcome! Welcome!' cried
they, who came out to meet the returning warriors.
`Welcome from the far northfrom the foiled Russ,
and the mountains.' The song was more loud and
cheerfulfor it told of triumph and success, unmixed
with mourning, and of abundance of peltries and spoil.
As the venerable Ellswatta and his wife relinquished
the embrace of their son, they most affectionately
welcomed
the friends of Elder Wood. With mute and
delighted attention they listened to the story of their
son's exploits, and the adventures connected with the
deliverance of the captives, as successively told by
Jablinski, Elder Wood and Frederic. As the
eventful
story closed, Ellswatta drew his calumet from his
mouth. `All we desire,' he said, `of the Master of
Life, is, that our son may come after us, as the sun
rises
upon the darkness, and that our rescued children,
Wakona and Katrina, may be content with our valley,
and never expose themselves to the cruelty of the bad
pale face again.'
Jessy and Elder Wood were speedily settled in the
house, built under other auspices, and for the Song
Sparrow. Once more she sat beneath those pines,
where she had first seen the light, and felt the
parental
caress. The deep strain of the evening breeze in
their tops discoursed to her the joy of grief,
remembrances
of joys that were past, and restored the shades
of the departed to the eye of memory. Close in view
were the brands and coals and ruins of her paternal
dwelling; and but a few paces thence the fresh graves.
From what scenes, from what toils, from what wastes
of land and sea had she returned! True, Katrina
was by her side. But the presence of the blithe and
buoyant girl accorded not with the tone of her mind
on thus revisiting spots so sacred to memory.
The first bursts of feeling and sorrow, by the
soothing
influence of the effort to resume her former
pursuits
,
and by the repetition of a few days, softened
VOL. II. 17
into the settled and sober sadness of a composure not
without its pleasures. Dividing her society and her
walks equally between Frederic and the young chief,
when Elder Wood accompanied them not, her
manner
seemed to say, `I have had enough of adventures,
in attempting to return to the world. I mean to cling
to the shelter and protection of the valley.' But such
had been the revulsion of the feelings and habits of
all the parties, concerned in the terrible recent events,
that it was many days, before the ancient order of
things resumed its course, and brought its former
interest
.
Elder Wood preached, and Jessy painted,
and Frederic played his flute, and Areskoui
governed
,
as those, who only performed the offices
mechanically
,
and took little interest, in what they did.
The two orphans, indeed, wanted no temporal
comfort. The confiscated property of Hatch
furnished
Elder Wood's establishment with such
conveniences
,
as had formerly belonged to the habitation of
William Weldon. Elder Wood manifested towards
his two wards the good fidelity and the paternal
solicitude
of a father. The first return of intelligence
from Astoria informed them, that the pecuniary and
other resources of Jessy, left at her lodgings, when
she was carried into captivity, were still in the
custody
of their host, and disposable at her order. Elder
Wood, as a devoted missionary of the cross, was once
more busy,
in season and out of season
, in the pursuit
nearest and dearest to his heart, the attempt to bring
these heathens to the obedience of the gospel. A
feeling of shame aroused Jessy from the indolence and
apathy of grief, as she saw all else beginning to be
interested
,
and occupied as formerly. `Shall I be the
only being in this valley,' she asked herself, `who
cannot
exercise sufficient energy of character, to awaken
to a pursuit, and find interest in some duty, as if no
duty in the universe any longer remained to me?'
With such purposes, she intimated to her friends,
that she would strive to resume her pencil in the
bower
of the blue lake. This wish was as a command.
Areskoui directed his warriors, while they grubbed
up the intruding tangle of foliage. The vines were
trained. The walks were smoothed. The interior
was fitted up, as formerly. There were no longer
fears from insurgent Shienne, or their moody and
plotting
chief. There could be imagined no grounds for
fear of danger from aught, that surrounded them.
Her books and drawing apparatus once more
surrounded
her. Their suppers and their coffee were
once more taken in this charming spot. But, while
Josepha and Ellswatta sat on the sod seats, enjoying
the cool of sunset, two figures were so conspicuously
wanting, that tears unconsciously fell from the eyes
of Jessy, while she was even speaking the accents of
gladness. Frederic played his flute, but the tones
sounded in her ear, as those of a dirge. She
attempted
to sketch the scenery; but her pencil involuntarily
evoked the shades of her dear parents, as they used
to ascend the acclivity, to conduct her home at
night-fall
.
Elder Wood was the only one of the establishment,
who soon found himself completely at home. By his
share in the property of Hatch, he was placed above
the necessity of longer following his yager or his traps,
except for exercise, and as an amateur; and the much
enduring Kentuckian returned from his wanderings
with an unbroken and unabated love for his holy
function
,
bringing to that the same generous intrepidity,
warmth of heart and capability of sacrifice, that had
so endeared him to his friends and Areskoui on the
late expedition. Again his sonorous voice was heard
on the Sabbath, and whenever circumstances
admitted
of a gathering of the red men under the
sycamore
,
in exhortations, prayers and hymns of praise.
The renewed experience, which his wards had had,
of the paternal care, that God exercises over
innocence
in oppression and distress, enabled him to speak
with more unction, and from a fuller heart, of the
parental
character of the Almighty. The vacant seats
where Julius had been accustomed to sit, the wide
unoccupied space, which had been formerly filled by
the proud and Herculean Nelesho, in the centre of
his Shienne, these circumstances were well
calculated
to be seized by an ardent and imaginative mind,
like his, as themes of powerful and impressive
eloquence
.
`But a short time since, they had listened
with us,' he said, `in comparative innocence. They
were swift as eagles. They were strong as lions.
But they are fallen in their sins. They have gone
down to the lake, that burneth with brimstone and
fire; and a voice seems in my ear to come from their
vacant seats, calling on you, who are still subjects of
mercy, to avoid their doom.' The minister, as usual,
once on this exciting strain, seldom failed to pour
forth the fullness of his heart, till his own excited
feelings
caused the tears to descend his cheeks. The
pale and thoughtful countenance and the tearful eye
of one of his wards evidenced, that he carried her
feelings, if those of none other, with him.
But while the man of God in his respectable
employment
was engaged and happy, while the nation
had returned to its pristine quietness, while new
trappers
from the shores of the sea and the sources of the
Missouri were occupying the vacant cabins of the
Shienne, while Katrina, joyous, buoyant, and in the
freshness of youth and health, was developing a
beautiful
form, and new personal charms, so gay and
happy
herself, as hardly to be capable of conceiving that
care and gloom could exist about her, Frederic,
Jessy
and Areskoui were, each in their own way, proofs
of the old adage, that men may change their sky and
condition, without changing their minds. The
parents
of the young chief had exulted, on his return, in
the sanguine anticipation, that now, when nothing
further
was to be apprehended from the Shienne; now,
that Wakona had returned, and it was understood, was
to remain perpetually in the valley, sharing her
kindness
between their son and Frederic, as a sister
to brothers; now, that he had come back in triumph
from such a glorious expedition, he would be
cheerful
,
spirited, and such a chief, as would more than
replace
his father. For a few days, his renovated
efforts
to resume his former spirit and activity, the
gladness
of a return to his parents, and the consciousness
of the deliverance he had wrought for her he loved,
seemed to promise the fulfilment of their hopes. But
in situations of extreme peril, in the long and trying
expedition, in the fury of the fray at Ostroklotz, when
bearing Jessy in his arms over the mountains and
precipices
,
in the distractions of a long journey, one
sentiment
neutralized another. Now, that events had
resumed their accustomed course, that the valley was
in repose, that a ray of cheerfulness played once more
upon the pale cheek of Jessy, the one, single,
absorbing
sentiment of his heart began to resume its terrible
empire there, as hectic fixes its surest influences,
where every thing external gives the strongest
promise
of health and life. His parents remarked, and all
that felt sufficient interest in him, to note his habits,
observed, that he no longer cared for his wonted
enjoyments
.
Sometimes he rose from his food,
apparently
unconscious, that it had been spread before
him. He was absent, dreaming and abstracted. He
returned vague and wrong answers to the questions
of his parents. Even, when in council, or command
among his Shoshonee, he was inactive and spiritless;
and required, that his proper course should be
dictated
to him by another. Hunting, trapping, Indian
17*
sports, warlike exercises, and all the varieties of
prompt calls to precede in the duties of a chief, were
either neglected, or required that Pentanona, or some
other devoted friend, should whisper them in his ear.
Chieftainship was indeed, to a certain extent,
hereditary
among his people. But, unless energy and the
spirit of command descended with it, the charter of
transmission soon became an obsolete form.
As this fierce people saw these symptoms of
decline
in their chief, saw him growing pale, feeble,
languid and indifferent in the discharge of his duties,
instead of pitying him, or being softened by sympathy
for his case, they began to murmur in disaffection.
They said, and they said perhaps, truly, `that it was
the poison of the mixed blood of the pale face in his
veins, that rendered him the victim of this medicine
spell, for which there was no corresponding feeling in
a red man's bosom, to enable him to account. They
remembered the fierce and ever active Nelesho. He,
too, had loved Wakona. But it was a love, that
rendered him more fierce and terrible, and abated
no portion of his power.' They failed not, at the
same time, to remark, that it was, because the
enervating
influence of no mixture of blood was in his
veins.
His parents expostulated. His mother wept with
him and for him, while his father used the stern and
uncompromising language of a red man and a chief.
`It is shame to thee, my son, said the hoary chief in a
voice of bitterness, `as I have said to thee in seeing
former follies of this kind, that thou hast no more
spirit, nor pride, than thus to allow thyself to yield to
this vile weakness, like a blighted prairie flower, cut
down under the withering of a summer's sun. I
have seen thine eye in battle become as that of the
eagle; and then I joyfully recognized my son. But
the moment thou camest back in triumph, and
beholdest
the rescued in peace, and ready to smile upon
theethe moment, thou once more becomest the
light of thy father's and mother's eye, thou art
languid
,
like a sick woman. I feel the bold and upward
spirit of a chief still burning at my heart, old, and
worn as I am. Art thou my true son, and yet
become
as a withered plant? Curse on the mixture of
blood in thy veins. It has brought on thee the wrath
and the medicine influence of the Wahcondah of the
white race and ours. When I ask, who will govern
the Shoshonee, after thy old father has gone down to
the sunless valley, the thought of leaving behind me
a weak and degenerate son, a passive slave of those,
he should have commanded, I become, as though
tormented
by the little white men of the mountains.
Perhaps a chief of the hated Shienne, for such a one
holds the next place in the council to thee, will
command
my nation. Little men will walk over my
grave, and Maniteewah's prophecy will be
accomplished
,
who foretold, that I should be the last of my
race. Thou hast loved Wakona, and for that I blame
thee not; for she is lovely, and at thy period of life, I
might have yielded to the same folly. She returneth
not thy love; and for that I reproach her not. The
Master of Life is alone able to move the fountains of
the heart. The sun, moon and stars, the streams and
seasons, touched by this finger, move on in their
unchangeable
courses. But I do chide thee for not
remembering
,
while thou beholdest the maiden of fair
face and raven locks, that thou art a chief, and shouldst
conquer a love, that cannot be returned, even as
thou must learn to govern others by first subduing
thyself.'
`Thy son listens to thy words,' replied the young
chief, `with reverence, and as if spoken by the
Wahcondah
.
But dost thou not forget, in thy stern
reproof
,
that the way of the Master of Life in the heart
of thy son is as unchangeable, as in the course of the
sun and the return of the seasons? Ask the wild
animals
not to love their offspring. Call on the birds to
forget the spring season of their loves. I, too, am
borne onward with the rest. Ah! it is, because
every thing is unchangeable, and settled by the Master
of Life, that I cannot tear her image from my heart.'
The heart of the mother of Areskoui, formed of a
material less stern, rose against the kindly intended
severity of her husband. All the mother was stirred
in her soul, as she saw him pale, subdued and
decaying
,
as a plant seared by premature autumnal frost.
She remembered well the devouring fires of her own
youthful bosom; `and I,' she said `have transmitted
him this destroying inheritance. Let me try to soften
Wakona herself.' With this purpose, she sought the
mourner alone. `Wakona,' she said, `I am a mother
in despair. I have an only son. I bore him in my
bosom, to perpetuate my name, and be the chief of
this noble people. Thou hast yet loved no one, but
thy parents, and canst not have sounded the depths of
a mother's love, or thou wouldst not leave us all to
see him consume away, as by a slow fire. Wakona,
did not thy parents love him? Played you not in love
together under yonder pines, when we were all so
happy? Rememberest thou not the pledges of a love,
which fixed upon thee from his infancy? But I will
not remind thee of his deeds of sacrifice and love from
his earliest years, to his late return with thee from the
cruel Russ. Canst thou say, that he is not noble in
appearance, or that the tinge, which he derives from
the red men, adds not a sternness to his visage,
befitting
a warrior, born to breast the elements, and look
upon the sun? Is he less noble in thine eye even, than
thy friend with the lily forehead? Were it not more
worthy of thee, to be the wife of a chief, and to reign
over this people by ruling him, than to be one of the
undistinguished million among thine own people?
What a race, fair as the angels, beautiful as the
children
of the sun, would come after you? How
glorious
to thee, to seal his heart for the true God, and the
faith of Elder Wood! We would raise the towns and
churches, and make the great paths, and introduce
the improvements of our own race into this fair valley.
The books of our writers should tell of us in story
and song; and the white people of the far countries
would travel among us, not to trap beaver or cheat us
of our furs, but to admire the female law-giver and
queen of the Shoshonee. I beseech thee, Wakona,
on my knees, to pity him, and not to destroy the hope
of our race, him, us, thyself; for who will protect
thee, when he is no more? I implore thee by the
mother of God, and thy own parents, to listen to a
mother in despair.'
While she was thus pleading with frantic
earnestness
for him, he entered, unavoidably instructed in
her purpose, and the tenor of her words, by what he
had heard. He spoke in a tone of calmness, but
almost
of authority, `my mother, thou forgettest thyself,
and dost not remember, that our medicine ways forbid
us to importune those, who cannot love. Wouldst
thou force Wakona to speak with a false tongue,
and take from her the charm of truth? Wouldst thou
by such motives use a violence only less, than that of
Julius? Let us away. Wakona has lost her parents,
and is not less sad than myself. I swear by the
Wahcondah
,
she shall not be tormented by these
importunities
.
Go, mourner, to thy medicine father; and
thou shalt in this way be vexed no more;' and with a
look of command, he requested his mother to allow
her to depart, to join Elder Wood, who was waiting
for her in the distance. This, thought the mourner,
if my heart could be moved, would be the way to reach
it. But even this noble forbearance, though it
produced
a feeling of the deepest respect, and the most
detailed review of all, that he had done for her, of all
the disinterested love and truth he had shown her,
failed to awaken that tender sentiment, the reality,
depth and torment of which she began herself too well
to understand.
The destiny of Areskoui was accomplished. The
great mass of our race are too little under the
influence
of reason, to follow other guidance, than the
mechanical
leading of temperament. What else could
be expected of a chief, like Areskoui, who inherited
the invincible and headstrong determination of his
father
,
and the ardent and impetuous passions of his
mother, born to the earliest cherished feelings of
command
and love, for his infant playmate? To the
remonstrances
of his parents, to the grave counsels of
Elder Wood, to the confidential expostulations of his
sub-chiefs, he soon learned to say, `can you cure the
headache, by exerting your will and reason against it?
Can you cool the skin, and render slow and regular
the beatings of your heart in a fever, because you are
uncomfortable from the malady? Think you, that
Areskoui loves pain? Think you, that he is the only
being in the world, who does not desire his own
happiness
?
Oh! show me, that you are able to cure
disease
,
and old age, and death yourselves, and then I
will follow your example, and pluck out the image of
Wakona from my heart.'
What the world calls destiny, seemed seriously
engaged
in weaving a tissue of cross purposes for the
dwellers of this valley. While the chief was thus
cherishing these sentiments of a morbid and hopeless
affection without a return, Katrina was steadily
nursing
a growing passion for the chief. Happily, she was
scarce fifteen, and it was all a feeling of that transient
and evanescent class, which in that period springs up
in the bosom, like weeds, that, sustained not by reason,
pass away, replaced by another class of feelings,
equally
the birth of fancy and the blood. Her beauty
might not be said to be intellectual in its associations,
and of the deep and enchaining moral interest of
Jessy's
.
But measured by the more common standard,
she was every day developing more rich and luxuriant
loveliness. The face was of that bright olive, in which
the eloquent blood mantles the cheek with the passing
sensations withinas the southern clouds chase each
other over the sun. Her intelligent and glistening
black eye was the window, from which looked forth
the ever varying train of sentiments, ardent, frolic,
merely sensitive, or intellectual, as they took their
predominant
hue from the store house, where they were
generating. The most splendid, glossy, raven ringlets
covered a head, and curled upon a form, which would
have been sought by a statuary, as a model. Her
movements corresponded with her form; and were
bounding and elastic, the putting forth of the general
expression of her countenance. Add, that she
inherited
the Spanish female voice of music, and that the
English, which she had learned, was enunciated in
the Spanish accent, and with a sonorous rounding of
melody; and that her thoughts were naturally colored
in phrases of quaint naivete, with a mixture of
Shoshonee
simplicity, and figurativeness, drawn fresh and
direct from visible nature. Such was the ardent,
charming and affectionate being, which the training
of Jessy had developed from the squalid and forlorn
captive child, won from the Black-feet. Jessy loved
her as the most spirited, beautiful, and affectionate
being, she had seen. She loved with the unconscious
fondness of hidden self-complacency, and seeing in her
the exquisite workmanship of her own hand. She
loved, as a sister, a companion, and all she had to
love. She loved her from the natural reciprocity of
an affection, as pure, ardent and disinterested, as ever
warmed human bosom, manifested in every movement
of her pupil. To her it was an incredible mystery, to
imagine, that any one could contemplate this lovely
girl, and not share something of her own love. A
hope, that more than once had visited her mind
before
,
carried a gleam of joy to her imagination. `It is
only necessary,' she thought, `that Areskoui should
see this girl in her loveliness, to transfer to her, in her
freshness and capacity of responding to his sentiments,
all, that he has felt for me.' Must it be said, that a
ray of light passed through the general gloom of her
thoughts, in meditating the possibility of another union
of attachment? Startling disclosures, in regard to
the state of her own feelings, began to be made to her,
in a light, and with an evidence, against which she
could neither blind herself, nor even remain longer in
doubt.
But though she met with little encouragement in
her effort to render Areskoui sensible of the
attractions
of Katrina, she became palpably taught, that she
had fearfully succeeded in rendering her pupil
abundantly
alive to the merits of Areskoui. She was of
course an object of the natural and national partiality
of Josepha, as one of her own race. Similarity of
natural temperament added another tie; and, wholly
unconscious of a thought of establishing any relation
between her and her son, she caressed the affectionate
girl with a mother's fondness. This order of things
placed her under the continued influence of an
intercourse
with the chief, altogether dangerous to her
peace. She had been reared, from earliest
remembrances
,
with the red people. She knew not higher
standards, from which to institute comparison. To
her there was neither ferocity nor degradation
associated
with the term
Savage
. Jessy was her grand
exemplar; and her estimates of opinions were her
laws. From her she learned the most touching views
of the wisdom, worth and amiability of the young
chief. Her imagination had been struck with his
imposing
and intrinsically noble character. His wan
and hollow cheek, the affecting tones of his voice, and,
more than all, pity inspired by seeing him daily
sinking
under the influence of a hopeless passion, taught
her a love compounded of admiration, compassion and
heart-felt attachment. In many striking ways she
manifested the sentiment; and fears that she would
display it at improper times and places, began to be
one of the annoying apprehensions of Jessy, whenever
they met.
In their walks to the blue lake, along the banks of
the Sewasserna, and whenever their pursuits led them
together, Jessy invariably took the arm, and received
the attentions of Elder Wood, as a child conducted
by an affectionate father. Areskoni often shared
their walks, and went thoughtfully by their side, silent,
musing, and seldom interposing more, than a laconic
sentence. Katrina, appropriated by circumstances
to the care of Frederic, generally walked apart with
him, and behind the chief, carefully observing his port
and steps. The retorted eye of Jessy numbered
every
case, in which he yielded her any of those natural,
simple and common attentions, called for by
circumstances
.
It was equally new and alarming to her, to
find, that those attentions, began to seem important,
and particular, and to fill her with anxiety. `Is it
possible
,'
she asked, `that the chief feels for me sentiments,
which I have not power to return; that I have taught
this ardent and inexperienced girl to love him who
cannot reciprocate love; and that this stern,
intelligent
,
high minded young American, whom I have so
often deemed incapable of feeling love, is in his turn
smitten with this beautiful and warm hearted, but
untaught
girl?' The last question, to her astonishment
and grief, vexed her more than the painful conviction
VOL. II. 18
of all the other web of crossed purposes and affections
thrown away.
It was not long afterwards, that she was seated in
private with her pupil of raven locks, delivering her
grave and matronly lectures, hinting at dangers,
prescribing
rules, and instructing her, where to receive
these attentions, and where, and how to avoid them,
and intimating, at the same time, with sufficient
clearness
,
that something was wrong in the case. The
affectionate girl comprehended slowly, and with
difficulty
,
the drift of her loved lecturer. When she did
at length understand, that Jessy was cautioning her
against walking so much with Frederic, she smiled
through tears, which formed in a moment at her tone
of rebuke, and archly said, `my wise and good sister,
I will obey. But how came you to know all these
things? You are but young yourself; and have never
been, as I think, in love.' `No, Katrina, no. But in
eighteen years I have suffered much affliction, and
that has taught me much.' `But, my wise sister
Jessy
,
why should you cast on me that reproving glance,
in reference to Frederic? You know, I may walk
safely with him, because I am perfectly indifferent to
his brotherly kindness. Ah! it is not so with the
chief. Ah! my sister, if you could impart to me
your stores of knowledge, and that look, which goes
to my heart, as well as his; if you could teach me to
transfer his love from you to poor unworthy me, he
should not have occasion to waste away in vain, poor
chief. You in turn would wed the fair young
American, and how happy we should all become!'
Elder Wood, deeply intent upon his Apostolic
labors
,
now promising much more ample results than
formerly, was the last of this group to note the
influence
of these capricious and misdirected workings of
affection. It was long before he was fully convinced
that the abstract dogmas of the Calvinistic school
were not the most useful and fundamental truths to
inculcate upon the simple Shoshonee, almost the
whole of whose thoughts ran in the channel of simple
and sensible ideas. The experience of many efforts
of fruitless exertions to make himself understood, and
when he was understood, the never failing
conviction
,
that his doctrines had inspired disgust, at length
convinced him, that such ministrations were neither
wise, nor expedient. He was far away from creeds
and schools, and had no conclave to dictate to him.
He determined to revolt his audiences no more with
these mysterious, and to them contradictory and
incredible
dogmas. He gradually fell into their train
of thought, and their modes of speech. The glorious
truths of the gospel in their simplicitythe sure and
certain hope of a resurrection from the deadthe
perfect example of the Saviourthe paternal
character
of the Almightythe connection of a
benevolent
and virtuous life, with happiness here and
hereafter
,these
became the prevalent themes of his
preaching, and when expounded in their phrase and
figure, produced an immediate, palpable, and most
encouraging
influence. New converts were almost
weekly added to the church, and Elder Wood was
exulting in the hope, that one of his catechumens
would be trained to become a preacher, to continue
the ministry of the gospel among them, after he should
be gathered to his fathers.
Among other persons, who visited him for the
purposes
of religious enquiry, his most assiduous and
earnest
visitant was the young chief. He had been
particularly
impressed with a sermon, in which Elder
Wood had eloquently set forth the parable of the good
shepherd, wandering over the mountains in search of
a single stray from his fold; and affectionately and
joyfully bringing the wanderer home. He was also
noted to evince particular delight in hearing the
preacher delineate the joys of heaven. He tired not
of the description of the unfading verdure of the hills
of paradisethe pleasant land, where the sun always
shines; where the sun, moon and elements bring
neither
disease, blast or inclemency; where the bread
fails not, and the water is sure; where there are no
bad passions or rankling cares; and, more than all,
where there are neither sorrow, tears nor death.
Areskoui
was often observed, during the discussion of such
themes, to turn away, that he might hide his emotion,
and he was often reported to exclaim, as he returned
from the service, `that is the country for the young
chief.'
Elder Wood labored, most of all, to indoctrinate the
chief, upon whose conversion he sanguinely
calculated
,
that of the nation would depend, in the spirituality
of the Christian doctrine. It sometimes almost vexed
him, that he could never instil into the mind of his
catechumen
,
that we shall not carry from earth the same
train of thoughts and feelings, which we have had
here. He furnished an additional case, in proof of the
general fact, that religious faith in every mind is apt
to receive the peculiar coloring of the mental
temperament
,
and the present state of the stronger passions.
`Do you not believe, medicine man,' Areskoui would
say, `that there will be that peculiar love and
appropriation
,
which belongs to the sexes in heaven?' `They
neither marry, nor are given in marriage there; but
are as the angels,' was the reply. `Be it so,' replied
the other. `Some spirit of the fair white race would
rob me of the love of Wakona, even in the land of
souls. It were better to be wholly free from the sting
of that tormenting passion. But then, what would
there be to desire there? Hopeless, tasteless and
weary existence seems to be equally in store for me
in this vale, and in the land of souls. I feel, as if
existence
itself were becoming a burden. It were
better
not to be at all.' `That, unfortunate pagan, is not
in thy power. God gave it thee. He only can
destroy
it.' `Well, medicine man, it may at least be
worth the experiment, to see how that may be. The
brightness of yonder great lamp has become as
darkness
to my eyes. Spring, with its flowers and
fragrance
,
is to me as the fall of the leaf in autumn.
Upon whatever side I look, all nature is becoming as
dark and desolate, as my own bosom. Wakona still
walks, like a night meteor, surrounded by her own
brightness. But the circle of darkness closes in around
her. Oh! that I could fly away with the eagle above
the mountains, or plunge into the thickest of the battle,
and die. When I look down from Wakona's bower
upon the sleeping bosom of the blue lake, and see the
trees and the sky so beautifully repainted in its far
depths, I would gladly throw myself down, and be at
rest. Father, thine is a true talk, as I now know,
when thou sayest, that all below yon bright lamp in the
firmament is vanity. Well do I know that even the
beauty of Wakona will pass away. Her fair face
will be scathed with wrinkles, and she will be seen as
a withered flower. Father, is there not an easy cure
for this insupportable sickness of the heart? Thou
knowest, it is natural to a red man, not to be afraid
to die. If I have the incurable medicine-burning of
the pale face in my veins, thanks to the Master of
Life, I have also the soul of a Shoshonee.'
It was not the first time that Elder Wood had perceived
the cherished purpose of suicide in his pupil. It may
be easily imagined, that every motive operated to stir
him to the putting forth all his eloquence against this
act; closing continually with the natural and
Christian
view of the deed, as a perpetration, which, in its
very nature cut off the suicide from the hope of the
mercy of God. `There, father,' the chief replied, `I
am again at issue with thy medicine book. The
Master
18*
of Life called me here, without my consent. I
had no voice in receiving this hated gift of life. If I
return him that bitterness, for which I asked him not,
will he be angry with me?' `But thy parents, chief; is
it not as a woman to desert thy parents? What will
become of their gray hairs?' `Ah! father, there you
touch my heart. Thou sayest truly, that I ought to
live for them. I have said so to myself, and that has
caused me hitherto to sustain my burden. But then,
I repeat again, that their moons will soon cease
in the course of nature, even if they were happy, and
I were all, they could wish. A short grief is better,
than a long one. They had better follow me by one
stern plunge to the sunless valley, than endure the
slow agony of seeing me live on, a feeble old woman
in the very freshness of my youth. Every plant,
father
,
that is nourished by the dew of heaven, must
wither. The Master of Life has so formed all things,
that they soon change to blackness. Ah! father, thou
wilt find it hard to persuade a red man, not to court
stillness and relief to his bosom, when it aches to
bursting.'
This was the strain to stir within the Kentucky
minister all the ardent and affectionate eloquence of
his ministry for a person so dear; for a case in every
light interesting. `Would to God, chief,' he said `that
I could show the eye of thy faith, Jesus, the conqueror
of death, coming in the glory of his triumphs, with the
brightness of the resurrection to the tomb. Ah! could
I infuse into thy dark bosom the radiance of that
eternal
and unclouded morning, the rapture of that blessed
meeting on the eternal hills, of that glorious country,
where sin, tears, and death are equally unknown, how
would all the little interests of this passing moment
of life vanish? The mere animal fondness, which
you call love, the play of the passions upon the
imagination
,
dwelling on tresses, which will soon be grey,
upon a beautifully painted face, on which the worm
soon will feed, how evanescent would these puerile
fancies appear in the light of eternal truth, and
measured
by the standard of the sanctuary, the worth of
the undying soul, and that day, which shall have no
night!'
Such at this time was the internal history of those
dwellers in this interesting valley, upon whom these
annals have chiefly turned. It is happy for mankind,
that but a very small portion of the species are so
constituted
,
as to be capable of such intenseness of either
joy or suffering. Happily for men, the greater
portion
move calmly onward towards the grave, in an
unruffled course, as unmarked by incident, as
unscathed
either by raptures or agonies, as the green
tribes of the vegetable kingdom, that bud, expand,
flower, mature and die in noiseless quietness. To the
thousands of the Shoshonee, among whom these germs
of joy and grief had evolved, and in the midst of whom
these personages of our history daily moved, most of
these developments would have been information of a
state of feeling, of which themselves, though daily
beholding
the subjects, had not dreamed.
CHAPTER XII.
They bleach beneath the wave.
They pillow on the ever heaving brine.
On
a mild summer afternoon, when the mellowness
of autumn was already beginning to steal upon the
richness of the season, Elder Wood had risen from
dinner with his two adopted children. He had just
taken his pipe, before commencing some afternoon
visits among his enquirers. His two wards were
proposing
to accompany him. It had become a rare
occurrence
for the young chief to pay them a visit.
Frederic, for the most part shared their promenades
with Elder Wood; and Areskoui appeared to consider
his presence as adding nothing to their enjoyment,
or his own. At this time he was announced, always
a welcome visitant to Elder Wood, who grieved that
they so seldom saw him; but rather a startling one to
his wards, and apparently an unexpected one to
Frederic
.
After the customary civilities of their meeting,
he said, `Wakona, I ask of thee the strange, and I
fear me, the unwelcome request, that thou wouldst
this beautiful afternoon accompany me to the blue
lake. I have somewhat to say, which I may say only
alone with thee. Thou canst make this apology for
me, that I do not often urge such requests.'
There was mystery in his manner, and extreme
emotion in his countenance. A thousand sinister
forebodings connected with the terrible event, that
had already befallen her there, passed through her
thoughts. The strongest pledge of unalterable
confidence
in the honor of the chief, which could be
given
,
she instantly gave. `I will immediately
accompany
thee,' she said; and made her arrangements to
walk with him, while the other three prepared to go
forth in another direction. He walked near her in
seeming irresolute meditation upon what he had to
say. Jessy, anxious to put him at ease, made many
efforts to elicit whatever communications he might
have on his mind. They arrived at the beautiful spot,
and she seated herself as usual, unrolled her port-folio,
and took her pencil. The red people, free and
independent
,
suffer little from bashfulness; and for the
first time she noted him apparently under the
embarrassment
of not knowing what to say, or not feeling
the requisite courage to say it. At length, he said,
hesitatingly, `I imagined, I had somewhat to say to
thee, when I invited thee here. But the words have
vanished from my memory.' Marking the transient
glow occasioned by this address, so unlike his usual
strain, he said, `if I alarm thee, Wakona, thou hadst
better return.' `Not at all,' she answered. `I would
gladly hear thy words. Canst thou doubt the
interest
of thy sister?' `I thought,' he replied, `there was
a fountain of words, like the flow of a stream, at my
heart. Where can all have vanished?' Observing
him to be excessively moved, marking his pale cheek,
his trembling hands, and the various symptoms of
debility
and decline, an irrepressible pity, that at once
banished alarm, arose within her. `Chief,' she said,
`I now perceive, that thy countenance shows unusual
illness. Thou wilt no longer trifle with the gratitude,
pity and sympathy of thy sister, but wilt leave these
wearing wanderings with thy people, and put thyself
in earnest to medicine thyself. I have much faith in
the skill of our father, Elder Wood. If thou art not
fixed, to grant nothing to thy sister, thou must mind
me, and attend to this matter.' He reached her his
arm. `I have far more faith, Wakona, in thy
medicine
skill, than in that of the father. Feel the pulse,
as the father doth.' An unwonted smile met hers, as
she took his arm, and applied her slender fingers to
the tense and bounding pulse. `Canst thou make
nothing
of it?' he asked, as the smile was replaced in his
emaciated face by its customary sadness. `This is
mockery, Wakona. Thou knowest the incurable
malady, but too well. I have not invited thee here
to utter weak and unjust reproofs, because the Master
of Life has not given thee the purpose, and it may
be, not even the power, to heal the disease, that is
drinking up my spirit.'
`Areskoui,' she said, `my brother, pity impels me
to be frank with thee. I may not affect not to
understand
thy words. Sit down beside me, for thou art
feeble; sit down, and hear the affectionate words of
thy sister, which should have been uttered long ago.'
The chief sat down, as requested, and regarded her
with forced composure. She proceeded, `chief, can
I ever forget, what thou hast been to me; in whose
presence we used to play in our happy morning days?
Can I ever forget, that my parents loved thee? Need
I be reminded of the long journeys, and the
deliverances
wrought by thee? It was, because sisterly
feelings towards thee grew up with me, that I was
rendered incapable of a less pure and less enduring
love. My heart is opprest with a sense of my
innumerable
obligations. Have I not pledged this sisterly
affection? If I cannot use false words, and belong to
thee, chief, in another relation, I here promise thee,
that I will never, while thou livest, belong in this
relation
to another. It seems to me, this ought to
content
thee, and restore to thee those sentiments, with
which we played together in our infant days. Do I
not, as a sister, suffer in thy sorrows? If thou wilt
not arise in thy strength, and shake off this
oppression
,
that wastes thy life, thou wilt kill thy sister, thy
parents and thyself together. Oh! chief, if my
parents
were with me, I could endure every thing. Thy
sister, an orphan, with none to claim a share in her
sorrows, appeals to thee, in behalf of thy parents.'
Tears, which could not be repressed, rushed to her
eyes, as she made this appeal.
`Pardon me,' Wakona, he said, `I perceive, that I
afflict thee, and it were well to bring to an end a
conversation
,
which must be fruitless to both. Hast thou
known me so long, and not yet learned, that I am
capable
of efforts over myself? Yes. I have said, what
thou sayest, more than once; and I have struggled,
Wakona, to forget thee, and to think only of my
parents
and my noble people. But I might as vainly
strive to wish away this hair, this hated tinge, and put
on the forehead and the locks of the pale face. Bitter,
hopeless, useless struggle to forget thee, has made
me what I am. The more I have resisted, the
deeper
has been my suffering; and I will patiently abide
the allotment of the Master of Life. Thou hast no
parents, Wakona. Oh! that mine too were under the
green sod. It is not the least of my afflictions, that I
bring them grief and shame, and sadden the brow of
my pitying sister. A generation of braves of five
hundred moons have preceded me. I am the only
degenerate descendant in the whole line. Canst
thou imagine deeper bitterness in my case, than to
see me in the presence of my parents, my totem
brother
,
Pentanona, my young warriors, my nation, and
hear them murmur, `there passes the mountain eagle,
that has become a song sparrow?' I am ashamed to
feel, Wakona, that I am worthy of pity.'
A silence of embarrassment ensued. As she again
attentively surveyed the worn countenance of the
chief, still noble in decay, visions of other days,
painful
gratitude, a thousand undefined emotions, darted
through her mind. The words almost formed upon
her lips, `chief, I will be thine for life.' The effort
was beyond her strength. The determination passed,
replaced by another remembrance. Calculating pity
again returned, in place of this momentary relenting.
She seemed to hesitate for words, as she resumed,
`chief, I half believe that I can impart a cure to thee
for this idle fancy.' There was a tone of mournful
sternness and decision in his reply. `Art thou the
one, Wakona, who hast called this feeling, as old as
my life, and the last, which will die with me, an idle
fancy? Thou wouldst not, in a feigned humility
unworthy
of thee, deny, that thou art deserving of this
feeling. It would be pain to me to believe, thou
couldst allow thyself to utter an unfeeling talk of
words upon the tongue, which come not from the
heart. And yet to look upon one, like me, borne
steadily onward towards the sunless valley, by an
incurable
oppression of heart, and call his hopeless
disease
an idle fancy, seems not like the considerate
kindness of Wakona.'
She stood reproved, and hesitating, and with a
forced quickness added, `thou seemest not to have
remarked
,
what a charming girl our Katrina has
become
.
She is as fresh in mind, and as ardent in her
capacity to love, as she is beautiful in person. Chief,
I could learn this fair girl to love thee, not with a
sisterly
kindness, as I do, but with an affection, such as
thou wouldst desire in a wife.'
She had never heard him speak in a tone so like
bitterness, as in his reply. `This is not kind of thee,
Wakona. I see, that my importunities weary thee,
and that thou wouldst gladly divert them to Katrina,
who is, I can see, as easily as thou, a beautiful and a
thoughtless child. Could I forget all the past, and
by a wish remove this disease from my bosom, and by
another wish replace her image there, I see, that
there would be no impediment between thee and the
loved pale face.' The grave rebuke carried cutting
truth with it; and the starting crimson in her cheeks
told the chief, that his words had sped, like an arrow
to the aimed mark. To hide her own confusion, she
added rapidly, `Yes, chief, this charming girl, an
orphan
,
like myself, and desert reared, like thee, who
has no thoughts beyond thy race, (I have no fear, that
thou wilt betray, or improperly use my confidence)
loves thee, loves thee with her whole heart; and if she
find no requital, will doubtless suffer, as thou dost.'
`Yes,' he answered, `Katrina is beautiful. She has
been trained by thee; and reposing upon the rose, has
caught something of its fragrance. It is possible, that
her docile affection for thee might teach her to love
me. Thinkest thou, that I am so little versed in
character
,
as not to know that this dear child will be likely
at present to suffer little from feelings of a depth and
permanence like mine? Wouldst thou compare with
the transient feelings of such a one, that deep
cherished
affection, which has made a chief, the
descendant
of fifty braves, what I am! Ah! Wakona, turn
the sun from its bright path in the sky. Roll back
the Sewasserna to its source. Become thou Katrina,
and transform her to thyself, and I will be ready to
love her.' She replied, `Chief, in stating so strongly
the impossibility of loving her, dost thou not prove,
that the affections cannot be controlled? Dost thou
not furnish my own apology, when I confess, that I
have admired, trusted, respected thee, felt as a sister
to a brother, felt obligations beyond all words to
express
,
reposed in thee unlimited trust, always rejoiced
to see thee! Yet there is'
The chief saw, that she broke off under the
influence
of such emotions, as he had never witnessed
before
.
He saw, that she was unusually distressed. The
generous and absorbing character of his disinterested
affection produced its wonted result, in inducing him
to forget his own sufferings in deeper concern for
hers. A glimpse that she was verging to a new kind
and degree of confidence caught his thoughts. He
saw, that she was gathering confidence to make
disclosures
.
He saw, that they could bring nothing of
hope to him. Yet, as the eye of a youthful trembler
is rivetted upon the terrific phantom, which
imagination
has created in the darkness, as the charmed bird
rushes blindly towards its doom, to reach this terrible
secret, whatever it might be, became the object of his
most earnest desire. He put his hand on his
forehead
,
under a kind of presentiment of what she would
say. Whatever it was, he saw, that irrepressible desire
VOL. II. 19
urged her to make it; and that at the same time it
amounted to agony to declare what was on her mind.
He resumed his self-possession and gloomy firmness, as
he saw her struggling to speak, and yet withheld, as
though speech had been repressed by a sudden fever,
that had parched her lips beyond utterance. `The
afternoon is beautiful,' said the chief. `The Great
Spirit looks down approving what thou wouldst say.
We are alone in the midst of the mountains; and
human
ear, save mine, shall not hear thy confessions.
Thou owest thy brother full confidence. I will not
ask thee, if I have not deserved it? The suspense
which I have long suffered, in regard to thy
sentiments
,
is the most afflicting of all evils. If thou now
impart stinted measures of confidence to thy brother,
I swear to thee, by the Master of Life, that I will
never
converse in this way with thee again. Do not I
well know, that however terrible to me, thou canst
make no disclosures, which will not honor thyself? I
am now in a frame of mind to bear all; and this is the
crisis of thy brother's fate. I adjure thee, by thy
Master of Life and mine, to say all, and to keep back
nothing.' Enthusiasm imparted to his pale and
languid
countenance a fearful brightness of excitement,
and his earnest and impassioned tones caused tears to
flow down her cheeks. `Areskoui,' she said, `I
tremble
at thy words; tremble at the disclosure of my
inward
thoughts; and tremble as I now feel, and as thou
hast adjured me, to hold back. Hast thou not
divined
,
chief, what I would confess? The moment, I have
said it, we shall both wish, I fear, that it were forever
committed to the silence of the grave.' `I begin to
comprehend,' he cried, his eyes glistening with an
unearthly radiance. `Chief,' she answered, turning
pale, `these conversations are not good for either of
us. Let us return.' `Not in this moment of
compliance
.
I adjure thee by whatever the red men hold
sacred, be frank, and let thy brother know all. No
thing, I repeat, is so terrible as suspense. I begin to
divine, that I am in the way, and that I can yet do
one thing more for thy happiness;' and as he said this
the big round drops formed on his forehead. `Oh!
Areskoui,' she answered, in the attitude of the most
earnest entreaty, `I implore thee, let me not see thee
thus. Thou canst never know, what I suffer to
behold
thee wasting away in thy prime. Friends, as
we are, we each seem destined to destroy the other.
Katrina cherishes love for thee. Thou desirest from
me the impossibility of an affection of a more
earthly
character, than the sisterly one, which is as old, and
as unchangeable, as my being. I, too,spare me the
confession of shame and guilt; I have suffered from
an internal wound, mingling its torments with my
trials
and bereavement, as an orphan, as a captive. I
felt the smart, when another would have deemed it
both impossible, and unworthy, that I should have
thought of any thing, but the pressure of my own
immediate
sorrows. I have felt, that I owed most to
thee. I have striven to control the affections of this
capricious heart, even as the drowning would contend
for life. Frederic, insensible, and immovable, knows
not, dreams not, that I thus suffer. Or did he know
it, the buoyant and beautiful Katrina, I perceive,
would be the choice of his heart. Nothing remains
for us, but the tried confidence of perpetual friendship.
Let us adore the dispensations of providence, that
have mixed for us this cup. Let us seek for eternal
rest only in those mansions, which Elder Wood
describes
to us.'
To her astonishment the countenance of the chief
began gradually to settle to a calm. His manner
became
collected. An imposing serenity diffused itself
over his person. `Now,' he said, in his customary
tones, `there is no mystery in all this. From the first
I thought it must be so. The pale face is fair and
good, and what chances had an untutored red man
beside him? Why hast thou not told him a hundred
times the secret of thy love! You have been alone
with him every day. A word would have explained
all. He loves with an ardor as near like mineas
the colder and more calculating spirit of the pale
face will admit. You have walked together in
concealment
and agony, deceiving and deceived, merely
to torment each other. A curse rest on the deceitful
ways of the pale face. And these are the fruits of
civilization! Thou hast pitied Areskoui; and a love,
which should have been as free as the winds, has been
chained up by deceit, and the vile calculations of the
pale face. Hast thou yet to learn, that Areskoui is
generous and brave; and that if he is the slave of
passion
,
he is only a slave in that? You shall see, how
easily he can dispose of the only obstacle in the way
of your enjoyment. My parents! They drag on an
existence, which a red man abhors. Let their
sorrows
also come to an end.' `Areskoui,' she cried,
`you terrify me. What mean you? Is it thus, thou
wouldst render me happy? Ah! thou little knowest
the heart of thy sister.'
At this point of their interview, Elder Wood,
Katrina
and Frederic approached the bower, alarmed at
the length of the conversation, and remembering the
result of a former visit to that place. A kind of
recoil
at the interruption affected both. Disclosures
had been made, which might call in all the pride and
stubbornness of the chief to cure this morbid
indulgence
of his passion. Pity for her, suffering from the
same cause with himself, might neutralize and assist
him to subdue it.
The entering party saw in a moment, that a
conversation
of no common interest had been
suspended
in the midst; and they stood in embarrassed
silence
,
as if waiting a signal, either to retire, or be
seated. The chief motioned them to enter, and sit
down. He stood himself a step in advance of Jessy,
who also stood; and he was looking, apparently in
profound thought, upon the bosom of the blue lake.
A firm and composed serenity sat on his countenance.
In an under tone the entering party remarked upon
the extreme beauty of the evening. Half of the red
disk of the sun yet shone above the highest western
peaks. The beautiful lake, as a sleeping mirror, five
hundred feet below, reflected the half of the sun's
orb, the evening clouds of brass and crimson, that
curtained
his departure behind the blue summits. The
green forests, the moon in the east, the sweet rural
scenery, grouped with mountain grandeur, all showed
more glorious in the far depths, than as they stood
forth in the air! The Shoshonee smokes curled above
their habitations, and then spread in horizontal
curtains
of ethereal whiteness. The baying of the dogs
and the thousand domestic sounds of life brought up
associations of repose and joy. The pines and
hemlocks
lifted their dark green heads in motionless
quietness
,
as if waiting to tremble in the evening breeze.
The council house was in full view, and Ellswatta
and his council chiefs could be seen on their benches,
as dusky specks; and it was easy to imagine, that the
eye caught the smoke rising from their calumets.
The turtles cooed at hand. The night hawk darted
down the clouds with its accustomed scream. Song
sparrows and orioles were discussing their vespers,
before they rested in the green brake for the night.
Every object was lovely; and nature showed in that
holy repose, which invites meditation.
`How lovely this evening,' cried Elder Wood, `the
scene calls on us for our praises. Nature in its
devotional
silence praises him. Let us sing `Rise my
soul,' and he was proceeding to give out his accustom
19*
ed hymn. `Not now!' said Areskoui, `not now.' They
saw him attempting to speak, and witnessed the new
spectacle, that his eyes were filled with tears. But,
as if summoning disdain, and all his former energy
to his aid, he dashed them from his eye. In a
moment
they saw him self-possessed again. He waved
his hand to the other three, and said `My words now,
medicine father, are for thee. Father, seest thou
this still evening and yonder fair valley? Is it not, as
if the Master of Life had come upon the scene,
bringing
joy and peace? How beautiful are the clouds in
the sky? and how quiet is every thing but this beating
breast? But yonder, in the depths of the blue lake, is
a world still more beautiful. There are the green
trees, the mountains, the scaling eagle, the skimming
swallow; and there, too, is Wakonastill brighter
than here. How beautiful! Thither flies away to
remain in shadow all that is pleasant above. There
on those hills the spirit, which has here been
imprisoned
,
can soar again, and look at the sun, which has
left us behind the hills. The spirit of Areskoui longs
to become, as yonder eagle.' The three, still
unconscious
of his purpose, approached him, as if startled
at the strangeness of his discourse. He waved his
hand to them, that his speech was still to Elder Wood.
`Father,' he resumed, `remember my charge.
Repair
to Ellswatta with thy good medicine words about
the land of souls. Tell my parents that they have
said to Areskoui more than once, `thy forefathers
were all braves.' More than one of them, when sick
at heart, determined to visit the Master of Life in the
sunless valley. I am the end of this line of braves.
Truebut the leaves wither, the flowers fade.
Winter
comes. Is it strange, that a line of braves should
have an end? Areskoui should have been as his fore
fathers. His heart, struck by the Master of Life,
withered, and he could no longer hope to be a brave.
It will cheer my parents to know, that I had firmness
for the last time, before my heart was all melted away.
I swear to the Master of Life, I will not remain, to
be as a feeble, and despised woman. I go to soar
with the eagle, and to look at the sun. Wakona,
there in the depths, shall at last be mine.'
Astonished
at his language, Jessy, Katrina and Frederic each
grasped his robe at the same moment. It was spread
loosely over his shoulder, and his usual dress, a close
silk tunic. He gracefully folded his robe, laid it on
the arm of Jessy, and with the quickness of thought
poised his hands, bent forward his head, and darted
down the depths, like an arrow discharged from a
bow. The eye scarcely traced his passage down the
dizzying depths, when the faint plunge was heard, and
the disturbed ripples were settling back to repose.
The parties stood thunder struck for a moment in
speechless horror. Jessy fell in faintness upon the
robe of the chief. The scene produced on Katrina
the natural effect of youthful exclamations and tears.
Frederic sprang down the shelving declivity, and was
in the lake, waiting to see, where the chief would rise.
Elder Wood forgot for the moment his wards, the one
unconscious in faintness, the other tearing her raven
locks, and uttering the shrieks of agonized terror,
and ran for the town. Mingled sounds of
lamentation
began to swell on the ear, and hundreds of the
Shoshonee were flocking to the scene. Josepha
started
with the rest; but had scarcely made ten paces,
before she uttered a shriek, and fell in strong
convulsions
,
and was carried back by women, who felt that
to be the most pressing duty, to her habitation. Two
hundred of the most expert swimmers were diving in
these fathomless waters. Others were pushing out
canoes with dragging hooks attached to lines, which,
it was soon found, reached not the bottom. Ellswatta
sat on the rocks, watching these fruitless efforts, with
the affecting indifference of despair. A deep
lugubrious
chaunt was occasionally heard, as he dashed
away the first tears he had ever been seen to shed.
`The last of my race has gone before me. Weak and
solitary old warrior, it is time for thee to follow.'
They dived, until the blood streamed from their
nostrils
,
as they rose, to no purpose. They doubled, and
tripled their lines, and found neither bottom nor body.
The chief had descended with a purpose too fixed to
allow his body to rise in the last struggle. He had
sunk too far towards the roots of the mountains to be
found. Two hours elapsed in these fruitless
exertions
.
`Come away, my children,' cried the chief.
`Let no other father be made childless, in searching
for a corse.' Elder Wood approached him,
sustaining
Jessy on his arm, whose wild and haggard look
intimated
,
that the stroke had almost touched her
reason
.
In a moment the crowd gathered in mute and
fixed attention round the father and the minister.
`Council chief,' said the minister, `I have a message to
thee from thy son.' He put his calumet to his mouth,
wiped his eyes, and drew a whiff of the smoke. He
then said, `I listen, medicine father.' Elder Wood
declared his last charge from Areskoui. As he
repeated
`I go to soar with the eagle, and look at the
sun,' the father took his calumet from his mouth, and
raised the funeral Cheowanna ha! ha! and the awful
dirge swelled high and long among the mountains.
All was finished. The collection began to steal away
in the darkness towards their homes. Elder Wood
and Frederic bore home, as they might, the two
orphans
,
and Ellswatta followed, occasionally chaunting
`The last of my race died a brave. Thy father will
soon follow thee.'
Much, that ensued can be easiest imagined.
Josepha
,
frantic with grief beyond endurance, expired
in convulsions. Areskoui had always been the idol of
the nation; and this desperation of suicide among a
people, in whose view fearlessness and contempt of
death is the highest title to admiration, redeemed his
memory from all the contempt created by the
weakness
of his last days. Revolutions in that fierce
republic
arose as suddenly, as a thunder storm. A
hasty council, for the election of a new war chief,
was assembled with a bustle and haste, which showed
their terrors at the idea of an interregnum. Ellswatta
cared no longer for any thing. The agony of
Pentanona
forbade his making an effort. Caucus and
scramble and high words and electioneering, in its
most odious forms, ensued. The Shienne were busy,
and the real friends of the old succession paralyzed
with horror. It was the hour for brooding and keen
eyed ambition. Then the intriguing aspirant kindled
his own star, and became the author of his own
destiny
.
None slept that night in the Shoshonee valley.
As Elder Wood and Frederic conducted the weeping
orphans homewards, amidst the buzzing groups, they
were sufficiently instructed, that their presence in the
valley was now considered, as a circumstance of evil
omen. `They are leagued with the little white men
of the mountains against us,' was the cry. `Wakona
witched our chief to death.' There was no
indication
of direct violence; but their best friends shrunk
from them. They were indubitably convinced, that
Jessy was considered, as having caused the death of
the chief, and that even their safety would probably
soon be a matter of question. A war chief was
elected by the union of various factions, agreeing only
in their envy and dislike towards the former
succession
.
An enemy to Ellswatta, and a favorite of the
Shienne now swayed the efficient power of this
tumultuous
republic.
Elder Wood, as soon as his young friend and the
orphans had entered the house, shut, and barred the
door. `They are,' cried the minister `a strange and a
fearful people. I would, we were far away from
them. We will sell our lives, however, if they
attack
us.' The two men arrayed their guns and their
weapons; and the two orphans sat clasped as on
another
occasion in each other's arms. Having made
all possible preparations for defence, `now,' said the
minister, `let us consult the word of God, and go to
the throne of mercy, after all the horrors we have
seen, and in view of what we have still to dread.' He
turned the scriptures from passage to passage reading
of Him,
who stilleth the noise of the waves, and the
tumults of the people;
whose way is to be reverently
sought, even when He planteth his footsteps in the
trackless waters, and maketh his judgments a great
deep. He went firmly through his regular and
accustomed
train of devotion, only omitting the call to
them to join in the hymn, as he said, `my children, it
cannot be expected, that you have not been too much
shocked, with what you have seen, to have freedom
to sing. I am an old man, and nothing ought to be
so strange or terrible, as to break in upon my
devotions
.
There is nothing enduring but God, nothing
important, but eternity;' and he sang his wonted
hymn through, with a firm and collected voice.
Having
finished, he said, `I charge you, my children, now,
in any emergency, to act according to your duty, and
not according to your fears or your feelings; and you,
Jessy, I adjure you by the living God, to calm
yourself
,
and take food, and lie down, and court rest. It
is not unlikely, that we may soon be called to put forth
all our self possession. There is no doubt, but we
must speedily away from this people; and we shall
have need of all our strength and calmness.
Effeminate
grief befits not the calls of present duty. Let
Katrina have an example of composure.'
There were reason and truth in these paternal
expostulations
.
Jessy ceased weeping, and Katrina
became
comparatively calm. `Go to your rest,'
resumed
Elder Wood, `and Frederic and myself will
keep watch in our arms.' They had scarcely turned
to obey, when some one seemed to be striving to
obtain
admittance. The effort seemed one of
determination
,
but not of violence. The intruder had already
entered, and walked forwards, heedless of their
pistols
and swords. The orphans had retreated with
the lamp; and it was some moments, before, by the
uncertain light, they recognised Ellswatta. He threw
off his buffalo robe, and stood before them in his tunic.
His cheeks were painted black, and the furrows of
his face seemed to have increased in number and
depth. `Thank God,' cried Elder Wood, `that we
did not slay you as a foe, before we knew you.' The
chief drew his calumet from his mouth, `and I should
have thanked the Master of Life, if ye had killed me.
It is the best service any one can now render me.
Would I not have chosen to have thus fallen by the
hands of friends, than to drag on a useless and
despised
life, or be slain by enemies?' He seated
himself
.
`On this seat,' he continued, `I have seen my
noble son a hundred times, in the midst of you;' and
for a moment the recollection overcame him; and
they saw Ellswatta, the hoary and firm, whose proud
boast it had been, that the thunderer was not strong
enough to wring tears from him, actually weeping.
He struggled hard against nature, and attempted to
resume his conversation. Deep spasmodic sobs, as of
impeded respiration, repressed speech. `I, too, am
become a woman, like the rest,' at length he uttered,
and resumed his calumet to regain self possession.
`
Man that is born of a woman
,' said Elder Wood, `
is
but of few days and full of trouble
. In every clime
we see, that the original clay was moistened with
tears, instead of water.'
The hoary chief had recovered himself, as he began
to sing in the customary strain of Indian recitative.
`My son is gone! My wife is gone! The frost has
cut us off! Another chief reigns! I am the last of
my race!' He then offered the calumet to each, who
drew once or twice of the smoke, and puffed it
towards
the sky, in token that they accepted his pledge
of peace. He then spake as follows. `Father, and
my children of the pale face, hearken. I blame you
not, that I have neither wife nor child, nor friendly
hand to lay me under the turf. I blame you not,
because
we have a chief, who was always an enemy to
him, who was the light of my eyes. They were torn
from my heart, without the fault of any one. Thou
hast often said truly, father, that it is wise to drink
patiently of the cup, which is mixed for us. Master
of Life, Ellswatta, though gray headed and alone,
murmurs not against thee. Neither, Wakona, do I
chide thee, because thou couldst not direct the stream,
that flows from the fountain of the heart. I rather
honor thee, that thou didst not, like the deceiving pale
face, feign, what thou didst not feel. I feel the
warrior
spirit returning. The life of man is but a few
short moons. Had you loved him, had he lived, I, my
wife, and even my son, would have soon withered, and
gone down to the sunless valley, in the course of the
seasons. I only lose the light of heaven a few days
sooner. Every thing, that comes forth from the
Master of Life, is marked with the dark speck of
decay
,
and nothing, that has been, could have been
changed. The red people here think not so. They
murmur at their desolate council chief, and say, that
his love for the pale face has brought all these evils.
Their murmurs begin to be directed towards you.
The very chief, who has become so by the death of
my son, and who in his heart rejoices in his fall, charges
the guilt on Wakona. He says, that the pale face
are in an accursed league with the little white men
of the mountains, to extirpate all the red men of this
valley, as they have destroyed them elsewhere. The
crafty new chief would exult, in acquiring favor at the
beginning of his rule, by arousing the sleeping
vengeance
of the red people, and then directing its fury
upon you. If you would avoid danger and death, and
spare them the guilt of inflicting it, arise, and depart
from this valley, which is black with the curse of the
Master of Life, before the morning shall arouse an
appetite
for blood. Ellswatta has lived too long; and
he wishes to relieve his sorrows, by seeking his son in
the depths of the blue lake. The forewarning of
Maniteewah is accomplished. I should consider it a
kindness of any of my people to kill me. But let not
the stain of your blood be upon them. Come, my
friends, not a moment is to be lost. The moon walks
brightly in the firmament. My own periogue is at
hand in the stream. Let its last office be to convey
my friends from this blood-stained valley. Take all,
that you wish to carry, especially enough of food to
last you to the town of the pale face. Two faithful
friends, who yet obey the orders of the old chief, will
row you to the dashing of the great river. Away, my
children. I should tremble to see you lingering here,
until morning shall return over the mountains.'
The parties consulted a moment in a low voice by
themselves; and unanimously agreed, that the chief
counselled with his accustomed considerate
generosity
,
and for the best. To Elder Wood it was indeed
as tearing his deepest hope from the fibres of his
heart, thus to leave the promise of a harvest of souls.
But the recent horrors had sufficiently instructed him,
how little dependence could be placed upon a people,
subject to such violent and terrible convulsions.
Besides
,
nature spoke in his heart, and told him, that his
first duty was to the unprotected orphans; and that
VOL. II. 20
it was by no means unlikely, that his own blood would
be spilled uselessly with theirs. `The crown of
martyrdom
,'
he said, `is a fearful, though glorious one.
If you, my dear children, were safe, I should choose
to remain, and risque my stake for it.' The cheek of
Jessy blanched to a more deadly pale, and she said,
`I abide with you, be it to remain or depart.' `Then
God do so to me and more,' he cried, with his wonted
energy, `if I depart not with you forthwith.' `Thou
sayest wisely,' said the chief; `for I doubt not, that
thou wouldst be the first victim.'
All hesitancy being banished, Ellswatta and his
two friends aided them to carry such articles, besides
food, as seemed most indispensable to them, to the
periogue. In less than an hour the arrangements
were made, during which Ellswatta was assiduous
beyond his age, in hurrying their preparations. When
they were completed, Jessy desired a moment for a
final visit to the graves of her parents, that she might
there utter her everlasting farewell to the valley.
`Thou art in the right,' said the chief, `thus to
remember
thy parents; but in the wrong, in either wasting
a moment, or trusting thyself alone on this terrible
night. I will protect the sacred graves. Little men
shall not walk over them, until they may safely do it
over mine.' Seeing her and Elder Wood still
disposed
to linger, the good chief seized them by the
hand, as the angel hurried his charge from burning
Sodom, and led them to the river; and they cast off
the fast, after their guides were seated to their
paddles
,
to make their way down the stream by the
melancholy
radiance which the moon gave forth from the
firmament. The venerable chief held up his hands
towards the sky, `Master of Life,' he said, `give these,
my dear departing children, bright suns and favoring
gales; and waft them safely over the dark waters of
the great salt lake.' He then embraced each in turn.
`When memory,' he continued, `recalls these blood
stained vallies, invoke blessings from the Wahcondah
on the desolate chief, the last of his race. Wakona,
he, who loved thee, sleeps under the waters of the
blue lake; but in this last embrace, I feel, as if I held
him once more to my bosom. All the past is already
no more, than the fading shadows of memory.' The
past rushed upon her; and in leaving the good chief,
she felt, as if father and mother and friend had once
more been snatched from her; and as she wept, and
threw her arms around him`adieu,' she said, `dear
and venerable old man, would to God, that I had
returned
the affection of thy noble son, if that might
have saved him.' `Spend not the strength, which thy
journey requires, in useless tears,' said the chief, as he
raised her gently from his bosom, and placed her in
the periogue. They floated rapidly away, and the
last sounds, that they heard from the shore, were the
measured and diminishing wail of the chief. `My
wife, my son, my friends are gone, and I am the last of
my race.'
Few circumstances can be imagined to inspire
more affecting sentiments, than those, that rushed
upon the hearts of these departing guests, a second
time leaving this vale. One of their guides sat in the
bow, and the other in the stern, alternately dipping
their paddles in the stream. The moon was
sometimes
hidden behind dark masses of clouds, and
sometimes
behind the lofty peaks of the mountains; and
they saw the inverted trees and cliffs speeding in
appearance
up the stream. Jessy sat by Elder Wood
in silent prayer. The man of God also said not what
were the subjects of his thoughts. Katrina alone
leaned on the shoulder of Frederic, and slept, as a
babe in the lap of the mother.
The melancholy party arrived safely at Astoria.
A passage was engaged for them in a fine American
ship, that was to sail in two days from Astoria. Their
time was occupied either in the necessary pecuniary
transactions, which were readily, and amicably
arranged
;
or in endearing conversations, in which their
future course was discussed. Elder Wood, as
formerly
,
showed recoil, and a disposition to look after
their departing guides, as he thought of the long
voyages
before them. `A Kentuckian,' he said, `better
loves range, the green wood shade, and the smell of
fresh fallen trees, than to toss on the wearying billows.
What shall I do among the yellow and avaricious
China-men, and the people, who follow no mystery,
but the leaves of a ledger. Thank God, by trap and
gun, by mountain glen, torrent and lake, I have
acquired
from the wild animals, granted by the Creator
for the use and service of man, enough for all my
wants. By honest spoils from the Russian, and the
vile trader, I have something more than a
compotence
.
I hate the sea, and ledgers, and all the
mystery
of gain, that comes in that way. Would to
God we were all safe in Kentucky. It is the best
country after all. May my worn out frame be finally
sheltered in its parent soil.'
`And I,' added Frederic, `here feel myself once
more a stranger among you. Why should I hang as
an incumbrance, to a society, to which a mere idle
imagination at first attached me? Yet I hope, you
will not be unwilling, that I should take a passage
with you over the sea.' `Is it possible,' asked Jessy,
`that we, who have seen, and suffered so much
together
,
and who sustain such peculiar relations to each
other, should feel it necessary to talk in this way? Is
it true, what my dear father used so often to repeat,
that the free and full sentiments of the heart are only
felt in solitudes, and among the red men? Is it true,
that, the moment we touch the ships of commerce,
and make arrangements to return to society, we begin
to breathe the atmosphere of mercenary thoughts?
My good friends, I do not feel, as though one of us
could be separated from the other. How little is my
heart acquainted with ideas, like those, to which you
allude. For you, Elder Wood, we two hold to you
as daughters. Providence has assigned us to your
charge; and we have no fear, that you will leave us,
whether you consider us a burden, or not. For you,
Frederic, you avow, that you have no distinct place
for the future. Allow me to propose one. You are
not to leave us either now, or wherever we shall
settle
.
I have never thought for a moment of making
use of the papers bequeathed to me by one, I need
not name. You are the proper person, as you know
the family, to attend to all these circumstances. I
have enough already for all my wants. There need
be no remonstrance. I will never avail myself of any
thing, that may be obtained from that source. The
whole duty and the whole bequest devolve on you, or
no one. You will not show a disposition so
uncompromising
,
as to refuse the charge, which I now
deposit
in your hands. Let us here arrange our future
plans. China, I am satisfied, will be no country, in
which any of us would choose permanently to settle.
It awakens tender thoughts in me, only as the parent
land of my dear mother. The great, free, and
glorious
country of my father, is that in which we should
all probably desire to fix our permanent residence.
Let us settle whatever is necessary; and repair thither,
as speedily as possible. I look forward to the time,
when we shall find some pleasant home, in which we
shall constitute one happy family, to be severed only
by death. I fix my mind incessantly on this
consummation
,
so soothing to my troubled spirit, as a kind of
remedy against the last earthly evil, mental
alienation
.
The horrible scenes, through which we have
all so recently passed, haunt my waking imagination,
20*
and depart not from my dreams. I have been fearful of
distraction, perhaps with the guilty complacency of
having indulged too much satisfaction in the pride of
reason. I have earnestly prayed God, that this cup
might pass from me. Nothing would so certainly, and
immediately inflict it, as the separation of any one
of our number from us.'
Indeed, had the minds of the rest been sufficiently
cool and disengaged to note them, there had been
already
manifold indications, that the interesting
mourner
,
overwhelmed by the succession of tragic
incidents
,
which she had experienced for the last few
months, was at times under the influence of that
species
of mental excitement, called hallucination. She
had, more than once, uninvited, commenced one of
her valley ballads, singing it with a sweetness that
thrilled the bosoms of her friends, at the same time,
that her unwonted cheerfulness of expression struck
them with astonishment. This gaiety was wholly
unlike
the retiring manner of even her happiest former
days. She laughed in the midst of tears. A
partiality
for Frederic began to be visible to every eye, but
the diffident one, towards which it was directed. She
became unusually particular in her attention to her
person and dress, studying, in the requisition of all her
exquisite taste, how to dress, so as to display her
person
to most advantage. The glow of this recent
excitement
on the lily of her pale cheek, the almost
fearful brilliance of her naturally bright eye,
imparted
a new and dazzling lustre to her beauty; and as
she entered, the second morning of their stay at
Astoria
,
to the breakfast table, even Elder Wood, not
at all remarkable for having his attention arrested by
beauty, whispered Frederic, `my daughter Jessy
shows the nearest like an angel, of aught that I have
imagined. In truth, it would be hard to find her
match in all Kentucky.'
Though nothing could now be apprehended to
inspire
them with any founded dread of danger, they
agreed not to separate a moment from each other,
during the day; and during the night, Elder Wood
and Frederic slept, armed at all points, on the
outside
of their door. They spent the days in
wandering
through the adjoining prairies and hemlock
forests
.
It was the musing season, so beautiful in every
portion of the American forest, when some of the
leaves already rustle, and fall; and the rest are in
green, orange, scarlet and purple, exhibiting at once
a richness and a fund of associations with the deepest
thoughts of decay, and the fragility of whatever
belongs
to the earth, which render this season so
delightful
to a contemplative mind. As they walked on
the verge of the glorious forest, amidst the million
yellow flowers of the prairie, and the perfect repose
of Indian summer, whose soft clouds slept in the
firmament
,
they were startled from their meditations by
noting Shoshonee periogues rowing up the
magnificent
Oregon. `Do your thoughts, like mine,' asked
Jessy, `follow these red men, whom I cannot but
regard
as brothers, all the long way up this stream, and
the Sewasserna, to the sweet valley? Do your
thoughts turn with mine instinctively to yonder blue
summits?' `Assuredly,' answered Elder Wood; `no
one here loveth mountains, and that wild and
beautiful
country, as I do. The wild deer, the mountain
eagle, and the Kentuckian, have the same instinctive
love for range. The spirits of my people exult in
nature's
freshness of forests, which the axe has not
touched; in secluded vales, where the bear and buffalo
rear their young. We are yet a frank and
unsophisticated
people, and many of our noblest sons,
unspoiled
by the effeminate feebleness and sterility of
refinement
.
It must be an instinctive and ever present
sense of the vanity, meanness, rivalry, supplantation,
and subservience of the nobler to the more bustling and
impudent, a consciousness of the sordid and pitiful
passions
always in action in society, that drives the
generous
thought to take shelter in the grandeur and
repose
of nature. The psalmist must have had the
heart of a Kentuckian, when he cried, `
Oh! that I
had the wings of a dove, that I might fly away and be at
rest
.' What a delightful residence would have been
yonder vale of the Shoshonee, had it been the abode
of the security of law, and, what I once hoped it
would be, of Christianity! Were it such, I would
return
thither to spend my days. But alas! Were our
people there, the axe, the plough and the loom would
follow. The grating of the saw and the clink of
machinery
would be heard. The barbarous dialect of
political economy would be spoken, and the buffalo,
antelope and mountain sheep would, in a little time,
be found only as skeletons in a museum. The grouse
would no longer whistle away from the mountain
heath, nor the partridge be heard drumming among
the dark pine woods. The innumerable flights of sea
fowl, the regular lines of geese, swans, pelicans and
loons, of every wing and cry, would no longer be
heard careering on the vernal breeze, from the shores
of ocean towards the interior. Towns, turnpikes and
canals, and the smoke of manufactories driven by
steam, would rise in the view of the Kentucky hunter.
True; there is one glory in those lofty summits, that
have sheltered us for so many years. Man cannot
dig down their everlasting battlements. Thank God!
He has made something, that defies the pick-axe and
gun-powder. Those blue summits would continue to
look down in derision upon the puny efforts of
civilization
.
But the man of society would soon be the
same there, as in towns. Even the Shoshonee in a
few years would become prudent and calculating even
in their loves; and the only medicine secret of
directing
the passion would be the amount of dollars or
beaver, which the girl could bring. But alas! blue
hills, roaring torrents, beaver streams, the range of
the swan and the buffalo, and the free thought, I shall
visit you no more. I must spend the remnant of my
days, where the limits of the farms are recorded; and
where the learned in the law have the highest places.
Be it so. My better thoughts will be allowed no rest
but in heaven.'
Such remarks sufficiently indicate the feelings, with
which Elder Wood left this romantic country forever.
The sails of the gallant ship, in which they took
passage
,
shortly after were spread upon the Pacific.
There were many respectable American fur dealers
on board. But there was an inner cabin; and it
hardly
need be said, that the Shashonee emigrants, bound
to each other by so many peculiarities, were seen
almost
constantly together. They talked over the past
with such a tone, as the character of the incidents
naturally imparted. Jessy amused herself in
sketching
from memory a hundred different spots which
they had passed in their travels; and the conversation
often turned upon the future. In these intimate
communions
in the narrow precincts of a cabin, and while
tumbling on the bosom of the ocean, under
circumstances
,
which, more than any other, tend to banish
restraint and reserve, the rich, balanced and well
principled mind of Frederic had an opportunity for
its true display. If Jessy had loved before, she now
cherished towards him all those sentiments which had
hitherto been shared by other objects. Her self
complacency
,
too, was soothed, to find that every
conversation
developed new treasures in his mind, and that
now the severest scrutiny of her judgment confirmed
the previous decisions of her heart.
Unhappily, Katrina saw him in the same light; and
as yet entirely unadvised of the position of Jessy in
relation to him. The juvenile passion, which had just
budded for the young chief, rudely broken off by his
tragic end, now that she hourly experienced the
courtesies
,
and saw the worth of Frederic, was transferred
to him. Her glistening eye was too frequently, and
intently fixed upon his high forehead, and his noble
countenance, as he entered their state room. With
the perfect frankness of her ardent and untrained
nature
,
she was not slow to disclose her new secret to
Jessy, who, won by this generous confidence, no
longer
felt the tortures of jealousy. `I am a fool,' said
the charming Spanish girl at her confessional. `I
thought, I should never again think of any one, but
the noble chief. But Frederic is certainly
handsomer
;
and, I am astonished to find, equally good.' Jessy
this time caressed her, and repeated a longer chapter
of matronly admonitions, and affectionate counsels,
than she had given her on a former occasion. But
the inexperienced girl was under the impulse of a
fervor
of feeling too strong to be arrested; and her marks
of partial tenderness, unwittingly shown, were as
innocent
,
as they were palpable. They finally caught
the eye of even Elder Wood, little accustomed to note
such matters. `We must have an eye to our Spanish
charge,' said he to Jessy; and they forthwith
meditated
an united lecture with the poor girl on the subject.
In her Spanish-English-Indian dialect, half laughing,
and half wiping away the tears with her clustering
curls, she partly denied, and partly defended the
charge. `They allowed,' she contended, `that he was
good and handsome; why might she not love him?
Was it forbidden the people in the civilized world to
love, or required to dissemble?' `The one,' answered
Elder Wood, `was contrary to the customs of society;
and the other was unhappily often necessary. But
were it otherwise, he had information to impart, which
would operate, he hoped, through her pride, to
produce
concealment and, as fast as possible, conquest
over this ill directed fancy.' `What is that,' she
eagerly
asked? `Our friend has confessed to me, in
confidence, that he loves my daughter Jessy. The
headlong earnestness of his confession astonished me,
who had considered him a man remarkable for his
calmness and self possession.' The alternate
paleness
and crimson in the cheek of both the girls showed,
that this information fell as a thunderstroke upon
them. The minister saw, that he had committed a
most egregious and embarrassing blunder, by this
direct
announcement, and hurried out of the room.
The abruptness of this unexpected intelligence
affected
Jessy with palpitations, that poorly qualified
her to impart the requisite cousolation to her charge.
She had scarcely succeeded in obtaining calmness
herself, and a cessation of the audible grief of
her companion, when the object of this discussion
entered
their state room, and begged a confidential
moment
with Jessy. The suppressed tears of Katrina
started anew, as she retired to the cabin, and left them.
`I have never seen a young lady, save one, more
beautiful and amiable, than that,' said Frederic. `As
playful as a fawn, she is as unsuspicious as an infant;'
and Jessy learned, that his object was to remove any
apprehensions, that he should note unfavorably the
manifestations of partiality, with which she had
honored
him. Never had he exhibited to her a more
honorable test of the permanence and dignity of his
sentiments, than in the assurance, that he should
allow
neither to his vanity or his wayward inclinations
a single movement of encouragement. Incapable of
the slightest return, he promised, never for a moment
to trifle with her peace. She had the satisfaction to
see, that the pledge was redeemed to the letter, and
to meditate upon this chivalrous decorum, practised
towards a girl almost constantly with him, who was
every day developing new loveliness. She saw in
her cheek the rich carnation of the rose glowing on
the polished olive. She saw her lustrous black
ringlets
,
her sunny brightness of expression, her eyes of
piercing brilliance, the glow kindled from a southern
sun, and the infusion of the warm blood of her race,
shaded, and softened with an inexpressible languor of
tenderness and propriety. `What must be the strength
of that honor,' she thought, `that dictates such
forbearance
?
What the love, which has protected him
from the influence of so much beauty?
The three first days of their passage gave presages,
that happiness was about to return to this endeared
circle. On the fourth, a new and dark cloud arose
upon their prospects. Katrina was the first to
discover
,
that Jessy, after the announcement of Elder
Wood, gave undeniable evidence of mental
alienation
.
Instead of flying with the burden of the secret,
as would have been the first impulse of a less noble
mind, to the two gentleman, the strength and
prudence
of her concealment triumphed over her terror.
She practised an ingenuity of invention entirely new
to her, in satisfying Elder Wood and Frederic, that
she was so indisposed, as to preclude their visits; and
yet without alarming them. During the first
paroxysm
,
the patient sometimes fancied herself at
Manitouna
,
and at other times in the castle at Ostroklotz,
in the power of Julius. She then imagined, she saw
him expiring in the flames. The scene of the
massacre
of her parents next passed so vividly before her
eyes, as to excite shrieks of agony. She afterwards
believed herself soothing Areskoui, confessing her
paramount obligations, instructing him, that although
she could not conquer her attachment to Frederic,
yet, if he would receive her under such circumstances,
she was ready to become his bride. More
frequently
,
she appeared imprest that it was an autumnal
sabbath
eve; that her parents and Elder Wood were
sitting near her under the pines, in front of her natal
home; that the evening devotions were just finished;
and that they were talking of the life to come. Gleams
of sanity and of the most intense anxiety, lest her
friends should witness her in this state, radiated
through these gloomy intervals, in which Katrina, in
utter inexperience, was tormented with solicitude,
what course she ought to pursue with her. On one
point she was settled; the most scrupulous and
delicate
concealment of the case, if it might be, from her
friends. `Who knows,' she thought, with noble
forgetfulness
of self, `what effect it might have upon the
love of Frederic?'
The first paroxysm passed off, after enduring two
days. The two friends were readmitted, not without
painful astonishment and enquiry, what could have
rendered such an interdict of their society necessary.
Frederic especially expressed himself with unwonted
energy, in delineating what he had suffered.
Diffident
,
and even hopeless as he had been of a return of
affection, it was with inexpressible surprise, that he
heard her gaily affirming, that the whole affair had
been a slight headache, magnified by Katrina into an
illness so formidable as to preclude company. She
was quite as eloquent, as he had been, in pourtraying
her sufferings from this interdict; and promising, that,
at the next attack, himself should be present to aid
in nursing her. Her countenance, the while, beamed
with an affectionate joy, which filled him with delight
equal to his admiration.
The evening, that ensued, was delightfully calm.
The ship, now touching the tropical climate, rippled
along the gently swelling cerulean with an almost
imperceptible motion. The sun, dipping his warm
forehead in the encrimsoned sea, was making a
glorious
set in a canopy of golden clouds. It was one of
VOL. II. 21
those lovely evenings, in which a sea life shows in all
its charms. Immensity above, around, beneath,
acted upon the little spot of life alone on the abyss, as
the collected rays in the lens upon the focal object,
giving intensity to the kind feelings of each for the
other. The moon had already emerged from the
orient, bringing cool and bland breezes in her train;
and here and there a star began to twinkle in points
of the concave above. All labor was suspended; and
the passengers, as if bathing in the delicious air, were
walking, arm in arm, along the deck in groups. The
sailors were gaily conversing on the fore deck; and
the frequent and reckless laugh told, that their
bosoms
were as light, as the evening was pleasant. The
four were sitting together on a settee by the
companion
door. Jessy arose, and bowing gracefully to
Frederic, begged the honor of his arm, while she
walked the deck with the rest. He arose; she put
her arm within his, and they began to promenade.
With an easy frankness of confession, she led the way
to a disclosure of his sentiments by avowals on her
part. `Is it possible,' he exclaimed with delighted
enthusiasm, `that you encourage me to repeat
declarations
,
which I had thought forever interdicted?'
`Not only possible but certain,' she replied. `Why
should there be reserve between us longer? We
have suffered too much, to inflict, or endure this
gratuitous
torment. Of the few, that remain of the dear
circle of our valley, each of us owes too much to the
other, to hold back from the most unreserved
confidence
.'
They had returned, and were immediately
in front of their friends on the settee. Katrina, with
an ever vigilant apprehension, saw in her excited
countanance the harbingers of another paroxysm. `I
have something,' she said, `to impart to my dear sister.
Let us to our state room.' Jessy, as it seemed, in a
momentary touch of docile sanity, gave her arm, and
they walked below.
Another period of apprehension and horrible
suspense
ensued for the affectionate Katrina. Again
Jessy conceived herself in the valley, in the presence
of Areskoui and her parents. She seemed to hear
them summing up her obligations to the young chief,
and supplicating her to consent to a union with him,
as the only circumstance, which would ensure them
composure and confidence, in regard to her future
condition. She opposed to these views her avowed
love of Frederic. They still insisted; and such a
struggle ensued between her sense of duty to her
parents
,
and the claims of tenderness, as raised her
excitement
to such a fearful issue, that Katrina,
vanquished
by her terrors, called in Elder Wood. With
considerate kindness she still interdicted the entrance
of Frederic. It was in vain, however, longer to
conceal
from him, that Jessy suffered intensely from
some kind of mental affection. He had been
sufficiently
quick sighted, much as affection blinded him,
to note the change in her manners. Though, such
was her instinctive and exquisite sense of propriety,
that even her present transparent frankness sat
naturally
upon her, and might have seemed the result of
the habits of a life. The excitement imparted a
brilliance to her eye, and a transient glow to her
cheek, which increased the interest of her loveliness.
It certainly was not less gratifying to his
self-complacency
,
to believe, that he had long been loved in
concealment
;
and now, that a succession of horrible
scenes, in which she had been tried, had occasionally
destroyed the balance of her pure and noble mind,
that the sentiment, which maidenly modesty had so
long reserved to itself, was disclosed. His heart
bounded in rapture, that the lovely, talented, and
enthusiastic
Jessy, whom he had so loved from the first
day of beholding her, would finally be his; that all
his visions of earthly bliss would at last be realized.
Nor was it the least splendid point of his dream, to
reflect, that, in being united to her, he should have
chances to pay her those soothing attentions, and
place her in that tranquilizing position, in which he
might be instrumental, in restoring her mind to its
usual tone. She was young; she was in the highest
degree talented, and exquisitely beautiful; and she
had opulence, and, more than all, an amiability and
goodness peculiarly her own. His imagination was
busy in painting the delicious spot, in which he would
place her beside his friends, in his own great country;
and he was firmly persuaded, that, in his own case, he
should be able to give the lie to all that had been
said and sung, in reference to the impossibility of
perfect
happiness on the earth.
Such were the visions of a lover's imagination. In
his impatience, he called on Katrina, requesting
admission
,
every half hour. But this paroxysm
endured
longer, than the preceding. At length she
became
more composed; and as the weather was still
delightfully calm, she insisted upon sitting with
Katrina
alone on the quarter deck. From sunset till
midnight, she remained profoundly silent, looking
intently
on the transparent bosom of the deep,
glittering
with the sparkling gems and phosphoric brilliance
thrown back from the wake of the ship. The greater
part of two following days she passed in the same
state of mind; evidently solicitous to avoid the
presence
of even Elder Wood. The perfect calm of the
weather, and the state of the sea, created that
astonishing
transparency, which certain portions of the
ocean exhibit. In such circumstances, it is a
spectacle
of poetic and sublime interest, either by sun or
moon light, to trace the cones of light downwards to
their almost fearful apex in the depths. It is, as a
new universe were unfolded to the eye, the universe
of imagination and magic. The eye of Jessy was
intensely
fixed on these cones of light. From a single
remark, which the importunities of Katrina drew
from her, it appeared, that her imagination had
converted
this beautiful sea green world, in which every
object, in descending, became gem-like and radiant,
into the paradise of departed souls. The gliding
dolphins, glistening in colors more vivid than those of
the bow or the prism, and the darting forms of
innumerable
fishes, as they gleamed in that world of
enchantment
,
in their ocean play, seemed to her, happy
beings exulting in the mansions beyond sin and death.
She imagined mountains, a valley, the Sewasserna,
her father's house, with its embowering pines, and her
parents holding out their arms, and desiring her to
descend to their embrace. In the wild ecstacy of
filial affection, she made a rapid movement over the
ship's side. Katrina grasped her in her arms; and,
in the buoyant energy of youthful power and love,
drew her back to her seat; and while fanning her, by
the sternness of her expostulation produced a
revulsion
,
that almost instantly restored her to reason and
sanity. At the moment a cool breeze filled the
flapping
sails; and the ship once more bounded through
the transparent waters. The elastic cheerfulness,
created by the breeze and the motion, after the
wearying
ennui of a calm, diffused the sympathetic
gladness
through her bosom, as in the hearts of all others
on board. She embraced Katrina, exclaiming, `my
headache is gone, and the oppression from my heart
with it. I am afraid that Frederic should perceive, how
happy I am. He may imagine, that I am impatient
to arrive at Macoa, for the day of our nuptials.'
The following evening was even more charming
than the preceding. The air had a bland feeling of
21*
deliciousness, which is perceived only by the senses;
but eludes the coloring of words. The parties,as usual,
were walking in groups under the steady swell of the
canvass, bounding over the billow by an advance,strong,
and yet equable, under moon and stars, radiating from
the ethereal brightness of tropical and cloudless azure.
It was the time when, in the obtusest bosoms,
remembrances
of the natal spot, the loved affinities, and the
cherished associations far away, spring up, and soften
the heart to tenderness. Elder Wood and Frederic
sat with their fair friends on the settee, now
congratulating
Jessy on the removal of her head-ache; now
looking at the sea and the stars; and only at
intervals
dropping those unfinished sentences of joy, hope
and anticipation, which are the peculiar indexes of a
full heart.
Frederic begged her to take his arm, and walk the
deck for exercise; and she promptly consented.
After
a silent turn or two, he resumed the theme
nearest
his heart. `You have not, I hope, my dear friend,
been playing cruel jests with me, in the hopes, you
allowed me the other evening to entertain?' `You
know, Frederic,' she answered, with a kind of gay
seriousness
,
`that jesting belongs not to my powers; that
every thing with me is seriousness and from my full
heart.' Upon the word, she had no longer occasion
to reproach him, as she had sometimes in her heart
before
,
with the cold and studied words of an unfeeling
heart. His extravagance and enthusiasm of
profession
almost excited a smile. It is sufficient to say,
that, amidst much fire and some smoke of poetic
declaration
,
the speech contained a most ample proffer
of love, homage and fidelity to death. She held out
her hands to him, not without something of jest in her
manner, (for he was in the fit posture for such a
confession
)
`begging him, not to mock her with this
affectation
of humility;' and with queenly courtesy aided
him to rise. `I suppose,' she added, `that it may help
to restore your countenance, after this humiliation, as
well as evidence the best returns, in my poor ability,
for such an eloquent declaration, to admit, that I, too,
have loved from the second week of our
acquaintance
.'
After the rapture of this ample
ecclaircissement
,
and the consequent confidential conversations and
arrangements
,
she entered into a free analysis of her
past thoughts and feelings in the valley, and
during
her captivities. The first remembered feeling of
her heart had been gratitude towards Ellswatta and
Josepha, and friendship for their son. This latter
feeling had so grown with her growth, had been so
identified with gratitude, and a deep sense of
obligation
,
that she probably would never have known a
different
or more tender sentiment, had not the
appearance
of Frederic in the valley furnished her new
quickness of internal sight, in analyzing the nature of
her sentiments towards one and the other. Alas! she
found, that duty, gratitude, respect, and every other
association with the young chief, had been merged in
a tyrannic and master feeling, which inspired more
reluctance at the thought of being united to Areskoui,
every time the idea was contemplated. She admitted,
that an ever present sense of obligation, beyond all
hope of cancelling, that the calm testimony of her
judgment to the moral dignity, and intrinsic worth of
the chief, her pity for his morbid and hopeless passion,
her full sense, that an union with him was the wish of
her venerated father, would forever have prevented
her from allowing her own heart the indulgence of
love for another, much less the thought of an union.
The terrible scenes, through which she had recently
passed, had still more effectually precluded any
thoughts of the kind.
`But now,' she concluded, `that the grave has closed
over my parents, and that Areskoui has insanely,
though I doubt not, with the generous purpose to
remove
an obstacle from my way, destroyed himself;
now, that we are in some sense alone to each other, I
know of no reason, to withhold the avowal of
reciprocal
love. If my dear parents could indicate from
their holy abode their wishes, it seems to me, they
would rejoice to see me so safely and honorably
connected
.'
The conversation ended by a promise, that
she would be his, as soon after their arrival in China,
as decorum in relation to her parents would admit.
The rest may be imagined. Elder Wood and
Katrina
were notified in due form, that the parties stood
pledged to each other, as engaged lovers. As such,
the minister joined their hands, and gave them his
parental
and sacerdotal benediction. There being no
reason for concealment, the news soon became the
common property of all on board; in whom the
surpassing
beauty of the orphans, the exaggerated
estimates
of their supposed wealth, and the romantic
outline
of their adventures, had excited a high degree of
interest.
In considerate kindness, Jessy requested Elder
Wood to inform Katrina in such a way, as would be
most likely to reconcile her thoughts to this
inevitable
blow to her own partiality for Frederic. Katrina
had thought, she was prepared for the intelligence,
by considering it as a probable event. But, when she
heard it, as a certain fact, that he was pledged to be
another's forever, the information struck her as a blow,
that at first bewildered her thoughts. The paleness,
that ensued, was partly occasioned by the bitter
sensation
of self-reproach, on finding, that it did not cause
unmixed satisfaction to hear, that the sister of her
heart was about to be happy. The ardor of her
nature
was that of a generous and noble bosom. The
thought of too many girls in her predicament, and
with her amount of early moral training, would have
been to have hinted to the lover, that he owed the
avowal of his mistress to insanity. It would have
been easy for such a one to frame insinuations,
calculated
to damp the ardor of love, and perhaps to break
off the connection. All might have been so naturally
cloaked under a pretext of honorable motive, an
unwillingness
to see him become the subject of such a sad
mistake, that could scarcely fail to render him
afterwards
wretched, and consequently indignant towards
those, who allowed him to be led blindfold to the
consummation
.
Not so the noble minded Katrina. The physical
fervor of the veins touched not the internal spring of
truth and honor. Nature said to her, more than the
schools have learned to the many. She wiped the
tears away with her silken tresses; and her high
purpose
was formed in a moment. Jessy, the beloved,
and pledged of Frederic, became from that
circumstance
dearer to her thoughts, than ever. `Noble
young man, charming sister,' she reflected, `I shall
always
be near you, and see you happy, if I may never
be so myself.' Jessy became thus invested with
tenfold
claims upon her respect, delicacy and unsleeping
vigilance, to prevent her mental alienation from
showing
in such forms, as to be calculated to inspire any
diminution of his love. She foresaw, that the declared
lover would have new claims to be with his
mistress
during the attacks of these dreaded paroxysms;
and the difficulty of her task of concealment would be
increased.
The tenderness of her solicitude, her ever watchful
assiduity began to astonish, and almost annoy her
charge; as usual, unconscious herself, of what was
obvious
to all about her. The transient gleam of a
moment's
lucidness enlightened the patient to her own
condition, and the motive of the watchfulness, with
which Katrina attempted to exclude Frederic from
seeing her in her alienation. But, as in the midst of
horrible dreams, we sometimes comfort ourselves, that
the shadowy terrors, under which we suffer, are but a
dream, Jessy gladly escaped from these fearful
intervals
of sanity, to the exhilaration of her excited hours;
and then, though not aware of her malady, she was
distinctly aware of the untiring vigilance of her
Argus
,
and her ingenuity in the invention of expedients,
to keep Frederic from visiting her state room. The
same cause, that had unsettled the balance of her
admirable
intellect, had ruffled the sweetness of her
temper, and the uniform tenor of her equanimity.
Her impatient earnestness, to see, and converse with
her lover, at length overcame her docility to this
duress. Somewhat sternly reprimanding Katrina's
officious exercise of authority, in refusing him
admittance
,
she begged, that herself might be allowed to
judge in the case, and refuse or admit his visits at
pleasure. `I am at a loss,' she said, `to divine the
motive of such an unauthorized assumption.' The
reply was a burst of tears, and these words, `thy
sister
has not thy eloquence of expression, or she could
explain herself. I must endure, as I may, till I find
my apology in your own heart.' The sight of the
beautiful and generous Katrina in tears, at her
harshness
,
operated a revulsion of sanity, and a conviction
of her own cruelty. She folded her in her arms, and
they wept together. She then put her hand firmly
to her forehead, and asked, `is it not the first time,
sister of my heart, that I have been capricious and
cruel? Forgive me this once. I am sure, all is right
at my heart. But you will pity, and excuse all, when
I tell you I have an inexpressible apprehension, that
something is wrong here.' It was the first time,
Katrina
had ever seen her in the light of asking
forgiveness
.
Accustomed to consider her, as an examplar
almost too much exalted above the errors and follies,
of which she was herself conscious, habituated to
receive
her word with implicit docility, as a command
love and pity, mingled with new emotions, presented
her with new associations of endearment. `Forgive
you, my dear sister?' she said. `Yes, and would have
you repeat the offence every day, if it would give me
a chance of feeling, that I love you more in your
failings
,
when you approach nearer to myself.'
Hence-forward
this girl of heroic affection was perusing all
the medical books, that could be loaned on board,
while Jessy slept, in search of the symptoms,
prevention
,
and cure of mental diseases. All the efforts of
an untrained, but vigorous mind, were directed in the
channel of inventing expedients, to present the
soothing
view and the sunny side of existence to her
patient
,
and to prolong to the utmost possible extent
the exhilarated and happy train of her feelings. The
schemer seeks not perpetual motion, or the
mathematician
the square of the circle, with a more intent
application of all their powers, than she sought to
acquaint
herself with the chain of ideas, which, she had
previously discovered, brought on the melancholy
hallucination
.
No physiologist could have reasoned to
better purpose, than did her nature taught mind,
impelled
by the keen promptings of affection. As
though to reward her kind and intelligent efforts, a
lucid interval of three days ensued, days to the two
lovers apparently of the highest and most unalloyed
happiness, that earth could bestow. They talked
over their future plans, in presence of Katrina and
Elder Wood, and they wove all the splendid
gossamer
webs, and they built all the high towers, and
painted in all the prismatic colors, the terrestrial
hopes fabricated in the imaginative warmth of the
hearts of youth and love.
When Frederic and Elder Wood retired to occupy
contiguous births, in a low and confidential tone, the
former remarked to the minister, in the emphatic
phrase of the bible, that he dared only to
rejoice with
trembling
. Naturally sanguine, and indisposed to
forebode evil, he began, for the first time, to feel
himself
alarmed with indefinite apprehensions drawn from
human mutability. He felt, as if the present
expansion
of heart, like the vibration of the pendulum,
raised
too high on one side, would settle back to some
hidden alternation of sorrow. `Have I not warned
thee,' said the man of God, `that there is nothing, on
which to rest the affections, but God; nothing, that
should elevate, or depress the spirit, but eternity?'
On Jessy the excitement had produced, during her
happy intervals, a delightful kind of hectic ecstacy,
precisely that state of happy mental tension, in which
the mind can dictate those wonderful acts, which
transcend the ordinary compass of human experience
and credibility; and which fits it to triumph over fear
and death. Her eye sparkled with an unearthly
brightness. Her fancy painted every object as with
a pencil dipped in sunbeams. Her intellect showed
an action of preternatural vigor; and her expressions
had a mellow richness and felicity, as if dictated by
the same temperament and power which inspired the
English songstress of the heart, the unequalled Felicia
Hemans. A benevolence still more ardent, than that
which had formerly led her to go about, among the
Indian cabins,
doing good
, sought all possible objects
of manifestation, and colored every word and action.
Even for the hardy sailors, passing to their
appropriate
tasks, she had some well timed salutation, some
remark implying affectionate interest, which won her,
along with her pre-eminent beauty, the universal good
will of all on board. Frederic, too, was of that kind,
frank and unsuspicious temperament, which naturally
begets popularity. The happy lovers were favorites
to enthusiasm. They, who would learn the avenues
of approach to the human heart, should have noted
the deportment of these happy persons. Such might
easily, also, have become acquainted with the natural
reward of such manifestations of good feeling, by
hearing what was said of them by the congregated
groups of sailors at their mess, or their conversations.
The extravagant encomiums and hearty good wishes,
lavished upon them, expressed in the peculiar
quaintness
and originality of the dialect of the sons of ocean,
would have convinced any one, that the most
splendid
prospects and the most fortunate condition do not,
as some have supposed, necessarily generate envy.
Not a single circumstance, connected with this case
of mental alienation, imparted to it any association
either disagreeable or alarming. On the contrary,
the subject had never shown more attractive
loveliness
.
Something of unnecessary reserve was
banished
,
and a peculiar brightness of the eye and
quickness
of manner indicated, that the internal movements
were exerted to an accelerated and wearing velocity.
In other respects, every word and action was so
perfectly
fit, appropriate, and in keeping, and her whole
conversation and deportment imbued with so much
sense and heart, that her lover could hardly desire
that an excitement, which rendered her society so
delightful
,
should pass away. He delighted to yield
himself to the illusion, that the whole was the result
of painfully concealed love, now indulged in
unrestrained
scope, diffusing itself in excited benevolence
and hilarity over a nature, the affections of which had
never before been aroused from their slumbers.
There was, beside, over the whole, a sanctity of
internal
propriety regulating every action. In short, it
was an excitement, that he could almost excuse
himself
in wishing it might last forever.
The sun was descending for another of those
delicious
VOL. II. 22
tropical evenings, so indescribably beautiful in
the lone wastes of mid ocean, and with the fresh air
of that peculiar balmy influence, which is only felt on
the sea. Jessy was still cheerful, and had been
enquiring
of the captain, in how many days they might
expect to land at Macoa? She retired to her state
room, to hear Katrina expatiate upon a theme of
equal interest, the virtues and attractions of Frederic,
a topic upon which the speaker dilated with but too
much earnestness of conviction. Her slender fingers
played with the glossy tresses of her patient; and,
delighted
to witness the longest lucid interval that she
had yet had, since her alienation, she was tasking her
invention to array every possible view of gladness
before
her, that she might so far break the morbid chain,
as to leave no fear of another assault. To this end
she was describing, from her own imagination, the
scenes and circumstances, in which, were she in her
place, she would deck the bride, the bridal bower and
abode.
While the subject was under that animated
discussion
between the fair ones, which such themes
naturally
excite in persons of their years and
circumstances
,
Frederic entered. They related to him the
tenor
of the interrupted points at issue. `We will
settle
it on the quarter deck, after tea, among us four,'
said Jessy, gaily rising, and giving her arm to
Frederic
,
as they were summoned to tea in the cabin.
Accordingly, after tea, the four friends assembled
on the quarter deck. `Pleasanter sky and stars never
canopied the ocean, nor softer breeze fanned the
atmosphere
,'
said Jessy; `nor lovelier spectators
surveyed
the one and felt the other,' cried Frederic; `at
least than two of ours. One can hardly talk at such
a time and place, and in a position, like mine, except
in poetry. The muses love alternate strains. Let
us now, in that way, settle the question of your recent
discussion. Let us imagine the bond, we
contemplate
,
made immutably fast. Let us imagine ourselves
landed. Let us thence suppose ourselves wafted, in
the delightful privacy of our cabin, over the immense
wastes of sea between China and my ever loved
native
country. You have studied its geography quite
as attentively, as myself; and its physical and moral
advantages are equally well known to you as to me.
Where shall we select that spot, which shall be
consecrated
by the sacred name
our home?
Shall it be,
where the orange and the fig ripen, and the jessamine
and the laurel pour their perfume in the bland
climate
of the sunny south? Or will you prefer the wide
medial regions; or the industrious, municipal and
moral north, with its frequent white villages, and
towering
spires? Or will we shelter under the
spreading
beeches; or fix on the grassy plains of the west,
in its virgin freshness? Where shall be the ark of
our rest? Let it only be where there is plenty of
noble trees. For me, next to my few friends, I
love a fine tree more than most things else.
Wakona
,
thou art to me, on this subject, as on all, oracular;
speak thou, and I will hearken, as though I heard the
words of the Master of Life. To give thee freedom
to fix, be assured, that the shores of the arctic sea,
with thy presence and love, would bloom for me an
eternal Eden.'
He sat between the two fair girls. The moon
shone full and sweetly on the calm bosom of the sea.
The stars trembled as brightly in the cerulean depths,
as they twinkled in the air. They were perceptibly
nearing the land, for a voluptuous aromatic breeze
fanned
their temples; and even Elder Wood seemed
aroused from his meditations by the rather
extravagant
compliment, with which Frederic had closed.
Jessy arose, and threw her curls from her neck. She
bowed a kind of ironical acknowledgment. `This is
all Ciceronian,' she said; `and so finely spoken, that
my worshipper cannot but go away accepted. Thou
hast paid thy homage to the oracle Wakona, for the
first time in thy life, in the beautiful phrase of the red
people. It befits thee to a charm; and it reminds me
of the soul of honor and truth, whose native language
thou hast adopted. But in this beautiful speech, thou
hast glozed a flattery, learned among thy own race;
and as thou well knowest, but too seducing. Well!
thou hast spoken in the flattering words of the pale
face; and I will answer thee in words as simple and
true, as though I were a maiden of the race of the
red people. Thou demandest of me, when we two
have sworn to be one, where we shall fix the ark of
our rest? Ah! if the dear Shoshonee vale were the
home of civilized men, and under the rule of laws!
Dear winding Sewasserna! Sublime sheltering
mountains! Beloved natal spot! Resting place of
the ashes of my parents, of the noble and
magnanimous
Areskoui, who endured and died under the
singleness
of one motive! Venerable Ellswatta, the
last of thy race, and Josepha, on whose maternal
breast I have so often reposed! Blue summits, that
have so often conducted my thoughts to God, I see
your rounded points stand forth in the air! Spring
formed torrents, I hear your deep discourse of music,
as you pour your brown waters into the dells below!
I feel your breeze rustling the first formed leaves of
spring; and mark its influences passing away, in the
eddying whirlwinds on the sides of the hills. I
behold
the red bird starting away in song from the
tangle
.
There I have felt peace and repose, before this
bosom learned to swell with this new sensation. Ah!
had I the wand of power, to wave over the sleeping
dead; could I evoke them from the narrow house;
and had we there our good Elder Wood, and our
church, surmounted with its church going bell, and
our Christian congregation of converted red men, in
that dear vale, secluded from the stormy passions,
from the hardening intercourse, the folly, vanity and
ambition of the world, there, of all places, I would
choose to fix the ark of our rest, and hope to renew
the scenes of Eden. These hearts, I know, are formed
for high and exquisite enjoyments. Thence we would
offer continually to heaven the incense of devout,
benevolent
and satisfied hearts. There we would
descend
the vale of years, without perceiving it; and a
stronger affection should spring up from intimate
acquaintance
and the long communion of the offices of
love, and from moral relations of beauty, than any
compound of sentiment based upon the bloom and
freshness of youth. Thence, resigned, and cheerful
at the call of Him, who made us, dropping the
manacles
of clay, we would soar away towards our father's
house, as the mist curls in its ethereal whiteness from
the mountain tops towards the morning sun. But
alas! we cannot awaken the sleepers, and that dear
spot may not be our home. For the rest, the world
is all before us. Wherever my dear Katrina, and
thou, and Elder Wood should choose to dwell, there
will be my chosen place of habitation.'
Whoever had noted her countenance, as the
entranced
speaker uttered these words, would have seen
the indications of a mind already severed by sorrow
from its earthly ties, and about to take its last flight.
Katrina, trembling and pale with apprehension, as she
thrilled with the tones of her voice of unearthly
music
,
rose, and put her arm within hers, reminding her,
that her health was delicate, and that she feared the
evening air was too fresh and humid; and begged to
be allowed to lead her to their state room. `Not yet;
I have not a fear,' she replied. `Never have I felt
joyfulness, like that of this hour; and we may not
hope such long measures of satisfaction in this
evanescent
22*
gleam of existence, as to spend such moments
as these in sleep, or the estranged sterility of heart in
our silent births. And, now I recollect, it is our
accustomed
hour for better thoughts. I dash from my
imagination the associations of the senses. Elder
Wood, this is the wonted hour of prayer. There
soar the blue outer walls of our temple. The stars
look down from their high abodes of purity and light
upon us. I hear the footsteps of the bygone days
returning
with gentle tread. Certainly the spirit of
prayer is upon us; and a felt inspiration from above
hovers over us. Thanks to our heavenly Father, my
ever dear parents, your weary daughter has returned
from her persecutions, and her far wanderings by land
and by sea; and we are once more united. Why
will you not embrace your long lost daughter? Well!
your hearts are too full. Father, thou art weary with
the idle and useless chase over those rugged hills.
Repose on this soft seat, dear mother, beside the
daughter that loves thee even as herself. Ellswatta
and Josepha, come in. Areskoui, thy noble heart is
not all pagan; and thou too shalt sing with me the
praises of Jesus above the stars. What a blessed
union, after such a long and terrible separation! Elder
Wood, there is the book of God. We are all ready.
Now recite that sweet hymn.
There was a solemn pause, in which each of the
three listeners suppressed the sigh, that rose
involuntarily
in their palpitating bosoms. But prayer and
praise seemed the natural balm for the visible malady
of the interesting sufferer. Katrina trembled beyond
the power of speech; and Frederic and Elder Wood
more distinctly perceived the extent of the
misfortune
,
than they had ever before. But she was
eloquent
;
and she was calm, and apparently triumphant
in her joy. The moon fell upon a face, which, as
Elder Wood afterwards said, shone like that of an
angel. There was so much elevation, tenderness,
sweetness and method in her madness, that they could
hardly have desired to call her down from her heights
of inspiration to the common place and obtuse sanity
of worldly discretion, and the measured prudence of
a speech, the source of which is no deeper than the
lips. All were awe-struck, and still, as the minister
read an appropriate portion from the scriptures, and
then gave out
Thou Shepherd of Israel, and mine,
Thou joy and desire of my heart,
For closer communion I pine;
I long to reside where thou art.
That pasture I languish to find,
Where all, who their Shepherd obey,
Are fed, on thy bosom reclined,
And screen'd from the heat of the day.
Elder Wood was a good mana man of strong,
though undisciplined genius, and capable of the
profoundest
feeling. This prayer might be fitly termed
wrestling with God. Precisely those words sprang
to his lips, and they were invested with the tone and
the pathos, which the occasion demanded. It was
one of those impressive seasons, when right words
carry a thrill of unutterable feeling through the frame.
As though the Author of Nature had accorded an
answer of peace to these earnest prayers on the great
deep, the breeze which freshened a moment before,
had lulled to a dead calm; and the ship seemed as
still as if anchored on the unfathomable waters. The
joyful cry
land! land!
was heard from the shrouds;
and the mingled perfumes from the flowers of that
near and sunny shore floated on their senses an
atmosphere
of aroma. Jessy sat perfectly composed,
looking upon the unruffled mirror, sparkling with stars.
Katrina arose. `Gentlemen,' she said, `it is late.
We need rest to prepare us for the bustle of landing
to-morrow. Remember, that our dear Jessy is an
invalid
.
It is high time for her to retire. You must
give the example; for, while you sit there, we are
reluctant
to retire to our births.' `She is right,'
replied
Jessy calmly. She shook hands with Frederic,
saying cheerfully
bon soir, mon ami; et demain nous
serons en joie
. She sat at the moment, in her wonted
position
,
as they retired, leaning against the taffrail,
alternately
casting her eyes from the stars above to the
depths below, in which the firmament was beautifully
repainted. She complained of thirst; and requested
Katrina to follow the gentlemen, and order her a glass
of water, in a tone of such perfect composure, as left
the affectionate girl joyfully assured, that her
paroxysm
had passed away. In three minutes she
returned
with the water. Jessy had disappeared. A
single piercing scream brought the ship's company on
deck. Katrina had fallen, fainting.
To attempt to describe the scene that ensued, would
be equally painful and hopeless. Lamps, candles,
pitch, and splinters of the pitch pine were kindled in
a moment, and threw a portentous glare upon the calm
ceruleanand the ship would have shown at a
distance
,
as in a conflagration. Coops, casks, planks
were thrown overboard. Ropes and boats were
lowered
down. Every person on board, who could swim,
was in the water. Frederic was among them, diving
to such a depth, and remaining so long beneath the
water, that when he rose, the blood gushed from his
nostrils. When Katrina recovered from her first
faintness
,
it was to utter such agonizing shrieks, to save
her sister, as chilled the heart. Elder Wood was at
first transported utterly beyond the precept and habit
of Christian submission and endurance. `My
daughter
!
My dear lost daughter,' he cried. `I could have
borne every thing, but this.' Old, and unused to
swimming as he was, he escaped from the friends, who
attempted to hold him, and he also was in the sea.
Not a breath ruffled the mirror surface, that showed
of transparent purple. Twenty persons were diving
in the depths, through which the eye traced the cones
of light, from the glare on board, in all directions from
the ship, to almost fathomless distances.
Innumerable
fishes were pursuing their ocean play, as though
it were no concern of theirs, that a fair maiden had
gone down breathless to their deepest retreats. The
white anemonies, like numberless shooting stars in
the water, were performing their quick contractions
and expansions in their uninterrupted sports. A mote
might be traced in the pale green element at
immense
depths.
It was in vain, that Katrina continued to cry, `oh!
save my sister,' as though her heart were bursting.
It was in vain, that Elder Wood, taken up in a boat,
when well nigh drowned, groaned, and scattered his
hairs into the sea, exclaiming, `all else I could have
borne.' It was in vain, that Frederic exhausted
himself
in ineffectual struggles, to force the mysterious
element to give up its dead. It was to no use, that
he made spasmodic efforts to escape from his kind
keepers, that he might spring overboard again. It
was in vain, that the heart-rending cry arose from
various points, find her! oh! find her. Mark where
she rises! To whatever extent the vision of the
swimmers could extend through the pellucid element,
her brilliant eye, glistening through the wave, her
glossy tresses floating from her neck, her beautiful
formwere no where to be seen. The voice of
music was mute. The heart of unutterable
tenderness
had imparted its warmth to the waters. She
had gone down beyond the power of imagination to
follow, or find her. All further hope of renewed
communion with the loved and lost must now rest on
the resurrection morning. Two hours had been spent
in these unavailing efforts. A strong breeze then
arose from the direction of the sea. However the
agonized friends of the lost one wished still to linger
on the fatal spot, there was no anchorage, and the
ship was rapidly driven towards the shore.
It may be supposed, that her birth, trunks and
cabinet were searched, to discover whether she had
left any written indication of her feelings and
purposes
.
She had been observed writing the day
before
this disaster. That writing was found in her
cabinet to this effect. `Merciful God! if it be
possible
,
let the cup of insanity pass from me! Is it truth
or illusion, that I see the dear valley, my loved
parents
,
the young chief, my natal spot, all distinct in
the sea? I feel my hands, and close my eyes, and
look again. It must be real. There are the same
dear images; and now they move, and hold out their
arms to me, and chide me, that I come not. Oh God!
sendest thou these illusions, to manifest thy frown
upon this uniou? Thou art righteous and terrible in
thus declaring that this long cherished love is a
guilty one. I cruelly compelled the young chief to
quench his noble spirit in a watery grave. Be it so.
Let me make all possible reparation. I am now
alone with God and my conscience. And should I
lose my reason, I bequeath all my wordly substance,
of which disposition is not already made, to Katrina,
the orphan sister of my heart, hoping that all the
wishes of her innocent bosom may be gratified. I
charge her on the care of Elder Wood. She will
not fail to bestow right portions of it on her guardian
and father. Frederic! Yes. If it be a guilty
sentiment
,
in presence of God, I tear it from my heart;
and if it may be, bequeath her his love. Should this
be my last act of a sound mind, those who come after
me, will consider this my last will and testament.
Jessy Yensi Weldon
.'
The ship anchored next morning in the harbor,
where it remained but for a few days. Frederic was
seen for the most part sitting on the cliffs alone,
looking
stedfastly in the direction, where the lost one had
left him. During this stay, he prepared the following
epitaph for her ocean grave:
She sleeps alone! She sleeps alone!
Down the green depths of ocean's bed.
The restless surge, with refluent moan,
Rolls noiseless o'er her peaceful head,
As with its dark, unceasing tide
The sweeping waters onward glide.
She has no marble monument;
She wants no stone, with graven lie,
To tell of love and virtue blent
In one, who seem'd too good to die.
We shall not need such useless trace,
To point us to her resting place.
The mariner, as gliding by,
May see, indeed, no mark, from whence
To learn, that he is wafting nigh
The sleeping corse of innocence.
But by one heart that ocean spot
In death alone will be forgot.
All, that is known further of these wanderers, is,
that the father of Julius was found to have deceased.
The mother conversed with Elder Wood and
Frederic
,
and perused the document from her son. A
satisfactory arrangement of all secular interests was
speedily accomplished through the agency of Elder
Wood, in whose mind duty was always the prevalent
idea. Frederic appeared perfectly reckless, in
regard
to the opulence, which had thus visited him
unsought
.
They shortly afterwards sailed from Canton
for the United States, in the ship
Pacific
. That ship
was spoken off Callao by the ship Mentor, both in a dead
calm. Visits, as usual, were interchanged between
the ships. The captain of the latter ship arrived first
in the United States; and, among his letters to his
friends, was one, which, with other matters, contained
the following particulars; from which it would seem,
that the appearance of the three Shoshonee emigrants
had a striking interest even for passing and
disinterested
spectators.
`We supped in the cabin of the Pacific. A
venerble
looking man, dressed as a minister, with gray
locks floating on his shoulders, led to the table the
most beautiful girl, I had ever seen. Beside her
was a fine looking young gentleman, who might have
been her brother or her lover. They were all three
in deep mourning. As they came to the table, the
previous gaiety and loud talking was instantly hushed,
and each one spoke under his breath. I know not,
but it might have been the grief in the countenance
of this lovely girl, and the interesting young man,
that struck us so much. But I have not been
introduced
to persons who left such a vivid impression
upon my memory. After they retired, I failed not
to ask their history. I give the following particulars,
as I received them.
`They had been among the Shoshonee, in the
interior
of the country on the Oregon, where they had
lived, and met horrible disasters. They took passage
to China. They spoke with awe, and never without
tears, of a young lady who had been one of their
number. They represented her, as lovely and
interesting
,
in terms of gloomy enthusiasm. The young
gentleman was to have married her. In a state of
derangement from religious melancholy, she threw
herself overboard. It was wonderful, that two such
splendid young persons, as rich as India merchants,
should keep up mourning and look dismal so long.
There was said to be, however, a strange sacredness
in their privacy, and a something in their manners,
which had wonderfully conciliated the attachment
and respect of their fellow passengers.
`I can hardly account for the uncommon interest,
which I took myself in these interesting people. At
any rate, the young lady need have no fears, if she
once arrives safe in America. Forgive these extra
memoranda. My next shall be on matters of
business.'
THE END.Minister of JesusA wretch in agony implores you
by Him, who suffered for mankind, to have mercy
upon him. He extenuates nothing. The vilest
outrage
and abandonment were his purpose. He
confesses
,
that he deserves the worst. His only plea is,
that he was ruined by the doting indulgence of his
parents. Luxury and pleasure have enervated him,
and he has not the courage to bear pain. Death is
horror to him, and Oh, God! Oh, God!the terrible
death of a slow fire. Christ pitied his tormentors.
Oh! let Jessy pity me. The agony is greater, than
human nature can bear. Oh! Elder Wood, come,
and pray with, and for
Julius
.'16 *
`They have unbound my hands, and furnished me
with the means of writing this. They are dancing
round the pile, on which I am to suffer by fire. My
oath, that I would possess thee, at the expense of
death and hell, rings in my ears, as a knell, that would
awaken the dead. Oh God! have mercy. Every
thing whirls before my eyes, and I can only pray, that
you may forget, if you cannot forgive
Julius
.'