CHAPTER I.
At
the close of a pleasant day, in the spring of the year
17, a solitary horseman might have been seen slowly
winding his way along a narrow road, in that part of
Virginia which is now called the Valley. It was nearly
forty years ago, and the district lying between the Blue
Ridge and the Allegheny mountains was but thinly
populated
,
while the country lying to the west, embracing an
immense Alpine region, was a savage wilderness, which
extended to the new and distant settlements of Kentucky.
Our traveller's route led along the foot of the mountains,
sometimes crossing the
spurs
, or lateral ridges, which
push out their huge promontories from the great chain;
and at others winding through deep ravines, or skirting
along broad valleys. The Ancient Dominion was never
celebrated for the goodness of its highways, and the one
whose mazes he was now endeavoring to unravel, was
among the worst, being a mere path, worn by the feet
of horses, and marked by faint traces of wheels, which
showed that the experiment of driving a carriage over
its uneven surface had been successfully tried, but not
generally practised. The country was fertile, though
wild and broken. The season was that in which the
foliage is most luxuriant and splendid to the eye, the
leaves being fully expanded, while the rich blossoms
decked the scene with a variety of brilliant hues; and
our traveller, as he passed ridge after ridge, paused in
delight on their elevated summits, to gaze at the beautiful
glens that lay between them, and the gorgeous vegetation
that climbed even to the tops of the steepest acclivities.
The day, however, which had been unusually sultry for
the season, was drawing to a close, and both horse and
rider began to feel the effects of hunger and fatigue; the
former, though strong and spirited, drooped his head,
and the latter became wearied with these lonesome
though picturesque scenes. During the whole day he
had not seen the dwelling of a human being; the
clattering
of his horse's hoofs upon the rock, the singing of
the birds, so numerous in this region, the roaring of the
mountain stream, or the crash of timber occasioned by
the fall of some great tree, were the only sounds that
had met his ear. He was glad, therefore, to find his
path descending, at last, into a broad valley, interspersed
with farms. He seemed to have surmounted the last
hill, and before him was a rich continuous forest,
resembling
,
as he overlooked it from the high ground, a solid
plane of verdure. The transition from rocky steeps and
precipices, to the smooth soil and sloping surface of the
valley, was refreshing; and not less so were the coolness
and fragrance of the air, and the deep and varied hues
of the forest, occasioned by the rank luxuriance of its
vegetation.
It might be proper, as it certainly is customary,
before proceeding to narrate the adventures of our hero,
to introduce him to the particular acquaintance of the
reader, by a full description of his person, character, and
lineage; but this manner of narration, supported as it is
by respectable precedent, we must be permitted to decline.
As we have no record before us showing that the
gentleman
in question ever passed under a regimental standard,
we are not aware that his exact height could now be
ascertained; and as he was neither a deserter from the
service of his country, nor a fugitive from the protection
of his guardian, we cannot think it necessary to set forth
the color of his hair and eyes, or to describe what clothes
he had on when he went away. To enlist the
sympathies
of our fair readers, whose approbation we would
fain propitiate, it is enough to say that he was a young
and handsome bachelor, leaving each of them to fancy
him the exact image of her favorite admirer; but as
we do not admire the practice of peeping into
gentlemen's
hearts, or pocket-books, without any other warrant
than the bare license of authorship, we cannot tell what
precious billet-doux may have filled the one, or what
treasured image might have occupied the other. These
are questions which may be incidentally touched
hereafter
;
and the curious reader will find ample materials
in the following pages, for the gratification of a laudable
thirst for knowledge on these interesting points.
The sun was about to set, and our traveller, having
completely left all the mountain passes behind him, could
have enjoyed the serenity of the calm hour, and the
bland landscape, had not other thoughts harassed him.
He needed rest and refreshment, and knew not where to
find the one or the other. While considering this matter,
he reached a spot where two roads crossed, at the same
instant when two other persons, advancing from a
different
direction, arrived at the same point. They were an
elderly gentleman and a young lady, both of
prepossessing
appearance. The former was a portly man, hale
and ruddy, with a gay eye and a profusion of gray
locks, as if the frost of age had prematurely touched his
head, without penetrating so deep as to chill the fountains
of life. His dress was that of a country gentleman; it
was not expensive, nor yet well assorted, but rather
evinced the carelessness of one who, living secluded
from the fashionable world, felt independent of its forms,
or who adopted with reluctance the changes which seemed
every year to depart further and further from certain
standards of gracefulness to which he had been
accustomed
in his youth, as well as from the peculiar notions
of comfort that fasten upon the mind with the approaches
of old age. He was mounted upon a fine high-bred
horse, rather oddly caparisoned; for the bridle, though
silver mounted, was broken in several places, and the
fractures had been remedied, at one part by a hard knot,
at another by a coarse seam, and at a third by a thong
of buckskin; while a Spanish saddle, which might once
have done honor to the best cavalier at a bull-fight,
having lost the stirrup-leather on the near side, was
supplied
with an accommodation-ladder of rope, and the
girth was patched with leather and linsey, until the
original material was hardly discoverable. The worthy
gentleman wore one spur, either because he was too
indolent to put on the other, or from a conviction, founded
on a well-established philosophical principle, that the
B
effect produced on one side of his animal must be
followed
by a corresponding result on the other, and that
consequently one armed heel is as effective as a pair.
Indeed, that gentlemanly weapon seemed to be worn
more from habit than necessity, for the free-spirited steed
needed no prompter; and the rider, who sat with the
ease and grace of an experienced horseman, would have
esteemed it a breach of the dignity becoming his age and
station to have proceeded at any pace faster than a walk.
He was evidently a wealthy planter, accustomed to good
living and good society, who had arrived at a standing
in life which placed him above any merely outward
forms that interfered with his comfort, and who felt
privileged to think as he pleased, and do as he liked;
while the frankness and benevolence of his countenance
at once assured the stranger that his heart was alive to
the best feelings of kindness and hospitality. His
companion
was a lovely girl of eighteen, richly and tastefully
habited. Careless as were the apparel and furniture of
the elder rider, that of the lady was studiously neat and
appropriate. Her palfrey had the fine limbs, the delicate
form, and the bright eye of the deer, with a gentleness
that seemed to savor more of reason than of instinct.
His hair was smooth and glossy as silk, his harness
elegant and neatly fitted; and as the fair rider sat
gracefully
erect in her saddle, the proud animal arched his
neck as if conscious of the beauty of his burthen.
As the parties met at the junction of the roads, each
of the gentlemen reined up his horse to allow the other
to pass; the elder bowed and touched his hat, and the
other returned the salutation with equal courtesy. There
was a momentary embarrassment, as neither rider
seemed disposed to take precedence of the other; which
was relieved by the young lady, who, slackening her
rein as she touched the neck of her steed with a hazle
switch, rode forward, leaving the gentlemen to settle the
point of etiquette between them, which they did by
silently falling in abreast, the road being just wide
enough to admit the passage of two riders in that
manner.
In our country, there is none of that churlish policy,
or that repulsive pride, which in other regions forbids
strangers who thus meet from accosting each other; on
the contrary, our hearty old Virginian, on meeting a
young, well-mounted, handsome stranger, with the
appearance
and manners of a gentleman, felt bound to do
the honors of the country. He accordingly opened a
conversation, and was so well pleased with the stranger's
frankness and intelligence, that he determined to take
him home, and entertain him, at least for the night, and
perhaps for a week or two; and the worthy old man
felt no small inward gratification in the idea, that while
he was discharging his duty as a true son of the ancient
dominion, he should secure a companion, and enlarge
for a time his own little circle of enjoyments. But the
stranger anticipated his invitation by observing.
I have business with Major Heyward, who resides
somewhere in this neighborhood, and am glad that I
have fallen in with you, sir, as you can probably direct
me to a tavern near his house, where I may lodge for
the night.
That I cannot; but I will with great pleasure show
you to the house itself, replied the other, who was the
identical Major Heyward; I am going directly there,
and will conduct you to the very door.
The stranger civilly declined this offer, under the plea
that he was totally unacquainted with the gentleman
alluded to, and that his visit was solely on business. He
wished, therefore, to lodge for the night at a public
house, and to dispatch his business in the morning as
early as might be.
I suspect, replied his companion, that you will
not do the one nor the other. Public house there is
none; you are now in Virginia, sir, where hospitality is
not an article of trade; therefore you must of necessity
lodge with a private gentleman. And you are under a
mistake, if you think to dispatch your business
to-morrow
,
or the next day, or under a week at least.
Why so?
Simply because, in this country, we do not turn
people out of our houses, nor treat a guest as if he was
a sheriff's officer. There is to be a
barbecue
to-morrow,
to which you will be invited; then you must hunt one
day, and fish another, and after thatbut see, there
is the house.
The stranger halted: I really cannot intrude
Intrude, my dear sir! Why, young gentleman, you
were certainly not
raised
in Virginia, or you would have
learned that one gentleman can never be considered as
an intruder in the house of another, especially one who
brings so good a letter of introduction as yourself.
Pardon me, sir, I have no such credentials.
Oh yes, you haveyes, you have, returned the
planter, laughing at his own wit, and bowing to his
companion; as a late writer hath it, a good
appearance
is the best letter of introduction; and your modesty,
young sir, is an indorsement which gives it double value.
Come along, I'll be answerable for your welcome.
But I am a total stranger.
True, and so you will remain until you are
introduced
;
then you will be so no longer.
But it is so awkward to go to a gentleman's house
just at nightfall, as if begging for a night's lodging.
The very best hour in the world, for then you are
sure to catch the gentleman at home, and at leisure to
entertain you. Virginia, my dear, continued he,
calling
to the young lady, who rode a few paces before
them, will you not join me in a guarantee that this
young gentleman shall be welcome at Walnut-Hill?
With great pleasure, if it were necessary, replied
the lady, but your introduction, my dear uncle, will be
all-sufficient.
The stranger, who began to suspect the truth, and
saw that he could not, without rudeness, decline the
proffered kindness of his hospitable guide, now
submitted
,
and the party entered a long lane which led to
the mansion. On either side were large fields of corn
and tobacco, lately planted, and exhibiting the distinctive
characteristics of Virginia agriculture. The scale was
extensive, but the manner of cultivation rude. The
spacious domain, spreading for more than a mile on
either hand, was covered with flourishing crops, which
attested the fertility of the soil; and the immense
worm-fences
surrounding the inclosures, and dividing them
B 2
into accurate parallelograms, were as substantial as they
were unsightly. The corners and skirts of the fields,
and every vacant spot, were grown up with weeds and
briars. Stumps of trees blackened with fire, and
immense
tall trunks, from which the bark and smaller
limbs had fallen, showed that not many years had
elapsed since the ground had been cleared; but those
sylvan remains became fewer and more decayed towards
the mansion of the owner, which was in the centre of
the opening, as if the occupant, after fixing his dwelling,
had been gradually clearing away the forest from around
it in every direction. An apple-orchard had been planted
so recently as to be now ready for bearing its first crop,
and peach-trees were seen scattered in every direction;
wherever a kernel had fallen by accident, and the young
shoot had escaped the plow, or outlived the nipping of
the cattle, was a flourishing tree, promising a luxuriant
harvest of this delightful fruit.
The mansion stood on a rising ground, overlooking
the whole plantation, and was composed of a cluster of
buildings rather inartificially connected. A stone house
with two rooms had been first erected; then a framed
building was added; and year after year, as the family
increased in wealth or numbers, subsequent additions
had been made, consisting of single apartments, all on
the ground floor, except the original building, which
contained an upper storythe whole connected by
piazzas, and being, in fact, a number of separate, though
contiguous, houses, inconveniently adapted for the
residence
of a single family. The offices were scattered
about in the rear of the main edificethe kitchen, the
ice-house, the smoke-house, being each a separate
building
.
Still further back were the negro-cabins, and
beyond them the stables; so that, altogether, the place
had more the appearance of a village than of the
residence
of a single family. The aspect of the whole was
pleasing and respectable. Had it been surrounded by a
wall and a ditch, it would have borne no small
resemblance
to some of the earliest of those old castles in
which the barons resided with their followers in
patriarchal
simplicity. The out-buildings were so disposed as
not to intercept the view from the front of the mansion;
and the latter, being painted white, looked well in spite
of its structure. A beautiful lawn surrounded it, set
with fine forest trees, the venerable and gigantic
aboriginals
of the soil; and on one side was a garden, laid
out with taste, and highly embellished with flowers and
ornamental plants.
As soon as the party entered the lane, droves of young
negroes ran out to gaze at them, hiding behind the
trees and fences, or peeping through the bushes; and
the worthy host began to exercise his lungs, in speaking
alternately to the negro children, to the blacks who
were returning in troops from labor, and to his guest.
Get away, you young rogues! what are you
peeping
at? There's fine corn, sir. Here, you Cato, tell
Csar to come to me.That corn has just been planted
six weeks.Pompey, come and take these horses.
There's the best tobacco in this country.Luke, where's
Peter and John? Primus, tell Adam to get some fresh
water, and go you, Finis, and help him. Virgil, you dog,
come out of that peach-tree. I'll take you and Milton,
and knock your heads together.These plagues destroy
all my fruit, sir, before it is ripe.Open that gate,
Moseshelp him, Aaron. Come here, Cupid, and hold
your young mistress's horse. Run, some of you, and
tell Venus to get supper.Come, sir, alight; you are
welcome to my house.
The stranger, who throughout this singular colloquy
had found no opportunity to address his host, had placed
himself beside the young lady, to whom he addressed
his conversation during the few minutes that preceded
their arrival at the house, where he assisted her to
dismount
;
and the whole party were soon seated in one of
Major Heyward's spacious piazzas.
Walnut-Hill was the seat of plenty and hospitality;
and in a few minutes servants were dispatched in
different
directions in pursuit of refreshments. The worthy
proprietor himself, in respect of his age, and certain
habits of reverence to which his whole household had
been long accustomed, received the first attention. His
niece placed his great arm-chair, a little negro fetched
his pipe, another brought tobacco, a third fire, a fourth
a glass of water, a fifth slippers; and in a few minutes
he was comfortably seated, enjoying his accustomed
luxuries; while his guest retired to arrange his dress.
On the return of the latter, he found his host in the
same position in which he had left him; and
approaching
him, said,
I have perhaps been to blame in delaying so long
to announce my name and business.
Your name, my young friend, I shall be glad to
hear, whenever you please; as for your business, we
will talk of that when we get tired of every other
subject.
I am well aware of your hospitality, and that
towards
either a friend or a stranger it would be
cheerfully
exercised; but neither of these characters can be
claimed by
Lyttleton Fennimore
.
The old man started as he heard this name; a cloud
passed over his features, and his frame seemed agitated
with painful recollections. These feelings he
endeavored
to suppress, as he replied,
I had rather you had borne another name; but that
is not your fault.
He then rose, extended his hand to his guest, and
emphatically added, Mr. Fennimore, pardon an old
man, for not being able to forget, in a moment, that
which has been a subject of bitter reflection for years.
The antipathies of parents should not be entailed on
their children. You are cordially welcome to my house
make it your home, and consider me as your friend.
Tea was soon announced; and Major Heyward, as
he introduced his guest to his niece, Miss Pendleton,
resumed
his usual courtesy of manner, but his gaiety had
entirely forsaken him, and immediately after this meal
he retired to his apartment, leaving the young people to
entertain each other. We need hardly add, that,
predisposed
as the latter were to be pleased with each other,
the evening passed agreeably; and that when Mr.
Fennimore
retired, he could not but acknowledge, that
whatever might be the character of the uncle, the niece
was one of the most agreeable women that he had ever
seen.
CHAPTER II.
On
the following morning, Fennimore rose early, and
sallied forth, but found that he had been preceded by
Major Heyward, who was bustling about, without his
hat or coat, in the sharp morning air, giving orders to
his servants. The cloud of the last evening had passed
from his brow; the reflections of his pillow had been
salutary; and he now met his guest, with his usual
cheerfulness of countenance, and kindness of manner.
Mr. Fennimore, said he, I did not receive you,
perhaps
,
as I ought, and I ask your pardon. I must be
frank with you, for I cannot be otherwise. Things
have passed between our families which I have not been
able to forget. But the ways of Providence are always
wise; it was necessary for my peace that you should
come here. I am too old to cherish an unsettled feud.
Let the past be buried. We are friends.
I know so little of the particulars of the affair to
which you allude, replied Fennimore, that I can say
nothing, except that I desire to stand in no other
relation
to Major Heyward, than that of a friend. I had
not thought of introducing that subject. My business
relates to a pecuniary transaction
Well, we'll talk of that another time. Any time
will do for business. We can settle that in five minutes.
There is to be a
barbecue
to-day, Mr. Fennimore; we
are all goingyou must go with us.
In vain did Fennimore plead that his engagements
required his attention elsewherethat he had no time
for parties of pleasurethat he had no taste for such
amusements, &c.
No taste for a barbecue! exclaimed Major
Heyward
.
You surprise me, Mr. Fennimore; no taste
for a barbecue! Well, that shows you were not raised
in Virginia. Time you should see a little of the world,
sir; there's nothing in life equal to a barbecue, properly
manageda good old Virginia barbecue. Sir, I would
not have you to miss it for the best horse on my
plantation
!
Talking of horses, continued the cheerful old man,
reminds me that I can show you a sight worth
seeing
;
and without waiting for a reply, he led his guest
to his stables, where the grooms were feeding and
rubbing
down a number of beautiful blooded animals.
These were successively paraded, and the proud owner
descanted upon the merits of each, with a volubility that
excluded every other subject, until breakfast was
announced
.
Has Mr. Fennimore consented to join our party
to-day
?
inquired Miss Pendleton, after they were seated
at the breakfast-table.
Certainly, my dear, replied the Major; Mr.
Fennimore
would be doing injustice to us, and to himself, if
he did not improve such an opportunity of witnessing a
festivity peculiar to our State. I am sure he would not
be deprived of it upon any consideration.
I cannot resist the temptation, said Fennimore,
with a bow which Miss Pendleton took to herself, while
her uncle received it as a tribute to his favorite
amusement
;
and after a hasty meal, the parties separated to
prepare for the excursion.
The horses were soon at the door, and the party
proceeded
,
attended by several servants, to the place of
meeting. It was a gay and beautiful morning. They
passed over a high mountainous ridge, by a winding
and rugged path, which at some places seemed
impracticable
;
but the horses, accustomed to these acclivities,
stept cautiously from rock to rock, or nimbly leaped the
narrow ravines that crossed the road, while the riders
scarcely suffered any inconvenience from the
irregularities
of the surface. Sometimes the path led along
the edge of a precipice, and they paused to look down
upon the broad-spread valleys, that lay extended in
beautiful
landscape before them. The song of the
mocking-bird
arrested their attention, as he sate among the
branches of a tall tree, pouring forth his miscellaneous
and voluble notes, imitating successfully all the
song-sters
of the grove, and displaying a fullness, strength,
and richness of voice, which often astonishes even those
who are accustomed to his melody. Upon reaching the
highest elevation of the ridge, they wound along its
level surface, by a path well beaten and beautifully
smooth, but so seldom travelled as to be covered with a
growth of short grass. Its width was sufficient only to
admit the passage of a single horseman, and its course
so winding that the foremost rider was often concealed
from the view of the last of the train. Dense thickets
grew on either hand, and the branches of the trees
interlocking above the riders' heads, formed a thick
canopy, giving to this romantic path the appearance of
a narrow, serpentine archway, carved with art out of
the tangled forest. Virginia, when she reached this
elevated plain, seemed to feel as if in fairy land, and,
loosening her rein, bounded away with the lightness of
a bird, gracefully bending as she passed under the low
boughs, gliding round the short angles, and leaping her
beautiful steed over the logs that sometimes lay in the
way. Fennimore galloped after, admiring her skill, and
equally elated by the inspiring scene; while Major
Heyward
,
who thought it undignified to ride out of a walk,
at any time except when following the hounds, followed
at his leisure, wondering at the levity of the young
people, which made them forget their gentility and ride
like dragoons or hired messengers.
Suddenly the path seemed to end at the brink of a
tall cliff, and far below them they beheld the majestic
Potomac, meandering through its deep valleys, and
apparently
forcing its way among piles of mountains. The
charms of mountain scenery were enhanced by the
endless
variety of the rich and gorgeous, the placid and
beautiful, the grand and terrific, that were here
embraced
in one view. At one place the tall naked rock
rose in perpendicular cliffs to an immense height,
terminating
in bare spiral peaks; at another, the rounded
elevations were covered with pines, cedars, and laurel,
always indicating a sterile soil, and a cold exposure.
The mountain sides were clothed with verdure, in all
the intervals between the parapets of rock; and the
clear streams of water that fell from ledge to ledge,
enlivened
the prospect. Far below, the rich valley spread
out its broad bosom, studded with the noblest trees of
C
the forest, the majestic tulip-tree, the elegant locust, the
gum, the sugar-maple, the broad spreading oak, and the
hickory. The numberless flowering trees were in full
bloom, and their odors filled the air with a rich perfume.
The river, with its clear blue waters, was full of
attraction
,
sometimes dashing round rocky points of the
mountain, and sometimes flowing calmly through the
valley; at one point placidly reposing in a wide basin,
at another, rushing over a rocky ledge whitened with
foam.
How beautiful! exclaimed Virginia, as she reined
up her horse, and gazed, with a delighted eye, over the
wide-spread landscape.
How exquisitely beautiful! re-echoed Fennimore,
as his admiring glance rested on the form of his lovely
companion. Her deer-like animal, smoking with heat,
and just sufficiently excited by exercise to bring every
muscle into full action, to expand his nostrils and swell
his veinshis fine neck arched, his head raised, his
delicate ear thrown forward, and his clear eye sparkling,
stood on the very edge of the cliff. The light figure of
Virginia was rendered more graceful by an elegant
riding-dress, closely fitted to her person, and extending
below her feet. She sat with the ease of a practised
rider. But her chief attraction, at this moment, was the
animated expression of her features. Her bonnet was
pushed back from her fine forehead, her eye lighted up
with pleasure, her cheek flushed and dimpled, her lips
unclosed; and as she extended her whip in the
direction
indicated by her glance, Fennimore realized the
most exquisite dreams, that his fancy had ever formed,
of female loveliness.
She turned towards her companion, as his expression
of admiration met her ear, blushed deeply when she
discovered
that his impassioned glance was directed
towards
herself, and then, with a little dash of modest
coquetry
,
which is quite natural in a pretty woman of
eighteen, laughed, and resumed her descriptions. But
her tones softened, and her conversation, without losing
its sprightliness, assumed the richness and vividness of
poetry, from an involuntary consciousness that all the
young and joyous feelings of her heart were responded
in kindred emotions from that of her companion.
In a few minutes they were joined by Major
Heyward
,
and the whole party descended the mountain by a
precipitous path, which led to a part of the valley
bordering
on the Potomac.
Arrived at the place of rendezvous, a novel and
enchanting
scene was presented to the eye of our stranger.
A level spot on the shore of the river, had been divested
of all its bushes and trees, except a few large poplars,
which were left for shade, whose huge trunks had risen
to a majestic height, while their spreading branches
interlocked
,
so as to form a canopy impervious to the
sun-beams
.
Having been the scene of these festivities for
many years, the ground was trodden hard, and covered
with a thick sward of short grass. On three sides the
forest
was seen in its native wildness, tangled and luxuriant
as it came from the hand of nature; on the other
flowed
the river. At the back part of the area, was a
fountain
of limpid waterthe Virginians always congregate
around a cool springissuing from the rock, and filling a
large basin, which served as a wine-cooler, and in which
a few trout, kept with great care, sported their graceful
forms.
The company began to assemble at an early hour; a
gay and miscellaneous assemblage, somewhat aristocratic,
but by no means exclusive. It was all of the class of
freeholders, but included every variety of that class.
Some were members of ancient families, well educated,
polished and wealthy, proud of their birth and of their
estates, simple and hospitable, though somewhat stately,
in their manners. Some were decayed gentry, a little
prouder than the nature of the case seemed to require,
in consequence of their poverty; and others were plain
farmers and their families, stout built, well fed, well clad
an intelligent and independent race, who lived on their
own farms, and justly considered themselves the peers
of the best in the land. In the whole circle there was
much of the sturdiness and simplicity of an agricultural
people, together with a degree of polish not often found
among mere farmers, and resulting here from the
hospitable
customs of the country, which induced a
continual
round of social intercourse, and from the fact that the
land proprietors, being the owners of servants, had
leisure
to cultivate their minds, and visit their neighbors.
Among them were many gentlemen of liberal education,
some professional men of high attainments, and men in
public life, or of large fortunes, who, spending a portion
of every year in large cities, had acquired all the
elegance
of manners, and cultivation of intellect, which is
found in the best circles. One peculiarity which
usually
marks a fashionable, or, more properly speaking, an
exclusive society, was wanting here, namely, that
uniformity
in dress, in manners, in thought, and in
phraseology
,
which results from a servile obedience to the
canons of fashionthat dismal monotony of taste which
forces every gentleman to furnish his house after a
prescribed
model, and a whole community to dress as much
alike as a body of soldiers in regimentals; reminding
one of Pope's description of a garden, where,
No pleasing intricacies intervene,
No artful wildness to perplex the scene,
Grove nods at grove, each alley has a brother,
And half the platform just reflects the other.
This neighborhood being secluded, and distant from
the sea-board, fashions, coming with a tardy step and
from different quarters, were partially adopted, and
never generally acquiesced in, nor carried to excess.
Manufactures of every kind were at that time at a low
ebb, and mechanics were not to be found in country
neighborhoods. The southern people, too, are habitually
indolent, and while they often exhibit on the one hand
great fondness for show, as often betray on the other
the most absolute carelessness for appearances; an
apparent
contradiction which arises from the fact that
though lavish in the expenditure of money, they will
not endure any personal labor, or discomfort, in the
purchase of luxury. If a splendid dress, vehicle, or
article of furniture, can be readily procured, it is eagerly
bought, without regard to the price; but if it cannot be
had, the nearest substitute is cheerfully adopted; and
they are too independent, either to value each other
C 2
on such adventitious possessions, or to mar their own
happiness by repining at the want of them. From these
various causes it arose, that while one lady was rolled
to the fete in an elegant coach, with four fat horses, and
plated harness, another of equal wealth came in a sorry
vehicle, which might have been very superb in the days
of her grandmother, but was now faded and crazy,
drawn by a pair of blooded nags, hitched to it with
tackle marvellously resembling plow-gear. An
ancient
spinster, whose last will and testament was a
matter
of interest with all kinsfolk, and of curiosity with the
rest of her acquaintance, rode in a sorry affair, which
had once been a creditable chaise, but was now
transformed
by repeated mendings into something resembling
a hang-man's cart; having undergone the same
mutations
to which our ships of war are subjected, in which
timber after timber is supplied, until none of the original
material is left; the only difference being, that in the case
of the carriage no care had been taken to preserve the
model, or to adapt the last repair to the one which had
preceded it. The horses were generally elegantbut
such a heterogeneous assortment of equipments! How
could it be otherwise? There was not a saddler within
fifty miles, and a gentleman who had the misfortune to
break a rein, or carry away a buckle, not being able to
procure a new article, must necessarily submit the old
one to a negro cobbler, or leave it to the ingenuity of his
own groom. The most usual plan was to supply the
rent with the nearest string. Thus it happened that
many of the animals were nobly caparisoned; elegant
saddles, dashing saddle-cloths, martingales, and
double-reined
bridles, were abundant; but when one of these
spruce affairs had chanced to be broken, a knot or a
splice, with a thong of rein-deer skin, not unfrequently
united the several parts, while a rope or a strap of
leather was sometimes substituted for a girth. Some
gentlemen rode saddles without girths, and some rode
with blind-bridles; for among this equestrian order, any
thing that could be ridden with, or ridden upon, was
better than walking, and any thing at all was far better
than staying away from the barbecue!
However odd all this might seem at first sight, to a
stranger, there was something in it that was
remarkably
pleasanta something which showed that the most
detestable of all pride, that which estimates an
individual
by his external appearance, was totally wanting.
There was a cordiality, a confidence in being kindly
received for one's own sake, which was cheering to the
heart. The girls, too, looked charmingly; and it was
marvellous to see them coming in pairs, two on a horse,
or mounted behind their fathers and brothers, laughing
and chatting, and just as happy as if they had ridden in
coaches. And then the greetings! one would have
thought that a single clan had peopled the whole
neighborhood
;
the stately old gentlemen as they shook hands
saluted each other as cousin Jones, cousin Lee, and
cousin
Thompson, with here and there an occasional Mr.
or Sir; but the girls were all cousins, and the old ladies
were aunts to all the worldthat is, to all that part of
the world which was paraded at the
barbecue
.
It was a gay scene: the horses hitched to the
surrounding
trees, the ladies sitting in groups or parading
about, and the gentlemen preparing for the diversions of
the day. Some dispersed into the woods with their
fowling-pieces, some distributed themselves along the
rocks that overhung the river, and threw out their
fishing-lines
,
and others launched their canoes in the stream,
and sought the finny tribes in the eddies of the rapid
current
.
A few of the ladies participated in the
amusement
of angling, whether to show their skill in
throwing
out a bait, or to prove that they possessed the virtue
of patience, is not known; but it is certain that they
broke quite as many rods and lines as hearts.
CHAPTER III.
Immediately
opposite the spot at which our party was
assembled, the river rushed over a series of rocky ledges
intersected by numberless fissures, affording channels to
the water, which at the same time foamed and dashed
over the rocks. A number of the youth were amusing
themselves in navigating these ripples with canoes. By
keeping the channels, they could pass in safety down
the rapids, but it required the greatest skill to avoid the
rocks, and to steer the boat along the serpentine and
sometimes angular passes, by which alone it could be
brought in safety through the ripples. Sometimes a
canoe, missing its course, shot off into a pool or eddy,
where the still water afforded a secure harbor; but if it
happened to touch a rock, in the rapid descent,
inevitable
shipwreck was the consequence. The competitors
in this adventurous entertainment soon became
numerous
;
several of the young ladies, who loved sport too
well, or feared the water too little, to be deterred by the
danger of a wetting, engaged in it; so that some of the
canoes were seen to contain, besides the steersman, a
single female, for these frail vessels were only intended
for two persons.
They first pushed their canoes up the stream with
poles, keeping close to the shore, where the current
flowed
with little rapidity, until they reached the head of the
ripple; then taking their paddles they shot out into the
stream, guided their boats into the channels, darting
down with the velocity of an arrow, sometimes
concealed
among the rocks, and sometimes hidden by the foam,
and in a few minutes were seen gliding out over the
smooth water below, having passed for nearly a mile
through this dangerous navigation. Sometimes they
purposely forsook the channel, and showed their skill by
turning suddenly into the eddies on either side, where
they would wait until the next boat passed, and dart
after it in eager chase. Dangerous as this amusement
appeared, there was in fact little to be apprehended; for
the upsetting of a canoe, which seldom occurred, would
throw the passengers into shallow water or lodge them
against a rock, with no other injury than a wetting, or
perhaps a slight bruise.
Fennimore, who had walked with Miss Pendleton to
the shore, and watched the canoes for some time,
proposed
to her to join the party.
Can you manage a canoe? inquired she,
hesitating
.
Try me, said he, gaily. I would surely not
venture
to take so precious a charge, without some
confidence
in my skill. I have been a western ranger for
several years, and am quite familiar with the use of the
paddle.
Virginia stepped into the canoe, and having seated
herself in the prow, while Fennimore took possession of
the stern, exclaimed,
A ranger! I am surprised, Mr. Fennimore; why,
you do not look like a ranger!
Am I at liberty to consider that doubt as a
compliment
?
Oh noI do not pay compliments. But I always
thought that a ranger was a great rough man, with a
blanket round his shoulders, a tomahawk at his belt, and
a rifle in his hand.
Such indeed is a part of the equipment of the
backwoods
soldier; and believe me, Miss Pendleton, many
of the most gallant men of this day have earned their
laurels in such a dress.
Oh, terrible! you will destroy some of my finest
associations. I never think of a hero, without fancying
him a tall elegant man in dashing regimentals, with a
rich sword-knot, and a pair of remarkably handsome
epaulets.
Add to your picture a powdered head, a long queue,
a stiff form, and measured tread, and you have the
beau-ideal of a soldier of the school of Baron Steuben.
Say not a word against that school, Mr. Fennimore:
it has produced a noble race of heroes. What would
have become of our country, had it not been for those
fine old generals, who trained our soldiers to war in the
late revolution, and who were models of that neatness
and military etiquette, which I am afraid you
undervalue
.
We have a dear old gentleman here, whom
you will see at dinner, and who is an excellent specimen
of by-gone times.
Who is he?
General Armour, one of our revolutionary veterans,
a most excellent man, but one who seems to think that
the highest degree of human excellence consists in
looking
and acting like a soldier. He continues to wear his
three-cornered hat, his buff waistcoat, and his blue
regimental
coat turned up with red, and would rather part
with his estate than with his black cockade.
I honor such men, said Fennimore, but see, here
we are at the head of the rapids.
Fennimore paddled his light canoe over the smooth
water above the rapids, advancing towards the reefs and
then retiring, describing circles with his little vessel, as
if to try his skill before he ventured among the
breakers
.
He was evidently quite familiar with this exercise;
and Virginia, as she beheld with admiration the strength
and dexterity with which he handled the paddle, felt no
longer the slightest timidity, but enjoyed the exciting
sport.
Let me now acknowledge freely, said Fennimore
as he cast his eye over the ripple, that I am unwilling
to attempt a dangerous navigation, which is new to me,
with so valuable a charge.
Virginia smiled; I have often passed these rocks,
said she, and feel no fear; but if you have the
slightest
desire to return, let us do so.
The stranger hesitated; his prudence restraining him,
while the natural ambition which a young man feels in
the presence of a lady, urged him on, until Miss
Pendleton
relieved him by saying, Let us run no risks, Mr.
Fennimore. I should not relish a wetting; and I am in
fault for not telling you sooner, that it would be difficult,
if not impossible, for you to pass through the rapids
without knowing the channel.
At this moment a canoe darted past them, containing
a young lady and a gentleman. Both were laughing;
and the young man, proud of his skill, in attempting to
flourish his paddle round his head, as a kind of salute to
Miss Pendleton, unluckily threw it from his hand. An
exclamation of affright arose from both parties; for the
canoe was rapidly approaching the breakers, while the
steersman had no means of directing its course.
Shall I follow? cried Fennimore.
By all means, exclaimed his companion; and in a
moment he was rapidly pursuing the drifting canoe.
The latter kept its course for a little while, then
swinging
round, floated with the broadside to the current,
rising and sinking with an unsteady motion, now striking
one end against a rock, and whirling round, and now the
other, and sometimes darting head-foremost through the
spray. Fennimore pressed on with admirable skill,
urging his canoe forward with all his strength, to
overtake
them, and guiding it with unerring sagacity. He had
nearly reached the object of his pursuit, when it struck a
rock, and upset, throwing the lady and gentleman into
the deepest part of the channel.
Keep your seat, Mr. Fennimore! guide the canoe!
exclaimed Virginia rapidly, as with admirable presence
of mind, she rose from her seat, kneeled in the boat, and
leaning forward caught the floating lady by the arm,
while Fennimore at the same instant, by a powerful
exertion
,
threw the canoe into an eddy where the waters
were still. The whole was the work of an instant; but
it was witnessed from the shore, and a burst of applause
excited by the presence of mind shown by Fennimore
and Miss Pendleton. The dripping lady was drawn into
the boat; the drooping gentleman, who had crawled on
a rock, was taken in as a passenger; and, when they
reached the shore, it would have been difficult to guess
that any of the laughing party had met with a disaster.
They were greeted with a hundred merry voices as they
ascended the bank, and Mr. Fennimore forgot, in the
lively scene, that he was a stranger.
It was now nearly noon, when the arrival of a
hunting
party that had gone out at day-break, attracted
universal
attention. At its head rode an elderly man of
large frame, whose face was browned by many a
summer's
sun. He wore a suit of plain home-spun, a
handkerchief
was bound closely round his head instead of a
hat, and his legs from a little above the knee downward
were wrapped in buck-skin, to protect them from the
briers, in riding rapidly through the forest. Under one
arm hung a large powder-horn, on the other side was
suspended a square pouch; and a broad leathern belt,
buckled closely round him, kept his dress and
accoutrements
D
confined to his body. A large buck, the noblest
trophy of the morning's chase, was thrown across the
horse, behind the saddle, and bound to the rider's back,
with the head and feet dangling on either side against
the flanks of the steed. After him came a dozen
hunters
,
mostly young men, variously equipped, some in gay
hunting-shirts, with elegant rifles, and others in the
plainer garb of ordinary woodsmen. Among them, they
brought several deer of a smaller size, and a variety of
wild-turkeys, and smaller game.
What a fine buck! exclaimed several voices.
Ah, Colonel Antler, you always carry the day!
And so he should, said General Armour, the
veterans
should set good examples to the new recruits. I
congratulate you, my old friend.
True enough, replied the hunter, we ought to
lead the young fellows; but, to tell the truth, I have
trained
these lads until some of them know almost as much
as myself.
A loud laugh from the hunters followed this speech.
Come, said General Armour, do us the favor to
make your report; tell us how the buck was taken,
before
you alight.
Hard duty, that, replied the leading hunter, for I
am as dry as a powder-horn. But the story is very
short. We had agreed to
drive
. I had seen large
tracks about the Cold Spring, up in the North Hollow,
lately, for several mornings in succession, and I knew
that a big buck
haunted
about there. We determined to
surround him, and accordingly stationed ourselves at
different points. I placed myself behind a large tree on
a path leading across the hollow. A driver was sent in
to start the game, and presently I saw this fine fellow
stealing along at an easy gallop, treading as gently as a
cat, and leaping over the logs so lightly as hardly to
crush a leaf. There was a light breeze from the south,
and some of the young men had gone up in that
direction
,
expecting that he would run with his nose to the
windand so he did, until he scented them, when he
suddenly turned towards the place where I stood. I
knew exactly where he would stop, and remained
perfectly
still. On he came at an easy
lope
, until he
reached
the top of a little knoll about sixty yards from me.
There he halted, wheeled round, and stood perfectly still,
with one fore-foot raised, the ear thrown forward, and
his eye flashinglistening and snuffing the breeze. I
fired, and down he fell. In a moment he rose and
dashed
off; but I knew I had
saved
him, dropped the but of
my rifle, and began to load. A hunter, general, should
never quit the spot from which he fires, until he loads
up again.
That's right, Colonel, on military principles.
I know it to be right, on hunting principles.
It is mathematically and morally right, replied
the veteran; military rules are all founded on the
immutable basis of truthbut I beg pardon; proceed,
sir.
The company all knew the crack of my rifle, and
came galloping up, the dogs took the trail of the blood,
and away they all went in chase, as hard as their horses
could carry them. I mounted, rode quietly over the
hill, and fell in ahead of them, just as the buck had
turned to bay. Up came the young gentlemen, and
slipped in between me and the game, but without seeing
me. Charles Cleaveland had raised his gun to his face,
and my nephew Will, the rogue, was taking aim, when
I said, `boys!' They both looked round, and at the
same moment my bullet whistled between them, and
knocked over the buck.
Bravo! cried several voices.
That was not fair, uncle, cried Miss Pendleton;
you outwitted the other gentlemen by your superior
knowledge of the woods.
Hey? Cousin Virginia; not fair! Why what's the
use of an old hunter's experience, but to outwit the
bucksthe old bucks of the woods, and the young
bucks of the settlements.
I have done, uncle, replied Virginia, laughing.
Well, here's one who has nothing to complain of
George Lee; he found a fat yearling doe on the pine
ridge, and brought her off. Henry Mountfort has
another
,
and the rest of them have shot small game.
The party now alighted, and the servants were soon
employed in preparing the game for dinner.
A long table was now spread under the trees, and
loaded with an abundant, and not inelegant repast.
Venison, poultry, hams, and rounds of beef, cooked on
the ground, sent up their savory vapors, while
numberless
huge baskets of cold viands, consisting of pullets,
tongues, bread, cakes, and pastry, supplied that variety
and profusion of eatables, which are supposed to have
characterized the hospitality of our worthy
grandmothers
.
The company took their seats with great
decorum
,
and no small parade of etiquette; and the
preparations
for a general onset, like the breaking ground of a
besieging army, advanced with system, and with a due
attention to all the little details customarily observed on
such solemn occasions. But as the scene became more
lively, good things were said, and eaten, with a rapidity
that would have defied the skill of even a modern
reporter; and amidst the Babel of voices, a few only
of the most prominent speakers could be occasionally
heard.
I'll trouble you, General Armour, for a slice of that
venison,take it rare, if you please,pardon me for
interrupting you
I was about to remark, that when General
Washington
determined to cut off the supply of provisions
from Philadelphia
Bad business thatcutting off provisions,
remarked
the venison-eater.
General, a morsel of the fat, if you please.
When General Washington in '77
determined
Allow me to recommend this fish, General.
I am very well helpeddetermined to cut
off
Did you say fish, madam? With great pleasure.
Let me add some of this butter, and a glass of wine.
My father, madam, who was a very facetious old
gentleman
He detached six hundred militia over the Schuylkill,
under General Potter
Quite a wit; I knew him well.
D 2
He intercepted their foraging parties, as directed by
the commander-in-chief
Was very fond of fish, madam.
Who, General Washington?
No, sir, my late father. He used to say that fish
should swim three times
On the roads leading to Chester, Lancaster, and
Three times, madam; first in the water, then in
butter, and then in wine.
General Washington remarking that
Dancing was a popular amusement
Gave strict orders
The fiddlers should be kept sober.
What did you say about the tender passion, madam?
General Knox
Who played the first fiddle
Wrote the Essay on Man
Between sun-set and roll-call
So the leather affairs were sent to General
Lee
A very pathetic story
Told in Hume's England.
For my father, you know, ma'am, was a witty
man.
Buzz! buzz! buzz! all became a confused clatter, which
continued until the cloth was removed, and the ladies
retired. A separation of the three estates now took
place;the elder gentlemen remained at the table,
the matronly portion of the females betook themselves
to the surrounding seats, and the youthful part of the
assembly arranged themselves in sets for dancing. Mr.
Fennimore had already discovered that Miss Pendleton
was emphatically
the Belle;
and her title to this
distinction
became more evident, when the younger part
of the company, relieved from the presence of their
seniors, were enabled to act out their own characters
more freely. The young ladies evidently yielded to her
the precedence, and the gentlemen were emulous in
paying her attention. As the acknowledged heiress of
Major Heyward, her expectations, in point of fortune,
were of the brightest character, and in beauty she had no
superior; while her vigorous understanding, the decision
of her mind, and the playfulness of her conversation,
threw an air of freshness and originality around her, as
rare as it was captivating. Among her constant
admirers
,
the most devoted was George Lee, a young
gentleman, whose fine person was only equalled by the
utter imbecility of his mind. He was tall, stout, well
built, and easy in his deportment. His features, taken
singly, were manly and handsome; but his face, as a
whole, had not the slightest expression of any thing
but good-nature. Amiable, kind, generous to prodigality,
and simple as a child, there never lived a more artless,
a better tempered, or a weaker man. His fine
appearance
,
and gentlemanly deportment, never failed to earn
him respect, on a first acquaintance; and the goodness
of his heart rendered him a general favorite among
those who had known him long.
Will you dance with me, cousin Virginia? said he,
as soon as he could plant himself at her side.
I have almost promised not to dance to-day.
But with
me:
I know you will dance with
me
. I
have been trying all day to get to speak to you.
I am glad you were so much better employed.
No, that was not the reason; but you are always
so surrounded. You know that I would rather talk to
you than do any thing else in the world.
Do not talk so, cousin George.
Why not? You know I think so. I am not ashamed
of it. You know that I have always told you so. But
you do not know the half that I feel
I will dance with you, Mr. Lee, said Miss
Pendleton
,
willing to interrupt his silly courtship.
Thank you, but don't call me
Mr. Lee
you know
I can't bear that; and away they tripped.
The company separated at an early hour; and Mr.
Fennimore was not displeased at having shared the
festivities
of this agreeable day, or at being destined to
pass another night under the hospitable roof of Major
Heyward.
CHAPTER IV.
As Mr. George Lee will come occasionally under the
notice of the reader, during the progress of this history,
we think it advisable to devote a few pages to some
special details, relating to his parentage and character.
This interesting young gentleman, the descendant of an
ancient family, was the only son of a respectable planter,
who lived and died upon his own estate, adjoining to
that of Major Heyward, to whom he was distantly
related. The elder Mr. Lee was only distinguished
among his neighbors as an industrious man, who
superintended
his laborers faithfully during the day, and
smoked his pipe contentedly at night. He pursued this
life so evenly, for many years, that the only vicissitudes
which marked his days, were those produced by the
revolutions of the seasons, or the changes of the
atmosphere
except,
indeed, that he was occasionally induced
to join a hunting expedition in the mountains, or allured to
the lowlands, to participate in a feast of oysters. Having
been reared on the borders of the Blue Ridge, he had been
early instructed in the use of the gun; and long before he
reached the age of manhood, could track the timorous deer
through all the labyrinths of the forest. He had even
ventured
upon more dangerous enterprises, and on more than
one occasion had joined the gallant volunteers of his native
state in repelling the incursions of the savage tribe. When
he married, he hung up his rifle and laid aside his
mocasins
,
but still cherished them as old acquaintances, and
could be prevailed upon at any time, by slight entreaty,
to resume them both. He had many acquaintances
among the lowland gentry, who loved his society because
he had a good appetite and a hard head, was fond of
oysters and apple-toddy, and was an excellent listener;
and, what was perhaps not the least of his good
qualities
,
he seldom made them a visit without carrying with
him a fat mountain-deer, as a present. He was,
therefore
,
an occasional, and always a welcome visitor, at
those glorious fish-feasts at which the gentlemen of
Virginia display such consummate skill, in catching,
cooking, and consuming, the inhabitants of the deep.
He was so well pleased upon such occasions, that he
might have become a punctual participant in these
festivities
,
had it not been for the frequent admonitions of
Mrs. Lee, who observed that her husband, though rigidly
temperate at home, never returned from such
merry-meetings
without exhibiting a certain unnatural
exhilaration
of spirits, not exactly conforming with this good
lady's notions of propriety. She therefore more than
once hinted that oysters and toddy did not agree with
Mr. Lee; and that gentleman, who had implicit faith in
the penetration of his helpmate, as readily promised to
eat fewer oysters and more trout, and to substitute
brandy and water for toddy. But as this arrangement
neither produced the desired effect, nor satisfied the lady,
he at last compounded matters, like a good husband, by
agreeing to go to the lowlands but twice a year. Under
this convention, which was kept inviolate, matters went
on like clock-work; the plough and the loom were plied
incessantly; the fields grew wider, and the
tobacco-crops
more abundant; the negroes were fat and well
clad; and Mr. Lee, as he ripened in years, increased in
substance. The lady, who was the moving cause of
this prosperity, may be sketched off in a few words.
Like her husband, she came of an aristocratic stock;
but, unlike him, she was shrewd, sensible, active, and
gifted with an uncommon knack for managing every
thing and every body around her. She managed the
plantation, the dairy, the poultry, the household, the
negroes; she managed her husband; and what was
better
than all, she regulated her own temper and conduct
with great decorum, and managed to be the most
popular
woman in the neighborhood. Of book-learning she
had not much, for ladies, in that dark age, were not
taught the sciences, did not visit lyceums, and had no
souvenirs. But then Mrs. Lee had a mind of her own;
her sensibilities were acute, and her ambition great;
and as she carefully improved every opportunity for
gaining information, she became as intelligent as a lady
could well be without the interesting aids above
mentioned
.
Such had been the prosperous condition of this family
for several years, when the oppressions of Great Britain
began to awaken her colonies to a sense of their rights.
Mr. Lee, for a long time, turned a deaf ear to the
murmurs
which surrounded him. Having been in the habit
of waiting on all occasions for Mrs. Lee to go foremost,
it never occurred to him to be discontented, while she
seemed to be satisfied. He was as happy as a clam.
His horses thrived, and his corn yielded famously; and
when his neighbors indignantly repeated their long
catalogue
of grievances, he quietly responded that King
George had never done
him
any harm. But no sooner
did that good lady take the patriot side, and incautiously
drop a rebellious expression in his hearing, than he
began to examine the case with different eyes. By
degrees, as the wrongs of his country were more clearly
developed, a radical change was operated in his feelings
and habits. He became a frequent attendant at public
meetings, employed an overseer to conduct his business,
and took to reading the newspapers; he lighted his pipe
more frequently than usual, and walked to and fro, for
hours, on the lawn before his door, with the air of a
person in great perplexity. His wife observed all this
with silent anxiety, for she was not in the habit of
crossing his humors, but rather of directing them
skilfully
to the accomplishment of her own purposes; and
after some days she ventured to ask her husband what
engaged his thoughts so busily. Mr. Lee, like a boy
who is about to ask a boon which he expects will not be
granted, had not courage to face the question when thus
suddenly presented; and hastily replying that he hardly
knew what he was thinking about, put on his hat and
sallied forth to his accustomed promenade. After
marching
about for several hours with unusual agility, he
returned with the air of a man who has made up his
mind, and sitting down by his good lady, said, I'll tell
you, Mrs. Lee, what I have been considering about.
I think that King George is neither an honest man nor
a gentleman; and if he sends any more of his soldiers
to murder their fellow-subjects in these colonies, I'll be
the first man to shoulder a musket against them. To
his surprise, his excellent better half not only applauded
this spirited resolution, but complimented his patriotism
in the most flattering terms.
As we design to write the history of the father only
as introductory to that of the son, we shall not ask the
reader to accompany the former through all his
campaigns
.
Suffice it to say, that he was a brave, though
not an active officer; and that after serving his country
faithfully during the whole war, and attaining the rank
of captain, he retired, when the struggle was over, to his
beloved retreat among the Blue mountains. Besides
some honorable scars, he brought back with him several
new propensities. He rose at day-break, and having
swallowed a mint-julep, sallied forth bareheaded, in his
slippers, and without his coat; and having cooled
himself
in the open air, repaired to his station in the
chimney-corner
.
This, which he called turning out at
reveill, he practised at all seasons. He had,
more-over
,
learned several military and political maxims,
which, as a soldier and a revolutionary patriot, he felt
bound to live up to. One of these was, that a captain
should command his own company, a proposition which
he failed not to repeat to Mrs. Lee, whenever he
suspected
her of intruding upon his authority; and another
referred to the indefeasible right of
pursuing
happiness
,
as laid down in the Declaration of Independence,
which guarantied to him, as he supposed, the privilege
of entertaining as much company as he pleased, and of
eating as many oysters, and drinking as much brandy,
as he found pleasant and palatable. His pipe became
his inseparable companion, and the management of all
E
his affairs devolved on his wife. He was a diligent
reader of the newspapers, and pored incessantly over
the numerous political tracts which issued from the
presses of that day. He became a great talker; and
described the various scenes of the war in which he had
been engaged, with a minuteness which nothing but
their intense interest could have rendered tolerable. Of
his own personal adventures, he spoke sparingly, and
with great modesty, though his merits had been great.
Once or twice only, he informed a confidential friend,
that he deserved to have been made a general for his
exploits, and would undoubtedly have attained that rank,
had it not been for his want of talents and education;
but he ventured such remarks with great caution, and
never until after dinner.
It will be readily imagined, that Mr. George Lee,
junior, was an apt pupil in the school of so meritorious
a parent. The heir of a large estate, he early learned
that he lived only to enjoy it, and to spend it like a
gentleman. The descendant of a revolutionary hero,
he felt it incumbent on him to support the dignity of his
family. Accustomed to see his father's table loaded
with a profusion of the bounties of nature, and
surrounded
by crowds of welcome guests, hospitality
became
,
in his eyes, the chief of the cardinal virtues. His
father, doating upon the beautiful boy, who was said to
be the exact image of himself, carried him with him,
not only in his daily walks and rides around his own
plantation, but to the numerous parties and carousals
upon which he was now a regular attendant. Before
he was twelve years old, this precious youth could follow
the hounds at full speed through the woods, with the
dexterity of a practised fox-hunter; at fourteen, he was
a member of a fishing-club, and an excellent judge of
cookery and Madeira; and at sixteen, when his worthy
progenitor was gathered to his fathers, the accomplished
heir took his place in society, qualified in all respects to
fill the void occasioned by this melancholy event.
To be briefGeorge Lee was a good fellow, a
thorough
sportsman, and a most hospitable man. His
purse, his horses, and his wine, were always at the
service of his friends. Too good-humored to make an
enemy, too generous to envy others, and too feeble of
intellect to lay any plan beyond the enjoyment of the
present moment, he had no desires which extended
farther
than the next meal, nor any anxieties which a
bumper of Madeira could not dispel. His mother had
long since abandoned the hopeless task of training his
mind to any serious pursuit, or any solid excellence,
because it was impossible to cultivate that which did not
exist. But he had affections, which were easily moulded,
and through these she obtained all that in such a case
was practicable: the entire management of his estate,
and the accomplishment of any temporary purpose on
which she set her heart.
It was in consequence of a plan early matured by this
politic lady, that George Lee attached himself to Virginia
Pendleton. The latter was an orphan, the niece, not of
Major Heyward, but of his wife. She was adopted by
them in her infancy, and as they had no children of
their own, became the idol of their hearts, and the
acknowledged heiress of Major Heyward's fortune
When Mrs. Heyward died, Virginia was quite young,
and Mrs. Lee supplied, to some extent, the place of a
mother to the orphan girl, by giving her advice from
time to time, and directing her inquisitive mind to proper
studies, and correct sources of information; and often
did she wish that she had found in her son a pupil of
equal docility and intelligence. It therefore very
naturally
occurred to her, that if George was deficient in
intellect, it was the more necessary that he should have
a highly-gifted wife, who could manage his affairs, and
by her talents and personal charms acquire a decided
influence over himself. For this office, Virginia was
eminently qualified; and to this important station, Mrs.
Lee had the kindness to devote her, even in her
childhood
.
They were thrown together continually; the
affectionate appellation of
cousin
was used between them,
and their intercourse was that of brother and sister.
Virginia, grateful for the kindness of Mrs. Lee, the full
value of whose friendship she had the discernment to
see, and the sensibility to feel, became sincerely attached
to Georgebut with an affection precisely similar to
that which she felt for his mother and Major Heyward.
They stood to her in the place of relatives. And such
also were the feelings of George Lee, until he was nearly
grown to manhood, when the judicious hints of his
mother, pointing out the eminent attractions of Virginia,
the suitableness of their ages, tastes, and tempers, and
the contiguity of their estates, opened his eyes to a new
idea, which, once indulged, remained for ever implanted
in his heart. Not that he, for a moment, entered into
the spirit of his mother's calculating policy; he was too
careless of wealth, too improvident, and too generous,
to form a sordid wish; but when the possibility of a
marriage with Virginia was suggested to his fancy, her
own matchless charms warmed in his heart a love as
fervent as it was disinterested.
Virginia discovered this passion, in the altered
manners
of her young friend, with unaffected regret, and
with a determination to discourage it by every means in
her power. She continued to treat him with the same
kindness and confidence which had always characterized
their intercourse; while she endeavored to withdraw
herself from his society, as much as was practicable,
without exciting observation. With Mrs. Lee, she was
more explicit; and when that lady, at first to feel her
way, and afterwards to advance a project which seemed
feasible, threw out repeated hints, which at length
became so broad as not to be misunderstood; she replied
to them with a frankness, an earnestness, and a spirit,
which convinced the female politician that she
understood
,
deplored, and disrelished, the whole plan.
But Mr. Lee was not so easily repulsed. He was not
sufficiently keen-sighted to discover the bearing of a
gentle hint; nor were his sensibilities delicate enough to
be wounded by a slight repulse. He remained true to
his first love, following the idol of his affections into
every company, besieging her at home, and urging his
suit with pressing importunity, whenever a favorable
opportunityor an unfavorable one, for he was not very
particularoccurred. More than once was his suit
kindly and respectfully, but decidedly, rejected. After
a repulse, George betook himself to his horses, his dogs,
E 2
his gun, and his wine, with unwonted assiduity. No
one discovered any evidence of despair in his voice or
look; his laugh was as loud as ever, and his song as
joyousbut the number of foxes that he took, and the
bottles that he cracked, after each refusal, was
marvellous
.
A few weeks, or at most a few months, brought
him back to Virginia's feet. Such was the state of
affairs, at the period which we have chosen for the
commencement of this history.
CHAPTER V.
It
was sunset when Major Heyward and his party
reached home. Never had Fennimore passed so
delightful a day. The hospitality and politeness of
his entertainment, had taught him to forget that he was
a stranger. Their free and joyous hilarity had excited
his feelings, and given a fresh impulse to his heart.
His conversational powers were naturally fine, and
were rendered peculiarly agreeable by a simplicity and
frankness peculiar to himself. But, under the influence
of a high flow of spirits, his manner acquired a more
than ordinary vivacity, his language became copious
and brilliant, and the rich stores of his mind began to
exhibit their exuberance. Two hours passed rapidly
away; the parties, pleased with each other, conversed
with that freedom which is the result of perfect confidence,
and with a degree of wit and animation, which showed
how highly they all enjoyed the intellectual repast. It
was one of those happy moments, which seldom occur,
when persons, pleased with each other, and surrounded
by propitious circumstances, are happy without effort,
and agreeable without design.
Major Heyward was in the habit of retiring early to
bed, and when his servant appeared to attend him to his
chamber, Mr. Fennimore desired an audience of a few
minutes, with so much earnestness, that he was invited
to accompany the worthy old man to his sleeping
apartment
.
Here they remained some time engaged in
business, and then all the parties separated for the night.
Mr. Fennimore, finding that it was still early, sat
down to write a letter to his friend Charles Wallace, a
young attorney in Philadelphia, in which the events of
the day were alluded to, and certain characters described,
in language which, the reader may well suppose, was
quite as sentimental as the occasion required. We
shall not copy this epistle, but will content ourselves
with treating the reader to one or two of the concluding
paragraphs.
So much for Virginia Pendleton, the belle of
the Blue Mountains, the fairest and brightest vision that
has ever warmed my fancy! How faint until now were
all my conceptions of female loveliness! How little did
I dream of that concentration of attractions, that
intensity
of excellence, that combination of charms, which
I have now witnessed! How many excellent qualities
have I this day seen combined in the character of this
extraordinary femaleexquisite beauty, superior
intelligence
,
elegant wit, and the utmost sweetness of
disposition
!
Of the other attributes of her mind and
heart, I am ignorant; but with respect to those that I
have enumerated, I cannot be mistaken.
If the reader will pardon us for the interruption, we
suggest that the last averment savors of what the
lawyers
call
surplusage
. It is certainly an unnecessary
averment; for how
could
a young gentleman be
mistaken
in such plain matters? We admire the argument
of a love-letter, or of any letter treating of the
mysteries
of this all-pervading passion. Let us proceed:
You will no doubt, now, take it into your wise head,
that I am in love, or, at least, that I am rapidly imbibing
the delightful, the dangerous poison. Let me assure
you seriously, that nothing is farther from my
intentions
.
I have already wooed a mistress, under whose
banner I am enlisted. Plighted to the service of my
country, with the path of fame bright before me, I may
not linger in the bowers of pleasure. Even Miss
Pendleton
has no charms, when weighed in the balance
against my duty. But why should I speak of her? I,
a penniless man, unknown to famea needy soldier,
depending on my sword, with an aged mother to
support
?
And she, the `observed of all observers,' the
darling of her friends, the heiress of a noble fortune!
It is painful to reflect on the disparity between us, yet
dangerous to think of her in any other light. * * * *
To-morrow morning, I must bid adieu to
Walnut-Hill
,
to Miss Pendleton, and to the generous-hearted
Major Heyward. When I left Philadelphia, to rejoin
the army now encamped in the wilderness bordering
on the Ohio, I was intrusted with dispatches for
General
Wayne. At my earnest request, I was permitted
to take this place in my route, and to halt one day, to
attend to my own personal affairs, but was admonished
at the same time, that as the letters committed to my
care were important, any further delay would not be
allowed. I have, therefore, no choice; and perhaps it is
well for me that I have none. Virginia Pendleton is
not a common woman, and it would be madness for me
to remain within the magic circle of her attractions.
At the very moment that Mr. Fennimore was inditing
these amorous and heroic sentiments, Miss
Pendleton
was seated at her writing-desk, penning a note to
her bosom friend, Mrs. Mountford, a young lady
recently married. The ideas of the fair writer ran off
in the following train:
I am sorry, my dear Caroline, that you were not
with us to-daywe had such a delightful party! You
cannot think how much I regretted your absence, nor
how much you lost by it. The weather was very
agreeable, and the scenery of the river-shore, and the
mountains, was never more beautiful than at this
moment
.
The arrangements were charming. I think I
never saw a Barbecue pass off so happily. There was
no shower, nor any disastrous accidentexcept the
upsetting of a canoe, by which nobody was hurt. Mrs.
Lee superintended the preparation of the dinner, with
her usual taste. General Armour had a new story for
the occasion; the Peytons had new bonnets, and we had
a new beau. The latter made quite a sensation among
the girls, and I have no doubt I shall have a dozen
morning visitors to-morrowfor he is staying with us.
Can you guess who it is? If you cannot, you must
remain in the dark, for I can give you little assistance.
He is a young officer, just dropped into our
neighborhood
,
from the moon, or from the frontier, or from some
other parts unknown. He is at our house, so that I
have the honor of entertaining him. He is not at all
handsome, though I think him clever.
I shall not be able, dear Caroline, to spend
to-morrow
evening with you, as I proposed, for my uncle
cannot accompany me, and you know I am unwilling
to leave him alone. Mr. Fennimore, our guest, will
remain, I suppose, some days with us, and although his
visit is entirely to my uncle, and on business, I must, as
in duty bound, make my appearance as lady of the
mansion, and do the honors to the best of my poor
ability. Mr. Fennimore has travelled a good deal, and
is quite intelligent; I think you would be pleased with
him.
Do come and dine with me to-morrowyou and
Mr. B. If you are still determined on taking that
dreadful journey over the mountains, it may be useful
to you to see Mr. Fennimore, who is just from that
country, and can tell you all about it. He is
remarkably
agreeable in conversation: I am very sure you will
like him.
Having sealed this note, Virginia retired to repose,
and was soon wrapped in that calm forgetfulness which
attends the slumbers of the young and innocent. About
midnight she was awakened by the terrific cry of
fire! Springing to the floor, she hastily threw a
cloak around her, and rushed to the chamber-door; but
as she opened it, a thick volume of smoke burst in, and
she beheld with affright a sheet of flame enveloping the
whole stair-case. Retreat in that direction was
impossible
.
She had the presence of mind to close the door,
and recollecting that the roof of a piazza extended
under her window, she determined to make her escape
that way. But here an object met her view, more
terrific
than the devouring element: the shoulders and head
of a man of most hideous appearance, occupied the
window to which she was approaching. The face was
larger than common, and, to her excited imagination,
seemed of superhuman dimensions. The complexion
was sanguine, and its redness heightened by the glare
of the fire; the features were harsh and savage; a
beard of several weeks' growth covered the lower part of
the face, while the uncovered head displayed an immense
mass of tangled coarse red hair. The malignant eye that
scowled upon her, was full of savage ferocity; and a
demoniac laugh which distended the mouth of this
human monster, conveyed to the affrighted girl a
sensation
of horror, such as she had never before
experienced
.
A single glance told her that the apparition was
not imaginary, that the form was that of a stranger,
and that the purpose of his visit was sinister. But
Virginia
was of an heroic mould; she neither screamed nor
fainted; but, summoning all her resolution, turned
towards a window in the opposite direction, and was
retreating, when Fennimore entered the chamber, having
clambered up the blazing stair-case at the risk of his
life.
Fly, fly! Miss Pendleton! he exclaimed as he
caught her hands, and drew her towards the same
window
at which she had seen the object of her terror.
Oh, not there! not there! she cried; stop, for
mercy's sake, we shall all be murdered!
Fennimore, attributing her incoherent expressions to
an excess of terror caused by the fire, delayed not; but
catching her up in his arms, proceeded towards the
window.
Virginia uttered a piercing shriek, and struggled to
release herself.
Pardon me, said Fennimoreexcuse my
rudeness
,
as he threw up the window, and passed through
it with his lovely burthen. In a moment he stood on
the roof of the piazza.
See there! screamed Virginia, as her eye caught a
glimpse of the figure of a man stealing behind a distant
chimney. Oh fly, Mr. Fennimore! hasten from this
dreadful spot.
Fennimore involuntarily turned his head in the
direction
indicated, and saw a man leaning against the
chimney. He looked again, and the figure had
disappeared
.
The servants, who were filled with consternation, and
crowded round the blazing pile, running to and fro
without order, or definite purpose, now beheld them, and
hastened to their assistance. One of the stoutest
negroes
mounting on a table under the eaves of the low
roof, was enabled to receive his young mistress in his
arms, while Fennimore leaped nimbly to the ground.
No sooner was Virginia in safety than she looked
round for her uncle, and not perceiving him in the
crowd that pressed round to congratulate her on her
escape, eagerly inquired for him. The negroes,
habitually
indolent, timid, and thoughtless, stood gazing in
terror on the conflagration, without thinking on the
possibility
of extinguishing the flames, or of rescuing either
life or property. But they loved their master, and when
his name was mentioned, made a general movement
towards
his apartment. In a moment the voice of
Fennimore
was heard, like that of one accustomed to
command
,
leading and directing them. The passive blacks,
used to implicit obedience, followed him with alacrity.
But it was all in vain. The fire seemed to have
originated
in Major Heyward's chamber, and the flames
were bursting from every window. Fennimore burst
open a door and rushed in, but was speedily driven out
by a volume of smoke and flame. Follow me, he
exclaimed impatiently to the blacks; rush in, and save
your master! and again he entered the apartment with
some of the most intrepid of the negroes. Their
efforts were herculean. Several times they had nearly
reached the bed, and as often were driven back by the
flames; and the negroes at last returned, dragging out
Mr. Fennimore, who was struck down by a falling
rafter. Exposure to the cool air revived him instantly,
and he returned with desperate courage to the room,
exclaiming, Follow me! in there! in! my brave boys!
It was a forlorn hope; but the effort was gigantic. The
negroes, attached to their master, and excited by the
heroic bearing of their young leader, now worked as
if in their native element. The side of the house,
which was of frame, was torn away, and in a few
minutes
F
the lifeless body of Major Heyward was dragged
out of the ruins.
By this time the whole pile was in flames. There
was no longer any occasion for exertions, except in
removing the furniture from some of the apartments.
The neighbors, who began to arrive, and the domestics,
stood round in silence. Virginia hung in mute agony
over the body of Major Heyward, who had been to her
more than a father. Nor was she alone in her sorrow.
Though none of those around her were possessed of
sensibilities as keen as her own, or had the same
personal
cause for grief, yet the respect and affection
entertained
by all for the worthy old man, and the awful
manner of his death, caused universal sorrow. At
length the flames began to sink; Virginia was torn
almost by force from the spot, and carried to the house
of her friend Mrs. Mountford; the neighbors dispersed;
darkness and silence settled over the spot, and a heap
of smoking ruins occupied the place which was so lately
the seat of hospitality and cheerfulness.
CHAPTER VI.
The
whole neighborhood assembled at the funeral of
Major Heyward, and it was a melancholy sight to
behold the same individuals, who but two days before
had mingled together on a festive occasion, now
collected
to pay the last sad duties to one of the most
conspicuous
of the number. The feelings excited by this
reflection, were rendered the more vivid, by the awful
nature of the catastrophe which had occurred; and as
the sad procession moved silently away to the family
burial-place, an uninterrupted silence pervaded the
company
.
The deceased had been universally loved and
respected. His age, his wealth, and his standing in
society, had given him an influence over those around
him, which had been honestly and kindly exercised, and
although he held no official station, it was felt that his
decease was a public loss. Another must inherit his
wealth, and sway its influence; but would his
conciliatory
spirit descend to his heir, and his virtues be
practised
by the inheritor of his estate? Such were the
mingled sensations of those who followed the remains
of this excellent man to their last earthly receptacle.
But that intensity of feeling, which, on the occurrence
of an unexpected and strikingly melancholy event,
absorbs for a while all other subjects, and employs every
faculty of the mind, is of brief continuance. The
practice
observed at military funerals, of marching to the
grave with solemn music, and returning from it with
cheerful, inspiring notes, is natural, and beautifully
expressive of human character; for it is thus that the
heart of man throws off the burthen of sorrow, and
though bowed low for the moment, regains its
cheerfulness
,
as the flower, weighed down by the morning dew,
erects itself as the sun exhales the incumbent moisture.
As the mourners retired from the grave, the silence
which had prevailed among them began to be broken, and
curiosity, which had heretofore been suppressed by grief
and astonishment, became audible. A thousand
surmises
and reports, touching the fatal accident, were
repeated and canvassed. Every one had his own
version
of the catastrophe, and its attendant circumstances.
Have you heard the particulars? inquired an old
lady, in a tremulous tone, and conveying the remainder
of the inquiry by a mysterious shake of the head.
The person addressed applied her handkerchief to her
eyes, and only ejaculated the words, too shocking!
One hardly knows what to believe, there are so
many stories, said an old maid.
I am told, said a gentleman, that our lamented
friend has lately been in the habit of reading in bed, and
it is supposed, that, having received some letters, which
he had not had time to examine sooner, he had caused
a light to be placed by his bed-side
All a mistake, cried colonel Antler, no man
of sense ever went to bed to read letters; my worthy
friend rose at day-break, and retired early to his pillow
for repose.
He was a man of plethoric habit, said a
consumptive
gentleman, who now intruded his ghostly form
between
the last two speakers, very plethoricand you
know, gentlemen, that such persons hold their lives by
a very uncertain tenure. Your full-fed, lusty,
corpulent
men, are short-lived at best, and subject to very
sudden attacks. There is very little doubt that this was
a case of apoplexy, and that, in his struggles, a
candle
,
that happened to be within reach, was thrown
over
That is all surmise, said another speaker.
Mere surmise, rejoined yet another; the truth
seems to be, that when Major Heyward was last seen
by his servants, he was sitting at a table covered
with papers, in his arm chair, with his spectacles
on
I am sure that you must be misinformed, cried a
lady, for Mrs. Lee, who is very intimate with the
family, assured me that he had gone to bed fully two
hours before the alarm took place.
I spoke to the Major's body-servant, this morning,
said colonel Antler.
Oh! did you?
Then you know all about it!
Major Heyward, and Mr. Fennimore, the young
gentleman who was on a visit there, had some private
business, and retired to the Major's chamber, after
tea
There! cried a lady, that is just what I heard.
The business was of a very mysterious character, was
it not, colonel.
I cannot say as to that.
F 2
But did you not hear that both the gentlemen
became
very much irritated, and got to such high words
that Virginia Pendleton, becoming very much alarmed,
rushed into the room just as Major Heyward ordered
the young man to leave his house instantly.
No, madam, I did not hear that; and I am very
certain that Major Heyward never ordered a stranger to
leave his house in the night.
But, my dear sir, if he suspected the stranger of a
design to rob and murder him?
That, indeed, would alter the case.
Well, I assure you, sir, I had it from a lady who
heard it from a particular friend of the Walnut-Hill
family
,
that when this Mr. Fennimore arrived, Major
Heyward
received him with great coldness, and was very
unwilling to permit him to stay all night.
Yet he introduced him to us the next day as his
friend.
That
was very singular, said the old maid.
An act of wonderful imprudence in our benevolent
friend who is gone, said the consumptive gentleman.
It is quite mysterious, I declare, continued the
lady, but I am sure I cannot be mistakenMajor
Heyward and Miss Pendleton were sitting at tea, in the
front piazza, when the stranger rode up: `Is your
name Heyward?' said he. `That is my name,' said the
Major. `I have some business with you,' said the
stranger
.
`We will talk of business when I have nothing
else to doyou must call again,'replied the Major.
I heard it a little differently, interrupted another
ladyMajor Heyward was walking on the lawn, and
Miss Pendleton was sitting in the piazza, talking with
George Lee, (you know they are to be married soon,)
when the stranger rode up, and inquired where Major
Heyward lived; the old gentleman replied, `That is the
house, and I am the man;' on which the stranger
remarked, `Not a bad-looking house, and quite a
pleasant
landlord;I believe I'll stay all night.'
The impudent rascal! exclaimed the consumptive
gentleman.
He has a forward look, responded the old maid.
I am sure
you
are mistaken, said one of the
former
speakers; for Mr. Lee does not go there now;
there is quite a serious coolness between the families.
Dear me, cousin! I'm sure you are altogether
wrong thereif you had seen them at the barbecue, you
would not have said
that
. Virginia refused to dance
with any one else; she refused several others, but
danced with him as soon as he asked her.
Straws show how the wind blows.
I believe you are right there; there has always
been a strong attachment between them.
Say rather a powerful attraction between
Walnut-Hill
and Locust Grove. The estates are large, and we
all know what an excellent manager Mrs. Lee is.
Did you not hear it surmised that Major Heyward
has latterly entertained different views for Virginia, and
that Mr. Fennimore is the son of a wealthy merchant in
Philadelphia, and came by express invitation to see Miss
Pendleton?
La! no!
Yes, indeed, it is more than suspected.
Well, who would have thought it?
Then it was to marry Miss Pendleton, and not to
murder and rob the family, that this young gentleman
came? said Colonel Antler.
OhI had forgotten that. I am sure that this
Fennimore is nothing more nor less than an incendiary
for I am told that Virginia, who was in a high fever,
and delirious all the next day, continually exclaimed,
`Take away that dreadful man! protect me from that
horrid wretch! He has murdered my unclehe would
destroy us all!' and similar expressions.
Very strange, that! she certainly must know
something
.
The evidence of a young lady in a state of
delirium
,
is quite conclusive, remarked Colonel Antler,
drily.
It is certainly a curious fact, said one of the
gentlemen
,
that this Mr. Fennimore has entirely
disappeared
since the fire, and that no one can give any
account of him.
Colonel Antler seemed puzzled, while the rest of the
company united in considering this circumstance as one
of a most suspicious character.
The young man is a stranger to me, said the
colonel
;
he may be a terrible fellow, for any thing I know
but at the same time, I don't believe a word of it.
He looks like a gentleman, and no one ever heard of a
gentleman committing arson.
Then you do not believe that he fired the house
purposely?
Believe it! no: why should I believe it? what
object could the young man have?
His purpose undoubtedly was to run off with
Virginia
.
Incendiaries often set fire to houses, in order to
plunder them during the confusion. They say that as
soon as the alarm was given he rushed into Virginia's
apartment, caught her in his arms, and although she
screamed dreadfully, attempted to carry her off.
And what prevented him?
They say he forced her through a window, and
succeeded in reaching the roof of the piazza, where one
of his confederates was waiting to assist him in his
villanous
design, when the screams of Virginia drew the
negroes to her relief, and they rescued her.
Poor Virginia, screaming bloody murder all the
while, continued the consumptive gentleman.
Poor Virginia! echoed all the ladies.
I am told, Colonel Antler, that no will can be
found.
All exertions to discover any trace of a will, have,
unhappily, been fruitless. Every gentleman who has
been on such terms of intimacy with Major Heyward,
as to render it likely that a document of that kind
might have been deposited with him, has been applied to
in vain. Mr. R., who has been his legal adviser for
many years, declares that a will was executed long
since, which he is sure remained in the possession of our
lamented friend, but declines giving any information as
to the contents.
Then Miss Pendleton will not be a great fortune,
after all.
Oh dear, what a pity!
Such a belle as she was! exclaimed one of the old
maids; I wonder if she will be as much admired
now.
Poor cousin Virginia!
Dear Virginia! how I feel for her! But you know,
Colonel, she had no right to expect any thing else. She
is not related to the Heywards, and there are a number
of heirs at law.
She
had
a right, madam! replied Colonel Antler,
warmly; if not related to Major Heyward, she is niece
to the late Mrs. Heyward, and their adopted daughter.
Major Heyward's intention of leaving his whole fortune
to her, has been declared so frequently, and is so well
understood, that no man of honor will dispute her
claim.
There will be claimants, I suppose, nevertheless.
Then they ought all to be
Speak lower, Colonel: there are some of them
within hearing.
I care not who hears me. The girl was raised
under Heyward's roof, and is entitled to the estate; and
no true son of the Old Dominion would take it from
her.
The conversation was here interrupted by the
approach
of Mrs. Lee's carriage, containing that lady and
the unhappy Virginia. As the beautiful mourner passed
slowly along, a common feeling of sympathy for the
sudden and melancholy stroke of fortune, which had in
a single moment blighted her brilliant prospects, and
reduced her to sorrow and dependence, pervaded the
whole party; and dropping off, one by one, they
repaired silently to their respective dwellings.
CHAPTER VII.
On
the following morning, at an early hour, Mrs.
Lee visited the distressed Virginia, who was now more
composed; and the worthy lady successfully exerted
her talents in endeavoring to calm the mind, and fortify
the courage, of her young friend. Although artful and
politic, she was really a benevolent woman, in all cases
where the interests of others did not interfere with her
own; and being sincerely attached to Virginia, she now
devoted herself assiduously to the task of administering
comfort to the mourner. Her common sense, her
practical
business habits, and that delicate perception of
propriety
in matters of feeling, which all women possess in a
greater or less degree, enabled her to do this with much
effect; and, after leading Miss Pendleton into the
garden
,
where they could converse without interruption,
she began to speak in a kind and rational manner of
that young lady's prospects, and, carefully avoiding
those topics which would be merely calculated to
awaken sensibility, soon engaged her in earnest
consultation
.
Virginia acknowledged that Major Heyward had
more than once assured her, that, on his death, she
would inherit his estate, but he had never mentioned his
will in her presence, nor did she know whether he had
ever executed such an instrument.
On that subject, said Mrs. Lee, my own
information
is more accurate. Knowing the determination of
my excellent friend, to make you the sole heiress of his
property, I repeatedly hinted to him the necessity of
making a will, and the propriety of performing this duty
without delay, and in the most careful manner. He
afterwards informed me that it was duly executed. I
have no doubt, my dear Virginia, that my evidence,
with that of the gentleman who wrote the will, and of
the witnesses to its execution, will restore you to your
rights.
Do not speak of that, replied Virginia firmly;
owing every thing, as I do, to the benevolence of my
uncle, I should be most ungrateful, to appear in a court
of justice, engaged in a contest with his legal heirs.
My dear Virginia, how often have I reminded you,
that feeling is a deceitful guide in the serious concerns
of life! You are no longer a young girl, protected by
a fond guardian, and sporting in the beams of
affluence
,
without any other care than that of imparting to
others a share of the happiness which you enjoyed
yourself. You are now a woman, your own mistress,
having duties to perform, and rights to assert; and
you cannot, my dear, testify your respect for the
memory
of Major Heyward more suitably, than by insisting
upon the exact execution of his own views in relation
to his estate. Besides, are you aware who your opponents
would be?
Indeed, I do not know exactlymy uncle had no
very near relations.
He had not, but a great many who are very distant;
and the embers will hardly be cold on his ruined
hearth-stone
,
before a number of claimants will be fiercely
engaged in litigation for this noble estate.
Virginia melted to tears. Contending emotions of
pride, and affection for the dead, swelled her heart. A
number of affecting associations arose in her memory,
and the thought that the spot which had so long
been the abode of peace, happiness, and hospitality, was
about to become the scene of bitter contention, filled her
mind with sorrow. Dear Mrs. Lee! she exclaimed,
I shall never be a party to so disgraceful a contest.
Oh, no! never, never!
I venerate your affection for the memory of Major
Heyward, replied her friend, calmly: it is natural,
and perfectly right. But, my dear, what obligations do
you owe to his relations?
None, particularly. They have always treated me
with respect and cordiality.
Except in a few instances, urged the politic Mrs.
Lee, in an insinuating manner. Openly they could
not do otherwise, for the very stones would have cried
out, at the slightest incivility to the dear girl that
we all loved and admired so much. Besides, you were
the presumptive heiress of a fine estate, and, as mistress
of your uncle's mansion, dispensed its hospitalities.
But you forget that you have sometimes been charged
with holding your head higher than became you, and
with having used some address in procuring the
execution
of this very will. Even I have been accused of
interested motives in my exertions on your behalf.
Virginia turned pale with emotion, and that spirit,
which, on some occasions animated her heart, and gave
a surprising degree of decision and vigor to the
conceptions
of her mind, flashed for a moment in her eye. But
G
the sensibility of a delicate mind overcame all other
feelings. Unconscious of a sordid motive, she shrunk
with indescribable repugnance from the thought of
encountering a suspicion of that description, and begged
Mrs. Lee to change the subject.
You have now, said she, given the strongest
reason
why I should not set up any claim to this property.
The bare idea of having ever been suspected of
entertaining
the interested views at which you hint, is too
shocking. Not for worlds, would I do an act, or give
the sanction of my name to any proceeding, which
might bring the disinterestedness of my conduct into
question, or throw the slightest shade upon the purity
of my affection for my dear uncle. Let his relatives
take the estate. It will be happiness enough for me, to
be grateful for his goodness, and to love his memory.
Mrs. Lee knew well the decision of her young friend's
character, and, aware of her inflexibility on points which
involved principle, or touched her feelings of delicacy,
determined, like an able politician, to change her mode
of attack, and to resort to arguments which she had
before resolved studiously to conceal. And the manner
in which she opened her batteries anew, was after the
following fashion:
There are two claimants to this property, of whose
pretensions you are probably not aware, and it is right
that you should be informed in relation to them. The
first of these is, my son George.
Indeed! I heartily wish my cousin George success.
Your wishes, my dear, are not his own. He has not
the slightest disposition, or the most remote intention, to
set up any claim, unless it may become necessary for
your interest. With the exception of one person, whom
I will presently name, my son is undoubtedly the
nearest
relative of our deceased friend. There are several
others, however, who claim to stand in the same degree
of consanguinity. Now, what I would suggest is, that
as my son has never for a moment thought of placing
his claim in competition with yours, you might, should
your own right to the property be thought doubtful, or
should you persist in refusing to assert it, avail yourself
of his. Understand me, my deardo not get impatient
all that I propose is the use of his name, agency, and
friendship, to procure that which is undoubtedly your
own; and when the intimacy between our families is
consideredwhen you recollect that from infancy you
have shared my affection with him, there can be no
impropriety in his assuming towards you the place of a
brother. I have surely some claim, my dear Virginia,
to the privilege of discharging towards you the duties
of a mother; and if George can never call you by a
dearer title, you may, you ought, to give him the
confidence
and affection of a sister. Confide to us the
management
of your affairs, and rest assured that your
name shall never be used in a manner that shall
implicate
your delicacy.
Virginia was affected and embarrassed. There was
a mixture of policy, and of genuine affection, in the
whole conversation of her friend, so characteristic of the
woman, that it touched while it perplexed her. But she
remained firm to her purpose, and decidedly, though
with delicacy and feeling, declined the proposal. Mrs.
Lee was puzzled, but not defeated. She now artfully
alluded to the magnitude of the estate, and to the almost
unbounded influence which the possession of great
wealth would give to a young lady, who was so
eminently
endowed with beauty, intellect, and
accomplishments
,
as her young friend. Failing in all her appeals
to the affections and the ambition of our heroine, she
now determined to awaken, if possible, her resentment.
The other name, which I have withheld out of
respect for your feelings, is that of this Mr. Fennimore.
Virginia turned upon her friend a mingled look of
surprise and curiosity, but made no reply.
He is more nearly related to the late Major
Heyward
,
than either of the other would-be heirs; supposing
it to be possible for him to establish his identity with the
person whose name he bears, which I suspect is rather
doubtful.
Can you suppose it possible, that Mr. Fennimore
would be guilty of an imposture?
I suppose nothing, my dear; the law will require
him to prove that he is really the person he pretends to
be; and this, I imagine, will not be in his power. It is
hinted, moreover, that being aware of the disposition
which your uncle had made of his property, the object
of his visit at Walnut-Hill was to induce Major
Heyward
to revoke his will, and that, failing in this, he has
possessed himself of that instrument, by means, of which
we have all witnessed the dreadful effects.
Miss Pendleton became deadly pale, on hearing this
insinuation. The allusion to the melancholy event,
which had deprived her of a home and a protector,
was in itself sufficiently distressing; but the foul
accusation
against the handsome stranger, whose image was
associated in her mind with the recollection of a few of
the most happy hours of her life, shocked and sickened
her heart. Determined to listen no longer to what she
could not consider as any thing but slander, unwilling
to offend one whose schemes in relation to herself had
been mingled with a long series of valuable kindnesses,
and dispirited by the afflicting troubles which seemed to
thicken in her path, and to add new embarrassments to
her situation, she now enjoined her friend to change the
subject, in tones of such pathetic supplication, as left
no room for denial. They returned to the house, and
Mrs. Lee soon after took her leave.
To prevent further importunity on the subject which
had so greatly distressed her feelings, Miss Pendleton
addressed a note to Mrs. Lee on the following morning,
informing that lady of her intention to accompany her
friends, the Mountfords, in their proposed journey to
Kentucky, to which country they were about to remove,
and where Virginia had an uncle, who had more than
once invited her to accept a home under his roof.
G 2
CHAPTER VIII.
A few
weeks subsequent to the transactions narrated
in the last chapter, a heavy travelling-carriage was seen
slowly winding its way among the mountains of the
Allegheny chain, drawn by a pair of tall horses, whose
fine eyes and muscular limbs bore testimony, to an
experienced observer, of excellent blood and gentle
breeding, but who now tottered along, galled, raw-boned,
and dispirited, from the effects of a long journey. The
heavily-laden vehicle bore also incontestible marks of
rough usage, and resembled, in its appearance, a noble
ship, which, having been dismantled in a storm, is
brought with difficulty into port. It had once been both
strong and costly, and was, in truth, one of the most
elegant of those cumbrous machines which were used
by such of our ancestors as were sufficiently wealthy
to indulge in such luxuries; bearing a coat-of-arms
upon its panels, and being amply decorated in the
patrician taste of that day.
A journey over the Allegheny mountains, then
inhabited
only at distant intervals, and whose best roads were
mere bridle-paths, beaten by the feet of pack-horses, and
occasionally travelled with difficulty by wagons carrying
merchandise, had left to the shattered coach but few
vestiges of its former splendor. The tongue, which had
been broken, was replaced by the green stem of a young
tree, hastily hewed out of the forest for the purpose; a
dislocation of one of the springs, had been
remedied
by passing a long stout pole underneath the body
of the carriage; and a shattered axletree, which had
been spliced repeatedly, bent and creaked under its load,
as if every revolution of the wheels would be the last.
In matters of less moment, the havoc had been even
greater. The curtains, by frequent and rather violent
collision with the overhanging branches of the forest,
had been rent and perforated in many places, and the
straps within which they were usually furled, having
been torn away, they now floated in the breeze in
tattered fragments, or flapped against the sides of the
carriage, like the sails of a vessel in a calm; while a
bough had occasionally penetrated so far as to tear
away the velvet lining and its gaudy fringe.
Two ladies, both of whom were young, and a female
negro servant, occupied this weatherbeaten conveyance;
accompanied, as every experienced reader will readily
imagine, by a voluminous store of trunks, band-boxes,
baskets, bags, and bundles. The husband of one of
these ladies, a plain, gentlemanly-looking man, of
five-and-twenty
years of age, rode in advance of the
cavalcade
,
on horseback, encumbered with no other
appendage
than a brace of large pistols, suspended across his
saddle in a pair of holsters.
Then came a train of wagons, some drawn by horses,
and others by oxen, carrying household furniture,
farming
implements, and provisions. Behind these, a drove
of horses and cattle, stretched along the mountain-path,
strolled lazily forward, halting frequently to drink at the
clear rivulets which crossed the road, or straying off to
graze, wherever an inviting spot of green offered a few
refreshing mouthfuls of herbage to the wearied animals.
Mingled with the cavalcade, or lagging in its rear, was
a large company of negro servants, men, women, and
children, of every age, from helpless infancy to hoary
decrepitude; whistling and singing and laughing as they
went, inhaling with joy the mountain air, and
luxuriating
in the happy exchange of daily labor for the lighter
toils of the road.
Such were the retinue and appearance of a wealthy
planter from Virginia, who was emigrating, with all his
family and movable property, to the newly settled wilds
of Kentucky; and who bore no small resemblance to
some ancient patriarch, travelling at the head of his
dependants and herds, in search of wider plains and
fresher pastures than were afforded in the land of his
fathers. Mr. and Mrs. Mountford, and the unfortunate
Miss Pendleton, were the principal persons of the party
which we have attempted to describe, and whose
adventures
will occupy the remainder of this chapter.
They had passed nearly all the ridges of those
formidable
mountains, and were now looking eagerly forward
towards the land of promise, and imagining every cliff
that rose before them to be the last. The day was
drawing
to a close, when they reached the summit of one of
those numerous ridges which compose the Allegheny
chain, and halted for a few moments to rest the animals,
who were panting and wearied with the toilsome ascent.
Looking forward, they beheld before them a deep valley,
bounded on the opposite side by a range of mountains
as steep and as high as the one on whose crest they
were now reposing. Its sides were composed of a series
of perpendicular precipices of solid rock, clothed with
stinted pines, laurel, and other evergreens, and which, at
this distance, seemed to oppose an impassable barrier to
the farther advance of the travellers. On more minute
examination, parts of the road could be seen winding
along the edge of the cliffs, and surmounting the ascent
by a variety of sharp angles. A troop of pack-horses,
with their large panniers, were seen descending by this
path, at a distance so great as to render it barely
possible
to distinguish their forms, and ascertain their
charactersometimes stretched in an extended line
along the summits of the elevated parapets of rock, then
disappearing behind a projecting cliff, or a copse of
evergreen, and again turning an abrupt angle, as if
counter-marching to retrace their footsteps. The sun
was now sinking behind the western hills, and though
still visible to our travellers, no longer shone upon the
eastern exposure of the mountain which they were
contemplating
a
circumstance which gave a still more
shadowy appearance to the descending troop, whose
regular array of slow-moving figures, impressed upon
the perpendicular sides of the cliffs, resembled the airy
creations of a magic lantern, rather than the forms of
living beings. Now they were seen traversing the
extreme
verge of some bold promontory, where the
sun-beams
flashed from the shining harness, and afforded a
momentary
disclosure of a variety of different colors, which
again were blended into one dark mass, as the cavalcade
passed on into the deeper shades of the mountain-glens.
As they gazed, the silence was agreeably broken by the
inspiring notes of the bugle, with which the drivers
cheered their lonesome way, and whose sprightly sounds,
echoed from hill to hill, sometimes faintly heard, and
sometimes bursting upon the ear in full chorus, gave a
tinge of wild romance to the scene.
From the contemplation of this prospect, their
attention was drawn to the western side of the mountain
on whose summit they stood, and whose declivities they
were about to descend. Looking downward, they
saw from their dizzy height a series of precipices, with
bald sides, and turreted and spiral crests, terminating
in a dark valley, which seemed to be almost directly
below their feet, although the distance was so great as
to render it impossible to distinguish objects in the deep
abyss. Here, as on the opposite side of the valley, the
path wound from cliff to cliff, and from one natural
terrace to another, like the angles of a winding
stair-case
;
but little of it was visible from the spot occupied
by our travellers. In this direction the sound of voices
was heard ascending, and approaching nearer and
nearer; and presently a large drove of cattle, conducted
by several men, was seen winding along the base of the
precipice on which the party stood, at a short distance
from them, and where the terrace traversed by the road
widened into a plain surface containing several acres.
Here a sudden terror seized the cattle. The foremost
of the animals halted and began to smell the ground
with manifestations of violent agitation, and then uttered
a low terrific yell. At this signal the whole herd, which
had been loitering drowsily along, urged slowly forward
by the voices of the drovers, rushed madly towards the
spot, bellowing with every appearance of rage and
affright. In vain the drivers attempted to force them
onward. The largest and fiercest of the herd
surrounded
the place where the first had halted, roaring,
pawing the ground, and driving their horns into the earth,
while the others approached and retreated, bellowing in
concert as if suddenly possessed by a legion of demons.
Foaming at the mouth, their eyes gleaming with fury,
and all their muscles strained into action, they seemed a
different race from the quiet, inoffensive animals, who
but a few minutes before had been seen lazily toiling up
the mountain-path. Those who were intimately
acquainted
with their habits at once pronounced that blood
had recently been spilt in the road. With the assistance
of Mr. Mountford's negroes, the alarmed herd was at
length driven forward, but not until one of the drovers,
in leaping his horse over a log, at some distance from
the road, discovered the corpse of a man concealed
behind it, and partly covered with leaves. An
exclamation
of surprise and horror announced this discovery,
and drew the other drovers to the spot, where Mr.
Mountford soon joined them. The body, which was
that of a young gentleman, was marked with several
wounds, which left little doubt that a murder had been
committed. However men may have been accustomed
to danger, or to scenes of violence, there is something in
the crime of murder which never fails to alarm and
shock them. Even where the injured party is a
stranger
,
and no particular circumstances occur, to awaken
special sympathy for him, or for those who may survive
to mourn his fate, the dreadful act itself, stripped of all
adventitious horrors, strikes a chill into the heart.
When such a scene is presented in the solitary wild,
where the gloom of the forest and the silence of the
desert are all around, and the quick breathing of the
terrified
spectator is whispered back by the woodland echo,
a deeper shade of solemnity is thrown about the
melancholy
catastrophe. The busy crowds, the cares and
levities
of life, are not there, to call away the heart from the
indulgence of natural emotions; it has leisure to
contemplate
undisturbed the cold image of death, and to reflect
on the atrocities of man. Fancy spreads her wings,
and looks abroad in search of the perpetrator and the
motive of the crime, and the absence of every trace which
might lead to discovery or explanation, involves the
dark transaction in the shadows of mystery. The
deceased seems to have been struck by some invisible
hand, and a similar blow may be impending over the
spectator, on whom the eye of the homicide may even
now rest, as he meditates some new violence in the
concealment
of an adjacent thicket, or the gloom of a
neighboring cavern.
Such were the meditations of some of the party who
were collected around the body of the murdered
stranger
.
A consultation was immediately held, as to the
course which ought to be pursued, when it was arranged
that a party should remain with the corpse, while an
express was sent to the nearest settlement to apprize
the legal authorities of the outrage. Both these duties
were cheerfully undertaken by the drovers, with the
assistance of Mr. Mountford's servants. The latter
gentleman
resumed his journey, and on reaching the bosom
of the valley, and learning that his road still lay through
an uninhabited wilderness for many miles, determined
to encamp here for the night. It was an inviting spot.
Though surrounded by mountains as savage and sterile
as the imagination can well conceive, the glen in which
the party rested was beautiful and fertile. The rich soil
was covered with a luxuriant growth of forest trees and
shrubbery. The sun-beams, which during the day had
been reflected from the bare rocks and silicious sands
of the mountain, afflicting the eye-sight of the travellers
by their intense brilliancy, or overcoming them with
excessive heat, were now intercepted by the tall
summits
of the ridges lying towards the west. The foliage
was fresh and green, and a delightful coolness pervaded
the atmosphere. A wide clear rivulet, meandering
through the valley, imparted an agreeable moisture to
the air, and invited the thirsty herds to its brink, while
it afforded more than one luxury and convenience to the
travellers. By the margin of the stream, on a spot
trodden hard by the feet of successive travellers, who
had been accustomed to encamp here, and covered with
a short green sward, the cavalcade of carriers had
halted, and were unlading their pack-horses; and Mr.
Mountford, passing on, chose a similar place on the
farther
side of the rivulet. The arrangements for
encamping
were soon made. Two large tents were taken from
the wagons and pitched for the accommodation of Miss
Pendleton and her friends, on a plain of table-land near
the brink of the water-course. In the rear of these,
smaller tents, composed of coarser materials, were
arranged for the sable troop of dependants. A large
H
fire was kindled upon the ground, and the servants
began to prepare a substantial meal for the hungry
party.
CHAPTER IX.
Having
seen the tents pitched, the horses and cattle
turned out to graze, and every necessary arrangement
made for spending the night in as much comfort as
circumstances would admit, Mr. Mountford, invited by
the refreshing coolness of the evening, and the beauty of
the scenery, proposed to the ladies a stroll upon the bank
of the stream. They wandered slowly along, following
its meanders for a short time, until its serpentine course
brought them nearly opposite to the point from which
they had set out; and they found themselves on a
projecting
point which overlooked the pack-horse camp, and
placed them within a few yards of its noisy inmates,
from whom they were concealed by a clump of
underbrush
.
The horses had been unharnessed, and were
now grazing at large; the packs of merchandise which
formed their lading, were piled up together, and covered
with canvas. The men had thrown themselves lazily
on the grass, except two or three, who were wrestling
and playing with a degree of hilarity which showed how
little they were affected by the toils of the journey. At
this moment the party was joined by a horseman, who
addressed them with the frankness of an acquaintance,
though he was obviously a stranger to them all. He was
a young man, dressed in a hunting-shirt, carrying a
rifle on his shoulder, and having all the equipments of
a western hunter. His limbs were as stout, and his face
as sun-burnt, as those of the rough men around him,
but neither his appearance nor carriage indicated a
person
accustomed to coarse labor. He had the plainness
of speech and manner which showed that his breeding
had not been in the polished circle, mingled with the
freedom and ease of one accustomed to hunting and
martial exercises. He threw himself from his horse,
leaving the bridle dangling on the neck of the animal,
who quietly awaited his pleasure, and seated himself
among the carriers with the air of one who felt that he
was welcome, or who cared but little whether he was
welcome or not. His dress, though coarse and soiled,
was neatly fitted, and adapted to show off his person to
the best advantage, and all his appendages were those
of a young man who had some pride in his appearance.
His features, though not handsome, were lively and
intelligent; indicating a cheerful disposition, a good
opinion of his fellow-men, and an equally good opinion
of himself, arising, no doubt, out of his republican
principles
,
which would not allow him to place himself below
the level of others. There was a boldness in his eye, a
fluency of speech, and a forwardness in his whole
deportment, which, without approaching to impudence,
gave a dashing air to his conduct, and a freshness to his
conversation. His horse seemed much fatigued, and
from his saddle hung the hinder quarter of a deer
recently
killed.
Gentlemen, good evening, said he, as he dismounted,
this has been a powerful hot day.
Very sultry, replied one of the carriers.
No two ways about that, said the hunter; there's
as good a piece of horse-flesh, to his size, as ever
crooked a pastern, and as fast a nag as can be started,
for any distance from a quarter up to four miles; but
this day has pretty nearly used him up.
You seem to have been hunting.
Why, yes; I have been taking a little tower among
the mountains here. I have just killed a fine deer, and
as I felt sort o' lonesome, I turned into the big road, in
hopes of meeting with a traveller to help me eat it.
This offer was, of course, well received; the venison
was sent to the fire, and the stranger prepared to
encamp with his new acquaintances.
The quick eye of the hunter was now attracted to
two of the youngest of the company, who were engaged
in a
tussle
, an exercise common among our western
youth, and far superior to wrestling or boxing, as it
requires greater skill and activity, and is far less savage,
than either of those ancient games. The object of each
party is to throw his adversary to the ground, and to
retain his advantage by holding him down until the
victory shall be decided; and as there are no rules to
regulate the game, each exerts his strength and skill in
any manner which his judgment may dictate, using
force or artifice according to circumstances. The two
persons who now approached each other, seemed each to
be intent on grappling with his adversary in such a
manner
as to gain an advantage at the outset. At first, each
eluded the grasp of the other, advancing, retreating,
seizing, or shaking each other off, and each using every
artifice in his power to secure an advantage in the
manner
of grappling with his opponent. Then they grasped
at arm's-length, and tried each other's strength by
pushing, pulling, and whirling round, testing the
muscular
powers of the arm, and the nimbleness of the foot,
to the utmost. Finally they became closely interlocked,
their bodies in contact, and their limbs twined,
wrestling
with all their powers, and after an arduous struggle
came together to the ground, amidst the shouts and
laughter of the spectators. But the contest was not
over; for now a fierce contest ensued, in which each
endeavored to get uppermost, or to hold his antagonist
to the ground. Their muscular strength and flexibility
of limb seemed now almost miraculous. Sometimes the
person who was undermost, fairly rolled his adversary
over, and sometimes he raised himself by main strength,
with his opponent still clinging to him, and renewed the
struggle on foot; and often their bodies were twisted
together
,
and their limbs interlocked, until every muscle
and sinew were strained, and it was difficult to tell which
was uppermost. At last their breathing grew short, the
violence of the exercise produced exhaustion, and one
of the parties relaxing his efforts, enabled the other to
claim the victory. The tired parties, dripping with
perspiration, ceased the contest in perfect good-humor.
You must not tussle with me no more, Bill, said
the victor; you see you aint no part of a priming to
me.
That's very well, cried the other, eyeing his
comrade
with perfect complacency; I like to see you have
a good opinion of yourself. If I didn't let you win once
H 2
in a while to encourage you, I could never get a chance
to have no fun out of you.
It was now perceived that while the attention of the
company was fixed upon the sport, another stranger had
joined them. He cautiously pushed aside the thick
brushwood behind the merry circle, threw a quick
jealous glance upon the party, and then advancing with
circumspection, halted in the rear, and remained for a
while unnoticed. When the contest which we have
described
was over, the eyes of the whole party fell on the
intruder. His appearance was too striking not to rivet
attention. In size he towered above the ordinary stature,
his frame was bony and muscular, his breast broad, his
limbs gigantic. His clothing was uncouth and shabby,
his exterior weatherbeaten and dirty, indicating
continual
exposure to the elements, and pointing out this
singular person as one who dwelt far from the
habitations
of men, and who mingled not in the courtesies of
civilized life. He was completely armed, with the
exception of a rifle, which seemed to have only been laid
aside for a moment, for he carried the usual
powder-horn
and pouch of the backwoodsman. A broad leathern
belt, drawn closely round his waist, supported a large
and a smaller knife, and a tomahawk. But that which
attracted the gaze of all the company into which he had
intruded, was the bold and ferocious countenance of the
new comer, and its strongly marked expression of
villany. His face, which was larger than ordinary,
exhibited the lines of ungovernable passion, but the
complexion announced that the ordinary feelings of the
human breast were extinguished, and instead of the
healthy hue which indicates the social emotions, there
was a livid, unnatural redness, resembling that of a
dried and lifeless skin. The eye was fearless and steady,
but it was also artful and audacious, glaring upon the
beholder with an unpleasant fixedness and brilliancy,
like that of a ravenous animal gloating upon its prey,
and concentrating all its malignity into one fearful
glance. He wore no covering on his head, and the
natural protection of thick coarse hair, of a fiery
redness
,
uncombed and matted, gave evidence of long
exposure to the rudest visitations of the sunbeam and
the tempest. He seemed some desperate outlaw, an
unnatural
enemy of his species, destitute of the nobler
sympathies
of human nature, and prepared at all points for
assault or defence, who in some freak of daring insolence
had intruded himself into the society of men, to brave
their resentment, or to try the effect which his presence
might occasion.
Although there was something peculiarly suspicious
and disagreeable in the appearance of this stranger, there
was nothing to excite alarm, or to call for the expression
of any disapprobation. He was armed like other men
of that frontier region, and the road was a public
high-way
,
frequented by people of various character and
condition. Still there was a shrinking, and a silent
interchange of glances among the carriers, on
discovering
his silent and almost mysterious intrusion; one
whispered, what does that fellow want? and another
muttered, keep a red eye out, boysthat chap is not
too good to steal. The young hunter who had just
joined them, was not of the kind of mettle to sit still on
such an occasion. He jumped up, and addressing their
visitor in a blithe, frank tone, said, Good evening,
stranger.
The person addressed turned his eye deliberately
towards
the speaker, and returned his salutation with a
nod, without opening his lips.
Travelling, stranger?
Yes, replied the other. The sound of his voice,
even in uttering this monosyllable, was cold and
repulsive
,
and any other than a resolute inquirer would have
pursued the dialogue no further. But the young
Kentuckian
was not so easily repulsed.
Which way? if it's a fair question, continued he.
West, was the laconic reply.
That fellow's mouth goes off like a gun with a rusty
lock, said the hunter aside; then addressing him again,
To Kentucky, eh? well, that's rightthere's plenty
of room theregame enough, and a powerful chance of
good living. No two ways about that. Come from old
Virginia, I suppose?
The stranger, instead of answering this question,
turned his head in another direction, as if he had not
heard it, stepped a few paces off, as if about to retire,
and then again halted and faced the party.
No, I'll be d'rot if ever that chap came out of old
Virginny, muttered the young man aside, they don't
raise such humans in the old dominion, no how. I'll
see what he is made of, however.
Then winking at his companions, he approached the
stranger, and taking a pen-knife from his pocket,
presented
it to him with a civil bow. The stranger was not
to be taken by surprise. He received the knife, looked
at it and at the donor, inquiringly, as if he would have
said, what means this? and then coolly put it in his
pocket, without saying a word. His tormentor did not
leave him in doubt.
It is a rule in our country, said he, when a man
is remarkably ugly, to make him a present of a knife.
Keep that, if you please, stranger, till you meet with
a homelier human than yourself, and then give it to
him.
This practical joke would, in some countries, have
been considered as a quiz; in Kentucky it was a kind of
challenge, which the receiver might have honorably
avoided by joining in the laugh, or which, on the other
hand, gave him ample cause to crack his heels together,
and assert, that he was not only the handsomest, but
the
best man
in company; which assertion, if concluded,
as the lawyers say, with a verification, would have been
tantamount to calling for pistols for two. The
stranger
did neither, but pocketed the knife and the affront,
and quietly turned to walk away.
To a brave man nothing causes more painful regret
than to have given an unprovoked affront to one who is
unable or unwilling to resent it. Had the stranger
shown the slightest inclination to take up the gauntlet
which had been thrown to him, the young Kentuckian,
who viewed him with intuitive dislike, would probably
have challenged him to instant combat, and have engaged
him with the ferocity of a hungry brute; but no sooner
did the latter discover that the person he addressed
neither relished his joke, nor was disposed to resent it,
than his generous nature prompted him to make instant
atonement.
Look here, stranger, he exclaimed, drawing a flask
of spirits from his pocket, and offering it; you are a
droll sort of a white man; you won't talk, nor laugh,
nor quarrelwill you drink? Take a drop, and let us
be friends.
This appeal was not in vain. The uncouth man of
the woods took the flask, raised it silently to his lips,
and drained the whole of its contents, amounting to
nearly a pint, without stopping to breathe; then placing
one hand on the shoulder of the young man, and leaning
towards him, he said in a low voice, we shall meet
again, at the same time grasping the handle of his long
knife, and casting a look of defiance at the whole party.
Whether he intended to strike is doubtful, for the young
man, stepping back, stood on his guard, looking at his
adversary with an undaunted eye, while the carriers
started to their feet, prepared to defend him. In
another moment the stranger had turned, and dashing
into the thicket, disappeared.
Well, if that ain't a droll chicken, I'm mistaken,
exclaimed the Kentuckian. I say, gentlemen, the
way that fellow takes his brandy is curious. He is not
of the right breed of dogs, no how. There's no two
ways about that.
Before any further remark could be made, the
attention
of the party was arrested by an exclamation of
terror from a female voice; the cause of which shall be
explained in the next chapter.
CHAPTER X.
Miss Pendleton
had left the place of her nativity,
under a melancholy depression of spirits. Reared in
affluence, the favorite and only object of affection of a
kind guardian, surrounded by friends, followed by a
train of admirers, and accustomed to every indulgence,
the sudden reverse of her fortunes afflicted her heart
with keen anguish. She was too high-minded to mourn
with unavailing regret over the blight of those
advantages
which merely elevated her above her companions.
The truly generous mind estimates the gifts of fortune
at something like their real value. But the loss of the
dearly loved guardian of her youth, and the dreadful
catastrophe which produced that melancholy
bereavement
,
deeply touched her heart, and awakened all her
sensibilities. The measure of her grief seemed to be
full; but when she came to the resolution of quitting
the scenes of her childhood, and parting with her early
friends, she found that her heart had still room for other
afflictions, and she left her native land sorrowing, and
bowed down in spirit. Possessed, however, of a strong
intellect, and a buoyant temper, the exercise of
travelling
,
the change of scene, and the kindness of her
companions
,
if they did not diminish her sorrows, rendered
them supportable. By degrees her mind began to
assume its natural tone, and she reflected more calmly
on the scenes through which she had lately passed. In
these reveries the image of Fennimore continually
presented
itself. His visit seemed to be intimately, yet
strangely, connected with the death of her uncle. She
had heard enough of the circumstances which we have
detailed, to know that it had relation to a pecuniary
claim against the estate of Major Heyward, but knew
nothing of its justice, extent, or character. Mrs. Lee
had spoken of it as a demand which would absorb the
whole of her venerable relative's vast fortune, and which
placed the claimant in the position of a competitor with
herself, and had thrown out imputations against his
integrity of the darkest import. On the other hand,
she remembered that he had been received not only with
the hospitality extended to all visitors at Walnut-Hill,
but with affectionate cordiality. Her uncle, who was a
man of excellent discernment, had treated him with the
confidence of friendship, and she was slow to believe,
either that he was deceived in the character of his guest,
or that he had professed a show of kindness which he
did not feel. Mr. Fennimore's appearance and manners
were highly prepossessing; there was especially about
him a frankness, and manly dignity, which could hardly
be deceptive. She passed in review the agreeable hours
of his short visit, and a flush of maiden pride mantled
her cheek, as she recollected his earnest yet respectful
attentions, and confessed, that of all the homage which
she had received in the triumph of beauty, none had
ever been so acceptable as that of this handsome and
gallant soldier. We have little faith in the romantic
doctrine of love at first sight; but on the other hand, we
cannot think it strange that an intelligent and susceptible
woman should readily draw a distinction between the
common-place civilities of ordinary men, or the silly
gallantries of mere witless beaux, and the enlightened
preference of a gentleman of taste and judgment, nor
that she should feel flattered by an appearance of
partiality
from such a source. She was at an age when the
heart is feelingly alive to the tender sensations, and it
would have been singular if she had not become
interested
in a modest and highly-gifted man, so nearly of
her own years and condition, who had been her
companion
for several days; nor would it have been natural
for one so accustomed as herself to the attentions of the
other sex, to mistake the effect which her own
attractions
had produced on the mind of the agreeable
stranger
.
Then the ready gallantry with which he risked
his own life to rescue her from the flames, and his
courageous efforts to save her unclethese, though she
never spoke of them, awakened a sentiment of gratitude
which she felt could never be effaced. Again, when
she recalled the circumstances under which he left
the neighborhood of Walnut-Hill, without any
explanation
to the friends of Major Heyward, of the object of his
visit, and without leaving any message for herself, his
conduct seemed incomprehensible, and strangely at
variance
with what she supposed to be his character. But
these mysterious circumstances, although they excited
momentary doubts, and sometimes awakened a slight
glow of resentment, only served in the end to render
Mr. Fennimore more interesting to Miss Pendleton; for
without inferring, as some ill-natured persons would do,
that the mind of woman is made up of contradictions,
I
it is enough to say that she exercised her ingenuity in
imagining a variety of
possible
explanations, by which
his conduct might be placed in a favorable light, and his
character even exalted, until she persuaded herself that
such developments
would
undoubtedly be made in due
time.
Mrs. Mountford, although she had never seen Mr.
Fennimore, had made up her mind that he was an
impostor
;
a mere fortune-hunter, who had visited
Walnut-Hill
in the prosecution of some desperate scheme against
the person and fortune of her fair friend. Without
having any definite ideas of that plan, or being able to
trace its connexion with subsequent events, she was
charitable enough to attribute the catastrophe which had
marred the fortunes of Virginia, to this source, and
spoke of Fennimore as little less than an incendiary.
Perhaps there might have been policy in this; for
discovering
that Virginia always defended her uncle's
visitor
with some spirit, she often introduced the subject for
the sole purpose of disturbing her reveries, and
awakening
her mind from the apathy into which it seemed to
be sinking. In these discussions, Miss Pendleton, with
her usual frankness, recapitulated all the evidence in
favor of Mr. Fennimore, with some of the arguments
which her own ingenuity had suggested, and thus
became accustomed to defend his character. After all,
there was but one argument which had any weight with
the pertinacious Mrs. Mountford; it was the same which
had appealed so forcibly to the genuine Virginia feeling
of Colonel Antler, namely, that a gentleman would
not commit arson. If he is really a gentleman, my
dear, was Mrs. Mountford's usual conclusion, that
settles the question; but how few of those do we find
north of the Potomac!and this Mr. Fennimore, you
know, did not pretend to have been born in the Old
Dominion.
The unexpected discovery of a murdered body in the
road, had deeply affected our heroine, and had led her
thoughts back to the most melancholy event in her own
history. She was this evening unusually depressed, and
it was in the hope of diverting her reflections into some
other channel, that her friends, though much fatigued,
had proposed the walk which led them to the vicinity
of the pack-horse camp, and had been induced to linger,
the concealed witnesses of the rude scene which was
there enacted.
The events which we have described arrested her
attention. It had so happened, however, that she stood
in such a position as not to see the face of the person
whose appearance caused so much curiosity, until the
moment of his drawing his knife, when a movement of
his body brought him full before her, and to her utter
dismay she recognized the same savage countenance
which she had discovered at her window on the night of
the conflagration! Her alarm and agitation may be
easily conceived. An involuntary expression of horror
burst from her lips, which drew the attention not only
of her own friends, but of the party on the opposite
side of the stream. With some exertion she resumed
her self-command, and returned immediately to the camp.
She had heretofore described to Mr. Mountford, the
apparition
which had so greatly terrified her on the
occasion
above alluded to; and that gentleman, as well as
others, had supposed that she had been deceived by her
imagination. But now, on her repeating that incident,
the description which she gave of the supposed
incendiary
corresponded so completely with that of the
remarkable person they had seen, as to leave little doubt
of the identity of the one with the other; and he
hastened
to the encampment of the carriers, to acquaint
them with his suspicions, and procure assistance to
arrest the stranger. Their services were offered with
alacrity, and all the adjacent coverts were carefully
examined; but, night coming on, any extensive search
was impracticable.
Virginia spent a miserable night. In addition to the
afflicting recollections that had previously depressed her
mind, the events of the day had suggested a new and
dreadful train of thought. Might not the unfortunate
person whose remains had been found concealed by the
mountain-path have been one in whom she felt an
interest
which she could not conceal from herself? She had
not seen the body, and the friend for whose safety she
now trembled was unknown to Mr. Mountford. She
knew that Mr. Fennimore was on his way to the western
frontier, when he called at Walnut-Hillhis presence
there on the night of the conflagration had probably
defeated to some extent the designs of the incendiary
and now a young gentleman whose description answered
too well with his, was found murdered in the very path
that he had taken. She had seen the murderer of her
lamented uncle; and circumstances had occurred to
render
it not unlikely that the same terrible assassin had
waylaid Mr. Fennimore, and was now tracking her own
footsteps! A dreadful mystery seemed to hang over
her fate. In vain did she endeavor to find some clue to
these dark transactions. Major Heyward had been the
most inoffensive of men; she herself had no enemy,
and why should she, now an unprotected and penniless
orphan, be thus persecuted? These thoughts tormented
her already agitated mind, and drove sleep from her
pillow.
Miss Pendleton occupied a tent containing her own
bed and that of a negro maid-servant. Mr.
Mountford's
negro train were accustomed to spend their
evenings
in those festivities, to which the whole of that
careless race are so much addicted. They had now
collected a great pile of logs, whose blaze illuminated
the camping ground, and threw a brilliant glare for
some distance into the surrounding forest. A
gray-haired
fiddler, whose musical abilities had contributed to
the amusement of several successive generations of the
Mountfordswhite and blacksat on a log scraping
his merry violin, while his sable comrades danced on
the green. Happy in the absence of all care, and under
the protection of an indulgent master, who had grown
up from childhood among them, and was endeared to
them by the ties of long association, and the interchange
of kindnesses known only to those who are acquainted
with the relation of master and servant, these
thoughtless
beings gave themselves up entirely to merriment.
They had no property to care for, no want to supply,
no peril in anticipation to excite their fears, no
speculation
in their eye to poison the enjoyment of the present
I 2
moment; and although undergoing the fatigue of a
toilsome
march, their eye-balls glistened, their sable cheeks
shone, and their snow-white teeth became visible, at the
first note of the fiddle. Seated in a circle round the
blazing log-heap, they ate their rations, told merry tales
of Old Virginny, and then joining in the dance,
capered with as much vigor and agility as if their whole
bodies were made upon springs and muscles, while
streams of perspiration rolled from their shining visages.
At length that part of the accompaniment, to which,
not being a musician, I am unable to give a scientific
Italian name, but which consists in certain drowsy nods,
and comfortable naps, on the part of the artist,
interpolated
between the tunes, and spreading off like the
shading of a picture, so as to mingle insensibly with the
brighter and gayer parts of the performance, began to
preponderate; the heavy eye-lids of the musician were
raised less frequently and with a duller motion, the
elbow lost its elasticity, the sable belles crawled away
one by one to their pallets, and the hilarity of the night
died away into a profound silence.
Our heroine, however, did not share the contagious
drowsiness. She remained in a feverish state of
excitement
,
sometimes wrapped for a few moments in
abstracted thought, as ruminating on the past, and
sometimes endeavoring to banish reflection, by listening
with an ear acutely alive to the slightest sound. As the
vociferous notes of merriment died away, other tones,
more congenial with her frame of mind, invaded the
silence of the night. The atmosphere was clear and
chill; not a breath shook the trees or disturbed the
repose of the valley. The murmuring of the rivulet,
scarcely perceptible during the day, now fell distinctly
and pleasantly on the ear. An occasional and distant
tinkling was heard, at intervals, from the bells attached
to the cattle and the carriers' horses. The wolf's long
howl, reverberating from cliff to cliff, was answered by
the bark of the travellers' dogs; but even these sounds
ceased when the faithful animals sought repose by their
masters' sides. The owl hooted from her solitary den;
and once, when every other voice was hushed, and
nature seemed to repose in death-like stillness, a huge
tree, probably a majestic pine, which had braved the
mountain storm for ages, fell to the ground with a
terrific crash, which re-echoed from rock to rock, and
from one cavern to another, rolling along the valley like
the prolonged reiterations of thunder, or a continuous
discharge of artillery. The scared owl shouted in
alarm, the dogs rushed howling from their beds, the
wolf renewed his savage complaint, and again all was
silent.
Miss Pendleton, exhausted by a variety of contending
emotions, at last sunk into a feverish slumber, from
which she was awakened by a slight noise. She raised
her head, and the strong light, still brightly reflected from
the expiring fires upon the white canvas, enabled her to
see distinctly the figure of a man at the entrance of the
tent; his headthat dreadful head, so strongly pictured
upon her memoryalready protruded within the
opening
,
and one hand, which grasped a knife, was employed
in cutting a number of strong cords by which the
entrance was closed. She uttered a loud scream, but
the villain, nothing daunted, continued his efforts, cutting
and tearing the slight obstacles, with a violence which
shewed a determination to accomplish his dreadful
purpose
at all hazards. Accident, aided perhaps by the
confusion of guilt, delayed him for a moment; his feet
became entangled in some harness carelessly thrown
before the tent: the screams of Virginia roused the
watch dogs; Mr. Mountford seized his pistols and
hastened
to her relief, while the foiled assassin hastily
retreated, leaping nimbly over every obstacle, pushing
aside the bushes with gigantic strength, and disappearing
in the gloom of the forest.
CHAPTER XI.
Two
days after the occurrence of the events detailed
in the last chapter, the inhabitants of the little village of
Stanford, in Lincoln county, Kentucky, were surprised
by the appearance, in their streets, of a singular group
of travellers. Although emigrants of various
descriptions
were continually passing through this place, to the
newer settlements, lying still farther to the west, there was
something about this party which attracted universal
attention. The leader of the cavalcade was the ferocious
individual who has already been more than once brought
under the notice of the reader. He was, as before,
bareheaded
,
and carried on his shoulder a long rifle, while
his belt supported two knives, a pistol, and a tomahawk.
Without turning to the right or left, and scarcely
appearing to notice objects around him, he moved
forward
,
along the middle of the street, with a firm and
rapid step, and an air of audacious defiance. Yet a close
observer might have noticed, that although he neither
turned his head, nor seemed to regard those who passed
near him, his fierce eye rolled rapidly from side to side,
with suspicious watchfulness. Behind him followed
three women, two of whom were sun-burnt, coarse, and
wretchedly attired, and the other somewhat more
delicate, and better dressed. The females led two
horses, almost broken down with fatigue, on whose backs
were packed a few cooking utensils, an axe, several
guns, some blankets, and a small quantity of provisions.
Three or four half-naked children, wild, sallow, and
hungry-looking, with small fierce eyes, glancing timidly
about, followed next; and lastly came a man, smaller
in size than him who led the party, but similarly armed,
having the same suspicious exterior, and a countenance
equally fierce and sinister. The deportment of all
the individuals of this company, was that of persons
who considered themselves in a hostile or an alien
country, and who, accustomed to the apprehension of
danger, stood ready to evade by flight, or resist even
to death, any assault which might be made on them.
Even their dog, a thievish-looking cur, resembling a
wolf in looks and action, stole along with a stealthy
tread, his tail drooped, and his malignant eye scowling
watchfully around. Their determination seemed to be
to proceed rapidly on without halting; but when they
had passed the most populous part of the village, and
had nearly reached its farther limit, they stopped,
apparently
for the purpose of procuring some article of
which they stood in need. The leader proceeded to a
small shop, while the rest of the party stood in the
middle
of the road, exposed to the burning rays of the sun,
and showing no inclination either to seek shelter, or to
hold intercourse with the inhabitants.
At this moment a different scene was presented in the
other end of the village. A horseman, mounted on a
foaming steed, covered with dust, came spurring in at
full speed, and dismounted at the house of one of the
principal inhabitants, who was also a magistrate. He
had brought tidings of the murder committed in the
mountains, and had traced the supposed perpetrators to
this place. Without disclosing his business to any other
person, he sought a private interview with the
magistrate
;
and in a few minutes a plan was prepared for the
arrest of the suspected persons. Intelligence was
secretly and rapidly passed from house to house, and
the hardy villagers, accustomed to arm hastily for
war, sallied forth with their rifles and tomahawks, and
dividing themselves into small parties, came so suddenly
upon the supposed murderers, that it was equally
impossible
for them to resist or escape. They expressed
neither surprise nor fear, neither the shame of guilt nor
the courage of conscious innocence, but submitted to
their captors in sullen insolence. Some articles were
found in their possession, and a variety of facts proved,
which rendered their guilt so probable as to justify their
commitment for further examination.
At that early period in the history of our country,
jails were neither abundant, nor particularly well
adapted
for the safe keeping of prisoners. There was none
at Stanford, and it became necessary to send the culprits
to Danville, where a wholesome institution of this kind
had been provided. The men were therefore placed
under the charge of a party of armed citizens, and
marched off, while the women and children, who were
left at liberty, followed at their leisure. The escort
rested
that night at the house of a farmer, a comfortable
log cabin, in one apartment of which the prisoners,
securely
tied, were placed, under the charge of two
sentinels, while the rest of the guard threw themselves
down to repose, on the floor of the same room. Here I
must introduce a new character, who came on the scene
at this place.
Hercules Short, or, as he was more frequently called,
Hark Short, was the only son of a poor widow, whose
miserable cottage stood on the borders of an extensive
swamp in North-Carolina. It was a wretched abode,
consisting of a single apartment, plentifully supplied
with crevices, which admitted the light of heaven, and
gave free access to the balmy airs of spring, as well as
the rude blasts of winter. On three sides it was
surrounded
by a range of barren ridges, covered with a stinted
growth of evergreens. In front, was a dismal swamp,
filled with huge trees, whose great trunks supported a
dense canopy of foliage, which excluded the rays of the
sun from the gloomy mass of turbid waters that covered
the earth. An undergrowth of tall weeds and rank
grass, nourished by the fertilizing ooze, but deprived of
the light and warmth of the sun-beam, shot up into a
sickly and dropsical luxuriance. Here the
mocasin-snake
might be seen gliding over the roots of the
melancholy
cypress, or exposing his loathsome form on the
decaying trunk of a fallen tree. Here the tuneful frogs
held nightly concerts, astonishing the hearer by the
loudness and variety, if not by the melody, of their
voices. This too was the favorite haunt of that musical
and valiant insect, the musquito, whose thirst for human
blood is so distressing to all persons of tender feelings.
The bear, too, loved to wander and repose in these
solitudes
,
wading with delight among the flags and rushes
of the ponds, in search of tender buds, or snoring
securely in the hollow of a tree, where the sound of a
human footstep never disturbed his pleasant slumbers.
His neighbor, the owl, sometimes kept bad hours,
screeching her untimely song at mid-day, when all
discreet
brutes should be sleeping; but this he had learned
to consider as a pleasant serenade. Other innocent and
playful animals tenanted these shades, but the spectator
who should have visited them at an hour while the sun
was above the horizon, would scarcely have believed
that any living thing existed here. All around him
would be motionless and silent. Even the humid
atmosphere seemed here to have lost its elasticity and
power of circulation. One animated being alone might
occasionally be seen, winding his way through the
morass
,
with the stealthy tread of the midnight prowler. It
was a youth, whose slender and emaciated form, of
dwarfish height, seemed a living personification of
hunger
.
His diminutive skeleton was covered with a skin
sallowed by the humid damps, and embrowned by
exposure. His gait was slow, from caution as well as
from indolence. His features were stolid, and the
muscles of his face as immovable as if nature had denied
them the power of expressing passion or emotion.
A small gray eye alone, moving warily in its socket,
and continually glancing from side to side, with the
watchfulness of apprehension, indicated the existence of
feelings common to the human animal. He was
bare-headed
and bare-footed; his tangled hair seemed never
to have known the discipline of a comb; while his
coarse and torn garments, which certainly performed no
useful or agreeable office in relation to the comfort of
his body, might have been worn in deference to the
customs
of his species; and this was probably the only
instance in which he complied so far with the prejudices of
society as to identify himself as a member of the human
family.
This promising young gentleman was Mr. Hark Short,
the boy of the swamp, and the heir of the pleasant cabin
described above. His father had, from necessity or
choice, found it convenient to select a retired country
residence; and after his demise, the widow, whose love
of solitude seemed congenial with that of her lord,
continued
to inhabit the family mansion. The earliest
employment of our hero, was to gather for his mother
the pine-knots which not only constitute the fuel of that
country, but are the most fashionable substitutes for
spermaceti candles; his first amusement in life was to
spear frogs and rob birds'-nests. His ambition, however,
soon rose above these humble pursuits, and before he
K
was twelve years old, he took to killing snakes, hunting
opossums, catching fish, and finding wild pigs in the
woods. His practice in relation to pigs was a little
remarkable
.
The farmers in that country suffer their hogs
to run at large in the woods, paying them little attention
except that of marking the ears of each generation of
pigs while in their infancy, so that each owner may be
able to distinguish his property. Our friend Hark, well
aware of this practice, and of the care with which the
farmers performed it, whenever an increase in their
swinish families rendered it expedient, reasoned plausibly
enough, that every pig which was not marked must be
common property, or, as he expressed it,
a wild varment
,
subject to be converted to the individual use of any one
who should first appropriate it to himself. Whether he
inferred this doctrine from the principles of natural law,
or practised it as an instinct, is not important, and could
not now be precisely ascertained. We deal only in facts,
and the truth is, that although Hark never acquired a
pig either by descent or purchase, he made it a rule to
place his own mark in the ear of every juvenile animal
of this species, which he found running unmarked in the
woods. Whenever the maternal care of a female swine,
wilder or more cunning than usual, induced her to hide
her litter in some unfrequented covert of the woods, or
in some solitary islet of the swamp, inaccessible to the
owner's search, or when any unfortunate orphan strayed
from the herd and escaped the owner's eye, Hark was
sure to find them. His dexterity in accomplishing this
feat was remarkable. He would lie at the root of a tree
watching a herd for hours; but no sooner were the
grunters
nestled in their beds of leaves, than Hark commenced
operations, crawling towards them with a noiseless and
almost imperceptible motion, until he could place his
remorseless
hand upon an innocent pig, who never dreamt
of being marked, until the knife was at its ear, while the
left hand of the dexterous Hark grasped the snout with
such skill as to stifle the cries of the affrighted animal.
A whole litter would thus pass through his hands in the
course of a short time.
If any should be so squeamish as to object to the
propriety of this mode of gaining a livelihood, we must
urge in its extenuation the same apology which is
considered
as sufficient in most of the ordinary transactions
of life, and especially in reference to its pecuniary
concerns
,that
of necessity. Hark had been raised a
gentleman
,
that is to say, he had never been taught to
work; he had no fancy for agricultural pursuits, and
the barren sands around his mother's cabin were ill
suited to that employment. He therefore necessarily
resorted to the woods for a support, where he sometimes
shot a deer; but although he handled a rifle well, he
disliked its use; the labor of carrying the weapon was
irksome to one of his gentlemanly nature, and the noise
of its report particularly uncongenial with his habits of
privacy, and meditative turn of mind. Besides,
gun-powder
and lead cost money, which is not to be picked
up every day in the swamps of North-Carolina. And
why should not marking a pig be considered as
respectable
as gambling, or as honest as overreaching a
neighbor
in a bargain? Hark could see no difference. He
knew little, of course, of morality; but an intuitive
greatness
of mind induced him, early in life, to adopt the
magnanimous rule of the Spartan, which attached no
shame to any act, except that of doing it so awkwardly
as to be detected. Hark had no ambition to make a
noise in the world, but on the contrary shrunk habitually
from observation, and courted the society of his own
thoughts. Like many great men, he seemed to have
discovered that ingenuity is a nobler quality than brute
force, and that discretion is the better part of valor.
His mother's table, therefore, was tolerably well supplied
with game, consisting entirely of the flesh of animals
which might be taken without labor, or ensnared by art.
In the spring he caught fish, in the autumn he shook the
stupid opossum from the persimmon-trees and pawpaw
bushes, and during the rest of the year he took
whatever
chance threw in his way. Sometimes the weather
was inclement, and nothing stirred in the woods, but the
creaking bough, or the trembling leaf; and sometimes
Hark, who like other persons of genius had his dark days
of despondency and lassitude, was disinclined to hunt, and
he and Dame Short were reduced to short allowance. But
they were used to this, and it was marvellous to see with
what resignation they could starve. They polished the
bones which they had picked before, and when this
resource was exhausted, passed whole days without
eating
;
the goodwife croaking over the fire with a short
black pipe in her mouth, and Hark nestling in his pallet,
like some hybernating animal who sleeps away the long
months of winter.
Solitary as was the life of Hark, it was not passed
without amusement. Every intelligent mind is apt to
become addicted to some pursuit, which soon grows into
a master passion of the soul; and although we can
hardly conceive that the practice of cruelty could ever
afford enjoyment, yet, strange as it may seem, it is no
less true, that
destructiveness
has been strongly
developed
in men of the most magnanimous souls. From
Nimrod the mighty hunter, down to Black Hawk,
the Sac warrior, the magnates of the earth have ever
taken great delight in killing animals, and cutting the
throats of their fellow-men. Setting down this
remarkable
thirst for blood as one of the undoubted attributes
of high ambition, we see no reason why Hark should
not be ranked with Macedonia's madman and the
Swede. The bent of his genius lay particularly
towards the killing of reptiles. With a slight spear,
formed of a pointed stick, or slender cane, he would sit
for hours by a pond, transfixing every frog which showed
its head above the surface of the water, or, with a great
switch in his hand, lie in wait for lizards by the
decaying
trunk of some great fallen tree. But his soul panted
for higher exploits than these. He entertained a special
antipathy for snakes, and like Hannibal vowed eternal
enmity against the whole race. Nothing delighted him
so much as to encounter a serpent; no matter to what
variety it belonged, the intrepid rattle-snake, the lurking
copper-head, the insidious viper, or the harmless
black-snake
,he
no sooner beheld his enemy, than he
prepared
for battle with the eagerness of an amateur, and
the skill of an experienced gladiator. A martial hatred
flashed from his eye, and his swarthy visage, flushed
with a chivalrous intrepidity, assumed an unwonted
K 2
animation. His mode of proceeding on such occasions
was a little singular; for, either to show his contempt
for the reptile, or his indifference to danger, or because
he thought it the most scriptural plan of bruising his
adversary's head, he invariably jumped upon the
crawling
animal with both his feet, and trampled it to death.
The world went quietly along with Hark until he
approached his eighteenth year, when several untoward
events occurred to mar his felicity. In childhood he
had been an honest boy, with a character perfectly
unblemished
except by certain little improprieties, such as
sucking eggs, or milking the neighbors' cows when he
found them grazing in the swamps; and it was thought
that the undue severity of the farmers, in flogging him
for these little frailties of his nature, caused him to grow
up with the shy and misanthropic habits, for which he
was so remarkable. But as he became older, his large
herd of swine began to attract attention; the farmers,
who believed in the adage of the civil law,
partus
sequitur
,
&c., which means in plain English that the offspring
belong to the owner of the mother, began to complain
that the descendants of their hogs were passing
frequently
into the possession of Hark, the snake-killer,
and threatened him with the visitation of Lynch's law.
Indeed, it is rumored that he was actually arraigned
before a tribunal exercising this impartial jurisdiction;
but as there is no report of the case, we suppose the
allegation to be slanderous. Dangers, however, were
thickening around him; he now spent all of his days in
the deepest recesses of the swamp, and grew so wild,
that whenever he heard the tramp of a horse, or the
crack of a rifle, he crept into some hollow tree, or
bounded away with the caution of a startled fox. The
fear of Lynch's law was continually before his eyes,
and he would rather have crawled into a den of
rattle-snakes
,
than have shown his face in the neighboring
settlement.
But the longest lane will have a turning, and the time
was arrived when the destiny of Hark was to be
materially
changed. One night, on returning home, he found
his mother expiring. He would have gone in search of
a physician, but she knew that the hand of death was
upon her, and charged him not to leave her bedside.
He lighted some pine knots, and as the blaze illumed the
cheerless cabin, gazed in stupefied wonder at the pale
and distorted features of her, who had been his sole
companion through life. She was the only human being
who had ever treated him with kindness. He had not
been taught obedience by precept or example, but had
served and supported her from that kind of instinct
which induces animals to consort together for mutual
protection, or to follow the hand that feeds them.
Blunted as his feelings were by his habits of life, he
discovered for the first time an emotion of tenderness
swelling at his heart. He watched for hours, in silence,
the expiring taper of existence. Unable to render any
assistance, and unskilled in those tender assiduities
which soothe the pillow of disease, he felt how helpless
and how hopeless is the sorrow of him, who watches
alone in the chamber of death, awaiting the departure
of the soul of a beloved object, whose flight he cannot
arrest nor retard. At length, when her breathing
became indistinct, he leaned over the ghastly form, and
sobbed in broken accents, Mother, don'tdon't
die! The dying woman recognized the voice of her
son; she turned her eyes towards him; a gleam of
maternal
tenderness passed over her face, and in the next
moment her spirit passed from life to eternity.
Hark, who was naturally superstitious, would now
have fled from the house of death, but a decent sense of
propriety restrained him, and renewing the blaze upon
his now solitary hearth, he sat with his face buried in
his hands, giving unrestrained vent to his sorrow. These
were new feelings, and, like all sudden impulses, they
were evanescent. Grief soon exhausted itself, and
when day dawned, and the beams of the sun began to
dissipate the mists that hung over his dwelling, his
wonted habits resumed their empire. The events of
that day need not be told. The following night the
moon shone brightly. A hunter who had strayed far
from home in search of game, returning at a late hour,
discovered the diminutive form of Hark, perched on the
summit of a small knoll, not far from the cabin of the
late widow. He sat motionless, with his head resting
on his hand, unconscious of the hunter's approach.
The latter, who knew the wary habits of the boy, was
surprised at his remaining thus motionless, and
supposing
he was hurt, or had fallen asleep, drew near with a
friendly intent to awaken or assist him. But the sound
of his approaching footsteps soon broke the reverie of
Hark, who no sooner became aware of being observed,
than he started up, and after a cautious glance around,
instantly fled in terror from the spot. The astonished
hunter, on examining, found that the boy had been sitting
by a newly-made grave, over which the moist earth
had been just closed. The spade lay there, with the
fresh soil still clinging to the blade. Alone, and by
moon-light
,
this singular being had performed the melancholy
rite of sepulture. On the following morning, some of
the neighbors visited the cabin by the swamp, but found
it deserted; nor was Hark ever seen again in that vicinity.
Sometimes the hunter, when entangled in the mazes of
that wild morass, fancied he heard a sound like that of
a man striking his feet rapidly on the ground, and it was
said that the form of Hark, the snake-killer, was seen
gliding quietly over the turbid pools. But his fate
remained unknown; whether in his solitary wanderings
he had been stung to death by some venomous reptile,
or sunk in a quagmire, or whether the Evil One, who
seemed to have long since marked him for his prey, had
carried him off, none could conjecture. It is said that
a variety of noxious animals took possession of the
deserted cabin, as if in triumph over their persecutor;
and when it was visited long afterwards, it was
surrounded
by a rank growth of weeds, and the entrance
choked with thorns and briers; a she-wolf had hidden
her litter under the ruins of the chimney; a numerous
colony of rattle-snakes coiled their loathsome forms
beneath the dilapidated floor, and the roof afforded a
congenial
solitude to the bat; from the hollow of a blasted
tree hard by, the owl shouted a savage note of
exultation
,
and a thousand voices arising out of the green and
stagnant pools, proclaimed that the tenants of the swamp
had increased in number and security.
CHAPTER XII.
Contrary
to all the conjectures which had been
formed respecting him, Hark Short, the snake-killer,
was still in the land of the living. Some months after
his disappearance from the place of his nativity, he
presented
himself, nearly naked, and almost starved, at the
house of a farmer in Kentucky, where he was received,
in conformity with the hospitable usages of that country,
without suspicion or question. It was enough that he
was destitute and a stranger. He was fed and clothed,
and continued to linger about the house, wandering off in
the day-time to the woods to hunt or kill snakes, and
creeping quietly into the cabin at night, where he nestled
in a blanket upon the hearth, with his feet to the fire.
When called upon to assist in any of the labors of the
farm, he complied with the most evident distaste. He
could not handle any farming implements but the hoe and
axe, and these but awkwardly; and evinced a thorough
dislike against all domestic animals. If sent to ride a
horse to water, or lead him to the stable, he was sure to
pinch or prick the creature with a thorn, until those
which were most sagacious and spirited, learned to show
their antipathy for the unlucky boy, by laying back
their ears whenever he approached. In short, he could
do nothing useful, except to hunt raccoons and opossums,
or to assist the farmer in catching his half-wild hogs,
which, as in all new countries, ran at large in the woods.
On occasions like the latter, his exploits were the
subjects
of wonder and merriment. It seemed to afford
him an honest pride to exhibit a genius superior to that
of the swinish multitude. He was an overmatch for the
fiercest and most bulky of these animals; evincing
clearly, in his triumphs, the vast disparity between
intellect and instinct. Having selected the object on
which to exercise his dexterity, he would lie for hours
coiled upon a log, until his victim approached, or would
drag his body along the ground towards it, so slowly
that the motion was imperceptible, and at last springing
upon its back, seize the bristles with his left hand, and
press his heels into its flanks, clinging with so firm a
grasp, that the enraged animal could neither assail nor
dislodge him, until he brought his prey to the ground by
passing his knife into its throat. If he failed to alight
on its back, or if his position was unfavorable for this
exploit, he seized one of the hinder limbs, and when the
animal happened to be large and strong, it would dart
away on three legs, dragging the light form of Hark
rapidly over the dried leaves and fallen timber. But it
was impossible to shake him off; in vain did the enraged
swine dash through the closest thickets, or plunge into
the miry swamps; Hark retained his hold until the dogs
and men came to his relief. These feats gained him
applause, and rendered his society tolerable to those who
would otherwise have been disgusted with his unsocial
temper and unamiable habits. The only brute that he
could endure was the dog; even these he at first viewed
with manifest symptoms of repugnance; but after
witnessing
their good qualities in catching hogs, and
hunting, he admitted that if dogs would not bark, they
might be made very useful. There was one redeeming
quality in the conduct of this singular being, which was,
fondness for children. He had never until now
associated
with any of the human race but his mother; of men
he had an instinctive dread, and seemed to hate the
whole brute creation; towards children alone did he
evince a show of kindness. It was a kindness which
displayed itself in mute and almost negative actions, like
that of the faithful dog, who watches the playing infant
with a complacent eye, and suffers it to sport with his
paws and teeth, to pull his ears, and even to torment
him, without the least show of resentment.
It was to the house of the farmer with whom Hark
had found a temporary home, that the prisoners taken
at Stanford were brought, on the evening succeeding
their arrest. On their approach, the boy, who sat in
a corner, in his accustomed moody silence, was the first
to hear the tramp of horses. Without speaking to
anybody
,
he rose, stole cautiously out, and under the shade
of an out-house, watched the dismounting horsemen.
With his usual stealthy habits, he continued to linger
about, listening to all the conversation he could catch,
without making his appearance. At last, as if satisfied
that no immediate danger threatened his own safety, he
entered the room in which the prisoners had been lodged,
veiling his constitutional fear of strangers under an
assumed
apathy of countenance, or only betraying it by
an occasional wild and timid glance, like that of the
wolf, who, crouching in his den, listens to the distant
bayings of the hunters' dogs.
After a little while, the men who guarded the
prisoners
left the apartment, some to take care of their horses
and others sauntering around the house, so as still to be
near enough to prevent the possibility of their prisoners'
escape. The latter sat upon a bench, with their feet
bound together, and their arms strongly pinioned behind
them, while Hark continued immovable in his corner,
until one of the men, in a coarse tone, asked him for a
drink of water. The boy arose, and, as if determined
to profit by the opportunity which thus presented itself
of indulging his curiosity without hazard, presented a
gourd of water with one hand, while he held a candle
with the other. The person to whose lips he held the
cooling draught, who was the larger of the two felons,
looked sternly at him; their eyes met, the boy seemed
to recoil, but the features of both their countenances
retained their imperturbable apathy.
Hark, said the man, in a low harsh voice, do
you know me?
The boy hesitated, as if afraid to reply.
Put down the light, continued the man, and sit
near me.
Hark obeyed; replaced the candle on a table, and
threw himself on the floor as if disposed to sleep, yet so
near the man as to hear him speak in a low tone.
Do you know me? was again repeated.
Nobody ever saw Big Harpe, and not know him
again, replied the killer of snakes.
Is that all you know of me?
WellI can't sayin peticklar,replied the boy
in evident embarrassment; I have
heern
tell that your
given name was Micajah.
L
Did you never hear your mother speak of me?
Notin peticklaras I know of.
Where is she?
Mammy's dead.
Here a pause ensued.
Will you do me a service? resumed Micajah.
Did
you
ever do any good to anybody? asked
Hark.
None of your business! replied the man, fiercely,
but still in the same under-tone; how dare you speak
to me that way, you stupid wretch?
Hark edged a little further off, and gazed at the man
with intense curiosity and fear, while his limbs shook
with trepidation.
The felon seemed to think it necessary to change his
ground, and try the effect of conciliation.
And so your mother's deadI'm sorryyou say
she never spoke about me?
Not, in peticklar
But she said something; I'd like to know what it
was.
Mammy didn't know as you'd ever hear it.
Then it was something bad?
Not in peticklar.
Then you might as well tell me what it was.
It would make you mad.
No it wouldn'tI don't mind what women say, no
how.
Well, she said, if any body was to rake hell with a
fine-comb, they could not find sich a
Here he hesitated.
Out with it, boy.
Sich a tarnal villain.
Was that all? inquired the man coolly, and as if
disappointed in not getting out some fact, which he was
endeavoring to draw from his stupid companionDid
she say nothing more?
WellI don't know as she ever said anything else,
in peticklar.
Give me some more water, said Harpe; and as the
boy held the gourd to his lips, instead of drinking, he
whispered something, in a hurried authoritative tone.
Hark stepped back in surprise, and retreated across the
room, much agitated. He then resumed his former
position
in the corner most distant from the prisoners,
coiled himself up upon the floor, and appeared to sleep;
and when the men composing the guard returned, every
thing seemed quiet.
As the night wore away, these hardy backwoodsmen
continued to sit to a late hour around the fire; for
although it was early in the autumn, the night was cool,
and a cheerful blaze glowed on the hearth. They amused
themselves in conversing of their early homes from
which they had emigrated, of the incidents connected
with their journeys, and of their adventures in hunting
and war. These subjects are so interesting as always
to awaken attention, and they become particularly so,
when discussed by a race of men who are eloquent by
nature, and speak with a freedom of sentiment, and
fluency of language, which are not found in any other
people who use our dialect.
At last one of the hunters, wrapping a blanket about
his brawny frame, threw himself on the floor, and soon
slumbered with a soundness which the bed of down
does not always afford; another, and another, followed his
example, until two only, who were appointed for the
purpose
,
were left to keep watch over the prisoners, for whom
a pallet had been made upon the floor. In the
meanwhile
Hark had been lying in the corner unnoticed, and
apparently fast asleep; his eyes were closed, and those
who might have looked towards him, would not have
been able to discover, by the uncertain light, that one
eye-lid was partially raised, and that, while seemingly
asleep, he was attentively watching all that passed. He
had changed his position too, unobserved, and the
prisoners
having been placed near the middle of the small
apartment, he was now lying near them. At length
one of the guards left the room, and the other was
sitting
with his back towards the prisoners, intently
engaged in cleaning the lock of his rifle. Hark now
drew himself silently along the floor, until he placed
himself
in contact with the pallet of the captives, then
passing
his hand rapidly under the blanket which covered
them both, cut the thongs which bound their arms,
placed the knife in the hand of the one nearest to him,
and hastily resumed his former place in the corner. All
this was the work of one minute; and in another, the
Harpes were on their feet rushing towards the door, and
the sentinels started up only in time to witness their
escape. The whole company was instantly alarmed;
men and dogs dashed into the surrounding thickets in
eager pursuit, but the murderers eluded their skilful
search, and the party returned dispirited and angry with
each other. An animated debate occurred as to the
cause of the disaster, but its real author was not
suspected
until it was found that Hark was missing. In
the confusion of the first alarm he had slipped away,
and was seen no more in that neighborhood.
CHAPTER XIII.
Some
of our readers are perhaps disposed to throw
this volume aside, in disappointment at not finding in it
any of those touching love-scenes, which constitute the
charm of most novels. It will perhaps be said that the
hero is the most insignificant character in the book, and
the heroine not half so interesting as some of the other
personages. This objection has been urged against
some of the most delightful pictures in our language,
but has not been found sufficient to prevent the
circulation
,
or diminish the celebrity, of those admirable works.
It has been said of Scott that he has made his heroes
secondary characters, while the highest powers of his
mighty genius have been employed upon those who
play subordinate parts. We may admit the fact as
stated, without, by any means, conceding that it forms a
valid ground of objection. We can see no reason for
the assumption, that the young gentleman, the story of
whose love is interwoven with our tale, should, as a
matter of course, be intruded upon the reader at every
turning, or that all the writer's best powers should be
L 2
exhausted in embellishing him, who being already so
attractive as to have made a deep impression on the
heart of the heroine, ought to be, in all conscience,
attractive enough for the rest of the world. Besides,
we wish to be permitted to tell our story in our own
way, and to pass our hero in silence until we find him
achieving some adventure worthy of being told. As for
love matters, we have little taste for them, and are
content
to leave them to be imagined by our tasteful and
sentimental readers.
If there be any who are disposed to listen to a dry
detail of events, which are necessary to explain and
connect the circumstances which have been hinted at in
this history, we shall introduce them into a small Dutch
tavern, on the frontiers of the settled part of
Pennsylvania
.
It was a stone house, built with an attention to
solidity, which showed that the proprietor entertained
the hope of transmitting it to his descendants. On the
sign-board, which swung conspicuously before the door,
was painted the bust of a woman, with arms extended,
and with a great suit of long hair, streaming like a birch
broom down her back, grasping a looking-glass in one
hand, and a comb in the other, while the lower extremity
of the figure tapered off into something resembling the tail
of a sea-serpent. Over this singular representation was
written THE MARE MADE, and underneath, By
Jacob Shultzhoover. The front door opened into a
bar-room, in the centre of which was placed a large
ten-plate stove, around whose heated sides was collected
a circle of teamsters, smoking their pipes, and
conversing
with all convenient deliberation, in the harmonious
accents of the Dutch language. In a back room,
similarly
warmed, was a table from which a traveller had
lately risen, and over whose ample surface was
scattered
,
in gigantic ruin, the remains of a great dish of
sour-kraut and pork, the relic of a capacious apple-pie,
and a rye loaf, flanked by pitchers of cider and milk.
Several bouncing girls, with faces round as my shield,
rotund forms, and fleshy sun-burnt arms, bare to the
elbow, were clearing away the truck of the evening
meal with a marvellous activity, simpering and smiling
all the while, as they covertly peeped at the handsome
young gentleman who sat picking his teeth by the stove,
so deeply plunged in meditation as not to notice what
was passing around him. I am not aware whether
picking the teeth is altogether heroic, but a fit of
abstraction
is the very thingit looks so lover-like and
interesting. This meditative gentleman was our friend
Mr. Fennimore, who was hastening to join the army on
the frontier. Shortly after supper he retired to his
chamber, took a set of writing materials from his valise,
and spent the evening in composing a long letter, from
which we shall take the liberty of making some
extracts
:
Lieut. Lyttleton Fennimore, to C. Wallace, Esq.
My father was a native of England, who came to
Virginia when he was quite a young man. He was of
a good family, and well educated; if my mother be
considered a competent witness in such a case, he was
even more,highly accomplished, and remarkably
interesting
in person and manners. He brought letters of
introduction, and was well received; and as soon as it
was understood that his extreme indigence was such as
to render it necessary that he should embark in some
employment, to earn a support, he was readily received
as private tutor in the family of a gentleman, residing
not far from Mr. Heyward, the father of the late Major
Heyward, whose melancholy death I have described to
you. Mr. Heyward also employed him to give lessons
in drawing, and the French language, to his only
daughter, then a girl of about sixteen. A mutual
attachment ensued between my father and this young
lady, which was carefully concealed, because the
Heywards
,
though generous and hospitable, were proud and
aspiring.
I do not know how it was, that my father became
unpopular among the young gentlemen of the
neighborhood
.
His manners might not have been sufficiently
conciliating, or his spirit might have been above his
station, and have prompted him to exact attentions
which were not thought due to a private tutor. Perhaps
his attentions to Miss Heyward were suspected, and
regarded as presumptuous. Whatever might have been
the cause, the result was, that he was coolly received in
society, and subjected to many petty indignities. The
younger Mr. Heyward, who had at first treated him
with kindness, no sooner suspected him of paying
attention
to his sister, to whom he was tenderly attached,
than he became his violent enemy, and insisted on his
immediate discharge. The elder Mr. Heyward, too
magnanimous to do a deliberate act of injustice, took
time for reflection. During this interval, an event
occurred, which brought matters to a crisis.
Although the American colonies were at that time
loyal to the British king, and no plan of revolution had
been matured, yet extensive discontents prevailed, and
language of the strongest reprehension against the
ministry
was currently used. My father had, in writing to
England, drawn a vivid picture of the state of public
sentiment in Virginia, and the letter having been shown
to a cabinet minister, he was so well pleased with the
spirit displayed in it, as well as with the talents of the
writer, that he intimated a wish that the correspondence
should be kept up. This led to a series of letters,
written by my father, expressly for the eye of the
minister
.
He was a Briton by birth and allegiance, and
did nothing dishonorable in acting thus, as an agent of
the government; and as he adhered strictly to truth, and
depicted the motives of the colonists even in favorable
colors, he could not be justly considered as violating
hospitality. This correspondence, however, was
discovered
;
its author was represented as a spy, and loaded
with all the opprobrium which the indignation of an
enraged community could suggest. Nothing but sudden
flight could have saved his life. Miss Heyward was the
first to warn him of his danger. Having already given
him her affections, and being prepared to share his
fortunes, she proved her sincerity and her devotion, by
nobly consenting to elope with him, and become the
companion of his poverty and misfortune. They
commenced
their flight at the dawn of day, and before its
close, had indissolubly united their fates by the marriage
bond.
They retired for a while from notice, hoping that
my mother's friends would become reconciled; but this
expectation proved deceptive. Major Heyward, though
of a generous disposition, was a man of aristocratic
feelings
;
he loved his sister tenderly, and had, perhaps,
indulged some views in relation to her settlement in life,
which were blasted by her marriage with my father.
He had also a great antipathy to foreigners, and
considered
his family degraded by the marriage of one of its
members with a person who, however estimable, was an
alien to our country. For even at that early period,
many of the oldest families among the colonists felt a
pride in their native land, and gloried in the name of
American, though it was then but a name. He refused
to be reconciled to my mother on any terms, and
spoke of my father in language which forbade any
subsequent
advance on their part. They settled in
Philadelphia
,
where they lived in the most retired manner,
supported by the scanty pittance earned by my father
as a merchant's clerk. Of that unfortunate parent I
have no recollection, for he died while I was an infant.
My mother, left penniless in a strange city, was reduced
to a state of extreme necessity, but her pride would not
permit her to return to her father's house, where she
would now undoubtedly have been received with open
arms. You have seen my excellent mother, and you
know that she is a woman of uncommon talents, and
remarkable fortitude. When thus thrown upon her own
resources, she resolved to make the best of her
unfortunate
situation. She took a secluded lodging, and applied
herself with unwearied industry to her needle; and being
patronized by several fashionable ladies, maintained
herself creditably, though with extreme frugality, by
fabricating the most elegant and expensive articles of
female dress. Her taste and skill in these delicate
manufactures
were unrivalled. I cannot express the feelings
of anguish which I experienced while a mere child,
in witnessing the silent, the incessant toils of my
mother, which were secretly undermining her health;
and the devotion with which all her affections were
concentrated in myself, the only earthly object of her
regard. And I can remember, too, the fervor with
which I mentally vowed to devote my whole life to her
service. The death of a relative of my father in
England
,
placed us in possession of a small annuity, which
relieved my excellent mother from the necessity of
laboring for a support, and enabled her to educate me in
a manner suitable to her wishes; though we were still
poor, and obliged, as you are aware, to live in the most
frugal manner.
At the decease of my grandfather, Mr. Heyward,
we learned that a considerable sum of money would fall
to my mother, under the provisions of a settlement made
at the marriage of her parents. But again her pride, and
her wounded feelings, induced her to prefer obscure
indigence rather than make her situation known in any
manner to her family; nor until I became old enough
to take the management of my affairs into my own
hands, would she consent to have her claim investigated.
This was the purpose of my visit to Virginia. I have
detailed to you most of the events attending that visit:
it is enough to add, that my uncle satisfied me that we
had been misinformed. No marriage settlement had
ever existed, his father died intestate, and he, under the
rule of primogeniture, which then prevailed in Virginia,
was the sole heir. Thus a hope long cherished in secret
by my mother, was in a moment blasted.
CHAPTER XIV.
At
the close of a fine autumn day, a solitary
traveller
found himself bewildered among the labyrinths of
the forest, near the shores of the Ohio. He had taken
his departure early in the morning from the cabin of a
hunter, to whose hospitality he had been indebted for his
last night's lodging and supperif that deserves the
name of hospitality which consisted of little more than
a permission to spread his blanket, and eat his
provisions
,
by the woodsman's fire. We call it so because
it was granted in a spirit of kindness. When he parted
from his host in the morning, he learned that the
settlement
to which he was destined was fifty miles distant,
and he spurred onward in the confident hope of reaching
his journey's end ere the setting in of night. Before the
day was half spent, he began to suspect that he had
taken the wrong path; but unwilling to retrace his steps,
he still pushed on in the expectation of meeting with
some human habitation from which he could take a new
departure.
It was, as we have before remarked, forty years ago,
and this country was still a wilderness; the Indian
tribes had been driven to the opposite shore of the Ohio,
but continued to revisit their ancient hunting grounds,
sometimes in peace, but oftener impelled to war by their
insatiable appetite for plunder and revenge. Small
colonies
were thinly scattered throughout the whole of this
region, maintaining themselves by constant watchfulness
and courage, and every here and there a
station
a rude block-house surrounded with palisadesafforded
shelter to the traveller, and refuge, in time of danger, to
all within its reach. Between these settlements,
extensive
tracts remained uninhabited and pathless,
blooming
in all the native luxuriance and savage grace, which
had captivated the heart of their earliest admirer among
the whites, the fearless and enterprising Boon.
On the same evening, Mr. Timothy Jenkins, the sole
proprietor, occupant, and commander of Jenkins'
Station, might be seen alternately plying his axe, with
a skill and vigor of which a backwoodsman alone is
master, and shouldering huge logs of wood, under the
burthen of which, any other sinews than such as were
accustomed to the labor, would have been rent asunder.
It was evident that Captain Jenkins was preparing for a
vigorous defence of his garrison against an enemy of no
mean importance, and was determined to guard against
the inroads of a frost, by building a log heap in his
fire-place
.
That the latter was of no ordinary dimensions
might have been readily inferred from the quantity of
fuel required to fill it; for Timothy, like a true
Kentuckian
,
never considered his fire made, until the hearth
M
was stowed full of the largest logs which his herculean
limbs enabled him to carry. An unpractised observer
might have supposed that he was laying in a supply of
fuel for the winter, when the hospitable landlord was
only performing a daily labor. And here it is necessary
to inform those who have not enjoyed the luxury of
reposing in a cabin, that the fire-place is generally
about eight feet in width, and four or five in depth, so as
to contain conveniently about a quarter of a cord of
wood, which quantity produces a cheerful warmth, the
more necessary as the doors are left standing open.
Having performed this duty, Captain Jenkins threw
down his axe, with the air of one greatly relieved by
having gotten fairly through a disagreeable job, and
relaxing into the ordinary indolence of manner, from
which the momentary stimulus of necessary exertion
had aroused him, sauntered round his inclosure with one
of his hard bony hands stuffed in either pocket.
Perceiving
that an aperture had been made in the outworks
by the removal of one or two of his pickets, which had
rotted off and fallen to the ground, he proceeded to close
the breach.
They are of no use, no how, said the Captain;
the Indians have not paid me a visit these eighteen
months, and may never come back. It seems right hard
to be at the trouble of barricading them out, when they
don't try to get in; but, howsever, he continued, as he
raised the prostrate timbers, and propped them in their
places, I'll put the
wooden sogers
on post again, if it's
only for a showthey keep the hogs and wild
varments
out, and if an
inemy
should come, it will
sort o
' puzzle
'em to find out the weak place. Having thus
compromised
with his indolence, he stopped the breach in such
a manner as to have deceived the eye of a hasty
observer, and returned to the house, hastened by the
sound of loud talking and mirth which proceeded from
his guests.
The fortress popularly known as Jenkins' Station,
consisted simply of a circular inclosure, formed by a
picketing composed of long sticks of timber planted
firmly in the ground, and was intended to protect the
domicil of honest Timothy against a sudden onset of the
Indians. At that period every farmer who ventured to
pitch his tent in advance of the settlements, fortified his
house in this manner; others, who followed, settled
around him, and sought shelter in the
station
upon any
sudden emergency. Thus these places, although
private
property, partook of the nature of public defences,
and became widely known; and travellers made their
way from one station to another, so that they also
became houses of entertainment, and those of the owners
of them who would accept pay from wayfaring persons,
were, in a manner, forced into the business of
tavern-keepers
.
The proprietor moreover, became a
captain
,
by common consent; because, as the people gathered
here in time of danger, and it was natural that he should
command in his own house, that office fell to him during
a siege, and of course pertained to him through life.
And such is the love of military titles among a people
who are mostly descended from warlike ancestors, that
however the individual thus honored may be afterwards
distinguished, though he may become a legislator, or
even a magistrate, his military designation is seldom
merged in any other.
The dwelling of Captain Jenkins was composed of
two log houses, covered under the same roof, so as to
leave a wide passage between them, after the most
approved
fashion of a Kentucky log cabin. Round the
fire-place, which occupied nearly the whole gable-end
of the house, sat five or six men recently dismounted
from their horses, who were compensating themselves
for the fatigue and abstinence of a day's travel, from
the contents of a bottle which was circulating rapidly
among them.
Come on, Tim Jenkins, said one of them to the
landlord, as he entered, step
forrard
, and touch the
blue bottle to your lips. Your whiskey is as good as
your fire; and that is saying a great deal, for you are
the
severest old beaver to tote
wood that I've seen for
many a long day.
I like to warm my friends inside as well as out,
when they call on me, rejoined Jenkins, the nights
are getting powerful cold, and they say it's not good for
a man to lie down to sleep with a chill in his blood.
I say so too, said the other: I don't know what
cold is good for, except to give a man an appetite for his
liquor
Or long nights, continued the host, but to get
sober inso here's good luck to you, Mr. Patterson, and
to you gentlemen, all.
At this moment the attention of the company was
arrested by a loud hallo! uttered without, and Mr.
Jenkins hastened to receive a new guest. He soon
returned
,
introducing a young gentleman of a very
prepossessing
appearance, whose dress and manners
announced him as an inhabitant of a more polished
country than that in which he found himself. It was
our friend Mr. George Lee, who having been lost in the
forest, as we have seen, had continued to grope his way
in great perplexity, until he chanced to fall into a path
which led him to the Station. Bowing cheerfully to
the rough sons of the forest, as they greeted him with
the usual How d'ye do, stranger? he seated himself
and began to throw off his spurs, leggins, gloves, and
other travelling accoutrements, while Patterson and his
companions, after a passing glance, resumed their bottle,
and their mirth.
Tired and cold, Mr. Lee drew his chair towards the
fire, and remained for a time solely occupied in the
enjoyment of its comfortable warmth. Patterson sat
by the table replenishing his glass, and pressing his
companions to drink, talking all the while in a loud and
overbearing tone, and growing more and more
boisterous
,
until the annoyance awakened Mr. Lee, from a
kind of stupor that was creeping over him. He raised
his head, and discovered the eyes of one of the party
fixed upon him, with a gaze so eager, and so malignant,
as to attract his own instant attention. The man, whose
countenance displayed nothing remarkable, except a
ferocity unmingled with the least touch of human
feeling
,
no sooner caught the eye of the young traveller,
than he drew back, as if to avoid observation. Mr.
George Lee was a young gentleman, by no means
remarkable for penetration; but he was bold and manly,
M 2
nad mixed with the world more than most persons of
his years, and had a tolerable faculty of knowing men
by their looksa faculty which by no means evinces
a high degree of intellect, but more frequently is found
in ordinary minds. He looked round upon the company
into which he had been accidentally thrown, and for the
first time his eye rested upon the savage features of
Patterson
.
The latter was a large stout man, evidently
endued with more than common strength. There was
a considerable degree of sagacity in his countenance,
and his strong peculiar language seemed to be that of
one accustomed to think and speak without constraint.
His blood-shot eye, and bloated skin, betokened
habitual
intemperance; the fierce and remorseless expression
of his face was rendered more terrific by a large scar
on his forehead, and another on his cheek, while the
whole appearance of the man was bold, impudent, and
abandoned. He possessed, or, what was more likely,
affected, joviality and humor, continually pressing his
companions to drink, and giving to every remark a
strangely extravagant and original turn, which always
created laughter. Another peculiarity was the loudness
of his coarse voicepartly from habit, partly out of an
assumed frankness, and an affectation of not caring who
heard him, and partly to produce an impression of his
superiority upon those around him, he always spoke as
loud, even in a small room, as another person would in
haranguing a multitude. But when intoxicated, this
peculiarity became very striking; then he bellowed and
roareduttering his sentiments with an astonishing
energy of language, and a horrible profusion of the
most terrific oaths, in a voice naturally loud, and now
pitched to its highest and harshest note, and with a
wonderful vehemence of gesture. This characteristic
had gained for him the nick-name of Roaring Bob,
by which he was as well known as by his proper
christian
and surnames.
Our friend George Lee, who had never before seen a
man whose presence excited so much disgust, turned
from him, and looked round upon his associates. They
were a villanous and ruffian set, who seemed fit
instruments
to perpetrate any crime, however base or bloody.
There was one person present, however, whose
countenance
drew his regard the more forcibly, from the
contrast
it presented with those around. It was that of a
young man whose placid features, and neat though
coarse dress, indicated an acquaintance with the
decencies
of social life. There was a fine expression of
ingenuousness
in his face, and his clear blue eye sparkled
with vivacity and intelligence. He seemed to be under
some constraint, for, although addressed by the party as
an acquaintance, his answers were brief, and while he
treated them with civility, he appeared to be not disposed
to join their conversation, or share their mirth. At an
early hour, a plentiful supper was spread, to which the
whole of this ill-assorted party sat down; and
immediately
after, Mr. Lee, pleading fatigue, retired to
repose.
A weary traveller needs no poppies strewn upon his
pillow, to medicine him to that sweet sleep which is
the reward of toil; and on this occasion, although the
imagination of our friend George, never very active,
was considerably excited by the novel scenes he had
just witnessed, his reflections were soon drowned in
forgetfulness. He had not slept long, when his slumber
was suddenly broken by a cold hand, which grasped
him by the shoulder. He started up in alarm, and was
about to speak, but was prevented by a voice addressing
him in a firm but hurried tone, so low as to be barely
audible: Do not speakyou are in dangerrise and
follow mebe quick and silent! The first impulse of
the traveller's mind, was distrust towards his
mysterious
visitor, for whose secret warning he could not
readily perceive any rational ground; but as he
proceeded
mechanically to obey the mandate, his generous
nature, not easily awakened to suspicion, repelled the
hasty suggestion of doubt, and induced him to follow his
guide with confidence. The latter, again cautioning him
to silence, led the way to the open air, and proceeding
under the shadow of the house, to an aperture in the
stockade, passed out of the inclosure, and hastily
penetrated
into the forest. Mr. Lee pursued the rapid, but
noiseless footsteps of his conductor, amazed at the
suddenness
of the adventure, and perplexed with his own
endeavors to guess its probable cause or issue. It will
be readily imagined that his conjectures could lead to
no satisfactory conclusion, and that his situation
decoyed
into the solitude and darkness of the forest, by a
strangerperhaps one of those whose felon glances
had attracted his attentionwas such as to have created
alarm in the stoutest heart. Yet there is something in
every young and chivalric bosom, which welcomes
danger
when it assumes an air of romance; and George
Lee, while internally blaming his own imprudence,
which seemed to be leading him from a fancied to a real
danger, could not resist the curiosity which he felt to
develope the mystery, nor resolve to abandon an
adventure
which promised at least novelty. His uncertainty
was of short duration; for his guide, after a few minutes'
rapid walking, emerged into an open clearing, and halted;
and as he stood exposed in the clear moonlight, Mr. Lee
had no difficulty in recognizing the young forester whose
prepossessing appearance he had remarked as affording
so strong a contrast to the suspicious looks and brutal
manners of his associates.
Pointing to a ruined cabin near which they stood, It
is fortunate for you, sir, said the guide, that our
landlord's
stable within the stockade was filled before you
arrived, and that your good nag was sent to this sorry
roof for shelter.
I shall be better able to appreciate my good
fortune
,
said Lee, endeavoring to imitate the composure
with which the other had spoken, when I learn in
what manner I am to be benefited by the bad lodging
of my horse.
By the badness of his lodging nothing, said the
other, by its privacy, muchto be brief, you must
fly.
Fly! whenhow?
Now; upon your horse, unless you prefer some
other mode of travelling.
Fly! repeated Mr. Lee, incredulously, from
what?
From dangerpressing and immediate danger.
The young traveller stood for a moment irresolute,
gazing at the placid features of the backwoodsman, as
if endeavoring to dive into his thoughts. His
embarrassed
air, and suspicious glance, did not escape the
forester, who inquired,
Are you satisfied?will you confide in me?
I cannot choose but trust youand there is that in
your countenance which tells me my confidence will not
by misplaced; I only hesitated under the suspicion that
I was to be made the subject of some idle jest.
I have been too familiar with danger, said the other,
to consider it a fit subject for pleasantry. Had you
looked death in the face as often as I have done, you
would have learned to recognize the warning voice of a
friend who tells you of its approach.
Enough, replied Lee, pardon my hasty suspicion
and let me know what has excited your apprehensions
for my safety.
First let us saddle your horse,we delay here too
long. So saying, the young woodsman hastened into
the cabin, and with Mr. Lee's assistance equipped the
gallant steed, whom they found sounding his nostrils
over a full trough, with a vigor which announced as well
the keenness of his appetite as the excellence of his food.
Your nag has a good stomach for his corn, said
the backwoodsman, leading him out into the moonlight,
and if he does not belie his looks, he travels as well as
he feeds; and, without waiting for a reply, he threw the
bridle over the animal's neck, and, returning into the
cabin, produced the baggage, great coat, and other
equipments of Lee, who, now more than ever astonished
at the conduct of his companion, prepared in silence for
his journey.
Are you ready? said the forester.
I am ready.
Then mount, and follow me.
The guide struck into the woods, and, proceeding with
the same noiseless steps which Lee had before remarked,
strode forward with a rapidity to which neither the
darkness
of the forest, nor the thick undergrowth of tangled
bushes, seemed to present any obstacle. They proceeded
in silence, the horse following instinctively the footsteps of
the forester, until the latter striking into a hard foot-path
halted, and, advancing to the horseman's side, placed his
hand on the pummel of the saddle.
With common prudence, you are now safe, said he
and after a moment's hesitation he continued in a low
rapid tone; those scoundrels in the house have laid a
plan to rob and murder you.
Is it possible? Can they be such base
It is trueI have not alarmed you on bare suspicion.
I overheard their planand knowing the men, I was
satisfied that you could save your life only by flight.
But our landlordsurely he is not privy to their
design.
He is not.
Why then should I fly? If he and yourself will
stand by me, I could defy a regiment of such fellows.
You do not know your dangerto return would be
madnessJenkins, though an honest, is a timid man; as
for myself, I would cheerfully aid you, but
circumstances
forbid that I should embroil myself with those
men at present. Besides, you cannot remain at the
station always, and your departure can never be effected
with such safety as now, before the enemy is on the
alert. Farewellkeep that path, and you are safe. So
saying, he disappeared, and our traveller, with a heavy
heart, resumed his journey.
If Mr. Lee had found his situation perplexing on the
preceding day, while wandering in uncertainty through
the forest, it was certainly more so now, when
surrounded
by the gloom of night. Unable to see the way, he
was obliged to trust entirely to the instinct of his horse,
who kept the path with surprising sagacity. Sometimes
he found himself descending into a ravine, sometimes
the splashing of water announced that he was crossing
a rivulet, and sometimes a bough overhanging the path
would nearly sweep him from his seat; but he continued
to move cautiously along, satisfied that he could
encounter
no danger more pressing than that from which he
had escaped. He was aware that the outlaw is often
found on the extreme frontier of our country,
perpetrating
deeds of violence and fraud, beyond the reach of the
civil authority. In those distant settlements, and at the
early period of which we write, the inhabitants, thinly
scattered, were fully occupied in providing for their own
defence and sustenance, and the wholesome restraints of
law, if they existed, were but feebly enforced. At such
points, gangs of ruffians would sometimes collect, and
for a time elude, or openly defy, the arm of justice.
Carefully avoiding to give offence to their own immediate
neighbors, and striking only at a distance, they for a
time escaped detection. The honest settler, simple and
primitive in all his habits, unwilling to meddle with laws
which he little understood, endured the evil so long as
the peace of his own community remained undisturbed;
until roused at last by some daring act of violence, he
hunted down the felon, as he would have chased the
panther
.
That Patterson and his associates belonged to that
class of marauders, Mr. Lee had little doubt; and he
judged correctly, that if they had really marked him out
as their prey, he could only be protected by a force
superior to their own.
Occupied with such reflections, he continued to grope
his way, until he supposed the night must be nearly
exhausted. The moon, whose beams had occasionally
reached him through the shadows of the forest, had gone
down, and the darkness was quite impenetrable. He
stopped often, turning his eyes in every direction, to
discover
the first beam of the morning. Never did night
appear so longhe counted hour after hour in his
imagination
until
his impatience became insupportable.
The silence of the forest, so long continued and so
death-like
,
became painfully distressing; but when it was
suddenly
broken by the savage howl of the wolf, or the
fearful screaming of the owl, the traveller involuntarily
started, and was not ashamed to acknowledge a thrilling
sense of danger. Even now, the panther might be
silently crawling along his track, watching for a
favorable
opportunity to spring upon his prey, the hungry
wolf might be scenting his approach, or the Indian
crouching in his path. Wearied with conjecture, a
feverish excitement took possession of his frame, and he
thought he could cheerfully encounter any peril, rather
N
than be thus tortured with darkness and suspense.
Bodily
fatigue was added to his sufferings, and at length he
dismounted to seek a momentary relief by change of
posture, and threw himself on the ground at the root of a
tree, holding his bridle in his hand; and the vividness of
his sensations subsiding with the inaction of his frame,
he was unconsciously overcome by sleep.
When Mr. George Lee awoke, the morning was far
advanced. The bridle had fallen from his hand, and his
horse was grazing quietly near him. Stiff and aching
with cold, he remounted, and pursued his journey. The
road, if such it could be called, was no other than a
narrow
path, winding through the forest, of sufficient width
to admit the passage only of a single horseman.
Pursuing
the course of a natural ridge, the traveller passed
through a hilly region, clothed with oak and hickory
trees, and thickly set with an undergrowth of
hazle-bushes
and grape-vines; often halting to seek the path
which was concealed by the intertwining brush, or
covered with fallen leaves, and sometimes delaying to
gather the nuts and fruit, which offered their luxuries in
abundance. Thence descending into the rich alluvion
flats, his way led through groves of cotton-trees and
sycamore, whose gigantic trunks ascending to an
immense height were surmounted with long branches
so closely interwoven as almost to exclude the light of
heaven. Sometimes the graceful cane skirted his path,
and he waded heavily through the tangled brake,
embarrassed
by the numerous tracks beaten by the wild
grazing animals, who resort to such spots, or alarmed
by the appearance of beasts of prey, who lurk in these
gloomy coverts. Alternately delighted with the beauties
of nature, or chilled by the dreary solitude of the
wilderness
,
our traveller passed rapidly on, sometimes
enjoying those absorbing reveries in which young minds
are apt to revel, and sometimes indulging the
apprehensions
which his situation was calculated to excite. For
the bear, the wolf, and the panther, still lurked in these
solitudes, and the more dangerous Indian yet claimed
them as his heritage.
The sun was sinking towards the western horizon,
when he reached the broken country bordering on the
Ohio. His heart, which had been saddened by the
monotonous
gloom of interminable flats, and the intricacy
of miry brakes, was cheered as the hills rose upon his
view, and his faithful horse moved with renewed vigor
when his hoof struck the firm soil. Still, the
apprehension
of approaching night was not without its terror.
The backwoodsman alone, accustomed to such scenes,
inured to the toils of the chase, and versed in the
stratagems
of border warfare, can contemplate with
indifference
the prospect of a solitary encampment in the
forest; and our traveller began to look impatiently for
the signs of human habitation. He listened with intense
interest to every sound. In vain; the deer still galloped
across his path, stopping to gaze at the harmless
stranger, then throwing back their horns, and leaping
leisurely away with graceful bounds. The owl hooted
in the dark valleys, sending forth yells so long, so loud,
and so dismal, as to mislead the traveller into the
momentary
belief, that it was the mournful wail of human
misery; while the long shadows falling across the deep
ravines, and seen through myriads of yellow leaves
which floated on the breeze, assumed fantastic shapes to
the now heated fancy of the tired wayfarer.
CHAPTER XV.
Mr. George Lee
had been accustomed from his
youth to active sports, and severe bodily exercises; he
was perfectly at home in the saddle, and loved to wander
about the woods, better than to do anything else except
to drink wine. There were, therefore, some pleasures
mixed with the perplexities of his present situation. He
bore the fatigues into which he was so unexpectedly
thrown, like an experienced hunter, accustomed to long
and weary excursions; his native courage rendered him
careless of the dangers of the way, and his taste for
forest sports was frequently gratified by the sight of
animals which were new to him, and of places
charmingly
suited to the amusements in which he delighted.
The only thing that distressed him was hunger.
Although he was in love, and had travelled all the way
from Virginia, in pursuit of Miss Pendleton, whose hand
he considered indispensable to his happiness, yet he was
so unsentimental as to be actually hungryand well he
might be, for the poor young man had now been riding
twenty-four hours without food. When suffering a
privation of this kind, we are apt to torment ourselves
with the recollection of the good things that we have
eaten in happier days. And who had been more
fortunate
in this respect than our friend George, who had not
only
sate at good men's feasts
all his life, but kept expert cooks, and gave famous
dinners himself? He looked back with pleasurable and
mournful reminiscence, similar to that of the man who
is suddenly reduced from opulence to poverty. He too
was reduced in his circumstances, for he was denied the
luxury of eating, which is the most important
circumstance
of life; and the visions of departed saddles of
venison, turkeys, hams, roast pigs, oysters, and various
other dainty dishes, which the Virginians have in great
perfection, and dispense with prodigal hospitality to their
friends, rose before his mind's eye in mournful yet
delicious profusion. These reveries he dwelt upon until
their sameness wearied his mind. He began to grow
faint and tired; excessive hunger produced drowsiness,
accompanied with such callousness of feeling, that a
propensity was creeping over him to throw himself on
the ground, and sleep away his senses and his existence.
He tried to recollect some text of scripture which might
comfort him, but for his life, he could think of nothing
but eat, drink, and be merry, or something that had
eating and drinking in it. He attempted to sing, but his
songs were all bachanalian, and only served to provoke
thirst. He would have repeated some stanzas of poetry
to keep him awake, if he had known any; but he had
never cultivated the muses, and not a line could he
recollect, but
Little Jackey Horner, sitting in a corner,
Eating a Christmas pie;
N 2
and the dreadful conviction fastened itself at last upon
his alarmed fancy, that if he should escape a miserable
death by starvation in the wilderness, he would surely
meet a wretched end by surfeit whenever he should
come in contact with food. Never did George Lee
commune
so long with his own thoughts, or reflect so
seriously.
All at once, his tired horse, who was moving slowly
along the hardly perceptible path, with the bridle hanging
on his neck, suddenly stopped, as the path turned almost
at right angles, round a dense thicket. A few paces
before him, and until this instant concealed by the thick
brush, stood a miserable squalid boy, intently engaged in
watching some object not far from him. A small, gaunt,
wolf-looking, starved dog, crouched near him, equally
intent on the same game, so that even his quick ear did
not catch the tread of the horse's feet as they rustled
among the dry leaves, until the parties were in close
contact. The dog then, without moving, uttered a low
growl, which the ear of his master no sooner caught,
than he looked round, and seeing Mr. Lee, started up,
and was about to fly. But George exclaimed, My
little man, I've lost my way, and the lad stopped, eyed
the traveller timidly, and then looked earnestly towards
the spot to which his glance had been before directed.
I have missed my way, continued Mr. Lee, and
am almost starved.
Can't you wait a minute till I kill that
ar
snake?
replied Harkfor it was he.
The traveller looked in the direction indicated by the
boy's finger, and saw an immense rattle-snake, coiled,
with its head reared in the centre, his mouth unclosed,
his fierce eyes gleaming vindictively, and all his motions
indicating a watchful and enraged enemy. Hark gazed
at the reptile with an eager and malignant satisfaction.
His features, usually stupid, were now animated with
hatred and triumph. The scene was precisely suited to
interest the sportsmanlike propensities of Mr. George
Lee, if he had not happened to be too hungry to enjoy
anything which might delay him any longer in the
wilderness.
Kill the snake, boy, said he, impatiently, and then
show me the way to some house.
Hark motioned with his finger, as if enjoining silence,
and replied laconically, It ain't ready yet.
The rattle-snake now raised his tail and shook his
rattles, as if in defiance; and then, as if satisfied with
this show of valor, and finding that his enemies made
no advance, but stood motionless, slowly uncoiled himself,
and began to glide away. Hark left his position, and,
with noiseless steps, alertly made a small circuit so as
to place him in front of the enemy. The snake raised
his head, darted out his tongue, and then turned to
retreat in another direction; but no sooner had he
presented
his side to Hark, than the intrepid snake-killer
bounded forward, and alighted with both his feet on the
neck of the reptile, striking rapidly, first with one foot, and
then the other, but skilfully keeping his victim pinned
to the ground, so as to prevent the use of its fangs. The
snake, in great agony, now twisted the whole of its long
body round Hark's leg; and the boy, delighted to witness
the writhings of his foe, stood for a while grinning in
triumph. Then carefully seizing the reptile by the neck,
which he held firmly under his foot, he deliberately
untwisted it from his leg, and threw it on the ground at
some distance from him, and seemed to be preparing to
renew the contest.
You stupid boy, cried Mr. Lee, why don't you
take a stick and kill the snake?
That ain't the right way, replied Hark, and as the
venomous creature, disabled and sadly bruised, essayed
to stretch its length on the ground, to retreat, the
snake-killer
again jumped on it, and in a few minutes crushed
it to death with his feet. Then taking it up in his hands,
he surveyed it with his peculiar grin of joy, counting
the rattles as he separated them from the body, with an
air of triumph, as great as that of the hunter when he
numbers the antlers of a noble buck.
Mr. Lee gazed at this scene with unfeigned
astonishment
.
Though no mean adept himself in the art of
destroying animal life, he had never before witnessed
such an exhibition. The diminutive size of the youth, his
meagre and famished appearance, his wretched apparel,
together with the skill and intrepidity displayed in this
nondescript warfare, with a creature scarcely his inferior
in any respect, strongly excited his curiosity.
Well, you've beaten your enemy, said he in an
encouraging tone.
Yes, I reckon I've
saved
him.
But why did you not take a club to it?
It ain't the right way. I never go snaking with a
pole.
What is your name?
Do you live about here, stranger?
No, I am a traveller from Virginia, and was going
to Hendrickson's settlement, when I lost my way.
People's mighty apt to get lost, when they don't
know the range, replied Hark familiarly, encouraged
by the stranger's affability.
Where do you live? inquired Mr. Lee, endeavoring
to conciliate the half-savage being, whose friendship was
now important to him.
I don't live nowhere, in peticklar.
But you seem acquainted with these woods.
Yes, I
use
about here some.
How do you employ yourself?
I hunt some, and snake a little; and when I
haint
nothen
else to do, I go a
lizardin
.
Lizardin! what in the name of sense is that?
Killen lizards, replied the boy, rather
consequentially
.
I use up all the varments I come across.
Then you must
frog it some
, said Mr. Lee, laughing.
Oh yesand there's a powerful chance of the
biggest bull-frogs you ever see, down in the slash
yander. It would do you good to go there in the night
and hear 'em sing. I reckon there's more frogs and
water-snakes there, than they is in all Virginny.
I have no curiosity to see them. And now, my lad,
if you will guide me to the settlement, I will satisfy you
generously for your trouble.
Hark made objectionsit was too farhe could not
tell the distancebut it was farther than he could walk
in a day. Mr. Lee then begged to be conducted to the
nearest house; but the snake-killer shook his head.
Surely you lodge somewhere, exclaimed the
Virginian
,
growing impatient; take me to your camp, and
give me something to eat. I am starving.
Hark seemed irresolute, and continued to eye the
traveller with a childish curiosity, mingled with suspicion;
then, as if a new idea occurred to him, he inquired,
Where's your gun, mister?
I have none.
For the first time the melancholy visage of Hark
distended into a broad grin, as he exclaimed, Well, I
never see a man before that hadn't a gun. If it aint no
offence, stranger, what do you follow for a living?
Why, nothing at all, you dunce, said George; I
am a gentleman.
Hark was as much puzzled as ever. In
North-Carolina
,
said he, where I was raised, the people's all
gentlemen, except the women, and they've all got guns.
All this is nothing to the purposewill you not
show the way to your camp?
WellI reckonreplied Hark, withdrawing a few
steps, I sort o' reckon it wouldn't be best.
What objection can you possibly have?
I am afeard.
You need not fear me; I can do you no harm, if I
felt so disposed; and I have no disposition to injure you.
Won't you beat me?
Certainly not.
Nor take my skins from me?
No, no. I would not harm you upon any
consideration
.
Well, then, I reckon I'll take you to my camp.
So saying, Hark marched off through the woods,
followed by Mr. George Lee.
CHAPTER XVI.
The
snake-killer urged his way through the forest
with a rapid but noiseless step, followed by our friend
George, whose weary horse was scarce able to keep
pace with the hardy boy. After travelling a short
distance
,
they arrived at the top of a hill, whence the river
Ohio could be seen at a distance, gliding placidly, and
reflecting the sun-beams from the broad mirror of its
clear and beautiful surface. Here Mr. Lee was
requested
to dismount, and leave his horse; and
arrangement
with which he was by no means disposed to
comply
,
for he was too good a horseman not to love the
generous
animal which had borne him safely through the
fatigues of so long a journey. But the cautious policy
of Hark was not to be overthrown by any argument;
and after some discussion, the saddle and bridle were
stripped off and hung upon a tree, and the horse turned
out to graze, with his legs secured in such a manner as
to prevent him from wandering far from the spot. They
then descended the hill until they reached an extensive
plain of flat alluvion land, covered with a thick forest
of tall trees, skirting the shores of
the beautiful
stream
, and forming what is called in this country, the
river bottom. Here, concealed in a tangled thicket of
brushwood, matted with grape-vines, was a small lodge,
constructed of slender poles, covered with bark. Hark
paused, and cast furtive glances of apprehension around,
before he disclosed the entrance to this primitive and
wretched abode, examining with his eye the neighboring
coverts, and then looking timidly towards his companion,
as if still balancing in his mind between prudence and
hospitality; while the dog, imitating his master's caution,
crept silently round the spot, snuffing the air. At last,
Hark, as if satisfied, pushed aside the leafy branches
which concealed his place of retreat, and entering hastily
with his guest, carefully replaced the bushes behind him.
If Mr. Lee had been astonished before, at all he had
seen of the mysterious being into whose company he had
been so strangely thrown, his wonder was not decreased
on finding himself introduced into a lodge in some
vast wilderness, which seemed a more fit habitation for
a wild beast than a human creature. The lodge was
square, and not more than eight feet in diameter, while
its height was barely sufficient to allow the dwarfish
proprietor
to stand upright in the centre. It was dry and tight.
The floor was formed by logs embedded in the ground,
and covered with dried grass. The only visible articles
of property consisted of an iron stew-pan, a steel trap,
an axe, and a quantity of skins. Motioning to his
companion
to seat himself on the floor, Hark proceeded with
some alacrity to prepare a meal. In the first place, he
drew from a magazine of sundries, hidden in one corner
of his tent, several pieces of jerked venison dried so
hard as to be nearly of the consistency of wood, but
which, by the bye, was by no means unpalatable; and
placing them before his guest, signified that he might
commence operations; an intimation which Mr. Lee,
with the assistance of a pocket-knife, obeyed without
hesitation. Hark then retired, and having kindled a
small fire, in a ravine near the tent, produced the
carcase
of a fat opossum, which he cut up, and placed in
the stew-pan. In a few minutes the savory mess was
in a condition to be placed before the traveller; and
although totally unseasoned, and destitute of the
accompaniment
of bread or vegetables, the famished wayfarer
did ample justice to the cookery of Hark, who sat by,
and refused to partake, until the hunger of his guest was
appeased. This was the proudest day of the life of
Hark the snake-killer. Unused to kindness, and
accustomed
from the earliest dawn of reason to consider men
as his enemies, this was probably the first time that he
had ever enjoyed the luxury of doing good from motives
entirely voluntary. He was in company with a
gentleman
of fine appearance, and, to his apprehension, of
superior intelligence, who treated him as an equal.
Although an aristocrat by birth, property, and
association
,
Mr. Lee was naturally good-humored, and his
habits as a sportsman and man of pleasure had thrown
him frequently into contact with the lower classes of
society, and this we suppose to be generally true of those
who engage in sensual pleasures, or in what is more
commonly called dissipation. And it is, if we mistake
not, a national characteristic, that our gentlemen can,
when circumstances render it convenient, adapt
themselves
with perfect ease to the society of their inferiors
in education and manners. Mr. Lee, therefore, without
much effort, had the tact to treat our friend Hark as an
O
equal, simply by avoiding any supercilious show of
aversion
,
or airs of superiority; and the consequence was
that he rose every moment in the esteem and affection
of this uncouth boy, who soon began to venerate him as
a superior being.
It was now dusk, and our traveller had no choice left
but to spend the night under the miserable shelter which he
had found so opportunely. Indeed, contrasting his
present
situation with the gloomy terrors of the forest, and
the disquietude which he had experienced within the last
twenty-four hours, he found great room for
congratulation
,
and recovered his natural flow of spirits sufficiently
to converse freely with Hark, whose reserve began
imperceptibly
to wear away. While they were thus
engaged
,
the dog all at once showed symptoms of
agitation
,
pricking his ears, then crawling out of the tent and
snuffing the air, and at last uttering a low sharp whine,
and hastily retreating back to his master, with his hair
bristling and his limbs trembling. Hark, always alive
to fear, looked at his dumb companion, and at his guest,
with a ghastly expression of terror on his sallow
features
.
Mr. Lee would have spoken, but the boy
cautioned
him to be silent, and creeping to the aperture of
the lodge, reconnoitred the surrounding shades with the
cunning of a wary hunter. George followed, and was
about to step from the lodge, when his companion caught
his arm, and whispered Indians! Footsteps could
now be heard passing around; they were the wily steps
of the cautious savage treading softly as if aware of the
vicinity of a foe; but the rustling of the leaves, and the
cracking of the dried twigs, betrayed them to the ears
of the attentive listeners. Then a low signal-cry was
heard, which was answered by another from a different
direction. A party of Indians, painted for war, was
seen scattered about, moving silently through the bushes,
or standing in the attitude of eager and watchful
attention
,
with their hands upon their weapons, and their
dark eyes gleaming with ferocious avidity. It was
evident
that they had traced their victims to this spot, and
were now anxiously seeking the place of their
concealment
.
Suddenly, Hark uttered a piercing scream, and
rushing forward a few steps, pushed aside the bushes, so
as to disclose the entrance of the lodge to the Indians.
Traitor! exclaimed Mr. Lee, as he sprung after
him, convinced by this action that the wretched boy had
betrayed him into an ambuscade, and intending under a
sudden impulse of passion to strike him to the ground.
But a momentary glance induced him to abandon the
suspicion. Before him stood a tall Indian, whose
superior
air and dress announced him to be a leader, with
his rifle pressed to his shoulder as if in the act of taking
aim. His keen eye had discovered the faces of the
whites, through some slight opening of the intervening
foliage, and he was deliberately preparing to fire with
a deadly aim, when Hark, perceiving his intention,
leaped towards him to implore mercy, throwing himself
on his knees, and regarding his savage captor with looks
of intense agony. Mr. Lee stood behind him, unarmed,
and embarrassed; while the Indians, dashing through
the bushes, with the most terrific yells, and brandishing
their tomahawks, crowded about their victims, prepared
to glut their vengeance by immolating them upon the
spot. But the chief restrained them, making a brief but
peremptory explanation, in a language unknown to the
prisoners, but which probably suggested a respite from
instant death, only as a prelude to a more lingering and
dreadful fate.
Ferocious as this band of savages appeared to the eye
of Mr. Lee, to whom the scene was new, an experienced
observer would have remarked in their deportment a
more than ordinary degree of moderation. The Indians,
like all other unlettered men, act from impulse. A battle
always whets their appetite for blood; and they visit
upon the lives of their unfortunate captives, the ill-humor
occasioned by their own fatigues, losses, or sufferings.
They are cruel, always when excited, and often without
excitement; and sometimes from mere caprice treat their
prisoners with lenity, and even kindness.
It happened that the captors of Mr. Lee were in a
good humor. They had perhaps made a successful
inroad
upon the whites, or had met with no occurrence
recently to awaken resentful feelings. The fine horse
of Mr. Lee, the gun, the axe, and the skins of Hark,
constituted in their estimation a prize of no small value,
and their ready tact enabled them to see at a glance
that their prisoners were not persons of warlike habits.
Some, or all of these reasons operated to protect the
captives
from ill usage, and they were marched off to the
shore of the Ohio, where the Indians embarked in
canoes that were concealed among the willows, and
crossed to the opposite bank, where they encamped.
At an early hour the following morning, the whole
party prepared to march; but not until some of the
warriors
evinced a disposition to amuse themselves at the
expense of Hark. The diminutive size and queer looks
of the half-civilized youth, attracted their attention, and
they indulged their drollery by forming themselves into
two parallel lines, and making the disconcerted
snake-killer
march backwards and forwards between them.
As he passed along, one would prick him in the side with
the point of his knife, and when the frightened boy
turned his head towards his tormentor, another would
trip him by placing an obstacle in his path. One of the
tallest of the braves led him to a tree, against which he
placed him, while with a tomahawk he marked his
diminutive
height accurately upon the bark; then measuring
and marking his own height upon the same tree, he
pointed out the difference to the amused warriors, who
laughed vociferously at this specimen of wit.
Mr. George Lee joined heartily in the laugh
occasioned
by the ludicrous appearance of his new
acquaintance
,
but it was not long until he became himself a
subject
of merriment. Among the spoils was a large iron
kettle, into which the Indians had packed their
provisions
,
and when the march was about to be commenced,
it was determined to make our friend George the bearer
of this burden. In vain did he remonstrate, both by
emphatic signs and imploring language, assuring them
that he was a gentleman, unused to labor, and totally
unable to carry such a burthen; the Indians persisted in
placing the kettle on his head, and the unfortunate
gentleman
,
willing to try the virtue of obedience, and afraid
to refuse, moved forward. But although his head had
always been considered hard, in one sense of the word,
O 2
it did not prove so in the present instance, and after
proceeding
a few steps he began to falter, and showed a
desire to set down his load. A very muscular savage,
a surly malicious-looking ruffian, advanced towards him,
and brandishing his war-club, ordered him to proceed.
George, without understanding the language, readily
comprehended the meaning of the Indian, and turning
towards him, exclaimed in a tone of vexation, I say,
my good fellow, if you think it's so mighty easy to
carry this load, you had better try it yourself. The
Indian raised his club to strike, but George, who was a
theoretical boxer, and a man of spirit, threw the kettle
from his head, suddenly darted upon him, wrested the
club from his grasp, and throwing it from him, struck
his assailant with his fist. The Indians shouted applause,
formed a circle, and encouraged their companion to
continue
the battle; and the latter, who could not refuse
without disgrace, sprung furiously upon the rebellious
prisoner. Though stout and active, he found his full
match in Mr. Lee, who was a young man of large
frame, in the prime of manhood, and accustomed to
athletic exercises. He was much stronger than the
savage, while the latter was his superior in cunning.
Thus matched, the battle was severely contested for
several minutes, when George, by a lucky blow, stretched
his adversary upon the ground, to the infinite
amusement
of the bystanders, who made the forest ring with
their acclamations, while they taunted their beaten
comrade
with the severest irony. Mr. Lee now rose
considerably
in the estimation of his captors; the kettle was
suspended upon a pole and carried by two of the party,
and our friend accommodated with a lighter load.
They had not proceeded far when they reached the
margin of a broad and rapid stream, which they
prepared
to cross by fording. To this evolution Hark
evinced great repugnance; for although accustomed to
dabble in marshy pools, he could not swim, and was
marvellously afraid of deep water. The Indians, who
became more and more amused with his untoward
vagaries
,
drove him into the water before them, with shouts
of merriment. The stream was about waist deep to the
men, who waded firmly through without difficulty; not
so, Hark, whose chin floated like a cork upon the
surface
,
while his feet scarcely touching the bottom, were
frequently swept by the force of the current from under
him, and the terrified urchin completely immerseduntil
he was relieved, and again placed in a perpendicular
attitude. The Indians, either from a sense of the
ludicrous
,
or from the pleasure of giving pain, found such
rare sport in the sufferings of Hark, that they no sooner
reached the shore, than they determined to repeat the
exhibition; actuated by the same spirit which induces
the spectators at a theatre to
encore
some precious piece
of buffoonery. Hark was therefore commanded to
retrace
his steps to the opposite bank, attended by a
warrior
,
whose duty was to keep the performer's head above
water, but who mischievously bobbed it under the
surface
,
whenever a suitable opportunity offered. Having
thus recrossed, and returned, the savages, satisfied for
the present, prepared to resume their journey. Such
are some of the sports of the Indians, by which they
enliven the brief intervals of enjoyment, few and far
between, that succeed the solitary labors of the chase,
and the butcheries of war, the gloomy nights of watching,
and the long days spent in brooding over meditated
violence
,
and insatiable revenge.
Hark, though greatly terrified, was not much fatigued
by his late exertions, for he was as hardy as a pine knot,
and accustomed to exposure to the elements. He was
therefore soon rested, and was leaning carelessly against
the stem of a young tree, when the singular expression
of his countenance attracted the attention of the Indians,
who are quick and accurate observers of physiognomy.
His eye, usually dull, was now lighted up, and keenly
fixed upon some object at a short distance off, in the
woods. His lips were compressed, and the muscles of
his vacant countenance in perceptible motion. He seemed
to be drawing himself up like some crouching animal
preparing to spring on its prey. Suddenly he darted
forward towards a large black-snake, which was slily
dragging its shining folds over the dry leaves, and
seizing
the reptile by the neck with one hand, whirled the
long body in the air over his head, as a child would
flourish a whip-lash. Then he suffered it to coil itself
round his arm and neck; and disengaging it, threw it
into the air, catching it as it fell. This he repeated
frequently
,
always taking care to seize the animal
dexterously
so near the head, as to prevent the possibility of
its biting. At length, he dropped on his hands and
knees, and fixing his teeth in the back of the creature's
neck, shook it violently as a terrier dog worries a rat;
and finally taking the head in his hand, he rose and
lashed the trees with the long flexible body of his victim,
until he dashed it to pieces, exhibiting in the latter part
of this singular exercise, a degree of spite and fury
altogether
foreign from his ordinary indolence of manner.
The Indians, in the meanwhile, gazed at this novel
achievement with delighted admiration, clapping their
hands, and shouting applause; and when Hark rested
from his labors, some of the oldest warriors patted him
on the head, and exclaimed in broken English, good!
velly good! They forthwith conferred upon him a
sonorous Indian name, which being interpreted, signified
He that kills snakes, and treated him afterwards with
lenity, and even favor.
It was very evident that the Indians were neither in
haste, nor fearful of pursuit; for they loitered by the
way, stopping at particular places, and examining for
signs, as if expecting to fall in with some other war
party of their own tribe. At length, towards evening,
they reached the brow of a hill, where a small mark
was discovered, which had been made by chipping a
portion of the bark from a sapling, with a tomahawk;
and at a distance, in the low ground, a thin column of
smoke was seen wreathing above the trees. Here they
halted, cut a large pole, which, after stripping off the
bark, they painted with several colors, and then planted
in the ground. They now cut a lock of hair from the
head of each of the prisoners, and after braiding them,
placed them in a medicine bag, which they hung upon
the pole; and endeavored to explain by signs and broken
English, that these locks represented the prisoners, whom
they intended to adopt into their tribe. All things being
ready, the chief shouted with a loud voice, uttering
certain
peculiar yells by which they intended to convey to
their tribe the intelligence of their successful return, and
the number of their prisoners. Then they formed a
circle round the pole, and joining hands with each other
and with the prisoners who were now taken into
companionship
,
danced round it, singing and leaping with
great vivacity.
After this exercise had continued about half an hour,
they were joined by some of their companions whose
smoke they had seen, and the whole party marched off,
in great ceremony, to the camp, where Mr. Lee witnessed
a spectacle which filled him with astonishment and
horror. What this was, will be explained in a future
chapter.
CHAPTER XVII.
The
course of our narrative now brings us back to
Jenkins' Station. William Colburn, the brave youth
who effected the escape of Mr. Lee, was the same hunter
to whom the reader was introduced at the carriers'
encampment, in the Allegheny mountains. He knew the
ruffians by whom he was surrounded, and having saved
a stranger from their clutches, retired silently to his
lodging, little apprehensive of any danger to himself.
But his situation was not without peril, which, however
he might be disposed to despise it, occupied his thoughts;
while the interest that he felt in the stranger, who
seemed to have been thrown upon him for protection,
concurred to drive sleep from his pillow. The apartment
which he occupied was a mere loft, the same which Mr.
Lee had just left, immediately above the room in which
the noisy ruffians were assembled. Their loud
conversation
had now ceased, and they seemed to have thrown
themselves on the floor to slumber. After some time, he
heard a slight noise in the apartment below, succeeded
by a faint murmur of voices; then a step could be
distinguished, as of one slowly ascending to his chamber.
He snatched his hunting-knife from the chair beside his
bed, and concealing it under the bed-clothes, feigned
sleep. A person entered, and approached the bed which
had been occupied by Mr. Lee. A short silence ensued,
then a blasphemous expression of disappointment escaped
the intruder, who now partially threw aside a cloak
which had concealed a dark lantern, and a dim light
gleamed over the apartment. Having satisfied himself
that the bed before him was empty, the ruffian turned
hastily to that of Colburn, whose placid features indicated
the calmness of profound slumber. The ruffian laid his
hand upon his knife, gazed for an instant with resentful
malignity, and then hastily retired, but not until the
youth had recognized the savage countenance of
Patterson
.
Colburn heard him enter the room below, and
arising lightly from his bed, placed his ear to a crevice
in the floor, and heard one of the party exclaim,
Gone!
Ay, replied Patterson, gone, hook and line.
A confused whispering ensued, from which Colburn
could gather nothing; but directing his eye to the
crevice, he saw Patterson point his finger upwards, and
concluded that the conversation related to himself.
A moment afterwards, one of the party remarked,
He
knows something about it.
Patterson, with a tremendous oath, replied, He knows
more than he shall ever tell.
A long consultation ensued, which ended with
Patterson's
saying, Not to-nightit will not dobut
to-morrow
he must be taken care of.
During this time, Patterson had applied himself several
times to the whiskey-bottle, and becoming much
intoxicated
,
began to curse his companions as villains and
cowards.
It was you, said he, that put me on thisI never
attempted the like beforeI have stood by you, and
protected you in all your villanybut you know I have
always said I would never be concerned in taking life
I never have done it beforethis is the first time
and when the act come to be done, you all backed out,
and left me to do itbut this is the last timeI shall
never lift my hand against a man in the dark again
Yes you will, said a coarse voice; and the speaker,
followed by another person, entered the room.
Harpe! exclaimed several voices.
Aythat's my name; I am not ashamed to own it.
You ought to be, rejoined Patterson, for if ever
there was a bloody-minded villain
That's enough, said Harpe fiercely, you and I
know each other, and the less we say of one another the
better.
I never killed a man, said Patterson.
Because you havn't the courage, cried Harpe; but
you pass counterfeit money, and steal horsesand
besides
that, don't I know something about a man that's
just gone from here, and another that's asleep, pointing
significantly upwards.
Patterson saw that Harpe had been eavesdropping,
and felt the necessity of compromising matters.
I was only joking, Mr. Harpe, said he: what you
do is nothing to nobody but yourselfgo your ways, and
I'll go mine.
I am willing to do you a good turn, replied Harpe,
and you must do me one; that lad up there, must be
you understandor else you must quit the country
and there's another that I missed in the woods, that
must be hunted up in the morninghelp me, and I'll
help you.
Colburn had been satisfied, until now, that he was safe
for the night. Being the son of a respectable farmer in
a neighboring settlement, whose courage and enterprise
were well known, and being popular himself, he was
aware that Patterson and his gang would not dare to
molest him under the roof of Jenkins, where a deed of
violence could not be perpetrated without the risk of
discovery. Had he been a stranger, his situation would
have been hopeless; the chances of detection would, in
that case, have been few, and the danger of retribution
small, compared with the consequences that would result
from an injury to himself. That an attempt would be
made in the morning to waylay him in the woods,
where no witness would be present, he saw was
probable
,
and to escape that danger required all his ingenuity.
P
But the arrival of the Harpes, and the disclosures he had
heard, convinced him that he was placed in imminent
peril.
At the time of the escape of the Harpes from justice,
in the manner formerly related, their names were
unknown
in Kentucky. They were strangers in the
country, and the aggression for which they were then in
custody, was the first that they were known to have
committed. Since then, a series of shocking massacres
had given them a dreadful notoriety. They had passed
through the whole length of the scattered settlements of
this wild region, leaving a bloody track to mark their
ruthless footsteps. They spared neither age nor sex, but
murdered every unprotected being who fell in their way.
What was most extraordinary, they appeared to destroy
without motive or temptation. Plunder was a secondary
object; the harmless negro, and the child, were their
victims as often as the traveller or the farmer. A native
thirst for blood, or a desire of vengeance for some real
or imaginary injury, seemed to urge them on in their
horrible warfare against their species. They had escaped
apprehension thus far, in consequence of the peculiar
circumstances of the country, and by a singular exertion
of boldness and cunning. Mounted on fleet and
powerful
horses, they fled, after the perpetration of an cutrage,
and were heard of no more, until they appeared suddenly
at some distant and unexpected point to commit new
enormities. Their impunity thus far was the more
astonishing, as the people of the frontier have always
been remarkable for the public spirit, alertness, and
success, with which they pursue offenders, who seldom
escape these keen and indefatigable hunters.
Colburn was aware that from such enemies he had no
chance of escape but in immediate flight, and hastily
putting on his clothes, he had the good fortune to slip out
of the house unperceived. A few minutes afterwards, a
loud hallooing from beyond the stockade, announced the
arrival of other travellers; and Captain Jenkins soon
appeared, introducing a lady and gentleman into the
common room, which served as a receptacle for all the
guests, gentle, simple, or compound, whom chance or
inclination brought to this primitive hotel. The lady was
Miss Virginia Pendleton, and the gentleman Colonel
Hendrickson, her unclean elderly man, of plain,
but peculiarly imposing exterior. He was spare and
muscular, and, though past the age of fifty, seemed
to be in the vigor of strength and activity. His person
was erect, his step martial, and somewhat stately.
His features, sunburnt and nearly as dark as those of
the Indian, were austere, and announced uncompromising
firmness. There was in his deportment towards Miss
Pendleton, a mixture of parental kindness, with the
punctilious courtesy observed by the gentlemen of
Kentucky
towards all females, as well those of their own
families as others. There was even a more than
ordinary degree of polite observance in his attentions,
which might have arisen, in part, from a spontaneous
admiration of the womanly graces of his lovely ward,
and have flowed in part from sympathy for her
misfortunes
.
These feelings produced a kind of fatherly
gallantry, a mixture of delicacy and respect, with
fondness
and admiration, which blended harmoniously with
the plain but dignified and gentlemanly air of the veteran
pioneer. They were followed by two negroes, a man
and maid servant, who, having removed the outer
garments
of their master and mistress, retired to the kitchen.
The arrival of Colonel Hendrickson, struck the ruffian
party who were assembled round the fire, with awe; for
he had long been a terror to evil-doers. They shrunk
back to make room for the travellers, while Micajah
Harpe drew Patterson out of the apartment, and
disclosed
to him a tremendous scheme of diabolical revenge.
Representing the advantage which would accrue to
themselves by ridding the country of Colonel
Hendrickson
,
an active magistrate, and a man of military skill
and intrepidity, he proposed not only to murder him and
his fair ward, but to destroy all evidence of the foul act
by including Jenkins and all the inmates of the house.
Patterson started back in horror at this proposal. The
felons who sometimes infest our frontiers, have generally
an aversion against deeds of violence, and seldom
practise
on the lives of those they plunder; Patterson, though
dissipated, unprincipled, and a hardened depredator, had
never dipped his hands in blood. But human nature is
always progressive in depravity or in virtue. The heart
of man is continually becoming strengthened in
principle
,
or callous to the dictates of conscience; and he who
embarks in criminal pursuits can affix no limits to his own
atrocity. Some recent occurrences had rendered
Patterson
more than ordinarily reckless, and stirred up his
vindictive passions; he was disappointed, excited, and
intoxicatedand the foul compact was made.
Supper was prepared for the travellers and placed
upon the table. Colonel Hendrickson led his niece to
the ample board, and as soon as they were seated, bowed
his head, which was slightly silvered with age, and in a
manly, solemn voice, implored the blessing of Divine
Providence. At that moment, while the uncle and niece
sat with eyes bent downwards, the two Harpes appeared
in the door, and deliberately aimed their rifles at the
unconscious travellers. Their fingers were already on
the triggerstheir eyes, gleaming hellish vengeance, were
directed along the deadly tubes with unerring skill, and
another second would have rendered all human aid
unavailing
,
when each of the ruffians was felled by a
powerful
blow from behind. The rifles went off, sending the
bullets whistling over the heads of those who had been
doomed to death. Patterson and some of his gang
rushed to the rescue of their confederates, while the
assailants, snatching the guns from the grasp of the
prostrate ruffians, passed rapidly over their bodies, and
Fennimore and Colburn stood by the side of Colonel
Hendrickson, who in an instant comprehended the scene,
and acted warily on the defensive. They were all brave
and athletic, and although opposed to thrice their
numbers
,
the gentlemen thus accidentally thrown together,
stood erect, fearless, alert, and silent. There is a dignity
in courage which awes even opposing courage, and
subdues
by a look the mere hardihood which is unsupported
by principle. The ruffians had crowded tumultuously
into the room; but when Colonel Hendrickson and his
two friends, who were all armed, advanced to meet
them, they faltered. Harpe, who was again on his feet,
P 2
with a voice of desperation, and the fury of a demon,
urged them to the attack; but they stood irresolute, each
unwilling to commit himself by striking the first blow,
and fearful of being the foremost in assailing men who
stood prepared to sell their lives at the dearest price; and
when Colonel Hendrickson, in a tone of the most perfect
composure, and in the most contemptuous language,
commanded them to retire, with bitter reproaches on their
baseness, they slunk away, one by one, until the two
Harpes, finding themselves deserted, retreated, muttering
horrible imprecations.
The doors were now secured, and the arrangement
being made that one of the party should act as a sentinel
while the others slept, alternately, the travellers
separated
,
but not until Colonel Hendrickson returned to
Colburn, who was his neighbor, and to Mr. Fennimore,
whom he now saw for the first time, his hearty thanks
and commendations for their gallant interference. Miss
Pendleton, in acknowledging her acquaintance with the
young officer, extended her hand with a cordiality which
evinced her gratitude, and having introduced him to her
uncle, retired.
CHAPTER XVIII.
On
the following morning, Miss Pendleton met the
young officer who had a second time been instrumental
in saving her life, with some embarrassment. She had
seen him first in the spring-day of her happiness and
the pride of her beauty, and had mentally awarded to him
that preference over most other men of her acquaintance,
which the heart so readily accords to a pleasing and
amiable exterior. He was associated in her mind with
the last of her days of joy, and with the dawn of her
misfortunes. She had twice witnessed his courage,
voluntarily and generously exerted in her behalf; and if
she acknowledged to herself the existence of no more
tender feeling, she felt that she at least owed him a debt
of gratitude. His abrupt departure from Virginia, at a
time when his own conduct had seemed mysterious, and
when some explanation appeared to be due to herself,
or to the representatives of the deceased Major Heyward,
surprised and perplexed her. She had ascertained that
he was related, in what degree she knew not, to the
guardian of her youth, and his interests had been placed
in painful opposition to her own. These recollections
passed hastily through her mind, and she met him with
a flushed cheek, and a constrained manner, very foreign
from the usual easy frankness of her deportment. But
she saw in him the same traits of character which at first
won her confidencethe same calm self-possession,
cheerful conversation, and open countenance; and the
thin clouds of suspicion which had cast a momentary
shadow over her mind, floated rapidly away.
After an early breakfast, the whole party mounted
and commenced the journey of the day, for in new
countries
,
ladies as well as gentlemen travel only on
horseback
.
They were not without their apprehensions that
the Harpes, who were desperate and unrelenting villains,
might endeavor to take revenge for the disappointment
of the preceding night by firing upon them from some
covert in the woods; but Colonel Hendrickson, confident
that his name and standing would deter their late
confederates
from joining in any such attack, considered his
party sufficiently strong to repel any attempt that might
be made upon it. But every precaution was used to
insure safety; the gentlemen, who were all provided
with rifles, loaded them carefully, and the little company
was arranged with all the precision that would have
attended the march of a squadron of cavalry.
Fennimore
managed, as young men are apt to do in such cases,
to place himself by the side of Miss Pendleton, the other
two gentlemen took the van, while the servants brought
up the rear. Their way led through the same lonesome
expanse of forest, which had been traversed by Mr. Lee,
when suddenly ejected from the hospitable roof of Captain
Jenkins, in the manner related: a vast wilderness, rich in
the spontaneous productions of nature, but in which the
travellers could not expect to see a human being, or a
dwelling, until their arrival at their place of destination.
In travelling, many of the restraints of social
intercourse
are necessarily laid aside; and those whose lots
are thus for the time being cast together, find it expedient
as well as agreeable to render themselves acceptable to
each other. There is a race of islanders, who, in
travelling
,
become even more unsocial, morose, and
supercilious
,
than they are at home; but the ordinary effect of
this occupation upon human nature is such as we have
suggested; and well-bred persons, in particular, always
bring their politeness into active exercise, when the
necessity of the case renders this accomplishment a virtue.
And at the risk of being accused of national vanity, we
will assert, that our own countrymen are the best
travellers
in the world, the most affable, patient, and cheerful,
and the least incommoded by accidental hardships. An
occasion like the one before us, is peculiarly calculated
to produce the effects to which we have alludedwhen
the long and lonesome way exhibits a wild but gloomy
monotony of scenery, and a sense of danger unites the
parties in the bond of a common interest. Thus felt the
young and graceful pair of riders, who had, besides, so
many reasons for entertaining a strong interest in each
other. Mr. Fennimore exerted all his powers in the
endeavor to render himself agreeable, and people who
try to please most generally succeed, for the art of
pleasing depends almost entirely upon the will; and the
young lady, with that admirable tact, in the possession
of which her sex is infinitely superior to ours, displayed
her conversational powers with more than ordinary
vivacity and eloquence. We shall not set down what
passed, because we were not there; and if we had been, it
would ill become us to give publicity to those sprightly
and unpremeditated sallies, which were never intended
for other ears than those to which they were addressed,
but flowed spontaneously from young hearts in the glow
of unrestrained feeling. Tradition has only preserved
the fact, that although they rode forth from the woodland
fortress, on a bright sunny morning, as stately as a hero
and heroine of chivalry, it was not long before they were
laughing and chatting like people of flesh and blood, and
wit and feeling.
They had travelled for some hours when the
experienced
eye of Colonel Hendrickson discovered the fresh
track of a horse in the path before them. On
dismounting
and examining more closely, it appeared that several
horses had entered the path at this place, and passed on
in the same direction pursued by our travellers; and one
of the tracks was pronounced by Colburn to be that of the
horse of Patterson. That the gang whose villany they
had so much cause to dread, should have taken the same
direction with themselves, and at the same time should
have avoided the beaten path, for so great a distance,
were circumstances so suspicious as to leave little doubt
of a design to attack them at some point, which was
now probably near at hand. In the irritation of the
moment, nothing would have pleased these gentlemen
more than to have marched directly upon the ruffians;
but a proper care for the lady under their charge
rendered
more prudent measures advisable; and, after a
short consultation, it was determined to abandon the
road, and to endeavor to avoid the danger, by taking a
circuitous route through the forest. They now proceeded
rapidly through the woods, observing all the precautions
of a warlike party; avoiding the thickets and low
grounds, and keeping along the ridges, and in the most
open woods. This mode of travelling was extremely
arduous, for they were now obliged to pass over many
inequalities of ground, and to surmount a variety of
obstacles. At one moment they leaped their horses over
the trunk of a fallen tree, at another they climbed a
steep hill; sometimes deep ravines were to be crossed,
and sometimes low branches, or the great grape-vines
swinging from tree to tree, obliged them to bow their
heads as they passed along.
After riding several miles in this manner, guided only
by that knowledge of natural appearances which enables
the experienced hunter to ascertain the points of the
compass
,
under almost any circumstances, they arrived at the
bank of a deep creek, which was not fordable except at
the spot where it was crossed by the road they had
forsaken
,
and where the robbers would be most likely to
await their approach. As there are several modes of
passing over streams, practised by backwoodsmen, they
rode along the bank consulting as to the most practicable
expedient, when they reached a place where a large tree
had fallen across the creek, affording the very facility
which they desired. Few ladies, however, would have
possessed sufficient courage and dexterity to have walked
over this natural bridge. The banks of the creek were
extremely high, and the trunk of the fallen tree was still
further elevated by the large roots at the one end, and
the immense branches at the other, so that its distance
from the water was so great, as to render it unpleasant
to look downwards. But Virginia had a mind which
could not be daunted by ordinary dangers, and stepping
nimbly upon the log, she walked with a firm step along
its round and narrow surface, and reached the opposite
shore in safety. The saddles and baggage were carried
over by the same way. The greatest difficulty was to
cross the horses, for the banks were so steep and miry,
as to render it almost impossible to get them into the
water. By dint of coaxing, pushing, and whipping,
however
,
all the animals were forced in, except that belonging
to Colburn; and after swimming part of the way, and
floundering through mire the remainder, they
struggled
up the opposite bank, where Colonel Hendrickson
and Fennimore stood to receive them. Colburn had
remained alone, and was about to send over the last
horse which was still fastened to a tree, when the rapid
tramp of horses' feet was heard upon the dry leaves, and
he had barely time to unloose his steed and spring upon
its back, when Patterson and his confederates came
sweeping towards him at full speed. To cross the creek
with his horse was now impossible; to abandon the
animal
and seek safety for himself on the other side, would
have been but the work of an instant, but Colburn loved
his horse, and had too much spirit to give him up to an
enemy. Besides, the heroic idea occurred to him at the
moment, of making a diversion in favor of his friends,
by drawing the pursuit upon himself. Catching up his
rifle which leaned against a tree, he shouted to his
companions
to take care of themselves, and turning towards
the pursuers, flourished his weapon round his head in
bravado, and dashed off through the forest. The
outlaws
saw that the party which had crossed the creek was
beyond their grasp, as it was but a few miles to Colonel
Hendrickson's settlement, which could be reached by the
fugitives, before they themselves could accomplish the
tedious process of crossing with their horses; nor were
they willing to attempt the passage in the face of two
resolute men armed with rifles. Their whole fury,
therefore
,
was turned towards Colburn, and, uttering a volley
of execrations, they put spurs to their horses, and went
off at full speed in pursuit of the young forester.
Colburn, well mounted and admirably skilled in all
the arts of the hunter, had little doubt of being able to
evade his enemies by speed or artifice; and guided only
by the sun, and by his knowledge of the country, pressed
onward through the trackless forest. Relying on the
great strength of his steed, and his own superior
horsemanship
,
he often chose the most difficult ground,
leaping
over ravines, plunging down steep declivities, or
dashing through dense thickets where thorns and tangled
vines seemed to render it impossible for any animal to
pass; and he had the satisfaction of seeing more than
one of his pursuers thrown from their horses, while
others were left in the rear. Still they kept upon his
track, with the unerring sagacity of woodsmen.
Patterson, who, although the largest man, was best
mounted, soon left his comrades, straining forward to
overtake the young hunter; while Colburn, confident of
success, and anxious only to separate his pursuers and
keep them in his rear, so as to prevent their surrounding
or intercepting him, held up his horse, to husband his
powers for a long race. But he had judged too meanly
of the animal ridden by Patterson, who soon came in
sight, uttering a loud yell when he beheld the young
forester
,
and madly urging his steed over every obstacle.
Q
Still the advantage was in favor of Colburn, who, being
the lightest rider, and mounted on a fine blooded animal,
led the outlaw through the most intricate ways, passing
dexterously through thickets apparently impenetrable,
plunging into deep morasses, and leaping ravines which
seemed impassable. The latter pursued with spirit,
sometimes gaining a view of his adversary, and
sometimes
falling in the rear.
At one time an accident had nearly decided the contest,
for Colburn's horse became entangled in a close thicket
of hazle and grape-vines, and the outlaw came near
enough to discharge his rifle deliberately, and with so
true an aim, that the ball passed along the side of the
hunter, inflicting a severe though not a dangerous wound.
The young man extricated himself from the tangled
brushwood, reined up his horse, and turning towards his
enemy, waved his hat in the air, shouted in derision, and
then rode on with unsubdued alacrity. At last, in
leaping
over the trunk of a fallen tree, his horse sprained an
ancle, and Colburn found that it was impossible to
retreat any longer. A gentle swell of the ground
concealed
him at that moment from Patterson, who had
stopped to reload his rifle, and hastily pushing his horse
into a clump of bushes, he crouched behind a tree, to
await the coming of his foe. In a few minutes
Patterson
came in sight, pressing eagerly forward, with his
heels closed into his horse's flanks, his eye gleaming
with fury, and his countenance animated by the
excitement
of an anticipated triumph. When he arrived
within a few paces of the spot where Colburn stood
concealed
,
the latter stepped boldly out, directly in front of
the advancing horseman, and presented his rifle.
Patterson
,
with a powerful arm, reined up his well-trained
horse, dropped the bridle, and threw his gun to his
shoulder; but before he could fire, the young forester's
ball passed through his body, and the wretch fell forward,
with a deep groan, upon his horse's neck. Instantly
recovering his strength, he raised himself in his stirrups,
and charged upon Colburn with his rifle presented; but
the latter, no longer avoiding the combat, darted nimbly
upon his foe, and throwing his arms around him,
dragged
him from the saddle. For a moment they struggled
fiercely upon the ground; the ruffian, abandoning his
gun, drew his knife; but Colburn parried the stroke, and
at the same time disengaging himself, seized the loaded
rifle of his adversary, and stood on the defensive.
Patterson
attempted to rise, but his career of crime was
ended!
The young forester now caught the outlaw's horse,
which stood trembling beside his own disabled animal,
and having re-loaded his rifle, continued his retreat. He
was pursued no further. The ruffian gang were struck
with panic when they reached the spot where their
comrade
lay in his gore, a mangled corpse. They had
perhaps
carried their scheme further than had been at first
intended, and they now feared the consequences of their
audacious attempt. The remains of Patterson were
hastily buried, at the lone spot where he had fallen; and
the unprincipled companions of his guilty life, dispersing
in different directions, sought safety in concealment or
flight.
Colonel Hendrickson and his young friends had been
greatly shocked, on beholding the peril in which Colburn
was placed, when surprised, as we have narrated. But
it was impossible to render him any assistance, and when
the sounds of the pursuit died away, they recommenced
their journey with heavy hearts. They soon regained
the road which they had left in the morning, and
descending
from the high grounds, struck into a rich flat,
through which a deep creek was sluggishly meandering.
On their right hand the Ohio, smooth and transparent as
a mirror, suddenly burst upon their view. They stopped
and gazed for a moment with delightfor there is
something so cheerful in the appearance of a beautiful
sheet of water, that the same scenery which had seemed
gloomy without it, became, with this addition, gay,
brilliant
,
and romantic. The western bank of the river
was low, and fringed to the water's edge with trees,
whose long limbs dipped into the current, while their
shadows stretched far over the stream, and pictured the
exact contour of the shore upon the green surface.
Nearer to them, the beams of the setting sun fell upon
the water, tinging it with a golden hue. There was a
softness
and repose in this landscape that were irresistibly
charming; no living object was to be seen, not a leaf
moved, not a sound was heard; all was serene and silent.
Their path now pursued the course of the river for a
short distance, then turning from it at right angles,
crossed
the creek by a deep ford. They had nearly reached
the fording-place, when their horses pricked their ears,
snorted aloud, and stopped trembling in the path. At
the same instant the travellers discovered that they were
beset on all sides by a party of Indians, hideously
painted
,
who had risen from an ambuscade, and stood around
with their rifles pointed, and their black eyes gleaming
with a hellish triumph. They uttered a terrific yell
when they beheld their victims; our travellers saw their
ghastly smiles, their murderous looks, their flashing
knives, and felt in anticipation the tortures of a lingering
death. A single glance satisfied them that it was
impossible
to reach the ford, as the largest body of the
savages stood in that direction, while on either hand they
were so stationed as to cut off all hope of retreat. One
of superior stature stood in the path, a few paces before
them, laughing with demoniac exultation, as he took a
deliberate aim, and discharged his rifle. This was the
signal of attack; several others fired at the same time,
and a number of tomahawks whistled around the heads
of the assailed party.
Colonel Hendrickson and Mr. Fennimore closed up
on each side of Miss Pendleton, endeavoring to shield
her with their own persons, and beating back the
assailants
,
with the most desperate courage. But they were
overpowered by numbers. Colonel Hendrickson was
dragged to the ground. Fennimore received a wound
which caused him to reel in his saddle. A faint and
sickly numbness was creeping over him. At this instant
his horse wheeled suddenly, and plunged into the thicket.
He rushed through the savage band, who in vain
attempted
to arrest his flight, and in a moment stood on
the margin of the creek. The bank was perpendicular,
arising to a considerable height above the water; but the
noble animal without hesitating leaped forward, and
alighted in the turbid stream, about midway from either
Q 2
shore. A few powerful struggles brought him to the
opposite side, which was steep, but less precipitous than
the other. Clambering up the bank, he soon reached
the level of the plain, and darted through the forest with
the swiftness of an arrow, bearing his rider, wounded,
and nearly insensible, beyond the reach of pursuit.
CHAPTER XIX.
The
place to which Mr. Lee was conducted by his
captors, was situated in a secluded valley, among a range
of low hills. At a spot from which the underbrush had
been cleared away, so as to form an open space, shaded
by tall trees, a number of Indian warriors, armed and
painted for war, were arranged in a circle, and seated
upon the ground. In the centre, strongly bound to
a tree, was a man of large stature, whose face was
painted black,an indication, as Mr. Lee recollected
to have heard, that the prisoner was doomed to death.
Near the victim, was a lady, also bound, in whom the
eye of our young friend instantly recognized the
companion
of his childhood, the idol of his heart, the
long-loved
Virginia Pendleton!
The warriors of the newly arrived party were received
with much ceremony by their friends, with whom they
took their seats, while Mr. Lee and Hark were placed
within the circle. A conversation ensued, in which
only the older and more conspicuous of the warriors
participated. They spoke with deliberation, but with
much emphasis, and from their pointing frequently
towards
the east, it was inferred that they were severally
relating to each other the incidents of the late predatory
excursion.
Their attention was then directed towards their
prisoners
,
and the interest with which they referred to him
who was bound to the tree, who was Colonel
Hendrickson
,
showed that they exulted in his capture with no
ordinary degree of triumph. One of the warriors
approached
him, and addressed to him a speech, in which
he seemed to pour out a volume of eloquent hatred,
contempt, and ridicule upon the defenceless captive, often
brandishing his tomahawk as he spoke, and describing,
with gestures too significant to be mistaken, the tortures
that were proposed to be inflicted. The unfortunate
gentleman eyed him with perfect composure, and listened
to his speech without showing the least appearance of
fear or irritation. Several warriors then placed
themselves
in front of the captive, and prepared to throw their
tomahawks. Mr. Lee, whose good-nature, and
chivalrous
feelings, began to be warmly enlisted, now sprung
up, and rushing towards the victim, exclaimed to the
torturers, Gentlemen! gentlemen Indians! consider
what you are aboutdon't murder the gentleman! If
he has done you any harm, I'll be security that he shall
make you ample satisfaction; while poor Virginia
shrieked and buried her face in her hands. In a moment
George Lee was at her side; Virginia! dear
Virginia
!
he cried, don't be alarmedthey shall not
touch youI'll fight for you, while there is a drop of
blood in my veins! But the Indians did not intend to
slay their prisoner. Paying no attention to the distress
of his friends, which only afforded them amusement,
they threw their tomahawks, one after another, in such
a manner as to strike them into the tree immediately
over his head, each striving to come as near as possible
to the mark without actually hitting it. Others came,
and threw spears in the same mode, and a variety of
other means were used to torture and intimidate their
victim, and to induce him to degrade himself by showing
some symptom of alarm. But all to no purpose: Colonel
Hendrickson was well acquainted with the habits of his
enemies; he had prepared himself to die, and faced his
savage persecutors with the composure of intrepid
resignation
.
The feelings of his companions in misfortune may be
better imagined than described. The unhappy Virginia,
though her high spirit enabled her to display a show of
resignation, felt herself bowed down by this
unexpected
calamity. The calm fortitude of her brave relative,
while it won her admiration and stimulated her courage,
made her heart bleed for the sufferings of one so worthy
of a nobler fate. Mr. Lee had ceased to entertain any
fears for his own safety, but his love for Virginia, and
his native goodness of heart, induced him to sympathize
deeply with his fellow-sufferers; while Hark, who had
withdrawn himself from observation as much as possible,
was lying on the ground, coiled up, gnawing a bone that
had been thrown to him, and hiding another which he
had stolen, casting stealthy and watchful glances around
him all the while, as if in constant dread of harm, but
lying so motionless that his eye alone afforded the
slightest
indication of his apprehension.
At length the shades of night closed in, and the
warriors prepared for repose. Colonel Hendrickson
remained
tied to the tree; Miss Pendleton sat not far from
him on the ground, but no intention was shown of offering
her anything to lie upon, or any covering to protect her
from the night air. Mr. Lee was more favored, for, as
the Indians happened to have several blankets among the
plunder recently taken, one of these was thrown to him.
Our friend George immediately threw his blanket over
the shoulders of Virginia, and obliging Hark to resign a
similar present that had been made to him, was enabled
effectually to protect the young lady from the cold. The
Indians interposed no objection to these arrangements;
though they look upon acts of gallantry with sovereign
contempt, they know how to estimate a humane action,
and thought none the less of Mr. George Lee, for this
sacrifice of his own comfort in favor of
a woman of his
tribe
.
Silence reigned throughout the camp. Not a sound
was heard but the footstep of the armed sentinels, who
moved incessantly about, watching the prisoners with
jealous eye, and listening with intense eagerness to catch
the most distant sound which might announce the
approach
of an enemy. As they glided slowly in the shade
of night, rendered still deeper by the thick shadows
of the overhanging forest, and but slightly relieved by
the faint glow of an expiring fire, they seemed more
like spectres than human beings. Colonel Hendrickson
remained in a standing posture, bound securely and
painfully
to a great tree, which was probably destined to be
his place of execution. He knew that the Indians more
frequently carry to their villages the prisoners destined
to death by torture, in order that the women, the
children, and the whole tribe, may participate in the
horrid entertainment, and derive instruction in the
dreadful
rites of cruelty. A conformity with that custom
might procure him a reprieve for a few days, though it
would enhance the tortures that inevitably awaited him;
while a more speedy death on the spot they then
occupied
,
would cut off all hope of rescue. Occupied with
such reflections, it was impossible to sleep; but though
denied repose, he was not without consolation. Colonel
Hendrickson was a Christian; and, in this trying hour,
when enduring torture, and anticipating a lingering and
excruciating death, he submitted with the most
perfect
composure to the will of the great Disposer of all
events. He prayed silently, but with fervor and sincerity,
in the full belief that he was heard, and that his was
the fervent effectual prayer of the righteous, which
availeth much to the humble petitioner. His devotional
feelings became quickened and elevated by this exercise,
until at last the overflowings of his heart burst from his
lips in audible and eloquent language.
Virginia, who dozed, but did not sleep, raised her head
when these solemn accents struck her ear. The embers
of a nearly extinguished fire threw a faint glare over
the figure of Colonel Hendrickson, and rendered his
features distinctly visible, while an impenetrable veil of
darkness hung around. The forms of the Indian
warriors
could be barely distinguished, as they reposed on
the ground, and raised their heads at this unexpected
interruption. Their dim outlines only could be faintly
traced in the uncertain light, except where, here and
there, a scattered ray fell upon the harsh visage of a
savage warrior, and for a moment lighted up the
ferocious
lineaments. The only object upon which the
expiring blaze threw its beams directly, was the victim
prisoner, whose person resembled the prominent figure
in a gloomy and deeply shaded picture. His appearance
was strikingly sublime. His large frame, placed thus
in bold relief, and dimly illuminated, assumed gigantic
dimensions to the fancy of the beholder. His face was
serene and tranquil; his full, bold eye, meekly raised
towards Heaven. Neither fear, nor resentment, marked
his features; all was hope, confidence, and calm
self-possession
.
His voice was full and manly; his
enunciation
deliberate, though impassioned; his language, the
bold, the beautiful, the affecting phraseology of the holy
scriptures. Even the eye of the savage was attracted
by this picturesque and striking spectacle, exhibited in
the lone wilderness, and at the midnight hour; and all
gazed upon it in wonder and in silence. They knew their
prisoner to be a distinguished warrior, before whose arm
some of the most renowned of their tribe had fallen;
and when they heard his solemn voice, beheld his
dignified
composure, and saw him in the act of holding converse
with the Master of life, under circumstances so calculated
to impress the imagination, they regarded him as a being
under supernatural protection, and were filled with awe.
And although they would have felt a dread in
approaching
him at that moment, they were the more determined
to rid themselves as soon as possible of so hated, and so
powerful a foe.
Gradually the fire became extinguished, a thick cloud
gathered over the camp, and total darkness shrouded
the spot. The voice of the prisoner ceased, the warriors
sunk again to their slumbers, and all was silent. The
sentinels renewed their vigilance, and as their eye-sight
could now avail nothing, other precautions were used to
prevent any attempt to escape on the part of the
prisoners
.
It was near day-break, when Colonel Hendrickson
felt a hand passing slowly from his feet upward along his
personand then another hand which evidently grasped
a knife. He knew that almost every Indian has some
individual quarrel to avenge upon the white men, which
he broods over in secret, until a favorable opportunity
enables him to satiate his appetite for vengeance; and he
supposed that some warrior who had lost a relative in
battle, was now about to take that revenge which is so
grateful to their lust of blood. Brave as he was, a chill
crept over him, and the blood almost ceased to flow in
his veins, as he felt the hand of the murderer, cautiously
seeking out, as he supposed, the vital spot, into which he
might plunge his weapon with the certainty of reaching
the life of his victim. The point of the knife was pressed
to his back, and he expected to feel the steel passing
through from that direction, when the cord that bound
his hands was suddenly cut, and in a moment he stood
free from his bonds. His unknown friend glided away
with a step as noiseless as that with which he had
approached; and the released prisoner had now to exert
his own ingenuity in effecting his escape.
His determination was soon made. To attempt to
release his companions would jeopard all their lives; and
should he succeed in escaping with them from the camp,
it was next to impossible that such a party could elude
the pursuit of a large number of skilful warriors, who
would follow them at the break of day, which could be
little more than an hour distant. But he was himself a
woodsman; hardy, cunning, and swift of foot: with a
start of an hour, he believed he could outstrip the fleetest
of the savage warriors, and bring a rescue to his friends,
whose lives were probably not in immediate danger. He
stole silently from the camp, passed the sentinels, and in
a few minutes was rapidly making his way through the
forest, with unerring skill, towards the waters of the Ohio.
Great was the astonishment, and bitter the
imprecations
,
of the savages, when they discovered, at the first
dawn of day, the escape of their prisoner. They were
almost frantic with disappointment and fury, and were
ready to sacrifice their remaining prisoners to their
rage. Suspicion very naturally fell upon them as having
been instrumental in the escape of Colonel Hendrickson;
but after a close examination it did not appear that Mr.
Lee or Miss Pendleton had moved. At length a track,
different from that of an Indian, was discovered near
the tree to which the victim had been tied, and a yell of
rage was uttered by the whole gang. It was the track
of Hark Short, the snake-killer, who, it was now
perceived
,
was also missing.
R
CHAPTER XX.
No sooner were these discoveries made, than the
greater portion of the warriors set out in immediate
pursuit of the fugitives, while a few remained to guard
the prisoners. Mr. Lee and Miss Pendleton were now
seated near each other, and for the first time had the
opportunity of conversing together; and the latter
addressing
her former playmate with the frankness due to
so old an acquaintance, expressed her regret for his
misfortune, while she could not help congratulating
herself
on having a friend near her at so trying a period.
Ah, cousin Virginia! exclaimed George, how
willingly would I bear captivity, or even death, to do you
a service!
This speech savored too much of gallantry for the
time and place, and Miss Pendleton looked very grave.
Dear Virginia, continued George, don't be cast
down; they will not have the heart to do you any harm.
I have been a brother to you all my lifeyou have been
kinder to me, and dearer to me, than a sisterand they
shall not separate us, while I have a drop of blood in my
veins.
Thank you, cousin George, was all that Virginia
could reply, while the tears started from her eyes. This
touching proof of affection went to her heart, and her
noble nature enabled her to comprehend the full extent
of the sacrifice that her kind-hearted companion was
willing to make for her. Had that affection flowed only
from the friendship of the playmate of her early years,
it would have been most grateful to her feelings; but
sensible as she was, that it resulted from a hopeless
passion
,
which she could not encourage without insincerity,
nor without cherishing hopes which she felt could never
be realized, it distressed and pained her. She endeavored
to change the subject; but the single-hearted George
always came back to the same point, and continually
exclaimed, Poor Virginia! Dear cousin Virginia!
To think that
you, you
, should be here, a prisoner
among savages!
At length a new thought seemed to strike him; and
starting up suddenly, he beckoned the Indian to him,
who seemed to have been the chief person in the party
by which he was taken. This person had seemed to
claim George as his own prisoner, and had treated him
with a show of kindness. To him Mr. Lee now offered
to give any ransom which might be demanded, for the
liberty of Miss Pendleton, assuring the Indian of his
ability to comply with any contract which he might
make. The Indian, who spoke a little broken English,
readily understood the proposition, and listened to it with
interest.
Hugh! said he, how much?
George, who was no great hand at making a bargain,
and was besides too much in love to think of standing
upon trifles, replied eagerly that he would give all he was
worth for her liberation.
Velly good! replied the Indian, perfectly
comprehending
the offer, how muchhow much you got?
George told him that he owned a thousand acres of
land; but the Indian shook his head, and swinging his
arms with a lordly contempt, as he pointed to the vast
forest around them, gave the Virginian to understand
that he had land enough.
The Indian then inquired if he had any
whiskee
.
George had no whiskey, but said he had money
enough to buy boat-loads of it, and promised to give his
captor as much as would keep the whole tribe drunk for
a month.
Hugh! velly good! exclaimed the delighted Indian,
who then inquired for tobacco.
Plenty, plenty, my dear fellow, cried George, who
thought he was making a fine bargain, I raise ever so
much on my plantation every year. You shall have as
much as you can use all your life!
How much hos? inquired the warrior.
Horses! no man in Virginia has more horses, or
finer ones. I have more than forty on my plantation
now, as fine blooded animals as ever you saw.
How much?inquired the Indian, who had caught
the meaning sufficiently to see that a large number was
intended to be expressed, but without understanding
exactly how many.
George was at a loss how to explain, until the Indian
directed him to hold up his fingers. He then held up
both hands, to express ten. The Indian nodded. Mr.
Lee repeated the operation, and the Indian nodded with
still greater satisfaction; and this dumb-show was carried
on until Mr. Lee had signified that he was willing to
give forty horses, in addition to the whiskey and tobacco
before stipulated, for the ransom of the lady of his heart.
Avarice is a passion which exists in some form in
every state of society; the Indian can make all the other
feelings and propensities of his nature bend to his
interest
,
as well as the most civilized inhabitant of a
commercial
city. The wealth of George Lee had its usual
effect upon his captor. Naturally distrustful, he had
some misgivings as to the sincerity of so generous an
offer, and he could hardly conceive how one man could
be so rich as to possess so many horses, and such a
quantity of whiskey and tobacco; but then Mr. Lee had
an ingenuous countenance, and a rather imposing person
and appearance, and, upon the whole, the Indian felt
disposed
to credit his word. Inasmuch, however, as he
had proffered freely thus far, the crafty savage
determined
to try how far he might extort from the liberality of
his captive; and he again inquired if Mr. Lee had
nothing
more to offer.
George considered, and muttered aside, Yes, I have
a great gang of negroesbut I can't give them to be
roasted and eaten by the savagesno, plague on it, I
could'nt have the heart to send my black people here
and he prudently replied, that he had nothing more to
give.
The warrior shook his head, and intimated that unless
more was offered, he should marry the lady himself.
Heaven forbid! exclaimed the terrified lover, take
all I have,take my farm! take my black people! I
have a hundred likely negroes; you shall have them all!
Nigger! said the Indian, velly goodhelp squaw
to make cornhow much nigger?
George had now to go through the tedious process of
R 2
counting his fingers, frequently stopping in hopes that
the cupidity of the savage would be satisfied without
taking all; but the latter possessed that faculty of the
wily gambler, or the experienced merchant, which
enables its possessor to judge from the countenance of
the subject under operation, whether he is still able to
bear a little more depletion, and continued to shake his
head until George declared that the black people were
all counted. He then coolly remarked that he should
keep the woman himself.
George flew into a rage, and then burst into tears
You unconscionable rascal! he cried, will nothing
satisfy you? I offer you all I have in the world, for
the liberty of this lady. I am willing, besides, to stay
and serve you myself all my life. Set her free, you
avaricious dog, and I will stay, and be overseer for you,
among my own negroes!
The white man has a forked tongue, replied the
warrior calmly: when he offered horses, whiskey, and
tobacco for his squaw, I thought he was honest. White
men are fools; they will give all they have for a
pale-faced
woman. But when the white man offers to sell
himself, to be a servant to the Indian women, and to send
his squaw back to the thirteen fires, I know that he
speaks lies.
So saying, he walked off. But the overture had a
good effect. The idea of procuring a valuable ransom
for Miss Pendleton, determined the Indians to treat her
with kindness. A lodge of mats was prepared for her,
and she soon found herself placed in a situation of
comparative
comfort. She was not an inattentive listener to
the preceding conversation. The solicitude and
generosity
of Mr. Lee, affected her deeply. But she was
generous herself, and noble natures know how to receive,
as well as to confer, obligations. Conscious that her
warm-hearted friend was offering no more than she
would have freely given to redeem him, or any other
human being, from so dreadful a fate, she did not
attempt
to interfere, until he proposed to become a slave
himself. Then she exclaimed No! not soGeorge
cousin George Leedear George but he heard her
not, and in the vehemence of his exertions in her behalf,
he lost perhaps the tenderest words that she had ever
addressed to him, since the days of their childhood.
But, however Miss Pendleton's heart might have been
awakened to sensations of gratitude, she felt that this
was not the time nor place to indulge them; and in the
exhausted state of her mind and body, she readily and
hastily accepted the shelter prepared for her, and
throwing
herself, stupefied with sufferings of various kinds,
upon a mat, endeavored to find repose. She had sunk
into a feverish slumber, when she was awaked by the
noise of loud and triumphant shouting. The camp was
again crowded with Indian warriors; the party which
had gone in pursuit of the fugitives was returned; they
had overtaken Colonel Hendrickson, and that
unfortunate
gentleman was again a prisoner. His fate was
now sealed. The determination which had originally
been formed, of carrying him to the village of the
captors
,
to be publicly sacrificed, was now abandoned; and
the savages determined to gratify their eager thirst for
his blood, by torturing him at the stake, without further
delay. He was again bound, and preparations were
made for the awful solemnity. Some of the savages
employed themselves in painting their faces and bodies,
to render them the more terrific; other were whetting
the edges of their tomahawks and knives; and some
were endeavoring to excite their own passions, and those
of their companions, to the utmost pitch of fury, by
hideous
yelling, by violent gesticulations, and by pouring out
bitter execrations upon their defenceless prisoner.
I saw you in the dark and blood ground, cried one,
drawing the back of his knife, in mockery, across the
throat of the victimYou killed my brother there, and
I will have your heart's blood!
You slew my son, shrieked a hoary-headed savage;
his bones lie unburied in the villages of the white men,
his scalp is hanging over the door of your wigwam
but his spirit shall rejoice in the agonies of your death!
You led the warriors of your tribe to battle,
exclaimed
a young warrior, as he flourished his tomahawk
over the head of the veteran pioneer, when the long
knives met the red men on the banks of the big river
my father fell thereyour foot was on his neckI will
trample on your mangled body. The wolf shall feed
upon your fleshthe bird of night shall flap her wings
over your carcase, and the serpent shall crawl about
your bones!
Revenge is sweet! shouted one.
Revenge! revenge! echoed many voices.
It is good, and pleasing to the spirit of the warrior,
to witness the death-pang of the enemy he hates!
exclaimed
another human monster.
The white man is our enemy!
He is the serpent that stung our fathers!
He is the prowling fox that stole away our game!
He is the hurricane that scattered our wigwams and
destroyed our corn-fields!
He drove us from our hunting grounds, and
trampled
in scorn upon the bones of our fathers!
His knife has drunk the blood of the red man; the
blood of our women and our children is on his hands!
Let him perish in torture!
Let him be slowly consumed by fire!
The great Spirit will laugh, when he sees the white
man writhing in agony!
The spirits of our fathers will rejoicethey will
shout and clap their hands in the world of shades, when
they hear the shrieks of the white warrior.
These exclamations were uttered severally by
different
individuals, in the Indian tongue, with which Colonel
Hendrickson was acquainted, in the emphatic tones of
savage declamation, and with that earnestness of
gesticulation
,
which renders their eloquence so impressive.
There were others who addressed the victim in coarser
language, loading him with opprobrious epithets, and
pouring out the bitterness of their malignant hearts, in
copious streams of vulgar invective. And now the wood
was piled about the victim; torches were lighted, and
blazing brands snatched from the fire, and the hellish
crew, flourishing them around their heads, danced round
the prisoner with that malignant joy, with which devils
and damned spirits may be supposed to exult in the
agonies of a fallen soul.
At length a chief stepped forward and commanded
silence. White man, said he, `are you ready to die?'
I am! replied the brave Kentuckian, in a calm
tone: the white man's God has whispered peace to my
soul.
Can the God of the white man save you from
torture
?
Can he prevent you from feeling pain when your
flesh shall be torn, when your limbs shall be separated,
one by one, from your body, and the slow flames shall
scorch, without consuming, your miserable carcase?
My God is a merciful God, replied the undaunted
pioneer; his ear is ever open to the prayers of those
who put their trust in him. He has filled my heart with
courage. I have no fear of deathblessed for ever be
the Lord God of Israel! Then raising his eyes upward,
he exclaimed, with devout fervor, Make haste, O God,
to deliver me; make haste to help me, O Lord. Let
them be ashamed and confounded that seek after my
soul: let them be turned backward, and put to confusion,
that desire my heart!
Virginia, who had thus far endeavored to restrain her
feelings, now rushed forward, and gliding rapidly through
the circle of warriors, threw herself upon her uncle's
bosom, exclaiming in frantic accents, Let us die
together
!
while Mr. George Lee, who had gazed on the
preceding scene with stupid wonder, sought to follow
her, determined to share her fate. Being prevented, he
swore that it was the most infamous transaction he
had ever witnessed, and that if he got back to old
Virginia, he would have satisfaction, at the risk of his
life.
And now the whole fury of the savage band was
ready to be poured upon their devoted but heroic prisoner,
when the report of a single rifle rang through the woods,
and the principal chief, who stood alone, received a
death-wound. A volley instantly followed, and every ball
being aimed by a skilful hand at a particular object, brought
one of the Indian warriors to the ground; in another
minute, a band of hardy backwoodsmen, headed by
Fennimore
and Colburn, rushed into the camp. Before the
Indians had time to array themselves for battle, the
bonds of Colonel Hendrickson were cut, and Fennimore
had passed one arm round Miss Pendleton, while he
prepared to defend her with the other. The assailants
rushed upon the savage band, and hewed them down
with desperate valor. Colonel Hendrickson snatched up
a war-club, and plunged into the thickest of the fight.
Nor was George Lee backward; he first sought Virginia,
and finding her supported by the young soldier, he
caught up a weapon, and mingled in the battle with more
hearty good-will than he had for some days shown for
any operation in which he was called upon to join,
except
that of eating. The valor and skill of the
backwoodsmen
soon prevailed. It was impossible to
withstand
their fury. Colonel Hendrickson seemed a new
man; he shouted until the woods resounded with his
battle-cry, and his friends, animated by the sound of his
voice, returned the yell, and pressed on with determined
vigor. They literally cried aloud and spared not. The
Indians sounded their terrific war-whoop; but that cry, so
dreadful to the white man, so full of thrilling horror to the
hearts of the borderers who have heard it in the lone hour
of night, breaking in upon the repose of the wilderness,
and ringing the death-knell of the mother and the infant,
was drowned in the louder shouts of the Kentucky
warriors
.
The first fire had reduced the savages to a
number
less than that of the assailants, and they now stood
opposed to men who were their superiors in bodily
strength, their equals in courage, and in all the
arts of border warfare. Thus overmatched, they
maintained
the fight for but a little while, when they began
to give back; the whites still pressed on, cutting them
down, with the most revengeful hostility, at every step.
The battle soon became a massacre, for the Kentuckians
not having lost a single man, the disparity of force was
becoming greater every moment; and those who had so
often witnessed the scenes of savage barbarity, or
mourned over the affecting consequences of that
unsparing
warfare, now dealt their blows with unrelenting
animosity.
So long as the battle raged round the spot where Miss
Pendleton stood, Fennimore joined in it, supporting her
with his arm, and shielding her with his body, while he
performed a soldier's duty with his sword. But when the
Indians began to give way, he withdrew from the fight,
and gave his whole attention to his fair charge. Not so
Mr. George Lee; animated with a newly-awakened fury,
smeared with blood, and shouting like a madman, he
rushed forward among the foremost, beating down the
stoutest warriors with his war-club, and taking full
satisfaction
for all the fright, the sufferings, and the hunger,
he had endured. While thus engaged, he saw the Indian
who had captured him, and had saved his life, struck
down, by a sturdy backwoodsman, who was aiming the
death-blow at his prostrate foe.
Don't strike! cried George, that's a good fellow
he treated me well
But he spoke to deaf ears; the tomahawk fell, and
the only Indian in whom he had seen anything to
conciliate
his good-will, slept with the mangled dead.
Bless me, cried George, what a bloody business!
They are all alikeIndians and Kentuckiansa
blood-thirsty
set.
Having uttered this moral reflection, he drew his gory
hand across his brow, to wipe off the big drops of
perspiration. The battle swept on past him, like a heavy
storm, which no human hand can stay, and his
momentary
pause gave him time to look round. The ground
was strewed with the dead and dying; wherever he
turned his eye, it fell on distorted features, and gaping
wounds, from which the crimson current still flowed.
He stepped forward, and the blood gurgled under his
foot-step
.
Groans and convulsive breathings fell upon his
ear. His heart sickened at the scene of horror, and he
slowly retraced his steps to the camp-fire of the
vanquished
Indians.
Colonel Hendrickson and young Colburn, who fought
side by side through the whole contest, were the last to
relinquish the pursuit. The veteran seemed to be
animated
with a supernatural strength and activity, and to be
actuated by an inhuman ferocity. Wherever his blow
fell, it crushed; but his fury was unabated. Blood seemed
to whet his appetite for blood. As he struck down the
last enemy within his reach, he halted, and his eye
S
seemed to gloat upon the victims of his revenge. His
cheek was flushed, his nostrils distended, and his muscles
full of actionlike those of a pawing war-horse. In a
moment, this excitement began to subside, and he
exclaimed
,
God forgive my soul the sin of
blood-guiltiness
!
Colburn looked at him with astonishment. The veteran
turned towards him, and said, Young man, I have this
hour shown how frail are our best intentions. I was
once a soldier of some note. But when I became a
Christian, and felt the obligation to love all men, and
forgive my enemies, I determined to fight no more,
except
in defence of my home or country. I even prayed
that I might have strength to forgive an injury which
had rankled in my bosom for years. You were too
young to remember my boymy only son, who was
butchered in my presence by this very tribe. Dearly did
I revenge his death, and devoutly did I afterwards pray
that I might forgive it. For years have I disciplined my
feelings so severely, that I had thought the last spark of
hatred was extinguished, and that my last days would
glide away in charity with men, in peace with God.
When I stood a prisoner, bound to the stake, and
expecting
a miserable death, I endeavored to subdue every
vindictive feeling. I prayed that I might die the death
of the righteous, and felt that peace which the world
cannot give nor take away. When it pleased God to
cut my bands asunder, it was my right and my duty to
defend the life which He spared, and the friends who
were dear to me. But no sooner did I raise my armed
hand, than all my former feelings of vengeance against
the race who had slain my child, were kindled up.
Hatred
,
long smothered, broke forth, with implacable fury,
and I tasted the sweets of revenge. It was a bad, a
wicked feeling. It is a dreadful, an unholy passion.
Take warning from me, my young friend; never let the
passion of revenge find a place in your bosom. It will
poison your best enjoyments, destroy your noblest
feelings
,
and make shipwreck of your purest hopes. God
preserve you from hating as I have hated, from suffering
as I have suffered!
CHAPTER XXI.
Several
days had succeeded the termination of the
adventure described in our last chapter, and the parties
were all assembled at the mansion of Colonel
Hendrickson
.
This was a house somewhat larger than ordinary,
built of hewn logs, after the plain but comfortable
fashion
of the country. There was not the slightest attempt
at ornament, but every thing was substantial and neat;
and a stranger might see at a glance that it was the
abode of hospitality and abundance. A large farm lying
around, consisted of extensive fields newly cleared,
whose deep rich soil was now heavily loaded with
luxuriant
crops of tobacco and corn. A large number of
negroes, decently clothed, cheerful, and contented, were
engaged in the various labors of agriculture.
The Colonel's family consisted of himself, his wife,
and an only daughter, a beautiful girl of eighteen, who
combined in her person and manners the truly feminine
gracefulness, the easy politeness, the cordiality, and
frankness, so remarkably characteristic of the ladies of
Kentucky, who unite, with singular tact and elegance,
the noble independence and generous kindness of their
country, with the gentleness and delicacy appropriate to
their sex.
This young lady was now walking, arm in arm, with
William Colburn, on the beautiful lawn in front of the
house. It was one of those fine autumnal days, which
are thought to be peculiar to the western country, when
the atmosphere is mild, and in a state of perfect repose,
the leaves of the forest are tinged with a variety of rich
and gorgeous but pensive hues, and every natural object
wore the sober drapery and the serene aspect of the
departing year. The sun shone brightly, the soft warm
air created a delightful sense of luxurious enjoyment;
and the young couple that sauntered together,
conversing
in expressive glances, and tones of confiding
affection
,
were not the least interesting objects in the
picturesque
landscape.
Miss Pendleton sat at a window, with Mr. George Lee.
This young gentleman was as much in love as ever, and
as difficult to be persuaded that it was not altogether
possible and proper for his fair relative to return his
passion
.
It was beyond the power of language, and the
art of logic, to convince him that he had not the best
claim to her affections. He was a gentleman of good
family, and had an ample estatehe had been her
companion
from infancy, and had loved her from the first
dawn of reason. These arguments he now urged, for
the hundredth time, with all the eloquence of which
he was master, not forgetting to insist on the priority of
his suit.
Who is there, cousin Virginia, who has loved you
as long as I have? or who will ever love you half as
much? When we were children, did I not climb the
tallest trees in the woods, at the risk of my neck, to
gather grapes for you, or to catch young squirrels or
birds for you to play with?
I am inclined to think, cousin George, that you had
a natural propensity for such feats, which required but
little stimulus to bring it into action.
There it is, again! I have been trying all my life
to convince you of my love for youand you will never
believe it.
Do not do me injustice; I have always known your
feelingshave always been sincerely grateful for your
kindnesshave always valued and prized your
friendship
Friendship! there it is, againit is a shame to call
such devoted love as mine by the cold name of
friendship
.
I love you better than my own life; I have shown
that.
You have indeed, replied Virginia, with much
emotion, and I should be most ungrateful not to be
deeply affected by your kindness, by an affection so long
continued and disinterested. But it is painful, Mr. Lee
Don't, don't, call me
Mr. Lee
. You know, Virginia,
I can never stand that. Refuse me, if you willbut
don't treat me as a stranger.
S 2
I was only going to remark, how painful it is to see
you persevere in a suit which I have never encouraged
and which I have so oftenso very oftendeclined.
I feel towards you, cousin George, all the affection of a
relative; if you were my only brother, my feelings and
sentiments in regard to you could hardly be different
from what they are. More than this we cannot be to
each other.
There it is, againthat is just the way you always
wind up. I can't for my soul, understand you.
Why
,
if you love me so much, will you not marry me?
Miss Pendleton, though grieved, and even shocked, at
the perseverance of her generous but silly lover, could
not repress a melancholy smile as she replied, Because
there is a great difference, George, between sisterly
affection, and that love which is necessary to happiness
in marriage.
Well, I cannot for my life see that. I love you like
a brotheryet I wish to marry you, to live for you, to
die for you, to do anything for you, that would make
you happy.
But if marrying you would not conduce to my
happiness
,
what then?
Dear Virginia, you could not help being happy. I
should be devoted to you. I have a large fortune, a fine
house, plenty of servants, and every thing that heart
could wish.
Let us drop the subject, Mr. Lee, now and for ever.
George rose, and walked across the room.
So you are determined not to marry me?
I have always told you so.
Virginia, it is not for myself that I care. It is for
your happiness that I am interested. I cannot bear to
leave you here in this cabin, in these wild woods, and in
the neighborhood of those dreadful savages. Say you
will go back to the Old Dominion, live with my mother,
and be my sister; let me divide my fortune equally with
you; and I will never again ask you to be my wife.
She was deeply affected. She had always known that
this simple young man, although almost an idiot in
intellect
,
was generous, and sincerely attached to her. She
had seen him forsake an affluent home, and pleasures to
which he was fatally addicted, to follow her to the
wilderness
.
She had been the innocent means of leading
him into captivity and suffering. There he had shown
his devotion to her, in the most extravagant, yet
touch-ing
,
offers of self-sacrifice. All this passed rapidly
through her mind; and his last offer brought tears into
her eyes.
No, George, said she, rising, and offering her hand,
which he grasped with a lover's eagerness, I cannot
accept your offer, nor is it necessaryI cannot be your
wife, but if ever I should need a friend, or a brother, I
will frankly apply to youif ever I shall be destitute
of a home or a protector, most willingly will I seek them
under your mother's roof. So saying, she left the
room.
While this scene went forward, Colonel Hendrickson
and Mr. Fennimore were engaged in close consultation,
in the garden. Mr. Fennimore, after communicating
the facts with which the reader is already acquainted,
proceeded as follows:
Major Heyward having satisfied me that my mother
had no legal claim upon him, added that he had already
made his will, by which he had bequeathed his whole
estate to Miss Pendleton, who had been brought up as
his adopted child, and who, having been reared in the
expectation of being his sole heiress, could not now be
disinherited without injustice. Nor could his affection
for her, which was that of a father, permit him to make
any disposition of his fortune to the prejudice of her
interest. But he desired to be reconciled to my mother,
and spoke of making some provision for her.
That will, you are aware, has been lost. I am the
heir at law of my uncle, and I have come to you, as the
legal guardian of Miss Pendleton, to say that I intend to
fulfil strictly his intentions. This instrument contains a
formal relinquishment and transfer to her, of all my
right, title, and claim, to the whole of my deceased
uncle's estate. This was one of the objects of my visit
here; the other is to bring to justice the murderer of
Major Heyward, who I am satisfied is Micajah Harpe,
and who, with the assistance of our friend Mr. Colburn,
I have traced to this neighborhood.
That paper, replied the Colonel, I shall not
accept, without consulting Miss Pendleton. I had
determined
to divide my own property equally between her
and my daughter. I shall apprize her of my intention,
and let her decide for herself on your offer.
But I hope, my dear sir, that you will advise her
that it is her duty to accept that which of right belongs
to her.
If my advice is asked, said Colonel Hendrickson,
I will give such as I think it becomes my niece to
accept. You are the proper heir of your uncle. Had
he left all his property to her, he would have done
wrong; and I shall certainly not advise her to avail
herself of your generosity.
CHAPTER XXII.
A HAPPY company was assembled that evening, at the
mansion of Colonel Hendrickson, consisting of the
agreeable
and interesting personages mentioned in the last
chapter, together with several young people who had
dropped in during the afternoon, and who were, of course,
expected to spend the night. For in this region of
generous living and abundant hospitality, a visit of a few
hours is a thing not to be thought of; the fashion of
making calls
, which furnishes such pleasant occupation
to the city belle, is not practised; and a young lady
always
carries with her, on such occasions, a wardrobe
that will serve for at least a week.
Colonel Hendrickson was comfortably seated in his
arm-chair, by the side of an immense fire-place, filled
with one of those enormous piles of wood, which the
Kentuckians build up, in the hospitable desire of giving
a warm reception to their friends; while the door was
judiciously left wide open, to admit a free circulation of
frosty air. The apartment was spacious, and the plain
old-fashioned furniture, consisting of a few articles, each
of which was particularly large and inconvenient, was
such as may be readily imagined by those of my readers
who are acquainted with the habits of the more wealthy
of the pioneers; and those who have not that advantage,
may fancy it what they pleasefor it has little to do
with the story. One article, however, must not be passed
over, because it is characteristic of the times and the
countrythis was a bed, covered with a snow-white
counterpane, and surrounded by a fine suit of curtains;
for as cabinsby which we mean log houseshowever
large, contain but few apartments, all of them are
occupied
as sleeping-rooms, and the common sitting-room is
always my lady's chamber. One consequence of this
fashion is, an excessive, and even ostentatious neatness,
rendered necessary by the fact, that every apartment is
open to the inspection of visitors; and another is, that
the mistress of the mansion must be an early riser, that
her room may be put in order before breakfast, and the
visitors must retire early at night, to avoid encroaching
upon her regular hours.
There was an engraved portrait of General
Washington
,
hanging over the fire-place, and above it a rifle,
with a powder-horn and shot-pouch. Of the rest, it is
enough to say, that the whole interior of this primitive
dwelling, bore evidence that it was the residence of
comfort
and abundancethat it was the habitation of a fine,
liberal old gentleman, and a handsome, neat, industrious,
stately, old lady. It was, as we have seen, forty years
ago, and this worthy couple were both revolutionary
patriots, who, having served their country well, in their
respective departments, were now enjoying their laurels
in content and competency. The worthy lady, who sat
in the corner opposite to her husband, diligently plying
her knitting-needles, still retained traces of great beauty,
and wore an air of demure sedateness, mingled with a
feminine, lady-like, grace, that contrasted finely with the
bold, manly, countenance of her lord. She was a dear
old lady; few of the girls were as handsome, and none
of them looked half so natural. Her soft eye beamed
with benevolence, the charities of life were in her smile,
and even her snow-white cap had a matronly and
christian-like appearance, which invited respect. Over
the back of her chair hung the almanac for the current
year, conveniently at hand for frequent reference; on
whose margin might be seen numerous marks, made
with a pencil, or still oftener with the point of a needle,
denoting certain days on which remarkable events had
happened in the family, such as the birth of a negro or
a brood of chickens, or the sale of a crop of tobacco,
and marking the times in the age of the moon, most
proper for planting particular seeds, or shearing sheep,
or weaning children.
When supper was announced, the whole party was
seated round a large table, loaded with substantials, well
cooked, and piping hot. Other people may know the
luxury of good eating, but the Kentuckians practise it.
Before the master of the house was an ample dish of
fried chickens, dressed with cream and parsley, a little
farther up were venison steaks, then fried ham; then
there was cold ham, and chipped beef, and sausages,
and, better than all, there was a fine dish of
hominy
, and
a noble pile of sweet-potatoes. Of the eatables composed
of bread-stuffs, served in various shapes, no one who has
had the misfortune to be
raised
north of Mason and
Dixon's line, can form an adequate conception. The
biscuits, white, light, spungy, and smoking hotthe
wheat bread, smoking hotthe corn bread, smoking hot
and the cakes, almost red hotthese are luxuries
which defy the power of description, and the excellent
qualities of which can only be estimated truly by that
infallible test which the old adage supposes to be
necessary
in reference to a pudding. There was no lack of
sweetmeats and pastry; but the pride of the feast were
the great pitchers of milksweet-milk, sour-milk, and
butter-milk; for, after all, milk is the staff of life, and
is a thousand times better than the cold water so
much lauded by modern philosophers. There were
other good things; but we shall content ourselves with
mentioning a capital cup of coffee, and leave the reader
to form his own conclusions as to the comforts of a
teatable
in the backwoods.
After supper, when the company were again ranged
about the fire, the conversation took a lively turn;
hunting
,
war, and love, naturally became the leading
subjects. The old, when they are benevolent, love the
conversation of the young. Genuine simplicity of
character
is always shown, in a relish for hearing the
sentiments
,
and witnessing the joys, of youth. Persons
of the strongest minds, often read children's books
with interest, and mingle with delight in their sports.
Colonel Hendrickson was one of those. Although
dignified
in his manners, and even austere in his appearance,
he could unbend, and win the eager attention of a
youthful
circle, by his cheerful sallies. On this evening he
was in high spirits, and joined freely in the mirth of his
guests.
I will tell you, said he, a very singular
hunting
adventure
, which happened when Mrs. Hendrickson and
I were both young people
Mr. Hendrickson, interposed the venerable lady
mildly, but with a little spice of one having authority,
I would not tell that story now.
Why not, my dear? It is a good story.
But you have told it so often, Mr. Hendrickson.
No matter for that, my dear; our guests have never
heard it.
You must know, said he, while the young folks all
assumed the attitude of eager listeners, that my father
was a wealthy farmer, in the western part of Virginia.
We lived near the mountain, and I learned to hunt when
I was a mere boy. We had plenty of servants, and I
had little else to do than to follow my own inclination.
At fourteen I used to break my father's colts, and had
gained the reputation of a daring rider; at the same age,
I could track a deer as successfully as the most
experienced
hunter; and before I was grown, I had been a
volunteer among the Indians. At sixteen, I began to get
fond of going to see the young ladies; so that between
my gun, my father's colts, and the girls, I was in a fair
way of growing up a spoiled boy. Things went on in
this way until I was twenty-one; then the Revolution
came on, and saved me. War is a good thing in some
respects. It furnishes employment for idle young men.
It brings out the talents, and strengthens the character, of
T
those who are good for anything; and disposes of many
who would otherwise hang upon society, and be in the
way of better folks. I joined a company that was raised
in the neighborhood, and was made an officer; and off I
went, in a gay suit of regimentals, mounted on a fine
horse, with a capital rifle in my hand, and a heart full
of patriotism, and courage, and love. Perhaps you all
want to know who I was in love with?
Here the old lady began to fidget in her chair, and
threw a deprecating look at her spouse, who nevertheless
proceeded:
I was just of age, and my old dame there was
seventeen
,
when the war broke out. Our fathers' estates
joined, and we had known each other, intimately, from
childhood. She was generally allowed by every body
Mr. Hendrickson, exclaimed Mrs. H., I would
leave
that
out.
To be remarkably handsome, continued the Colonel,
and what every body says, must be true. She was,
really, although I say it myself, a
very great beauty
.
Well, I declareyou ought to be ashamed, Mr.
Hendrickson! interrupted the lady; but the husband,
who was used to these scattering shots, very composedly
continued his story.
She was a regular toast at the barbacues, and
General
Washington, then a Colonel, once drank her health
at a county meeting.
This reminiscence was better received by the worthy
matron, who took a pinch of snuff, and then left the
room; not without throwing a look of pride and affection
at her good man, as she passed; but as the tale was
becoming rather personal, as respected herself, she
remained
absent until near the close of it.
I cannot say that we ever fell in love with each
other; for our mutual affection commenced with
childhood
,
grew with our growth, and filled our hearts so
gradually, that it may be said to have formed a part of
our natures. As for courtship, there was none; I rode
to meeting with Caroline every Sunday, went with her
to the races and barbacues, danced with her at every
ball, and spent half of my time at her father's house.
When returning home late in the evening, after an
absence of several days, I used to stop at her father's,
or at my own, just as happened to be most convenient,
and felt myself as welcome at the one as at the other.
But no explanation had taken place. When equipped
for service, the last thing I did, before we marched away,
was to go there in my new regimentals, to take leave.
She wept, but my mother and sisters did the same, and
I thought nothing of it at the time.
I was gone more than a year, was in several
engagements
,
and went through a great variety of hardship
and suffering. We were poorly paid, badly fed, and
terribly thrashed by the regulars, while learning the
discipline
which enabled us to beat them in return. At
length our company was completely destroyed; some
were killed, some taken prisoners, some got sick, and a
few grew tired of being patriots. The remainder were
discharged, or transferred into other companies; and I
obtained leave of absence. I had lost my horse, spent
all my money, worn out my clothes, and had no means
of travelling, except on foot. Patriotism, young
gentlemen
,
was a poor business then, and is not much better
now. Like Falstaff's honor, it will not set a limb; and I
found to my sorrow, that it would not keep out cold, or
furnish a barefoot soldier with a pair of shoes. But it
warmed the hearts, and opened the doors of all true
whigs, and I generally procured a meal and a night's
lodging, at the close of each day's travel, under the roof
of some friend to the cause of liberty.
I had lately thought a great deal about Caroline. It
was not until I parted from her that I knew how
necessary
she was to my happiness. I now recollected her
remarks, and recalled with delight the amusements in
which we had participated together. When lying upon
the ground in my cheerless tent, or keeping guard at
some solitary outpost, I amused the weary hours in
forming
plans for the future, in which she was always one
of the
dramatis person
. When anything agreeable
occurred, I longed to tell it to her; and when in trouble,
I could always fancy how entirely she would enter into
my feelings, and how tender would be her sympathy,
could she be at my side. I had no doubt that her
sentiments
were similar to my own; yet, when I recollected
that no disclosure had been made, or pledge given, on
either side, and that she was not even bound to know of
my attachment, I condemned myself for having taken
no precaution to secure a treasure, without which the
laurels I had won would be valueless, and life itself a
burthen.
In order to get home, I had to pass the door of
Caroline's father; and I determined to stop there first,
curious to know whether I should be recognized in my
wretched garb, and how I should be received. I was as
ragged a rebel as ever fought against his unlawful king.
I had no shoes on my feet, my clothes were faded, torn,
and dirty, my long hair hung tangled over my face, I
had been without a razor for some time, and this scar
which you see on my cheek, was then a green wound,
covered with a black patch. Altogether, I looked more
like a deserter, or a fugitive from a prison-ship, than a
young officer. The dogs growled at me as I
approached
the house, the little negroes ran away, and the
children
of the family hid behind the door. No one
recognized
me, and I stood in the hall where most of the
family were assembled, like some being dropped from
another world. They were engaged in various
employments
;
as for Miss Caroline, she was spinning upon a
large wheel, in the farther end of the room; for young
ladies then, however wealthy their parents, were all
taught to be useful. She looked at me attentively as I
entered, but continued her work; and I never felt so happy
in my life, as when I saw her graceful form, and her
light step, while she moved forward and backward,
extending her handsome arm, and displaying her pretty
fingers, as she drew her cotton rolls into a fine thread.
The ingenuity of woman never invented a more
graceful
exercise for showing off a beautiful figure, than
spinning cotton on a large wheel.
I thought she looked pensive; but her cheek was as
blooming as ever, and her pretty round form, instead of
being emaciated with grief, had increased in stature
and maturity. I felt vexed to think that she was not
wretched, that her eyes were not red with watching, nor
T 2
her cheeks furrowed by tears. I endeavored to speak
in a feigned voice, but no sooner did the tones meet her
ear, than she sprang up, eagerly repeated my name, and
rushing towards me, clasped both my hands in hers,
with a warmth and frankness of affection, which
admitted
no concealment, and left no room for doubt. The
whole family gathered round me, and it was with some
difficulty that I tore myself away.
When my good mother had caused me to be
trimmed
,
and scrubbed, and brushed, I felt once more the
luxury of looking and feeling like a gentleman. I passed
a happy evening under my native roof; and the next
morning, early, shouldered my rifle, for a hunting
excursion
.
My friends thought it strange, that after the
hardships
I had so recently undergone, I should so soon
evince a desire to engage in this fatiguing sport. But I
had different game in view from any that they dreamed
of. I took a by-path which led to the residence of a
certain young lady, approaching it through a strip of
forest, which extended nearly to the garden. Caroline
was in the garden. I thought she was dressed with
more than usual taste, and she certainly tripped along
with a livelier step than common. I leaped the fence,
and in a moment was at her side. I shall not tell what
passed, nor how long we stood concealed behind a tall
clump of rose-bushesnor how much longer we might
have continued the
tte--tte
, if the approach of some
one had not caused Caroline to dart away, like a frighted
deer, while I retreated to the woods, the happiest fellow
in existence.
I strolled through the forest, thinking of the pleasant
interview, recalling the soft pressure of the hand that
had trembled in mine, the exquisite tones of the voice
that still murmured in my ear, and the artless
confessions
that remained deeply imprinted on my heart. It
was some hours before I recollected, that in order to
save appearances, I must kill some game to carry home.
How many fat bucks had crossed my path while I was
musing upon this precious little love-scene, I know not;
I had wandered several miles from my father's house,
and it was now past noon. Throwing off my
abstraction
of mind, I turned my attention, in earnest, to the
matter in hand, and, after a diligent search, espied a deer,
quietly grazing in an open spot in full view. I took aim,
touched the hair-trigger, and my gun snapped. The
deer, alarmed, bounded away; and not being very eager,
I renewed the priming, and strolled on. Another
opportunity
soon occurred, when my unlucky piece again
made default,the priming flashed in the pan, but no
report followed. As I always kept my rifle in good
order, I was not a little surprised that two such accidents
should follow in quick successionand I began to
consider
,
seriously, whether it might not be an omen that
my courtship would end in a mere flash. Again and
again, I made the same attempt, and with a similar
result. I was now far from home, and night was closing
around me; I could not see to hunt any longer, nor was
I willing to return home without having killed anything.
To sleep in the woods was no hardship, for I had long
been accustomed to lodging upon the hard ground, in
the open air; indeed, I had been kept awake most of the
preceding night, by the novel luxury of a feather-bed.
Accordingly, I kindled a fire, and threw myself on the
ground. I never was superstitious; but my mind was
at that time in a state of peculiar sensitiveness. My
return home, the sudden relief from privation and
suffering
,
the meeting with my family, and the interview with
Caroline, had all concurred to bewilder and intoxicate
my brain; and as I lay in the dark shade of the forest,
gazing at the few stars that twinkled through the
intervals
of the foliage, some of the wild traditions of the
hunters occurred to my memory, and I persuaded
myself
that a spell had been placed upon my gun. When
I fell asleep, I dreamed of being in battle unarmed, of
hunting without ammunition, and being married without
getting a wife:the upshot of the whole matter was,
that I slept without being refreshed.
I rose, and was proceeding towards a neighboring
spring, when a strain of singular music burst upon my
ear. It was so wild, solemn, and incoherent, that I
could make nothing of it, and became more and more
convinced that I certainly was bewitched; but, determined
to see the end of this mysterious adventure, I hastened
towards the spot from which the sounds proceeded. As
I approached, the tones became familiar, and I recognized
a voice which I had known from childhood. I had
rested near the foot of a mountainous ridge, at a spot
where a pile of rocky masses rose in tall cliffs abruptly
from the plain. Against the bald sides of these precipices,
the rising sun now shone, lighting them up with unusual
splendor. On a platform of rock, overhung by jutting
points, from which the sound of the voice was returned
by numerous echoes, knelt a superannuated negro,
whom I had known from my infancy. From my earliest
recollection, he had been a kind of privileged character,
wandering about the country, and filling the various
offices of fiddler, conjurer, and preacher. Latterly, he
had quit fiddling, and taken to philosophy, most probably
because ambition, the last infirmity of noble minds, had
induced him to seek higher honors than those achieved
by the triumphs of the violin. The old man was
engaged in his morning devotions, and was chanting a
hymn, at the top of his voice, with great apparent fervor
and sincerity. I made up my mind, in a moment, that
he was the very conjurer who had placed a spell upon
my gun, and, perhaps, upon my courtship; for he had
long served as a kind of lay-brother at the altar of
Hymen, and was famous for his skill in delivering
billet-doux
,
and finding out young ladies' secrets. Moreover,
his name was Cupid. As soon as his devotions were
concluded, I approached, and disclosed, with perhaps
more seriousness of manner than I felt, and, certainly,
with more than I would have acknowledged, the
mysterious
conduct of my gun, which was as good a rifle as
ever a man put to his shoulder, and my suspicions that
some necromancy had been practised. The old man
was overjoyed to see me, for I had danced to his violin
many a long night; he uttered some very profound and
philosophic moral reflections, upon the rapidity with which
little boys grow up into big mencomplimented me
upon my improved appearance, and safe return from the
wars, and assured me that I looked
mighty sogerfied
.
Then proceeding to inspect my unlucky weapon, he first
examined the lock, then drew the ramrod, and having
searched the barrel, handed it back, exclaiming, with a
most sarcastic grin,
`Please goodness! massa Charley, how you
speck
your gun go off, '
out
no powder?'
The truth broke upon my mind with the suddenness
of an explosion. I stood with my finger in my mouth,
like a boy caught in a forbidden orchard, a lover
detected in the act of swearing allegiance upon his
knees, or an author whose wit has flashed in the pan.
The simple fact was, that in the pleasure of courting, and
the delight of winning my old dame there, who, plain as
you see her now, was, as I said before, in her young days,
allowed to be a great beauty, I had totally forgot to load
my gun! But old Cupid kept my secretI kept my own
counselCaroline kept her word, and I have always had
reason to consider that as the best hunt I ever made.
CHAPTER XXIII.
When
Colonel Hendrickson had concluded his story,
it was found that the hour of retiring to repose had
arrived
.
Mrs. Hendrickson arose, and placed a large
family bible and a hymn-book upon the table; for these
worthy people, as we are happy to say is the case with
a great many families in this region, never separated for
the night, without bowing down together in worship.
The Colonel read a chapter in the holy book, selected a
hymn, in the singing of which the whole circle joined,
and then kneeling down, prayed with fervor and
solemnity
.
There is no worship which impresses the
imagination, and warms the heart, like that of the family.
When in the silent hour of night, those who are joined
together by consanguinity and affection, kneel together
when the father prays for his children and dependants
there is a touching interest, and moral beauty, in the
scene; and we know not how any, who profess the
doctrines
of Christianity, can neglect so serious a duty, or
deny themselves so delightful a pleasure.
Just as they were about to retire, a loud barking of
the dogs announced the arrival of other visitors, who
proved to be a party of boys, sons of the neighboring
farmers, going to hunt the raccoon. They had called to
borrow the Colonel's favorite dog, who was famous at
catching these animals. Mr. George Lee, delighted with
anything in the nature of sport, immediately proposed
to the other gentlemen to join the party, but they
declined
participating in any amusement which was
considered
as being more properly suited to boys. But George
was not to be balked in his humor. A refusal from
Virginia Pendleton had always the effect of driving him
to the sports of the field with renewed ardor, and he now
joined the lads in their excursion with hearty good-will.
The party consisted of a number of lads, some of
whom were nearly grown, and others quite small. They
carried axes, and blazing torches, and were followed by
a number of dogs. On reaching the woods, the dogs
scattered in different directions, in search of their game;
and the human animals strolled carelessly along, waiting
for a signal from their brute companions. The
atmosphere
was still, but frosty; it was a clear and starlight
night, but the heavy mass of decaying leaves, that still
clothed the tops of the tall trees, rendered the darkness
impenetrable, execept where the torches carried by the
hunters, threw a bright glare immediately around them,
as they passed along. The stillness that reigned through
the forest was profound. As the hunters moved, the
leaves rustled under their footsteps, and their voices
breaking in upon the repose of nature, seemed to have
an unnatural loudness; and when they stood still to
listen, nothing could be heard, but now and then a
distant
faint sound of the tread of a dog, leaping rapidly
over the dried vegetation, or the scream of an affrighted
bird. They pursued no path, but strolled fearlessly
through the coverts of the forest, directed only by their
acquaintance with the local features of the country.
They often paused to listen. The dogs continued to
hunt, taking wide circuits through the forest, and
returning
at long intervals, one by one, to their masters, as if
to report progress, or to ascertain what had been the
success of others. All at once a barking was heard,
falling upon the ear so faintly, as to show that it
proceeded
from a distant spot. It came from a single dog,
and announced that he had fallen upon the scent of
a raccoon; and in a few minutes a change in the tones
of the animal, which became more lively, intimated that
he had chased the game to its hiding-place. The other
dogs, on hearing this sound, all rushed eagerly towards
the spot from whence it proceeded, followed by the
hunters at full speed. They found the successful dog
sitting at the foot of a large honey-locust treeor as
the boys expressed it, barking up a honey-locust,
with every appearance of triumphant delight.
The first thing which was now done, was to collect a
quantity of fallen limbs, which were piled into a large
heap, and lighted by means of the torches that had been
brought for this purpose. In a few minutes an intense
blaze shot upwards, throwing a brilliant glare of light
upon the surrounding scene; and the animal for whose
capture these preparations were made, was seen standing
on a bough forty feet from the ground, endeavoring to
conceal itself, while it gazed downwards in alarm and
wonder. A loud shout announced the delight of the
party on beholding their game, the dogs evinced an
equal degree of pleasure, and it would have been hard
to tell which animals,the human or canine,
experienced
the greatest degree of enjoyment in the sport.
The young men now threw off their coats and began
with their axes to cut down the great tree, in which their
prey had taken refuge. It was several feet in
circumference
;
but that which would have been considered,
under
other circumstances, a laborious task, was cheerfully
undertaken in the eager pursuit of amusement. Blow
after blow fell upon the solid trunk in quick succession,
and the woods re-echoed the rapid and cheerful strokes
of the axe. Two of the hunters wielded the axe on
opposite
sides of the tree, striking alternately with regular
cadence, and with such energy and skill that every blow
made its appropriate impression; others relieved them,
from time to time, by taking their places, while the
smaller lads continued to supply fuel to the fire. At
length the work was so nearly accomplished that a few
U
more blows only were required to complete it, and all of
the party, except those engaged in chopping, retired to
the side of the tree opposite to the direction in which it
was expected to fall, gathering together all the dogs, and
holding them fast by main strength, to prevent them
from running under the falling tree, and being crushed
by its descent. Nor was it an easy matter to restrain
the eager animals, for no sooner did the great tree begin
to totter and creak, than they began to whine and
struggle
,
showing the greatest impatience to rush forward and
seize their prey, as soon as he should reach the ground.
The tall tree slowly bowed its top, trembling for a
moment
as if blanced, then cracking louder and quicker,
and at last falling rapidly, tearing and crushing the
boughs that intercepted its downward progress, and
stretching its enormous length on the ground with a
tremendous
crash. The neighboring trees, whose branches
were torn off, and whose tops were disturbed by the
sudden
rush of air accompanying the fall of so large a
body, bowed their heads over their prostrate comrade,
waved their splintered limbs, and then relapsed into their
original state of majestic repose.
No sooner did the tree strike the ground, than the
raccoon darted from among its quivering branches, and
bounded away pursued by the whole yelling pack of
dogs and boys. And now there was shouting and
scrambling. Surrounded by so many foes, the raccoon
was soon brought to bay by a young dog, who paid
dearly for his inexperience, for the enraged animal
turning
suddenly, struck his sharp teeth into the head of the
dog, who yelled lustily with pain; this occupied but a
second; the raccoon resumed his flight, and the beaten
dog, whining and bleeding, slunk away. Again and
again was the hard-pressed animal obliged to face his
pursuers, who now headed him in every direction that
he turned, and more than one dog felt his keen bite.
The human tormentors crowded around, interfering no
further than by encouraging the dogs with loud shouts;
and the sport went bravely on, until the raccoon
suddenly
springing at the trunk of a large tree, clambered
up, and with a few active bounds placed himself out of
the reach of his pursuers.
Another fire was now kindled under the second tree,
which happened to be of a less formidable size than the
first, and the indefatigable hunters went to work again
with their axes. The raccoon was less fortunate than
before, for when the tree fell, he was completely
surrounded
by his enemies, who took care to prevent him
from again
treeing
. It was astonishing to see the
fierceness and success with which this small animal
defended
himself against so many adversaries of superior
size; the sharpness of his teeth, and the quickness with
which he snapped, rendered his bite severe, and his
sagacity
in seizing upon the most vital and sensitive parts
of the bodies of his assailants was remarkable. He
sprung often at the eye, the lip, and throat of the dog
who ventured to engage him; and it is always observable
that a dog who is a veteran in such affairs, or as the
hunters say, an old 'coon dog, has a face covered with
scars, an effect probably produced by the skill of the
canine animal, in protecting the rest of his body, by
presenting his front only to his foe. It was impossible,
however, to contend long against such unequal numbers;
several of the dogs were sent yelling out of the fight;
but at last one more experienced and bolder than the
rest rushed in, seized the brave little animal by the
throat, and in a moment worried him to death. The
whole combat, though lively, fierce, and eventful, lasted
but a few minutes.
The dogs were again sent out, and soon succeeded in
chasing another victim into a tree, and the same
proceedings
were thereupon had, as a lawyer would say, as
in the case aforesaid; and in the course of the night
several raccoons were taken, in a similar manner so far
as respected the kindling of fires, and chopping down
trees. In other particulars, however, there was a
considerable
variety of incident. A veteran old male
raccoon
fought like a determined warrior, and sold his life
dearly, while one of smaller size, or of the softer sex,
fell an easy prey. Sometimes the unhappy animal was
crushed to death by the fall of the tree in which it had
taken refuge; and sometimes after an immense tree had
been felled with great labor, it was found that the wily
game had stolen away along the interlocking branches,
and found refuge in the top of another. Then the fires
were renewed, and the bright glare usually enabled the
hunters to discover the fugitive closely nestled in a fork,
or at the junction of a large limb with the body of the
tree, where it lay concealed, until curiosity induced it to
show its face, in the sly endeavor to take a peep at the
operations going on below, or some slight motion
betrayed
a protruding paw, or the quivering tip of the tail.
Occasionally the young dogs committed the disgraceful
mistake, of treeing a lazy fat opossum, in the
branches of a slender sapling, from which it was
quickly
shaken down, and beaten to death ignominiously with
clubs.
The hunters were nearly satiated with sport, when it
happened, that the dogs, on striking a trail, went off with
great vivacity, following it to a considerable distance, to
the surprise of their wearied masters; for the raccoon
runs slowly, and on finding itself pursued, immediately
climbs a tree. On they went, full of hope, the scent
growing more and more fresh, and the dogs barking
louder and with greater animation, as they proceeded,
until the game was driven to a tree. The fire was lighted,
when the trembling of a bough showed that the animal
was springing from one tree to another, where new
operations were commenced, and the axes were striking
merrily, when an alarm from the dogs was heard, and it
was found that the wily game, after stealing from tree
to tree, had descended to the ground and dashed off.
Away went the dogs and boys again, in higher spirits
than ever, for the ingenuity and boldness of the animal
showed that nobler game was now started, and that they
were on the trail of a wild-cat, who was so closely
pressed, as to be again obliged, after a gallant run of
about half a mile, to take refuge in the branches of a tall
oak, which happened to stand apart, so that the animal
could not leap into a neighboring tree. Fires were now
lighted all round the spot, so that a considerable space
was illuminated with a brilliancy as great as that of
noon-day; the cat was seen, with back erect, and
glaring eye-balls, looking fiercely down; the axes
U 2
were plied with renewed vigor, and the oak was soon
prostrated. Greater precautions were now used, to
prevent the escape of their prey; the youths, armed with
clubs, formed a large circle, and the dogs rushed in from
different directions. The enraged animal sprung boldly
out, bounding with vigorous leaps, showing his white
teeth, and growling defiance. The dogs, highly excited,
dashed fearlessly at their prey, and a hot engagement
ensued, for they had now to cope with one of the most
ferocious brutes of the forestone which, though not
large in size, is muscular, active, cunning, and
undauntedly
fierce. Fighting with teeth and claws, he inflicted
deep wounds on his eager assailants. Growling, barking,
hissing, and shouting, were mingled in horrible discord.
Dried leaves, and earth, and fur, were thrown into the
air, and the slender bushes were crushed and trampled
down, by the maddened combatants. Surrounded, and
attacked on all sides, the furious cat fought with
desperation
.
Sometimes springing suddenly up over the heads
of his assailants, he alighted on the back of a dog, fixing
his teeth deep in the neck, driving his sharp claws into
the throat on either side, and bearing down the agonized
and suffocated animal to the earth; and sometimes
overthrown
,
and fighting on his back, bitten and worried
from every direction, he sprang at the throat of one of
his tormentors, sunk his deadly fangs into the jugular,
nor released his hold until the dog quivered with the
pangs of death; until wounded, torn, bleeding, and
exhausted
,
he was overpowered by numbers. Thus ended
in triumph, a most
glorious hunt
.
The night was nearly wasted, and the sportsmen, now
several miles from home, began to retrace their steps.
After proceeding a short distance, they divided into
several parties, each taking the nearest direction to their
respective habitations. One of the youths agreed to
accompany Mr. Lee to Colonel Hendrickson's; and our
friend George, after expressing the delight he had
experienced
in the capital sport which they had enjoyed,
bade them a hearty good night, and marched off with his
young guide, through the dark and now silent forest.
Fatigued with several hours of severe exercise, they
sauntered slowly along, and as the hunter walks,
habitually
,
with a noiseless tread, their footsteps fell silently
on the leafy carpet of the forest. The death-like repose
of the woods afforded a strong contrast to the fires
which had lately gleamed, and the sounds of conflict
that had awakened the echoes of the wilderness.
Although
the darkness was almost impenetrable, the guide
moved forward with unerring skill, keeping the direct
course, without deviation, climbing over hills, on whose
summits the star-light glimmered faintly through the
foliage, or descending into vales, where not a gleam of
the light of heaven broke in upon the solitary travellers.
At length, they crossed their former track, at a spot
where one of the fires had been lighted. The fuel had
been heaped up at the foot of a dead tree, of considerable
magnitude, and as the pile had been great, and the heat
intense, the flames had enveloped the trunk, extended
upwards to the branches, and lighted the whole fabric
in a blaze of glowing fire. They first saw this beautiful
sight from the summit of a neighboring hill, from which,
though still distant, it was distinctly visiblea tree of
fire, standing alone in the dark forest! The trunk
presented
a tall column of intense redness, round which
the flames curled, and rolled, giving to this majestic
pillar of fire the appearance of a waving motion; while
the branches and twigs were all lighted up, and
completely
enveloped with the glowing element, and parts of
them were continually breaking off and falling to the
ground, like drops of blazing liquid. As they stood
gazing
at this splendid exhibition, several figures were seen
moving in the light, close to the burning tree, which were
ascertained to be those of men and horses; and the
hunters felt their curiosity excited by the appearance of
horsemen in this solitary place, at such an hour. Mr. Lee
proposed to approach them, and ascertain their character;
and the guide, equally inquisitive, consented, with some
hesitation, and after suggesting the propriety of using
caution. Deeds of violence had lately been perpetrated;
and the young forester whispered, that for some days
past, when the men of the family were at work in the
fields at some distance from the house, his mother had
kept the doors fastened all day, and if she heard a
foot-step
approaching, hid her children, and armed
herself
with a rifle, before she looked out, to ascertain the
character of the visitor. The butcheries of the Harpes
had filled the whole country with dread.
Thus prepared, they advanced, cautiously, towards
the fire, and came sufficiently near to distinguish two
men, stout, ill-looking, and completely armed. They
frequently looked suspiciously around, and listened, like
men expecting to be pursued, and resolved to be on their
guard; and as they stood exposed in the broad glare of
the light, there could be no doubt that they were the
identical ruffians who had disturbed the peace of these
new settlements, and against whom the whole community
was about to rise in vengeance. Each of them held by
the bridle a fine horse, panting as if from a hard ride.
There was another person with them, to whom one of
the men was speaking, in earnest and authoritative
language
,
and who was recognized, at a glance, by Mr.
Lee, as his late companion, Hark Short, the snake-killer.
After conversing a few minutes, the men mounted
their horses, and rode rapidly away, plunging their
spurs into the sides of their spirited steeds, and riding over
obstacles, and through brush, with fearless and careless
speed. Mr. Lee waited until they were out of hearing,
and then advanced to the fire, to speak to Hark; but the
boy, on hearing his footsteps, ran nimbly away, without
waiting to ascertain who it was that approached; and the
hunters resumed their homeward way, which led in a
direction opposite to that taken by the Harpes.
CHAPTER XXIV.
It
was nearly noon, when Mr. Lee rose the following
morning. He found Colonel Hendrickson, and all his
guests, waiting for him to accompany them in a ride
to the house of a neighboring gentleman, where they
had engaged to dine. When he communicated the
intelligence of having seen the Harpes on the preceding
night, the gentlemen expressed great regret at not having
heard it sooner, and determined to go in a body the next
day, in pursuit of the ruffians.
The horses were soon at the door, and the gay party
began to mount, each of the young gentlemen selecting
a favorite fair one for his own special charge, as is
customary
and proper in all well-regulated parties of pleasure.
Mr. Lee, who considered that he had a prescriptive right
to wait upon Miss Pendleton, was advancing to assist her
to mount her horse, when he perceived that Mr.
Fennimore
had already taken her hand; and turned back,
jealous, mortified, and almost determined that he would
not join the company. The blood mounted into his
cheeks, and his brow lowered, as he stood irresolutea
momentary paroxysm of rage struggling in his bosom,
against his native good-humor and habitual politeness.
Colonel Hendrickson saw his embarrassment, and with
ready politeness endeavored to remove it.
Mr. Lee, said he, I must show you a few acres
of fine tobacco, as we ride along. I suspect you are a
good judge of such matters; your father, if I recollect,
was a famous tobacco raiser.
George bowed, and silently walked with his host
towards
their horses.
Cousin George, said Miss Pendleton, with one of
her sweetest smiles, as he was stalking sulkily by her
horse's head, will you have the goodness to arrange
that rein for me?the cloud passed from his brow, as
he placed his hand on the bridlenot that one George,
the otherthank youtherethat is exactly rightyou
are going with us, cousin George? and, bowing
gracefully
,
she rode off, escorted by Mr. Fennimore; while
George Lee, completely conciliated by this little
manuvre
,
swore, internally, that she was the sweetest creature
in the world, and that Fennimore deserved to be shot.
As the gay company filed off in couples, Mr. Lee and
the Colonel lingered in the rear; the latter pointed out
his tobacco crop, his corn, and his turnips, talked of his
horses, and then turned the subject to hunting, and
told some stirring anecdotes of backwoods adventure.
George listened until he became interested, and, before
the ride was over, had recovered his usual spirits. But
still he was not satisfied. To give up Virginia was
sufficiently painful, but to see another carry off the bright
prize was more than his slender stock of philosophy
could bear.
They found a large party assembled to dinner. We
shall not stop to count the roasted pigs and turkeys, the
juicy hams, the fat haunches of venison, the bowls of
apple-toddy, and the loads of good things, on which they
were regaled. More important matters lie before us, and
urge us forward to the sequel of this history.
After dinner, when the gentlemen were strolling in the
open air, Mr. Lee whispered to Mr. Fennimore, that he
wished to converse with him in private, and led the way
to a retired place. Fennimore noticed his discontented
air, and an expression of defiance on his features, and
followed him in silence, wondering what was to be the
subject of their secret conference. When entirely out of
hearing of the rest of the company, Mr. Lee demanded,
in a haughty tone,
I wish to know, sir, whether you intended to affront
me, by your conduct this morning?
Most certainly not, replied Mr. Fennimore, in a
cheerful tone. I am even ignorant of the circumstance
to which you allude.
George had invited his rival to this conversation, in
the determination to quarrel with him at all events. The
conciliatory tone of Fennimore disarmed him for a
moment
;
but having, like most men when acting under the
influence of passion, predetermined not to be satisfied, he
returned to the charge.
Do you say, sir, that you do not consider it an
affront, to have stepped between me and a lady that I was
about to conduct to her horse?
If I had done so intentionally, I should say I had
been guilty of great rudeness.
Then you assert that you did not do it purposely?
I do, sir, replied the officer composedly; and I
will add
Well, sir? exclaimed George, pricking up his ears,
and expecting to hear a defiance which would lead to
the result that he wished to provoke.
I will add, with great pleasure, that if
unintentionally
I was guilty of such seeming rudeness, it is due to
my own character, and to your feelings, that I should
ask your pardon.
A soft answer turneth away wrath. George was too
much of a gentleman, and had too much native
good-humor
,
not to be reconciled by the politeness and good
sense of these replies. He gave his hand to Fennimore,
and then walked up and down for some time, in great
embarrassment.
And so you won't quarrel with me? said he, at
last.
Not willingly, Mr. Lee, replied Mr. Fennimore,
laughing; I have seen such evidences of your prowess,
lately, that I would much rather fight by your side, than
against you.
Would you do me a favor, Mr. Fennimore?
With a great deal of pleasure, sir.
Then just insult me, if you please; say any thing
that I can ask satisfaction for; do any thing that I can
take offence at, and I will thank you as long as I live.
I am sorry I cannot gratify you, Mr. Lee, replied
Fennimore, much amused; but really I like you too
well, to feel any desire to forfeit you friendship.
Well, if you will do nothing else to oblige me, will
you go to the woods, and let us shoot at each other, for
amusement?
Excuse me, Mr. Lee, replied Fennimore in the best
humor possible.
V
Tell me one thing, if you please, sir, and I have
doneare you in love with Virginia Pendleton?
How shall I answer you? replied Fennimore; to
say I am, might argue presumption; to say I am not,
would show a want of taste.
Well, sir, allow me to put you on your guard. It is
useless to court her. She will not have you. I have
been courting her these ten years, and have offered
myself
fifty times. It is perfectly useless, sir, to court her.
I know her wellshe is determined not to marry. She
is the finest woman ever raised in Virginiabut she will
not marry any manI have ascertained that.
I thank you, Mr. Lee, for your friendly warning;
and should I be unsuccessful, I shall recollect that I have
ventured contrary to a friend's advice.
Recollect another thing, if you please, sirI have a
prior claim to that lady's affection, which I will maintain
at the risk of my life.
Nay, but, Mr. Lee
Excuse me, sir,I have made up my mind on that
point; any man who marries Virginia Pendleton must
fight me first.
So saying, Mr. George Lee walked off, leaving
Fennimore
a little provoked, and very much amused; though
upon reflection, he felt only sympathy for this amiable
young man, who, with an excellent heart, and the most
gentlemanly feelings, was betrayed by the weakness of
his intellect, and his perseverance in a hopeless passion,
into the most extravagant absurdities.
CHAPTER XXV.
The
Harpes had heretofore escaped punishment, in
consequence of a variety of peculiar circumstances.
The scene of their barbarities was still almost a
wilderness
,
and a variety of cares pressed on the people. The
spoils of their dreadful warfare furnished them with the
means of violence and of escape. Mounted on fine horses,
they plunged into the forest, eluded pursuit by frequently
changing their course, and appeared unexpectedly, to
perpetrate new enormities, at places far distant from
those where they were supposed to lurk. More than
once were the people lulled into security, and the pursuit
of the ruffians abandoned, by the supposition that they
had entirely disappeared from the countrywhen the
conflagration of a solitary cabin, and the murder of all
its inmates, awakened the whole community to lively
sensations of fear, horror, and indignation.
Miss Pendleton heard of these atrocities with
shuddering
.
Thrice had she seen one of these assassins, under
circumstances calculated to excite the most dreadful
apprehensions
.
On each occasion his hand was raised
against her life, and his malignant scowl seemed to
announce
the existence of some deadly feud against her.
But why she should be thus an object of vengeance and
pursuit, she was totally unable to discover, or even
conjecture
.
In the meanwhile, the outrages of these murderers
had not escaped public notice, nor were they tamely
submitted
to. The governor of Kentucky had offered a
reward
for their heads, and parties of volunteers had
pursued
them; they had been so fortunate as to escape
punishment
by their cunning, but had not the prudence to
fly the country, or to desist from their crimes.
On the morning after these wretches had been seen
by Mr. George Lee, the intelligence arrived of their
having murdered a woman and all her children. The
vengeance of the whole community was now roused to
the highest pitch, and it was determined to raise parties,
and hunt down the murderers. Horsemen were seen
traversing the woods in every direction, eagerly beating
up all the coverts, and examining every suspicious place
where it was supposed the outlaws might lurk.
A man named Leiper, who had some renown as an
active and successful hunter, and who was both
muscular
and brave, headed a small party. The ruffians were
encamped in the woods, at an obscure wild spot, distant
from any habitation; and were seated on the ground,
surrounded by their women and children, when the
hunters came so suddenly upon them, that they had
only time to fly in different directions. Micajah Harpe,
the larger of the two brothers, sprung upon a fine
blooded horse, that he had taken from a traveller but a
day or two before, and dashed off, pursued by the whole
party; while his brother, not having time to mount, stole
silently away among the brushwood, and escaped notice.
Micajah, who was kept in view by the pursuers,
spurred
forward the noble animal on which he was mounted,
and which, already jaded, began to fail at the end of five
or six miles. The chase was long and hot, and the
miscreant continued to press forward; for although his
pursuers had one by one dropped in the rear, until none
of them were in sight but Leiper, he was not willing to
risk a combat with a man as strong, and bolder than
himself, who was animated by a noble spirit of
indignation
,
against a shocking and unmanly outrage. Leiper
was mounted upon a horse of celebrated powers, which
had been borrowed from the owner for this occasion. At
the beginning of the chase he had pressed his charger
to the height of his speed, carefully keeping on the track
of Harpe, of whom he sometimes caught a glimpse as
he ascended the hills, and again lost sight of in the
valleys and the brush. But as he gained on the foe, and
became sure of his victim, he slackened his pace,
cocked
his rifle, and deliberately pursued, sometimes calling
upon the outlaw to surrender.
It was an animating, but fearful sight, to behold two
powerful and desperately bold men, armed, and mounted
on gallant steeds, pursuing each other so closely as to
render it almost certain that a mortal struggle must soon
ensue. At length Harpe's horse, having strained all his
powers in leaping a ravine, received an injury which
obliged him to slacken his pace, and Leiper overtook
him. Both were armed with rifles. When near enough
to fire with certainty, Leiper stopped, took a deliberate
aim, and shot the retreating ruffian through the body;
the latter, turning in his saddle, levelled his piece, which
missed fire, and he dashed it to the ground, swearing
that it was the first time it had ever deceived him. He
then drew a tomahawk, and waited the approach of
Leiper, who, nothing daunted, drew his long
hunting-knife
,
V 2
and rushed upon his desperate foe, grappled with
him, hurled him to the ground, and wrested the weapon
from his grasp. The prostrate wretch, exhausted with
the loss of blood, conquered, but unsubdued in spirit, now
lay passive at the feet of his adversary.
Leiper was a humane man, easy, slow-spoken, and
not quickly excited, but a thorough soldier when his
energies
were aroused into action. Without insulting the
expiring criminal, he questioned him as to the motives
of his late atrocities. The murderer attempted not to
palliate or deny them, and confessed that he had been
actuated by no other inducement than a settled hatred
of his species, whom he had sworn to destroy without
distinction, in revenge for some fancied injury. He
expressed
no regret for his bloody deeds. He
acknowledged
that he had amassed large sums of money, and
described
some of the places of concealment; but as none
was ever discovered, it is presumed he did not declare
the truth. Leiper had fired at Harpe several times
during the chase, and wounded him; and when Harpe
was asked why, when he found Leiper pursuing him
alone, he did not dismount and
take a tree
, from behind
which he could have inevitably shot him as he
approached
,
he replied that he had supposed there was not
a horse in the country equal to the one he rode, and that
he was confident of making his escape. He thought
also that the pursuit would be less eager, so long as he
abstained from shedding the blood of his pursuers. On
the arrival of the rest of the party, the wretch was
dispatched
,
and his head severed from his body. This
bloody trophy was then carried to the nearest magistrate,
before whom it was proved to be the head of Micajah
Harpe; after which it was placed in the fork of a tree,
where it long remained, a revolting object of horror.
The spot is still called
Harpe's Head
, and the public
road which passes near it is called the Harpe's Head
Road.
Colonel Hendrickson and his friends had ridden out
to join in the pursuit, and had been scouring the forest
some hours, when they met a party who informed them
of the death of Harpe, and they turned their horses'
heads homewards. They were passing over a high but
level tract of country, whose surface was undulated by
gradual swells, and covered with a thick growth of
timber
;
to their right was a hilly, broken tract, called
the
Knobs
, in which these villains had often harbored. In
front of them was a region of open brushy land,
destitute
of trees, and which seemed to have been lately a
wide prairie, with no other covering but grass. Mr. Lee,
whose feelings seemed to be less social than usual, was
riding by himself in advance of the party; when at a
spot where two roads crossed, he was surprised to see
Hark Short, leaning against a tree, in an attitude of
fixed attention. He was so completely absorbed as not
to be at all conscious of the approach of Mr. Lee, until
the latter spoke to him.
What's the matter, Hark? said he: have you
found a big rattle-snake?
Hark started as he heard the voice, and looked timidly
round. His features, usually melancholy, now wore
an expression of fear and horror. Without answering
the questions of Mr. Lee, he raised his eyes wildly; and
George looking upward in the direction indicated by the
glance of the boy, beheld the bleeding head of Harpe!
For a moment he felt his own faculties bewildered, and
a shuddering sensation crept over him, as he gazed at
this shocking spectacle; but a recollection of the crimes
of the delinquent, who had been punished in this
summary
manner, changed the current of his feelings, and
he exclaimed sharply,
Is the boy mad?is it so strange a thing that a
murderer should be put to death?
Hark only groaned, and looked perplexed.
This wretch was an acquaintance of yours, it seems
you appear so much concerned about him, that I am
inclined to have you taken up as an accomplice.
No, don'tdon't, if you please, stranger,
exclaimed
Hark.
Then tell me why you seem so much interested in
the death of that murderer.
Whothat gentleman? inquired Hark stupidly,
pointing to the mangled relic.
Yes, that miscreant, who has been put to death for
his crimes,what do you know about him?
Well, I don't know
nothen
, in
peticklar
.
The other gentlemen now rode up, and on learning
the subject of conversation, insisted that the boy should
disclose all the particulars that he knew respecting the
ruffians, of whose history little was known.
I never saw that gentleman, said Hark, till since
I came out here to Kentuck.
But I understand, replied Colonel Hendrickson,
that a lad who I have reason to believe was yourself
assisted these ruffians in escaping, when arrested some
weeks ago, and went off with them.
Anan! exclaimed the lad.
Colonel Hendrickson repeated, and explained what he
had said.
'Spose I did cut the stringswas there any harm in
that?
Certainlyaiding in the escape of a prisoner, is a
criminal offence; and it is my duty, as a magistrate, to
bring you to punishment for it.
Would you punish me for cutting the strings, when
the Indians had
you
tied to the pole, to be roasted?
This was an appeal which was not easily parried. The
Colonel acknowledged his obligations to Hark, and at
once disclaimed any intention of arresting him, but on
the contrary offered him his protection.
And now, said he, I want you to tell me all that
you know about Harpe.
Will you let me go, arter that?
Yes.
Won't you beat me, afore you turn me loose?
No, my lad, nobody shall touch you. You did me
a good turn, at the risk of your life, and I will repay it,
at the risk of mine, if necessary.
WellI never seed Harpe, as I know on, in
peticklar
,
till that night.
Had you never heard of him?
Wellnot in peticklaronly what mammy said.
What did she say?
She told me that 'Kage Harpe was a powerful bad
man. She used to get mad, and curse him a hour.
Did she ever tell you anything that he did?
Not in peticklaronly that he killed every body that
he got mad atand that he would kill her and me, if he
got a chance.
Why should he wish to kill your mother?
I axed her that myself, but she wouldn't tell me.
Why then did you release Harpe, when you saw
him for the first time, in custody?
I couldn't help it.
Why not? Come, tell us all about itnobody shall
hurt you.
WellHarpe told me that he was my father!
And then you cut him loose?
Yeswouldn't you cut your daddy loose, if
anybody
had him tied?
Hark, said George Lee, you must go with me to
Virginia, and live with meI will take care of you.
I reckon, I can't go.
Why not?
'Cause I don't want to.
Would you not like to live in a fine house, and have
plenty to eat, and nothing to do?
I don't like to live in houses.
You don't! what is your objection?
WellI can't say, in peticklaronly I'd rather live
in the woods. I can do just as I please in the woods, and
be as happy as a tree-frog.
So saying, Hark began to move off. He cast a look
of terror towards the remains of his inhuman parent, as
he retired. It was not affection, nor regret, which
chained his glance to this revolting object; but a kind of
instincta superstitious reverence for the only remaining
being whose blood was kindred to his own, mingled with
a dread of human punishments, that seemed to have been
instilled into him in infancy, and which was the
masterspring
of all his actions. He quickened his pace on
finding himself at liberty, walked rapidly away, and
never was seen again in that region; nor is it known,
with any certainty, what ever became of Hark Short,
the snake-killer. It is most probable that he perished in
the wilderness; although it is altogether possible, that he
may still be killing reptiles, on some distant frontier of
our vast country.
A company of people now arrived, who had in their
possession a number of articles which had been found
in the camp of the Harpes. Among the rest, was a
small tin case, which was filled with papers. Mr.
Fennimore
having hastily looked over this, expressed a wish
to examine it more at his leisure; and it was,
accordingly
,
placed in his charge. The fatigued woodsmen
separated, and Colonel Hendrickson conducted his friends
once more to his hospitable mansion.
Their arrival was joyfully welcomed by the family,
who had been under great apprehensions during their
absence. Miss Pendleton, though much shocked at some
of the particulars which they related, could not but feel
relieved, when she heard that the enemy of her peace
was no more. Fennimore, who had concealed from his
friends, as they rode home, an interesting discovery
which he had made, advanced to her, with a face
beaming
with joy, and, presenting to her a parchment,
remarked
,
I am happy, Miss Pendleton, to have it in my power
to restore to you this document. It is the will of my
uncle Heyward, and places you in full possession of all
his estate. Allow me to congratulate you on your good
fortune.
I do not know, Mr. Fennimore, whether I ought to
accept the bounty of my uncle, which, by making me
rich, deprives you of your natural inheritance.
Happily for us both, replied the officer, that is a
question which need not now be argued; Major
Heyward
,
who had the undoubted right to dispose of his own
property, has made the decision, and we have only to
acquiesce.
Mrs. Hendrickson, who seldom spoke, except when
spoken to, but who, with the sagacity peculiar to her
sex, in matters relating to the heart, had made some
shrewd observations on the deportment of these young
people towards each other, now remarked, in her quiet
way,
If there is any difficulty about the property,
perhaps
you had as well let
me
keep that instrument, until
you can devise some plan for holding the estate jointly.
Virginia blushed deeply; and Fennimore, very gaily,
handed the parchment to Mrs. Hendrickson.
On those terms, madam, said he, I most cheerfully
deposit this document in your keeping, and shall, on my
part, submit the controversy to your decision.
George Lee, when he heard that the
will
was found,
danced and capered about the room, like a boy, wished
his cousin Virginia joy a hundred times, and shook
Fennimore
cordially by the hand, swearing that he was the
cleverest fellow in all Kentucky; but when he saw what
he considered proof positive, that Fennimore was a
successful
candidate for the hand of her who had so long
been the object of his affections, he left the room, and
began to make immediate preparations for his return to
his native state.
CHAPTER XXVI.
THE CONCLUSION.
Several
years had passed away, since the occurrence
of the events recorded in the preceding pages. Captain
Fennimore and the fair Virginia had been married, and
were residing near to Colonel Hendrickson. William
Colburn was united to the Colonel's only daughter, and
was settled in the neighborhood; and as no evidence to
the contrary is before us, we are authorized in believing
that both these couples were enjoying the most
uninterrupted
matrimonial felicity.
The best friends, however, must sometimes part; and
Captain Fennimore found it necessary to leave his
pleasant home, and his agreeable wife, to attend to the
affairs of their joint estate in Virginia. The farm
formerly
occupied by Major Heyward, was rented out; but
the tenant had erected a house on a part of the land
distant from the spot where the former mansion had
stood. Captain Fennimore, feeling a desire to revisit the
place where his uncle had resided and his wife had
W
grown up from infancy to maturity, rode over, one day,
to the ruins of the old house. The lane was still kept
open, but was grown up with weeds and briers. The
lawn around the house preserved something of its former
verdure and beauty; but the garden was overrun with
bushes, whose wild and tangled limbs were strangely
mingled with the remains of a variety of rare and
ornamental
shrubs. Indigenous thorns, and domestic fruits,
grew side by side, and wild flowers mingled their
blossoms
with those of exotic plants. There is nothing so
melancholy as such a scene, where luxury and art are
beheld in ruin, and their remains revive the recollection
of departed pleasures. There has always seemed to me
to be something peculiarly desolate in the appearance of
a deserted garden, where the spot, once adorned with
taste, and cultivated with assiduous care, has been
suffered
to run into wilderness. Nowhere are the efforts of
nature and art so harmoniously blended, as in the
garden
;
nowhere does embellishment seem so appropriate,
or labor so productive. There is something quiet, and
innocent, and peaceful, about the beauties of a garden,
that interests the heart, at the same time that the senses
reap enjoyment.
While Captain Fennimore was strolling pensively
about, he discovered a horseman riding up the avenue
towards the same place. On reaching the large gate
which opened into the lawn, the person halted, and
remained sitting on his horse. Fennimore, supposing that
it might be some one who had business with himself,
walked slowly towards the gate; but before he reached
it, and while concealed from the stranger by a cluster of
bushes, he was surprised to hear the voice of the latter,
as if in conversation with another person.
She is not at home, eh? said the voice; well, tell
her I called, boy, d'ye hear?tell her Mr. George Lee
called.
Fennimore, curious to know to whom Mr. Lee was
speaking, advanced a few steps, so as to see, without
being exposed himself; and was surprised to find, that
no person was within sight but themselves. Mr. Lee was
mounted on a fine horse, and completely armed, with a
sword, a pair of large pistols, and a rifle. He wore his
father's revolutionary uniform coat, buff waistcoat, and
cocked hat, and, thus accoutred, formed an imposing
figure
.
His countenance wore the flush of habitual
intemperance
,
together with the mingled wildness and stupidity
of partial derangement After sitting silent for a few
minutes, he drew his sword, and exclaimed,
Gentlemen, I pronounce Virginia Pendleton to be
the most beautiful woman ever raised in the Old
Dominion
,
and I am ready to make good my words. You
understand me, gentlemen! There she sits at her
window
she
has made a vow that she will never marry,
and I stand here, prepared to cut any gentleman's throat
who shall dare to pay her his addresses. Gentlemen,
shall we hunt to-morrow? Pass that bottle, if you please,
Mr. Jonesno heeltaps. My compliments to Miss
Pendleton
,
boy, d'ye hear? and tell her, I called to inquire
after her health.
Then drawing himself up, he saluted with his sword,
and sheathed it, took off his hat, bowed towards the
spot where the house had been, and kissed his hand;
after which, he wheeled his horse about, and rode with
a slow and stately pace down the avenue.
Poor George! he had fallen a victim to the evil
example
of an intemperate father, and the intrigues of an
ambitious mother. With a heart tenderly alive to the
best charities of human nature, and a disposition easily
moulded to the purposes of those with whom he
associated
,
he might readily have been trained to respectability
and usefulness, and although he could never have become
a brilliant man, he might have been what is far more
important, an amiable and worthy citizen. But his weak
intellect, assailed by the seductions of pleasure on the one
hand, and by dazzling schemes of ambition on the other,
became unsettled, and at last totally destroyed. His
vigorous constitution enabled him long to outlive the
wreck of his mind, and he continued for many years
to visit the ruins of Major Heyward's mansion,
dressed
in the fantastic habiliments which we have
described
.
He remembered nothing which occurred
after
his ill-starred journey to the frontier; and the
events of his early life were mixed up in his
memory
in the most singular confusion. He continued to be
the devoted lover of Virginia Pendleton, and nothing
ever ruffled his temper except the mention of her
marriage
,
which he always denied with indignation, as an
insult to her and himself; while the recollections of his
early love were mingled with visions of bacchanalian
orgies, and with hideous dreams of bloody encounters
with the savages. Many years afterwards, when his
cheeks were furrowed, and his hair gray with premature
old age, he might still be seen, mounted on his sleek
hunter, clad in his ancient uniform, with his hair
powdered, and his long queue neatly tied, riding with
stately grace, every day, along the old avenue, paying
his imaginary morning visit to the idol of his heart. He
was followed by an old negro valet, as gray and nearly
as stately as himself, who humored all the fancies of his
master, until it was supposed that the faithful black
began to be tinctured with the madness which he had
affectionately humored, and spoke of Miss Virginia
Pendleton
with the most unaffected gravity, long after that
lady was the mother of a numerous and thriving colony
of young Kentuckians.
Mrs. Lee mourned over the disappointment of all her
hopes, in the bitterness of unavailing repentance. When
our errors affect only ourselves, the pang of remorse
may be borne with patience; but when they have
extended
to those we love, and our own conviction comes
too late to restore peace to the bosoms we have ruined,
the cup of wretchedness is fatally poisoned for the
remainder of a miserable life. She never smiled, and
was never seen to weep; and bore the sufferings which
only a woman's love can know, with a dignified
resignation
,
of which woman's fortitude alone is capable.
THE END.Lieut. Lyttleton Fennimore, to C. Wallace, Esq.
My father was a native of England, who came to
Virginia when he was quite a young man. He was of
a good family, and well educated; if my mother be
considered a competent witness in such a case, he was
even more,highly accomplished, and remarkably
interesting
in person and manners. He brought letters of
introduction, and was well received; and as soon as it
was understood that his extreme indigence was such as
to render it necessary that he should embark in some
employment, to earn a support, he was readily received
as private tutor in the family of a gentleman, residing
not far from Mr. Heyward, the father of the late Major
Heyward, whose melancholy death I have described to
you. Mr. Heyward also employed him to give lessons
in drawing, and the French language, to his only
daughter, then a girl of about sixteen. A mutual
attachment ensued between my father and this young
lady, which was carefully concealed, because the
Heywards
,
though generous and hospitable, were proud and
aspiring.
I do not know how it was, that my father became
unpopular among the young gentlemen of the
neighborhood
.
His manners might not have been sufficiently
conciliating, or his spirit might have been above his
station, and have prompted him to exact attentions
which were not thought due to a private tutor. Perhaps
his attentions to Miss Heyward were suspected, and
regarded as presumptuous. Whatever might have been
the cause, the result was, that he was coolly received in
society, and subjected to many petty indignities. The
younger Mr. Heyward, who had at first treated him
with kindness, no sooner suspected him of paying
attention
to his sister, to whom he was tenderly attached,
than he became his violent enemy, and insisted on his
immediate discharge. The elder Mr. Heyward, too
magnanimous to do a deliberate act of injustice, took
time for reflection. During this interval, an event
occurred, which brought matters to a crisis.
Although the American colonies were at that time
loyal to the British king, and no plan of revolution had
been matured, yet extensive discontents prevailed, and
language of the strongest reprehension against the
ministry
was currently used. My father had, in writing to
England, drawn a vivid picture of the state of public
sentiment in Virginia, and the letter having been shown
to a cabinet minister, he was so well pleased with the
spirit displayed in it, as well as with the talents of the
writer, that he intimated a wish that the correspondence
should be kept up. This led to a series of letters,
written by my father, expressly for the eye of the
minister
.
He was a Briton by birth and allegiance, and
did nothing dishonorable in acting thus, as an agent of
the government; and as he adhered strictly to truth, and
depicted the motives of the colonists even in favorable
colors, he could not be justly considered as violating
hospitality. This correspondence, however, was
discovered
;
its author was represented as a spy, and loaded
with all the opprobrium which the indignation of an
enraged community could suggest. Nothing but sudden
flight could have saved his life. Miss Heyward was the
first to warn him of his danger. Having already given
him her affections, and being prepared to share his
fortunes, she proved her sincerity and her devotion, by
nobly consenting to elope with him, and become the
companion of his poverty and misfortune. They
commenced
their flight at the dawn of day, and before its
close, had indissolubly united their fates by the marriage
bond.
They retired for a while from notice, hoping that
my mother's friends would become reconciled; but this
expectation proved deceptive. Major Heyward, though
of a generous disposition, was a man of aristocratic
feelings
;
he loved his sister tenderly, and had, perhaps,
indulged some views in relation to her settlement in life,
which were blasted by her marriage with my father.
He had also a great antipathy to foreigners, and
considered
his family degraded by the marriage of one of its
members with a person who, however estimable, was an
alien to our country. For even at that early period,
many of the oldest families among the colonists felt a
pride in their native land, and gloried in the name of
American, though it was then but a name. He refused
to be reconciled to my mother on any terms, and
spoke of my father in language which forbade any
subsequent
advance on their part. They settled in
Philadelphia
,
where they lived in the most retired manner,
supported by the scanty pittance earned by my father
as a merchant's clerk. Of that unfortunate parent I
have no recollection, for he died while I was an infant.
My mother, left penniless in a strange city, was reduced
to a state of extreme necessity, but her pride would not
permit her to return to her father's house, where she
would now undoubtedly have been received with open
arms. You have seen my excellent mother, and you
know that she is a woman of uncommon talents, and
remarkable fortitude. When thus thrown upon her own
resources, she resolved to make the best of her
unfortunate
situation. She took a secluded lodging, and applied
herself with unwearied industry to her needle; and being
patronized by several fashionable ladies, maintained
herself creditably, though with extreme frugality, by
fabricating the most elegant and expensive articles of
female dress. Her taste and skill in these delicate
manufactures
were unrivalled. I cannot express the feelings
of anguish which I experienced while a mere child,
in witnessing the silent, the incessant toils of my
mother, which were secretly undermining her health;
and the devotion with which all her affections were
concentrated in myself, the only earthly object of her
regard. And I can remember, too, the fervor with
which I mentally vowed to devote my whole life to her
service. The death of a relative of my father in
England
,
placed us in possession of a small annuity, which
relieved my excellent mother from the necessity of
laboring for a support, and enabled her to educate me in
a manner suitable to her wishes; though we were still
poor, and obliged, as you are aware, to live in the most
frugal manner.
At the decease of my grandfather, Mr. Heyward,
we learned that a considerable sum of money would fall
to my mother, under the provisions of a settlement made
at the marriage of her parents. But again her pride, and
her wounded feelings, induced her to prefer obscure
indigence rather than make her situation known in any
manner to her family; nor until I became old enough
to take the management of my affairs into my own
hands, would she consent to have her claim investigated.
This was the purpose of my visit to Virginia. I have
detailed to you most of the events attending that visit:
it is enough to add, that my uncle satisfied me that we
had been misinformed. No marriage settlement had
ever existed, his father died intestate, and he, under the
rule of primogeniture, which then prevailed in Virginia,
was the sole heir. Thus a hope long cherished in secret
by my mother, was in a moment blasted.