STEEL BELT.
CHAPTER I.
Boston Harbor at sunsetThe flect becalmed
The skippers and the strange sailThe
moonlight
and the breeze from the seaThe frigate
and goleta
.
The
waters of Boston Bay slept without a
ripple. The round green isles that swell here
and there from its bosom were reflected in
dark blue masses and bold outlines beneath
the surface. It was near sunset. The skies
were suffused and glowing with molten gold,
and the waters were no less gorgeous than the
sky. `As face answers to face in a glass,' so
the mirror-like bay gave back the green
islands
,
the golden firmament and the
empurpled
clouds that magnificently curtained the
West. By inclining the head a little one
could see another world beneath the wave.
A soft haze, such as is peculiar to a
September
sunset blended sky and sea, and
communicated
a dreamy, pleasing indistinctness to
the horizon. The domes and towers of the
distant city enthroned upon her Three Hills;
the stately edifices on the wide sweeping
shores of the Bay; the fortresses upon its
islands
,
all, were tinted with the richest light,
reflected from the sunset sky and clouds; and
the hundred vessels of every size and class
that lay beclamed amid the scene, seemed to
have exchanged their snow-white canvass for
sails of purple and of gold.
The breeze by which they had been
impelled
on their various courses, had died away in
mid-afternoon, and left them there
motionless
.
Each vessel was reflected in the watery
world below, with the distinctness of outline
of the reality; every spar and rope being
answered from beneath; and the mock vessel
was so like the true that it could not have been
told from it, save that it, like the islands, was
up side down
. The men were reflected,
moving
about uposide down, walking, as it seemed,
on their heads. It was all a beautiful scene.
It seemed to be suspended in a liquid
element
,
neither air nor water, between two
worlds. Some of the vessels, especially the
larger ones, had their sails brailed up, hanging
in festoons from the yards; others let them
remain to catch the first zephyr that should
come in from seaward.
The calm extended far out to sea, and the
glassy ocean rocked upon its shining bosom
many a vessel, diminished by the distance to
a mere speak flashing back the sunbeams from
the West, and sparking like a star. Near the
land idly hung upon the arch of the smooth
turquoise billow the graceful fisher's skiff
swinging lightly to its undulations.
Occasionally
an unwieldly porpoise would roll his
huge curving back out of the water, and
blowing
a cloud of silvery spray into the air,
disappear
;
or a scool of ellwives dart upwards
with one impulse and descend in a silvery
shower with a rushing noise rippling the sea in
a wide circle around.
The sun had but a few minutes longer to
remain above the horizon. Surrounded with
the glories he had created he was slowly
retiring
behind the gorgeous curtains of rose
and purple clouds he had gathered about his
couch. But with his departure the splendor
of the sunset scene did not cease. The
crimson
,
violet, orange, rose and azure mingled
and suffused the heavens from West to East,
`till the Orient rivalled the West in
magnificence
.
Slowly and gradually the celestial
splendor diminished. The rose and purple
changed into russet, and the golden lining of
the Tyrian clouds became silver, and the
Tyrian changed to black. The silvery lining
then grew gray and gray mixed every where
with the fading dyes, `till sky and earth and
sea assumed the sober livery of evening. A
glow, a blush yet lingered in the West and
North, while the East became more and more
a sober gray.
Still the calm continued. Not a breath of
air had stirred the polished waters of the bay.
The evening breeze was withheld, and, save as
they were slowly borne harborward by the
scarcely perceptible tides the numerous
vessels
that dotted the bay, remained motionless.
The last tinge of rose had not given place
to gray in the North West, and the stars had
but just began to stud the blue arch, when
the Eastern horizon commenced to lighten up,
at first with a soft silvery radiance, just tinged
with the palest gold. It spread skyward
growing brighter each moment, suffusing the
East with the lovliest lighta fleecy, silvery
light reflecting the most delicate tints of
violet
and orange. Suddenly, amid this
exquisite
and lovely rivalry of the gorgous scene of
sunsetas gentle woman rivals man! the
upper end of the round moon appeared above
the sea. She rose like the sun with a veil of
silver over his disc. As she ascended from
the waters she flung a scarf of light across
them to every mariner's eye that watched her
rising, impatient for the ocean breeze that he
knew would follow her appearance.
Among the numerous vessels that reflected,
as if from banks of snow, her pure beams, there
was one which had before sunset drawn many a
curious eye from the decks of the trading
vessels
that lay becalmed near her. She was a
three masted
caravel
of about one hundred and
eighty tons burthen, that lay abreast of the
pyramid known as `Nix Mate.' It was a craft
of a description entirely unfamiliar to the
honest skippers who were watching her from
the decks of their lumber vessels, and
discussing
her with that freedom of speech which
republicans are apt to extend to every subject
at all novel or that looks like mystery.
There were, however, some of the rough
coasters, who had sailed in the molasses trade
to the West Indies, and who were, therefore,
more informed as to the probable character of
the stranger, which, like a hawk got among a
flight of doves, was making her way with the
Yankee craft into the harbor. They recollected
having seen such in Matanzas and on the
`main,' and knew they were used as trading
luggers in those distant seas.
`But what can the tarnal kritter be a-doin'
away here to Bosting, sticking her nose in
here among christian craft as if she had as
good right here as we
natives?
' said the skipper
of a lumber schooner from Penobscot in
answer
to the skipper of a Kennebec sloop, who
lay becalmed just under his stern window
and who had given him the information just
detailed.
Wall, Capting Pettingell,' answered the
skipper, from the top of his lumber, which
was piled half way up to the cross-trees,
dodging
,
as he replied, to avoid a cloud of smoke,
seasoned with onions, that floated towards
him from the funnel of his caboose; `Wall,
that's wot I cant guess. Taint of en Spanish
vessels come to Boston Port, and sich a craft
as this I never know'd ventur' out o' the West
Indies!'
`It's a mity odd looking fish, any how,'
responded
Captain Pettingel, looking through
his hollow hand at the stranger, which lay
about a third of a mile to the south and west
of him; `three masts and not a darned bit of
cross tree nor yard. Her sticks be as strait
and smooth as a liberty pole. I dont like her
looks, Capting Pinkham, do yew?' And this
courteous gentleman took three strides
forward
and three strides aft on the plank that
served him for a quarter-deck.
`Wall, I can't zactly say as I do,
Capting
Pettingell,' responded the Penobscot
skipper, shutting one eye and letting fall
his under jaw as he surveyed more closely
the suspicious vessel. `She don't to me look
exactly
like them Spanish traders I've seen
to the West Indies. She looks too cranky
and trim for that. Just see how clean she
looks from stem to starn. She is as sharp in
the bows as a pilot boat, and as strait as an
arrow. That thing in my 'pinion is made
more for sailin' than freightin!'
`That's just my pinion, Capting, `said the
Kennebec skipper with an air of consequence
stickin' his hard brown hands into the pockets
of an old blue broadcloth coat, which he wore
instead of a pea-jacket, and throwing back from
his forehead an antiquated bell-top hat to get a
better look at her. To tell you the truth,
Capting Pinkham, I have my `spisions `bout
that ar' three masted chap! I'm thinkin' he
in these waters for no good. But thar's a
mano'-war
below `ll have an eye on him; so he
better look out how he behaves if he aint any
better than he should be, which it's my
solemn
'pinion he aint. He musn't think he can
take the same liberties in these here parts as
he could in the West Indies. It's comin on
night and I tell ye, capting, it becomes us to
keep our eye on him. Josh!'
`Feyther!' answered a white headed smoky
faced urchin thrusting his head out of the
caboose
,
which was perched upon a pyramid of
shingles nearly on a level with the fore-cross
trees.
`Go down into the cabin and bring up my
double-barrel `Bunker Hill' and my powder
horn and bag 'o buck shot! I mean to show
fight till I die, Capting?'
`Don't be alarmed Capting Pettingel,' said
the Penobscot skipper laughing at the
seriousness
of his friend; `I dare say he won't
do any mischief if he should prove to be
even a pirate. We are almost in harbor, and
with that frigate becalmed below us, there is
nothing to fear. Pirates look after higher
game than you or I!'
`Wall, it aint no harm bein' prepared,
Capting
.
If they send their boat aboard me, I'll
give 'em both barrels of Bunker Hill, if I can't
do no more! I am a Captain in the militia
when I'm to hum, and it wouldn't answer
for Capting Eben Pettingell to give up his
ship without firin' a shot. I'll be darned if I
don't kind o' feel riled when I look at the
kritter, and sort o' wish he was a Spanish
pirate
and would take a notion to board the
`Polly Ann,' while I am her Captain; I guess
they wouldn't want to come agen!'
`You've pluck, I see Capting. But I don't
think you will have a chance to show your
military spirit. They seem to be lying
becalmed
there very quiet!'
`I only wish they'd come aboard!' cried the
valorous man shouldering his double barrelled
gun and marching up and down the planks,
which were laid above his cargo of shingles
and clapboards! `I only wish they'd come!'
This spirited and courageous individual
then stopped and resting his gun upon a
ratlin
of the starboard main shrouds aimed at
the vessel with the three masts: and made
several appalling demonstrations of his
intention
to fire! There is no saying what might
have been the consequences of his
over-broiling
militia valor to the object which had
aroused it, when all at once he dropped his
gun and, with a pale countenance, looked
over to the deck of his friend the skipper.
`Do you see that, Captaing Pinkham!
They are letting down a boat and men are
gettin' in it! I do really believe they are
comin' right aboard o' me coz I aimed my gun
at 'em! 'Tisn't possible they overheard me,
think 'tis captaing?'
`I shouldn't wonder,' answered the other
dryly.
`What in natur shall we do, capting? I'm
darned if they aint fillin' thar boat with men
in red capspirates they tell al'ays wears red
caps! I say, what shall we do?'
`Give 'em both barrels of Bunker hill,'
answered Captain Pinkham with a smile; yet
closely watching the boat.
Although the vessel had to him a suspicious
appearance, he did not apprehend any danger
from her in the harbor, just at sunset, with a
frigate within gun shot and hundreds of
coasting
vessels in sight. Yet he did not observe
this movement without interest. The boat
filled with men and impelled by light oars,
put off and pulled out towards them.
`They are coming,' cried the valorous
captain
as pale as a sheet! `Shall I give it to em?'
`And before his friend could reply, bang!
bang! went both barrels of Bunker Hill, the
buck shot ploughing up the glassy surface a
hundred fathoms off, and falling a quarter of
a mile short of the boat. At the same moment
the boat changed its course and pulled out
ahead of the Spanish Baxel, when it was seen
that she was attached to her by a tow-line
fastened
to the end of her flying jib-boom.
`There I told you I'd keep em off!' cried
the courageous gentleman on seeing the boat
haul ahead. `If it hadn't been for my bravery
we'd had our throats cut and our head strung
on a signal hilyard to make a necklace for her
captain! Thank
me
Capting Pinkham'
`You are an ass, Captain Pettingell. Dont
you see the boat was not coming here at all;
but only put off to tow! The vessel was
drifting
towards the Nix Mate rock and they have
got their boat out to pull her off into the
channel
.'
`Wall, so they be!' answered the
discomfited
warrior `But if they'd ha been coming
that
would a skeered em I know! It ant done
no harm. They heered it and seed the shot
in the water and know we are ready for em
if they get up to any o' their piratish capers!'
`If they'd come nigher, captain, I should
have expected to see you jump into your boat
and pull for the next island! I dont think
your gun frightened them much! I dare say
they thought you were shooting at the
seagulls
that are flying about us!'
`Captain Pinkham, you may jest; but I
tell ye, that chap is a dangerous neighbor.
If I was the captain up to the castle I wouldnt
let him pass, and if he tried to I'd skin him,
I'm plagued if I wouldnt! You see! That
boat ant out there for nothin! Its only
playin'
bunkum.
And this bold man after calling for his
supper, set down and ate his biscuit and fried
onions with his eye on the enemy, and
Bunker-Hill
placed loaded and ready cocked
across his knee.
A like curiosity and interest was felt on
board the other craft that were in sight of the
stranger, and to all she presented a suspicion
aspect. Those who, when the calm fell, found
themselves near her, towed themselves with
alacrity out of her way, for those who came
nighest to her least liked her looks.
In the meanwhile the object of the general
feeling of fear and dislike that pervaded the
fleet among which she had crept, lay upon
the waveless surface of the water as if
sleeping
between two skies. Below her was
painted
in bold outlines, hull, spar and canvass
inverted
.
She was very long and narrow and
lay crouching as it were, like a sleeping grey
hound, close to the water. Her hull was of a
dark bronze hue, relieved by a narrow bead
painted steel color, and intended to represent
a band of shining steel. Her decks were
closely shut in from stem to stern by her
bulwarks
,
above which could only be seen the
caps of her crew as they moved about. There
was visible no port, no gangway for
admittance
on board. All was close aud
mysterious
.
What transpired on her decks was
concealed
from all eyes. This feature presented
a striking contrast to the high open decks of
the Yankee craft around her, where skipper
and crew lived as exposed as if on the roof
of a meeting-house. This mystery the
skippers
did not by any means like. They could
not think any thing honest could be going on
when they built up the sides of their vessel so
high `to keep folks from seeing.' Many a
skipper shook his head and prophecied about
her, as well as that respectable gentleman
who was the valorous possessor of `Bunker
Hill.'
The strange vessel as she lay suspended as
it were between two worlds, presented to the
eye of the true seamen a fine spectacle.
Her model was beautiful. Its symmetry as
faultless as that of a regatta club-boat! She
sat upon the flood with two of her graceful
lateen sails extended upon her slender masts
like a swan with its wings outspread to catch
the first air that stirred. Her three masts
were slender single sticks, the main being full
seventy feet long, and raking with a hold but
graceful inclination aft. They were stained
a bright vermillion, and the slender round
like yards that obliquely crossed them
supporting
the triangular sail were black and
polished like ebony. There were but few
ropes visible, and the standing rigging was
very slight and without rattlings; as the sails
were hoisted from the deck, yard and all, by
halyards rooved through a truck at the
masthead
.
There were also halyards for pencil
flying topsails which were not now aloft, her
fore and main sails only being hoisted. She
carried also a jib and flying jib, both of which
were set. A more graceful, novel and
picturesque
looking object altogether, as she lay
idly upon the water, has seldom met the eye
of either landsman or seamen than this
foreign
looking craft. There was no sign of
armament, nothing to indicate whether she
was an armed vessel or only a simply
merchantman
.
That she was Spanish was
evident
from her rig, and the dark red capped
crew that showed themselves in the boat.
Her ensign hang drooping over the stern, and
could not be made out; though from the
different
colors it displayed in its closed folds, it
promised the first breath of wind that should
lift it to display the broad insignia of Spain.
The sun set; and the boat which had been
sent out ahead was ordered aboard, and the
vessel lay as before dark, silent and
mysterious
.
She had towed half a mile farther into
the harbor, and while, as the current began to
set seaward, the vessels around dropped their
anchors to hold their ground, she threw out
from her bows two pairs of huge sweeps and
began heavily and slowly to work them
unseen
within deck.
Gradually the sunset glories of the closing
day blended with the sober gray of night, and
still the three masted schooner or ship worked
her oars, and by this process held her own.
The evident dislike on board of her to
dropping
anchor did not escape the vigilant
observation of the Yankee skippers, and
especially
of the bold captain of the shingle
sloop, who with `Bunker Hil' charged
within
three inches of the muzzle, had not left his
deck or taken his eye off the suspicious fellow
since the sun went down.
The moon at length rose upon the scene and
with her came the first `paw' of the night
breeze that had been so long delayed. Her
bright wake was rippled and the young waves
began to dance in her path and sparkle with
merry light. The vessels most seaward first
felt the wind as it set towards land, and were
first in motion; some standing out of the
harbor
close hauled to make an offing, but the
greater part of them seeking the port directly
before them. It blew gently and steadily, scarce
ruffling the crest of a single wave and
sending
the vessels in at about three knots speed.
Those that lay in the more open channel and
passes between the islands next took the wind
and were set in motion, while others sheltered
by islands were slower in spreading to it their
idle canvass. At length the caravel took it
on her quarter and gracefully yielding to the
invisible impulse shot onward, her sweeps at
the same time being drawn aboard by unseen
hands, and her three light flying topsails a
moment after were seen ascending from the
deck like snow-white birds of gigantic size,
and spreading their wings to the silvery
radiance
of the moon. Then next the breeze
reached the Penobscot schooner and sloop,
and they also were in motion. Soon the
whole fleet, a few moments before so still and
inactive, was alive and the cheering song of
the heave-o-yo! as anchor after anchor was
hove up, gave place to the rippling music of a
hundred prows cutting the limpid surface of
the joyous sparkling bay.
Among those vessels that got the first
fanning
of the breeze and stood harborward, was
the double decked frigate or
razee
, already al
luded to as having been becalmed a mile
below
the Spanish caravel. Her lofty royals
first felt the upper current of moving air
before
the surface of the water was disturbed
by a flaw, and slowly and majestically she
began to advance: she had, therefore, made
considerable progress, when the three masted
schooner which lay so much farther in,caught
the breeze. This vessel had not been noticed
from the frigate, as several coasters and the
low shoulder of an island lay in the range, and
it seemed from her manuvering to be the
object of the schooner to keep in this range
even after the moon had risen, and she was in
motion again. If the honest coast skippers
had been surprised at her outlandish rig, they
were not less astonished and confounded at
her rate of sailing after the wind rose. She
seemed to walk the water! The breeze that
moved them along heavily at two knots, sent
her three or three and a half. She seemed to
want but a cap full of wind to make her dance
over the water like a whaleman's skiff. She
soon came up with the Polly Ann, and as the
vessels were crowded thickly together and the
passage was narrow, she went so near that
Captain Eben Pinkham trembled so that he
let fall Bunker Hill upon the plank and came
very near shooting his son and heir `Josh'
through the head; as it was he made a seive
of his fore-sail and was knocked over on his
back by the concussion. When he got to his
feet the `pirate,' as he swore she was, was
fifty fathom ahead of him leaving a white track
of foam behind.
`You'd better scamper and git out o' my
way,' said the militia hero on seeing this
favorable
state of things; and taking up Bunker
Hill he put it to his shoulder and aimed at the
vessel in bravado; fully satisfied that the
report
of his double-barrel had saved his load of
lumber, and perhaps his own and his son
Josh's neck from the hands of the `darn'd
pirate;' such being the complimentary and
graceful appeleation which Captain Pinkham
bestowed upon the enemy.
`I guess he wont want to come no nigher
the Polly Ann arter this,' said this worthy
and brave man as he looked after his
retreating
fear-inspirer.
He then turned to seek the ocngratulations
of his son Josh and those of a bottled nose
Kennebec fisherman who composed his whole
crew, and who felt safe and happy under the
protection of so brave a man, when he was
struck with astonishment on beholding his
vessel almost under the shadow of the triple
tower of canvass that rose high above the
lofty decks of the frigate. The next moment
the stately structure surged past her decks
looking down upon the sloop's topsail yard,
leaving the sloop as she passed rocking in her
wake as a child's chip boat would have done
in her own.
CHAPTER II.
The Return to PortThe Goleta discovered
The end of the CruiseSuspicious
Movements
on the water
.
The razee marched onward with a stately
advance amid the fleet of lesser craft, which,
one after another, fell into her wake. She
was clad in canvass from deck to truck, and
towered into the skies above the humble sails
around like a huge tower of snow piled
terrace
on terrace. At the same distance ahead
of her as at first starting, the strange
schooner
kept her course. The fast sailing frigate
had passed every thing else, but did not gain
upon this vessel, which was now plainly
seen from the deck of the former, the
coasting
vessels which had intercepted the view
having been one after another left astern.
Two bells in the first watch had just been
struck. The frigate was about two miles
below
the castle and five from the town, and the
Spanish
bazel
a little less than half a mile
right ahead. The wind was from the South,
and both vessels were running with it free
on the larboard quarter. The decks of the
frigate shone brightly in the moonlight, save
where the black shadow of the sails would
fall across it, and the brightest spaces were
crossed and netted with the gold pencil-like
shadows of the rigging intercepting the moon
beams. The usual watch was increased by
large numbers of the crew grouped on gun
carriages and the forecastle, and crowding the
forward hammock nettings, watching the
advance
of the noble vessel into harbour; for
she had been long absent and in the return
to port the rigid discipline of other time was
in some degree relaxed. Many a weather
beaten face was turned eagerly and earnestly
in the direction of the dome-crowned queen
of New England, sending up her hundred
glittering spires like fingers heaven-pointed.
A cheerful yet suppressed murmur and
laughter
broke the usual gravity of the forward
part of the ship, while aft the officers were
no less elated with the prospect of a speedy
termination to their voyage, the anticipation
of a happy meeting with friends, and the
enjoyment
once more of social pleasures. The
middies were in high spirits in the prospect of
liberty and larks, and were as merry as school
boys let out of school for a half holiday.
Smiles and good humor and kindly feeling
characterized all on board from the captain,
arrayed in his shore uniform, to the
gigantic
African cook who was shaving his ebony
chin in a bit of broken mirror preparatory to
paying a shore visit to his expectant Phillis.
Gallantly the returning frigate bowled up
the harbour which seemed to open its arms
and then gradually to enclose in the embrace
of its arms the two years wanderer. Nets of
golden oranges, huge branches of bananas,
and festoons of fragrant pine apples, which
were hung in different parts of the frigate,
showed that her last departure was from the
West Indies, and that she was not many days
thence.
A party of young officers off duty were
standing near the larboard gangway, some of
them upon the hammock nettings, watching
the lights in the distant city, and pointing
out to each other familiar places; for the
bright moon revealed every object with
remarkable
distinctness.
Opposite this group, on the starboard side
of the deck, a little further aft, stood the
captain
,
his first lieutenant and the
quarter-master
the
latter a respectful step to leeward of
his commanding officer. He managed to
listen
and con the ship at the same time. They
were talking about bringing the frigate to
anchor, and the best ground to be chosen for
it after they got up to town. In the mizzen
rigging, just above them, stood a young
lieutenant
with the quarter-master's spy glass to
his eyes looking out ahead. His face was
suddenly animated. The goleta was a couple
of points to windward and plainly visible from
the quarter deck. He had been watching
her for some moments, being surprised at her
ability to keep her distance ahead of the
frigate
which usually walked by every thing.
The rest on board, save some of the sailors
who were also observing the stranger keep
ahead with no little surprise, seemed too
much taken up with the familiar shores, the
city and the idea of going on shore to notice
her. To this young officer she seemed to be
only a schooner as her three masts ranged,
and the light was not strong enough at the
distance she was off, for him to distinguish the
lateen rig from the ordinary sails of a
schooner
.
But while he looked it became necessary
for her to fall off four or five points suddenly
where the channel took a sharp turn, just
below
the castle, which she was now most up
with. This change in her course brought her
three quarters to, and to his surprise he saw
that the supposed schooner had three masts
far apart, and that she was remarkably long
in the hull. The change in her position also
brought the beams of the moon more broadly
upon her canvass and he was astonished to
trace the outlines of the sharp triangular
lateen
sail.
`Faith! The secret of that long legged
fellow's
speed is out,' he said with a rounder
oath than it becomes us to chronicle, or
became
the quarter deck of a frigate.
`How? what is it, Winckley?' demanded
the captain, stopping his conversation and
looking at the young officer inquiringly.
`What have you discovered?'
`A lateen schooner running a race into
Boston harbor with the tightest frigate in
Uncle Sam's navy, and beating her at that. I
never expected to meet with a lateen out of
sight of the Pan of Matanzas!'
The officers attention was now drawn to the
vessel; and as the frigate rapidly neared her
after she had taken the angle in the channel
and running for awhile nearly broadside to,
they easily made her out to be a large class
Spanish baxel.
`This is a strange craft to see in a Yankee
port,' observed the captain. `I suppose she
has taken a run with a cargo of oranges and
pine apples. We are but nine days from
Havana
and if she had as quick a passage it will
turn out a good venture!' Thus saying the
captain, after glancing up the harbor, turned
to his lieutenant and resumed his
conversations
and instructions.
The frigate now gallantly passed the
Castle
,
which then presented to the eve
snow-white
walls and green parapets, and for the
rest of the way all on board were too busy
to heed the goleta, though her class had been
discovered by other groups both amidship and
on the forecastle, and given rise to no little
curiosity as to her business in those seas.
The goleta was at length lost amid the
numerous
vessels at anchor in the broad basin of
the harbor, and soon after the frigate drew in
among them and taking in sail after sail, at
length dropped her anchor in the stream
opposite
the India pier.
The deep mouthed bells in the city towers
were ringing out the good old fashioned hour
of nine o'clocka sort of social
curfew
for
regulating the hours of all well disposed
citizens
,
when the frigate came to with her anchor
once more grasping the ground to whih its iron
flukes had so long been a stranger. The sails
were furled, the yards squared, the port watch
set, the captain and one or two of his officers
had gone ashore, as well as all who had got
leave, and ten o'clock struck from half a dozen
turrets, iron tongue answering to tongue from
one extent of the reposing city to another.
The lieutenant of the watch was pacing up
and down the deck; three or four of the older
midshipmen were standing aft upon the
quarter
deck, gazing towards the town and
conversing
in animated voices about the joys of
tomorrow. Groups of tars were forward
listening
to long yarns to beguile the time, or
leaning over the hammock netting, watching
the moving lights ashore and listening to the
sounds that came off to their ears. All were
impatient for the morning; every bosom
throbbed with joyful anticipation. There was,
however, one exception to the general
happiness
which pervaded the frigate. But in the
satisfaction that made each heart full there
was no room to cast a thought upon the
wretchedness of others.'
The lieutenant of the watch had been
pacing
up and down the lofty deck with a short
quick impatient step like a man to whom time
lags and who would haster its flight by the
rapidity
of its own motion. He was suddenly
stopped by hearing his name called by a
midshipman
,
who was standing upon the quarter
davits, upon which he had sprung a moment
or two before.
`Roswell! Look here!'
`What is it, Dalton?'
`Come here and see for yourself!'
The office approached him and stepping
upon a gun carriage, looked over the
bulwarks
in the direction whither the young
man's eyes were turned.
`I see nothing but some scores of small craft
anchored about us!' answered he. `You are
always discovering sea-serpents, Dalton,' he
added with a smile.
`There are plenty of craft at anchor and
one that is not at anchor. That one I called
you to look at. I have been watching her the
last five minutes! She is now hid by that
brig. Watch the brig's bows closely and you
will see the craft I mean, poke her sharp nose
out beyond it in a moment! There! Now
do you see her?' he demanded with
animation
.
`Yes; I see a vessel moving beyond the
brig?'
`And do you see nothing extraordinary in
that, nor in her? Do you not see now that
she shows half her length that she is the
goleta
?'
`What goleta?'
`The three masted schooner that run into
harbor ahead of us, and keeping just her diso
tance to a fathom, and not two thirds of her
canvass set!'
`I was below writing a letter for home, you
know, when we came into port. I did not see
her! But sure enough, Dalton, that is a
regular
West Indian caravel! a three masted
lateen
!
I see her plainly enough now!'
`Well, she came into port at the same time
we did, only showing us her saucy heels. I
lost sight of her, just before we came to
anchor
,
among the other vessels, for you must
know I am positive I saw that self-same craft
at anchor in Havana, up by the Reglas, the
evening before we sailed!'
`Another of your sea-serpents, Dalton? It
is impossible, though there is no doubt she is
from Cuba. We have made the passage in
nine days from anchor up to anchor down, an
unparalleled passageand there is no
Spaniard
that could sail with us at such odds!'
`I could swear to her!'
`So you swore the Coffee Key was a
sea-serpent
.
You were positive you saw it lift
its head and lash its tail!'
`No more of that an' thou lovest me?' said
the lively young middy, coloring. `What I
now say is true!'
`Well it
is
possible. But you have
doubtless
mistaken some other goleta for this. Yet
if any craft could sail it should be that! She
is built like a greyhound. How she hugs the
water, and yet how lightly her bows and stern
sit above it. And her masts rake with the most
dare devil look, just as a spirited race-horse
throws back his slender ears! You may be
correct, Dalton! Yet it is odd she should
have been in Havana the night before we
sailed, and to-night be anchored within fifty
fathom of our stern!'
`She is not anchored. Do you not see she
is steadily moving, though very slowly!'
`I now see that she is. I thought it was an
apparent motion, caused by the brig this side
of her dragging her anchor. She surely moves
and yet without any perceptible means!'
`That is what surprises me! Before I called
to you she was astern of the brig. At first I
thought she was at anchor; but I soon
discovered
that she was creeping almost impert
ceptibly up against the ebb tide and
withouusing
any visible impelling powyr. Her sails
being all furled and on deck I was not a little
surprised!'
`You have reason to be! What can it mean?
See how she has left the brig and is yet
moving
steadily and noiselessly on!'
`These Spaniards are always doing things
unlike anybody else. What in the deuce can
he want creeping about among the fleet this
way!'
`Perhaps he wants to change his anchoring
ground!'
`Then why dont he do it with his boat
ahead? And how do you explain this
motion
?'
`It puzzles me I must confess. If I was in
a Spanish port or any foreign harbor, I should
tell that chap to keep his distance. Here there
is no danger, He is only manuvring like
all these Spanish vessels. They do every
thing secret and with a mystery, confound
them! Keep your eye on him, Dalton, and
see if you can make out where his fins are!'
Thus speaking the lieutenant sprung from
the gun to reply to some question put to him
by the purser. The middy continued to watch
the goleta with no little curiosity. Slowly,
yet with a steady onward motion, she opposed
the current which had began to ebb, and each
moment drew nearer and nearer under the
stern of the frigate. At length her motion
ceased when within about pistol shot, and she
became stationary within a few fathoms of the
bows of the Polly Ann, which she had a
moment
before passed as she lay at anchor. But
her bold commander overcome with the
military
achievements of the day had turned in
and was asleep upon his laurels, leaving the
vessel to take care of herself. An anchor
fast hold upon the mud was Captain Eben
Pinkham's harbor watch.
Dalton surveyed the mysterious vessel a
few moments, and satisfied that she did not now
move, and that, so far as he could see, she
had not dropped anchor, he was not a little
confounded. A faintly formed superstisious
feeling gathered about his heart, and bold as
he was, he could not but confess that he
experienced
something like fear. He was about
to call to the group of young officers who were
laughing and talking on the opposite side of
the deck looking towards the town, when
Roswell came aft and got upon the gun again.
`Ah, she has dropped her mud-hook,
Dalton
,'
he said on seeing her nearly in the same
position in which he had last seen her.
`Not she! It is my opinion she is sailing on
the devil's back; and he carries her about
where she chooses. She has ceased to move
and yet has let fall no anchor. The devil has
stopped to take breath!'
This was said half-soberly half-laughingly.
`She can't have grounded, for she must
have ten fathom under her keel. Your devil,
Dalton, must be a long-legged child to touch
the bottom. But jesting aside, this is a very
curious and strange affair. Did you discover
how she worked her way up so far.'
`Not I unless, as I say, she came on
Belzebub's
back!'
`If we were lying in Havana, and I should
see such manoeuvering I would send a boat
on board of her! How the deuce she moved
along without any sweeps or sails puzzles me.
Ah, I have it. She must have had a line out
ahead and been drawing herself forward
steadily by that?'
`But where could she have it fastened?'
`That is the difficulty. I am still in the
dark. I will get my glass and take a look
upon her decks!'
`I have not seen a soul moving!'
`I will take survey of her in-board! Here
is the spy-glass! I shall have to go two thirds
of the way up to the top to be able to take a
bird's eye viewher sides are built up and
lean in so?'
`What do you discover?'
`A clean deckrigging neatly coiled
latteen
yards snugly stowed, and every thing as
fine as a feather. She is a beautiful craft.
Too neat for a Spaniard, yet she looks Spanish
altogether!'
`Do you see any one on board!'
`Not a soul. Yes! I see above the
bulwarks
the cap of a man walking on the
starboard
side of the deck. Forward in shadow I
think there are half a dozen men lying down;
but it is so dark there and the moonlight
glitters
so upon the waterfor the goleta lies
right in the moon's wake, that I can't well
make them out! She has two boats, of the
same slender elegant model of herself,
amidships
!'
The remarks of the lieutenant of the watch
drew the attention of the remaining officers
upon the quarter deck to the goleta, which
now lay quiet and motionless upon the water,
her dark and beautiful proportions finely
releived
against the silvery back ground of the
moonlit wave.
After discussing her strange manoeuvering
and admiring her symmetrical and nautical
finish, one by one as the hours advanced they
sought their hammocks, leaving no one upon
the quarter deck save Roswel and the young
middy Tom Dalton. These two were on
watch; and the goleta having, for the last
hour remained without a movement, they
ceased to think of her and beguiled their
weary watch walk with talking of friends
they hoped soon again to meet, till Dalton
closed his eyes and slept, yet still
mechanically
pacing up and down the deck; and as
he slept he dreamed of a sister's embrace, a
mother's love, and the blushing welcome of a
maiden with whom he had exchanged looks of
hair three years before.
`Eight bells,' suddenly reported in the
quick, hilarious tone with which the end of
the four hours watch is usually proclaimed,
aroused him to momentary consciousness;
and without quite waking himself up and
losing the delicious dream, he instinctly
reached his hammock and tumbled into it,
there to have out, undisturbed, his happy
dream.
Roswell at the same time surrendered the
deck to the lieutenant of the next four hours
watch, and forgetting the schooner, or
thinking
it not worth while to report her for
observation she was now so quiet, he followed
Dalton below and was soon fast bound in that
deep sleep which falls upon the sailor after
ending his long night watch.
The movements on board the frigate had
not been unnoticed from the goleta. This
vessel after passing the castle ahead of the
frigate, it will be remembered, was lost to
those who watched her, among the numerous
vessels that filled the harbor. She had,
however
,
run but a little distance in among the
crafts at anchor, when instead of dropping her
slender lateen yards and coming too, like the
rest, she took it in all but her fore sail, with
which lowered a few feet she with diminished
speed gently kept on her way through the
fleet as if seeking an anchoring ground. All
around her were vessels among whom as she
made her way she attracted no little attention.
The only person to be seen in her was a man
standing upon the bows, who
communicated
orders from time to time to the
helmsman
,
by the motions of his hand. Guided
by these motions the helmsman steered the
goleta
on through the midst of the closely
anchored
fleet without coming in contact.
At intervals, as they sailed along, the
person
upon the bow would cast his eyes in search
of the frigate which was also making her way
under shortening sail towards her present
anchorage
.
From his manner and the dumb
orders he communicated aft, it was plain that
the movements of the caravel were governed
by those of the frigate, that she was watching
the vessel of war, as the small, quick-moving
king-bird watches the hawk as he hovers over
before settling upon, his cyrie.
At length, as the frigate came to anchor
the foresail of the goleta descended upon her
deck, and a man in a scarlet cap taking a
ight grapnel in his hand cast it from the end,
of the bowsprit far ahead beyond the hawser
of a brig that was anchored just above. The
line was then drawn in board through a round
channel in the bows and the goleta was
stationary
without an anchor. The success of
this cast was watched from the windlass by
the man who had been giving the orders from
the bows. When he found that the vessel
was held by the grapnel and slender line
attached
to it he sprung from the windless and
went aft. As he moved along the deck the
bulwarks enclosing them were so high that
the top of his head was level with them. The
quarter deck was elevated a step above the
main-deck. Here stood a youth with a spy
glass in his hand surveying the frigate through
a small port level with his eye. Several of
these look-outs were now visible so
constructed
beneath the cap of the bulwarks as to be
unnoticed a little distance off: through which
observations might be taken of things without
the observer being seen. The upper
portion
of the bulwarks was also so made with
hinges and hasps as to fall down all around
the quarter deck, like the leaf of a table,
leaving
them only breast high. Amid-ships were
hammock nettings. Her inner works were
all painted a rich vermillion, and the raised
work around the cabin and binnacle, and the
mouldings upon the capstan were all silvergilt.
A crescent of boarding pikes half encircled
the main-mast: and beneath an upturned
boat amid-ships a practised eye might have
guessed that an eighteen pounder was
lurking
.
If this was the case it was carefully
concealed. The cleanly decks; the well
arranged
running rigging; the neatly furled
sails, triced up against the masts, the slender
arched yards rivalling in length the masts
themselves; the air of nautical precison
pervading
every thing were features certainly not
often found in a mere merchantman.
Forward
were gathered about a dozen men, light,
active looking fellows, with skins as brown as
hazel-nuts; eyes glittering like the basilisks:
wearing picturesque red caps with tassels;
striped shirts, and scarlet sashes bound about
their waists; men of Castillian features and
tongue. Yet the men were none too many
to sail so large a vessel, and they displayed
neither
knife nor pistol in their sashes. The
goleta
might be an honest merchantman after all.
But circumstances looked very strongly
against her, to say the least
CHAPTER III.
Scene on board the goletaThe two officers
The mystery of the bazel's motion explained
The frigate's gun deckThe prisoner
.
The
goleta after having anchored by the
grapnel to the brig's hauser, remained
stationary
,
being about one third of a mile
distant
from the frigate. The person who had
stationed himself upon the bows to direct her
course through the closely anchored vessels,
after going aft took the spy-glass from the
hand of the young man who held it, and
springing upon the companion way, levelled
the instrument at the vessel of war, between
which and himself lay three vessels at anchor?
viz., the brig at whose hauser he was swinging;
the Kennebec sloop Polly Ann; and a large
square rigged brig, before alluded to by Dalton.
`She is quiet,' said the youth delivering up
the glass.
`Yes. But we must be cautious.
Rashness
on our part would be fatal to our plan!'
`We shall succeed! We
must
succeed,
brother!' answered the other with
extraordinary
carnestness.
`It is a bold act; it is attended with risk's;
but we shall be successful.'
`God grant it!' was the fervent response.
This conversation was carried on in
Spanish
.
The taller who held the glass then
resumed
his observation of the frigate while the
other walked up and down the deck with a
slow, sad, thoughtful step. At every turn his
walk would bring him full into the moonlight
that fell upon the glistening decks, and then
as he would recede he would fall beneath the
dark shadow of the lofty bulwark encircling
the stern.
As the moon fell upon his countenance,
which was scarcely protected by a silken
scarlet bonnet, it shewed that it was a
youthful
one and that its expression was pensive,
yet determined; as if grief and a bold purpose
were both together upon his heart. He was
not more than twenty if so old, with a profile
of singular elegance and finish; dark curls,
black as the raven's wing, escaped from his
bonnet and fell about his checks which were
palepaler from the contrast with the chon
locks that shaded it. His mouth was finely
shaped and spirited in expression; and his dark
black eyes were melancholy yet full of fire.
His person was elegant; his gait easy, and his
step firm and manly. He wore a gold
embroidered
jacket richly lined with fur, closely
fitting his shape, and blue trowsers slashed
above the knee and ornamented with hanging
silver buttons, that jingled at every step. His
waist was girdled by a belt of stamped leather
and he wore slouched boots of the same
material
;
a costume picturesque and singularly
becoming; but more befitting a young
Mexican
cavalier in the
pasco
, than the occupant
of the quarter deck of a goleta. A very small
gold inlaid pistol stuck in his belt, seemed
worn more for ornament then as a means of
defence. His warm olive complexion, though
now pale from some secret anxiety, and the
pure Castillian in which he had spoken,
betrayed
him a child of the
terra caliente
the
land of ever blooming flowers and suns that
shine in an endless round of summer.
His companion after surveying the frigate,
with his spyglass resting in the small port
opened
in the bulwarks, turned and addressed him.
`I think we can move now without
suspicion
.
The three vessels laying in range
will favor our approach till we haul nigh
enough!'
`Let us move at once then,' answered the
other with an eager gesture of impatience.
We must do what we are to do to night or all
will be in vain. Heaven smiles upon us in
sending us before favoring winds and
bringing
us into port in advance of the frigate.
This strengthens my hope for the future?'
`I believe we shall be successful! We must
have been seen by Diego, for we were full
three hours in sight of the frigate in the calm
that followed the dense fog under which we
first made the land. It is well for us that the
frigate, if she noticed us particularly, did not
fall in with us outside in the fair sea. She
would then have brought us to, for the
appearance
in these Northern waters of a latteen
ship is not an every day occurrence. In the
harbor we are safe from her curiosity.'
`How shall we advance upon the frigate,
Basilio?'
`By a warp-line. Are the two men ready
with the line, Tito?' he called to a stout dark
man who was standing near the helm.
`
Estan listos
, senor,' answered the man
touching his cap.
`Then send them out with it to the hawser
of that lumber sloop that lies astern of the
frigate!'
`Si, senor!'
`They will soon reach it, though it is a long
swim with a line to carry. But two better
swimmers never dove for pearls, than the men
I send to fasten us to the sloop's cable!'
The men let themselves down over the
bows by the martingale, one of them with a
small line passed once around his body and
the end held in his teeth. They both struck
out together, and as the line grew in length
one of them fell back to support it, so as to
relieve his fellow from the increasing weight.
The foremost one succeeded in reaching the
cable and securing it with a double turn round
it; and then throwing himself upon his back
floated down towards the goleta, which, at
the same moment, began to move. The line
was so small, yet strong enough with a steady
pull to draw the vessel forward, that it was
unseen on board of the frigate by Dalton and
the lieutenant. Having reached a position
within half cable's length of the frigate and
in a direction about two points off her
starboard
quarter, or that side which was farthest
from the town, the goleta, as has been seen,
ceased her progress. For two hours she lay
perfectly quiet. The first watch was ended
on board the frigate, and the first half hour
in the middle watch passed, and yet she lay
as if not a human being was on board
Roswell
had not drawn the attention of the
lieutenant
of this watch to her, and she was onl
noticed by him as being the polacre ship
which had beat them running into port. Of
her subsequent mysterious movements he was
wholly ignorant.
After she had became stationary, the young
man in the scarlet
gorra
and slouched boots
seeing that they were regarded from the deck
of the frigate, laid his hand impressively
upon
the arm of him, whom he had addressed as
Basilio.
`Do you not observe that officer in the
rigging
looking down upon us with a spy glass!
This close scrutiny augurs unfavorably for
our plan!'
`It is the duty of the officer of the watch
on board of a man-of-war to note every thing
that transpires in the vicinity of his ship. If
yonder lumber sloop should let down her
boat she would be as closely scrutinized as
our movement! To avoid increasing any
suspicion
,
we will lay perfectly quiet till after
midnight when a new set of men will have
the deck, and then we shall be able to carry
out our plan without further suspicion. To
stir now, would be to bring every action
under
the vigilant eye of the officer who has
seen us in motion!'
`It is two hours nearly to midnight! we
need every moment for flight and action!'
answered the younger with energy.
`There will be time after twelve o'clock.
Be sure that our every motion is closely watch
ed now. If we remain quiet, we shall cease
to attract attention.
`I will be patient brother!'
`Be so. Rashness may defeat all our
plans. Throw yourself upon that Indian mat
and, with my cloak over you, sleep for you
have been a long watcher! I will awake
you in good time!'
As he spoke he kindly laid his hand upon
the well turned shoulder of the youth, who,
without replying, slowly sunk down upon the
mat, and was soon asleep.
Basilio stood gazing upon him a moment
with singular interest, and then calling to a
slave who was lying below in the door-way of
the cabin, he lighted a cigar and began to
walk the deck, but so near the bulwarks as to
prevent being seen from the frigate. His
men were lying down on the forecastle. He
was the only man moving, and seemingly the
only one awake on board.
`Let them repose. They will do better
service by and by,' he said as his eye fell on
his prostrate crew. `The wind is favourable,
but the moon is full bright for secret action.
There are heavy clouds in the west that look
as if they might rise by midnight and give us
more obscurity for our purpose. Diego must
have been successful thus far or we should
have seen him swimming down to us.
Fortune
and Anita's star have favoured our
voyage
in a remarkable manner. Let the same
bright star shine upon what we have to do,
and thy happiness will be secure?'
This was uttered with deep feeling and
energy
.
He then, as if lost in meditation, began
slowly to pace up and down the deck. In
height this person was a head taller than the
young cavalier who was sleeping at his feet.
His air was commanding, united with the
bold, graceful, nonchalance of the seaman.
His countenance was strikingly handsome,
with hazel eyes full of passion and
intelligence
.
His brow was noble, and as he
carried
his broad Panama
sombrero
in his hand,
his features were unshaded save by flowing
masses of dark brown hair. The style of his
features was Castilian, and they had that
refined
aristocratic outline which belongs to
the purest blood of Spain. His upper lip was
darkened by a mustache which did not
wholly
conceal the expression and beautiful shape
of his fine mouth. His costume was simple;
consisting only of a blue striped gingham
ca
saca
, and nankeen trowsers, secured at the
waist by a blue silken sash, through the folds
of which glittered, as he moved, a broad band
of shining steel inlaid in thread like gold with
Arabesque figures.
Slowly and thoughtfully he paced the deck
of his beautiful vessel with the moonlight
broadly shining down through the rigging
making a tracery of clearly defined shadows
across his path; the youth upon his Indian
mat, just under the shadow of the mizzen mast
slept soundly, though at intervals a bright
blush would mantle his pale check, and his
lips would move in the indistinct
articulation
of some name: the men forward also slept,
and silence and repose reigned over the decks
of the vessel whose late movements had
seemed
so mysterious to the two young officers
who in the first watch had been watching her
from the deck of the frigate.
Besides Roswell and Dalton there were
two other individuals on board the vessel of
war, whose interest in the manuvres and
presence of the goleta was far deeper than
theirs. In the general rejoicing which brought
smiles and cheerfulness to every face on board
the razee at the prospect of soon meeting
friends, there was one young man whose brow
wore no smile, whose countenance was
clouded
and sad. The green islands of the harbor,
the familiar shores and the pleasant scenes
that gladdened all hearts, as the frigate sailed
up the harbor, only deepened the gloom upon
his brow!
He was not one among the group of officers,
who had been idly watching the town as they
approached it; nor was he to be seen in the
watch with Dalton and Roswell. Alone in
one of the state rooms appropriated to officers
of the frigate, upon the lower gun deck, nearly
adjoining the ward-room, chained by the wrist
to the bolt of a gun-carriage, he was brooding
over his gloomy condition. No one visited
him. No one was nigh him to sympathise
with him or help him bear up under his
condition
.
A prisoner chained and closely
guarded
,
he held no communication with any one
save the soldier who stood sentry by the low
door which opened into his place of
confinement
.
It contained a berth and one gun with
space enough for him to walk a few paces up
and down at the length of his chain.
The port was open, and he sat looking from
it out upon the shining water as the frigate
was sailing up the harbor, His thoughts were
dark and melancholy as became his destiny.
He saw as his companions on the deck had
done, the green islands, the castle and the
familiar shores of the Bayfor he was
returning
to his native landbut they presented
to his mind no pleasant thoughts. He turned
away from them and in the darkness and
solitude
of his prison paced to and fro, while
deep sighs escaped him.
What crime had he committed thus to be
condemned to chains and imprisonment, while
the free winds blew and the free waves flowed
for his blue nautical costume showed that
he was `a child of the winds and of the
waves!' What crime had deprived of liberty
one still youthful and whose countenance was
noble and generous even in its despondency?
When every heart was throbbing with the
thoughts of home and of liberty on shore,
why did his beat under the chains of
bondage
.
The frigate came to an anchor, and the
prisoner ceased his short promenade and
setting
upon the side of the gun looked out of
the port. His air was listless and hopeless.
He gazed into the water as if he coveted its
deep embrace; as if, but for his chains he
would have plunged at once to death and
freedom
!
Suddenly a dark object swung before his
eyes, intercepting his view through the port,
which to his surprise he saw was a man's foot.
Another foot followed, and then lightly
descended
the whole figure, and a man stood
crouching in the port within a yard of him.
He started back, when he heard his name
pronounced
in a low tone. The voice was
familiar
.
He looked again closer, for the
apartment
was lighted only by the reflection of the
moonlight from the waterand instantly
sprung forward.
`Diego! my goodmy brave Diego! Is it
you I behold indeed, or is this a vision?'
`It is me, Master Walter,' answered the
man in broken English. I have not left you.
I have been on board of the frigate!'
`Not since she left Havana? But we must
speak low and cautiously.'
`I know it. I shall hold here by the rope
ready to swing out of the port if any one
comes in. I have been on board all the time,
and heard of you every day. I did not dare
to speak about you, because nobody on board
suspects that I know you; but I have been
making my discoveries and spying about you
till I know exactly how the ground lays. I
could have got to see you before to-night, for
I have had my line ready four or five days
ago, but I didn't want to give you any hopes
till I was sure!
`Sure! Hopes? What am I to
understand
,
Diego?' asked the prisoner who had
listened with profound surprise, and
apparently
bewildered to comprehend him.
`Sure of assisting you; giving you hopes
of escaping.'
`Of this there is no prospect. You see I
am heavily chained and that a sentinel
always
stands at my door.'
`That I know. But chains and sentinels
cannot keep those whom love would make
tree.'
`How mean you, Diego? You talk
mysteriously
.
Your presence here confounds
me. Relate all!'
`In a few words. I shipped on board of the
frigate as soon as I found you were arrested
and taken on board. I was resolved not to
let you go without a friend. I hoped
something
might turn up by which Diego could
prove to you that he is not ungrateful. You
saved my life, Don Waltero. I was ready to
risk mine, if need were, to save yours!'
`Faithful and good friend! But I fear you
have come this long passage in vain. You
alone can do little, Diego. You see they
regard
me as no common prisoner. They do
not mean I shall escape.'
`But I mean you shall, senor.'
`You speak positively. What hope can
you give me? Seeing you, seems like half
regaining
my liberty? And so, unknown to me
my truest friend has been on board all this
dreary passage.'
`I would have visited you sooner to cheer
you up, Don Waltero, but I thought it best to
keep periectly quiet till something was sure.'
`Then from your coming to see me you
would imply that you have something sure?'
said the young man eagerly, his fine (though
very pale) countenance lighting up with
animation
and hope.
Diego smiled; and then pointing
warningly
to the door outside of which the sentinel
was posted he said,
`
poco a paco
, senor? If you speak so loud
even the noise of the young gentlemen in the
ward-room will hardly drown your voice. I
have something certain. I have come to see
you to let you know there is a plan on foot to
aid your escape, and that you have friends at
hand you little suspect!'
The prisoner warmly embraced the hand of
the faithful Spaniard and said,
`Bless you and them with you! Liberty
life! Oh, Diego these are sweet sounds to my
ear! But above all the hope of escaping a
felon's death in my native land! Do you bid
me hope? Remember that we are now in port.
To-morrow I shall exchange the frigate for the
cell of a prison on shore. Can you bid me
hope to escape! If it is to be achieved it must
be done by night and
this
night! No, Diego.
This is too sudden! too short a time for me
to believe I can gain my liberty in it! to escape
from death in! Freedom between this and
dawn! No, Diego you mock me!'
`If senor were able to look from the deck
and see what I have seen to night he would
hope!
`What have you seen?'
Before Diego could reply the door of the
room opened and the sentinel thrust in his
head with a lantern held in his hand. The
active Spaniard had heard the first touch upon
the door and swung himself from the port
before
he was discovered.
`Sure, and I thought I heard a vice here,
yer honor,' said the marine, looking round as
he elevated his lantern.
`You often hear my voice, Mooney. Is it
new to you?' demanded the young man
haughtily.
The lantern now rendered apparent what
the indistinct light did not permit to be visible
before that the prisoner wore the uniform ofa
lieutenant with the buttons cut off! He had
long flowing light brown or auburn hair, a
clear, fearless blue eye, a finely expressive
mouth, and a look at once calm and
determined
.
He was about two and twenty tall and
manly, with an air more martial than seaman
like, yet he also looked, as he was, every inch
the sailor. No one could look upon him
without
a feeling of prepossession in his favor.
Yet he was chained there like a felon! What
extraordinary circumstances could have
brought one whom nature and education had
formed to interest the most indifferent, to such
a position? The reader will soon be informed
in due detail.
The sentinel after looking carefully around
the room, under the gun and even peeping
into the muzzle, went slowly out again mut
tering,
`I would have sworn I hearn two vices in
here!'
`You hear as you see, David, when you are
drunk,' said the prisoner not a little gratified
at Diego's escape.
`How is that, Mr. Nevil?'
`Double.'
The marine scrowled, and then said,
`You may have your talk free now, sir, and
wilcome, for its few watches more I'm
thinkin
yer honor'll be after kapein'. Its a pity
sich a young gintleman should be stretching
hemp wid his neck instead o' wid his hands
in pullin' ropes which yer honor's more used
to. Its a bad law as makes a capstan o' a
Christian's neck. Sorra me! its a pity any
how, for yer honor's sake!'
`You seem to have made up your mind to
hang me, Mooney,' he said with a smile.
`Not me is it, but the Captain and the
gintlemen
.
Its iviry sowl o' thim as says ye'll
be hanged without judge or jury.'
The young man laughed, as he replied
turning
on his heel,
`It is to hang me
with
judge and jury,
David
,
that I am brought home in the frigate.'
`Will any how, yer honor takes it easy,'
said the marine as he shouldered his musket
and closed the door. Hardly had the door
shut begore Diego reappeared in the port and
swinging himself in lighted upon the gun.
CHAPTER IV.
The Vermilion towerThe conspiracy of Don
LazaroHis ExileThe death of the
Traitor
The
clemency of the Governor-General
The young Basilio
.
The
scenes of the tale now change to Cuba
and its waters, going back to a time a few
weeks previous to the appearance of the razee
and three-masted schooner in Boston bay.
This transition or turning back upon the
narrative
,
is for the purpose of unfolding, in due
order of narration, those events which
preceded
and led to the imprisonment on board
the frigate of the young officer whom we have
seen confined there under striet guard, and
in chains.
There is on the south side of Cuba, forty
leagues from Havanna, a small, romantic
bay almost land-locked by curving shores and
numerous rocky islets that extend in a chain
nearly across the mouth. The bay at its
broadest part is not more than a half a league,
and in length about a league. It is a secluded
spot seldom visited by the merchant vessel,
for no town is seen upon its shores, and only
here and there a ruined
quinta
visible with its
greyish white walls appearing above the trees
upon the heights; while inland can be
descried
a vermilion tower rising above a
snow-white
battlement. The shores are wild and
wooded, here sloping in gentle woodlands
towards
the water, there fronting and
overhanging
the dark flood beneath with precipitous
walls of rock. The feathering palm and
cocoa-tree lift here and there their
plume-like
tops, and the crevices of the rocks are
filled with vines bearing wild flowers of the
most brilliant colors, and of vast size and
wonderful beanty. The rocky chain that
stretches from the headland rich with foliage
on the right, nearly across to the cliff-like
promontory which forms the eastern shore,
are dark and sterile, their black sides and
gaping crevices, through which in storms the
sea leaps in cataracts of foam, showing no
signs of that vegetation which clothes the
main-land with perpetual verdure and beauty.
Two or three solitary banana trees alone grow
upon the loftiest of the islets, serving as
beacons and guides for making the entrance
to the harbor. But few are the vessels which
seek this shelter save for protection from the
tornadoes that at certain seasons sweep the
seas in this latitude.
On a bright tropical morning about two
months prior to the time our story opens in
Boston Bay, a person appeared upon the
summit
of the vermilion tower, which was
situated
less than a half a mile inland
commanding
a view of the bay and its shores, the chain
of rocks across its mouth, and the blue south
sea beyond. It was a female, young and
beautiful, with large black eyes whose lashes
shaded the soft olive cheek, and a superb
form of exquisite roundness and symmetry.
She could not be more than nineteen. Her
costume was deep mourning with a black
mantilla
thrown across her head and passing like
a scarf around her waist. The contrast
between
the mourning costume and the pale
brilliancy of her complexion was striking; and
the outline of her finished profile was finely
relieved by the black veil which drooped
from her head.
The sun was just rising and flinging his
golden light over the dark green seas of
foliage between her and the horizon, and
turning the turquoise waters of the ocean to
rose and gold; lending to her cheek a glow
like that of the roseate lining of the
pearl-shell
.
The prospect around her was wide and
magnificent. To the north the mountains in
the interior of the island rose blue and bold,
their crests glancing in the light; and
between
the tower and their base extended vast
plains with here and there a puebla or villa
ifting its white walls and turrets to the
sunbeams
.
Westward beyond the forest, which
seemed on all sides to encircle the bay for a
league in depth, were visible the
haciendas
' or
casas de campo
of the wealthy islanders,
surrounded
by their vast sugar and coffee estates,
each with its African hamlet, a little village.
To the south lay the bay just described half
its waters yet lying in shadow, the precipices
on the east interspersing their lofty heads
between
them and the sun.
Towards the bay the maiden, on reaching
the summit of the tower, directed her eyes.
To the scenes around her she scarcely
glanced
;
but with an eager air, a look long and
earnest she fixed her attention upon the bay.
The calm which had left its waters in
mirror-like
repose during the night was now gently
breaking as light veins of wind would sweep
across its surface with a scarcely perceptible
ripple as if invisible wings were passing over
it. That part of the bay that lay eastward in
shadow was like glass; and in its depths were
reflected the dark forms of the cliffs with
life-like
distinctness. The placid surface of the
waters in the passage of the harbor was first
stirred, and seaward, where the morning
breeze moved unobstructed by the land, the
waves soon glanced and flashed as they were
put in motion; till at length, the whole deep
became mottled, and alive with dancing
sunbeams
playing upon their undulations.
From the earnest, anxious expression of
countenance with which she looked seaward,
searching
earnestness of her gaze, it was
plain that she was expecting some one in
whom she was deeply interested. Her eyes
for the third time, after wandering over the
nooks and passes of the bay, swept the
horizon
with a penetrating search, and then were
withdrawn with an expression of sorrow and
disappointment.
`No sail visible in all the broad sweep of
waters! And yet this is the twelfth day of his
absence, which was to be extended but to
seven
.
The winds have been propitious though
light, and he should have returned if some
accident
had not happened. Oh, this
dangerous
life he leads! I trust if he returns with
that beauteous bride who has so won his heart,
he will lead a life more suited to her
happiness
and his own rank! Well Jose, there is
nothing in sight this morning!'
This remark was made to a fine old man
with long white locks and a beard of silver.
His countenance was dark but finely
expressive
,
both of benevolence and cheerfullness.
He wore a coarse blue mantle gathered at the
waist by a monk's girdle; but he looked more
like a man who had passed his life in the
world than in the cloister. He came and stood
upon the top of the tower, as she spoke,
remaining
respectfully a step behind her.
`Do not be troubled, Senora. The winds
and the currents cause many delays.
Perhaps
the maiden whom he went to take as his
bride has kept him longer! 'Tis but five days
past the time!' And the old man looked
keenly
towards the sea.
`Yet he should be here, for he never
delays
.
He would have sent to me. Five days
I have waited with a feast prepared to receive
my brother and his bride, and yet not a sail
whitens the sea! It is time to fear, Jose! You
know how my brother is aurrounded by
enemies
;
how he lives in planning against the
government; and that be has voluntarily gone
to Habana where I hear a price is set upon
his head! I would have prevented him! I
pleadI clung to himI wept and implored
him by his love for me not to go! But he
heeded me not. For his rashness he has now
perished!'
`Fear not, Senora! Le El Senor your
brother
is bold and also discreet. He is safe. Had
danger menaced him, we should hear of it.
He would have sent a messenger to you!'
`If he comes not to-day, I myself shall take
a horse and ride across the mountains' to Ha
vanna! I cannot endure this suspense! This
young American will be my escort!'
`Believe me Don Basilio my master is safe,
Seora! If you desire it I will send at once a
trusty messenger to the city! The American
cavalier is not yet recovered enough for the
saddle!'
`I will alone go myself. If he is in danger
I will share it with him or rescue him. He
is my brother, and we are one in heart and
affection
.
We have but one life, and one
liberty
!
See! is that anything upon the water!
or do my hopes create illusion to mock me,
'Tis something! It must be a vessel!'
Old Jos, who had been all his life a seaman!
turned his gaze to the far western horizon
towards which with a kindling eye, a flushed
cheek and animated questions, she eagerly
directed
his attention. At first he shook his
head:
`I see nothing, Seora!'
`It is gone. It seemed to be  nay!
'Tis visible again! Look this way, Jos! To
the west of that tamarind tree just beneath the
second branch, where the horizon seems like
a fine blue thread drawn between the sky and
ocean. There is a speck as it were, a knot
in the thread line! I see it when I lift my
vision a little above it, but if I direct my gaze
full upon it it is invisible! Look! Jos it is
now a bright white! It is the sun-light
reflecting
from the sails! 'Tis a vessel! 'Tis
my brother!'
It would be impossible to describe the
happiness
and beauty which beamed in her face
at this discovery. She clasped her hands
together
,
and tears, large pearls of gratitude
came into her glorious eyes!
`
Por mi vida
, Doa Anita, it is not possible
for me to see what you see!'
`You are old and have lost your sight,
hombre
anciano
,' she said with quickness.
`Maria! I believe I see it now! its just
above the branch of the tamorind!'
`Did I not tell thee it was there, probecito!'
`Nay, Doa Anita, I am getting old. Do
not be vexed with an anciano. Your young
eyes can see a thousand stars in the far skies
where mine can see one! But I have seen
the day, Senora, when I could discover a sail
as far as a glass could see her!'
`The spy-glass! Go for it below Jos!'
`I see the sail plainly now, Senora! It is
at least four leagues off,' said Jos after a close
scrutiny. `I will bring the glass, which I
mended yesterday, and then we will make her
out. I hope it is the caravel of Don Basilio!'
`Hope! I know it
must
be, Jos,' she said
earnestly. `Should it not prove to be him,
I should not watch longer, but take a horse
There are so few vessels that pass here, that
I feel confident it is the goleta!'
Old Jose brought up the spy-glass and
placed it open in her hand. It was a
beautiful
instrument with silver tubes and a row of
rubies ganishing the rims around the glasses.
She placed it to her eye while he formed a
focus with his closed hands and also surveyed
the distant sail. After a few moments she
exclaimed,
`It is the goletta, Jose! Take the glass and
look! I cannot be deceived.'
`It is a latteen rigged vessel, but whether a
ship or schooner I cannot make out, as she is
standing on towards the bay, and all her masts
are in one!'
`Her course should decide it. What other
vessel would be standing in this way?'
`It may be Don Basilo, senora. But I don't
like to have you disappointed. There are a
great many lateen rigged craft in these seas!
In a little while we can tell. The wind
freshens
outside and is fair for her, so that she will
come on rapidly. As soon as her hull open
above the horizon I can tell her at once. Or
if she should put away a little so that I could
see all her masts I could tell. There is no
mistaking the rake of the
el cinto de Acero
.
*
*
Steel Belt.
`She must be sailing five or six knots and
in less than two hours, if it is Don Basilio,
she will be anchored in the bay within half a
mile of us?'
The young lady with the spy glass as her eye
continued to watch the slow advance of the
distant
sail, exchanging from time to time words
of hope or impatience, with the attentive Jose.
The vessel slowly but steadily grew upon the
sight, and it was soon made clear that she was
a polacca rigged schooner with two masts only
visible; but whether that of Don Basilo or
not, with one of her masts carried away or
shipped, Jose would not positively say until
she should be a league nearer.
In the meanwhile the reader may be
learning
something of Dona Anita and her brother
and of the vermilion tower.
This tower, rose from the
azotea
or flat roof
of one of those old Spanish country houses
which are dispersed over the island of Cuba.
The house was a vast square one story high,
the walls white washed and perforated at
long intervals with tall grated windows. On
one of the sides was a large
porte cochere
or
carriage way beneath an arch which led into
the
patio
or square paved court around which
the house was built. In this patio was a
fountain; huge orange-colored vases of
gorgeously
flowing plants stood around the sides;
and into the court as a common hall opened
the doors of all the apartments of the mansion.
The doors of the sleeping rooms were hung
with crimson and damask drapery and the
grated windows were releived by curtains of
muslin and orange or rose-colored silk. There
was an air of old-fashioned Spanish luxury
and grandeur with a want of comfort and taste
pervading the whole place. On the exterior,
the quenta was surrounded by spacious
outhouses
,
falling into ruin; and adjoining it
stood a small chapel surmounted by a silver
cross communicating with the mansion by a
covered corridor. The domain around had
once been a coffee estate, but was now
desolate
and covered with luxuriant vegetation in
the wildest profusion: while the forests were
suffered to encroach upon the gardens, only a
narrow avenue which the sun scarcely
penetrated
being left open between it and the shore
of the bay. This avenue was the only
approach
to the quirta; the ways which once
had led from it to the interior and to the
neighboring
coffee estates being grown up and
rendered impassible, and impenetrable. There
was, however, a single secret path in which
persons on horseback might travel but this
was known only to the dwellers in the
vemilian
tower, or `El Torre Bermellon,' as the
place was called by the Spaniards.
This estate had, in former years, belonged
to Don Lazaro, a wealthy Spaniard, connected
with the government of the governor-general.
During his time of power, he had purchased
this estate then one of the most fertile in
Cuba
,
and in a high state of cultivation. The
mansion which was upon it he enlarged and
converted it into an abode rivaling that of the
quinta of the governor-general himself. Here
Don Lazaro passed his leisure, and here he
plotted on conspiracy against the government.
It was defeated, however, before maturity by
a change of administration, which deprived
him of that influence with his party which he
had held, and healed those political
differences
,
which otherwise would have burst out
into revolutionary flame. The part Don
Lazaro
took in the abortive conspiracy could not
be concealed, and he was condemned to
perpetual
banishment to his estate on the South
side of the island and compelled to maintain a
guard of soldiers who were placed by the
government
to watch his conduct, and also to
paint the tower he had erected the color of
vermilion, as the mark of a traitors habitation
to all the country round. The exile was
married
to a charming Spanish woman of high
rank,and,was the father of two lovely children.
The eldest, who was a boy, at the the time of
his banishment was six, and the youngest,
Anita, three years of age. He felt less his
disgrace on his own account, when he
reflected
upon that of his children, whose rightful
position in society he had forfeited. He was
a man of education and intelligence and
thought much of his proud Castillian lineage.
Four years passed in this exile, when the
government saw fit to withdraw its soldiers,
fearing nothing further from the ambition of
the exile. Inspired with hope of restoration
to favor by this seeming act of clemency,
addressed a respectful petition to the
governor-general
,
entreating to be permitted to
reside
in Havanna for the education of his two
children To this petition he oblined no
reply
.
He addressed a second to which he
received
the following answer from the chief:
`If Seor Marial is tired of living he may
visit Havanna; for he may be assured that if
he is found beyond his estate his head shall
answer for his temerity.'
This missive destroyed all hope of
reconciliation
.
He internally resolved to plot in secret
against the government. His wealth and tact
aided him in his plans, and he had secretly
raised a party among the dissatisfied cavaliers
who from time to time visited him The
governor-general
,
however, kept a vigilent eye
upon him; and sent a spy among them: Don
Lazaro was taken at a Quinta a league beyond
his own and conveyed prisoner to Havana,
where he was shot in the public square. The
Seora de Marial received shortly after a
message
from the governor-general, that justice
was sufficiently satisfied in having the forfeited
life of her husband; and that she should be
permitted to enjoy unmolested his estate, and
transmit it to her children. She was however
commanded to keep the tower painted
vermilion
,
and to pay a thousand
pesos
annually
into the public treasury
The Seora Maria, who had been as warm
a conspirator as her husband, was not a little
surprised at this clemency; for she had
expected
the estate would have been confiscated
and herself and offsprings banished from the
island. Left with these two children exiled
from the world, she resolved to cease all
communication
with the world and devote her life
to educating them. Insensibly she inculcated
in the braast of Bazilo, the boy, his father's
sentiments, and he grew up with the deepest
hatred of the government which had shed his
father's blood. These feelings were shared,
but in a less degree, by his sister. In this
state of seclusion, with but a few faithful
slaves and the old man Jos, whom Don
Lazaro
had taken into his confidential service,
she lived until Bazilio reached the age of
seventeen. Up to this period he had no
intercourse
with the world. The roads to the
`Traitor's Tower' had been suffered to grow
up with trees and the forest to close around it
an impassible barrier; so that the place was
shut out save by the sea from all the world.
This was Bazilio's world. The Bay was the
scene of all his amusements. He early
became
a skilful boatman and oarsman, and
when but twelve years of age with his sister
by his side, he would stretch far out to sea till
the blue shores of the island seemed blent with
the sky; and then, only at her entreaty put
back to land. It was his daring ambition to
go out in his light skiff where he could behold
only the sky and sea; and to fly before the
storm like the winged sea-bird escaping to its
nest.
When he reached his seventeenth year, he
exchanged his skiff with its single sail for a
small lugger of three or four tons which Jos,
assisted by the slaves, constructed for him. It
was a light, beautiful craft, and sailed like the
wind. In this, which he called the Eagle, he
used to make long excursions of two or three
days up and down the coast, with Diego for
his mate and three of his ebony slaves for a
crew. Sometimes, Anita, who was scarcely
less sailor than himself, would accompany
him; and once he run to an island twelve
leagues distant, the rocks near which he found
inherited by fishermen, a bold, resolute class
of men, who made an impression upon his
mind that grew with his growth, and in time
matured to a definite result.
La Seora Mariae suffered these excursions
of Bazilio, for she could not control them. Her
influence extended over Anita only. This
maiden to a disposition at once fond and
yielding
,
united a superior mind, and a spirit full of
generosity and goodness. She was fearless
in danger, bold in action and faithful in all
things. She was devoted to her brother who
was no less attached to her.
Thus they lived together mother and
children
,
forming a world of their own. Bazilio
as he advanced into manhood evinced a quick
and fiery temper and a spirit of reckless
daring
.
His affection for his mother did not bind
him to any kind of submission to her will. His
nature was as free as the waves over which
his light bark bounded. Though willful and
independent in his conduct, he was neither
vicious nor lawless. His bosom was the abode
of honorable and manly feelings; but a
cherished
hatred to the government of the island,
and sentiments hostile to it he deemed no part
of dishonor. He had been taught by his
mother to live its deadly foe! And the spirit
of determined hostility to the murderer of his
father, as he bitterly denounced the
government
filled his bosom and influenced his early
life and character.
In the possession of his little vessel, the
Eagle, he almost makes it his home. He soon
got several of the fisher's lads of his own age
from the islands, to whom he paid wages to
act as his crew and over whom he exercised
the most absolute sway. He was educating
them to his service; for he cherished in his
soul a plan that he had not breathed even to
his sister; a scheme over which he had
meditated
even in his boy-hood, and which
deepened
and interwove itself with his existence. In
the Eagle he made long bold excursions, and
became familiar with every inlet, creek and
lagoon along the whole South side of the
island
.
In some of these excursions he had
discovered the haunts of pirates, and once fell
in with them and was urged to join them; for
they admired his daring and free spirit. But
he scorned the proposal and when they would
have seized him and his boat, he fought his
way from their hold and escaped with the
party
of eight Spanish youths forming his crew
Such was the character, education and
pursuits
of Bazilio de Marial until he reached his
twentieth year, when he resolved to put the
plan so long chershed in his heart into
execution
.
CHAPTER V.
The adventures of Don Basilio and his goleta.
The progress of the plot.The Governor
General visits the vesselThe stratagem
The cannonadingDon Basilio's subsequent
scheme aided by Donna Elena
.
The
plan which the young Basilio had in
view was to seize the person of the Governor
General and avenge his father's death! To
this end he had been training the lads he had
obtained from the Fisher's Rocks, and to this
purpose devoting all his own energies. Up
to the time when he had reached his
twentieth
year he had not travelled into the interior,
or visited any of the distant
Quintas
' visible
from the tower. All his excursions were
taken
upon the water along the coast. He now
resolved to visit Havana secretly, and there
ascertain what difficulties lay in the way of
accomplishing his object, and to see how he
should best surmount them. On the pretence
of going on a voyage to the Fisher's Islands,
he took leave of his mother and sister,
without
communicating to them any thing of his
wishes or plans. He was now twenty years
of age, tall, noble-looking, and striking in his
air and carriage. His complexion was a
glowing
brown; his eyes dark and piercing; his
teeth brilliant; his smile like sunlight; his
voice deep and musical; while his whole
countenance beamed with intelligence and
boldness. Never was a young man better
fitted
for a hero in personal appearance, or
better
adapted by education, courage and deep
feeling of filial retaliation, to head a
conspiracy
.
He embarked in his little vessel of only two
sails and thirty feet in length, and sailed out
of the bay. He coasted along the land a few
leagues and then ran into a creek near which
was a small village. Here he left his lugger,
with orders to his men to be there that day
two weeks to meet his return, and in the
meanwhile to visit their native islands; for
he did not wish them to return to the Bay
without him. He then took his way to the
village, and boldly entering the Posada, for
he was clad in the dress of a muleteer, he
purchased a horse, and started on his journey.
The distance was sixty miles to Havana.
After
various adventures he reached the capital.
His emotions were deep and sorrowful on
entering
the place where his father fourteen
years before had been executed.
He remained ten days in Havana, and by
means of money of which he had unlimited
command, and no little address, he was able
to obtain all the information he required. He
also saw the Governor General, by whose
order
his father had been executed. He stood
in his presence thrice, unsuspected as the son
of Don Lazaro the Conspirator, himself no less
a conspirator than his father!
He formed his plan of action, and then
prepared
to put it, when fully rife, into execution.
In the disguise of an African trader, he
contracted
for, and ordered to be built, a vessel
of one hundred and eighty tons, of which he
furnished the model. She was to be one
hundred
and fifty-five feet in length, polacca
rigged
,
with three masts; with a large capacity
for burden, yet with an eye primarily to
speed. Having left these instructions, he
returned
across the island to his lugger after
two weeks absence. Remaining a day or two
at home he set sail for the Fisher's Rocks, and
came to at night in a little inlet where they
were in the habit of congregating with their
shallops. He was hailed with great pleasure,
for he had got to possess an influence over
them that a lord of a hundred vessels might
envy him. They were about two hundred in
number, men, women and children; and he
had succeeded in obtaining over them the
most supreme authority, receiving from them
in return the most devoted attachment.
Among the young men were at least thirty
that from time to time had been with him in
his shallop; for he would every few months
change his crews, returning one and taking
another. Though a fierce, untractable race
of men, and regarded as lawless and little
better
than buccaneers, young Basilio had made
good sailors and faithful adherents of those
who had been attached to his shallop; while
the older men were ready to do his bidding to
the death. To have succeeded in wielding
such authority without the exertion of force
or discipline of fear over a colony of wild
fishermen
,
savage in appearance, who obeyed no
laws, was proof of great tact, courage of
character
,
and of the possession of great qualities
of the heart and head.
Basilio was received like a lord returning
to his affectionate dependants. He told them
briefly that he had come to ask their aid.
That his father had been slain (he did not say
when or how) and that he had determined
venegeance upon his assassins.
`I want fifty of the young men!' he said,
`who will follow me and do my will!'
Every fisherman, boy and man, cast their
caps in a shower at his feet, in token of their
submission to his wishes!
`I thank you all, generous friends, I want
only those who have been my companions in
the last four years.'
`We are fifty-three in all,' answered one of
the youths who was called Isidore, and whom
Basilio had heretofore made next to himself
in command; bold, handsome, dark-eyed
young man of twenty, with a spirited
expression
of features, with long, flowing locks,
that a maiden might covet. `None will be
left behind, senor!'
`Then let all come with me! Senoras, I
will leave you gold for your sons services
while away,' he said to the women. `They
will also return rich to you once my end
is accomplished! In two, or three months at
the farthest, I shall be here with a new vessel
now building for me. It will hold all my
tried friends. She will be armed, and I will
have on board arms for you all. I now leave
you in the shallop with its crew, who will be
enough to enable me to bring the vessel here
for the rest of you. Be ready here to meet
me. In the meanwhile breathe to no one you
may meet what I have said, or your own
intentions
.
My success will depend on
secrecy
!'
At the end of ten weeks, young Don
Basilio
,
was once more in Havana. This time
he sailed thither by doubling Cape St
Antonio
,
disguisihg his shallop as a molasses
droger
,
and himself and his men as her crew.
He thus passed into port without notice. He
found his vessel nearly completed. In a few
days she was finished and ready for sea. She
was the admiration of every seaman in port;
and even the Governor-General visited her.
To Basilio, who represented himself as a
merchant
of Cadiz and had built the vessel for the
Mediteranean and Morrocco trade, he
proposed
to purchase her. But Don Basilio
respectfully
declined, while his heart was on fire and
his eyes flashed at having before him his
father's
executor.
`I regret, Senor General,' he said with as
sumed politeness; `that I cannot sell her to
your excellency. It is my intention after I
have made first a short voyage to New
Orleans
in her, that your excellency shall also
make one!'
`You are very civil, good Senor Captain,'
said the Governor-General. `I should be
most happy to take a run up as far as
Matanzas
in her on some occasion when my duties
called me there! She must sail very fast.'
`That is but sixty miles,' answered Don
Basilio. `I mean your excellency shall have
a longer sail in her.' And he bowed as he
spoke to the Governor-General with great
courtesy; and a smile on his lip covering the
vengeance in his heart.
`You do me honor, Senor Captain. You
deserve credit for having so fine a vessel
built. It is an honor to the Island.'
`Your excellency is very kind!' answered
Don Basilio, with a low bow as he escorted
the Governor-General and his suit to the
gang-way.
Don Basilio loaded his vessel with bags of
coffee, and took out his papers for New
Orleans
.
In a few days afterwards he set sail
with his crew of eight young men besides
Isidoro his first officer. This small crew with
her freight of coffee lulled suspicion; for it
had began to be whispered that she was a
slaver or would hoist the free flag when she
got on blue water. This arrangement
originated
in her young commander's deep policy
and sound discretion.
Three days afterwards he was lying off the
Fisher's Rocks in his graceful Three-masted
schooner. Here he took on board the
remainder
of his party, and then set sail for
Vermilion Tower Bay, and thence to Havana.
It would require a romance of itself to
follow
Don Basilio upon his bold adventure.
Three weeks after he had left it he re-entered
Havana harbor in ballast, having landed his
coffee at Vermilion Tower, instead of New
Orleans. He anchored near the quay and
then waited upon the Governor-General.
Previous to his conversation with this dignity,
he had contemplated seizing him by force or
stratagem in his palace and conveying him off
by a
coup de main
on board his goleta, which
he intended to anchor just beyond gun-shot
from Moro castle, conveying his
distinguished
guest to the vessel in his boats. This
was a bold plan and one not very likely to
succeed; yet he had resolved to undertake it.
He had thought also of seizing him as he
came out of the theatre and aided by his fifty
young men hurry off to the boats. He also
thought of attacking him in his carriage as he
rode out at evening upon the Alemeda. A
hundred schemes had occurred to him, all of
which had for their end taking the
Governor-General
prisoner and conveying him to
Vermilion
tower! He might have assassinated
him in his palace, but he did not wish his life
there
.
This uncertainty was at once changed for
decision after his conversation with his
intended
victim during his visit on board the
goleta. The wish of the Governor-General
to purchase his beautiful craft, and his desire
to run to Matanzas in her when he should
take his voyage towards Cadiz, suggested to
him a plan of action which promised success.
When therefore he reached Havana, with a
visible crew of only eight men, the
remainder
being concealed below, he waited on the
Governor-General and offered him his vessel
to take him to Havana. But business
prevented
him from accepting it then and Don
Basilio was requested to wait a week. This
was a long time to keep his men confined
below
,
but he promised to do so. In the
meanwhile
he was often at the Palace, attended
the theatre and other places of amusement,
and was distinguished both for his noble
appearance
,
apparent wealth and affable
manners
.
Among the ladies whom he met, was
the beautiful and only daughter of Don
Patricio
Garcia. With the lovely Elena the
young Don Basilio became enamored. She
knew him only as Don Anito Basilio, he
having assumed his sister's name in the
masculine
terminature before his own christian
name, omitting the well known name of the
conspirator
Marial
. No one suspected his
relationship
with the traitor Don Lazaro. He
passed everywhere as a wealthy young
merchant
from Cadiz. By the time the week
expired
Don Basilio had lost his heart to the
fascinating Habanera belle. But his love did
not cause him to forget his object in being in
Havana. He saw the Governor-General often
and won his confidence. At length his
excellency
said to him,
`Senor Don Basilio, I shall be ready
tomorrow
to take passage in your beautiful
vessel
as far as Matanzas. I am desirous of
testing
her sailing qualities; as it is my
intention
,
if she proves what she promises to be, to
construct three or four of the same size and
on the same model to cruise against the pirates
that begin of late to trouble us. I will dine
on board with you to-morrow before sailing,
with some of my staff and a few fair senoras,
who desire to see your vessel; especially my
friend La Senora Elena Garcia!'
Don Basilio colored and was confused!
How could he refuse? The Governor's wish
was a command. Donna Elena's was no less
so. Yet, with forty men quartered between
decks, how could he safely entertain a party
on board without their presence being
detected
;
especially as ladies would be of the party
who are famous for finding out secrets? He
bowed in acquiescence and left his
excellency's
presence, feeling he had been caught
in his own trap; for he had given strict
orders
to admit no one on board while in port,
save the custom-house officer, who when he
had gone below stumbled over a small bag of
gold which Basilio, knowing his species, had
purposely dropped across the step of the
companion
way. The man took it up and quite
quite forgot there was any way leading
below
.'
On reaching his vessel Don Basilio
consulted
with Isidoro, his faithful friend and
officer
,
and it was decided to let the party come
on board; and on pretence of showing the
governor how the goleta worked propose to
run a short distance out of the harbor beyond
the Moro.
The Governor-General and party appeared,
in all, including himself, six gentlemen, one
of them Don Praticia Garcia and another a
priest; and five ladies, Donna Elena Garcia
being one of the number. The Governor
readily consented to the proposal to run a
little
ways out of the harbor as the day was fine
and a steady six knot wind blowing, and the
anchor was weighed and they set sail.
`Now,' said Basilio to Isidoro in a low tone,
`if any discovery is made I have the whole
party in my power. I shall not return into
the harbor but send the ladies, unless Donna
Elena will consent to share my fortunes as my
bride, on shore in a boat, keeping the
Governor-General
and his aids my prisoners.'
This bold plan he spoke of to Isidoro with
a coolness and quiet of manner that was in
striking contrast with the daring character of
the deed he contemplated.
But the good star of the Governor-General
or the evil star of Don Basilio prevailed to
defeat
this well-conceived plan of abduction.
As the goleta was flying, like a tri-winged
bird beneath the overhanging battlements of
the Moro Castle with the open sea all before
her, they were startled by a loud hail through
a trumpet from the skyey height above their
heads, commanding the
goleta
to heave too!
Surprised at this order, Don Basilio who
was engaged in a delightful
tete-a-tete
with
Donna
Elena at once obeyed it; and at the
same time
saying in an under tone to his
lieutenant
,
`This looks suspicious. Go below and bid
the lads be ready to come on deck at a stamp
of my foot. I fear mischief.'
A barge from the castle well filled with
soldiers with the captain of the fortress in her,
put off and came alongside. His countenance
was stern and menacing.
`Your excellency,' he said as he stepped on
deck, speaking in a loud tone, `you have been
betrayed! This vessel is a pirate! I take
possession of her in the King's name. And I
congratulate your excellency and the party
present on their escape from the basest
treachery
!'
`'T is false!' cried Don Basilio indignantly.
`I am no pirate!'
`Seize him!' cried the Governor-General
after the captain of the Castle had said in
haughty reply, that two pirates who were at
work in chains upon the ramparts had given
him the information as they saw the captain
upon her deck.
The soldiers had began to board the goleta
from the barge when Don Basilio finding
affairs
had reached a crisis, went below seized
his arms, shouted to his men, who led by
Isidoro
poured upon deck cutlass in hand
through the companion-way, steerage,
main-hatch
and fore-castle. The astonishment or
the gentlemen who found themselves
prisoners
,
and the soldiers who found themselves
confronted by thrice their number of fierce,
daring looking young men, cannot be
described
.
There was no resistance. Don Basilio
had the victory in his own hand.
`I am
no
pirate, I fling the word back with
scorn into your teeth, senor captain!' he cried.
`I am, your excellency, a patriot! I am a foe
to the Spanish rule and would see the fair
island of Cuba
free!
To this I am devoted
I and these men! To this we are sworn. To
aid this cause this vessel was constructed!
No, senores, I am no free-booter! You are in
my power. Ladies, be not alarmed. You
shall be set on shore with these gentlemen in
the castle's boat now alongside. Gentlemen,
you will assist them in and follow yourselves.
The boat may return for the soldiers. Nay
here is one passing which will hold them.
The boat which was a lugger, pulled by six
men, and capable of holding twenty, was
hailed and ordered along side. The soldiers
were disarmed and made to enter her, which
they did without urging. The ladies, save
Donna Elena, had been assisted into the boat.
Don Basilio took her hand. She did not
withdraw it.
`Do you despise me? Do you believe me
to be a pirate?' he said impassionately.
`No,' was her firm reply, while tears filled
her fine dark eyes.
`Will you remember me?' he said, tenderly.
`In my heart, even though we meet no
more!'
`May I hope?'
`When you prove to me you are only a
patriot
.'
`This I may do. You should be a patriot
by these words! Your uncle was one!'
`If you were only a patriot, Don Basilio, I
should deem you still an honorable man!'
`Then believe me honorable. I am only a
foe to tyranny!'
`Then I do not ask you to forget me.'
`We shall meet again. God bless you,
noble
Senora!'
Don Patricio being impatient at this
whispered
interview with his daughter, he
pressed
her hand to his lips, and she entered the
boat. The Governor General who had been
detained last by Isidoro, who addressed him,
was about to follow when Don Basilio said,
with an ironical smile
`You, Senor Governor-General are to be
my guest to dinner. I cannot let you depart
fasting.'
`Do you dare detain me?' cried his
excellency
;
and drawing his sword to defend
himself
he sprung to the opposite gangway and
leaped into the lugger among the soldiers who
at the same moment pushed her off. Don
Basilio was about to leap after him, when
Isidoro
caught him.
`It would be madness! You will fall short
of the boat into the water and be beaten to
death with their oars. We must let him
escape
this time. Before we could put off an
armed boat they would be out of our reach.
See with what speed both boats are pulling
towards the Moro.
Don Basilio was convinced that to attempt
to retake his prisoner would be folly. He saw
also that now that the party were no longer
on board, his vessel would become a target for
the guns of the castle as soon as they could be
brought to bear upon it.
`We must put up with this defeat! Yet he
escapes me not! I will wait my time. We
must now take care of ourselves. This little
affair has been witnessed from the
battlements
and there are soldiers now ranged upon
them. The captain of the fortress shouts for
them to fire their musketry down upon our
decks. Below every man that can be spared.
We must now run the gauntlet. There it
comes.'
His voice, while he was speaking, was
drowned by the roar of musketry and the
humming
and rattling of bullets upon the deck and
among the rigging. The helmsman fell dead
at his post. Basilio sprung to his place. The
goleta was moving about five knots with a
flowing sheet, and standing out to sea. A
second discharge followed. Only a few shot
struck the vessel's deck splintering the planks
as they ploughed their angry way across their
smooth surface.
`In a few moments more and we shall be
out of reach of this hail-storm,' coolly said
the young patriot chief; but it will be only to
exchange it for cannon-shot. There goes an
eighteen pounder. The shot flies a hundred
feet above our main-truck and strikes a half a
mile ahead! We must not run out so far as
to come within range, but creep along shore.
By this means we will escape their heavy
guns. The smaller pieces they will depress,
perhaps, so as to make some of their shot tell.
But this can't be helped. We must let them
do their best and we will do ours, Isidoro.'
The goleta instead of standing boldly out as
she had done hauled her wind and hugged the
shore so as to keep under the shot of the great
guns of the castle. When this manuvre was
understood at the fortress they ceased firing
the heavy cannon which sent the balls too
high, and depressing some sixes at an angle of
forty-five degrees began to fire. But the
goleta was each moment changing her
situation
and after ten minutes firing but two shot
had struck her: one entering her
main-hatchway
and wounding two men; the other
passing
through the mizzen. She was now out
of range, though the firing ceased not for a
quarter of an hour afterwards. A man of war
brig was now despatched out of the harbor in
chase. But the goleta out-sailed her three to
two, and night setting in favored her escape.
The third day afterwards the three-masted
schooner was anchored in a secret bayou
concealed
by trees that penetrated the land as far
as the base of the Vermilion Tower, in the
shadow of which she lay protected and
defying
discovery.
Don Basilio remamed quiet a few months
until the affair should have passed over, and
then in disguise by land visited Havana with
the double purpose in view of seeking the
hand of Donna Elena and planning a way to
get the Governor-General into his hands.
Here he discovered that the pirates who had
denounced him were of the party from whom
he had once escaped in his shallop.
His love was now seemingly more
successful
than his conspiracy. Of Donna Elena,
finding her as he believeda true patriot, he
had unbosomed himself. He made her the
confidant of his name, fortune and plans;
plans which he had not even yet revealed to
his sister or mother. She promised to favor
him and aid him. But she advised delay both
in love and vengeance, and to this he
consented
with impatience. At length she told
him that if he would bring his vessel round to
Havana on a certain day he might take her
away in it as his bride to his home, and also
bear off the Governor-General as his captive.
To this plan, though replete with danger
Basilio consented; and leaving Havana taking
a tender adieu of Donna Elena, he crossed the
island to the Vermilion tower. Here he found
that his mother had just died. After a
suitable
time of mourning, he prepared his goleta
for sea and informed his sister that he was
going to Havana to bring home a bride! He
had now been absent several days over the
time he had set; and it was to watch for his
return from this two-fold expedition of love
and filial revenge that Donna Anita had
mounted to the summit of the tower.
CHAPTER VI.
The
distant sail which Jose and his
mistress
had been watching from the top of the
`Traitor's Tower,' had now got abreast of the
narrow entrance to the Bay, and was about
four miles from them. She was distinctly
made out to be a polacca of two masts, and
much smaller and a heavier sailer than the
goleta.
`Although it is not El Cinto, senora,' said
Jose, when it was plain that it was a stranger,
`yet as it is making for the passage into the
Bay, perhaps she bears some message from
Don Basilio to you.'
`She can only be a messenger of evil
tidings
,
if she bear not my brother,' said the
maiden sorrowfully.
`She is running direct for the Needle rock,
as if she knew the channel. Now if she hauls
her wind and puts her helm hard down and
runs sharp eastward after she passes the Penas
she has some one to pilot who has been in
here before. See, my lady! She keeps the
channel like an arrow. Now watch her! She
has doubled the Needle, and look! See how
she turns towards us her broadside and
stretches easterly. They are friends! They
are friends! Now she keeps away and stands
in again to clear the Tiger Rock! There is
no mistaking her, Donna Anita! There are
friends on board if the vessel is unknown to
us.'
`All this only increases my anxicty and
fears' That any of my brother's companions
should return in another vessel tells me that
danger has befallen him and his. See, she
displays a flag.'
She caught up the glass and looked
earnestly
.
The stranger had now got within the
chain of rocks that stretch from one headland
nearly to the other across the Bay, and was
almost two miles off, standing in under a
flowing sheet.
`What do you make out of the colours,
senora
?'
asked the old man eagerly.
`It is the Spanish ensign, with Basilio's
penant flying above it. It is lowered again!
Hoist the answering signal, Jose. It is my
brother. He is safe!'
In a few minutes a blue and scarlet
answering
flag was fluttering upon the flag-staff
above the tower. With a countenance
rediant
with joy Donna Anita cried to the old
man,
`Come, Jose, let us fly to the beach and
there meet them. I would embrace him the
earliest moment.'
`I fear Don Basilio has had some difficulty,
returning in another and inferior craft,' said
Jose looking grave.
`We shall soon hear. Let us hasten to the
shore. By the time we reach the end of the
path by the water, she will have come to an
anchor.'
With a rapid step they descended from the
tower, into the court or
patio;
and thence by
a gate, opening on the side of the Bay, she
struck into the forest, closely followed by old
Jose, whose less agile limbs could with
difficulty
keep pace with her swift progress. The
way led first through a thick wood, then
wound along a precipice for a hundred yards,
then descending into a dark ravine, through
which it followed the banks of the bayon in
which the goleta had been secreted; and after
a little while it thence emerged beneath a
terrace
of gigantic rocks, upon the open beach,
upon a level with the blue waters of the bay.
On reaching the beach Donna Anita saw
the vessel only half a mile distant standing in
towards the deep water at the mouth of the
bayon. She had not brought the spy-glass
and vainly strained her eyes to catch a glimpse
of her brother upon the polacca's deck!
Like a huge-winged bird stooping to her
nest the vessel as she came near folded her
canvass, swept gracefully round and dropt
her anchor within a hundred fathoms of the
shore where they stood. Donna Anita could
see nothing of her brother.
`Where is he? Do you see him, good
Jose?'
`No, by my faith, senora, I see him not.
I behold Don Isidoro, and many more familiar
faces. But I discover not Don Basilie.
Peradventure
he is in the cabin.'
`I fear the worst. Their countenances are
sad! I dare not ask! See, they are letting
down a boat! Isidoro and others jump into
it! My brother is not of the number. He is
slain! He is lost to me forever!
`Nay, take comfort, Donna Anita! The boat
is pulling rapidly towards us. We shall soon
know!'
`I know all already! My heart tells me I
have no brother. Speak, Isidoro!' she cried
rushing into the water as the boat grounded
within a few feet of the beach. `Where is
Don Basilio? Where is my brother? Why
do I not see him with you? And this strange
vessel that you return in! Oh! for the love
of heaven torture me not by those sad looks!
Speak. Tell me he is dead, and pierce my
own bosom.'
`Don Basilio, lady is not dead. He lives,
but is a captive.'
`Do you say truly that he is not dead but is
a captive? Do you dare come back and tell
the sister of Don Basilio this? Captive and
you have left him. Base coward! Were I a
man senor Isidoro, you should not live to tell
the tale of your master's captivity twice!'
`Lady, I am here by his command! Every
effort that could be made by man was made to
rescue him, but in vain. If you will give me
leave I will relate to you the circumstances,
as he desired me to do!' and Isidoro stepping
on shore walked with her as she paced
impetuously
up and down the hard white beach.
`Then he sent you to me! Where does he
lie imprisoned?'
`In the Moro Castle, I grieve to say.'
`And by whom was this done?'
`By the Governor-General.'
`I feared this. I suspected much of this.
I knew Basilio meditated avenging our
father's
bloody death. I had prayed him to let
vengeance remain in God's hands. But he
never answered me openly but looked dark
and menacing. I have feared this. So he
made an attempt upon the Governor's life!'
`No, senora, not upon his life but upon his
liberty. He has long been forming a scheme
to get him into his power.'
`A conspiracy. Then will he perish!' she
cried clasping her hands in agony. But go
on! Let me hear all. For I would know
how to actwhat steps to take, for Basilio
shall not lie in chains while I am free.'
`The circumstances are briefly these,
senora
;
for he desired me to make you fully
acquainted
with them. He left here twelve
days ago for the double purpose of bringing
home as his bride the daughter of Don Pa
tricia Garcia and with whom he had become
deeply enamored in his first visit to Havana,
and as prisoner his Excelleucy the
Governor-General
.'
`Do I hear you, Don Isidoro?'
`You hear rightly. He had communicated
his plan to surprise the Governor to Donna
Elena his betrothed who professed herself a
warm patriot.'
`And was she not?'
`Hear the issue, senora. She entered into
his scheme, and promised to aid it by giving
a party to the Governor-General; and while
he was there to open a secret gate in her
father's garden, admitting Don Basilio and his
associates. A carriage was to be in waiting
to convey both herself and the Governor to
the sea-shore, where a boat would take them
on board the goleta, which I was to keep lying
too off the land within three miles of the city.
This plan would have been feasible and would
have been successful, if the treachery to which
Don Basilio is now the victim, had not
stepped
in.'
`Treachery! By whom?'
`You shall shortly learn, senora. Don
Basilio
came hither in accordance with the plan
between himself and Donna Elena, to man the
goleta and proceed to Havana. Twelve days
ago he parted from you for this purpose.
`Only as he told me to bring back a
beautiful
bride. I knew nothing of all this deep
conspiracy, nor his intentions against the
governor! Now who was this traitor?'
`It was none other than Dona Alena, the
very lady he had expected to make his wife,
and whom he had made a co-partner in his
conspiracy!'
`Is it possible this woman betrayed him?'
`You shall hear, Senora. We came in
sight of Havanna just at sunset, and then
shortened sail standing off, so that we might
run under the land in the dark. It was the
night on which Dona Alena was to give the
ball to the Governor-general. Every thing
was favorable. As soon as it was dark enough
to run into the land, Don Basilio disembarked
in a solitary place near the ruins of the old
San Mateo, not three miles from the city. He
found in waiting, a carriage which, Pablo,
one of our men, who had been left behind for
the purpose, had driven to the beach to
receive
him. With six men brave and true, two
of them mounted behind and two before, and
the other two in the carriage with him, all
well armed, he started for the city, which he
entered by the Pasco. In a few words, he
entered by the private gate, the gardens of the
Casa, leaving the coach without and
privately
met Dona Alena, who was expecting him.
`All is ready,' she said to him after a few
moments conversation, with unusual
animation
.
`The Governor General is here. In
five minutes he shall be in your power. I
will go for him to walk in the garden, and I
will lead him round by the gate so that you
can seize him without giving alarm to the
guests within!'
She left him. He felt the moment of his
triumph and vengeance had come. He
hastened
to the gate, from which he had been
gone about half an hour, to place his party so
as to seize his prisoner if he offered any
resistance
.
He found the carriage and men there,
scarcely visible in the darkness. Though he
could hardly see them, he gave them his
orders
how to proceed, and then leaving the
gate hardly open he stood within it, the men
silently drawn up by its side. After waiting
impatiently a quarter of an hour, he saw two
figures approaching. They passed a lamp
suspended from a tree, and he recognized the
Governor General and Dona Elena. They
came near when a third person who seemed
to have leaped over the wall, he appeared so
suddenly, stood before them. Raising his cap
he said,
`All is safe, your Excellency! Proceed
without danger!'
Don Basilio heard these words, though
spoken
in an under tone, but they understood
them not. The man disappeared as abruptly
as he had made his appearance, and the two
advanced seemingly in absorbing
conversation
towards the gate. At the moment that
they seemed to be passing it in their walk.
Don Basilio stepped out and presenting his
sword at the breast of the Governor,
commanded
him to surrender himself as his
prisoner
.
`It is in vain for your Excellency to
resist, as I am supported by eight men!'
`Treachery, ah!' cried the Governor, half
drawing his sword. He then sheathed it,
adding, `If you say truly, and from those
dark figures you seem to speak truth, then am
I your prisoner! But to whom do I surrender
myself?'
`That you shall know Senor, in good time.
Pass through this gate. My carriage awaits
you!'
`Whither do you conduct me?'
`That you shall know also, soon. May it
please your excellency to enter!'
`And the lady!'
`She will accompany you. To her I am
indebted for this happy fortune!'
`Ah, Dona Elena! Is it thee! am I betrayed
by you! the daughter of one of my
counsellors
!'
The lady made no reply; and assisted by
Don Basilio followed the Governor General
into
the carriage.
`Now my men to your stations,' cried Don
Basilio. `The two who were with me in
the coach, must ride back as postilions!' The
carriage started, and the horses flew rapidly.
They had rode about eight minutes when Don
Basilio looked out of the window, being struck
by the strange appearance of the house.
`Are we retiring the same way we came?'
he called to the box.
There was no reply. The next instant
while he was yet looking out of the window
of the carriage and about to give an order to
take the Pasco road, he was astonished to see
the carriage turn short from the street and
roll thundering beneath an arch, both sides of
which were lined with mounted dragoons.
As the coach passed under the mansion
gateway
he saw an iron port-cullis fall behind it
while the vehicle stopped suddenly. Lights
were carried about in hurrying hands, voices
of command were heard and glancing round,
Don Basileo saw himself in the interior of a
miliiary fortress!
`What means this?' he cried confounded
and bewildered, shouting to his men upon the
box. To his surprise he saw by the torches
that they were not his own men, but soldiers
dressed in the costume worn by his own
party
.
He looked behind the carriage and
soldiers
were there! The postilions were soldiers
also. He could discover no face that he knew.
He at once suspected that he had become the
victim of treachery, and was himself a
prisoner
to
his prisoner!
The door of the carriage was opened by an
officer in a gorgeous uniform, when Don
Basilio
drawing his sword, cried,
`Am I betrayed? Dona Alena how is this?'
`That I am the traitor, Don Basilio,' she
said firmly. Iloved you till I knew you were
a traitor and the son of a conspirator. Then
I ceased to love, you then became my enemy.
I have encouraged your confidence and
entered
into this conspiracy for the purpose of
defeating it. I am too good a friend to my
country to wed one who conspires against it,
or plot with him in a conspiracy to overthrow
it. I trust now, Don Basilio that you will do
my patriotism justice, though it is not such
patriotism as your own!'
`The arch traitress!' cried Dona Alena
with a glowing cheek.' `My poor, noble
brother
!
Well?'
His Excellency then said,
`To this brave and loyal maiden, sir, do I
owe my liberty, and perhaps my life. She
has communicated to me all the steps of your
conspiracy. I gave myself to her plan to get
you and your vessel into my hands. It has,
you see, been succcessful. Armed boats have
been sent to capture your schooner which
was seen in the offing from the Moro long
before
night set in. You were taken by a
stratagem
;
for Dona Elena knowing all your plans
had provided a second carriage precisely like
the first with men attired like yours to lie in
wait a short distance from the gate. After
you had entered a messenger as from you was
sent to tell your party that a mistake had
been made and that the carriage must drive
round the gardens to a postern on the farther
side. They obeyed, and on reaching the
postern
the carriage was surrounded by a
detachment
of soldiers, and every one of your
party
taken into custody. In the meanwhile the
other carriage with its party had taken the
place of yours at the gate. Of this I was
informed
before I reached by one of my
messengers
!'
`I seeI see how I have been ensnared!'
cried Don Basilio bitterly. He was too proud
of spirit to reply to, or reproach the traitress.
For a moment he looked as if he would have
sprung from the carriage and cut his way
through the dragoons; but a moments
reflection
showed him that this would be fatal
to him. He therefore quietly surrendered his
arms to the officer who had opened the
carriage
door and delivered himself up as a
prisoner
!'
`Poor Basilio! My unfortunate brother!
My life will be the forfeit of thy crime,' cried
his sister ringing her hands in despair.
`Nay, lady, we hope to rescue him,' said
Isidoro boldly. `Never! You said the Moro
held him prisoner. Whoever enters there,
sees no more the sun's light!' Yet you have
seen him and discoursed with him, Isidoro!
or else you had not learned all this you have
related to me, for my brother only could have
told you.'
`I have seen him, Senora!'
`Where and how?'
`I was left in charge of the goleta after he
disembarked. I stood off and on waiting for
the return of the carriage. At the end of two
hours, as agreed upon I sent a boat for him.
I took the command of her leaving the
schooner
half a mile from land. On landing I saw
a carriage about fifty yards from the water
and approached it. I was instantly seized
and bound and thrown into it by half a dozen
soldiers. It was all done in an instant! My
men at the boat had not time to understand
what had happened and come to my rescue
before the carriage was driven off at full speed.
I learned from an officer within the carriage
that Don Basilio had been betrayed and was
then in prison. In half an hour I was thrown
into the same prison with him. Here he told
me all that had occurred. He was calm and
firm. He was only grieved that one whom
he loved should have proved a serpent in his
bosom! Yet he spoke no word of bitterness
against her. He lamented the result of his
conspiracy and spoke with confidence of being
yet able to succeed if he could effect his
escape
.
I remained with him only till morning
when he was removed as I was told, to the
Moro Castle. His last words were for me,
if I escaped to see you, or send you word; to
bid you not despair and send to his agent in
Havana all the money you could command.
If the governor sent troops to occupy the
Quinta, to resist them with all the force you
can command!'
`Noble Basilio. I will be worthy of you
and regard your slightest wish! Oh, that you
had made me a confidant in your plans and I
might have saved you from this treachery.
As it is I will not rest till you are free! I will
to Havana at once! But, you came not in
Basilio's vessel! You lost yours! How
happened
this! And how have you escaped?'
`Our vessel was taken by treachery.
Before
my men, finding me a prisoner, could
decide what step to take, a party of soldiers
were upon them. They escaped in their boat
leaving several of their assailants dead on the
sands. Before the boat reached the goleta
those in ber saw these barges pulling towards
her also. They were also seen from her
deck. But suspecting no treachery there was
no suspicion raised until the goleta's boat
come along side, when the men at once gave
the alarm. The barges come up at a rapid
rate, with at least twenty soldiers in each,
armed with muskets and carbines.
Carlos, whom I left in charge, saw at once
that there was no escaping this superior force,
as there was a dead calm. The only way was
to desert the goleta and leave her to the
enemy
.
With great presence of mind he ordered
the boat round to the side opposite to that on
which the barges were advancing, and also
lowered the quarter-boat into the water upon
the same side. He then commanded all the
men to jump into them armed and as the
barges
came up on one side pull away on the
other!'
`Could he not have fought them!'
`Not so near the walls of the Moro. It was
calm, and if he had beaten off these boats he
would have been overpowered by others.
Carlos did well, though the vessel was lost to
us. He had no time to scuttle her. He was
the last to leave her decks and as he did so,
he applied a torch to the rigging. The
barges
came on and the soldiers boarded her,
no doubt, surprised at finding her deserted.
There being no wind to spread the flames,
they were soon extinguished. In the
meanwhile
the boats containing our men pulled
seaward as rapidly as they could force the
boats through the water. After getting a
league beyond the goleta, which the captors
had began to tow towards the harbor, Carlos,
after consulting with his men resolved to
capture
the first vessel that they should fall in
with. They kept on about three leagues from
the land until after sun-rise, when not seeing
any thing they resolved to stand in towards
the port as most likely to meet one. About
nine o'clock in the morning they descried a
polacca schooner coming out and standing
westward along the shore. But I must now
tell you of my escape!
After Don Basilio had been removed from
me, the governor sent for me to question me
about the conspiracy, and to learn its extent.
Under the pretence that I had something of
importance to communicate I requested to be
left alone with him. After searching my
person
for arms he consented to my request. I
immediately locked the door and sprung past
him through a window which opened upon a
balcony. I placed my hand upon this and
leaped to the ground. I found myself in a
garden. Behind me I heard the alarm. I
flew with the speed of a greyhound along the
walks. I reached a high wall. The bell of
the palace tour was ringing as I climbed its
sides, and an alarm gun was fired from the
battlements as I sprung into the street
on the opposite side. A man drew a
knife to dispute my way. I snatched it from
him, and thus armed cleared my way. I
reached the harbor. I cast myself into the
water among the fleet of fishermen's boats and
diving beneath them rose between two some
distance from the shore. I heard shouts of
pursuit. I dove again and rose near a vessel.
I dove again and come up under the bows of
a polacca-schooner which was under weigh.
Her gib fortunately overhung her bows so low
that by pulling it a little it concealed me
completely
while it afforded me support. I
remained
thus until the polacca was well out of
the harbor when I made my appearance over
the bows. I pretended to have been upset in
a boat outside and they let me remain,
promising
to land me at some convenient spot. I
had not been fifteen minutes on board when I
discovered, for I was scarching for them, two
boats filled with men at a great distance off.
I knew they must be our men; for the
governor
told me that they had escaped in the dark
and were probably landed somewhere; and as
he had despatched soldiers to scour the coast
he hoped to entrap them. But I knew that
Carlos was too wise to land. At my
suggestion
the Captain stood for the boats, as I told
him they were doubtless in distress. As we
come near them, and he saw they were armed
and pulling for him, the captain became
alarmed
and would have put about. But drawing
my knife I with a blow cut the tiller rope and
severed the halyards of the main-sail. The
polacca come up into the wind and lay
perfectly
unmanageable. The captain and his
crew of five men assailed me, but I defended
myself and kept them at bay until the boats
come along side and the polacca fell into their
possession. The surprise of Carlos and the
men at seeing me on board I need not describe
to you. That lady is the polacca!' he said as
he ended his narrative, pointing to the vessel
as she lay at anchor off the beach.
CHAPTER VII.
The Story of the Licutenant of Don Basilio
The Tarnado in the Indian SeasThe
Siesta
,
and the appearance of a stranger at
the Vermillion TowerA scene upon the
Azotea.
Isidore
, the young lieutenant of Don
Basilio
,
having ended his narration, remained
watching the face of Dona Anita. During
his recital of the events which had led to
Don Basilio's imprisonment he had been
walking by her side up and down the silvery
sands, the rocky cliff towering darkly above
and flinging its shadow far beyond them. The
bay outstretched before them just rippled by
the breeze; and abreast upon its surface rode
the polacca. The bold wooded arms of the
Bay curving and connected by the chain of
islets at its mouth, formed a noble frame to
the beautiful and romantic scene. The boat
from which Isidoro had landed was grounded
upon the beach, the men grouped around it
in picturesque attitudes. Old Jose, leaning
upon his staff at the entrance of the defile,
watched anxiously the faces both of his
mistress
and of Don Isidoro, that he might catch
from their expression such portions of his tale
as his cars were not able, as they moved away
from him in their pacing to and fro, to catch
with distinctness.
As Isidoro's story ended, Dona Anita
stopped
short and gazed full into his countenance
as if she sought therein to read it reflected
and re-confirmed. Her lovely eyes were full
of tears yet the fire of determined purpose
burned in them. Her cheeks were pale
during
the recital, but now were flushed with
deep emotion, the stirring feelings to which a
knowledge of her brother's fate had given
rise. Her graceful person was drawn to its
full height, and a calm dignity, approaching
sternness sat upon her fine brow. The deep
fountains of her sisterly affection were stirred
within her, and bold and daring plans for his
release flashed rapidly across her mind. With
her sculptured lip compressed, her eye
intently
fixed in meditation, she stood silent
and seemingly unconscious that they rested
upon Isidoro. At length, after the lapse of
several minutes, she spoke:
`Isidoro this is sad news you bring me! I
have been trying to realize my brother's
danger
.
Our father perished by the hand of the
dreadful man into whose power Basilio has so
unhappily fallen. I can foresee, unless we
can effect his escape, only his father's fate!
The Governor-General is a man of a stern
and unfeeling nature. He regards no man's
life, when its continuance would menace his
own safety or the peace of his government.
My brother, alas, has menaced both. He is
in his power, and will die!'
`Never while Isidoro has a life to give for
his!'
`You are Don Basilio's friend, Isidoro. I
thank you. Forgive my harsh language
a while ago. I know you and all these would
die for my brother. But his fate is clear! But
he will not die in the Moro! He will not be
privately slain in his cell. God forbid! he
will be brought to trial. He will be taken
from the Moro to the Court of the Governor's
Palace, as my father was, and then tried.
Sentence will be death! Before he dies
we
must save him
, Isidoro, or die with him!'
`I swear to free him or perish!'
`So say we all! Basilio's freedom, or
death!
' cried the young men at the boat,
hearing Isidoro's words.
`
Basilio or death!
' shouted the crew from
the polacco, catching up the generous shout.
`Freedom to our noble captain or
death!
'
`You hear that, Dona Anita?' said Isidoro
with a sparkling eye.
`I hear it,' answered the maiden with
emotion
.
And waving her snowy hand towards
them she added, turning to him; `with
devotion
such as this I do not despair of again
embracing my brother!'
`What means, Senora, would you propose?
We are ready to do your bidding. Our lives
are yours and Don Basilio's!'
`Thanks, good and noble youth! I will
think what course to take. I am now too
much agitated by the fresh intelligence you
have communicated to form any plan at once.
Yet the time admits of no delay. Each
moment
is precious to him who is my life! I
wish you to have the polacca ready to sail
within an hour if need be!'
`She is ready, Senora, to depart now!'
`I shall now proceed to the tower! Come
to me by noon when I shall have decided on
some course of action. Adios, Don Isidoro!'
Thus saying this beautiful Spanish girl,
folding her mantilla about her head,
half-concealing
her exquisite features, moved with a
graceful tread, but with an air singularly
determined
and earnest. She walked like one
who is influenced by strong feelings and an
elevated purpose. Her brother's danger was
her own. From childhood her heart had been
bound up in him; and so secluded had she
lived that to the age of nineteen she had not
knowledge of any other love or any other
attachment
than a sisterly one. She did not
know that there was any other love or any
other emotion, than that which her affection
for Basilio elicited, which could find
existence
in her heart. `Love' to her, was to love
her brother. If she experienced any thing
like tenderness of which Basilio was not the
object it was for Old Jose; who in his
sixtieth
year and venerable beard, was not likely
to take the place of a very dangerous rival to
Basilio in her breast. Isidoro, though young,
handsome and grave had not drawn a single
glance of regard from her; although it could
not be concealed that when she met him or
discussed with him, which was but seldom,
she did it with a heightened glow upon her
cheek and without meeting his large black
eyes, as she was accustomed to those of Basilio
and old Jose. But this was not love; only the
instinct whereby it manifests its indwelling;
only the fragrance which is shed from the
folded bud of the Carlinda. Isidoro was not
the sun to whose warmth the bud was destined
to unfold its leaves; the light to which it was
open shone from other eyes than the young
lieutenant; who, albeit, was the sun of a fair
flower, in the shape of a brown maiden who
dwelt in the cot adjoining his father's in his
native island, and whose young heart followed
him over the sea.
One afternoon, it was the third after
Basilio's
departure from the Tower on his
expedition
which had so fatally terminated, Donna
Anita was sleeping upon the roof of her casa,
for it was the hour of the
siesta
. Above her
was an awning of blue silk fringed with
silver
,
and gathered so as to exclude the sun on
the western side. Her lovely head reposed
upon a cushion of velvet rose-colored and
werked in silken flowers of such exquisite
beauty and truthfulness that her head seemed
pillowed on living flowers. By her side sat a
negreas, with soft round features, and lus
trous black eyes, half-closed in sleep. In her
hand she held a gorgeous fan of feathers of the
bird of paradise, which she would slowly wave
with a gentle motion above the head of the
sleeper. A soft breeze blew from the sea, with
just force enough to stir the pendulous leaves
of a palm which grew at the corner of the
house. The top of the house overlooked the
forests, the bay, the islands and distant sea.
Above the house-top full thirty feet higher
rose the Vermilion Tower, a far-seen beacon
both on land and sea. In the
patio
or court
beneath, slept in the shade of the walls the
slaves, and swinging in a hammock beneath
an arch through which the cool wind
circulated
,
was old Jose with a cigarito in his mouth,
which he was trying to keep alight and keep
asleep at the same time. All was still and
wore that indolent air of repose and dreamy
security which characterizes the interior of a
Spanish house in that climate of luxurious
indulgence
.
The sea though its surface was calm yet
rolled in toward the land huge underswells,
glancing in the sun like vast cylinders of glass
one revolving over the other; when, breaking
upon the beach, they would burst into a
myriad
of crystals. The low sound of these
waves reached soothingly the ears of Jose,
and soon decided the contest between sleep
and his cigar; for the latter fell from his lips
while he sunk into deep slumber.
There had been the preceding night a
terrific
storm, to which the present agitation of
the surface of the beaving Bay was owing.
It was not an ordinary gale, but one of those
wild, irresistable tornados, which in the hot
months sweep the seas like a besom. This
which had just taken place, was unusually
fearful. The first hours of the night had been
sultry and close, and although there was no
clouds to be seen, not a star was visible; a
dense steel-like atmosphere far above the
region of clonds seemed to cover the sky.
Not a breath of air stirred. Dona Anita placed
the lightest feather of down upon the
battlement
and it rested there as motionless as lead.
Jose as the sun had set had prophecied a
hurricane
,
and now joined her to confirm and
strengthen his opinion. A leaden hue rested
upon the sea, and a singular blackness lay
upon the forests. There was patches of dull
light in the skies, but none could see by what
they were proceeded? and occasionally a
musky red glare would glow upon the cliffs
surrounding the Bay.
Jose and Dona Anita sat up late upon the
housetop watching the portentous signs and
talking of the absent goleta, which had now
been out three days. But Jose, calculating
by the winds, gave it his opinion that she
must before this time have doubled Cape St.
Antonio, and by this have reached Havana.
But Dona Anita's anxiety prevented her from
taking encouragement. Just before the sun
set a vessel had been seen to the South and
Eastward, which Jose, by the aid of the glass
made out to be a top-sail schooner, although
her hull was hid beneath the convexity of the
ocean line. The vessel they now thought of,
and Dona Anita sent up many prayers for the
mariners on board; for it was clear that the
storm, if it should rise, would sweep over her.
The thickening gloom of night hid the sails
from view when she was about nine miles
distant, standing to the West.
Towards eleven o'clock the steely hue of
the heavens, gave place to a white
appearance
,
which was not light nor a reflection
from light, but a fearfully wild aspect of the
skies which is indescribable. It spread over
the sea and over the land, and without sun or
moon or stars, there prevailed such dreadful
light as mortal eyes quailed to look upon! It
revealed no object! All around was as
invisible
as in the murky darkness of a few moments
before. Gradually yet swiftly, the `light of
hell,' as it is termed by the Islanders, rolled
together in waves not unlike the undulations
of the Aurora Borealis. It seemed to be
seeking
a focal centre, rather than to irradiate from
one. It rolled off towards the south west, the
blackness of darkness following in its train!
It gathered in the sky in the south east in a
vast field of light reddening as it condensed,
until a fierce fiery eye burned in a single
point above the horison, casting its baleful
glare over the sea. This was the eye of the
storm, `el ojo del hurican!'
Old Jose's experience, after seeing this,
told him that it was now time for Dona Anita
to seek shelter, and the casa to be closed.
She, however, waited and lingered to watch
the fearful progress of the tornado. The
Ojo del hurrican
became a deeper red mingled
with changing violet hues as beautiful as they
were terrible to look upon; then the violet
became black, and the blackness formed it
self into sable clouds which rolled in vas
volumes, like smoke pouring from a crater,
up the sky across the fiery centre, which, in
a moment was enveloped and extinguished in
a frightful chaos of night. All now was
darkness
impenetrable over sky, land and sea.
Dona Anita could not see Jose, although he
stood close at her side. The silence that
reigned was appalling. The heart seemed to
shrink and suppress its own beating as in
sympathy with the universal stillness.
`Come, Senoralet us fly for safety?'
whispered
Jose hoarsely.
`Nay, one moment longer. This is awful.
Hark! Do you not hear a roar! Look see
that whiteness upon the sea!'
`'Tis the hurricane ploughing it up into
fields of phosphorescent light. See how
broadly it spread, and how rapidly it
advances
!
Now the waters of the bay are
seemingly
on fire! God have mercy on any craft that
is now abroad!'
`The roar is terrific! Let us fly!' cried
Dona Anita clinging to the old man.
Scarcely had they disappeared from the
azotea
when with a noise like thunder rolling
upon the earth, the tornedo leaped from the
sea upon the land leaving a glittering track a
league broad in its carreer as it came on.
Hurled from their heights, rocks and trees
flew through the air and plunged into the
water! the forest bowed before it with a crash
and uproar of sound that no words could
convey
any idea of. All at once it burst upon
the tower and casa beneath. Stones from the
battlements were shot through the air like
feathers, and the foundation of the dwelling
shook as if shaken by an earthquake. The
rain descended amid sheets of flame, and
thunder-peal followed thunder-peal with the
noise of a ceaseless cannonading.
In two hours the tornado had passed away!
the clouds rolled back! Stars glittered through
openings to the blue sky, and the spent winds
were lulled! Only the roar of the subsiding
sea could be heard as it dashed lazily upon
the beach which it had so lately lashed with
terrific strokes.
Unable to rest Dona Anita and Jose once
more ascended to the roof. The scene was
wild but beautiful; and they stood a few
moments
gazing upon the serene heavens, in
thankfulness for their escape.
`Alas, for the mariner,' said Anita. Some
vessel must have been in the destroyer's path.
I shudder at the fate of those on board!'
`No doubt, lady, the vessel we sawthe
topsail schooner that hove in sight just before
sun-down, and which looked to me like a
schooner of war, I have little doubt, lady, but
that she has gone down all standing! If she
lay in the course of the hurricane she is sure
to be lost! But the sea is the marriner's proper
grave, and the snowy lap of the storm-wave
his winding sheet!'
The day broke and the heaving of the sea
was the only sign of the late tempest. This
had not subsided even towards afternoon
when Dona Anita and Jose are discovered
enjoying
their siesta as if nothing had
transpired
to alarm them for their safety. The
smiling
,
though warm sun, the pearly clouds and
gentle breeze were the features of serene
weather, inviting to repose and tranquility.
Old Jose had swung his hammock in the arch
and left the door open towards the sea to
catch the cool breeze as he indulged in his
siesta and cigaritta. If he had been standing
in the door which commanded a view of the
pathway he might have seen a person slowly
making his way up the rocks from the beach.
As he came nearer he would have discovered
that he was without a hat, that his flowing
locks of light brown were wet with the brine,
and that his dress was also saturated with
sea-water
;
which dress was a blue naval undress
jacket, white pantaloons, and buff vest with
the small anchor button; which button was
also on his blue jacket. His feet were bare
and lacerated, and his appearance
fatigue-worn
.
Had he seen all this, Jose would have
set him down as a shipwrecked officer. But
being fast asleep he saw neither his approach
nor suspected it.
The young man, for he was not more than
five or six and twenty, if so old, approached
the open gate, across the entrance of which
lay fast asleep a negro whom Jose had
stationed
there while he took his own repose.
The wanderer gazed at the high walls and
higher tower for a moment and then advanced
to the gate. He paused a moment as he saw
the black asleep, but stepping over him he
passed beneath the arch. As he proceeded he
saw Jose in his hammock; when finding him
also asleep he passed beneath it and found
himself in the
patio
or interior of the
csa del
canfa
. He looked around him with an eye of
curiosity and interest. He surveyed the
sleeping
slaves in the corners; the fountain with
its refreshing waters; the orange and lemon
trees; the tesselated pavement; the rose and
crimson damask curtains of the long grated
windows; the foliage of a hundred flowers
waving in the soft breeze and the blue sky
over all. As he leaned against a column to
survey the place, in which he found himself,
his appearance was greatly in his favor.
His person though not tall was
commanding
,
although now bent a little with fatigue;
but there was an air of refinement and
high-breeding
in his features and bearing that would
have showed without the aid of his officer's
undress uniform, that he was a gentleman, or
as Jose afterwards observed, `
un coballero
noble
.' His eye was a clear blue and
expressive
of courage and sensibility His
countenance
was altogether interesting, and invited
confidence. Notwithstanding his present
triste and disordered appearance he wore a
cheerful look and tranquil manner.
`This place into which I have wandered
seems to be the Castle of Sleep. Well, I need
sleep more than food and will even yield to
the potent influence of the spot. It will be
time enough when these wake for them to
find out who has intruded upon them and I to
find out where I am. Upon the roof I see the
top of a canopy. I will see if I can't find a
cool shade beneath it where I can rest my
weary limbs. With swimming and floating a
mile, and walking two leagues over rocks and
through forests, I am hardly able to mount the
stairs. The inhabitants are probably asleep
in their richly curtained chambers around, so
I shall be undisturbed upon the flat roof.
There are females here, for men never gather
flowers around them like these. Perhaps
young and beautiful senoritas. A pretty plight
I am in to be presented.'
As he spoke he left the column and
ascended
a broad flight of stone stairs that led to an
interior balcony, from which by a half a dozen
more steps he reached the
azotea
or flat roof.
It was spacious and running all around the
patio, with the tower rising at one angle. In
the shadow of the tower, was the awning, the
canopy of which he had seen from
below
.
It was but a few feet distant from him.
Beneath its folds of azure silk he discovered
half hidden, the sleeping form of Anita, with
the slave seated by her couch also asleep!
He stood still in an attitude of surprise! He
gazed and then advancing a step continued to
gaze. One cheek and side of her face, was
presented to his view. He stood entranced
by its perfection. A gentle glow warmed the
delicate olive, and her rusty lips were pouted
with the beautiful voluptuous swell of a
child's. Her dark lashes lay in long and
surving fringes upon the cheek, and a tress
of her dark hair slept upon her snowy hand,
which by the contrast looked like an exquisite
piece of alabaster work. The elegant
undulating
outline of her figure was perceptible in
all its bewildering beauty, and a small foot,
from which the slipper had fallen, of the most
lovely symmetry and diminutiveness, was
visible peeping beneath the vague folds of the
canopy.
He gazed with clasped hands in silent
wonder
!
He approached with noiseless tread
nighernigherand nigher still, emboldened
by the deep sluumber that had fallen upon
on her and upon the slave. He stood and
bent over her. He had forgotten his fatigue,
his bleeding feet! He traced the sculptured
outline of the faultless profile, the statue-like
beauty of the lovely head and moulded arm!
The expression of her face, too, charmed his
soul.
`Never have I beheld mortal beauty like
this,' he exclaimed. `If I were an idolater
this should be the object of my heart's
worship
.
Who can she be? What strange thread
of destiny have guided me hither! I have
found here my heart's ideal! At this shrine
shall terminate my heart's pilgrimage. She
moves! I will retire! Sleep is ready to
overpower
me. I will recline here within the
shadows of this strange old red tower, for I
would have my last gaze upon her that she
may mingle in my dreams. Sleep! my eyes
are already closing! Great will be her
surprise
on awaking to find me sleeping not far
from her! But I can remove no farther!'
He laid his head upon the pedestal of a
gigantic
orange tree jar, and the next moment
was buried in profound sleep.
CHAPTER VIII.
The discoveryThe impression made by the
stranger upon the lovely hostessThe
narrative
of the shipwreckedThe hospitality
of Donna AnitaThe growth of loveThe
young stranger ensnaredA struggle
between
passion and duty
.
The
sun descended low in the west behind
a terrace of purple and silver-gold clouds,
above which his prismatic colored beams
radiated
to the zenith. Gold was every where!
upon the cliff-edge; upon the tops of the
forests
;
upon the battlements of the tower;
upon the clouds and upon the sea. All was
gold mingled with purple. The breeze set in
cool and pleasantly, and already lifted in its
increasing strength the silken folds of the
canopy beneath which Donna Anita slept.
The same wind that tossed her dark curls
awoke the negress, who began with great
diligence
to fan away with her gorgeous crest of
feathers. The cool air upon her cheek
banished
sleep and opening her large dreamy
eyes, Donna Anita awoke also. She sat up,
throwing back her cloud of hair from her
forehead
,
and casting her eyes round upon the
glorious sunsetting, gazed upon it a few
moments
with calm delight.
`You have let me sleep long, Linda. The
day is nearly closed. You look so bright you
have been asleep too.'
`Dat must be true, missus, coz leetle bit
'go de sun up dar, and den I look agin ony
a minnit and dare he be.'
`How lonely without my brother! I am
delighted he is to bring home with him a bride.
She will then be a companion for me in his
absences. Come let us go down to the
sala!
'
`Madre de Dios!' cried the negress in alarm
her eyes resting on the young man who was
lying fast asleep a few feet distant.
`What do you see?' cried her mistress
looking
in the direction of the slave's gaze. `
Santa
Maria! A stranger! Asleep upon the
Azotea!'
She rose to her feet, thrust her little foot
into her slipper and gathering her mantilla
about her form was about to fly. But he slept
calmly and tranquilly. If he meant ill he
would not lie there buried in profound repose.
If he were an enemy he would not place
himself
in the power of his foe.
Such were the thoughts that passed rapidly
hrough her mind as with her eyes fixed upon
him in alarm and half-flying, she arrested her
flight. His pale face, his noble countenance,
his fair complexion and light brown hair that
showed him to be from a northern land, his
garments evidently wet with sea-water the
salt brine of which encrusted his locks, the
quiet, deep sleep in which he was sunk, all
pleaded to her in his behalf. She paused and
then timidly approached him. She stood still,
and gazed upon him as he had upon her while
she slept. As she looked and thought that
perhaps he was a shipwrecked sailor who had
sought asylum here, she felt a tender interest
for him, and compassion took the place of
fear. Yet how he came to lie upon the
azotea
she was at a loss to imagine. In a low voice
she bade her slave go down and awake Jose.
But this worthy at the same instant made his
appearance at the head of the stairs.
`How is this, Jose?' How come this young
man here?' she asked.
`Nombre de dios! how came he here sure
enough!'
`Don't speak so loud! Don't wake him! Do
you know who he may be?'
`It may be a robber or a loyalist come as a
spy. I had best run him through before he
wakes up and mischief come of it.'
`No, Jose! He seems to be a foreigner!
An Ingles, or Americano. Go softly near and
see if you can decide for me who and what he
is.'
Jose obeyed advancing on tip-toe, but with
his staff advanced like a pike to be ready to
meet any sudden hostile demonstrations.
`Es caballero, senora,' he answered after a
moment's scrutiny; `and he is an officer in
the American navy. I know the button. I
have seen them often in Havana. The little
gold stripe on his shoulder shows that he is a
lieutenant. That much I can make out.'
`I am so happy he is an American,' said
Donna Anita, with carnestness; I love the
Americans. They are friends of liberty. He
must be taken care of when he awakes. But
how came he here, Jose?'
`I do not know, senora, unless that he came
in past me and Fingo who both fell asleep
leaving the sea gate open to let the sea breeze
and picaroons too, come in, for that matter!
It's a mercy they didn't carry us off casa and
all!'
`It is dangerous in these times, when
pirates
are so thickly abroad and even coming
into the Bay, to leave the Quinta so exposed.'
`I will not be guilty of it again, senora.
He must have come in and come up here to
sleep, knowing the custom here of taking our
siesta upon the house-top. But it is a
wonder
no one saw him. But as we were all
asleep we couldn't. He must be honest or he
would have robbed us. Nohe is no robber.
His dress is already wet and with the sea. He
looks like a man who has been swimming.
We have not forgotten the hurricane of last
night, senora, that we should ask how he came
here! He has been shipwrecked and
wandered
hither for shelter! I will wake him,
senora! He can then tell his own story.'
`Nay, Jose, let the poor cavalier sleep. He
seems wearied. He wakes!' she exclaimed,
as the young stranger opened his eyes and
looked around. At first he seemed
bewildered
,
but on seeing Anita he recollected all the
circumstances that preceeded his going to
sleep. He rose, with some difficulty, for he
felt the effects of his fatigues and the wounds
in his feet, and said with courtesy, while the
color deepened his cheek,
`Pardon me, senora. I am a shipwrecked
sailor, and coming hither and finding all
asleep, overcome with weariness I slept also.
My sleep was sweet and my dreams were
pleasant for I knew an angel was near me.'
Donna Anita blushed, for she could not but
understand the meaning of the handsome,
pale young stranger. Without meeting his
deep impassioned yet respectful gaze, she said,
with modesty,
`Senor you are welcome to our hospitality.
The gates of the Casa del Torre were never
closed against the unfortunate. I sympathise
with you in your misfortune and trust that by
our kindness we shall be able in some degree
to alleviate that grief which you must
experience
for the loss of your vessel and
companions
.
Are you the only one saved?'
`I said I was shipwrecked, senora,'
answered
the stranger with increased admiration of
her now that he had heard her rich sweet
voice and listened to her warm expressions of
sympathy; `my vessel, lady, is not lost, that
I am aware of; though how she can have
out-lived
the hurricane I am unable to see! In
the midst of it as we were running before it
under bare poles, as I was standing on deck a
sea broke over the stern which submerged the
vessel and swept every thing from the decks.
I was borne far from her, and rising upon
the top of a wave saw the vessel flying away
like an arrow beyond sound of my cries. I
gave myself up to a sailor's death, when
something
struck against me. I grasped it! I
clung to it, and fortunately found attached to
it its lashings with which I bound myself to it
by one arm. I then endeavored to reach the
land which was full a league distant. The
sea was as white with foam as a wintry plain
over which the wild snow is driven. I was
borne onward almost on the wings of the
storm often lifted by its force from the waves
amid clouds of spray and dashed headlong.
How I reached the land I know not. I have
no recollection of the remainder of the night.
When the sun rose I found myself lying upon
a rocky spur of a small island at the entrance
of this bay.'
`God be blessed for this miraculous
preservation
!'
exclaimed Donna Anita devoutly.
Jose crossed himself and muttered `Ave
Maria purissima.'
`After coming a little to myself I looked
round for some signs of human habitation and
discovered this Vermilion Tower in the
distance
.
I then set out to reach it; but my
progress was attended with great pain and
suffering. I had to swim from islet to islet
before I could reach the main-land; and
thence after a difficult journey I reached here.
I found the gate open and entered. I
ascended
to the azotea, where I beheld you, noble
lady, also asleep beneath yonder canopy, I
gazed on you and forgot all I had suffered.
But sleep overpowered me and I yielded to its
influence, only to behold you still present in
my dreams. Senora if I have offended by
intruding
here I hope
`Offended, senor! You are welcome!
Heaven
has directed your steps hither! Jose you
will at once see that el senor has every thing
to render him comfortable, food and clothing.
Conduct him to Basilio's chamber and let him
choose from Basilio's wardrobe.'
`Senora, your goodness'
`Not a word, senor Americano,' answered
Anita laughing. `You must do as I bid you.
Go with Jose who will see to your comfort.
After you have reposed awhile and made your
toilet I will visit you. Jose is a good
medico
,
and will do something to heal your lacerated
feet. Pobsecito! I need not assure you,
senor, how much my heart sympathises in
your distresses. But Heaven has preserved
your life, and for this we are all thankful!'
If the young stranger was charmed by her
beauty as she slept, he was enchanted by the
grace and unaffected simplicity of her manners
and the noble traits of character her
conversation
exhibited. The impression her
loveliness
of human face and person had first made
upon his mind was now deepened by the
superior
loveliness of her mind and heart.
Donna
Anita could not fail to read his admiration
in his expressive blue eyes, which seemed to
to her
` as deep and full of light,
As the star-lit skies
Of a summer's night.'
He left her guided by Jose who led him to
the magnificent
camera
occupied by Basilio
when at the tower.
`Senor is an officer of La armada
Americana
?'
asked Jose as he ushered him into the
chamber.
`Yes,' Senor, answered the young man in
pure Spanish.
`You were in the schooner that was in the
offing just before sun-down yesterday?'
`Yes. Did you discover us?'
Si, Senor! You were about three leagues
or ten miles off! I know she was a schooner
of war; and when the tornado came on I
feared for her!'
`I have little hopes that she has escaped.
She is, however, a good sea-boat and as dry
as a teal!'
She may have taken the tornado near its
edge and got out of it. But is hardly
possible
!
What schooner was it, Escelentissimo?'
`The Porpoise, U. S. schooner of six guns.
We were cruising after pirates. I was her
commander. We left Matanzas three weeks
ago, and during that time I have taken and
burnt one piratical craft and driven two on
shore. We were in chase of a heavy lugger
sloop carrying a forty eight pounder
amidships
,
and thirty men, when the tornado came
upon us. The lugger aided by her sweeps
run for the land and I have no doubt got
shelter in some inlet before the storm burst!
Whose Quinta is this in which I am so
hospitably
entertained, Senor?'
`It is that of El Senor Don Basilio Marial,
and of his sister La Senorita Dona Anita.
They are the orphan children of Don Lazaro,
the Patriot conspirator who was executed at
Havanna some years since! and a nobler
breast was never pierced by a bullet! He was
my master and friend, Senor!'
`And where is Don Basilio?'
`Like his father he is a patriot. His
ambition
is to see Cuba free from the yoke of Spain
and governed by her own children, and by a
free constitution. To this end he devotes his
life, influence, energies and wealth. I speak
openly to you, Senor Escelentissimo, because
I know you too are a friend of liberty. I wish
Don Basilio were at home now to receive you.
He would be happy to have as his guest un
Americano caballero. He loves the
Americans
,
Senor. I love the Americans! Dona
Anita loves the Americans!'
At the name of Dona Anita the young
American's pale cheek glowed, and his eyes
sparkled.
`And Donna Anita! has she lived always
here?'
`She has never been away, save once to
Havanna
,
when a child.'
`Sheshethat isis Don Basilio, her
brother
married?'
`No, senor. He is now gone to Havanna
to bring here a bride. We expect him in a
week, and trust we shall have your
excelleney's
company until he arrives. Don Basilio
would feel glad to grasp the hand of an
American
.'
`And Donna Anita, his lovely sister,has
shethat isdoes she contemplate marriage?'
`No, senor! the Donna Anita loves no one
but her brother. For that matter, secluded
here all her life she has seen no one to love
worthy her rank. Yet she has a noble great
heart, excellentissimo, and would pour a
wealth of its rich treasures into any man's
bosom
whom she could love!'
The young man's countenance beamed with
delight. The words of old Jose filled him
with a joy he could not conceal. This
conversation
took place while Jose was carefully
binding up his wounded feet, after having
bathed them, and robed him in one of Don
Basilio's
dressing-gowns. He was refreshed by
suitable food prepared and sent into him by
Donna Anita, and by Jose's direction, he laid
down to repose for the night.
Jose returned to Donna Anita who had left
him in the azotea, and was seated in the
sala
,
her thoughts running upon the handsome
young American officer, whom fortune had
thrown upon her hospitality. She recalled
his looks, his smile, the tone of his voice, the
devoted respect and deep admiration of his
manner towards her. As she suffered her
thoughts to dwell upon him, his image
deepened
its impression upon her heart, and
tender
feelings began to arise in her bosom, such
as she never before experienced. They
were not such as she had all her life
entertained
for her brother, but dissimilar, and yet
originating like these, in the very depths of
her being. Those with which she regarded
Basilio wero deep, quiet, peaceful, like the
tranquil flow of a summer's stream. Those
which the young stranger awakened were like
the same stream agitated by rapids and wildly
tossed by the winds. Their novelty
surprised
and yet pleased her, communicating to her
soul a secret delight amid all the commotion
that they occasioned. Love, new, fresh, pure,
had taken possession of her virgin bosom, and
to its hallowed influence she yielded up her
senses as in a pleasant dream when one is
half-waking.
It was in the gentle mood of heretofore
unknown
bliss that Jose found her, after
quitting
the young stranger.
`How did you leave our guest, Jose?' she
asked, deeply blushing as if she feared he had
read her thoughts.
`He sleeps, Senora! He is a pleasant
gentlemen
un
caballero! I have dressed his
wounds; they will be healed in three days.
He partook of the wine and orange orgeat, and
other refreshments you sent him and bade me
thank you!'
`Did he say nothing more, Jose?'
`Oh yes, Senora! He talked a great deal
and asked me a great many questions about
you!'
Then Jose began in detail, with certain em
bellishments of his own, what had transpired
and all that had been said by the young
Americano
.
Dona Anita listened well-pleased; and
the joy of her heart was deepened at the
consciousness
of having awakened an interest in
the breast of one in whom she felt her
happiness
was being deeply involved.
The next morning the guest who had
given
his name to Jose as Walter Nevil, having
signified to Jose that he was so far recovered
from his fatigue as to be able to walk in the
patio
, on this being duly reported to Dona
Anita she invited him to breakfast with her.
Their meeting was not without
embarrassment
;
for in both their breasts love had
taken
deep root. Walter scarce raised his eyes
to hers, as he saluted her, and she timidly
dropped
her own as she replied. He took a seat
opposite to her, and for a few moments both
remained silent. He was too fearful of
betraying
too much if he spoke, and she trembling
lest if she looked up or opened her lips the
first word or look would betray her passion.
Old Jose who stood by gazed from one to the
other, gently shrugged his shoulders, and a
significant expression of intelligence passed
across his features. The old man saw at a
glance how matters stood. The discovery
gave him no little satisfaction which he
betrayed
by a bright sparkle in the eye and a
smile that played about his mouth.
Oppressed
by the silence Walter raised his eyes to
address his lovely hostess. It so chanced that
she raised hers at the same instant! Their
glances fully encounteredan interchange of
expression passedan involuntary knowledge
of each other's passion, was conveyed like
electricity from eye to eye thrilling the
deepest
toned chords of both their hearts! The
glow of pleasure which deepened the cheek
and brow of the young man was reflected in
lovlier and softer tints from her own, and that
moment their happiness was too great for
utterance
.
Dona Anita rose as if to fly for joy
and shame, but the happy youth arresting her
hand caught it to his lips and reseated her,
and yielding to his gentle entreaty resumed
the seat she had left. Jose had discreetly left
the
sala
, and the young lover did not fail to
take advantage of the favored moment to plead
in tones of passion the depth and purity of his
first love!
Days passed, and the young lovers were
happy in each other's presence. The
Vermilion
tower had become a paradise. Don
Waltero
,
as old Jose had denominated him, had
related all his history, and Donna Anita in
return
had told him the story of her family.
His sympathies as an American, was with the
conspirator and his family, and he panted in
his enthusiasm, to behold and clasp hands with
Don Basilio, whom he began to esteem for his
patriotism as well as love for his near
relationship
to her whom each day he more and more
idolized. In her society he forgot his fatigues,
his ship wreck, the fate of his companions and
vessel, and even the future, with its calls to
duty. Each day he was improving in his
health and strength, and at the time when
Donna Anita is introduced watching from the
tower for the return of her brotherthe vessel
of Isidoro hove in sight bearing the news of
his imprisonment, he had so far recovered as
to ride out with her in short excursions along
the retired shores of the Bay. At times the
thought of rejoining his frigate then at
Havana
,
would pass over his mind, but he would
banish it, and gazing in the face of Anita
banish
all else but her image and his happiness
n her presence from his mind.
But as he grew strong and well, and his
duty would call more loudly than was
welcome
to the ear of his conscience, he would
plead to himself the necessity of waiting the
return of Basilio, who would furnish him in
his vessel with a passage to the Havana.
`It is true,' he said, as he sat in his room on
the morning on which Jose and Donna Anita
discovered the sail, `it is true I am now quite
recovered, and my honor calls me at once to
report myself alive and ready for duty again.
But courtesy renders it expedient I should
await Don Basilio's arrival, who is daily
looked
for. My happiness, dear Anita has placed
in his hands! I must obtain his consent
before
I can claim the lovely girl as my bride.
I will wait. I think I shall perform my part
by writing to the ship and informing the
Captain
of my safety, say that I shall return as
soon as I can take passage in a vessel I am
expecting into the Bay! This I will do; and
when Don Basilio's vessel comes I will ask
permission to sail in her. I will write at
once!'
With this resolution he sat down and wrote
a letter to the captain of the Razee, then
supposed
to be in Havana, giving him a flrief
account
of his cruise and of his being washed
overboard and of his safety. Having
completed
it, he took horse, and without
communicating
with Donna Anita, who with Jose were
then engaged in watching the sail they had
discovered, he took his way through the
sccret
foot-path in the forest to the nighest post,
two leagues distant in the interior. Here he
deposited his letter, and then returned to the
Tower, which he reached just as Donna
Anita
appeared from the beach where Isidoro had
landed and communicated to her the news of
Don Basilio's imprisonment.
CHAPTER
IX.
The love-test.The embarkationThe arrival
of the polacca in HavanaThe plan of
NevilThe attempt and resultThe
separation
Don
Bazilio and Anita meeting
.
The
young officer had discovered Donna
Anita's approach to the casa from the shore of
the Bay some moments before he reached the
arch of the gateway. Her eager step, her
rapid walk, her pale and excited face struck
him at once with alarm and curiosity.
Throwing
himself from his horse he advanced to
meet her with a countenance of deep and
tender anxiety.
`What sad intelligence have you received,
senora? what sorrowful event has transpired
since my absence this morning to produce
such an aspect of grief?'
`My brother, senor de Nevil!' she faltered
out.
`What of himof Don Bazilio? I fear me
it is sad from your sadness. Speak Anita,
your griefs are mine,' he said taking her
hand.
`Come in with me, Walter, and you shall
hear!' she said with mingled grief and dignity.
He followed her into the sala and seated
himself by her upon a divan. She wept for
some moments and then said,
`It is sad sad news, senor! My brother
lies at this moment a prisoner in the Moro
Castle.'
`Is this true?' he exclaimed starting to his
feet in his surprise. `Don Bazilio in prison?'
`It is too true, senor! A vessel has just
arrived in the Bay in which came his
lieutenant
Isodoro and most of his men confirming
the fact.'
Donna Anita then composing herself
informed
him of the circumstances just as
Isidoro
had communicated them to her. The
young American listened with surprise and
sorrow. His deep sympathy for Donna Anita
was written in his countenance. When she
had ended he said warmly,
`Don Bazilio must be rescued, senora. For
your sake he must not meet the doom to which
his captor has destined him. But how to aid
him I cannot advise you. I am powerless.
You have only my wishes.'
`Your are far from powerless, senor de
Nevil! You are braveyou are generous
you are a patriot.'
She suddenly ceased and looked down with
a deepening color gathering in her cheeks.
`How can I serve you, Anita?'
`You profess to love me, Walter'
`Profess! Oh, recall that word. I love you
Anita, with all my soul and being.'
`Will you prove that love to me?' she said,
her dark eyes lighting up with glorious
beauty
and her whole manner singularly earnest.
`With my life!' he answered firmly.
`Then listen to me, Walter? You have
sought my hand. I have referred you to my
brother. He lies in prison. I cannot think
of love or wedlock while Bazilio is in chains.
Rescue my brotherrestore him to me free,
and my hand, as my heart already is, shall be
vours.'
The young American officer paused a
moment
as if to reflect. She regarded him an
instant earnestly and then cried,
`Oh, can you hesitate, Walter? Can you
pause to decide where the sufferer is my
brother
?
Can you love Anita and be indifferent to
Bazilio's fate?'
`I am not indifferent, Anita. My heart
bleeds for you and my eyes weep with yours.
I would risk my life to restore your brother to
you. To make you happy again would fill
me with joy. I paused not to decide whether
I should attempt to free Bazilio or notbut
how
I could do it.'
`Foagive me, Walter. Pardon a sister's
impatience. I do not doubt your love. I know
you will not let my brother lie in chains while
you in ease and quiet remain in safety here
sharing half that love which he should share
with thee. You need not deliberate upon how
you shall aid him. To the brave all things
are possible. If I were there instead of
Bazilio
,'
she said smiling as she lifted her
tear-glistening
eyes to his face, `would you not
rescue me? I know you would, noble
Walter
.'
`I would save you or perish in the
attempt
.'
`Then regard my brother as my other-self
and save him!' she cried with eloquent
fervor
.
`Anita,' he said taking her hand, your wish
is my law. I will seek to rescue Bazilio from
imprisonment. If I succeed I shall make him
happy! If I succeed I shall render you
happy
!
If I succeed I shall be happier than both
of you if the possession of this fair hand is
the reward of my devotion to you. To win
you, dear Anita, I would not count my life of
any weight in comparison with the prize
before
me. I go to obey you.'
`Return and bring my brother, and from
his arms I will turn and throw myself into
yours, never to leave them.'
`If I return it will be with Don Bazilio. If
I do not return it will be because I have loved
you too well to value life in comparison with
your wishes and happiness.'
`Your words alarm me! I never thought of
danger to you, dear Walter, so lost were my
thoughts in my brother's! You must not
perish
.
I must not lose you both! I must not
loose either of you. To me you have become
as dearnay, dearer, if possible, than my
brother! yet he must not perish!'
`I will save him, Anita. I will proceed to
Havana, and there are every effort to obtain
his release or aid his escape. Perhaps, as an
American, I can gain access to his cell. I
will try to do so, and furnish him with
instruments
to free himself from his irons. As I
think upon it, hope inspires me! I will at
once leave!'
`I will accompany you. I cannot remain
here in suspense to learn the issue. I will go
too, Walter. The vessel in which Isidoro
came is now ready to sail. The wind, though
light, is fair. Let us set sail at once. The
vessel shall be placed under your command.
We can run in safety into Havana, as the
capturre
of the polacca is not known there,
Isidoro
still holding the crew prisoners on board.
We will go on shore in disguise. I will work
with you as a sister by a brother's side, till he
be rescued. I have money. I am bold and
resolute. I can aid you with my advice and
encourage you in disappointment!'
`Noble woman! how can I render myself
worthy of you!'
`By regarding Basilio your brother as well
as mine, and restoring him to my embrace!'
`The attempt, full of difficulty and danger,
as it appears, shall be attempted. Let us at
once embark, Anita! Your presence will
bless my efforts!'
`Isidoro says that my brother is to be
brought from the castle to the city for trial.
It is then I hope to rescue him. They
transport
their prisoners in barges under a guard
of soldiers. When we reach Havana, Isidoro
will learn when my brother will be conveyed
across the water, and at that time the attempt
to rescue him must be made! If it fail, then
I shall despair!'
`It will be successful,' answered the young
sailor, with animation. `I give myself to this
enterprise, heart and soul. I shall think only
of you, dearest Anita, and of Don Basilio till
he is free, and smiles again reanimate your
face. Till I achieve this happy result I shall
forget that I have ship or country, to whom I
owe duty and allegiance!'
It was late in the afternoon of the fourth
day after this interview just described, when
the polacca-schooner appeared two or three
leagues from Havana, standing for the
harbor
.
The stately battlements of the Moro,
the West Indian Gibralter, towered dark
and menacing above the port with its
thousand marts, and the city with its domes
and towers. The sight of this fortress brought
tears into Anita's eyes. Numerous craft were
coming in and going out of port; several
vessels
of war were at anchor or under sail; and
as the polacca proceeded just inside the Moro,
Nevil recognized the well known warlike
outline
of his own vesselthe Razee of 60 guns,
which he had left five weeks before to cruize
in the Porpoise; and as he advanced, to his
surprise and joy, he saw the schooner from
which he had been swept, and which he
supposed
lost in the tornado, snugly at anchor
under the lee of the frigate.
He drew Basilio's scarlet cap, that with the
rest of the young conspirator's wardrobe, he
wore, lower over his brow, and sending all
his men below but enough to work the
schooner
,
(for he had taken command of her,
making
Isidoro his lieutenant,) he boldly ran into
the harbor just as the sunset gun had fired
from the castle and the ships of war; at which
signal the flags waving above the fortress and
the quarter deck descended like huge birds of
gay plumage stooping to the ground.
The shades of twilight were gathering over
the harbor and town as the schooner came
silently
to anchor
directly under the stern of the
three-masted goleta
, which Isidoro, who was
at the helm, had with joy discovered in port,
and near which he now purposely steered his
little vessel; perhaps with some daring
purpose
in his mind! Anita had also recognized
the goleta of Don Basilio, amid the thickly
surrounding craft, and with an exclamation of
pleasure pointed it out to Nevil. He gazed
upon it with an expression of singular
interest
;
and Donna Anita thought she could read
the thoughts which were passing through his
mind!
`Oh that Basilio was free!' she cried with
animation. `Once more would he tread his
own vessel's deck, rescue her, and spread her
sails upon the open sea, in spite of castle and
guard-ship!'
`I was just thinking if he was at liberty,
how soon he would again be her master. It
would not be impossible for a bold man with
thirty such men as he commands, to cut her
out! It shall be done! Basilio shall be free!
I will go on shore to-night, and by some
means find out what the Government intend
to do, where he is imprisoned, and obtain all
the information that will be of service in our
purpose to rescue him. I know some
Spaniards
connected with the Government, and as
I fortunately speak the language with
finency
,
and am an American, I can do perhaps
better than Isidoro, in whose faithful charge I
will leave you. Early in the morning I will
come on board. I shall preserve my present
disguise of face and costume, lest I fall in
wiht any officers of the Razee; as I am not
yet ready to rejoin her till Basilio is at liberty.
To him only, for your sake, dear Anita, do I
give my thoughts!'
The following morning Nevil returned to
the polacca, which was too small and
ordinary
a craft, of which great numbers almost
precisely like it lay in port, to attract any
special notice. He said that with a good
deal of difficulty, he had ascertained that Don
Basilio was still confined in the Moro; that
his trial was to take place that day, when he
would be conveyed in an armed barge to the
quay, and thence escorted before the tribunal.
`He will be guarded by twenty soldiers in
the boat, and through the streets. It will be
impossible to effect his liberation by attacking
such a body. But do not despair, Senora! I
have meditated a plan. It is as follows. The
escort will leave the stairs at the Moro
precisely
at elven o'clock to-day. At this hour
there is always a seaward breeze blowing at
this time of the moon. You recollect we had
it off land yesterday, and run seven and eight
knots under it. It is now calm, as it is only
six o'clock, but it will rise by eight. You may
listen, Isidore, for I would have your advice
as to the feasibility of my plan. It is a bold
one, but I doubt not will be successful; for
you command brave and faithful men; and
tke sight of Don Basilio will animate you all
to the utmost! Hear my plan! As the wind
freshens, which will be about ten o'clock, we
will lift our anchor, and, raising our foresail,
run to windward of the three-masted goleta,
which I learn has only a guard of six soldiers
on board, to keep her until the Governor
hauls her into the dock, to refit and arm her.
When we get to windward, we must drop
anchor
in a position that will enable us at any
moment to slip the cable and drift aboard of
her as if by accident. Once alongside, we can
take possession of her with the force of thirty
eight men you command. But we must wait
our time to slip the cable, timing it so that we
may be able, after getting her into our
possession
,
to make sail and fall in with the
guard-boat
,
which at eleven will be conveying Don
Basilio across the Bay. It is my purpose to
steer for the guard-boat so as to strike her
amid-ships and sink her. Three of you be
ready with ropes to aid Don Basilio, who will
not be ironed, and to whom Isidoro you must
shew yourself upon the bows before we come
in contact that he may know we are friends,
and that we expect him to take advantage of
the confusion to get on board! We must then
get out of the harbour the best way we can;
but if the goleta sails as she looks there will
be but few shots strike her. But we must
run the risk. I only fear in this event for
your safety, Anita!'
`Think not of me, if Basilio be saved!' she
said with strong emotion.
Nevil's plan was further discovered and
approved of. At nine o'clock the wind was
blowing from the south and west directly out
of the harbor. At two o'clock the polacca
raised her anchor and hoisting her fore sail
changed her ground and came again to
anchor
,
to windward of the goleta. With great
caution Nevil now began to reconnoitre the
latter; and was satisfied that his information
respecting the number of men on board had
been correct. He could discover only some
five or six Spanish soldiers lounging about
upon her decks smoking and one stationed at
the gangway as a sentry. He was satisfied
that he could carry her without difficulty.
He was not insensible to the danger that
would attend its successful issue in the
midst of a fortified harbour. But love for
Donna Anita rendered him blind to
consequences
.
Brave, daring, and chivalrous, he
only regarded in his future her hand, as the
reward of all he should risk on Basilio's
freedom and his own happiness were bound
together inseparably by her own fiat.
Towards eleven o'clock he began to watch
the stairs at the base of the Moro castle for
any signs of the escort and its prisoner. The
boat in which they were to cross he knew
would pass not very far to leeward of the
position
held by the Goleta. At length, with a
glass he saw the boat full of soldiers leave the
castle landing. It was the signal for Isidoro
to slip the cable. This was done silently and
the polacca began to drift rapidly toward the
three masted schooner. The soldiers on board
shouted to warn them that they would run
aboard of the Goleta, while Nevil called
loudly
for them to catch a rope he held coiled in
his hand, saying that they had got adrift and
wanted to fetch up by the goleta. The
soldiers
seized their muskets and ordered them
to keep off, saying they were commanded to
fire on any strange craft that came near! The
vessels came in contact, the bowsprit of the
polacca with the stern davits of the goleta.
Before Nevil and his men could secure them
together, the soldiers who yet forebore to fire
believing the approach accidental, cut away
the stays and fall which momentarily held the
polacco when she separated from her and
drifted to leeward!
`We are defeated,' cried Nevil, with intense
disappointment in his looks and manner, `by
not taking into our reckoning the current that
set us toward astern! But for that we should
have dritted broadside on and carried her!
But we must do our best in the polacca. The
barge is under full weigh and will soon be
near us. They will not suspect us as they
would have done the goleta. We must escape
afterwards in this vessel, as we can!'
`Once on board the goleta we could have
flown out of the harbor,' said Isidoro.
`Set the fore-sail, main-sail and jib!' cried
Nevil, `And order all the men on deck with
pistols and cutlasses! There we are under
swift way. Every thing draws, and she runs
six knots through the water!'
`This is force enough to run the barge
under
,
Senor, said Isidoro as he went forward
to take his place on the bows where Don
Basilio
could see him. Nevil took the helm.
Before him not a great ways off was
anchored
the Razee to which he belonged, and from
which he was absenting, and concealing
himself
under his disguise. The track of the
barge from the castle to the Quay lay almost
within her huge shadow. But Nevil turned
away his eyes from his ship and thought only
of love and Don Basilio! By his side stood
the inspirer of his bold attempt, his lovely
temptress from his duty. He had eyes
but for her, and for the approaching barge!
The boat pulled by twelve oars came
nearer
and nearer! The polacca was moving
swiftly before the wind so as to intercept her.
Nevil made his calculations closely and
steered
the vessel with coolness and precision. As
the barge advanced Donna Anita uttered an
exclamation of mingled joy and fear; for she
discovered her brother seated in the stern
sheets, with an officer on each side of him.
He was not chained. He was pale but his
countenance was firm and composed. He
looked like a brave man resigned to his
destiny
!
The space betwen the polacca's bows and
the barge lessened rapidly. She was not ten
fathoms off pulling directly across her course!
Nevil managed his helm so that he might meet
her full upon the beam. The proximity of
the polacca now alarmed those on board the
boat, and the officer in command rising up
and waving his sword called out to Nevil to
put his helm hard up or he would be into
them!'
Nevil made no reply, save by giving an
order
to the men not to let Basilio perish!
Isidoro
caught his eye and waved his hand. The
conspirator sprung to his feet with an
exclamation
of surprise and pleasure! The soldiers
stood up to present their muskets, not to fire
but to ward of the bows. The oarsmen did
the same, while cries, shouts, oaths and
commands
filled the barge with confusion. The
next moment the bows of the polacca struck
the huge boat full amidships crashing and
surging over her, while the air was filled with
shreiks and cries and the roar of muskets
discharged
by the soldiers as they were hurled
into the foaming vortex. Don Basilio on
seeing
Isidoro well knew that this was a plan to
rescue him; and on the instant the bows
struck he leaped over the stern of the barge to
escape being involved in the watery death to
which the soldiers in their heavy uniforms
were destined. The boat divided in two and
the schooner scarcely checked by the shock
went surging over the ruin she had made,
while the thirty men were struggling in the
flood. The pieces of the boat in an instant
after it was struck went down leaving every
man to take care of himself. Basilio after
striking out from the mass, swam towards the
polacca's quarter, where ropes were thrown
and where he beheld Dona Anita calling upon
his name. The officer in charge of him who
was in the water near him, hearing them and
seeing him swimming, and fearful of the
consequences
if he escaped, threw himself upon
him with a strong grasp. Don Basilio caught
him by the throat and both sank together!
The polacca was in the meanwhile moving
apidly on leaving him; and Anita wringing
her hands over the stern gazed on the spot
far astern where he had disappeared. But he
rose to the surface without the officer!
`Heed me not! I can swim ashore!' he
cried. I shall be safe! Escape out of the
harbor
with the schooner, Isidoro!'
At least a dozen of his men sprung into
the water when they saw the Spanish officer
grasp him, some with ropes, which they were
compelled to let go, and others with knives
They reached him swimming and surrounded
him; but the polacca was full fifty fathoms
to leeward.
`My brave men,' said Basilio, `you have
taken to the water to save me and I thank
you! We cannot reach the schooner! Here
comes a boat to pick us up! Let us get in and
taking possession of it pull to the shore on the
side of the Reglars. We can then escape to
the country or conceal ourselves 'till we can
mature a plan to recapture the golets. I am
now as free as the soldiers who are struggling
there and shouting for help!'
The boat came up containing three
fishermen
.
Basilio and his men filled it and
pulled
swiftly towards the land on the country
side half a league distant!
The officers and soldiers were picked up
afterwards by boats from American vessels;
but as they could not speak English they
were not able to explain that their prisoner
was escaping and that they wanted them to
go in pursuit. Thus Bazilio and his men, who
were nine in number, had the start and were
rapidly making for the shore.
The polacca in the meanwhile kept on her
way. Nevil had at first shortened sail but
seeing Basilio and his men get into the boat
and take possession of it, he resolved to try
and escape with the polacca out of the harbor;
for he well knew he had by his act identified
himself with the prisoner and his party. The
whole occurrence had been witnessed from
the deck of the razee; and to every one who
beheld the polacca's progress in coming
towards
the barge, it was apparent that it was
her intention to run her under. The event
justified their expectations; and when they
saw her decks instantly crowded with men and
heard the cries to the prisoner and those of
the Spanish officers of El presenero! El
presenero!' they guessed that the guard boat
contained a pirate and that the polacca was
his vessel making a bold push to rescue him
from the soldiers. When the captain of the
razee saw the soldiers struggling in the water,
he ordered his boats along side from the boom,
and throwing an officer and men into them
gave orders to one pick up the soldiers and to
the other to board the polacca and take
possession
of her.
Nevil saw the boat approaching to board
him, and not fully justifying himself as an
American officer in the part he had played in
this daring affair, he resolved not to to be
known in it. He therefore gave orders to
repel
the boat while he pressed every inch of
canvass to escape. He had passed the razee
andwas full two cable's length to leewardwhen
the boat came up. He was hailed and
ordered
to heave-to, but made no reply. The boat
came along side and an officer and two men
sprung upon the polacca's deck. The two
seamen were instantly driven back, but the
officer after defending himself with great
bravery, was run through the body by Isidoro
and fell dead upon the deck.
Nevil was appalled! He had not anticipated
such a fearful catastrophe. He uttered a cry
of anguish and leaving the helm caught
Anita's
hand and pointing to the body of the
officer
said,
`For thee, Anita, I have slain my
fellow-officer
!
Yonder majestic ship is mine! For
your love I have plunged myself into infamy
and despair! But I reproach you not! For
you I would die at any moment! But honor
the loss of honor! How can I explain this
dreadful occurrence to my commander? how
acquit myself to my country.'
`Walter!de Nevil!' cried Anita, `
henceforth
let the land of my birth be your home?
Forget other lands and let us be happy
together
!
Let us escape to the Tower, where
doubtless
we shall be soon met by Basilia, who will
now escape to the country! Do not despond!
If you love me smile again and charge me not
with your friend's death!'
`I do not, Anita! But I regret itI must
regret it! See the boat is reinforced and we
are again to be attacked! I will surrender! I
will not again resist my own countrymen!'
As he spoke, he was about to bring the
polacca
to the wind, when Isidoro sprung
forward
:
`With your own person you may do as you
please, senor, but not with us! We must not
be taken. If you would leave us take the
boat and return to your countrymen! It is my
duty to escape from the harbor if possible. I
take the command!'
He put the polacca before the wind but
finding the battery would open upon him if
he tried to ran past, he hauled the tacks close
aft and run for the green shores on the
opposite
side of the Bay. The boats continued in
pursuit. The polacca grounded the men
escaped
to the shore by aid of the sunken rocks
and by swimming. Nevil remained on board
resolved to surrender to the boats. Anita
determined
not to leave him.
The boats boarded her and took possession
of her. The surprise of the officers on
discovering
in the Captain of the polacca Walter
Nevil, needs no description. He surrendered
himself and was taken on board the razee.
Dona Anita accompanied him. Nevil made
known his history in confidence to his
captain
,
who in reply told him he sympathized
with him, but it was his duty to take him
home in irons to be tried for the death of the
officer; adding,
`The Spanish authorities, if they knew I
had you in my possession, would demand you
to be given up. You would be executed as a
pirate. It is better you should be tried by the
laws of your country!'
Dona Anita implored to be permitted to
share her lover's imprissment. The captain
sent her on shore to the house of a friend.
Her parting with Nevil was touching and
characterised with the most eloquent despair.
Yet Anita was not the one to despair. She
was courageous and love made her bold in
planning and persevering in action. On
reaching the shore, instead of going to the
house to which she was ordered to be escorted
by the midshipman in charge of her, secretly
left him and sought the abode of one whom
she knew to be Basilio's friend and a friend
of her father. The address she had learned
from Basilio. This friend, an old Spaniard,
received her with open arms and entered
fully
into her wishes. He told her that it
Basilio
had escaped he would be there that night.
That night she embraced her brother in the
old Spaniard's mansion!
CHAPTER X.
The bold adventure of Don BasilioThe
three-masted-schooner
The
escape from the
harbor
The
scenes return to Boston Bay
.
It
was an hour after dark the night
following
the escape of Bazilio and the arrest of
Nevil when a band of eleven persons might
have been seen standing close to the water,
near a ruined wall not far from the public
quay. They consisted of Bazilio, Anita (in
the disguise of a Spanish youth) and nine men,
who had swam with the former to the shore.
They were well-armed, and had just arrived
at that spot by different ways. They seemed
to be waiting for some one. At length a boat
approached creeping along the shore. It was
filled with men.
`
El torre!
' said a low voice in the boat.
`
Libertad!
' answered Bazilio.
The boat appoached and Isidoro sprang
ashore.
`I was fearful you had miscarried in your
efforts to get the boat, Isidoro.'
`Every thing favored me, Don Basilio. I
have twenty-eight men with me. Some have
fallen and others been taken.'
`I have nine here. There is room for all of
us. Now aboard before the patrol appears and
let us pull silently from the shore. This
cloudy sky favors us.'
The long pirogue filled with men and
almost
level with the surface of the dark water
shot swiftly out from the shadow of the wall
and with Isidoro at the helm and Don Bazilio
at the bow. They steered directly for the
Three-masted-schooner, which lay where she
had done before; though it was, as Basilio
knew, the intention of the Governor to haul
her next day into the dock as well for safety
as for refitting.
They came in sight of her and then with but
two oars moving, silently approached her
quarter. They were alongside before they
were discovered and in an instant Basilio stood
upon the deck with the sentinel disarmed
and beneath his feet. The rest of the guard
were secured, gagged and bound and all were
thrown into the pirogue, and set adrift. The
cable was slipped, the sails set and in five
minutes after being boarded the goleta was in
motion out of the harbor. Two of her sails
were only set that she might be supposed to be
only a polacca schooner, and swiftly and
unchallenged
she passed guard-ship, battery and
Moro castle, and once more, tree like her
master
,
she spread all her canvass to the ocean
breeze.
Basilio now embraced Anita and then
Isidoro
and congratulated his brave companions,
whom he thanked with grateful warmth for
all they had done for him.
At the house of the old Spaniard he had
heard from Anita's lips the history of
Walter
Nevil's visitof her love, of his own, and
of his daring efforts to effect his reseue. He
was also informed of his present condition as
a prisoner in chains about to be taken to his
native land to be tried for the death of the
officer
who was killed in boarding the polacca.
Don Basilio's grateful and generous nature
was deeply moved by what he heard of the
young American and he pledged himself to
his sister that if he could recover his goleta
he would save him from an ignominious death.
All his energies were then directed to this
end. The success of his plans have been
witnessed
.
The goleta was once more his.
He now detailed his project in full to
Isidoro
.
Anita being already acquainted with it.
`Isidoro, my brave friend,' he said `to this
young stranger, `not forgetting your own
part also, I owe my present liberty and the
possession of this vessel again with you by
my side and surrounded by my brave
companions
.
In the attempt to restore me to
liberty
this noble youth has lost his own. He lies
in chains on board the razee. He is charged
with piracy and murder. He will be taken to
his own land and there tried for his life. He
may perish ignominiously. He must be saved.
I owe him my life. Fortune has smiled on us
to-night. Let Nevil share with us our
happiness
,
which so long as he is in chains can never
be complete.
`I swear, senor, to devote myself with you
to effect his liberation.'
`Thanks, good Isidoro!' exclaimed Anita
fervently.
`We all swear to obey you, noble captain,'
cried his crew. `We have seen Don Waltero
and know he is a brave man and a true
sea-man
.
He must be rescued, for we love him
who risks his life for Don Basilio.
`Hear then my purpose!' said Basilio. `By
means of a spy I have learned that the razee
sails for Boston in New England in the ebb
to-night. Diego, a man who lives in Havana
when ashore, and to whom I have shown
favors
and who also owes his life to this very
American officer who rescued him three years
ago from an assassin in the strects of the city,
this Diego has by my order, got himself
shipped
on board the razee as a steward, speaking
English fluently. He has entered fully into
my plans and will prepare the way for senor
de Nevil's escape by the time the razee
reaches
her port. To this port is my own
destination
.
I shall lay off here till the frigate comes
out and then keep ahead of her if possible.
She is a fast sailer but we can out sail her. As
she leaves to-night she will not have heard of
the capture of the goleta and its appearance in
Boston Bay will not draw suspicion upon us.
Once there and with Diego's good aid the
escape of this brave young American may be
effected. At all risks, it becomes us to make
the attempt.'
The goleta lay off about a league from the
Moro, until after midnight ebb, when Basilio
beheld a large ship standing out. With his
glass, as she came nigher, he made her out to
be a frigate of the largest class and no doubt
the razee that he was expecting. To make
sure, he lay by until she came within half a
mile, when he could no longer be deceived.
It was the sixty gun frigate. Having satisfied
himself of the fact, he gave orders to make all
sail and stand Northward. At sunrise the
frigate was nearly hull down astern.
Convinced
of his superior sailing, Basilio kept his
own distance from her, sometimes ahead,
sometimes hovering on the horizon to
windward
,
and the next day as far off to leeward.
In this way he watched her, scarcely
losing
sight of her until the day before they came in
sight of Cape Cod lights, when the goleta
shot freely ahead and the next day entered
Beston Bay before her. The passage of the
two vessels up the harbor, the anchorage of
the
razee
and the subsequent mysterious
movements of the goleta in her neighborhood
have already been noticed. The reader has
also visited Nevil in his confinement and
witnessed an interview between him and
Diego, which had been interrupted by the
entrance
of the sentry, just as the faithful
Spaniard
was about to inform of the presence of the
goleta in the harbor.
After the sentry had returned, Diego
reentered
the port and proceeded to explain to
Nevil the reason of his visit.
`You must know senor, that you have
friends stronger than I am who are at hand to
serve you. For this I bade you hope. You
see after you were taken, and Don Basilio
escaped
to the shore!'
`Did he escape?' asked Nevil earnestly.
`Yes safely. Hear me senor and you shall
learn all. He got to land and nine good men
men with him, besides those that leaped from
the polacca after she struck when you run her
upon the rocks. He took to the
bosque
and
there hid 'till night; and favored by the
darkness
made his way to the city to the house of
a friend, where he met Dona Anita?'
`Dona Anita! What news of her? How
heard you this! Speak! What know you of
this lady?'
`That she is safe, senor.'
`Safe! I have not dared to think of her
lest I should go mad! For her sake I have
done all this and yet she is lost to me forever!
If I could behold her once more, Diego, I
would not care for these chains! Her presence
would make a dungeon a palace! Tell me
more! You are a messenger from Heaven!
What more of Dona Anita. Till this moment
I have been left in darkness and doubt as to
her fate and that of Don Basilio her brother!'
`Soon, senor, all will be made clear. While
I am talking with you let me be engaged in
filing this band of iron round your ancle. After
I leave you you can complete it!'
`What means this Diego?'
`That friends are near and ready to aid your
escape!'
`Shall I escape, and thus give an air of
truth to the charge of piracy? Do I fear to
meet my destiny? No, Diego, I will not
escape
.
I will encounter my fate like a man
it I must die I will die like one! no; I am no
crimnal that I should escape!'
`Senor, you have not heard me out. I will
file here while I speak It will do no harm!'
and Die go began to work away with his file at
the iron shackle upon his leg. `I told you
Don Basilio had met Dona Anita. She told
him of all you had done and had suffered, and
a good deal more about her attachment to you
and yours to her, begging your pardon, Don
Waltero! Well he swore like a brave man and
true friend to try and get you free. But he
must first have his goleta in his possession,
for he could do nothing without her, not he!
So he got together his men, met Isidoro and
got his party together and the night after you
were taken they got a boat and seized the
three masted schooner at her anchors?'
`Recovered the goleta!'
`Si, senor! They set the soldiers adrift in a
boat and made sail, and before a fair wind run
out of the harbor! I knew what they
intended
and was in the fore shrouds of the frigate
watching for her; and saw her pass with only
her fore and mizzen set, looking like a
polacca
;
but I know her in that disguise; and I
saw her more than once at sea after that!'
`Seen her at sea?'
`Si, senor!'
`But Dona Anita? Did Basilia leave his
sister in the Havana with his friends,'
demanded
Nevil eagerly.
`No, senor, he took her on board with him!
This iron is as hard as if it had been steeled
to make razors of!'
`And where did they go from Havana?'
`They steered North and kept us company;
for you know we sailed just after midnight
the same night!'
`Tell me, Diego! Is my sudden suspicion
right? Has the goleta followed the frigate
from Havana?' he cried taking him by the
arm and earnestly grasping it as he spoke.
`You have guessed it, senor. She has
hovered
round us like a hawk the whole passage,
now ahead now abeam, but always just under
the horizon so that no body could make her
out or suspect her to be always the same
vessel
.
But I knew her as far as I could see her.
`And when did you see her last?'
`This afternoon, when coming into the
harbor she was only a mile ahead of us!'
`Can this be possible?'
`It is, senor!'
`And Donna Anita on board?'
`She is, Don Waltero.'
`And they have come thus far to endeavor
to effect my escape!'
`They have, senor. And it would be
ungrateful
for you to disappoint them. I
shipped
on board her, by Don Basilio's orders, to
serve you. I have nearly filed off the ring.'
`And where is the goleta now?' demanded
Nevil, agitated with joy and hope, and hardly
able to realise that he had heard truly; that
it was not a dream.
`She is not half a cable's length from the
Razee, lying about two and a half points off
under her quarter, waiting for my signal!'
`Can this be real?'
`As real as that you are free from your
irons, senor,' said Diego, as he softly
removed
the shackles from his limb, and noiselessly
laid them down by the side of the gun
carriage
.
`Diego, I am in your hands! Anita's
presence
is an argument for my attempting to
regain
my liberty that I am incapable of
resisting
.
I will abide by your directions!'
`Love always makes a man reasonable,
senor
,'
answered Diego, smiling. `I knew on
would not object after you had learned who
was near you!'
`This is wonderful. The goleta's arrival
here the same night and now is
miraculous
!'
`She outsails the Razee; and having the
same winds was able to measure her time and
distance. She has, moreover, been a lucky
vessel, senor.'
`Noble Basilio! devoted Anita! What is
your signal, Diego?
`It was agreed upon in Havana, that if the
goleta reached here when the Razae did, that
she should anchor near her, and that I should
free you from your irons, whethe by day or
night. If in the day that you should disguise
your head in a cap, and jump from the port,
when I was to sing out`a man overboard,'
and jump over, as if to rescue you. That you
should swim for a boat, in which would be
Basilio and two of his men, who would take
you in and pull for the goleta, which would be
already under sail. Basilio trusted to his
good fortune to get out of reach with you
before
your absence would be discovered.'
`This would have been rash and dangerous.
Yet it might have succeeded.'
`I am positive it would. Don Basilio
always
succeeds, except there is treachery in
the way, as at Havana, when he was taken
prisoner. But we have nothing to do now
with that. It is night now; and our plan for
the night was ior you to let yourself down
from the port into the water, and swim for the
goleta with the tide; to get the advantage of
which the goleta was to take up a particular
position. If you were seen I was to cry out a
man overboard, and throw over half a dozen
tarpaulin hats, which I was to collect for the
purpose, and at the same time take to the
water
myself. The hats would look like men in
the water, and under cover of the confusion
we could reach the schooner! This now my
plan, senor! You are freed from your irons
The tide will soon serve. Here is a rope to
lower you without noise into the water! Look
out of the port, and you will see the goleta
not a pistol shot distance off! Hearts true
and devoted are on board waiting for you!'
`What was your signal?'
`When you were safe down in the water, I
was to discharge one of the carronades with
my cigar, as if by accident!
`This would be dangerous and needless,
even if you could do it undiscovered. I will
drop into the water and swim to the goleta.
You can follow me. The night is too dark to
apprehend discovery!'
`This will be the safest, to be sure, senor.
But I thought the discharge of the piece at
night would create a confusion in the midst of
which your escape would be sure!'
`There is no need, good Diego. Go down
into the water. I will follow you!'
`Go first, senor. I must see you in safety
out of the ship before I leave her.'
With a light hoart and spirits buoyant with
hope the young officer threw his weight upon
the rope and lowered himself into the water.
He was instantly followed by Diego.
Together
they struck out, swimming below the
surface and only rising to take air, until they
had got half way to the goleta, when they
were discovered by Basilio, who had kept his
eyes steadily fixed in the direction of the
frigate
.
He instantly called to the young
Spanish
youth who was sleeping upon the mat on
the deck, who was none other than Donna
Anita herself.
`There two dark objects on the water!
They approach us!' said Basilio.
`It may be Diego with Don Waltero,' said
Isidoro.
`But we have had no signal!' answered
Basilio
.
`It is painly two men swimming towards
us,' said Anita, breathless. `I can hear them
pant!'
`Yes! they are men!' cried Don Basilio,
with intense emotion. `Let us throw them
ropes. If they are enemies, we need not fear
two!'
The two swimmers came nigher still, and
Diego raising his arm from the water said,
distinctly,
`Don Basilio, he is safe.'
`It is Diego,' exclaimed Basilio with joy.
`And Walter?' gasped Anita.
`He is with him!'
The next moment they had caught the
ropes thrown to them, and Nevil was just
drawn on board Anita with a glad cry flung
herself into his arms, dripping as he was.
`The sea gave you to me just, and the sea
has now restored you to me, dear Walter!'
she said with joy. `This is Basilio my
brother
?'
`Don Waltero, let me embrace you also!
I owe you my life. Friend and brother with
happiness indiscribible I clasp you in my arms
and to my heart!'
Nevil returned his embrace, while Diego
received scarcely a less ardent welcome than
himself. Isidoro without waiting to welcome
them had first thought of duty; and scarcely
had they touched their feet to the deck before
the line which secured the goleta to the
cable
of the Kennebec sloop was severed, and
the Steel Belt moving on her way through
the water, each moment with increasing speed.
Soon the Razee was lost to sight hid by the
intervening vessels, past which one after
another
the goleta glided running at the rate of
five and a half knots on a bowline. The
towers of the city grew dim in the distance,
castle Independence with its white walls
glistening
in the moon beams was swiftly passed;
island after island was left behind; the light
houses in the bay were approached and thrown
astern; and broad and blue before them spread
the ocean.
The ensuing morning when Captain Eben
Pinkham of the Polly Ann on weighing
anchor
discovered fifty fathoms of line fastened
to his cable with a double turn and two
half-hitches
,
he was not a little puzzled to guess
how it came there. But in an hour or two
afterwards
he heard of the escape of the
prisoner
from the
razee
and that the three masted
schooner had been seen hovering about her
in the night, and was supposed to have carried
him off on board of her, he was no longer at
a loss to account for the line being fastened
to his cable.
`It's jest as I know'd and suspicioned,' he
said to his friend Captain Pettingell; `the
darn'd chap wanted to take the Polly Ann in
tow as prize, and the rop bruk! wall, I got a
good piece o' runnin rigging, and I hope it 'll
make a halter yet for him and all his tarnal
crew o' pirates! That ar' officer as boarded me
this morning to see if I'd seen or heard any
thing on his prisoner told me how he was
supposed
to have been taken off in that
three-masted
outlandish craft! He said her motions
in the first watch had been mity queer and
suspicious
like, and she'd oughter had an eye kep'
on her. But who'd look for mischief in
Bosting
harbor! Wall it's a fact the prisoner,
who they say was a sort of a pirate and the
three-master have both gone together.
Somebody
,
they tell, helped him to a file and so he
lowered himself down and swam off to her.
I am quite sure it was `Bunker Hill' as saved
both on us last night, Capting Pettingell! I
mean to keep her reglar charged, and when I
get back to Agusty I mene to mount in the
Polly Ann the old Hallowell gun we
captured
in the Hook war jist a purpose to navigate
these seas in; for its getting dangerous I tell
ye! Thar was a pirate schooner called the
jumpin' feather
`Dancing Feather you mean, Capting.'
`Wall dancing or jumpin' either, it makes
little odds. I've hearn tell how she robbed a
brig between this and York with a hundred
sail right in sight! There's a brig o' war
gettin
under weigh and they are hailing her from
the frigate! I reckon she is going in pursuit
`It looks very like it,' answered the
Penobscot
skipper. Both now watched the brig,
which, after being boarded from the frigate
squared her yards and made all sail before a
fair wind down the harbor. She passed the
castle about seven hours after the Steel Belt,
and evidently was crowding on all sail in
pursuit
of her.
Shall we, in one brief sentence, here ends
our story with the marriage of Nevil and
Donna
Anita, like a true story-writer, or shall we
in the pages of another romance follow their
flight over the sea and gradually unfold the
events which subsequently occurred,
intimately
affecting the destinies and fortunes of
our characters?
THE END.