BOOK I.
CONTINUED.
CHAPTER VIII.
The wind blows fair! the vessel feels
The pressure of the rising breeze,
And swiftest of a thousand keels,
She leaps to the careering seas.
Willis
.
Commanding, aiding, animating all,
Where foe appear'd to press, or friend to fall,
Cheers Lara's voice.
Lara
.
Towards
noon of the day on which the events
related in the last chapter transpired, a signal was
displayed on one of the towers of Castle Cor, and
shortly afterward the yacht, which hitherto had
appeared
so lifeless, got under weigh. Like a snowy
seabird seeking her nest, she spread her broad
white sails and stood in towards the land, fired a
gun, and hove to within cable's length of the beach.
A well-manned boat, with a crimson awning
stretched
above the stern-sheets, and gay with the flags
of England and of Bellamont, presently put off
from her, and pulled to the foot of the path that led
up to the castle. In a few minutes afterward a
party was seen descending the cliff, consisting of
Lady Bellamont, Grace Fitzgerald, Kate
Bellamont
and the earl, on the arm of whom the latter
leaned pale and sad, followed by a large number
of attendants, and others who had come to witness
the embarcation. On arriving at the boat, which
lay against the rock so that they could easily step
into it, they were received by the commander of the
yacht in persona bluff, middle-aged seaman, his
manners characterized by a sailor's frankness,
united
with the ease and courtesy of a well-bred
gentleman
.
How is the wind, Kenard? asked the earl of
the officer, as he came to the place of embarking;
'tis somewhat light and contrary, methinks, for
our voyage.
It comes from the south by west, my lord, but
we can lay our course till we clear the cape, when
it will be full fair. I trust our cabin will be
honoured
with a larger share of loveliness than I had
anticipated, he said, smiling with gallantry as he
saw Kate Bellamont and the countess were of the
party.
So you did not give me the credit for being so
very
lovely until you had seen me, Master Kenard,
said Grace, wilfully misapplying his words.
When I look on your face, I assuredly can have
no wish that my cabins should be graced with more
beauty than I behold there, fair lady, answered
the seaman, lifting his cap gallantly.
A pretty speech to come from the sea, said
Grace, laughing.
Come, fair niece, the winds wait for no one,
said the earl, stepping from the rock upon the
cushioned seats of the gig, after having taken a
tender leave of his countess and daughter.
Adieu, then, sweet cousin!
Adieu, dear Grace!
And, for a moment, the lovely girls lingered in a
A 2
parting embrace, kissing again and again each
other's cheeks, while their full eyes ran over. It
seemed as if they never would separate!
Nay, my sweet Grace, will you give all your
adieus and affectionate partings to your cousin?
said the countess, interrupting their lingering
parting
.
With another warm embrace, another kiss, and a
fresh shower of tears, Grace released herself from
Kate's entwining arms and threw herself into those
of Lady Bellamont. The earl then gently took her
hand and led her into the boat.
The baggage, in the mean while, had been placed
in it by the servants and seamen, and the earl and
his niece having taken their seats beneath the
silken
canopy and once more interchanged adieus with
those on the rock, the captain bade the men give
way in the direction of the yacht, the yards of which,
at the same moment, were manned to receive the
noble party. The boat, urged on its way by eight
oars, cut swiftly through the crested waves, and
in a short time after leaving the land was
alongside
.
The deck of the vessel was within a few feet
of the water; and half a dozen steps, let down by a
hinge into the boat, formed a safe and easy means
of getting on board. As Grace, who had not ceased
to wave her handkerchief to the party on shore,
placed her foot upon the deck, her eyes rested, with
surprise that nearly broke forth into an exclamation,
on Mark Meredith, who stood close beside her,
manning, with other young sailors, the rope that
lifted the stairs. Forgetful of his duty, he looked
with all his soul after her retiring form, as, leaning
on her uncle's arm, she walked aft amid the loud
cheers from the crew on the yards.
Run away with it! cried the officer of the
gangway
to the young seamen at the fall.
But Mark was deaf to the order, and was nearly
thrown down by the rapid movement of his
companions
ere he could recover himself.
So, so, my green un! you must have quicker
ears than this if you would serve King Billy. And
what are your eyes doing aft? Tom, he added,
to a seaman who was fitting a tompion to the
starboard
gun amidships, as Mark, blushing and
confused
,
retreated from this reproof among the crew,
is this lad in your mess?
Ay, sir, said the man, ceasing his occupation
and respectfully lifting his cap.
Then teach him that a seaman must look ahead
and not astern, said the officer, dryly.
Ay, ay, sir, was the equally dry response.
Lay in, lay in, off the yards! now shouted the
lieutenant; all hands make sail!
The boatswain's whistle rung sharp and clear as
it repeated the call to the deck; and in an instant
the yards, save two or three men left on each to
assist in loosening the canvass, were deserted, and
the sailors descended with activity to the deck.
The yards were now swung round to the wind,
and every light sail was spread to woo the gentle
breeze that came off shore. Yielding to its
influence
,
with a ripple about her prow as she began to
cleave the water and a slight inclination towards
the direction opposite from the wind, the graceful
yacht slid smoothly over the sea, with a rapid yet
scarcely perceptible motion.
Grace stood beneath the awning that covered the
quarter-deck, and, as they glided down the bay,
watched the shore, which seemed to move past like
a revolving panorama. Castle Cor, with its lordly
towers, rose to the eye lone and commanding for
many a league; and she could fancy, long after the
flag that fluttered on its topmost tower was no
longer
to be seen, that she could discern the white
kerchief
of her cousin waving to her from the cliff. As
the vessel continued to gain an offing, the
battlements
of Castle More, far inland, became visible;
and as her eyes wandered from the cliff to these
towers, her thoughts ran rapidly over the scenes in
which Lester, the preceding day, had been an
actor
;
and she wondered as she thought. Had she
known allhad Kate made her her confidant after
her interview with the sorceress, she would have
had food for wonder indeed!
Gradually the scenes with which she was
familiar
faded from her view. The towers of Castle
Cor and the far-distant battlements of Castle More
sunk beneath the horizon, and she found herself, on
turning, after taking a long, last, lingering look at
these dear objects, to the scenes about her, that the
vessel was moving before a steady breeze past the
outermost rocky headland of the bay, and boldly
entering
the open sea. The sun was shining redly in
the west, his broad, flaming disk on a level with
the ocean, the top of every leaping wave of which
he touched with fire: a dark cloud hung just above
it, with lurid edges; and the whole aspect of the
heavens was to her eye angry and menacing, and
betokened a tempest. The yacht cut her way
swiftly through the water, as if, so it seemed to her
imagination, flying from the approaching storm,
with every sail flung broad to the breeze, which,
after
the course was changed to the east on doubling
the headland, blew directly aft. She cast her eyes
along the decks, and saw that the most perfect quiet
and order reigned throughout, and that every seaman
was employed in some occupation of his craft, or
stationed at his post ready to obey the orders of his
officer. Now and then an old sailor would cast
his eyes to windward, look a moment at the sun,
then lift them to the sails, and, with an approving
glance, again pursue his momentarily interrupted
task. This trained coolness of men accustomed to
meet the dangers of the deep, but whose very
feelings
were subdued and regulated by the stern
discipline
of their profession, reassured her; and when
she saw the captain of the yacht carelessly
lounging
over the quarter-rail, chatting with his first
lieutenant
,
and her uncle lying at his length on one of
the luxurious couches calmly reading a book, all
her fears vanished, and she watched the descent of
the sun, which resembled a vast round shield of
dead gold, into the sea, with a pleasure unalloyed
by apprehension. Slowly and majestically it
descended
till half its orb was beneath the sea, which
now no longer reflected fire, but grew black as ink
up to its blood-red face. All at once it appeared
as if dark lines had been drawn across its disk, as
though traced by a pencil.
Look! she involuntarily exclaimed, pointing
towards it; see those lines on the sun.
The earl threw aside his book and sprung to
his feet, so sudden and energetic was her
exclamation
.
The captain and his officer both started,
and also looked in the direction indicated by her
finger.
What? cried the former, after looking an
instant
,
lines on the sun?
Ropes
, lady! By the
rood, 'tis a ship! he exclaimed.
The upper portion of the luminary was yet above
the horizon, and the practised eye of the seaman
detected in the delicate tracery, that had struck
and pleased the eye of Grace, the outlines of a
distant
vessel lying under bare poles. He looked a
little longer, and distinctly saw her hull rise on the
swell in bold, black relief against the sun.
My glass! he hastily demanded.
It was placed in his hand by an under officer,
when, directing it towards the object, he looked
steadily for an instant, and then, turning to his
noble
passenger, gave him the spyglass, saying,
'Tis a pirate, my lord! Doubtless the same I
have been advised to look out for, as having been
seen in these seas.
What cause have you to suspect it? asked
the earl, surveying the stranger through the
telescope
.
His wish to avoid observation; his lowering
his sails; his peculiar rigthree straight sticks for
mastsand the knowledge that they swarm in these
waters, was the confident reply.
They have disappeared! exclaimed Grace, as
the upper rim of the sun sunk beneath the watery
waste, leaving all the sky cold and cheerless.
He is still there, maiden, said the captain, but
has no longer a bright background to show his
spars on. If he is trying to hide from us, he has
made no calculation for the sun, and has been raw
enough to run directly in its wake; but doubtless
he dropped sail just where he was the instant he
discovered us.
From fear, captain?
No, my lord, was the reply, in a voice
lowered
so as not to reach the ears of Grace. These
fellows are night-birds. His object is to hide
himself
till dark, and thenno doubt taking us for a
merchant coasterpop down upon us, under cover
of the darkness, when he is least expected. But
we have him our own way now, thanks to the
kindly sun and our fair young lady here.
Can you cope with him, should he come down
upon you under cover of the night? asked the
nobleman
.
I shall not run from him, my lord. I have
eight bulldogs here that can growl and bite as well
as e'er a mastiff in his majesty's service: and
from the size of his sticks, and his light rig, he
carries
not so many. But, more or less, he lies to
windward of us, and so has the advantage; and, if
he can outsail us with a flowing sheet, will, if such
be his pleasure, be down upon us ere the middle
watch is called. Besides, there is a cap full of
wind gathering in that quarter, which will help him
along if his humour takes him this way.
Is there a probability that we shall be pursued,
Kenard? asked the nobleman, with seriousness,
glancing anxiously towards Grace, who was
watching
,
with a childish pleasure, the black waves as
they leaped up to the stern, broke in glaring white
heads, and fell in crystal showers back into the
sea again.
There is, my lord, was the quiet answer.
It is my desire, then, that you use your best
efforts
to escape.
My lord! exclaimed the hardy seaman, in a
tone of disappointment, yet emphasizing the words
as if he had not heard aright.
Exert all your skill and seamanship to avoid a
meeting with this bucanier, if such he be,
repeated
the earl, who perfectly comprehended him.
Those who are unfitted to encounter danger
should not be thoughtlessly exposed to it, he
added
,
looking towards his niece. There is one here,
whom you see, that cannot profit by your success,
yet will suffer everything by your defeat. Were I
alone, my brave captain, I would give you the
weight of my blade in this matter. As it is, we
must fly.
We will but let him come within reach of my
barkers, my lord, and wake him up with a couple
of broadsides, and be off again before he knows
what has hurt him.
I must be obeyed, Kenard, said the earl,
decidedly
,
turning away and joining his niece.
That Dick Kenard should ever run away from
a bucanier, said the seaman, grumblingly, to
himself
,
as he took up his trumpet to give orders,
and without showing him his teeth, is a disgrace
both to himself and his majesty's navy. Bluff King
Billy himself, were he on board, would be the first
to stand by me for a hard brush. This comes of
leaving my snug little clipper, the Roebuck, and
taking command of this gingerbread yacht, fit only
for boarding-school girls to sail about in on a
park-lake
.
Howel, he said, to his lieutenant, in no
very good-humoured tones, have all sail made on
this penny whistle; stretch out every rag she's got;
make every thread tell. Set stun'sails both sides
alow and aloft. See to it!
For a few moments the yacht was a scene of
apparent confusion, but really of the most perfect
order. Commands were given and repeated, and
instantly obeyed. Additional sails rose on either
side of those before standing, as if by magic. Men
moved quickly in all directions, yet each obedient
to his own officer, and each engaged in obeying a
particular order, as if but one had been given, and
he the only one to execute it. The masts were
soon white with broad fields of canvass, stretching
far out on either side of the vessel; and the
increased
ripple around the bow, and the gurgle
heard about the rudder, indicated that she felt the
new impulse, and was moving with increased
velocity
.
The captain, who had, in the mean while, walked
the deck with a moody pace, looked up as the
bustle
made in increasing sail ceased.
She is under all she will bear, sir! said the
lieutenant, approaching him.
What way has she?
Five knots.
'Tis her canvass presses her along then, said
the captain, looking aloft with a gratified eye, for
there is scarce wind to float a feather.
She moves wing and wing, like a duck, said
the officer, in reply; for I've sailed in her many
a cruise before you took command of her, sir, and
know what she'll do; but, with the wind a point or
two forward the beam, a spar would work better
and gain more headway than she will.
Pray Heaven the wind soon chop round ahead,
then, said the captain, with energy; I would not
lose the chance of a brush with this three-masted
rigger for a post-captaincy. Keep good lookout
astern, and watch everything like a change in the
wind: report if you see anything moving between
the sea and sky, he added, going to the
companion-way
.
And what if I can change the wind for you by
bringing her to, a few points, by degrees, archly
suggested the lieutenant, in a low voice, as he was
about to descend into the cabin.
'Tis a temptation, i'faith, Howel, he said,
laughingly; but wouldst have me keep a false
log? No, no. Not Dick Kenard, for a score of
pirates.
The captain disappeared as he spoke, and the
lieutenant, with his speaking-trumpet beneath his
arm, and his right hand thrust into the breast of his
jacket, mechanically paced the deck fore and aft
the starboard guns in the waste, leaving the whole
of the quarter-deck to the earl and his niece.
Twilight was stealing over the sea, and the
headland
of Cape Clear looked, through the hazy
distance
,
like a cloud resting on the water. With her
head reclining on her uncle's shoulder, Grace
Vol. II.B
watched in silence the stars, as one by one they
came out of their blue homes and took their places
in the sky; and her fancy amused itself, as she
saw them light up one after another, with the idea
that the invisible angels, which are said to keep
watch over the earth, were hanging out lamps to
give light to it in the absence of the sun. The
musical murmur of the parted water, as it rippled
past the vessel's sides; the occasional dash of a
wave against the stern; the gentle, rocking motion
of the yacht, as it coursed along, threw over her
spirit a pensive sadness. Twilight is sacred to
thought! Its dreamy influence begets reflection.
There is something in its deep silence that
elevates
and spiritualizes. To religion and its
mysteries
,
the mind then insensibly turns, and always
for its good. If men think at all, they will think at
this magic hour. If they are religious ever, they
will be devotionally so then. There is no man,
however humble or however lost, who does not at
times feel its sanctifying influence. It is the
sabbath
of the day, and its time to the thoughts of the
heart of man is a holy time.
The mind of Grace experienced the sacred
influences
of the hour. For a while she gave herself
up to her thoughts, that would take to themselves
wings and fly whither they would. At length
night came on in all her starry glory, and the
meditations
of the maiden grew less ideal; and
returning
from contemplating, as young and ardent minds
delight to do, creation and its wonders, religion and
its mysteries, the wearied wing of her imagination
rested among those whom she had left at Castle
Cor. She thought of Kate and of Lestergrieved
at their quarrel, and sympathized with her unhappy
cousin. She then thought of Mark; of his
intrepidity
on the cliff; of his pride, and of his low
station
.
She caught herself wishing, she could hardly
tell why or wherefore, that he had been noble; and
began devising some way of drawing him from his
degrading occupation of a fisherman, and elevating
him to a worthier stationwhen all at once she
remembered
,
what she had forgotten, that this was in
part accomplishedthat he was on board the same
vessel with herself! She started at the
recollection
,
and looked around confused. But the darkness
concealed her changing colour from her uncle, who
nevertheless spoke, as she so suddenly lifted her
head from his shoulder.
What, dreaming, my Gracy? It is growing
late, and time for you to retire. We will take some
refreshment below, and then I will resign you to
your maidfor this little head should have a softer
pillow than an old uncle's arm.
As the earl spoke, he took the hand of his niece,
and descended with her to the cabin, where, after
partaking of their evening meal, they parted, one
to go to the deck and join the captain, the other to
retire to the state cabin. This was furnished with
costly hangings, couches of down, gilded sofas,
thick carpets, tables inlaid with pearl, a toilet stand
and laver of ebony and marble, and pier glasses
extending
from the ceiling to the floor; while nothing
that could contribute to the comfort or administer
to the luxury of the occupant was wanting.
When the earl returned to the deck it was
nearly
ten o'clock, and the moon was high in the east.
He wrapped himself in his cloak, and walked for
an hour thoughtfully, occasionally casting his eyes
to windward, or stopping to examine the compass.
The captain, in the mean while, leaned over the
quarter, fixing his eyes steadily towards the
direction
from which his vessel had come; at one
moment
putting his night-glass to his eye; at another
giving an order to the lieutenant of the watch, and
now and then addressing a brief sentence of caution
or reprimand to the helmsman.
Seven bells had struck, and it was near midnight,
when, after taking a long and scrutinizing survey
of the horizon, he crossed the deck towards the
earl, and said, with impatient disappointment,
We are safe enough, my lord. There will be
no one to trouble us to-night.
I am glad it is so, Kenard. You may have
been mistaken in his character.
No. But he probably has discovered what we
are, and has thought better of it. Ha! did not the
main-topgallant-sail flap then? he asked, looking
aloft.
The wind is lulling, I believe, said the earl.
It is, by Heaven! exclaimed the seaman.
What headway do we make? Heave the log.
She logs full four, but makes not above three
and a half knots way, repeated the officer of the
deck.
We have a strong current setting to the south
and east in our favour by the dip of this ripple,
which will make it four again. Ten minutes ago
we were running eight! There is a chance of
exchanging
compliments with our neighbour, my lord;
yet I have done my best to keep out of his way.
But, if we have no wind, he must be in the same
situation.
He will have it first, and bring it along with
him. There was a wind-bag hanging over the sun
that will soon be piping a merry note. There flaps
the fore-topsail against the mast! The wind is
leaving us. She does not now move two knots
through the water, he added, glancing over the
side. We shall have it dead calm in ten minutes.
Take in the lower stun'sails, Howel, and stand by
to hand all the light canvass! we shall have it soon!
Preparation is half the victory, my lord, he added,
turning to the earl with a formal bow.
What mean these preparations? inquired the
earl; for I profess to be better landsman than
seaman
.
And it requires no unskilled hand to sail the
ship of state, my lord, of which, I hear, you are an
able officer, said the captain, in a complimentary
manner. This southwest wind, which has held
us so fair, is dying away to make room for a tight
blow here away from the northwest, which I have
been watching suspiciously. There heaves a cloud
now towards the zenith; you can scarcely discern
its outline for the haze, my lord; but you will find
no stars in that direction, and the horizon looks
thick and black.
The wind has quite gone, said the earl, raising
his palm to catch the air.
It is now time to make ready to welcome its
successor. Turn up all hands, Howel. Take in
every stitch of light sail!
In a few moments the yacht was stripped to her
two topsails, spanker, and jib.
Put a single reef in the topsails, Mr. Howel,
ordered the captain, as he saw that the dark cloud
rose rapidly in the northwest.
It is done, sir! reported the officer, a few
moments
afterward.
Very well! Secure the guns with single
lashings
only, and have the decks clear for action!
was the next order.
Action, captain? exclaimed the earl, who had
witnessed these preparations with interest.
It is best to be prepared, if that dark cloud
rolling towards us should chance to conceal a foe
in its bosom. A dark cloud, as well as a dark eye,
sometimes hides dangers, my lord.
B 2
You may be doing right, Kenard, but Heaven
defend us from other dangers than the elements
threaten us with.
These several orders were executed; and the
yacht lay rocking, with scarcely any progressive
motion, on the sluggish surges, which all at once
began to heave and swell, as if lifted by some vast
and mysterious power beneath. She was nearly
divested of her canvass, yet still beautiful in her
nakedness, showing to advantage the graceful
symmetry
of her tapering spars, and the exquisite shape
and proportions of her hull. Like a bird seated on
the water, she yielded to every undulation of the
heaving billows with a grace that seemed the
instinct
of life.
The stillness that now reigned was profound and
awful.
List, my lord, said the captain, after the lapse
of a few moments, during which all eyes were
turned to watch the storm-cloud walking the skies
in its power, and flinging its broad shadow on the
sea.
The earl bent his ear more acutely, and heard a
deep moaning sound, like winds bowling in caverns
under-sea. Gradually it grew louder, and at the
same time the dark cloud cast itself across the skies
towards the zenith, its edges streaming in advance,
like hair blown out by the wind. In a few seconds
the moon was darkened, the stars became suddenly
extinguished, and an impenetrable gloom fell like a
pall over the deep. Not a breath yet moved the
air. But deeper and more awful grew the moan of
the storm as it swept down the sea. Louder and
louder it came, and now was distinctly heard the
roar of agitated waves, tossed by the shrieking
winds; and between the sky and sea, which seemed
to meet within reach of the hand, glared a line of
white foam, seeming, to their imaginations, the
glittering
and gnashing teeth of the mad tempest. The
earl hid his head within his cloak, and uttered a
prayer for the safety of the souls on board; the
captain
stood upon a gun, with his eyes upon the
coming
storm, professionally cool and collected.
Two steady men go to the aid of the
helmsman
,
he said, in a calm, low voice. She will
bear nothing, Howel; we must make an Eolian
harp of her. So! stand by the topsail halyards.
All ready, sir, replied the lieutenant, in the
same subdued tone.
Let go all!
The topsails came down by the run, and in a
moment's
time were furled by the active seamen.
Let go the jib and spanker, he now shouted,
in an energetic tone.
All gone, sir!
The yacht was now under bare poles, and left to
the mercy of the hurricane. The roar of the
coming
tempest was now deafening, and the vessel
began
to pitch wildly, yet there was no sensible
agitation
of the air.
Every man throw himself on his face to the
deck! cried the captain, suddenly, in a loud tone.
My lord, you will be safer below. Our decks
will be swept clean as your hand.
I will remain, Kenard.
And I will remain with you, uncle, said Grace,
suddenly appearing before them like a spirit, in her
snowy night-robe, which seemed like a garment of
pale light in the surrounding blackness and gloom;
I will share the danger by your side, she added,
with decision.
There was no time to refuse her entreaty or
conduct her to the cabinthe tempest burst upon
them, as if a cloud, swelling with wind and rain,
had broken over the vessel. Instantly all who
were on their feet were prostrated. Howling and
shricking through the rigging, accompanied by a
crashing and splintering that appalled every soul on
board with the present sense of danger, it swept
over them with terrific fury. Borne down by its
weight, the vessel careened till she lay almost on
her beam's end, while the mad surges leaped over
her bulwarks and deluged the nearly
perpendicular
decks. The darkness became illumined by a
wild, strange light from the foaming sea, and every
object was distinctly seen by its supernatural glare.
The captain got upon his feet, and, climbing to
windward, lashed himself to the main rigging, and
gave such orders as the crisis demanded. But his
voice could not be heard, and his presence and
example
were alike useless at a moment like this.
The vessel was driving in the van of the tempest
with inconceivable velocity. The waves seemed
to lift her hull, and hurl her onward like a
feather
.
The brave seaman beheld many of his crew
swept off, and saw them, without the power to help
them, struggling amid the boiling sea; but their
shrieks were lost in the louder shrieks of the wind,
and the flying vessel soon left them far astern.
Others were lashing themselves to the rigging;
others clinging to the guns; and all were exerting
themselves to preserve their lives. Casting his eyes
aloft, he saw, with a pang of grief, that his
main-topgallant-mast
was gone, and that his
fore-top-mast
was wounded and tottering fearfully at every
pitch of the vessel. The first fury of the tempest
was spent, and there being a momentary lull, it
occurred
to him that it might yet be saved.
Ho, there, forward! he shouted.
His words seemed to have an electrical effect
upon the crew, as if the sound of a cheerful human
voice, in that fearful moment, inspired them with
hope. Half the danger was lessened to their
minds, and twenty voices replied,
Ay, ay.
At the instant, there came a second blast of the
tempest, and a huge sea breaking over the vessel,
swept the captain into the waste, and bore three
more of the men into the sea, who the next
moment
were lost in the darkness astern. The first
glance of the captain, on recovering his feet and
sustaining himself by clasping round a gun, was to
the fore-topmast.
She yet stands it! he exclaimed, but another
such a blast will pitch it end foremost through our
decks. Ho, my lads, which of you will take a
couple of fathoms from the topgallant-halyards and
go aloft and fish that stick?
Many an eye was turned upward, but not a foot
moved.
A light lad will do it best. The spar must be
saved where it is; for, if it falls inboard, 'twill make
a hole through our decks big enough to let the
ocean in. Be quick, lads!
I will do it, sir, said a young sailor, springing
into the weather rigging, with a coil of rigging on
his arm.
That's my lad. You shall wear an epaulet for
this.
With the eyes of the whole crew upon him, the
intrepid young seaman ascended the rigging, though
with much difficulty, as the wind pressed him so
closely against the stays that he could scarcely
climb from one rattling to another. After great
peril he gained the top. Here, breaking from its
latticed guard a couple of oaken slats, he swung
himself into the topmast rigging, and, ascending to
where the stick was splintered, commenced with
great coolness, while the storm howled terrifically
about him, to wind the rope about both it and
the pieces of wood he had torn from the top. At
every pitch of the vessel the wounded spar would
gape wide, and threaten to carry him with it into
the sea. But to the eyes of those below, who could
plainly see him by the white light shed from the
phosphorescent waves, he appeared to be as cool
as if engaged in an ordinary duty on an ordinary
occasion. After taking numerous turns about the
mast till his rope was exhausted, he skilfully
fastened
the ends, and then, by a stay, descended like
an arrow to the deck.
What lad is that? asked the captain, who had
silently watched his labour.
The fisher's lad, replied one.
Gallantly done, my lad, said the captain.
This night has made thy fortune for thee, young
man.
I believe there is a vessel in sight, sir.
What is that you say? Come aft, for this wind
will let nobody hear anything but its own howl.
I discovered aloft what appeared to be a
vessel
to windward, scudding under bare poles,
repeated
Mark.
Ha, say you? Then we are like to have
company
in the gale.
As he attempted to ascend to the weatherside to
look for the stranger, a fresh gust of the tornado
burst upon the vessel and threw her upon her beam's
end, the sea breaking over her bulwarks from stem
to stern with the force and volume of a cataract.
My niece, my niece! cried the Earl of
Bellamont
,
suddenly; save heroh, God! she is lost!
The first shock of the tempest had thrown the
nobleman and Grace to the deck; but he had
contrived
to shelter her in his cloak, under the lee
of the companion-way, during its continuance, and,
save the apprehension attendant on the danger she
was in, she had suffered comparatively little. Her
attention had been drawn, in the mean while,
to the bold enterprise of the young sailor. She
would have shrieked as he volunteered, but her
voice failed her. She had watched his ascent and
the progress of his perilous duty with trembling and
with prayer; and, when he descended to the deck,
she released her hold upon her uncle, and clasped
her hands together in gratitude for his preservation.
It was at this moment the vessel was thrown upon
her beam's end, when, caught up by a wave, she
was borne far from the reach of the earl, whose cries
now drew all eyes towards him.
My niece! Grace! Where is she? he cried,
in tones of despair.
Here, uncle! she faintly answered from the
sea.
Guided by her voice, they discerned her at some
distance from the vessel, her body immersed in the
water, clinging by one hand to a stay which lay level
with it. Every heave of the sea lifted her nearly
out of the water to let her descend again far beneath
its surface. Yet she held firmly to the stay with
that tenacity which is taught by the love of life.
The earl no sooner beheld her than he was about
to jump overboard to her rescue, when Mark, with
a rope fastened around his waist, run along the level
bulwarks and arrested him before he could take the
leap.
Stay, my lord! Hold firmly by the end of this
rope, and I will save her or perish in the attempt.
As he spoke he cast himself into the sea; and
partly by swimming and partly by the aid of the
stay, he had nearly reached her, when a wave lifted
her high on its crest, and forced her to release her
grasp.
Save me, Mark! she cried, and sunk in the
hollow
it left, and almost within reach of his arm.
He dove, and brought her to the surface scarce
ere she had gone beneath it. She instantly clasped
her arms firmly around him with the instinct of
self-preservation
;
her cheek lying against his, and her
rich tresses blinding him.
She is safe; draw us inboard, he shouted,
buffeting the waves with one arm, the other
encircling
her with a firm grasp.
The earl, assisted by the captain and sailors, the
next moment drew his half-drowned niece from
the sea, dripping like a naiad, while the captain did
the same office for the brave youth.
Two epaulets, by the rood! he exclaimed.
'Twas a lucky day Dick Kenard shipped a lad of
your mettle. Ho, there, men! We must now
look to the craft. Save the ship first, and think of
ourselves afterward, is my maxim, my lord. Bear
a hand with an axe! Cut away the masts!
Cast the lee guns overboard, and she may
right, captain, said Mark, shaking the salt spray
from his locks.
We can but try it, my boy. Overboard with
the barkers!
Forthwith the men set to work and pitched the
starboard guns into the sea, and, after cutting loose
the fore and main yards, and giving every man's
weight to the weather side, the yacht righted with
a tremendous roll to windward and a lurch that
threw every man flat upon the deck.
There she is on her legs again, cried the
captain
,
exultingly. The storm seems to have shown
its roughest paw, and we'll ride it out yet. We
are less a topgallant-sail and a brace of yards, my
lord; but an hour's calm will make all shipshape
again. But the poor fellows that are washed
over-board
!
there's no getting them back. They are
gone to their last muster, he added, with manly
sympathy.
The fury of the tempest had been spent on the
yacht; and though it now blew a stiff gale, it was
no longer attended with any of those tremendous
gusts which had characterized it at the first. The
sea no longer boiled and tossed confusedly, but on
every side rolled its waves in one direction to
leeward
;
and though they broke in snowy heads, and
lifted themselves in mountainous billows, the
regularity
of their motion indicated that the tornado
had settled into a steady though violent hurricane.
The clouds, although still dark and laden with
wind, flew higher above the sea than before, and in
the east they broke into masses, showing between
white places in the sky.
She will bear her spanker close reefed, and a
hand's breadth of the jib, Mr. Howel. Pass the
word forward to set the jib, sir!
There was no reply.
Where is Mr. Howel? he demanded, with a
foreboding of the fatal result.
He was washed overboard by the last sea we
shipped, replied one of the men.
A noble seaman gone! a lovely woman
widowed
!
It has been a fatal night! Marston, ho!
Where is my second lieutenant?
Mr. Marston was struck by a spar, and knocked
into the water as we went over on our beam,
answered
another.
This has been a dear night indeed, my lord,
said the captain, addressing Lord Bellamont, who
was supporting Grace in his arms by the
companion-way
;
I have lost my two oldest officers, and
how many of my best men I know not. Edwards!
Thank God, I have one lieutenant left. You must
Vol. II.C
be my second now, and act as my first! Muster all
hands aft. Let us see who are missing, and then
let us set to work and put the crippled craft under
an inch or two of canvass, if only to ease the
fore-topmast
,
which, with this pitching, in spite of its
support, will soon take leave of the ship.
The men were mustered aft, and thirteen less
than the yacht's complement answered to their
names.
Ah, poor fellows! sighed the captain, they
have got a seaman's end! but they would have had
the same fifty years hence; or else have been
thrown into a hole on shore, which is worse than
they now have got. A short life and a gallant one,
is my maxim, my lord, he said, turning round and
speaking to the earl. Poor brave boys, Heaven
give them a snug berth aloft! Well, lads, let us
get a bit of sail on the craft, and cry afterward.
My lad, he continued, addressing Meredith, I
see you are a sailor! You must take poor Marston's
place, and wait till you get on shore for your
commission
.
Go forward and set the jib at once.
Here! a dozen of you close reef this spanker, and
let us see how long it will take for the wind to cut
it up into ribands. Lively, men, lively! Stand by
there, at the helm, to bring her smartly up to the
wind as soon as she begins to feel her canvass.
Hoist away briskly!
In a few minutes the yacht was lying to under
a reefed jib and close-reefed spanker, with her
helm lashed to the starboard bulwarks; the
steersman
,
with the two men who had been detailed to
assist him at the beginning of the storm, having
been carried forward into the waste on the first
billow that broke over the stern.
The force of the wind gradually lessened, and, in
half an hour after the jib was set, an order was
given to set the foresail, and shake the reefs out of
the spanker.
Put her away a point or two, and give her
headway, said the captain to the lieutenant, as the
above orders were executed. So, steady! there
she walks bravely! See, my lord, how like a duck
she rides on the top of the waves. She's a tight
boat for so gayly painted a craft, or we should, ere
this, have been helping the mermaids string coral
in their sea-caves below. Never judge a ship by
the colour of her bends, is my maxim, my lord.
The yacht was now under steerage way, and
rose regularly on the billows, which before had
broken against her sides flinging the spray in
showers upon her decks. The wind blew steadily,
but no longer with violence; the storm-cloud,
broken into a myriad of fragments, was scudding
across the heavens towards the southeast; the
waves momently diminished in size; and at
intervals
the moon shone down through an opening
upon the sea, like the smile of hope beaming on the
tempest tossed mariners: all things indicated the
termination of the hurricane, to the fury of which
they had so nearly been sacrificed. The pumps
were now tried, and it was ascertained that less
than three inches of water had been made.
A capital craft, my lord. The Roebuck would
scarcely have ridden out a tornado like this,
especially
after having been laid on her ribs. I
congratulate
both your lordship and your niece on your
escape
from a grave in the sea, for which landsmen,
I am told, have a strange antipathy. But bury me,
my lord, in the deep sea; let the green waves, which
have borne me living, wrap about me dead. Let
me lie where the ripple of driving keels and the
song of the sailor shall be my requiem.
You are eloquent, Kenard; and perhaps you
are right.
It matters little where a man's bones are laid,
my lord; and the sea is as safe a repository, and
will yield them up as readily at the judgment day
as the earth. Ay, more readily, it may be, said
the captain.
It may be so, replied the nobleman, smiling
at the literal way in which the seaman viewed the
subject. If it is now safe to unclose the
companion-way
,
I will convey my niece to the cabin for
a change of wardrobe.
We shall have no more washing decks to-night,
replied the captain, giving the necessary orders to
remove the companion-way and hatches, which had
been firmly closed as the storm came on.
They were now opened, and the earl awoke
Grace, who, after her submersion, had dropped into
a gentle sleep in his arms, and assisted her to her
stateroom, where, arousing her terrified and almost
insensible maid from the floor, he left her with a
kiss of paternal affection, mingled with gratitude for
her preservation.
Shall I come to the deck again after I have
changed my dripping dress? she asked, with
playful
entreaty, as he was leaving her.
No, my child, you need rest after your bath.
Your cheek is pale as marble, he replied, tapping
upon it.
I shall be sick here; I miss the pure air; there
is a suffocating sensation of closeness; and I think
I feel the motion of the vessel more below. I must
go on deck again, uncle, she said, earnestly.
Besides
,
the moon is coming out, and it will be
pleasant
to watch the caps of the waves sparkling in her
light.
There is no resisting you, Grace; I will come
down for you when you are ready. Let us be
thankful
,
my child, for our preservation, he added,
devoutly
.
I am, uncle, indeed, she said, with touching
sincerity.
And, as the earl closed the door of her stateroom,
she kneeled by her couch in her wet garments, and
offered up a short, heartfelt prayer of thanksgiving
and gratitude for her safety; nor in it did she
forget the youth who had been the instrument of it.
How much nearer did the gallant service he had
performed for her bring the handsome but humble
young sailor to her heart! How much closer did
the union of his name with her own in prayer bind
him to her young and warm affections! And when
she rose from her knees, her thoughts, it is to be
feared, ran much more upon the instrument of her
preservation than upon the Being who directed it.
When the earl returned to the deck, the moon
was riding in a broad field of blue, unobscured by
a single cloud, and on all sides the waves leaped
towards
it to fall back into the shining sea in
showers
of silver. The clouds were drifting far to
leeward
,
and the darkness and terror that had hitherto
reigned had given place to brightness and serenity.
The yacht was gallantly riding over the crested
waves, parting them with her prow and dashing to
either side their glittering drops in snowy jets of
spray. The fore-topgallant-sail was set, and
drawing
freely; and, notwithstanding the loss of her
topsails and main-topgallant-mast with its yard, she
held her course and was making good headway
through the water. Two of her larboard guns had
been shifted to the starboard, and other means had
been taken to put her in suitable sailing trim. The
men were engaged in clearing the decks; serving
the rigging where it had been chafed; fishing the
foremast, which Mark had before temporarily
secured
and thereby saved; and otherwise repairing
the disasters of the storm. Some of them, the earl
C 2
observed, were filling the beds around the guns with
shot, disposing cutlasses and muskets in stands and
beckets about the masts, and making altogether very
plain preparations for fight.
You see, my lord, we are hard at work, said
the captain, approaching the earl as he saw him
come to the deck. In half an hour, save bending
a new set of topsails, we shall be as sound as we
were before this squall. See that those guns are
as dry as a boatswain's whistle, he shouted to the
men.
What is the meaning of these hostile
preparations
,
Kenard?
I have reason to believe the pirate is lurking
in this quarter. He was seen from aloft during
the blackest of the storm, scudding through it, like
the flying Dutchman, under bare poles. If he
should discover us as we are, we should have a
hard matter to escape him.
He is likely to be as crippled as ourselves.
Not he, my lord; the masts of these craft are
stout single sticks, and their sails are fashioned so
as to come down by the run at an instant's warning.
There is no way of sinking one of those fellows
without knocking his bottom out. Lively, men,
lively. Ha! that's my lad! make them fly!
It was Meredith he addressed. In the absence
of the usual number of superior officers, prompted
by an active spirit and the impulsiveness of his
nature, and inspirited by the scenes in which he
was placed and to which he readily adapted
himself
,
he had involuntarily echoed the encouraging
cry of the commander. The seamen, with that
instinct
which teaches men the presence of a master
spirit, without questioning his authority, moved with
more alacrity, and obeyed his orders without
hesitation
.
They had borne witness to his courage
and fearlessness, his contempt of death and
promptness
of action in danger: these were virtues
which, in their eyes, were above all others, and in
his case they atoned for want of years, experience,
and seamanship. The charm by which he
governed
them, as if by common consent, was simply the
exercise of the same mysterious power which, since
the world was made, has governed the mass of
mankind
.
Decision, bravery, and high moral energy
of character! in one word,
courage;
the attribute
through which one man leads a nationspeaks, and
it is so! the dragon of human adoration! an
attribute
pre-eminently possessed also by spirits as well
as men, and through the influence of which Lucifer
was enabled to lead whole armies out of Heaven
into hell!
Is not that the bold youth who saved my niece?
asked the earl. I think I should know the voice.
The same, my lord; and, saving your lordship's
presence, he is worthy the hand of any niece,
humble
or high, whom he so promptly perilled his life
to save; for none but a brave man and a gentleman
at heart would do so noble an act; that's my maxim,
my lord.
Doubtless a true one, Kenard. I shall bear
this youth in mind.
Do so, my lord; and I will, with your leave, set
you the example. Though I am glad of the
opportunity
,
I regret the necessity. My lad!
Sir, said the youth, coming forward with his
cap in his hand.
As I am without a third lieutenant, I have
promoted
you to this rank, and his lordship will see that
your appointment is confirmed in the right quarter.
You were bred upon the sea, and though, perhaps,
have never sailed in a ship, are, I perceive a
natural
sailor. Now you may go to your duty, sir.
Thank you, sir! said Mark, with manly
emotion
.
He could say no more, but turned away to
hide his tearful gratitude.
Hear there, forward. Obey this youth, who
fills the place of poor Marston.
Ay, ay, sir, cried the men, simultaneously;
and, as their new officer walked forward, many a
cap was respectfully touched to him, and many a
gray head uncovered before the striplingsuch is
the tribute true bravery everywhere receives! so
universal is the homage it irresistibly challenges!
Do you see, my lord! That lad will make his
way, mark me. Observe how readily he assumes
the duties of his station. He is already in the
rigging
!
going aloft to see that the men are properly
fishing the fore-topmast.
Your protege shall not want advancement
through my forgetfulness, be assured, Kenard. But
why are you so anxiously looking through your
glass to the windward?
For the three-masted frigatoon.
You are doubtless mistaken in her character!
I cannot be, my lord. No honest trader in
these waters ever had such a rig. She is a pirate,
and, if she is anywhere near us, will be sure to give
us a taste of her quality ere long.
And we are far less prepared to meet him than
before.
Four guns, and a dozen men and two good
officers
less, my lord; nevertheless, we must do what
we can to fight him off. That he is in our
neighbourhood
somewhere, I am confident. These gentry
are like sleuth hounds; once on your track, double
and turn as you will, they never lose it till they
run you down. I believe I see an object in the
wake of the moon, under that cloud to the
windward
,
he suddenly added, looking steadily through
his spyglass. It is gone. It may have been the
cap of a wave! There, I think I see it again.
By
Sail, ho! shouted Mark, from the fore rigging.
Where away? demanded the captain, without
removing the glass from his eye.
Just in the moon's wake, three points off the
weather quarter.
I see it. 'Tis the same, my lord. I was sure
he would not take his eye off of us. Edwards, see
all clear for action. Station all the men you can
spare from working ship at the guns, and select
twenty of the best for boarders. Be prompt.
Keep away a point, helmsman. Aloft there! Get
through with your duty and come down. I give
you command of the lee battery, sir, he said to
Mark. Cheerily, men, all! Prepare for battle
with merry hearts, that's my maxim, my lord, he
added, turning round to the nobleman.
How do you make her out now, Kenard?
asked the earl, who had heard the announcement
of the stranger's vicinage with a pang of anxious
solicitude for the safety of Grace; I am unable to
hold my glass steadily with this pitching of the
ship.
She is walking this way with a nimble foot,
replied the captain, who, after giving his brief and
rapid orders, once more turned to observe the
motions
of the strange sail. She is a three-masted
luggerwith her three huge topsails spread
without
a reef, ploughing her way towards us, and
sending a cloud of spray to her masthead.
Is she heavily armed?
I cannot see; but above her bulwarks is
something
like a mass of human heads.
How far off is she?
Not more than two miles.
In what time will she overtake us?
She must be going seven or eight knots; we do
not make more than five, he said, glancing over
the side. Probably in two hours' time.
In two hours! We can increase our sail; you
have studding-sails, captain?
But not a stun'sail boomevery deck-spar is
washed overboard. Crippled as I am, I cannot
carry one stitch more sail, my lord. We must let
him come an he will, and trust the issue to
Providence
.
That's my maxim, my lord.
Providence give us the victory! said the earl,
devoutly.
Amen! responded the captain, taking the
glass from his eye, and reverently touching his
cap.
The earl immediately went below, and met
Grace coming from her stateroom wrapped in
comfortable garments, and enveloped in a hood and
cloak.
My dear niece, he said, taking her hand and
leading her to a sofa, I have come to prepare you
for a scene of trial and danger infinitely greater
than that we have just passed through. Hitherto
we have had to contend with the terrible display of
the power of the Almighty, when he moves upon
the deep in his angerbut it was tempered with
mercy. We have now to meet the fiercer passions
of men, to whom the word mercy is unknown.
Speak, dear uncle! she said, with a calmness
that surprised him. I fear not for myselfI have
a trust, thanks to my sainted mother, that places
me above all fear of death.
This was spoken with that serene confidence
which innocence and purity alone can wear.
The earl pressed her hand in silence, touched
by the sweet simplicity of her manner, and
admiring
the sublime hope which elevated her above the
fear that gives bitterness to the cup of life.
There is a strange vessel bearing down upon
us, which the captain has reason to think is a
pirate
,
he said, with more composure.
Grace turned pale, but betrayed no emotion
beyond
an upward glance of her eyes and a
movement
of her lips, as if in silent prayer.
It is our intention to fight him, and only
surrender
with our lives. In case we should be
overcome
,
and the pirates board usand I should not
survive to protect you any longer Here the
earl stopped from emotion, pressed his niece to his
heart, and then hastily added, you are my brother's
daughter! you have his spirit and decision! I will
trust to you.
Uncle, speak! explain, my lord! gasped the
young creature, terrified at his manner rather than
his words, which her innocence could not
comprehend
.
He drew from his breast a dagger, and silently
placed it in her hands.
For what is this, my lord? she gasped, half
guessing its fearful meaning.
You must sacrifice yourself before you suffer
these ruffians to lay hands upon you, he said,
with emotion that nearly rendered his words
inaudible
.
She clasped her hands over her forehead and
stared in his face with a wild glareher colourless
lips parted with horrorand her whole frame
shivering. Like a thunderbolt, the horrible reality
of her situation had flashed upon her.
Ha! what? ha! what? hawh and with
a piercing and most heart-rending shriek she fell
upon the cabin floor. He raised her, and spoke to
her in tender accents of sympathy.
Enough, she gaspedenough, unclesay
no more.
Dear niece, be calm!
Naydo not think Grace Fitzgerald is not
herself
,
she said, with forced calmness. Uncle!
My dear child! he answered, folding her to
his heart.
Give it me!
Oh God! groaned the earl, overcome with
the full realization of the evil that threatened her.
Must it be, my child?
It must. Give me the dagger, she added, with
energy. I will not now shrink from itit may
yet be, next to Heaven, my best friend.
Take it, heroic girlbut our danger may not
be so greatwe may yet conquer! I feel, when I
look on you, and reflect on your helpless state,
the might of a host in my single arm. Ha! there
is a gun. I must leave you for a while. Remain
in your stateroom, and both you and your maid
be careful to lie on the floor below the line of
shot. God bless you, my child! Your presence
alone should ensure the salvation of the ship.
He embraced her with almost parental affection,
tenderly forced her to enter her stateroom, and
closed the door. Then arming himself from his
luggage with a brace of pistols, and buckling on
his sword, he hurried to the deck as the report of
a second gun came booming over the sea.
She has fired, captain? he said, as he joined
the commander on the quarter-deck, who was
looking
to windward with his glass.
A long shot to bring us to. It is plain he takes
us for an unarmed vessel.
This gives us an advantage, then, said the
earl, turning his telescope in the direction of the
stranger, who was plainly visible less than a mile
distant, white with canvass, and fast gaining on the
yacht, as she laboured slowly along under her
diminished
sail.
A great one, if we can keep him in ignorance
till he is close aboard, replied the captain. By
the rood! he comes down bravely. This it is,
your lordship, to have sound spars, and plenty of
canvass to hang on them, he added, looking
moodily
up, and surveying the bare poles of his own
ship. You are armed, I see, my lord. It is time
I should be. Will your lordship be so good as to
watch his motions. I will be on deck again in a
moment.
He descended to his cabin as he spoke, and soon
afterward returned armed with a cutlass, his head
covered with a steel boarding cap, and with a
couple of braces of pistols stuck in a leathern belt
buckled round his waist. He caused his
lieutenant
and Mark to arm themselves in a similar
manner. Every seaman, also, had a serviceable
blade girded to his side, and one or more pistols
in his belt; and harquebusses and cutlasses were
place on the companion and capstan, ready for
indiscriminate
use. Throughout the vessel, every
preparation that the time and circumstances would
admit of, or consummate skill on the part of its
master
could effect, was made; and every man stood at
his post, silently and sullenly awaiting the approach
of the piratefor such it was now plain to every
one was the character of the advancing stranger.
There is a flash! said the earl, who was
intently
watching the bucanier.
No, it is a battle-lantern passed along the decks.
He will not fire again seeing we do not heave to,
but run us aboard, and carry us, if he can, cutlass in
handthis is the mode of fighting with these devils.
They must not board us, Kenard! said the
Vol. II.D
earl, with calm determination in the tone of his
voice.
We will give him a touch of our quality before
he comes to close quarters. An introduction
before
an intimate acquaintance, is my maxim, my
lord.
If you give him a broadside, I would suggest,
sir, that the battery I command be added to the
guns on the weather side, said Mark, who, while
waiting the attack, had been pacing athwart ships
near the cabin door, as if the presence of Grace in
the cabin had something to do with the choice of
his walk.
The captain stared at him a moment; but the
respectful
tones of the young man's voice, and the
deference of his manner, left no room for reproof
if he had designed to check the boldness of his new
lieutenant.
Born for a seaman, by the rood! he exclaimed.
Shift the starboard guns to the weather side, Mr.
Edwards. We shall only have a chance of one
full broadside, and it is best to let him have all we
can give him. If you want to be generous, give
all you've got, is my maxim, my lord.
By the time the change in the battery was
effected
,
the pirate was within three cables' length, or
a third of a mile of the yacht, and, by the light of
the moon, the decks could be discovered with the
naked eye to be full of men, while her dimensions
and rig were distinctly visible. She was one of
that small class of three-masted luggers called
frigatoons
,
common at the period, with very broad beam
and round bows. She came along with the wind on
her starboard quarter, noisily ploughing the waves
before her with her blunt bows, under three huge
lugger sails, covering each mast from deck to truck,
a jib, and triangular mizzen sail not unlike a ship's
spanker. The moon shone white on all, while its
rays were reflected in quick flashes here and there,
as if from steel, from amid the dark mass on her
decks.
A fine shot in that dense crowd, Edwards, said
the captain. Give every man a musket after the
broadside is discharged, and let him pick a red cap
for himself.
Ay, ay, sir, responded the lieutenant,
preparing
to obey the order.
Silently and steadily, as if no man was in her, the
dark hull continued to approach.
She is full near for a shot, Kenard, said the
nobleman; I can see the very faces of the men.
A man should know the colour of his enemy's
eyes before he fights with him, is my maxim, my
lord, he said, coolly levelling his glass. Let me
single out their captain. Ah, there he stands
beside
the helmsman, a grisly old dog, and the
moonlight
on his weather-beaten features makes them
appear bronzed. There is a youth standing beside
him with a glass at his eye, whom he is speaking
to. Ha! the old bucanier is giving orders to
prepare
for boarding, I see, by the wave of his
cutlass
and the motion of his lips. Now is our time,
he added, energetically.
As he spoke he threw down his glass, drew his
cutlass, and sprung upon the companion-way.
Stand by for a broadside, he shouted, in a voice
that reached the pirate.
All ready! answered the two lieutenants, in
the same breath.
Helm a starboard!
Starboard 'tis!
Steady now!
Steady.
Let them have it! he shouted, in a clear voice
that rung like a trumpet.
Terrible cries of men taken by surprise, of men
wounded and in pain, followed close the
deep-mouthed
roar of the guns: the volumes of smoke,
that shot half way towards the pirate, then rolled
swiftly back upon the yacht, and were blown to
leeward, leaving a full view of the enemy. His
foremast was hanging over the side; a glaring gash
along the hull showed where a shot had told
between
wind and water; and a breach in the
forward
bulwarks, near the catheads, and the groans
of the wounded, indicated the passage of a raking
shot through the mass on deck; instead, also, of
presenting her starboard bow to the range of the
broadside as at first, she had yawed wide of her
course, and was shivering helplessly in the wind.
Neatly done! We have thrown them into
confusion. If we can only keep her at this
distance
,
we can riddle her like the top of a
pepper-box
,
and have the pleasure afterward of seeing her
go down to Davy's locker, bodily, before our faces.
See your enemy buried handsomely, after you have
done for him, is my maxim, my lord. There it
comes, he shouted, suddenly. Fall to the deck,
all!
He had hardly spoken, when, amid a loud yell
from the pirates, who had recovered from the
surprise
of their rough salutation where, apparently,
they had calculated on slight resistance, a heavy
broadside was discharged: the balls came singing
through the air, knocking against the sides of the
yacht, and splintering and crashing the upper
works, tearing the decks, wounding the spars, and
creating terrible ruin and confusion, while shrieks
of the wounded rose appalling from every part of
the ill-fated vessel. The captain glanced hastily
at the poor fellows that lay bleeding on the decks,
then looked up anxiously at his masts, and leaned
over the bulwarks and run his eye along the side
of his vessel to see what injury she had sustained
in the hullfor, in his eye, the wounds of the ship
were of infinitely more importance than the wounds
of the men.
No damage to her timbers; but two poor fellows
dead as they ever will be, he said to the earl, who
stood beside him. Fivesixseven wounded.
Handle that man carefully, you lubbers, or you will
do his business for him before you can get him to
the doctor. See that the wounded are taken at
once, and with care, to the cockpit, Mr. Edwards.
Lively, there, at the battery; charge to the muzzle!
Now watch the weather-roll. Fire!
Again the sides of the yacht belched forth fire
and smoke, shaking the little vessel through every
oaken joint.
Fire away as you load, again shouted the
captain
.
Let each gun fight for itself. Take sight
at his poles, and bring his huge mainsails down
without giving him the trouble to let go his
halyards
.
Give your foe a lift when you can, is my
maxim, my lord. There, he returns it, he cried,
as a flash illuminated the open decks of the pirate.
Down all!
The hurricane of iron passed high above their
heads, cutting the rigging and splintering long,
slender pieces from the spars. The smoke from
the guns, at the same time, rolled sullenly towards
the yacht, hid the pirate from them, and enveloped
the brig in an impenetrable cloud of sulphurous
smoke.
Stand by, boarders, to repel boarders!
shouted
the captain, in a loud, quick tone. He will
be down upon us in his smoke before we know it.
D 2
I thought there was more powder than iron in those
guns, my lord, and suspected there was an object
in it. Boarders, all!
Boarders! answered the lieutenant.
Keep good look-out through the smoke. There
it lifts. By the rood! see, he is close upon us!
Put a shot into his fore foot. Lame him, or he'll
be thrusting his snub nose between our ribs.
As the captain spoke, Mark sprang towards the
after gun, and levelled it against the bows of the
pirate, who, having made sail under cover of his
smoke towards the yacht, was now within twenty
fathoms of her. He applied the flaming linstock
and fired the piece. The shot, taking a slightly
ascending course, struck beneath the bowsprit, tore
it from its bed with its jib, and lodged in the
mainmast
ten feet from the deck, nearly severing it
in two. Deprived of her jib, the lugger broached
to, and once more presented her broadside to the
yacht.
Give it to him, my lads, before he brings his
guns to bear! shouted the captain. Pour in your
iron! That's my hearties! You knocked her a
foot out of the water that shot, boys! Quit your
guns now; there is no time to reload! Take to your
cutlasses and pistols. We have the rest of it, lads,
at close quarters. We'll show them what it is to
board a king's ship. If your muskets are in the way
in the fight, throw 'em aside and use your English
fists! We'll whip them yet! If we believe we
can do a thing, we can do it; that's my maxim, my
lord. Your lordship will now have the pleasure of
cutting a score or two of these murderer's throats,
with the advantage of exercise to the muscles.
Pleasure with business is my maxim. Stand ready
all! When I give the word, each of you bring
down one of those red devils that are crowding about
her bows.
The men replied with loud cheers, and prepared
resolutely to receive the attack.
The pirate, after the loss of his jib, being no
longer able to hold a direct course, drifted towards
the yacht, which, being at leeward and disabled
both by the storm and action, was in no situation
to choose her own position, and had, therefore, no
other alternative than to lie passive as she was, and
repel as she best could the expected attack.
The bucanier had now ceased firing, not being
able to bring any of his side guns to bear, and
converted
all his crew into boarders, who crowded
about the forepart of the lugger, ready to leap
cutlass
in hand on the deck of the yacht when they
should have drifted near enough. The brig had
also ceased her fire, her opponent having skilfully
worked out of the range of her guns, by coming
down, as well as his crippled condition would let
him, upon her quarter.
The deck of the pirate was crowded with men,
numbering eighty or ninety, apparently, in all, while
the crew of the yacht, exclusive of the wounded,
consisted of less than forty-five. But cool courage
and confidence in the right, opposed to fierce and
sanguinary passions in an evil cause, count to the
righteous side in a battle for twice the number of
opponents. The earl trembled for the issue. But
the brave Kenard, with his knowledge of the spirit
of his men, and his confidence in their English
courage
and in their contempt for pirates, whom he gave
them the credit of despising as cordially as he
himself
did, gave not an anxious thought about the
result
,
assured that, if each man did his duty, victory
would side with the honest and brave. During the
exchange of broadsides, he had kept his place on
the quarter-deck, encouraging his men by his
cheering
voice: the earl was also beside him, scarcely
less energetic in inspiring the crew with his own
spirit. The first lieutenant was actively engaged,
sword in hand, in directing the fire of the battery;
while Mark, who was in a new element, flamed
with the fierce fire of war, and seemed, amid the
smoke and roar of battle, to have been suddenly
endued
with a new and sublime character. He was
everywhere where his presence was most needed,
encouraging and cheering on the men both by his
voice and example; but, notwithstanding his
animation
and fire, was as cool and collected in the
sagacious orders he gave as the oldest veteran.
But, with all his devotion to the fight, he forgot
not that the cabin contained a lovely creature,
helpless
as she was beautiful, whose life depended on
the issue of that night's conflict. Though his heart
may have been proof against her charms, being
shielded with the proof-plate of another's love, yet
he felt an interest akin to love in her fate. She
was the cousin of Kate! She had expressed an
interest
in him that he could never forget! He had
saved her life! It was a second time endangered!
These were all motives to sympathy; and, properly
nurtured, the germes were there from which might
spring a tenderer and deeper feeling. But he had
no room in his breast for a second love. There
was but one polar star to the eye of his affections;
and steadily he steered the bark of his hopes
towards
it, although, like the north star of the
mariner
,
the farther and nearer he sailed in its
direction
,
it would higher and higher ascend the skies,
mocking his aspiring ambition. Nevertheless, he
resolved to steer steadily onward, even if he should
perish at last amid the icebergs of her cold and
wintry affections. But whatever a lover, in the
warmth of his affections, may sincerely feel and
solemnly vowlove unrequited, like the Persian
flower, that withers when the sun is hidden by a
passing cloud, without the warmth of its sun will
speedily die. Time, in the present instance, will
test the truth of this proposition.
The vessels were now within twenty feet of each
other, the pirate rising heavily on each wave, and
surging nearer and nearer at every heave of the sea.
Silence was broken only at intervals by a groan
from a wounded bucanier, and terrible expectation
hung over the two vessels. The moon at length
broke from a cloud and lighted up the scene.
There were beauty and peace floating on her
silvery
beams; but the passions of men reigned, and
their souls were closed to everything bright and
lovely. Yet they hailed her light with a shout, for
by it foe was able to see foe nearly with the
distinctness
of noonday.
Now pour in your fire! shouted the cool
Kenard
to his crew; aim wherever you can see the
glitter of an eye!
The bows of the pirate vessel were within an
oar's length of he yacht's larboard and weather
quarter as this order was given, and a dozen
half-naked
,
savage-looking men were just in the act of
leaping into the main rigging. The simultaneous
discharge of pistols, muskets, and blunderbusses
was like the explosion of a volcano, and but one
third of the bucaniers succeeded in springing alive
into the chains: the remainder plunged, dead ere
they struck the surface, into the sea. The fire was
answered by a loud yell from the pirates, and a few
straggling shots only from pistols; for these
demons
seemed to trust more to their dangerous
cutlasses
in their wild conflicts than to firearms. They
now pressed forward over the bows in dark swarms.
From every part of her that offered any prospect of
reaching the yacht, they leaped without waiting for
the vessels to come together, with cries and
execrations
most appalling, into the main chains, or
sprang for the bulwarks, catching recklessly by
their hands at whatever offered. Many fell short
into the sea, or were hurled into it by those who
met them; some leaped overboard, swam to the
side, and drew themselves up by the rigging that
hung over the water, but fell back with curses and
cries of pain, leaving their hands, severed at the
wrists and dripping with gore, clinging to the rope.
Grappling-irons were thrown on deck, but were cast
overboard by the crew before they could be
entangled
;
and wherever a pirate struck the side of the
yacht with his foot, he was opposed by one of its
defenders.
Three times the Earl of Bellamont sheathed his
sword in the breasts of as many of these ferocious
beings and cast them backward dead into the sea,
and as a fourth, who had thrown himself bodily upon
the quarter-deck, made a tremendous stroke at him
with his yataghan, he blew out his brains with a
pistol. Everywhere, in their first daring attempt to
board them, were they encountered with equal
resolution
and success, and of the twenty pirates that
by some means or other succeeded in reaching the
brig, not one retained a foothold on her decks
every individual of them being either slain outright,
or hurled maimed into the water, where several
swam about amid dark spots of blood, lifting their
handless limbs, and in vain calling to their
comrades
to take them on board. The fate of these
checked for a moment the ardour of the remainder,
and they waited till the vessels should come
together
before making a second attempt.
The pirate, who had some time before dropped
his lugsails, to prevent his shooting past the yacht,
towards which the waves were slowly urging him,
was now lifted and dashed with great violence
against it, striking her on her quarter, carrying
away her bulwarks, and opening her planks in
several
places.
Throw yourselves into her now, shouted the
pirate chief, leaping forward and waving his cutlass.
Flesh your blades in their carcasses! Give no
quarter to beardsbut spare bright eyes! Board!
board! clamber over each other's backspress on,
press on! Follow your young leader. He will
shame the best of ye!
Like a crew of demons, yelling and shouting
menaces
of death, mingled with horrible execrations and
oaths of vengeance for their slaughtered comrades,
they obeyed the energetic and sanguinary orders
of their chief. They were headed by the pirate's
first lieutenant and a youth with long fair hair,
which, in the light of the moon, shone like silver,
who, with strange recklessness of life, cast himself
from the bows as they approached the side of the
yacht, and fell feet foremost into the midst of a grove
of sharp steel, amid a shower of balls, that, while
they told in the bodies of his followers, seemed to
pass him as if he carried a charmed life. The old
pirate captain himself headed another party near
the stern of his vessel, which was slowly swinging
round towards the yacht's bows, apparently for the
purpose, when it should come in contact, of
boarding
on the forecastle. Here stood Edwards the
lieutenant, with a force of fifteen men to oppose
him; while midships, and near the companion-way,
Mark was stationed at the head of a third of the
yacht's crew, and, acting as a reserve, was prepared
to throw in the weight of his numbers as should be
required, either on the forecastle or the quarter-deck,
at which latter point, at the head of an equal number,
stood the captain, supported by the earl's good blade,
ready to repel the attempt to board from the bows
of the pirate.
More like devils incarnate than human beings,
the pirates followed their young leader, and cast
themselves from the bows, some running over the
heads of their comrades and leaping on board; some,
more active, flinging somersets through the air into
the mle; and all rushing, crowding, and falling
upon the deck in every possible attitude, seemingly
indifferent, so that the yacht's decks received them,
whether they landed head foremost or upright on
their feet. Such a torrent of desperate men was
irresistible. The defenders of the quarter-deck
were borne down by the mere weight of the
assailants'
bodies, or their cutlasses were turned aside
like feathers as they were levelled to meet this
novel and terrible human storm. Immediately in
advance of himself and the earl, the captain had
placed half a dozen men with pikes, the bristly
points of which served to protect, in some measure,
their position by turning to one side the current of
boarders.
The conflict now became most terrible and
sanguinary
.
The crew, that had been borne down by
the first shock, had recovered their feet, and nearly
every man was instantly struggling with a bucanier.
Kenard fought like a lion, thrice clearing a space
around him in which he could sweep his cutlass.
The earl, at length, seeing some of the pirates
rushing
to the companion-way and attempting to force
it, placed his back against it, and met their fierce
lunges with well-directed thrusts, turning aside
their descending strokes aimed at his head, with
the skill of a swordsman and the coolness of a
soldier. He fought not only on the defensive, but
his eye was quick to see where any of his own
party within his reach were being worsted, and his
blade was instant in its service of relieving them
from their mortal peril. Every sweep of his blade
was fatal, for he fought for one dear to his heart
whose life and honour were at stake.
For some time the battle was waged with
doubtful
success. At one moment the pirates, who, after
the first wild charge, had formed into a body, would
be driven over the side, and at another they would
press the defending party towards the stern. Their
youthful leader, who was everywhere present,
cheering them on with animating cries as often as
they were beaten back towards their own vessel,
was at length opposed to Kenard face to face.
I would not slay a youth like thee if I could
help it, he said, parrying his attack, and
endeavouring
to close with him, and wrest the cutlass from
his grasp.
Thou shalt have no space left for compunction
if thou shouldst, said the other, avoiding his grasp,
and making a lunge at his neck, which he grazed
with his blade.
Have at thee, then, if such be thy play! give as
you get, is my maxim, my lord! he added, looking
round as usual when he gave utterance to a
maxim
,
to catch the earl's attention.
But his lordship was too busily defending himself
and the companion-way against a gigantic and
active
Frenchman to acknowledge the usual appeal.
The turning of his head gave the youthful pirate
an advantage, of which he availed himself. With
great dexterity, he twisted with his cutlass the
weapon out of his grasp, and sent it flying through
the air into the sea. He was about to follow up his
advantage by sheathing his blade in his breast, when
it was struck up by an intervening one, and
turning
round, the young pirate found himself confronted
with the Earl of Bellamont, who, having that instant
Vol. II.E
freed himself from his assailants, was looking round
to see where his sword would be of most service,
when he discovered the peril of the captain. His
presence had an electric effect on the youthful
bucanier
.
He started back with an exclamation of
surprise, and half repeated the name of the
nobleman
.
But instantly he checked himself, and
successfully
parried the pass he made at him, retreating
at the same time, and acting wholly on the
defensive
.
The earl wondered at his exclamation and at
the sound of his voice, which reminded him of a
familiar
one. This sudden change in the tactics of
one who hitherto seemed to know only how to
advance
and attack, also surprised him; and,
although
he surveyed him closely, as the drifting
clouds across the moon let it shine brightly at
intervals
,
his features were so shaded by a drooping
bonnet, and so black and begrimed by the blood
and smoke of battle, that his scrutiny was defeated.
Nevertheless, thought he to himself, have I
heard that voice and seen that form before!
Inspired as much by curiosity to ascertain who it
was that revived such indefinable associations, as by
a desire to put an end to a dangerous foe, he pressed
him hard. With all the youthful bucanier's
coolness
and skill, he had been wellnigh worsted, never
returning back a blow for those the earl gave him so
freely, when a loud shout from the forecastle caused
every combatant on the quarter-deck to suspend
his descending stroke, withhold his deadly thrust,
or leave, half-sheathed, his sword in the body of his
antagonist. As the earl paused to look for the
cause of this fresh outcry, he saw that the lugger's
stern had at length came in contact with the bows
of the yacht, and that the pirates, headed by their
old chief, were pouring across the bulwarks and
leaping upon the deck, wild with fury and thirsting
for blood. Hitherto chafing with inaction, and
roused to a fearful pitch of excitement by the
spectacle
and uproar of the combat from which they were
withheld, like tigers chained in an arena panting to
mingle in the fierce conflict of their species, terrific
and overpowering in proportion to the length and
impatience of their restraint, was their first onset.
The little band under Edwards, who had reserved
their energies for this moment, drew back to the
opposite side of the vessel to escape the
tumultuous
fall of their almost flying bodies on the deck,
and poured in upon them a fatal fire of pistols and
harquebusses.
Now at them, my brave fellows, with your
cutlasses, he cried; throw away your pistols,
and grapple while they are crowded together! Set
upon the rascals, and give a good account of them!
With a shout, they charged in a body, and a
terrific
and sanguinary contest ensued. Mark, with
his division, hitherto had not been idle. He saw
that the fate of the yacht would depend on the
reception
given to the last boarding-party, headed by
the old pirate chief himself, and wished therefore
to husband the strength of his men until this crisis.
Nevertheless, while he was anxiously watching the
lugger as its stern drifted round, he was present
with two or three of his best men, to turn the
tide of the combat on the quarter-deck, as it went
now against the earl, now against the captain; and
several times he received, in the hottest of the fight,
the warm acknowledgments of both for the
promptness
in which he effected diversions in their favour.
It now came to his turn to enter more closely into
the combat.
No sooner did the boarders find themselves in a
mass on the forecastle of the brig, than they
separated
into two bodies, one of which received the
charge of, and entered into fierce fight with, the
division
under Edwards; while the other, consisting
of twenty men, headed by the pirate in person, made
a rush aft to carry the quarter-deck. Here a few
of their comrades were fighting at a disadvantage
under their youthful leader, who, taking the
advantage
of the earl's pause at the shout of the fresh
boarders, had again mingled among his few
remaining
men, who were defending themselves on the
opposite side of the deck against a much larger
number of their antagonists.
Mark had anticipated the charge, and had formed
his men in a firm phalanx to meet it. The first
line consisted of five men, who just filled up the
passage between the launch and the forward
larboard
gun, along which the pirates were advancing.
Besides their cutlasses, they were armed with
boarding-pikes, which protruded three feet in
advance
.
A second and third line were armed with
cutlasses and pistols. Their young leader himself
sprung upon the gun as the rush was made, and
in a cool, steady tone of voice, said,
Stand firm, pikemen. Never mind their
cutlasses
;
your comrades behind will take care of your
heads. Now they come! Give them your
pistols
!
he exclaimed, as the bucaniers came upon
them like a wedge, as if they would cleave bodily
through their centre. They were checked by the
advanced pikes, and thrown into confusion by the
discharge of a dozen pistols, which they instantly
returned with scarcely half as many, without
material
effect.
Cut them down. Let not a handful of cowards
put ye back. No quarter! Down with them!
Strike off the poles of their pikes! Close with
them, shouted the old pirate chief.
A second rush was made with better success.
The old bucanier shivered with his cutlass, as if they
had been pipe-stems, two of the pike-staffs, and
the front line of men gave back.
Drop your pikes and take your blades!
shouted
Mark, at the same time discharging his pistols at
the pirate chief and wounding him in the shoulder.
The combat was now waged with terrible
ferocity
.
Fight hard, or we shall be routed! cried Mark,
with energy. Stand steady, men! Keep your
ground, or you will be cut to pieces. Stand! fly
not, on your lives! One good blowAll is lost!
he suddenly cried, as he saw the men give back
before
the obstinate attack of the pirates.
Leaping from the gun into the midst, he dealt
blows as if he had the strength of a Hercules, and
essayed to stop, with his single arm and the
intervention
of his body, their onward and victorious
course. But the impetus was already given, and
they bore him forward with his men in a dense
mass, so crowded together that no man could use
his weapon. They were driven aft and upon the
quarter deck, where the captain came to his aid
and succeeded in rallying them for the defence of
this important post. At the same instant the
youthful
pirate, seeing the success of his party, called his
followers from their unequal contest, and leaped
down with them among his crew, leaving half his
men dead behind him.
On the forecastle Edwards fought for a while
with success, and had nearly beaten the pirates back
to their vessel, when the victorious shouts of the
conquering party gave them renewed spirit, and
filled the minds of the crew with sudden panic.
The bucaniers, taking advantage of their
hesitation
,
in their turn became the assailants; and the
men, completely routed, fled towards the
quarterdeck
,
E 2
cutting their way with the desperation of fear
through the party that besieged it, and, with the
loss of a third of their number, succeeded in
reaching
it.
The whole of that portion of the yacht forward
of the quarter-deck was now in possession of the
pirates, a portion of whom began to force open the
hatches; while the majority, under the direction of
the chief and his youthful lieutenant, prepared to
carry this last post, which was elevated four feet
above the main deck, by forming their men into
two divisions, and attacking it on both sides of the
companion-way at the same time.
The earl, Mark, and the captain, though all three
were wounded more or less severely, the latter
supporting
his left arm in a sling, assembled their force,
now diminished to twenty men, to meet the
escalade
.
The pirates, with yells of vengeance for their
slaughtered comrades, began to bring to the assault
loose spars, sails, and whatever they could lay hands
on, which they heaped against the wall the deck
presented. The harness-casks were rolled up,
made firm, and covered with rolls of canvass; and
the hatches, which some of them had torn off for
the purpose of descending to plunder the hold,
were laid against it, to aid them in constructing a
glacis.
Bring along those carcasses! pile them up
here! shouted the old chief, ferociously. We
will yet make a fair run of it.
The bodies of the dead, both of pirates and the
crew of the yacht, were eagerly dragged forward
and thrown on the pile, and it was soon raised so
that the quarter-deck could be gained erect and
sword in hand without the danger to which they
would be exposed in climbing a barrier so well
guarded.
Now, men, make a run for it and sweep the
deck! he shouted.
The pirates retreated a few steps in two parties,
headed by the old chief and his young lieutenant,
and, with a yell, rushed forward and up the human
glacis to the quarter-deck. But they were met
with a resolution that matched their own ferocity,
and several of them fell back dead, adding their
own bodies to the pile they had the moment
before
assisted in constructing. A few battled for
a few seconds, giving and receiving wounds, but
were finally pressed back to the main deck. In the
assault, Mark and the young pirate leader had once
crossed weapons; but, ere they could exchange
passes, the latter was forced back by the retreat of
his own party.
Let them maintain the deck if they will, said
the chief to his young lieutenant; we have the
command of the cabin and hold. Keep them busy
while I force the companion-way, and see what kind
of a prize she will prove. I little thought we had
engaged with a king's ship, but we must now make
the most of it. I have lost men enough for one
night's work, and don't care to make a capture of
the yacht if I can get anything of value out of her.
So keep them employed on the quarter-deck till I
take a cruise through the cabins.
As he spoke he gave orders for his men to force
a spar from the doors of the companion-way which
the earl had braced against it.
Hold there, fiends! cried the nobleman, as he
saw these demonstrations of the pirate's intentions.
He sprung forward as he spoke, and with a
blow of his cutlass clove the scull of a bucanier,
who was wrenching the lock with a pike-head, so
that it fell in two parts over either shoulder. He
aimed a second blow at the pirate chief so suddenly
that the point of the blade laid open his cheek, and
an active movement to one side only saved his
head from flying from his shoulders: at the same
instant, a pistol-ball, fired by the chief, struck the
earl near the knee, and he fell over into the arms of
Mark.
The doors at once were forced open, and the old
leader, accompanied by two or three of his men,
descended to the cabin.
To the rescue! To the rescue! shouted Mark,
on seeing them disappear, letting the earl down
gently upon the deck.
Protect or slay her, young man, and I will bless
thee! cried the earl, faintly.
He made no reply to the earl's words; and,
heedless whether he was followed or not, leaped,
cutlass in hand, through the top of the
companionway
,
and lighted on his feet at the bottom of the
stairs.
The doors of the first cabin were open, and a
glance showed him two of the pirates rifling the
baggage of the earl, and the chief in the act of
forcing the inner door leading to the stateroom
occupied
by Grace.
Poor maiden! how had she been occupied
during
the fearful conflict above and around her?
How had she borne the terrific sounds of battle?
From the first moment of the fight she had been
kneeling in silent prayerbearing on her heart's
orisons the names of her uncle, and of one, though
of lowly origin, not less dear to her. Of herself
she scarcely thought: but at every report of
cannon
,
every discharge of musketry, she shuddered
for those who were exposed to the dreadful horrors
of the fight. Her maid had become insensible
through overpowering terror. Terror, too, was
acutely felt by herself, but it was modified and
subdued
by the bright hopes of religion. She feared
not death. The sting of death is sin. She knew
no sin! For her it could have no terrors. Nature,
indeed, shrunk at contemplating its violent
dissolution
;
but the glorious certainties of a new life
beyond this reconciled her to put this away for that
better one. She expected to die within the hour
perhaps
by her own hand!
The dagger her uncle
had given her was hidden in her bosom, and, as she
knelt, her grasp was firmly laid upon its hilt. Long,
long and terrible had been the conflict to her ears
more terrible, perhaps, than if she had witnessed it.
Its sanguinary horrors were indeed hidden from her
sight; but her imagination, with its hundred eyes,
aided by the horrid sounds that reached her,
reflected
the scene upon her dizzy brain in colours, if
it could be possible, more dreadful than the reality.
Who can imagine the effect upon her of the loud
roar of the cannon vibrating through every oaken
nerve of the vessel, and filling its hollow decks
with a noise more awful than the thunder that
explodes
at her feet. Who can conceive the fearful
shrinking of the heart at the rush of the ballsthe
sound of the crashing decksthe wild and unearthly
shrieks of the woundedthe moans of the dying
the fierce yells of the combatantsand all the
thousand and terrific sounds that assimilate war
to the hellish pastime of accursed spirits. Who
is there that, not participating in its mad excitement,
calmly witnesses a battle, that will not turn away
in disgust and horror, be ready to deny his
humanity
,
and to believe men neither more nor less than
demons incarnate?
When the cabin doors burst open, she hurriedly
committed her soul to Heaven, and, rising from her
knees, held the friendly dagger above her virgin
bosom, and stood facing the closed doors of her
cabin, feeling that the crisis of her fate was
approaching
its consummation.
The entrance of Mark into the forward cabin
was not perceived by the pirates nor their chief.
With a blow of his cutlass he nearly severed the
head of one that was leaning over a chest, and,
before
the other could rise, the ball of his pistol had
laid him across the body of his comrade. The
next instant he was opposed to the terrible pirate
leader himself.
Ha, my young fledging! cried he, his cutlass
descending with tremendous force, and with a fatal
accuracy of aim, that would have cleft him to the
chine had it taken effect; but, with youthful
activity
,
he avoided the stroke which he could not
avert, and the point of the pirate's weapon buried
itself so deep in the floor of the cabin that he was
unable to extricate it. Mark instantly availed
himself
of this singular advantage, and, quicker than
lightning, sheathed his blade in his heart.
Oh! villain, you have done for me! he cried,
pressing his hand on his side, through which the
crimson tide rushed in an irresistible torrent.
He staggered as he spoke, and a lurch of the
vessel at the same moment sent him headlong,
breaking his sword off close to the floor as he fell
with it in his grasp, upon the bodies of his men.
Courage! my lady! said Mark, bounding to
the door, and speaking in the triumphant tones of
success. Their leader is slain! we shall soon
clear the vessel of his base herd! Courage!
Bless you for these words of hope! You are
safe! and my uncle! how fares my dear uncle?
Before he could reply the companion-stairway
was filled with pirates.
A female voice! shouted one, as he entered
the cabin.
Love and ransom, cried another, with a
sensual
laugh.
We will draw lots for her, Hans.
The captain has saved us that trouble, growled
a third. Ho! who have we here? he cried, seeing
Mark, with his dripping cutlass in his hand,
standing
resolutely with his back against the door of the
stateroom.
Our captain is slain! cried another, fiercely,
now for the first time seeing the body of his chief
lying in its gore.
The pirates for a moment forgot Mark, and
gathered around their fallen leader. They raised
him up, and his head fell back helpless upon his
shoulder, and his eyes glared with the fixed stare of
death.
He is dead! His sword is broken. Let us
avenge the old man! they cried, with one voice.
Ha! here is the point of his weapon, that ne'er
failed him before, sticking in the deck, and he hath
been taken at vantage ere he could draw it out.
He who hath done this for thee, old man, shall
die by my hand! said one of them, letting him fall
again.
With one accord, their glances rested on Mark,
and he was fiercely attacked by the one who had
last spoken and another, while the remainder
commenced
breaking open chests in search of
treasure
.
For a few seconds he defended himself with
great skill and courage. But, being hard pressed,
and twice severely wounded by his fierce
opponents
,
he became faint with loss of blood; his
head swam; his eyes became dim; he grew
bewildered
,
and struck at random. His assailants saw
their advantage, and one of them made a final lunge
at his breast to transfix him. But, ere the blow
could take effect, he sunk sideways to the floor, and
falling behind the hangings, the blade buried itself
within the door of the cabin.
Curses light on the foul steel! Finish him,
Renard.
He is done for, said the other, sheathing his
blade through the curtain.
Now for the woman! His mistress, I dare say,
he fought so like a lion. I will try and console her
for his loss, he added, with a laugh.
The fall of its brave defender left the way
undisputed
to the inner cabin. With united efforts,
they forced open the slightly-secured leaves of the
door. Grace stood before them in an attitude of
sublime self-sacrificing, her eyes raised heavenward
full of hope and faith, while the uplifted dagger was
in the act of descending into her bosom. The
foremost
pirate instantly comprehended her purpose.
Quick as lightning, he leaped forward, and, with
his cutlass, struck the weapon from her grasp as it
was entering her bosom.
By the Virgin! that was skilfully done,
Renard
!
said the other. You have won her fairly.
And he who would have her must win her from
me, he continued, with dogged resolution, catching
her as, with a shriek of hopeless despair and
wretchedness
unspeakable, she was falling to the deck.
A sweet voice, but somewhat loud! said the
other, with a laugh. Ho! what have we here?
Another prize, he exclaimed, descrying the helpless
maid. Smaller game! but not the less welcome.
Dead, for a guilder! No, she breathes! We are
lucky, Renard. It will cost us some hard knocks
to keep possession of our prizes.
We have no captain now, and each man is for
himself.
Not quite. Our new fighting lieutenant will
command us now; and suppose he should, as he
is like to do, take a fancy to your bit of
womankind
?
He will first have to fancy me! said the other,
menacingly. Nor shall he command me while
men older than he are in the lugger.
He will have a word to say on that score, and
here he comes to speak for himself.
He had scarcely spoken ere the young pirate
made his appearance in the cabin. The shriek of
Grace had drawn him from the deck, where he had
been defending the entrance to the companion-way
against the whole force of the yacht, under the
captain
and the earlthe danger menacing his niece
having suddenly restored the latter to almost
supernatural
strength, and a fierceness of spirit that rose
superior to physical suffering. With his wound
hastily bound up, he had once more joined in the
fight, and was foremost in battling with those who
opposed his passage to the cabin. Repeatedly his
life was exposed, but saved by the voice of the
young leader, forbidding his men to harm him; and
even in the heat, and noise, and fury of battle, their
wild spirits involuntarily yielded obedience to a
voice that seemed formed to command and to be
obeyed.
With flashing eyes he entered the stateroom, and
his glance rested on the lifeless form of Grace,
clasped in the arms of the pirate Renard.
I am right! It is she! he cried. Release
your prize, villain!
You say well, boy; she is my prize, he
answered
,
with a menacing look.
Ha! shouted the youth.
Quicker than thought he sprang upon him, got
within his sword arm, seized him by the throat,
closed with him, and buried his sabre to its hilt in
his chest.
So have I washed out the pollution of thy touch
Vol. II.F
on this fair creature, he said, attempting to
disengage
Grace from his hold as he fell backward.
But his arm so firmly encircled her, that he was
forced to sever the tendons of it with his cutlass
before he could release her from this horrible
embrace
of lust and death.
Oh God! he said, involuntarily, that I should
be an actor in such a scene as this. Yet my
presence
here has been her preservation. I will save
her and protect her now, even with the life of the
captain!
His life is already ended, said the bucanier,
who, on witnessing the fate of his comrade, had
quietly dropped the lifeless form of the maid where
he had found her.
He pointed as he spoke to his body.
Dead! exclaimed the youth. Then am I
chief here. I will save, for her sake, all that are left
alive. But she shall not know me! She shall
ever be ignorant to whom she is indebted. Yet
methinks I would like to send by her a message to
the haughty daughter of the house of Bellamont.
This was spoken with bitter irony. But I must
try to restore her.
He poured a vase of water over her forehead, and
moistened her lips, and she revived.
Where am I? What has transpired? Who
howwhere
She glanced wildly around, and everything that
had passed flashed upon her mind. She bounded
from him with a deplorable cry, and covered her
face with her hands. Mercy, oh God! mercy!
Grace! he said, in a gentle tone.
Who speaks? who?
Grace!
Thou art no enemy! Bless thee for the sound
of thy voice. Tell me what has happened? Where
is my uncle? Oh, speak as if life hung on thy
words.
The Earl of Bellamont is living.
Heaven, I thank thee! And this dead body?
I have protected thee from a fate worse than
death, with the life of this man.
Whowho art thou? I should know that
voice, she exclaimed, with returning confidence
and hope, gazing upon his now swarthy and
disfigured
features which defeated her scrutiny,
deeply
shaded, too, as they were by his bonnet, which
he pulled farther over his brows.
An outcast, unworthy a thought from innocence
and purity like thee.
Yet you are my friend. How came you here?
To save thee!
I am confused, puzzled, perplexed! your voice,
your air! I know not what to think or say. A
pirate boarded us, and youyou are not a pirate.
Oh, my uncle! my dear uncle! Heaven be
thanked
,
you are safe! she cried, darting forward and
flinging herself into his arms as he entered the
cabin
,
literally covered with blood, while behind him
crowded a dark mass of pirates, through whom he
had cut his way.
How fares it with thee, my child? he cried,
with anxiety, pressing her to his breast.
Safe from all but terror!
God bless thee! we will die together; there is
no hope. Come on, ye fiends, now, he cried,
turning
upon his foes with one arm entwined about her,
and brandishing his cutlass in the calm defiance of
despair.
They rushed upon him with a shout.
Back! cried the clear, commanding voice of
their young leader, in a tone that arrested every
advancing
foot and suspended every cutlass mid-air.
Look! there lies your late captain in his blood!
Your first lieutenant is slain. I am now your
leader
.
Obey me. Stand back, all of ye! The men
sullenly dropped their weapons and retreated to the
foot of the stairs. Earl of Bellamont! you and
your niece are, from this moment, safe. Your
yacht shall be instantly cleared of every man but
its own crew, and you shall be at liberty to sail on
your course. Call upon your captain for a
cessation
of hostilities on deck, while I draw off my
men.
The astonished earl immediately obeyed.
Who are you, mysterious young man? he
asked, turning to him after communicating his
request
to the captain. Your voice and air are
familiar
.
It matters not, my lord. I have saved thy niece
from violence, and would, had I the power, earlier
have put an end to this scene of bloodshed. Bid
your captain call his crew to the quarter-deck, while
I pass to my own vessel with my men.
The order, with the object of it, was repeated to
the captain.
Ay, ay! he replied from the deck. Let
them go, with a left-handed blessing. But what
has changed the devils about so? Have they had
fighting enough?
We have mistaken the character of your
vessel
,
said the young leader, evasively.
Ha! you are there, my lion's cub, and can
speak like a Christian, too. A little fighting
always
makes a man feel more civilized, is my maxim,
my lord, he said, looking down upon them through
the skylight.
To your own vessel, men! said the youth,
sternly. Throw down that casket! Take not
with you the value of a groat. Go as you came,
with only your arms in your hands.
The men looked at each other, and surveyed
their athletic young chief, who stood like a
youthful
Mars, with the look and bearing of resolute
command. His eye rested for an instant on each
man, as he saw their hesitation, with a searching
and terrible glance, and, as each one encountered
it, he turned his eyes away and silently obeyed.
As the last man left the cabin, he said,
Some of you return, and bear your captain's
body to the decks of your own vessel. Lay him
decently along the quarter-deck.
Four of the pirates came back, and raised it
without a word, while he stood quietly by, leaning
on his sabre.
Michael, he said, to one who seemed to take
the lead of the rest, I make you, for the present,
second in command. Have the wounded conveyed
to the lugger, and the dead thrown into the sea.
Be ready to cut clear of the yacht at a moment's
warning; and, with what time you have, repair
damages and get sail on. Work will keep the men
from thinking of mischief. Go! and see that I am
obeyed. I shall instantly follow you.
The bucanier departed with ready obedience to
the will of the lofty spirit that had at once
assumed
such irresistible power over his mind. The
earl and Grace listened with surprise to the stern
authority with which he governed such fierce men,
and witnessed with wonder the entire control he
seemed to possess over their wills. The former
gazed on him for a few seconds as he stood beneath
the swinging lamp, his features thrown into the
deepest shadow by the falling brim of his bonnet
and his drooping plume, and then spoke:
Mysterious and wonderful young man,
whoever
F 2
you are, we owe you much. This life of crime
and horror is not your sphere. There is humanity
about you. Tell me, he added, with irresistible
curiosity, who are you?
A
bastard!
It is impossible to convey the manner and
emphasis
with which this word was articulated. It
expressed volumes to both uncle and niece. It told
a dark history of shame, scorn, and disgrace;
explained
why, being so above them by nature, he
herded with the basest. A painful tale of moral
wrong and suffering it unfolded to their
imaginations
,
save that they knew not his name or family.
They read from his brief confession all that could
have been told them. The earl sighed, shook his
head, and was silent. Grace looked upon him with
pity.
He contemplated for a moment the effect of this
disclosure, and then, turning haughtily away, said,
The service I have done you is cancelled by
your discovery of the baseness of the instrument.
There is debt on neither side. Adieu, my lord
adieu, Lady Grace Fitzgerald.
How know you my name and rank?
And
mine!
simultaneously exclaimed both.
It matters not. Thou wilt learn full soon
enough to scorn as well as pity me.
With these words he departed. The yacht was
cleared of its piratical horde, and the two vessels
separated, and soon were steering on opposite
courses.
END OF BOOK I.
BOOK II.
THE EFFECT.
'Twas in the third King William's time,
When many a pirate bold
Committed on the seas the crime
Of shedding blood for gold.
My name is Captain Kyd,
As I sailed, as I sailed:
My name is Captain Kyd,
And so wickedly I did,
God's laws I did forbid
When I sailed.
Old Ballad
.
CHAPTER I.
All in the olden time.
Our ancestors smoked long pipes, wore breeches and buckles,
spoke in a strange tongue, and were called Dutchmen; for what
saith the chronicle?
Dutchmen lived in those days in Nieuve-Amsterdam.
Five
years have elapsed since the events
narrated
in the last book transpired. In the interim,
the seed then sown has had time to ripen to the
germe; the germe to bud, and blossom, and bear
fruit: youth has advanced to manhood; the
characters
then forming, formed; and the effects of the
various causes then in operation fully wrought, and
apparent to every eye. The scene, as well as the
time of the story, is now changed, and, with its
actors, transformed from the Old to the New World.
In the year 1695, William the Third appointed
Richard, Earl of Bellamont, governor of the
province
of New-York. He did not, however, receive
his commission until eighteen months afterward,
nor arrive in his government until April, 1698. At
this period the American coast, from New-England
to the Capes of Virginia, were infested by a daring
bucanier, who not only swept the seas with his
fast-sailing
vessel, but frequently run boldly, in open day,
into the harbours of New-York, Boston, and
New-port
.
To such an extent did his depradations reach,
so fearful became the terrible name of Kyd,
that at length the fisherman feared to launch his
boat, the mariner to spread his sail, and citizens
trembled for their safety within the very centre of
their fortified towns.
Such being the state of things, Lord Bellamont,
on assuming the administration of colonial affairs,
was especially instructed by the English
government
to make use of all the means placed at his
command to remedy an evil so alarming, and fraught
with consequences so fatal to the growth and
prosperity
of the colonies. For this purpose,
immediately
after his arrival at New-York, he had
despatched
the light-armed vessel which had brought
him over from England in pursuit of the pirate.
She had been absent some time, and her
arrival
in the bay was hourly and anxiously looked
for by the honest Dutch citizens. As the time for
her return drew nigh, it was the custom of certain
of these worthies, after the humble occupations of
the day were over, to assemble at eventide about
the stoope of
frau
Jost Stoll's tavern by the water
side, and with their long pipes supported in their
mouths with one hand, and a mug of double beer
or mum held in the other, steadfastly to gaze down
the bay, in expectation of the return of the crusier,
the while gravely discussing their doubts of the
bold bucanier's captivation by mortal ship; and by
times relieving their discourse with dark tales of his
marvellous and bloody exploits on the high seas.
Before entering further upon this division of the
story, it perhaps may be necessary, for the proper
understanding of it, to describe New-York as it
was at this period. On the north side of the
present
Wall-street there extended from East River,
then called Salt River, to the North River, a
palisade
ten feet high, constructed of piles firmly driven
into the earth, strengthened and sustained by
crosspieces
of timber. The interstices were filled with
earth and stone, and it was in every part ball-proof.
South of this palisade lay all that then was
New-York
.
Beyond were forests, and a vast tract called
King's Farms, now embraced between Canal and
Liberty streets. This wall was perforated midway
between the two rivers by a gateway, through which
passed the road to Albany: this avenue is now
called Broadway. At the eastern extremity of the
wall, at the foot of Wall-street, and facing the water,
was a half-moon fort, called a Rondeel: another was
at Coenties-slip, or Countess-slip, so called in
honour of the fair Lady of Bellamont; and a third,
equidistant from it, on the site of what is now the
corner of State-street and the Battery. From
Broadway, west, there was a sloping shore to the
beach, there being neither wharf nor landing on
this side of the town; and on the south, the tides
came up nearly to the iron gate of the Battery that
at present opens into Broadwaythe site of the
present Marine Park being at low tide a sandy
beach strewn with vast fragments of rock, and
called The Ledge, where fishermen spread their
nets and dried their fish.
At the foot of Broad-street, then called Here
Graft, and at that time the principal street of
New-Amsterdam, were two great docks, called
West or East Dock, as they chanced to be on
the east or west side of Broad-street. Through this
street nearly to Wall-street also run a creek,
widened
into a canal, and spanned by bridges
wherever
it was intersected by streets. Near the head
of this canal was the abode of the city ferryman,
who conveyed passengers in a wherry either to the
Island or Jersey shore. The houses of the better
class stood principally on William and Pearl streets,
the latter being open to the water, with dwellings
only on the west side facing it. Maiden-lane was
then a green lane with a fine spring at its head
where the Dutch maidens were accustomed to
bleach the linen they wove. Fronting the river
stood the Stadt Huys (the ancient City Hall), a
massive stone structure two stories high, with
battlements
rising above the gable ends. The lower
story was used as the colonial prison. Opposite
the Stadt Huys stood the fish-market. In the
Bowling
Green, then an oblong square, surrounded by
locust-trees, was the City Market, which was held
three times a week, and opened and shut by the
ringing
of a bell. The gate of the city was formed of a
pair of massive leaves of oak, strengthened with bars
of iron: they were shut at night on the setting of
the watch, and opened at sunrise by ringing of bells.
The citizens took watch by turns or were fined.
They were to be good men and true, and free from
cursing and swearing. It was their duty to watch
by the gate and the bridges, and thrice during the
night to take the rounds of the city, particularly to
see that neither Indians nor negroes were abroad, or
lying about in the market-places. In cases of
emergency
or alarm, they were commanded to call on
the nearest citizen for aid; each householder being
required to keep always in his house a goode
fire-locke
,
and at least six rounds of balls thereto.
Gutters
run through the centre of all the streets, which
were unpaved; and in the middle of Broadway,
near Wall, and also in Pearl-street, were public
wells and pumps. The houses were built mostly
in the Dutch style, with gable-ends to the street,
and stoopes.
The Rondeel, or crescent before mentioned,
that defended the south side of the town at the
Vol. II.G
foot of Broadway, was erected on the top of a large
mound, fourteen feet high, with a green sloping
glacis
on every side. The wall of the fort was still
twenty feet above the glacis, strongly constructed
of stone, with two square wings, the centre being in
the shape of a half-moon. On the north side stood
a few apple-trees and an aged linden that
over-topped
the walls, from the parapet of which was
a near view of the market, of the fields about the
Bowline Greene, the hay-scales, and the north
gate of the city. In the centre of this fort stood a
small stone chapel, the first Dutch church erected
in New-York. Four cannon were mounted on the
water side, and a heavy gun, of vast calibre, planted
on the north side of the wall, commanded the gate
of the palisades. East of the fort was a forest of
several acres, in which were kept the governor's
deer. Nearly hid among its old trees, yet open to
the bay, stood, within a stone's throw of the gate of
the fort, the gubernatorial mansion of the earl, a
stately Dutch edifice of stone, painted white and
ornate with scalloped gables, turret-like chimneys,
a cupola, latticed galleries, and stoopes. The
ground before it sloped in a smooth lawn to the
glittering beach; and from its door the eye embraced
the whole of the far-extended bay, with its green
and wooded islands, and a distant glimpse of the
sea. On the east of this mansion, which, from its
white exterior and imposing appearance, was named
by the admiring burghers Der Vite Sals, or White
Hall, a name the site has retained to this day,
commenced
Pearl, then called Dock street. It was on
the corner of this and Broad-street, and within one
hundred yards of the White Hall, that the
publichouse
of frau Jost Stoll was situated.
This ancient, well-frequented, and popular inn,
the humble progenitor of the numerous costly and
palatial
hotels
that now adorn the modern city, was
one story high, and extended far back on both
streets, showing a front on each. Its roof was tiled
with glazed Dutch tiles, and ascended almost
perpendicularly
to a great height, where it met a
second
or super-roof, which was clapped over it like
an extinguisher. In its descent towards the ground,
however, it took a horizontal curve outward, and
projected full seven feet from the walls across the
sidewalk, supported along its eaves by a row of
rude columns. The gable-ends rose ambitiously
above the roof, from which be it said projected
sundry dormant windows, which were cut into steps
or half-embrasures, giving the building a sort of
castellated aspect. Its windows, and they were
many of divers shapes, square, circular, oval, and
diamond, were placed in all possible positions, as the
fancy of the architect dictated. On each street was
a broad door, with a narrow carved canopy above
it, and beneath a stoop with seats on either side.
To these, for the accommodation of her
numerous
customers, the bustling Dutch hostess had of
late placed four long benches, two on each side of
the house, against the wall and just beneath a row of
windows with little three-cornered panes of glass set
in leaden sashes. The advantage of two fronts to
the inn is apparent, and was a very great
convenience
to the worthy citizens. In the summer
mornings
they were wont to sit on the south and shady
side, which looked down the bay; and in the
afternoon
on the east and now shady side, which
commanded
not only a side view of the harbour, but a
full view of the muddy dock, alive with ducks, at
their feet, and the clumsy stone bridge that crossed
it. But, since they had begun to watch for the
reappearance
of the Ger-Falcon, the name of the
vessel
which was despatched in pursuit of the pirate,
the south front, notwithstanding it was in the month
of June, and the level sun lighted up the little
windows
of the inn like an illumination, had become the
most frequented and popular; and, on the evening of
the day in question, the east side was deserted by all
save a tawny slave, a recumbent Indian, and one or
two sleepy dogs. On the south front, therefore, at
the time of the opening of the second part of this
story, were gathered, towards sunset, beneath the
shade of the projecting roof, a motley group,
composed
of some of the best burghers of
New-Amsterdam
,
and, what is more, the choicest customers of
frau
Stoll. They were seated on benches on
either
side of the stoop, the two seats of which were
occupied by a little, short, fat member of the
corporation
,
and a tall, thin, long-nosed
churchwarden
,
the chiefest dignitaries of the church and state.
Besides these worthies, there were several artisans,
and other worthy citizens of the ancient town.
Dere vill be moche fear dat de tamt pucanier
hash got de king's ship, and no te king's ship haav
got te pucanier, said one of the worthy burghers,
sagely shaking his head after a long look down the
bay; and taking his pipe from his mouth and
emitting
a generous cloud of smoke, he looked round to
see how his opinion was received.
'Tis quite time, Mynheer Vandersplocken, that
the ship should be back; but whether she brings a
prize or no is another thing, said the warden,
blowing through his pipe to ignite the tobacco
therein
.
I'll ventur' to say you are right dere, Mynheer
Varder, said an antiquated Dutch skipper,
blowing
forth with his words a volume of smoke that
for a time rendered his round, rubicund visage and
portly paunch invisible; dis skipper Kyd ish not
to pe taken sho easily. Schnaps and tunder! he
would plow up his yocht to de tyfil first. Ay! he
vill never haav te hemp cravat, te plack rogue.
Is he black? asked the warden, eagerly.
Ayish't plack he ish, schipper Schenk?
repeated
the burgher.
Goot! schipper Schenk, den hash seen him!
how doesh dou know dat he ish plack? asked a
third, who, from his greasy apparel, was the
tallow-chandler
of the town, laying his pipe across his
oily knee and looking him in the face with the air
of a man who expected to hear something
marvellous
.
'Tish not plack in te face I mean, put in te
heart, said the skipper. I have seen him, as you
say, Mynheer Schnops; and his hair vas white as
te lint, and his eye plue as te sky, and his skin
fair as te lantlaty's taughter here. A fair young
man he vas to look upon.
And cruel as fair, said the warden. Tell us,
worthy skipper Schenk, o' the time you saw this
bold rover; doubtless it will be a tale to listen to.
Ay, good schipper! Yaw, schipper Schenk,
gif us te story, cried several voices.
Ashes were knocked from some of the pipes,
and others were refilled; the more distant listeners
moved nearer to the skipper, who, looking round
with the patronising and superior air of a man who
hath seen more danger than his fellows, settled
himself into the attitude of a story-teller, and took
a long-drawn whiff at his meerschaum:
It vas in te Long Island Sount, he began,
just after the last line gale. I vas in mine little
yocht, te Half Moon, and, haaving carried away
my powsprit, put into a creek unter Sachem's Heat
to cut another from te treesh dere. I left te men
to vork hewing te spar, and valks about on te shore,
looking rount, and tinking vat a nice plaace it vas
G 2
te Sachem's Heatfor a city, if te lant vas lower,
so tat a tyke micht be made all rount it.
A tyke, sure; vat is te citee mitout te tyke? vera
goot, were the approving ejaculations of his
listeners
.
Ton't interrupt me, or tish tyfil a pit more you
get o' mine shtory. Now vere vas I? Vell, as I
vas saying, I vas valking by mineself ven I comes
to te oder side of te heatlant, ant tere lay anoder
vessel mitout a mast, ant more tan fifty men at
vork putting new spars into her. Vell, I vas
vondering
vat craft it vas, for she vas carry many kuns,
vhen somepoty vas lay a hant on mine shoulter,
ant I looked rount ant vas see a tall, hantsome,
ant fair young man, mit plue eyes ant light locks,
mit pistols at belt ant swort py his side.
`Goot tay, Mynheer Schipper,' says he, in a
free ant easy vay. `Ish tat your craft pelow in
te creek?'
`It ish, mynheer,' says I. `Dis gale has put
us poth into von bipe, if tat ish your craft pelow
dere.'
`It ish, schipper; vill you go on boart?'
`Ish must get my repairs tone ant pe off,' I
sait.
`I haav a flasche of goot Scheitam, mynheer,'
sait he.
So I vent aboart, ant ve hat a merry time mit
te Scheitam ant te bipe.
`Tis ish te real shuniper from Deutch-lant,
captain,' says I, pouring te last trop out of te
flasche.
`It's made from the Italian shuniper, schipper,'
says he.
`Deutch or Italian,' says I, `it's te oil ov life;
ant never pefore tid I trink such shin.'
`I am glat you like it,' says he; ant he mate
a negro, in golt ant green jacket ant brocken, put
on anoder flasche.
By-ant-py, says I, `Vat's te name o' your craft,
captain,' tinking it a ship in te king's navy.
`Te Silfer Arrow,' says he.
`Te Silfer Arrow. I haav not hear tis name
in te navy.'
`Nor ever vill,' sait he. `Fill your glass,
schipper, I vill give you a toast.'
So I filled to te top, ant, rising up, swore I't
trink it on mine legs, if he gave te tyfil himself, for
te Scheitam vas in me. So I helt on to te
taple-corner
,
ant he sait,
`I give te healt of Kyt.'
`Nefer,' sait I; ant smashed my glass on te
taple in a tousant atoms. `I vill trink to te tyfil,
put not to Kyt,' says I.
His eyes flashed like coals ov vire, ant he put
his hant on a pistol; put ten he laughed ant sait,
`Drink to my healt, ten, good schipper.'
`I'll trink your healt, captain, from te neck ov
te flasche, till tere pe not von trop left pehint.'
`Pledge me, den,' sait he.
So ve filled, ant I trank a bumper to his goot
healt.
`Very vell, schipper. You haav done as I
wished,' he sait, smiling. `Who, tink you, is your
entertainer?'
`Te'il care I,' sait I; `I know te Scheitam, tat
is enough for schipper Schenk to know.'
`Did you ever hear of te Adventure Galley?'
says he.
`It's Kyt's vessel,' sait I, `tat he scours te sea
mit.'
`Look here, schipper, ant reat,' said he,
shoving
asite a sliting panel above te transum.
I looked, ant reat, in large letters,
`
The Adventure Galley
.'
`Vat te tyfil!' sait I, laying a hant on my
cutlass
,
`tish is not te'
`Te Adventure Galley, ant I am Captain Kyt,'
says he.
So I drew my cutlass ant mate a lunge at him,
supposing I vas in for a death; but he wrested it
vrom me, ant mate me sit down ant vinish te pottle,
ant we soon got right vell acquainted.
`Vhen do you leave te creek, schipper Schenk?'
says he.
`It vill take me two tays yet, mit my three
men, to set te bowsprit. It's a pad pusiness, dish
delay; ant I vish I vas vell out of dis place'for I
pegan to fear for my throat, notmitstanding ve
drank Scheitam togedder. But Captain Kyt vas
de shentleman. He sent his men to help mine, ant
in four hours I vas ready for sea again, sount as
ever. He came to see me off, sent two flasches ov
de Scheitam, ant shook hants mit me, mit many
pleashant vords, ant gave me dis arrow, saying,
`Tese are my passports for my frients. If you
ever are in any tanger from my peoplesh, it vill pe
your safeguart.' Ant he spoke true; for it hash
twice saven my cargoesh.
As the skipper concluded, he held up to view a
small silver arrow the length of his fore-finger, on
which the warden discovered, as it was passed
round from one to the other, the words:
Respect the sign
.
Kyd
.
Strange  it ish vonderful  vera goot!
exclaimed
severally those to whom it was handed.
He is not so wicked after all, then, schipper
Schenk, said the warden.
The skipper shook his head, and replied
mysteriously
,
I vish I may alvays gif him a goot vide
berth, datsh all, Mynheer Vorden, notmitstanding
te Schietam.
I can tell you a tale that will give you a
different
opinion, Master Warden, said an English mate,
who formed one of the party of listeners.
By all means let us hear it, said the warden,
knocking the ashes from his pipe against his shoe,
and refilling the bowl from a leathern pouch by his
side wherein he was accustomed to carry a pound
of loose Turkish cut.
Ve vill lishten; tell it, skipper Jack, all cried,
directing their eyes first down the bay to see if
they could discover an approaching sail, and then
turning and fixing them upon the face of the seaman.
Well, shipmates, said the sailor, dropping from
his mouth carefully into the palm of his hand a huge
quid of tobacco, and sprinkling a shower of saliva
over the pavement; you see as how it was in the
West Indies. Captain Kyd had captured a trader
bound from Newport to Barbadoes, and, having
taken out all the valuables, set fire to her, with every
soul on board save a young gentleman and young
ladyone being sweetheart to the other, you must
know. These he took on board his vessel, the
'Ventur' Galley, and told the young lady, who was
very rich, that if she would pay forty thousand
dollars
for her ransom, she should go free. So she
went into the cabin with him, and wrote the order
for the money. `Now,' says she to him, `I will not
give it to you unless you promise to give me what
I love best on earth.' `Now,' says he to her, `fair
lady, what do you love best on earth?'
`My betrothed husband,' said she.
`Would you have his heart rather than all else
in the world?' asked he.
`Yes.'
`I comply with your demandbut first you
must dine with me,' said he.
So a great dinner was served up, and only Kyd
and the lady sat down to itfor he treated her with
great respect all the time, and more like a
gentleman
than a bucanier. After they had dined, she
said, `Now grant me my wish, and let me have
what I love best on earth.'
`You have had it,' said he.
`Wherewhat?' she asked, trembling all over
at his fearful looks, and hardly knowing what to
dread.
`Your lover's heart.'
`Where?' she asked.
`You have just dined off of it,' said he.
What became of the lady? asked the warden,
after the exclamations of horror and surprise had
subsided.
She became a maniac, and in three days was
buried in the sea, replied the narrator, replacing his
quid and taking a hearty draught at a can of ale
handed him by Frau Stoll herself.
Donder ant blixen! I don't pelieve ittish not
true, I vould shwear, said the skipper. He ish
pad enough, put not so pad ash dattish one of te
itle shtories tat peoplesh frighten von oder mit.
'Tis said he always gets devil's luck, before he
sails, from them as has dealings with the Evil One,
and always burns a Bible on his capstan every time
he weighs anchor, said the sailor, without
regarding
the incredulous skipper.
The last time he was here, when he walked our
streets so boldly, with a score of armed bucaniers
at his back, before he set sail I heard how he got
evil charms from the witch at Hell Gate, observed
the warden, in a low, cautious tone.
I can give ye a wrinkle on that point, I guess,
said a lank, half-farmer, half-sailor looking being,
who commanded a trader between the Rhode Island
plantations and New-Yorkone of the first of the
species now so numerous. I anchored once,
waiting for the flood tide to take me through the
gate, close alongside the rock her hut is on.
Feeling
kind o' neighbourly, and not knowin' then who
lived there, I got into my yawl, and pulled ashore
to scrape acquaintance and talk a bit. As I came
up to the hut I heard a strange noise, and smelt
a brimstonish smell, and so thought I'd reconnoitre
afore goin' in. Looking through the window, I see
the old Witch of Endor and Captain Kyd, as I
learned a'terward it was, goin' through the
awfullest
hellifications ever hearn tell on. She hanged
a piece o' yarn round his neck, and then said as how
he had a charmed life. Gracious! and the way it
lightened and thundered jist then was a sin to death!
Blue blazes an' brimstonegreat guns and little
gunsbig devils and little devils, mixed up with
owls and hobgoblins, snakes and catamounts, with
a sprinkling o' hell-cats and flying sarpents, touched
off with the tarnellest yells, 'nough to lift a feller
right off his feet by the hair of his head. I thought
creation was comin' to an eend, and dropped down
on my marrow-bones and prayed away like a
disciple
.
Soon as I could get on my legs, I showed
'um some purty tall walkin' till I got to my yawl
again, I tell ye! I expected nothin'd be left o' me
when I got there but my eyebrows and shirt
risbands
.
She is a fearful woman, said the warden; and
little thanks do we owe them for sending her among
us. 'Tis said, before she was transported to the
colony
from Ireland, that she had spirited away by her
foul charms the son of some noble house. Ill has
fared the colony the three years she has been in't.
She shoult pe purned for von vitch vooman,
said the skipper; I would pe te first to make te
fagot plaze.
I'll be there to help you a bit, I guess, too, said
the Rhode Islander. I han't been to Salemtown
in New-England for nothin', I guess. The way
they do with the critters there is a little the cutest.
If they want to tell for sartin if an old woman's a
real witch, they throw her into a pond. If she's
drownded she's no witch; but if she swims, its
gospel proof she iscoz what old woman could
swim if she warn't a nat'ral witch. They then tie
her to a stake and set fire to her.
Mit your leave, goot peoplesh, I vill shay vat
dey doesh mit vitches in mine countree, said the
Dutch burgher, deliberately taking the pipe from
his mouth. Virst, dey tries her py veighing her in
te scales mit von Piple; if she be heavier nor te
Piple, she ish prove von olt vitch voomans. Dis
ish vera goot! Secont, dey tries to shoot her mit
silver pulletsh, ant den dey tiesh her heelsh ant het
bot' togedder, and drops her into te deep vater.
Dat is alsho more vera goot!
What are ye gathered here for, ye idle knaves
and fat burghers, ye masses of smoked flesh
sponges steeped in aleand paunches like your own
pint-pots, frightening each other's cowardly ears
with tales of fear. Who is it ye would kill with
your silver bullet, Master Von Schmidt?
The company started at the harsh, stern voice
that addressed them so unexpectedly, and uttered,
as they looked up, divers exclamations and
interjections
of surprise, not unmingled with apprehension.
The warden rose from his wooden bench, and,
hurrying
away, disappeared quickly round the corner
of the inn; the tallow-chandler upset his can of
ale in his over-eagerness to gain the taproom; the
burgher broke the long stem of his pipe by striking
it against the door-sill as he crowded in on the
tallow-chandler's
heels; and on each countenance and
in every gesture of those who remained was depicted
consternation and anxiety.
The personage who had caused this sudden
movement was a female of low stature, deformed
and hideous in person, with a stern aspect, and a
wild, restless eyeindeed, none other than Elpsy
the sorceress. Suspected of having made way with
the young Lesterthe illegitimate Lestershe had
been arrested by the countess and thrown into
prison. But confessing nothing on trial, and the
circumstances not being sufficient in themselves to
convict her, after remaining in prison two years, she
was sent, with other criminals and dangerous
persons
,
to the colonies. Forbidden by the worthy
burghers to harbour in the town, she had selected,
as more in unison with her wild and wandering life,
and the mysterious character she claimed, a lonely
abode, once a fisherman's lodge, on the rocky islet
on the right of the outlet of Hurl Gate, still known
as the Witch's Rock. Here she performed her
unholy
rites, and far and wide her fame spread as a
sorceress. Seamen, as they shot through the
dangerous
pass, propitiated her; and those who would
have fair winds sought them of her in full faith.
The good came to her for good, and the evil for evil.
The tender Dutch maiden would do pilgrimage
there to ask after the fate of an absent lover, or
seek assurances of his happy and speedy return.
There were tales, too, that she favoured the
bucaniers
who swarmed the coasts, and that their
success
was owing to the heavy bribes of gold they
gave her for prosperous cruises. Occasionally she
visited the town, to the consternation of its worthy
citizens, who never failed to presage evil to scot
and lot from her presence.
What is it ye fear, Master Wardenwhat is
it leads ye to leave your bench, schipperis't your
Vol. II.H
own shadows ye fear? she now cried, fixing her
eyes darkly and angrily upon each countenance.
It ish out ov reshpect, Frau Elpshy, replied
the half-tipsy schipper, mustering his physical to
the aid of his moral courage, and speaking in a
deprecatory
tone. We knowsh your power, ant make
reverensh to it by getting up, ash you say.
Ye are a hypocritical and fear-stricken set, all
of yeever gulping ale, ye have only ale courage.
Jost Stoll, woman, give me a can of thy best Island
spirits. I have walked far, and am athirst and
weary.
The strong potation was given her by the
reluctant
hostess, who dared not refuse her demand, lest,
in the evil that she would visit upon her hearth-stone
and roof-tree, she might lose far more than the value
of a goblet. The weird woman quaffed the beverage
at a draught, and, placing the cup on the bench with
an emphasis, turned and looked down the bay with
a steady gaze. Every eye followed hers. The sun
had just touched the hills of Jersey with his lower
edge, and the evening haze lifting from the water
gave a dimness to distant objects. For some
seconds
she continued to gaze, and then suddenly cried,
He comes!
Sail ho! instantly shouted the Rhode Islander.
At the same moment, a universal exclamation from
the observers upon the stoope showed that all eyes
had discovered the object that had attracted the
attention
and caused the sudden outcry of the woman.
Far down the bay, near its junction with the
sea, diminished to a mere speck by the distance,
and appearing not bigger than a snow-flake
floating
above the water, or a white gull riding on
the waves, a vessel was seen entering the
Narrows
and standing towards the town. Instantly
all was excitement. The noise and rumour of
its approach flew from the Rondeel on the south
even to the wall on the north. The worthy
citizens
,
attended by their fraus and their little folk,
maids and matrons, old and young, black and white,
slaves and Indians, and everything that had life in
New-Amsterdam, assembled in front of Jost Stoll's
inn, with their eyes directed down the bay. With
a steady, onward course, the vessel came gallantly
up the channel, and such was the way she made
that she promised to drop anchor off against the
fort ere the twilight should be deepened into night.
Gradually, as she approached, her form and size
began to grow more distinct to the eye, and her
proportions to stand out clearer.
She is a brigbut not the Ger-Falcon, I am
thinking, said the warden, who had again taken his
place among the crowd, his curiosity overcoming his
superstitious fearsalbeit, he gave the sorceress a
wide berth. Nor indeed was he alone in his
aversion
to her society; for every one present seemed
instinctively to avoid her neighbourhood: so that
she stood alone in an open space before the inn,
intently watching, without heeding those around
her, the advancing sail.
Vat oder prig can it pe, put te Sher-Falcon, said
the skipper. Dere ish none expected here till next
Shaint Andrew's tay. De Barbadoesh packet vash
just sailde Glasgow merchantman ish not due till
Christmash, and tere ish put one oder prig dat trade
here, vich is gone to te Golt Coast for negroesh.
'Tis te Ger-Falcon, or te pucanier Kyt himself.
Got forbid! was the exclamation from every
tongue.
She should carry her colours boldly aloft if she
were an honest trader, said the warden. 'Tis
suspicious.
The Ger-Falcon, neighbour, was a
square-rigger
,
I guess, said the Rhode Islander, making a
focus of his closed hands, and looking long and
scrutinizingly
at the stranger; if I know a mainsail
from a spanker, that craft is a 'morfydite, with a
reg'lar straight stem for a mainmast.
It ish true; tish not te king's vesshel, said
the schipper, looking eagerly at her. She ish not
square-rigged; nor ish she von 'morfridyte neider.
She ish polacca-rigged, and has von cut-vater like
a pike's nose. Dat craft ish here for no goot.
As the skipper spoke he felt in his pouch
anxiously
,
and, drawing forth his little arrow, looked at
it between doubt and confidence, and, shaking his
head bodingly, walked into the taproom to comfort
his spirits with a fresh can of mum.
The oracular shake of the skipper's head seemed
to have affected all present. Glances of
apprehension
and words of trembling inquiry were
interchanged
;
and, fluctuating between hope and fear,
they continued anxiously to watch the approaching
stranger, at times turning their glances towards the
witch, to see if, on her dark features, they could read
a confirmation of the fears the skipper's words and
mysterious manner had awakened. As the vessel
came nearer, it was clearly apparent to the most
unpractised
eye that she was not the vessel sent out
in search of the bucanier, and for which they had so
long been on the watch. There was something,
too, in the shape and air of the stranger, that roused
their suspicions of his pacific character, and the
dreaded monosyllable Kyd was whispered
under
breath from one to the other. Many an anxious
eye was turned towards the Rondeel, to see if the
vigilance of the town's defenders was roused, and,
to the confirmation of their fears, they saw that the
little garrison was on the alert; that armed men
were on the walls; that the tompions were taken
from the guns; and that its captain stood with his
glass on the outer bastion watching the vessel, while
ever and anon an order, hastening the warlike
preparations
,
reached their ears.
The stranger, a long, sharp, polacca-rigged
brigantine
,
came swiftly on, boldly passed Red Hook,
disappeared a few moments behind the wooded
swell of Governor's Island, and reappeared on the
east side, within gunshot of the town. Just as the
more timid citizens began to think of withdrawing
to the protection of the fort or the covert of their
stout stone houses, and just as a warning gun was
fired from the Rondeel, she rounded to, her canvass
shivered in the wind, her after sails descended to
the deck by the run, and her fore sails one after the
other rapidly disappeared: a moment afterward,
with everything furled, she dropped her anchor,
and, swinging slowly round to it, remained, dimly
seen through the thickening twilight, as stationary
as the island off which she was anchored. After
commenting upon her appearance and character,
and giving vent to their doubts and suspicions, one
by one the worthy citizens retired to their
well-defended
mansions, trusting to the governor to keep
and hold the city should it be placed in peril before
the coming dawn. Elpsy was left alone where she
had stood all the while, watching the vessel's
approach
:
the red light of the western sky lighted up
her dusky features with a baleful glare, and her
features worked with some deep, inward emotion.
She would one moment strain her eyes towards the
reposing vessel, and the next, with an exclamation
of disappointment, stride, with an impatient step,
to and fro the narrow strand before the alehouse.
'Tis he, she said, looking fixedly in the
direction
of the vessel. 'Tis the day he said he should
return, and he has not deceived me. Now will I
H 2
bring about that I have laboured five long years to
accomplish. He shall obey me; he shall do it; he
shall do what I commandfulfil it to the letter, or
he shall die. No boat yet! she said, pausing and
looking over the water. He waits for night. He
will scarce think to meet me here; but he shall
not come and go again without seeing me. He
escapes
me no more. Let me lay my hand on his
heart and get his promise to see me, and I will go
back to my rock; for I know then he will come to
me there.
The stars at length came out, and night took the
place of the glowing twilight. The customers of
Jost Stoll had returned to their homes, or were
seated within, under protection of the massive
shutters
and bars, which, earlier than at her accustomed
time, the fore-guarding landlady had placed over
her windows. All was still throughout the town
save the tread of the sentinel on the parapet of the
Rondeel, the tramp of the night-guard going with
quicker and more determined tread than usual to
their posts, the regular dash of the waves on the
beach, and occasionally the low, deep voice of the
weird woman soliloquizing. At length, after many
an earnest look and impatient word, the distant dip
of oars in the direction of the brigantine reached
her ears, and in a few minutes afterward, faintly
visible through the darkness, a boat was seen
approaching
the entrance of the canal below the inn.
With a glad exclamation she hastened forward to
meet it.
CHAPTER II.
The stain of crimethe stain of crime
Glows in immortal colours there!
Not e'en the coursing flood of time
Can make that foulest plague-spot fair.
My love was thine; it would have stood
The test of years, or falsehood even;
But thine own hand, imbued in blood,
Hath shut to thee both earth and heaven.
Away, away! there flows 'tween thee and me
The deep, dark ocean of eternity.
The
worthy burghers assembled before the inn
of
frau
Jost Stoll had not been alone in their
anxiety
for the return of the Ger-Falcon, nor in their
curiosity about the strange vessel which had sailed
so boldly into their harbour.
Between the Rondeel and the alehouse, amid a
park of majestic trees with a lawn before it sloping
to the water, stood, as has been before described,
the ancient White Hall, the gubernatorial residence
of the Earl of Bellamont. It was an antiquated,
rambling edifice, with divers bastion-like
projections
,
chimneys terminating in turrets, lofty-peaked
gables, and long, low wings. Running along the
whole front was a balcony, upon which the windows
of the second story opened, converting it into an
airy and elevated promenade for the occupants of
the suite of rooms connecting with it. At the
eastern extremity of this terrace, which here wound
round an octagonal-shaped tower obtruding from
the angle, was a deep curtained window, which led
into a boudoir. The slanting rays of the setting
sun fell in rich tints through it upon the carpet, and,
reflected from its crimson curtains, diffused a
roseate
light throughout the chamber. Near the
centre
of this apartment, which was furnished with the
most costly articles of luxury, stood a superb harp,
with its music lying open upon a stand beside it,
as if just deserted. Paintings, of subjects tastefully
appropriate for such a scene, from the pencils of
the old masters, hung upon the walls, and shelves
of gilded books filled the sides of a niche, in which,
on a pedestal of black marble, stood a snowy statue
of Calliope. In an opposite recess answering to
it was a Clio; and in a third, fronting the window,
was a Madonna and child, by Guido, before which,
on a tall tripod of silver and ivory exquisitely carved,
was placed a crucifix of gold, set with precious
stones, and several books of prayer and of pious
reading.
By the open window which faced the south sat
a female, in the white and flowing evening costume
of the times. Her face lay in the palm of her right
hand, which rested on a slab supported by bronze
lions that stood beneath a lofty mirror half hidden
in tapestry. A guitar lay unheeded upon her lap, on
the silent strings of which her fingers
unconsciously
lingered, while her eyes were turned towards
the sea, whither, it was plain, her thoughts had also
flown. At her feet was a silken flag, on which was
embroidered the crest of Bellamonta boar's head
and beneath, in Gothic characters, the letters
R.
F.
, the latter unfinished, with the needle left in it.
She was exceedingly lovely, beautiful as the houris
that awake the glowing lyre of the Persian bard.
Her beauty was oriental toosoft, languishing,
dreamy, and most dangerous to look upon. The
amorous sun lingered and still lingered on her olive
brow, rioting on its beauty, and, to the last, entwined
his golden rays among her glorious hair. And such
hair! It was dark as the midnight cloud. Evenly
parted on her forehead, it was turned back from her
blue veined temples to the top of the head, and
braided to resemble the crest of a helmet; but
several
flowing waves of the luxuriant braid had burst
the bondage of the fillet, and now sported about her
superb neck in the gentle evening wind.
Five years had passed, and Kate Bellamont had
become the lovely woman she now appeared. She
had grown taller, being now a little above the
common
height, and her ripened figure was moulded
in the most finished model of feminine grace.
Nothing
could be more fascinatingly perfect than the
undulating outline of her person; and from the
rounded arm and elegant hand, to the symmetrical
foot just peeping from beneath her robe, resting its
tip on an ottoman, all was grace and harmony.
Her features, too, were in keeping with the
enhanced
beauty of her person. The expression of her
face was something loftier and more decided, but
blending, nevertheless, much sweetness with that
peculiar and graceful dignity becoming a very
beautiful
woman. Her dark, floating eyes were fuller
of passion and thought, and far more fatal to the
beholder
were their animated glances. The budding
loveliness of her ruby, laughing lip had changed to
a sweeter and more quiet character; yet love, now
a practised archer, lay hidden there still, nestled
amid smiles and dimples; perhaps, too, they bore
a stronger impress of pride of birth and firmness
of character than heretofore. Indeed, all that the
youthful maiden had promised was fulfilled in the
more matured woman, and the unfolding bud had
burst into glorious flower.
As she gazed forth from the window, and looked
long and anxiously down the bay, which stretched
before her reflecting all the hues of the gorgeously
painted sky, a pensive shadow would at times steal
across her features, and a sigh escape her bosom;
then, with a conscious blush, she would drop her
eyes, thrum a nervous note or two on the guitar,
and again bend her searching, wishful gaze over the
water.
At length, just as the sun was setting, a vessel
appeared afar off in the entrance of the harbour,
and with an exclamation of joy she bounded to the
balcony, and watched, with no less interest than the
skipper and his companions had done, its approach
towards the town. As it came nearer, a look of
disappointment clouded her features, and anxiety
and suspicion began to take the place of hope.
No, it is not he; such was not the fashion of
his sails; nor does the flag of England fly from her
mast as it is wont to do. Heaven forbid that
accident
should have befallen him. Oh, that he would
return and relieve my anxious watching.Yet
perhaps
this stranger may bring me news of him.
As this thought occurred to her, she watched the
motions of the vessel with renewed interest, until
she dropped anchor within gunshot of the town.
The gun from the Rondeel, and the confused
murmur
of voices from the inn below, increased her
curiosity; and the deepening twilight still found her
at the window, with her eyes fixed on the scarcely
visible hull, as if, although it might not contain him
she looked for, it was yet in some way connected
with her destinies.
Elpsy, it will be remembered, after her
appearance
at the inn of Jost Stoll, waited until nightfall,
and then, hearing the approach of a boat from the
strange vessel, hastened to meet it. It pulled in
close by a large rock; and as the person it bore
stepped to the beach, she at once knew him by his
bearing to be him she sought. He gave a few
brief orders to his men, warning them to be
guarded
against surprise, and then, wrapping his mantle
about him, first loosening his sword in its scabbard
and bringing his pistols round to be ready for use,
he moved across the beach towards the silent inn.
She permitted him to pass her unseen, and followed
him till he reached the open space in front of the
alehouse, when, seeing him pause as if to
reconnoitre
,
she approached him from behind and lightly
touched his arm.
Quick as lightning, his hand was upon her
throat, and a pistol was held to her heart. But as
quickly the hand was released and the weapon
put up.
Is it thou, Elpsy? Thou shouldst come less
stealthily upon a man who is accustomed to the
use of steel. Had I not recognised thy accursed
shape, not to be mistaken even in this faint
star-light
,
thou wouldst have caused me to shed thy
blood. What wouldst thou?
The fulfilment of thy promise.
Have they come?
All. 'Tis five weeks since the ship that bore
them from the old country anchored in the
harbour
.
All?
All, even thythat is, even to the Lady
Lester
!
Ah, the poor lady! Does she live?
Scarcely. For years she shut herself in her
castle; but the Earl of Bellamont, pitying her
loneliness
and her sorrows, a year since did prevail on
her to take up her abode at Castle Cor.
And so, when he was appointed governor, she
came hither with him? I would see her, Elpsy.
Nay, thou hadst better not. There is one who
alone will demand all thy time and thought! Hast
thou the will to perform? will no faint-heartedness
come over thee?
None, I love her still. Time only increases
my passion. Five years has given me worldly
lessons. I am ready to fulfil the vow I made to
thee when in port a few months ago, in expectation
of her arrival, and now assert my claim to the rank
and title of Lester, for I have been taught that
kings have been bastards, and bastards kings.
And to this title seek to annex that of the house
of Bellamont?
But will she hear me still? I fear even thy art,
aided by thy subtlest filters, could not make her
love if love has once died in her heart.
It will depend on theeas it chance that thou
love her or her title more.
I care not for her title so I be once more her
accepted wooer. Elpsy, he said, with animation,
I have loved this maiden well; never, save when
sleepingnor even then, for my dreams were of
her alonehave I ceased to think of her. There
is none, save thyself, that know I am not the true
Lester?
None. Even Lady Lester still mourns thee
as her son, and would be first to hail thee.
The Mark Meredith?
Is lost at sea, and so thou art the only claimant.
Canst prove it?
His name appeared, 'tis said, in every print, as
one lost in a king's ship, that went down at sea, in
a storm off Calais four years ago.
'Tis better than I thought. Yet he was a brave
lad! Does Lady Lester know of thy presence here?
She lives secluded in the White Hall, and
knows naught that passeth in the world. But did
she, am I not beyond the reach of justice, should
she seek my death on suspicion of slaying thee?
Was I not tried and nothing found against meas
how should there be? I am an exile and under
sentence. Ha, ha, law cannot reach me; and man,
unaided by it, dare not. I reign here; I rule all
minds. It is they who fear, not I. They are the
slaves of superstition, and I make them obedient to
my will. Even thou, proud man, dost
acknowledge
my power.
I do, Elpsy.
Therefore shalt thou have its aid in thy wooing.
Nay, first let me try my fortunes on the footing
of our former love.
If she will not listen to thee?
She will.
Wilt thou resign her if she will not?
He was silent for a moment, and then said,
What would you have me do?
Take her with thee to thy vesselonce there,
thy will must be her will. I shall give thee neither
rest nor peace, on sea or land, till thou art the
acknowledged
Earl of Lester, and, by marriage, Lord
of Bellamont. Go. Where you see the light
burning in yonder window is her chamber. I saw
her there as the sun went down. Go, and when
thou hast spoken with her, come to my hut and
tell me how thou art received. See thou lag not,
for I have prepared the rites thou hast sought of
meand if thou wouldst have thy buried treasures
hid from mortal eyes, and prosper in what thou
undertakest, see thou art with me before the
midnight
hour.
Stay, Elpsy; should she discover that Kyd and
Lester are the same?
Then, said the woman, in a sneering and
malicious
tone of voice, thou wilt have to woo the
rougher, and 'twill be more to thy credit if thou
carry her off. Would it humble thy pride to have
her know it?
By Heaven, did I believe she did, I would not
go near her.
Vol. II.I
The witch laughed in such a way that he half
suspected her of betraying him. He laid his hand
on her shoulder, and said quickly,
Woman, thou hast told her, to gratify thy
malicious
soul.
Think you I would crush the seed, when, by a
little patience, I can pluck the fruit of the full-grown
tree? Go, boy!
As she spoke she pointed towards the White
Hall. He left her without replying, and walked in
the direction of the mansion, which stood silent and
majestic amid its noble grove of oaks.
As the night advanced, lights were brought into
the boudoir of Kate Bellamont. Turning away
from the window with a sigh of disappointment, she
struck a few sad notes on her guitar, and then,
throwing
it aside, took up the flag she was embroidering,
and began mechanically to ply the needle,
occasionally
pausing in her graceful toil, with her head
inclined towards the open window, as if she fancied
she heard sounds from the water. Suddenly she
started and sprung to the balcony. The regular dip
of oars now struck distinctly upon her ears, each
instant
approaching nearer and nearer, and a dim
object
soon advanced from the distant gloom; and, as
it came swiftly on, she could distinguish the bodies of
men and the outline of a boat boldly relieved against
the glassy flood. In a few seconds it was hidden by
an oak and a clump of shrubbery, but she could hear
it still as it made its way towards the entrance of the
canal in front of the Boat and Anchor, as the
inn of Jost Stoll was designated. After listening
a while longer, and hearing nothing to confirm her
hopes that it bore a message to the White Hall,
she re-entered her boudoir and once more resumed
her embroidery. This in a little while she
restlessly
cast aside, and, approaching her harp, struck
its golden chords, and, accompanying it by her
voice, sung, in a wild and thrilling strain, a popular
Irish air. Now slow and solemn sounded the
deep, majestic notes; now light and free; now soft,
and touching, and most melancholy, even to
sadness
,
they wailed beneath the magic touch of her
fingersher voice, or deep as an angel's trumpet,
or soft as a guitar, or clear as a flute, or wild and
high like a clarion, following in faultless harmony
through the rangeless fields of melody.
Like an emerald gem on the breast of the sea,
Dear Erin, my home! is thy vision to me;
As the sun to the dayas the moon to the night,
Is thy thought to my soul'tis its warmth and its light.
Sweet clime of my kindredloved land of my birth!
The fairest, the dearest, the brightest on earth;
Oh! where'er I may roamhowe'er bless'd I may be,
My spirit all lonely returns unto thee.
There first budded passionthere burst into bloom
The flower of young hopethough it droop'd to the tomb!
But that brief life of love! though whole ages may roll
O'er my heart in despondence'tis fresh in my soul.
Let the winds wildly blowlet the waves madly rise,
Till the storm sprite's libation is flung in the skies;
Still my spirit will seek, o'er the ocean's bright foam,
For my home in dear Erinmy own native home!
[1]
[1]
Composed by Owen Grenliffe Warren, Esq.
The last notes of the music were trembling on
the chords, and the maiden stood as if entranced by
her own strains, when a noise like the flitting of a
humming-bird in the chamber caused her to start,
and, at the same instant, something glittered past
her eyes and fell at her feet. She stooped to lift it
from the carpet with an exclamation between fear
and surprise.
A silver arrow! What can it mean? Ha!
surely I have seen it beforeno, no, it cannot be!
I will examine it! what strange recollections
what long buried memories start up! I will see if
my suspicions are true!
She held it to the light with a trembling hand,
and with undisguised astonishment read:
Field of Archery, Castle For, May,
MDCXCIV.
Merciful Heaven! she almost shrieked, it
is
it is the same!
Who can have done this?
Whence came it? 'Tis Lester!
It is Lester! repeated a deep, rich voice.
She turned with a half cry and startled look
towards
the window, and, to her terror, beheld
standing
just without on the balcony, in the shadow of
the curtain, a tall dark figure enveloped in a cloak,
his features shaded by sable plumes drooping over
his brow from a Spanish hat looped boldly up in
front.
She would have shrieked, but her surprise and
alarm for a moment denied her utterance. She
leaned on her harp for support, and gazed on the
intruder without the power to move. He
advanced
a step and stood within the window. The
movement restored her presence of mind, and with
a degree of self-possession that surprised herself,
and in the tone and manner of one who feels herself
insulted by intrusion rather than intimidated by the
presence of the intruder, she cried,
Stand, sir, whoever thou art! Approach no
nearer, or I alarm the Hall.
As she spoke she extended her hand towards a
silver bell that stood on a table near her. Quicker
than thought, the stranger's hand was upon hers, and
he was kneeling, without cloak or bonnet, at her
feet. Surprise, rather than fear, rooted her to the
spot. She gazed on him with astonishment; and, as
she gazed, her features worked with extraordinary
emotion. The light shone full upon his face, and
exhibited
the features of a fair, handsome man, scarce
twenty-five, with light flowing hair, an eye like a
hawk's, and a figure of the most noble and
manly
proportions. He wore a short Flemish cloak of
green cloth, richly embroidered, and a short Spanish
sword, with a jewelled hilt, hung at his side. His
face was lifted to hers with eloquent pleading. She
met his gaze with a wild, alarmed lookclasped
her hands on her forehead as if she would recall the
past, and steadfastly fixed her eyes upon him as if
tracing in his features a resemblance that startled
her.
Kate.
Soft were the tones of his deep, rich voice as
he spoke, and full of tenderness were his eyes as
he lifted them to hers.
Robert of Lester! she cried, starting back as
if memory had vividly returned at the sound of his
voice.
I am he, was the reply of the stranger,
bending
his head lowly, as if deprecating her
displeasure
.
Leave me, sir, she said, haughtily, though
returning
love was evidently struggling for the
mastery
over her sense of right. As she spoke she
drew herself up commandingly, though her bosom
heaved with emotion, and her averted eyes
contra-dicted
her words.
Dearest Kate!
Robert of Lester, I bid you leave me. Your
presence is an intrusion, sir.
Lady, he said, with tenderness, do you not
remember when, five years since, you placed, with
your own fair hands, the arrow you now hold in
them, in my bonnet.
Nay, bring not up the past; 'tis buriedlong
forgotten, she cried, nervously, and in a voice
I 2
tremulous with feeling. Would to God you had
not appeared to revive it.
Lady, he continued, in a soft, subdued tone,
that touched her heart, does not love's early
dream
That dream is o'er. Oh, that you would cease
to recall what will only render me miserable! she
added, with feeling, burying her face in her hands.
Is there no room for pardonnone for
forgiveness
?
Hear me, Kate! dearest Kate! You who
were my playmate in childhoodwho in youth
first awakened love in this bosom. Dash not the
cup of hope for ever to the ground! I have sought
thee, and now kneel to thee, to tell thee how
fondly
,
how madly I love
Cease, sir. This is no language for me to
hear. Oncebut, no matter'tis past. If you
have aught to say touching matters foreign to this,
speak, and I can listen; then, prithee depart. Oh,
that thou hadst kept away from me for ever! The
sight of thee has torn my heart!
Then there is hope?
None.
Hast forgotten, he said, with passionate
tenderness
,
how often we have sailed together on
the little mere by Castle More; how together we
have pursued the stag through the forests of Castle
Cor; how oft we have rambled by the shores of its
bay by moonlight, entwined in each other's arms
as we walked; how we loved one another, and
did pledge in the sight of Heaven undying love
Robert, Robert she cried, moved by the
touching images he had recalled.
Have you forgotten, he continued, in the same
tone, rising and advancing a step nearer to her,
while she leaned against the harp, nor thought to
retreat from him, oh, have you quite forgotten
all this? Can you recall it and bid me leave
thee? Will you spurn him you have loved and
still love
Hold, hold! I love thee not! no, no, I love
thee not. You presume too much, sir, she added,
starting from her attitude, and with difficulty
assuming
a haughty bearing. A maiden may once
love, and, finding she has loved unworthily, hate!
Dearest Kate, he said, in a tone that reminded
her of the days when they were lovers, gently
taking
her hand.
Nay, stand back, sir! she cried, troubled and
with difficulty governing the tones of her voice,
which returning love fain would have fashioned in
its own sweet way.
Nay, dearest Kate, you love me still!
Wherefore
this shrinking form and averted eyethis
wild look of alarmthis struggle to reprove when
your heart gushes with returning love? Why do
you gaze on me with looks of horror! At one
moment terror is depicted on your face, at another
tenderness takes its place. It could not be thus
if you scorned me!
Robert, I cannot listen to you'tis dangerous
fatal. Ifif I did love you still, thy crimes
Ha! do you know me!
As `the Kyd.'
Who told thee this? he asked, fiercely.
Elpsy.
When?
Yesterday!
The foul fiend! he cried, pacing the floor.
He then muttered, Sothis plan is defeated. I
can no longer rewoo her as Lester! Ten minutes
since, this false witch told me that none save
herself
knew that the bastard Lester and Kyd were
one! I would have made her believe I had
returned
from five years of honourable exile, to which
her anger had banished me, and penitent, wooed her
as Lester, as I have promised the sorceressfor
I can do now what then I could not do: five years
of crime makes a wonderful difference in a man's
feelings! Yet I will deny all. She should believe
me before this witch.
Such were the thoughts that run rapidly through
his mind as he walked the room. Turning round
to her, he said, in the tone of voice that innocence
would assume,
Alas, dearest Kate! has this baleful sorceress,
with envenomed breath, instilled her poison in a
flower so fair. Alas, and were I `the Kyd,' would
you, with the taproom gossips of the babbling town,
believe me such as Rumour with her hundred
tongues would make me? Shall I to
her
refer this
altered airthis cold lookthis hand that's neither
given nor withdrawn? Dost remember when first
we parted after our plighted vows beneath the linden
by the southern tower of Castle Cor ('twas the third
day before thy birthday, I remember it well); thy
heart against mine beat wildlythy head lay upon
my breastmy arm encircled thy waistmy lips
were pressed to thineand this 'kerchief, bearing
thy initials wrought by thine own fingers, and which
I have kept sacred as the pious monk a relic of the
cross, was saturate with tears
thy
tears, Kate.
And thus, though five long years have separated us,
do we meet now!
'Fore Heaven, sir! hast thou not given cause?
she exclaimed, recovering herself after a brief but
terrible struggle with her feelings, for she was fast
melting at his words. Dost remember how thou
didst leave me, and to what end? Hast forgotten
thy crimes? I am mad to talk with thee. Thou
art no longer Lester. In thee alone I see the
freebooter
,
the bucanier, the terrible Kyd! Shame that
a noble, for a light word spoken by a spirited maiden
in anger, should thus have cast himself away!
I had other causethou dost yet believe me
to be Lesterbut
I will hear no palliationthou hast thrown
thyself
awaywhen, if thou hadst really loved me,
thou wouldst have come back and sought to heal
the breach.
I would have done itbut
Thou didst not. Therefore are we no longer
aught to each other!
Thy words tell me what I have scarce dared
to hopethat thou wouldst have received and
pardoned
me! But there was an impassable
barrier
Which was thy pride. Fatal, fatal has it been
to thee.
Nay, but a dark stain
Enough, Robert of Lester! I will hear no
more in extenuation or plea. Let this interview
cease.
She turned from him as she spoke, though it
evidently cost her an effort to do so, and made a
step towards the door communicating with the main
body of the mansion.
Lady! Katedear Kate, he cried,
passionately
,
approaching her and kneeling before her,
you have said you would have received me had
I then returned. If thy love was true love, five
years should not kill it, but increase it rather.
Behold me returned; forget the long lapse of
time; see me only at thy feet to atone the deep
offence given on thy birthday, which has so long
separated us; receive me as if but a day, and not
years, had intervened; take me once more to the
throne of thy affections; let me again be the
Lester
of thy early yearsthe Lester whom thou hast
loved
thy
Lesterthy
Nay, Robert, she cried, with softness, yet
turning her head away as she spoke, as if fearing
to trust herself to meet his glance; nay, it may
not be. I pity you; but love!love?no, no, it
lives no longer. Then art thou not guilty? she
cried, with sudden energy, recoiling from him.
Thou didst make me for the moment forget Kyd
in Lester. Go, thou art not the Lester I have
known. I no longer love thee, Robert; and if I
did, crime on thy part has placed between us a
wall high as heaven!
I am not so guilty as you believe, lady; but,
if I have sinned against thee, thus here at thy feet
I do atone my deep offence.
Rise, sir. I accuse you not; with Heaven
lies the knowledge of your guilt. But, if
conscience
goad thee not to it, why thus a suppliant?
Conscience useth neither spur nor exhortation.
If I am proved innocent, yet is the homage of my
knee still due to thee as the divinity that my soul
for years has worshipped.
Enough, sir! I tremble to hear thee link my
name with such gross impiety. Detain me no
longer.
Dear Lady Kate! he pleaded, entreatingly.
Release my hand! and remember, she added,
with a suddenness characteristic of this
capricieuse
cration
, when you fashion your speech, that you
address Lady Catharine of Bellamont!
She drew back haughtily as she spoke, and the
guilty lover bent his head low before the reproof,
while resentment and grief were mingled in the
expression
of his countenance.
Lady, he said, without looking up, and
speaking
in a voice apparently modulated by injured
feelings
,
do you believe the tales of crime men charge
me with?
How else, she replied, pausing and turning
back, losing, in her just resentment, the lover in
the pirate, and speaking in tones of virtuous
dignity
,
How else? 'Tis rife on every tongue. Thy
deeds are the undying theme of fireside wonder and
village gossip. Nay, mothers use the dreaded
name of Kyd to scare rude children to obedience!
By the cross! he cried, starting up and
speaking
with fierce vehemence, 'tis all a foul
invention
;
an idle tale and lying calumny; the escaped
bile of some long-festering sore, nourished and
fattened
in the breast of scandal. Nay, dear Kate,
he continued, changing his manner and voice, and
speaking as if he made light of it all, 'tis not worth
a passing thought! 'Tis an old-wives' tale only;
and for such inventions thou hast too much good
sense to crush the hopes of years; thou hast, he
added, tenderly, too deep remembrance of our
former love to tear a heart that, like the rootless
mistletoe which borrows life from that it clings
to, lives only by its hold on thine!
Robert, she said, moved by the solemn and
impassioned tones of his voice, his pleading look,
his face upturned to hers, all eloquent with love
and bringing him, as in happier days, before her
memory, Robert, I once loved youhow truly,
Heaven and my own heart were witnesses. Thou
wert virtuous then, and helmeted with truth, and
thy heart was girt about with honour, like plate of
proof. Thy look was noble, and thy port such as
became the nobleness within. I was proud of thee.
Absent, I treasured thee in my heart of hearts, and
lived onlywas happy only, in thy presence!
When Rumour came trumpeting your misdeeds,
I
was the
last
to believe them true.
Katedearest Kate
Nay, speak not. Your tongue and eyes are
not yet drilled to play their parts together.
KateI entreat
True love for a noble maiden should have been
to thee a shield and buckler, Robert, and kept thee
from this sad fall.
Lady, you do me wrong. My hand, but not
my heart, has erred
I have not yet done. From one source, that
mingles not with the noisy torrent Rumour has let
loose throughout the world, I've gathered most
certain
proof that you are guilty both in heart and
hand. Ay, men do not, for very fear, tell the half
of what thou hast done.
This sourcethe witch?
No. Long had I heard of Kyd the outlaw; long
had crime and guilt, in shapes most dreadful and
appalling
,
come to my shrinking ears coupled with his
name. Night and day, as we crossed the sea, was
double watch set, lest he should come upon us
unawares
.
Everywhere did I hear of him and his
deeds of blood, till I did believe him to be a demon
human only in shape, let on earth for its punishment.
'Twas from one who had been thy prisoner I heard
the sanguinary tale. 'Twas told me ere I knew thee
other than the world knew theefor 'twas only
yesterday Elpsy told me, what before had crossed
my mind as the mere shadow of a suspicion,
banished
as soon as it came, that thou wert Lester,
and that revenge against me had driven thee to
piracy
.
This I believe not; Heaven keep me from
answering for thy guiltrather attribute it to thy
own evil passions, and, I fear, an innate love for
rapine; for how else wouldst thou have torn thy
noble mother's heart (I speak not of hers to whom
thy troth was plighted), and foregone thy rank and
title among men?
If thou didst know all, lady, thou wouldst not
judge me thus
Thou canst say nothing I will believe. He
who told me is, as once thou wert, the soul of truth
and honour!
Who is this Daniel come to judgment? asked
the bucanier, with irony.
A naval officer, who was taken prisoner in the
Indian Seas by a rover, and afterward made his
escape by stratagem.
This rover?
Thyself.
There is but one of rank above a common
sailor
who was my captive and escaped, he
muttered
,
turning away as if recalling the past; Fitzroy
I think was his name; it may be he; if so, I will
no longer urge my innocence, but woo her under
my proper colours. Pray, he said, abruptly
addressing
her in a voice in which awakened
jealousy
was mingled with sarcasm, hast thou ever
chanced to know a youthful officer called
Fitzroy
?
Fitzroy! she repeated, with embarrassment,
while the blood mounted to her cheek in a way in
which it never does in a maiden's save when a
lover is suddenly named.
Ay, I said Fitzroy. Is there aught in the name
to call up the rich blood to the face? Fitzroy's
the name--Rupert Fitzroy, I think!
In her agitation her eyes involuntarily turned to
the spot where she had dropped the colours she
was working, and, to her increased confusion, the
letters she had just completed met her eye. His
glance followed hers, and instantly he exclaimed,
with an eye sparkling with jealousy and surprise,
By the rood! lady, there are the very initials!
So this pretty bit of bunting can tell tales! Now,
Vol. II.K
by the cross, I see it all, he said, walking the
room with anger and speaking in an under tone;
behind this tale of my deeds she let slip so glibly,
and under cover of believing it, she fain would
conceal her transferred love. Woman, he cried,
sternly addressing her, know you this Rupert
Fitzroy well?
You hold no right to question me, she firmly
replied, and I refuse to answer.
So, I have a rival! 'Tis love for another, and
not hatred of the crimes you lay to my charge, that
leads you to scorn me thus. The arms of thy
house above his name! Ha! 'tis a well-ripened
love! I'll find it out; and if he who stands
between
me and thee be on the sea or wide earth, I
will cross blades with him. A proper youth, that
thou art ashamed to own himperhaps the young
fisher's lad has taken my placeI have heard he
took to the seas.
Even he, if honourable, were worthier than
thou, with the nobility which thou hast dishonoured.
But he no longer lives. Lest you give wrong
motives
to my silence, I will confess to thee that I do
know a Captain FitzroyRupert Fitzroyonce
your captive by most foul-handed treacherynow
as far removed above you as the eagle, that looks
unblenching on the sun, above the tortoise.
You love him?
I do.
Then, by the holy Heaven! thou shalt repent
thy love and he, crossing my path ere the sun, that
shall rise to-morrow, be a month older.
As he spoke he turned from her and disappeared
through the window, leaving her overwhelmed with
surprise, wonder, and alarm. She heard him
strike the ground as he sprung from the low
balcony
,
and listened with trembling to his departing
footsteps as they rapidly crossed the lawn towards
the seaside. For a few moments she remained
standing as he had left her, as if endeavouring to
realize what had passed, her eyes strained, her
hands clasped across her forehead, her lips parted.
Oh God, that this had been spared me! she
cried, with the bitterness of a soul surcharged with
intense grief. Have I seen him? Was it he?
His voicehis airoh, it was Lester's self!he
whom I have never ceased to lovewhombut
these are dangerous thoughtsI must think of him
no more. Oh crime, crime! what a deep and
impassable
gulf hast thou placed between us! Yet
I have seen him, spoken with him! His hand
has pressed mine in gentleness as it was wont.
Oh how the past came back! time seemed
obliterated
,
and I could at one moment have given
myself
up to himbut crime, crime! No, no, I must
think no more of him; yet I am not sorry I have
beheld him once more. Strange that, after so many
years, and years of crime, have elapsed, he should
still be dear to me! No, no, he is not dear to me
not
he
as he isit is Lester of my youthit is
he that I lovehe I alone think of, whose memory
I can never cease to cherish; but this guilty being
I know not! Yet he is Lester! My poor, poor
headmy poor hearthow they strive with one
another. Oh that my love could wash out his
crimes! But whither do my thoughts wander?
The sight of him has made me forget that I am no
longer a wild girl at Castle Cor. I must root out
this young love, and try no longer to identify
myself
now with myself then. I am now the
betrothed
of anotherof another who has won me
by his sympathy and gentleness, by his nobleness
and his honour, by his manly virtues, and the deep
devotion of his pure and elevated love. Rupert, I
will not be false to thee; the trial is over.
Henceforward
I will fill my heart with thee alone, though
I did tell thee, when thou didst woo me on the sea,
that I would not give it all up to thee; that in one
part was sacredly embalmed the sad memory of a
first, yet unworthy love!
Such were the conflicting thoughts that were
passing through the mind of the troubled maiden,
when she was startled by a low tap at the door.
It was a second time repeated before she could
command her voice to bid the applicant enter. The
door slowly opened, and the family confessor of the
Earl of Bellamont entered the boudoir. He was a
man of commanding figure, with light flowing hair,
and a peaked, auburn beard reaching to his breast,
giving the appearance of the usual pictorial
representations
of the Saviour. He was about fifty years of
age, and in the full prime and vigour of life. His
forehead was white and high, his features noble, and
his face eminently handsome, with a gay and
youthful
expression, while a light smile played constantly
about his fine mouth. The under lip had a slight
voluptuous fulness, with which the soft expression
of his sparkling blue eyes harmonized, while both
gave intimation of a liberality in morals by no
means in strict conformity with the letter of his
order.
Though holding the station of confessor in Lord
Bellamont's family, Father Nanfan had not come
with him from England. Twenty years before,
a hermit had taken up his abode in a cave among
the cliffs of Hoboken; his country, name, or order
no one knew. He soon acquired great reputation
for sanctity, and his fame spread far and wide. At
length Governor Fletcher, hearing of him, visited
him, and, for some cause which has not
transpired
,
prevailed upon him to live with him as his
private secretary. Subsequently, Father
Nanfan
won the confidence and esteem of the first
Robert Livingston and other leaders of the time,
and, through his talents, knowledge, and ambition,
exercised great influence in the government. He
moved the wires of the famous Leslierian rebellion,
and, though unacknowledged, was the real leader
of the faction. When Bellamont succeeded
Fletcher
,
he had sufficient influence with the party to
induce
them to adhere to the new governor, who
rewarded
him by appointing him his private
secretary
and family confessor. He had been an inmate
of the White Hall but a few days, when,
concealed
beneath his religious guise, Kate Bellamont
thought she detected a dangerous and bad man.
It might have been imagination, for she
confessed
that neither by word nor look had he given
ground for such suspicion; yet, from the first, she
had felt a dislike towards him, and experienced a
fear in being alone in his presence, which she
could neither define, nor, on any reasonable grounds,
defend.
He paused an instant, with his hand upon the
half-closed door, as he saw the embarrassment of
her manner, and fixed upon her inquiringly his large
penetrating eyes, and then said, in a voice the words
of which alone conveyed a reproof, for the gentle
tone in which they were addressed to her were
calculated to alarm from their tenderness rather
than from their severity,
Thou wert not present at vespers, maiden; and,
at the bidding of thy noble mother, I have sought
thee to learn why of late thy thoughts are more
given to earthly than to heavenly things. If thou
wilt kneel, I will now confess thee here.
Nay, father, I will meet thee at matins and
there confess. Beshrew me, sir, thou art full bold,
K 2
and art disposed to carry thy priestly privileges to
their full compass, that you intrude upon a lady in
her private chamber. Hast heard me, sir? I would
be alone; or, if thou wilt remain, thou art at liberty
to do so, if first thou wilt move from the door and
permit me to pass out.
Nay, daughter, thou art troubled; the quick
flushthe startled eyethe timid aspectthou
dost need to disburden thy heart!
I bid thee leave me, she cried, with mingled
alarm and aversion.
Calm your spirits, lady, he said, closing the
door, and taking her hand ere she could prevent
him, though she instantly withdrew it with a quick
impulsive action, and retreated towards the window.
Lady, I see you know me; you have read
aright the admiring expression of my eyes when
first I met theethe devoted deference of my
manner
the
impassioned tones of my voice. Yes,
sweet Lady Catharine, thy charms have fired me
thy image has taken the place of that of the
Virgin Mother in my heart; for one smile, one look
from thee, I am ready to sacrifice even my hopes
of Heaven!
He kneeled at her feet as he spoke, and his noble
features, noble even through the guilt that shadowed
them, were animated with passionate ardour.
Hoary blasphemer, silence! Thank Heaven
that gave me secret and instinctive warning of thy
black character! Leave me, sir, or I shall call on
my father!
He is not within hearing, he said, rising and
taking both her hands; and, if thou shouldst rouse
his vengeance against me, his life, not mine, would
be the sacrifice. So, if thou lovest him, beware!
Release me, then, sir. Cowardfalse priest
unhand me.
One kiss from those voluptuous lips, he said,
throwing his arm about her waist, for full long
have I fasted from beauty's favours.
Ho, within there! she shrieked.
Instantly he released her hand, but said, in a
hoarse whisper, while his eyes flashed with
resentment
,
If thou alarm the house, or give the least shadow
of a hint of what has passed, and evil to me do
come of it, the lives of all dear to thee shall be the
sacrifice. If you will not love me, you shall fear
me. Beware! The next moment, changing his
manner, he said, Lady, it was but a momentary
passion; it is passed; thy matchless beauty
maddened
me; fear me no longer. Forever keep
silence, and thou wilt hear no more of my
ill-matched
love. Wilt thou forgive me, lady?
Seek it first of Heaven, dreadful man, if
heavenward
thou hast the boldness to lift thine eyes.
Can I now hope to confess thee, maiden?
Thou
, hypocrite! If it be that thou canst thus
deceive thyself, and mingle holiness with sin, I
am not to be part with thee in thy sacrilege! No,
sir; rather would I ask absolution at the hands of
the arch fiend than at thine. I know thee!
And of thy knowledge shalt thou one day reap
the bitter fruit, he said, in a voice and with a
changed manner that intimated a threat.
I do not fear thee, trusting in a power stronger
than thou!
Thou wouldst have made a sublime priestess!
Indignation but adds dignity to thy beauty, and
excitement gives richness to thy cheek, brilliancy
to thine eyes, and the haughty curl of thy lip is but
the more tempting with its ripe fulness unrolled.
By Heaven, I will not be thwarted; I am no mewly
boy, to be frightened at a woman's frown. I will
clasp thee in my arms, and ravish a kiss from that
mouth, which even scorn cannot make less lovely,
in punishment for thy pride!
As he spoke he approached, and was about to
clasp her in his embrace, when he received a blow
from a mace which felled him to the floor, and the
next instant the sorceress was standing above him,
with one foot upon his chest.
Ha, ha, ha! we are well met, Father Nanfan.
'Tis thus thou dost assoilzie the souls of maidens,
by first teaching them to sin! Oh, thou hypocrite.
But there will be a time! Nay, thou canst not get
up, she added, pressing the end of her mace hard
upon his forehead as he struggled to rise. Maiden,
I have saved thy lips from pollution! and thou,
monster, do I not know thee? Oh, ho! Get thee
up and go!
As she spoke she stepped aside from his body,
and he rose to his feet, his countenance black with
mingled fury and shame.
Foul witch, I will have thy lifeand thou,
haughty lady, shalt not escape me!
He was passing swiftly, with gestures of
vengeance
,
from the room, when the sorceress laid her
hand upon him.
Beware, I bid thee! Me thou canst not injure!
her thou shalt not!
Who shall hinder me, woman? I will have
thee, ere to-morrow's sun, burned at the stake!
And I will have thee hung higher than ever
Haman was, if thou move a step towards it. I
know thee, and thy life is in my hands!
Ha! you speak mysteriously!
Do I? But there is no mystery about thee
that Elpsy cannot unravel.
Speak, woman!
Thou darest not harm me, nor do injury to any
one I would protect; for I have the key to thy
secret, and, therefore, to thy life.
Thou! Who am I, then? What secret? he
hoarsely demanded.
She approached him, and whispered low in his
ear.
He started back as if he had been struck with
a dagger, and, staring upon her with wild surprise,
in which intense alarm was mingled, cried,
Who art thou, in Heaven's name?
Elpsy the sorceress!
But beside?
No matter.
Wonderful woman! Thy unholy arts could
alone have given thee this secret. Thou art indeed
to be feared.
Obey me, then, and secret it shall ever be.
Speak; what would you?
Swear never to harbour revenge against this
maiden, or any one of the house of Bellamont;
of myself I speak not, for I do not fear thee! Dost
thou swear?
By the sacred cross, I do.
Thou art safe, then, so long as thou shalt keep
thine oath. Go!
The priest slowly left the chamber, and, as he
closed the door behind him, the sorceress darted
from the window upon the balcony, and disappeared
in the darkness as suddenly as she had appeared,
leaving the maiden overwhelmed with shame, anger,
and wonder at the scenes and events in which she
had borne so singular a part.
CHAPTER III.
Lo! now in yonder deep and gloomy cave
Th' unholy hags their spells of mischief weave
Raise the infernal chant; while at the sound
Dread spirits seem to dance the caldron round,
And fiends of awful shape from earth and hell
With direful portents aid the magic spell.
C.
Donald M'Leod
.
When
Robert Lester, now Kyd the pirate, left
the presence of Kate Bellamont, without seeking
the stone steps that descended to the lawn, he
leaped
from the low balcony to the ground, and strode,
at a pace made quick and firm by the strength of
his feelings, towards a gate that opened into the
lane in which the inn of Jost Stoll was situated.
Avoiding the narrow street, though it was silent
and deserted, he turned his footsteps aside towards
the beach, and, winding round a ledge of rocks
wildly piled together, with a few shrubs and a
dwarf cedar or two clinging in the clefts, he came
to the mouth of the canal, where his boat lay half
hidden in the shadow of a huge overhanging rock.
Who comes, challenged one of several men
that were standing around.
He was too much wrapped in his own dark
thoughts to hear or give reply, and was only roused
to a consciousness of his position by the cocking
of pistols and the repetition of the challenge in a
sharper tone.
The Silver Arrow! he answered, briefly.
The captain! Advance! was the reply.
Ho, Lawrence, you are alert. Yet it should
be so, for we are surrounded by enemies. You
must learn, nevertheless, to challenge lower under
the guns of a fort. By the moving of lights and
show of bustle on the ramparts, we have already
drawn the attention of the honest Dutch warriors
whom our English governors have seen fit to
retain
to man their works.
It's to save linstocks, by making them touch
off the pieces with their pipes, said Lawrence;
their powder always smells more of tobacco than
sulphur.
A truce to this. Man your oars and put off,
said Kyd, in a stern tone.
The men knew by the change in his voice that
their chief was in a humour that was not to be
disregarded
;
and scarcely had the orders passed from
his lips, before every man was in his seat, with his
oars elevated in the air. The coxswain, Lawrence,
at the same time took his place at the helm, and in
a low tone said,
All's ready.
Shove off and let fall, cried Kyd, in the same
suppressed tone, springing into the stern-sheets.
What course, captain?
Hell Gate, was the deep response, as he seated
himself in the stern and wrapped his cloak about
him.
Give way, lads, followed this information,
from the coxswain, and swiftly the barge shot out
from the mouth of the canal; doubling the south
point of the town, it moved rapidly up the
narrow
sound between Long and Manhattan Islands,
now called East River, and was soon lost in the
gloom.
When Kyd parted from Elpsy before the inn, she
had remained standing in the place in which he had
left her until his form was lost beneath the trees
surrounding
the White Hall; then, turning towards the
street that led by a devious route in the direction
of the north gate of the city, she walked a few
moments
rapidly along in the deep shade cast by the
far-projecting roofs of the low Dutch mansions.
Suddenly she stopped.
He may have a faint heart, she muttered, as
if her thoughts run upon the interview between the
pirate and noble maiden. She will not now
accept
him as Lester after I have told her who
Lester
has become. Oh, I did it to make him use
force in his wooing. I would not have him, after
all that has passed in the last five years, win her
with honour to herself. I would have her humbled.
I would have her become Lady Lester against her
own will. And if he has remaining in his memory
a tithe of her former scorn of him, he will love to
repay her thus. Yet I doubt. I will go back and
see that I am not thwarted. Never shall I rest, in
grave or out, till he is Lord of Lester, and Kate
Bellamont his wedded wife.
She turned as she spoke, and, retracing her steps
towards the inn, continued on past it towards the
wicket that opened into the park, and, gliding
beneath
the trees, stole towards the window of the
maiden's chamber, directed by the light that shone
through the foliage that climbed about it. Aided
by her white staff, she was cautiously ascending a
flight of steps that connected the extremity of the
balcony with the lawn, when she heard Kyd's
angry
words at parting, saw him rush forth, leap to
the ground, and take his swift way towards his
boat. Her first impulse was to call him back; but,
suppressing it, she softly approached the window
for the purpose of using her own fearful power
over the minds of all with whom she came in
contact
,
in giving a turn more favourable to her
design
to the alarmed maiden's mind. She was
arrested
by the entrance of the priest as she was in
the act of entering the chamber, and drew instantly
back into the shadow. But she gradually moved
forward into the light of the lamp, and, as her eyes
rested on his features, they grew bloodshotten with
the intensity of her gaze. Her face was thrust
forward almost into the room, her long scragged
neck was stretched to its full length, and her whole
person advanced with the utmost eagerness. It
could not have been the words of the priest or his
manner that caused an excitement so sudden and
extraordinary. She evidently discovered in him a
resemblance that surprised her, while it filled her
soul with a savage and vengeful joy.
It is he! she gasped. Ever before have I
met him cowled! He, he alone! I would know
him in hell! Ha, I have lived for something! Oh,
this knowledge is worth to me mines of gold! I
would have sold my soul for it! The same brow,
still almost as fair; the same mouth, the same rich
light in the eyes, and, save his beard, almost as
young as when last we met. Ha! 'tis he. We
have met to some purpose now. Ho, ho! am I not
getting work to do? This is a new matter on my
hands. I will plot upon it. Ha, dares he? The
hoary lecher! Nay, she has flung him back!
'Tis a proper maiden! she added, as she saw the
priest foiled in his attempt to sully the purity of the
noble girl's lips.
Thus run the current of the weird woman's
thoughts. With fierce resentment, she listened to
the interview between the confessor and his
penitent
;
and when a second time she saw him
approach
her with unhallowed lip, she sprung upon
him: but whether to save the honour of the
maiden's
cheek, or prompted by some feminine feeling
Vol. II.L
known only to herself, will, if it is not already so,
doubtless by-and-by be apparent.
After she had quitted the chamber she swiftly
crossed the lawn towards the inn, turned up the
narrow path that bordered the sluggish canal, and,
following it to its termination near the wall, turned
short round some low stone warehouses to the left,
and ascended a narrow, steep street that run along
close to the wall, and therefore had obtained the
distinctive
appellation of Wall-street. Getting close
within its deep shadow, she glided along stealthily
till she came to a double gate, over which hung a
small lamp. Beneath the light, leaning against a
guardhouse constructed on one side of the gate, she
discovered a man with a firelock to his shoulder
and a long pipe in his mouth. A few paces from
him walked to and fro a second guard, who from
time to time paused in his walk, and, in a listening
attitude, looked down the broad, open street that
led from the gate to the Rondeel, as if expecting
the approach of some one.
Sacrement Donner vetter! 'Tish aight ov de
klock, Hanse, he said, stopping and addressing
his comrade as Elpsy approached; te relief shall
'ave peen here py dish time, heh?
It vill pe te Schietam at frau Stoll's vat keeps
dem, replied the other, with a grunt of assent.
Hark, Hanse! dere ish von footshteps along te
vallno heh?
Tish te pigs and te cattlesh. An' if it vas de
peoplesh, vat matter so dey pe inside ov te valls? It
ish against te rogue from te outside ov te vall vot
ve keep te guart here for.
Goot, Hanse. Ve lets nopoty in, to pe shure
nor lets nopoty out neider, heh? Pots gevitter!
Vot vas te passvoord, Hanse? I vas licht mein
bipe mid te paper te captain left mid us.
Yorck.
Yorck. Petween ourshelves, Hanse, Ich don't
like dis new name ov our old city ov Nieuve
Amstertam
.
Dese Anclish names pe hart to shpeak.
'Twas a wrong ding, Hanse, to put away te olt
name, heh?
It vash, mein comrate, no vera koot.
Pfui Teufel! Ich am klad I vas shmoke it in
mein bipe. It vas batriotic, heh, Hanse? Let ush
av te olt name pack again, Hanse.
Vera koot, mein comrate, Ich vill.
Ich too. Now if the peoplesh shay Yorck, tey
shall pe put in de guarthouse for traitor. If tey shay
Nieuve Amstertam, den tey pe Kristian peoplesh
and honest men.
If she pe a voman, comrate?
Den she shall pe von honest voman, to pe
shure.
At this juncture of the embryo conspiracy,
hatching in his very stronghold and among his
tried warriors, against the Earl of Bellamont's
government
,
striking at its very roots, and teeming with
seeds of a civil war, a low, dark figure appeared
from behind the guardhouse and suddenly
confronted
them.
Himmel tausand! Te vitchte tyfil! they
both exclaimed in one breath as she stood before
them, plainly visible by the light of the lamp that
illuminated her wild features, and threw into strong
contrasts of light and shadow the prominent angles
of her hideous person.
Let me forth, she said, in a commanding tone,
laying her hand with a determined gesture on the
heavy bar that was placed against the gates.
The men drew back in alarm, and uttered
exorcisms
expressive of superstitious fear.
Will ye not unbar? Brave men are ye to keep
watch and guard over a city's gates. Unbolt!
Vat, Hanse, heh? asked one of the men of
his comrade, whose arm he had grasped; sall ve
lets her go?
It vill pe pest to hav' her on te outside,
comrate
.
So it vill pe, Hanse. Ve had petter let her
out. I vill see if she knows te voord. Vitch
vomans
,
vat ish te password, heh?
I give neither password nor countersign. I go
and come as I list, and no man can hinder me.
Stand aside.
As she spoke she placed her hands on the heavy
bar, lifted it from its bed, and threw it at their feet.
Then, turning the massive key that remained in
the lock, the wide leaves flew open.
Ve must not let it pe, Hanse, mitout te voord.
Nor mitout leave, neider, comrate, cried one
after the other, both being inspired with sudden
energy
.
Ve shall pe shot.
Ant hung too.
With one impulse they rushed forward to secure
the gate, when she closed it fast in their faces, and
they heard the key turn in the lock on the outside
with a scornful laugh.
Himmel! It ish lockt insite ve pe, Hanse, heh?
Ant she tid not shay Yorck, comrate.
Nor Nieuve Amstertam neider. If she vas say
only Nieuve Amstertam now.
Tere ish no more need to keep guart, comrate.
Nopody can get in.
Tunder! no more dey can, Hanse, heh?
'Tish after aight o'klock, and te relief ish not been
come. Dere ish no more use to keep guart,
Hanse, heh?
Tyfil, no. Ve vill go ant get some
Schietams
.
So ve vill, Hanse, ant a fresh bipe too.
Thus determining, the stalwort guard of the city
gates of ancient Amsterdam shouldered their
fire-locks
,
and, confident in the security of the city,
descended
the street together in the direction of the
alehouse of
frau
Jost Stoll, while Elpsy kept on
her course through the suburbs. Directly after
leaving the gate she turned from the road which,
bordered by forests, small farms, and here and
there a lonely dwelling, run from the gates in a
northerly direction. The path she took was a green
lane, famous for lover's rambles, that led towards
the East River. She traversed it at a swift
running
pace, now winding round some vast tree that
grew in its centre, now ascending, now descending,
as the path accommodated itself to the irregularities
of the ground. In a few minutes she came to a
romantic spring, open to the sky for many yards
around, with greenest verdure covering the earth.
She recognised it as a favourite resort for the
industrious
maidens of the town, who there were
accustomed
to bleach the linen they woveand skilful
weavers too were the rosy and merry Dutch
maidens
of that homely day! At evening they would
go out to gather their bleaching; and, ere they left
the spring on their return, the youths of the town
would make their appearance, and, each singling
out his sweetheart, take her burden under one arm,
while, with the blushing girl hanging on the other,
slowly they walked through the shady lane towards
the town. Happy times! Gentle customs!
Unsophisticated
age! Oh, Maiden-lane, busy,
shopping
Maiden-lane! thy days of romance are
passed
!
Who can identify thee with this green lane!
But this is no place to eulogize thee; yet who may
L 2
travel over the olden-time scenes of New
Amsterdam
,
and not pause to pay them the tribute of a
thought!
After leaving the spring, her way faintly lighted
by the stars, the sorceress struck into a path that
led northeasterly; and, after a rapid walk of nearly
a mile, came to the shore of East River at a point
that could not have been reached by water without
going over nearly twice the distance she had come
by the forest. Descending the steep shore, she
stopped at the head of a small creek that made a
few yards into the land, and drew from beneath
the shelter of a thickly-netted grapevine a light
Indian
birch canoe of the frailest structure.
Stepping
lightly into it, giving her weight accurately to
the centre, she seated herself on the crossbar that
constituted both the seat and strengthening brace
of the bark: striking the water lightly with a
slender paddle, she shot rapidly out of the creek.
The moon had just risen, and flecked a trembling
path of silvery light along the water. Plying the
magic instrument, first on one side and then on the
other alternately, she darted along the surface of
the water with inconceivable velocity. Her course
was northwardly in a line with the shore, close
to which she kept. Every few minutes she would
cease her toil and bend her ear close to the water,
listening for sounds; and then, with a smile of
gratification
,
renew her swift course. At length, as she
rounded an elevated point, the distant fall of oars
reached her ears in the direction of the town.
He comes! He has gained on me! I must
be there to prepare for him! Hey, my little bark,
let us fly now!
She stood up in the skiff as she spoke, the
moonlight
streaming on her dark face, flung her cloak
from her shoulders, and, tossing back her long red
hair, seized the paddle with a firmer grasp, and
away like a mad thing flew witch and boat. Soon
she turned a headland, and the waves began to be
violently agitated, tossing and bubbling round her,
while a roar of breaking surges was heard in the
direction towards which she was driving. Far and
wide the solemn moan of agitated waters filled the
air. She shouted with the dash of the waves, and
hissed as they bubbled and foamed in her track.
Momently the commotion grew wilder and more
appalling. The waters seethed like a boiling
caldron
.
Whirlpools turned her skiff round and round
like a feather, and yawning gulfs threatened each
moment to ingulf her. Yet on she flew, standing
upright in the boat, her hair streaming in the wind,
her garments flying, and sending the boat
irresistibly
through the terrible commotion. The passage
now became narrow, and on every side frowned
black rocks, threatening destruction to the bark that
should be dashed against their sides. Suddenly,
when it appeared the boat could not survive an
instant
longer, by a dexterous application of her paddle
she forced it from the boiling seas into a placid pool,
sheltered by a low ledge, that formed the southern
spur of a small islet a few rods square that stood
at the mouth of Hell Gate on the north side.
Ha, is it not a proper place for a witch, amid
the mad waves and gloomy rocks! Oh, 'tis a home
I love! The noise of the water is merry music!
when it is lashed by a storm, the birds go sweeping
and shrieking by like mad, and then it is music
sweeter than the harp to Elpsy. So, I have well
done my errand, and found him as he landed, and
he is now on his way to me. And
who
besides
Robert have I seen? Ahhave I not made a
good night's work of it! Well, it shall go ill with
me if I reap not the fruit of what I have learned.
Ho, Cusha, slave!
As she called thus in a harsh, stern tone, she drove
her skiff into a crevice in the rocks, where it
became
firmly fixed, and, stepping from it, she
bounded
lightly up the precipitous shore to the summit.
The top of the rock, which was but a few feet
from the water, so far as could be seen by the light
of the moon, was a grassy surface, dotted with a
few stunted trees and one large oak, that with its
broad arms nearly shadowed the entire islet.
Between
the columns of the trees all around the sky
and water were visible. But in one place it was
broken by the outline of a large rock and the roof
of a low hut placed against it, directly beneath the
oak. It was a rude, rough structure, wild and
desolate in its appearance. On one side it
overhung
the foaming waters, that leaped so high
beneath
it as to fling the spray upon its roof. In
every part of it were crevices, from which, as the
sorceress looked towards it on arriving on a level
with it, streamed rays of light as if from a bright
flame within; while a volume of thick, dark smoke,
of an exceedingly fetid and sulphurous smell, curled
upward against the sides of the rock, and rolled
heavily away among the foliage of the oak.
The slave is prepared, she said, approaching
the hut.
She had taken but a single step towards it when
the deep voice of a bloodhound from within broke
the silence that reigned.
The hound is alert! Ho, Sceva!
At the sound of her voice the alarm bark of
the dog was changed into a cry of delight; and,
springing against the door, he would have burst it
through had she not spoken, and, at the same time,
opened it. Instantly the animal sprung upon her
and licked her face with his huge tongue, and
growled a savage sound of welcome. He was a
brute of vast size, and with long, coarse gray hair,
stiff, uncouth ears, and immense head; around
which, and along his spine to his fore shoulders,
the hair grew long and bristly like a boar's mane.
His eyes were red and fierce in their expression;
and huge tusks, protruding glaringly over either
side of his hanging chops, gave him an aspect still
more repulsive and savage.
Down, Sceva, down! she said, sternly, as he
caught his huge paws in the tangled masses of her
hair in his rough caresses; down, I say! The
animal slunk from her and crouched upon a pile
of fern in a corner of the hut.
The abode of the sorceress was rude and wild in
the extreme. It was a slight frame of branchless firs,
constructed against a bare rock, which constituted
the east side, or wall of it. The interstices between
the upright stakes were filled in with loose limbs of
trees, and planks from wrecked fisher's boats; the
roof in many places was open to the sky, and in its
centre was a large aperture that served for an
outlet
to the smoke that rose from a fire smouldering
beneath a caldron placed underneath. By the fitful
glare it sent round, the interior of the hut, with its
furniture, was distinctly visible. Entwined about
an upright pole that sustained the roof were dead
serpents of enormous size, and of brilliant colours,
their glittering fangs hideously shining in the
firelight
.
Festoons of toads, lizards, and other
revolting
reptiles hung from the ceiling, while round the
wall were placed human bones arranged in fantastic
figures, and ghastly sculls glared on the sight on
every side, while all that could affect the
imagination
was conspicuous to the eyes of the observer.
In the caldron in the centre of the hut was
seething a dark liquid that emitted a fetid odour,
and threw up volumes of smoke, which, unable to
escape freely through the roof, hung heavily to
within a few feet of the ground floor. Over the
caldron bent the figure of an African, who was
stirring the liquid with a human thigh bone, and
occasionally, with a child's scull, dipping a portion
from it and pouring it on the fire beneath, which
instantly flamed up fiercely, casting a blue, baleful
light throughout the hut. The firelight shone bright
upon his person, bringing into relief every feature
of his hideous countenance. His head was of
huge proportions, and deformed, being perfectly
flat on the top, and obtruding in front into a round
forehead like an infant's newly born. It was, save
a thick fringe of hair that hung shaggy and grisly
above his eyes, wholly bald. His eyes were large,
and projected red and wild from their beds, while
his nose and lips were of enormous dimensions,
which, with the total absence of anything like a
chin, gave the lower part of his face a brutelike
look. Yet there was an extraordinary human
intelligence
in the expression of his eye, in which
dwelt the light of no common intellect.
He rose as the witch entered, and displayed a
skeleton-like figure of great height, the low roof
compelling him to bend half his length. His neck
was long and scraggy; his shoulders bony; his
arms and legs lank and attenuated; while his
fingers
,
with the hard skin that clave to them and
their long oval nails, resembled, as he himself did
altogether, save his huge fleshy head, a dried
anatomical preparation. A kilt reaching half way
to his knees, and a sort of cape covering his
shoulders
made of the feathers of owls intermingled
with the brilliant dies of snakes' skins, were his
only clothing. He wore about his neck as
ornaments
a string of newts' eyes and serpents' fangs,
and on his wrists and ankles were massive
bracelets
of silver.
Thy slave welcomes thee, he said, in a voice
that corresponded with the hideousness of his
appearance
.
He lifted his hands to his forehead as he spoke,
and made an oriental obeisance nearly to the
earth.
Thou hast obeyed me, Cusha! 'Tis well!
See that all be ready for the rites. He comes a
second time to secure our aid against the rock and
the shoal, the waves and the wind, the hand of man
and the bolt of Heaven!
Comes he in the right spirit?
He fears and obeys.
'Tis enough.
Let nothing be wanting to retain our power
over the minds of mortals; let our art lose no tithe
of its honour. I will now make ready to receive
him. He leaves me not till he has done my
bidding
,
and through him my ends are answered.
Now let us prepare the rites!
In the mean while the superstitious victim of the
unholy rites in preparation was on his way
towards
the Witch's Isle. For nearly an hour the
crew had pulled steadily along, and, save now and
then a cheering cry from the coxswain, urging them
to renewed exertion, not a word was spoken. Silent
and thoughtful, revenge and disappointed love
mingled
with shame the while agitating his breast, he
sat by himself in the stern of his boat, and took a
retrospect of his past life.
His sense of honour was now blunted, and the
experience of a reckless life had made him weigh
less nicely his acts, and pay less deference to
the opinions of men. He now laughed at and
cursed what he called his folly in sacrificing, for a
mere boyish notion of honour, his earldom. From
the time he had thrown himself on board the Dane
at the tower of Hurtel of the Red Hand, up to the
moment that found him on his way to the abode of
the sorceress, he had been scouring the seas, a bold,
reckless, and sanguinary bucanier. Under the
name of `the Kyd,' or
al Kyd
, the sea-kingwhich
had been given him by the Algerine corsairs, among
whom he spread terror whenever he cruised up the
Mediterraneanhe had filled the world with tales
of bloodshed and predatory conflict unparalleled in
the annals of piracy. He seemed, from the first
moment he placed his feet on the deck of the Dane,
to have made a shipwreck of principle; to have
buried, as he had said on taking leave of Lady
Lester
,
all human feeling with the filial kiss he placed on
her unconscious forehead. Yet it has been seen, in
his fight with the yacht which contained the Earl of
Bellamont and Grace Fitzgerald, that he had not
wholly lost sight of every social tie that bound him
to those with whom he had once associated. But
this was the last instance of his sympathy with
others
.
Henceforward he seemed to war with mankind
as if he would avenge on his species the wrongs of
his birth. The instance here given may be thought
an exaggerated estimate of the rapid growth of vice.
But the daily annals of crime show that it is but a
step from virtue to vice, from innocence to crime.
And, let the cause be strong enough, there is never
an intermediate step.
Had Lester altogether forgotten Kate Bellamont
while running this career? No. His thoughts
reverted
to her daily. Sometimes with the gentle
character of his former young love, but oftener
taking colour from his present altered character, and
then they were resentful. Twice he had resolved to
visit Castle Cor, and obtain an interview with her,
and, if not by fair, by foul means, make her his bride.
But he had been pursued and driven from the coast
by cruisers, and his intentions had been foiled.
That he loved her still was evident; and if he could
have been rewarded with her hand by doing so, he
would have deserted his present career for her sake.
But these hopes were dissipated from the fear that
she might have discovered that Kyd and he were
one. This suspicion did at times alone prevent his
seeking her out more resolutely and casting
himself
at her feet.
At length, a few months previous to the arrival of
Lord Bellamont to assume the government of
New-York
,
he, with large treasures, came into Long
Island
Sound; and, after burying them on Gardiner's
Island, beneath a certain triangular rock which, it
is said, seventy of his men rolled upon the spot, he
came through Hell Gate into East River, where he
anchored. As he sailed past her rock the witch
recognised him, though she had not seen him since
they separated at Hurtel's Tower, and at midnight
paid him a visit in her skiff. She recovered her
former influence over him, crime, as it ever does,
having made him superstitious. From her he
learned that the Earl of Bellamont was to succeed
Governor Fletcher, and that his daughter would
probably accompany him to America. Probing his
feelings in relation to her, she discovered that he
was still attached to her; and to her joy she found,
on feeling his moral pulse, that she had less to fear
than on a former occasion. From the moment
Lester
had cast away his title and fled the country, she
had given her whole mind to one single object, if
she should ever again meet him: viz., to bring about
his restoration to his title and estates. She rightly
calculated that time and the lawless school in
which he had placed himself would lead to a
revolution
in his feelings. She now found him ripe for
her purpose. Learning from him that he was bound
on a cruise to intercept a fleet from Barbadoes, and
Vol. II.M
was to sail the following day, by his return she
expected
,
as it turned out, that the Earl of Bellamont
would have reached his new government.
Therefore
,
before she left his cabin, she drew from him a
promise that he would visit her at her hut the
ensuing
night; and there, amid the solemnities of her
art, take the oath to lay claim to the title of Lester,
and woo for the hand of the heiress of Bellamont:
in fine, resume the position, notwithstanding all
that had passed in the long interim, that he had
held before the fatal field of archery at Castle Cor.
Ere the next night, however, two frigates from
Newport, learning his presence in the waters of
Long Island, appeared in sight sailing up the Sound,
when, weighing anchor, he sailed down the East
River, passed boldly between Brooklyn and the
town, exchanged shots with the Rondeel, and,
steering
down the bay, put to sea. His second
appearance
,
and the events that followed it up to the time
when he is approaching the Witch's Island, have
already been narrated.
Give way, menpull for your lives! shouted
the coxswain, as at length they entered the boiling
waters of Hell Gate.
With great exertion and skill, the tide now
setting
strongly through the gut, they avoided the
dangers
that beset them on every side, and at length
reached the island. Giving orders for his men
to remain in the boat and preserve silence, Kyd
stepped on shore in a secluded cove at the
western
extremity of the island most remote from
the abode of the sorceress. He passed through
a dark ravine, that led with many a rugged step
to the top, and, looking round as he reached it, at
length discovered the hut he sought. It was
calculated
,
combined with the roar of the sea and the
lateness of the hour, and a knowledge of the
fearful
character of the occupant and of his own evil
purposes in seeking it, to affect his mind with
gloom and superstitious fears. He cautiously,
and not without superstitious awe, approached the
door and struck it with the hilt of his sword.
He was answered by the deep growl of the
bloodhound, and the moment afterward the
sorceress
chanted, in a wild, supernatural strain, an Irish
weird hymn, the only part of which he could
comprehend
were the last two lines:
Enter, mortal, if thou bear
Priest nor Bible, cross nor prayer!
With his drawn sword held firmly in his grasp,
he opened the door. Instantly the place was filled
with a blue flame, by the light of which the
various
supernatural paraphernalia of the sorceress's
abode were made visible with the most appalling
distinctness, while sounds infernal and terrific
assailed
his ears. He stood a moment filled with
alarm, and overpowered by what he saw and heard.
The sorceress, clothed in a garment apparently of
flame, covered with strange and unearthly figures,
her features wrought up to a supernatural degree
of excitement and wild enthusiasm, stood before the
caldron in a commanding attitude, her hair
dishevelled
,
her long white wand held towards the
intruder
,
and every sinew of her arms and neck distinctly
brought into light. A serpent was bound about
her temples, and one was entwined around each of
her naked arms, while a fourth encircled her waist.
Beside her stood a spindle, with a crimson thread
upon it. She fixed her eyes on his with an
unearthly
expression as she extended her wand
towards
him, and, in a voice that became a priestess of
rites so unholy as she performed, addressed him:
Welcome, mortal! I have waited for thee.
Kneel.
Wherefore? he asked, as if addressing a
supernatural
being, his imagination affected by the
circumstances and situation in which he was placed,
and scarcely recognising, in the fearful appearance
and aspect of the sorceress, her whom he had seen
and conversed with but a few hours before.
Wherefore should I kneel?
To swear.
The oath?
To assume the title of Lester and wed the
heiress of Bellamont.
I have sworn it without thy aid. I have seen
her.
And she has scorned thee.
She has. Foul witch, thou didst betray me to
her!
Ha, ha! Thou hast learned this of her. She
laughed maliciously. I told her who thou wert,
that she might scorn thee.
Fiends! Dost thou not wish me to marry her?
Yes; but only against her will.
Otherwise she will never. And, by the cross!
I will not bear the haughty scorn with which she
has received me. Witch, I am ready to take the
oath; but, if I take it, thou shalt give me thy aid in
avenging myself.
On her!
Yes, but through her lover.
Has she a lover? asked the sorceress, with
surprise.
Did not thy art teach thee this?
Who? she demanded, without replying to his
question.
A certain Captain Fitzroy.
He who commanded the ship that brought
them hither. Where were my wits I did not
suspect
as much? she added to herself.
Dost know him?
I have seen him on his deck as I passed in
my skiff. He sailed instantly in pursuit of you, or
I should have discovered something of this new
love. She confessed it?
Without hesitation. I have sworn to seek him
and cross blades with him.
First repeat the oath thou hast come hither to
take.
If thou wilt exert all thy skill and art to give
me success in my revenge, I will take it.
Swear.
Nay. I am told thou hast, as do all of thy
unholy
craft, an amulet which, worn on the bosom,
will give him who for the time wears it a charmed
life, and cause him to prosper in all that he
undertakes
.
This amulet I ask of thee.
First lay thy right hand upon the head of the
serpent that binds my waist, and thy left hand upon
thy heart, and, kneeling, swear to obey me in
resuming
thy earldom and thy wooing of Catharine of
Bellamont, and it shall be thine.
He knelt, and with solemnity took the oath,
repeating
each word after her in an audible tone.
This you promise to do or your soul forfeit.
This I promise to do or my soul forfeit.
Or thy soul forfeit!
repeated, from some
unknown
quarter, a sepulchral voice, that made
him start to his feet with mingled surprise and
alarm.
Woman, what hast thou caused me to do? he
asked, with superstitious dread.
No evil, so thou break not thy oath.
So thou break not thy oath!
repeated the same
voice, close to his ears.
Sorceress, I will not break my oath, he said,
after the surprise at this second interruption had
M 2
subsided; but until I have first crossed weapons
with this rival lover, I approach her no more. He
has gone to seek me, therefore should I meet him.
But that he should dare to love where Robert
Lester has loved, is ample reason why we should
meet. Till I find him, be he above the sea, I
neither
assume the name of Lester nor see the
haughty
heiress of Bellamont. So give me success in
this, and, after, thy wishes shall be fulfilled to the
letter.
Darest thou delay? she said, striding up to
him and taking him by the breast, while her eyes
flashed vindictive fire.
Thou hast not the whole control over my will,
Elpsy. I fear and respect thy power, but I obey
it and thee only so far as it chimes with my own
ends. I have yielded to thee: now yield to me!
Thy wishes, whatever may have prompted them,
shall soon enough be realized. If thou wilt give
me the amulet, and put thy arts to work and send
me prosperous winds, I will, ere the month end,
hold this Fitzroy my prisoner; and then, by the
cross! in my very cabin shall he be spectator of my
bridal. If in a month I do not meet him, I will
then do thy pleasure.
The sorceress gradually released her grasp as
he continued, and, when he had ended, said,
'Tis well. Go.
The amulet?
Nay. Thou shalt not have it, she said, firmly.
By the rood! if thou give it not to me, I will
wring thy shrivelled neck for thee, he cried, with
sudden impetuosity.
Lay but the tip o' your least finger upon me,
Robert Kyd, that moment shall thy arm be
palsied
to its shoulder, and thy strength leave thy body,
till the infant an hour old shall master thee!
She stepped back as she spoke, and extended
her wand towards him with a menacing gesture.
Nay, nay, fearful woman, he cried, betraying
some alarm at her words and threatening attitude,
I meant not to anger thee. Wilt give the
amulet
?
I cannot go forth on this mission of revenge
without it. I know its mysterious and wonderful
power, and must avail myself of it on this occasion.
Thou shalt have it after.
The sorceress looked troubled at his eager
anxiety
to possess the mystic seal, and at length said,
in a solemn tone of voice, and with a manner
calculated
to have its effect on an imagination the
least tinged with superstition,
Mortal, thou knowest not what thou seekest!
If he who wears this on his breast fail in his last
trial of its mystic power, he shall become the
slayer
of the mother who bore him!
What is this to me? I have no mother,
sorceress
.
Ha! well, no, no! thou hast not! she said,
with a singular expression. Yet such is the
doom of him in whose hands it fails.
Thou
shalt
not wear it!
I will. If I tear it from thee by violence!
'Twill then do thee no good. It must be
placed around thy neck with solemn rites. Thou
shalt have it, she said, suddenly, after a moment's
thought, for thy success is my success. The
risk shall be run by me! Hast thou the nerve to
go through the initiating rites?
I will stop at nothing. Give it me, with every
hellish charm thou canst invent. Once my revenge
accomplished, take it back.
But
He
'll not give thee back the price thou
payest for it.
Ha! Well, be it so! I will not ask it. My
soul is as well in the devil's keeping as in my own.
The world beyond has for me neither hopes nor
fears. My present aims accomplished, I care not
for the bugbear future! In the name of the
master
whom thou servest, give me the amulet!
I obey, she said, with wild solemnity. Slave,
appear!
She cast, as she spoke, a powder upon the flame,
which shot up to the roof and filled the place with
so dazzling a brilliancy that for an instant he was
deprived of sight. The light sunk as suddenly as
it had risen, and he saw before him a tall,
skeleton-like
figure, over whose face played an unearthly
glare from the smouldering flame beneath the
caldron
.
It was the slave Cusha. The pirate chief
gazed on the hideous being with horror; his sword
dropped from his grasp, and an exclamation in the
shape of an exorcism escaped his lips. The
sorceress
witnessed his alarm with a triumphant smile;
she then touched and turned her spindle, while
the slave, obedient to her nod, kneeled and began
to kindle the flame and stir the seething caldron.
The bucanier witnessed these preparations with
curiosity not unmingled with dread, yet
nevertheless
determined to abide by the issue. All at once
she began to chant: now in a low, deep voice, now
in a high, shrill key, as her words required, the
slave at intervals chiming in in a tone so deep and
sepulchral that the startled bucanier could not
believe
that it was human, especially when his eyes
rested on the hideous being from whom it
proceeded
,
who grovelled on the earth at his feet,
Witch (to the wizard).
Kindle, kindle!
Both.
To our tasks!
Witch
(whirling the spindle).
Turn the spindle!
Mortal asks
A web of proof
From charmed woof!
Wizard.
The pledge, the pledge?
Witch.
Body and soul
To his control,
The pledge, the pledge!
Wizard.
The seal, the seal?
Witch.
A bleeding lock
Of the victim's hair
Given to earth, sea,
Sky, and air,
The seal, the seal!
As the sorceress chanted this she broke from
the thread what she had wound off, and,
approaching
him, chanted,
Kneel, mortal, kneel!
And let me sever
The pledge that makes thee
His for ever!
He kneeled before her with the obedient
submission
of a child. She then entwined her fingers
in a long lock that grew above the left temple,
and, drawing from her bosom a dagger, held it above
his head and chanted,
Dost thou believe, Robert Kyd, Robert Kyd,
Nor earth nor air, water nor fire,
Ball nor steel, nor mortal ire,
My potent charm
Have power to harm
Till it fulfil its destiny?
I do.
Dost thou believe, Robert Kyd, Robert Kyd,
That within, without, body and soul,
This amulet shall keep thee whole
From ball and steel,
And mortal ill,
Till thou fulfil thy destiny?
I do.
Thus I take the seal and pledge,
That, soul and body, thou engage,
When thy master calls for thee,
Ready, ready thou wilt be.
She severed the lock of hair from his temples as
she ceased, and commenced dividing it into four
equal parts. When she had done so she stepped
backward, and, standing in the attitude of a
priestess
about to perform an idolatrous sacrifice, cast
a lock into the air, chanting in the same wild
manner
,
Prince of Air! take the pledge!
As she ceased a gust of wind swept over the
islet, as if, so it appeared to the imagination of the
excited victim of the rites, acknowledging the
sacrifice
.
She then cast a lock upon the ground and
chanted,
Prince of Earth! take the pledge!
Instantly the ground on which he stood seemed
to tremble; he heard a deep rumbling as if in
caverns
beneath; and the little island appeared to shake
as if an earthquake had answered the appeal.
Prince of Sea! take the pledge!
She cast a third lock into the caldron as she
repeated
the line: the water boiled and hissed with
a great noise, and the waves from the sea at the
same time seemed to dash with a louder roar against
the rocks below, and flung their spray with a heavy
dash upon the roof. A fourth lock she cast into
the flames, chanting,
Prince of Fire! take the pledge!
Instantly the place was illuminated as if with
the most brilliant flashes of lightning, while the
loudest thunder seemed to explode at his feet.
He started upright at this, for hitherto he had
continued
to kneel, overcome by what he was both a
witness of and a trembling participator in, and with
every sign of mortal wonder and dread, cried,
Sorceress! avaunt! I will no more of this!
Peace, mortal, peace!
Cease, mortal, cease!
See no word by thee be spoken
Lest our magic charm be broken!
As she chanted this reproof, she turned to the
slave and continued in the same strain,
Hast thou the murderous lead
From the grave of the dead?
'Tis here, he said, prostrating himself, and
giving
to her, with divers mysterious ceremonies, a
leaden bullet.
Sought you the grave at midnight deep
Dug you down where dead men sleep
Search'd youfound you this charm'd ball
Did you this in silence all?
I did, answered the monster, prostrating
himself
.
Slave, 'tis well.
From fire and air
We now prepare
Our mystic spell!
She commenced walking around the caldron,
drawing mystic figures on the ground and in the
air. At the end of the first circuit she chanted,
with slow and solemn gestures and growing
energy
,
A brother's hand must have shaped the lead
at the end of the second, with more spirit, she sung,
From a brother's hand the ball have sped.
The third time she chanted, in a still more exci
ted manner, while she danced about the caldron,
And a brother's heart the ball have bled.
As she ended her third sibylline circuit around
the fire, she turned to the slave and said,
Is such this lead?
Swear by thy head!
It is, he responded, crossing his clasped hands
across his forehead, and prostrating himself to the
ground.
'Tis well.
Fire and water, perform thy task,
A charmed life a mortal asks.
She now poured the water from the caldron, and,
casting the lead into it, continued to dance round
it, her gestures gradually increasing in wildness
and energy, while in a low, monotonous tone she
chanted unintelligibly certain mystic words,
derived
from the ancient Irish incantations. With
folded arms the bucanier watched her aloof. At
length she poured the melted lead into a shallow
vessel containing water, when with a hissing noise
it spread itself out into a shape resembling a
human
heart. Instantly the hut was darkened; loud
unearthly noises filled the place; blue flames shot
upward from the head of the sorceress and wizard
slave, and, to the astonished bucanier, the apartment
seemed to be filled with demoniac forms, flitting
and gibbering about him.
Aghast and horror-struck, he cried aloud,
Merciful Heaven, protect me!
No sooner had the words gone from his mouth
than the whole hellish confusion and uproar ceased,
while, with an expression of fierce wrath, she cried,
By that word thou hast taken from the charm
one half its power. It will protect thee from ball,
but not from steel; from earth and fire, but not
from water and air; else, with this amulet against
thy heart, thou wouldst bear a charmed life.
'Tis nothing lost, he answered, recklessly.
If ball can harm me not, a strong arm, quick eye,
and faithful cutlass shall protect me against steel.
Thou hast ensured me victory in love and revenge?
I have.
More I ask not. Water can scarce drown one
whose home is on the sea. Air I fear not!
Take heed, lest one day thou die not in it!
Ha! what mean you?
Nothing. Kneel while I hang this amulet
about thy neck.
Attaching to it a strand of her own long hair, she
suspended it about his neck as he kneeled before
her, chanting,
Mystic charm,
Shield from harm!
Winds and waves,
Be his slaves!
Mortal, naught can injure thee,
Spread thy sail and sweep the sea!
Vengeance now is in thy hand,
Be thy foe on sea or land!
If thy oath be kept not well,
Ill befall thee with this spell!
Instantly thunder seemed to shake the hut, which
was filled with a sulphurous flame, while a
repetition
of the sounds he had before heard filled him
with consternation; and, ere he could rise to his
feet, he was struck to the earth by an unseen hand.
When he recovered himself the hut was deserted,
and, save a ray of moonlight streaming through
the roof, buried in total darkness. Confused, his
senses overpowered, and his imagination excited
by the scenes he had been so prominent and
passive
an actor in, he left the hut, the door of which
was wide open, sought his boat, and roused his
men, who, save Lawrence, had fallen asleep.
Giving his orders briefly, he put out from the
Witch's Isle, and at midnight stood on the deck of
his vessel. Shortly afterward he got under weigh,
Vol. II.N
sailed down the Narrows and put out to sea. When
the morning broke, great was the surprise and
delight
of the worthy people of New Amsterdam to
find that the stranger had departed as silently and
mysteriously as he had come; and many were the
sage conjectures ventured the following evening by
the worthies that gathered, as usual, about the stoop
of the Boat and Anchor, as to his character; and,
sooth to say, they hit not far from the truth.
CHAPTER IV.
She saw the noble in the peasant's garb,
And dared to lovenay, more, she dared to brave
The world's dread frown, to follow him afar
Amid the danger of the stormy wave.
He bore a charmed life. O'er earth and sea
No fiend so feared, no spirit dread as he.
An
hour after sunrise the pirate vessel had gained
an offing, and, under all her light canvass, wafted
by a fresh wind from the northwest, was running
the coast down, leaving the Highlands of
Neversink
on her starboard quarter. On her deck stood
Kyd, with his glass in his hands, with which every
few minutes he would sweep the horizon, and
then turn and walk the deck. It was a bright,
sunny morning; the crested waves leaped merrily
about the prow and glanced in the sun as if tipped
with gold.
The vessel was a low-built brigantine, with a
flush deck, on either side of which was ranged
a battery of six carronadesin all twelve guns.
Eighty men, half of whom were blacks, that
composed
her crew, were variously occupied forward
and in the waist, though many of them were lying
listlessly between the guns. They were a desperate
band, with hard looks, and the aspects of men
accustomed
to crime and inured to danger. Every man
was armed with pistols and cutlass, while racks of
these weapons, with the addition of boarding pikes
and harquebusses, were ranged about the masts and
bulwarks. Order and discipline prevailed
throughout
the wild company, and, save the bucanier-like
character and build of the vessel, it differed not
materially
in its internal arrangements from a king's
ship. The bold spirit that kept these inferior and
scarcely less fierce beings in subjection walked
the deck with a determined tread, now bending his
eyes in thought, now lifting them, flashing with
excitement, towards the sea, and rapidly scanning
its wide circle. He was dressed in the same
picturesque
costume that he wore when he first
appeared
in the presence of Kate Bellamont at the
White Hall, though his sword lay upon the
companion-way
instead of being sheathed at his belt.
After taking a longer survey than usual of the
horizon
,
and turning away with an exclamation of
disappointment, he was addressed by a short,
square-built, swarthy man, with large mustaches
and long, matted hair that hung low over his eyes
and descended to his broad shoulders, who had
hitherto been silently pacing the leeward side of the
deck.
What's in the wind, captain? You seem to
steer as if in chase! You gave your orders so
briefly to get under weigh, and have loved your
own thoughts since so well as to forget to speak.
I have not even asked our course.
We are full three leagues from our anchorage,
and, if you have no objections, suppose we open
our sailing orders.
You are right, Loff, said Kyd, smiling at the
blunt address of his first mate. Listen, he said,
walking aft, followed by the mate, where they could
speak without being overheard by the helmsman.
Now learn my plans!
I have half guessed them.
What?
Some Indiaman, ballasted with guilders, you
have heard of in shore.
Far better than a Spanish argosy. I pursue a
rival. Thou art no stranger to an amour pursued
by me some years ago with a fair and noble maid
of Erin. Before I took the seas I was her only
and accepted lover. She is now in the port we left
this morning.
And so you are running away from her.
No. As some fiend would have it, rumours
of my deeds, blown far and wide, at last reached
her ears. She lends them to the tale. And when
last eve I hastened to her arms, she meets me cold
as an icicle; but soon gets warm, charges me with
my misdeeds, and at length, taking fire with her
own heat, breaks out in full blaze, dips her tongue
inch deep in gall, and paints me blacker than the
devil.
Just like these sort o' craft, remarked Loff,
dryly.
This is not all. I found she had plugged the
hole in her broken heart with another lover sound
and hale.
And who was this interloper?
No less a cavalier than that Fitzroy of the
British navy whom we took by stratagem in the
Mediterranean, slaying his crew; and who afterward
escaped us by swimming a league to the shore.
I remember him. A proper youth for a
woman's
eye.
It shall ne'er look on him again, said Kyd, with
fierceness. He told the story of his escape,
confirmed
that which before was rumour
And so she put you out her heart and took him
in.
Even so.
That's what I couldn't stand, captain.
I'll have revenge. Besides, I think I have an
old quarrel to settle with him, if he be the same
Fitzroy who escaped from us. Did I not tell thee
then he reminded me of one whom I had known
under peculiar circumstances in my boyish days?
You did, said the mate, after a moment's
thought; and that you said you would, in the
morning
,
see if your suspicions were true.
And in the morning the bird had flown. It is
this suspicion that, from the first mention of his
name last night, added to a new object I have in
view (which, if he be the one I suspect he is,
cannot
be accomplished without his death), that sends
me in pursuit of him. 'Tis rumoured that he whom
I mean was lost at sea; but, if he escaped us by
swimming a league, he may have escaped also at
that time.
Where does he hail from now?
He is master of the brig of war that brought
the new governor to the province; and, hearing of
us, with laudable ambition set sail, directly after his
arrival, in pursuit of us. He is now on his return,
as his leave of absence has expired. I learn by a
skipper of a Carolina schooner I hailed in the
harbour
as I passed him in my boat, that a vessel
answering his description was seen three days ago
becalmed off the Capes of Delaware.
Shiver my mizzen! we will soon fall in with
him if he is steering back to port.
If the `Silver Arrow' hang not like a
sleuthhound
on his track, there is no virtue in wind or
canvass.
N 2
What is the name of the chase? demanded
Loff, taking a deliberate survey of the horizon with
a weather-beaten spyglass he held in his hand.
The `Ger-Falcon,' I am told; and this name, for
certain reasons, increases my suspicions that this
Fitzroy is he I suspect. If so, I have an old score
to balance with him. It is this that adds point to
my revenge, and which has led me to seek aid of
earth and hell to accomplish my desires.
The Silver Arrow, bound on its mission of
vengeance
and crime, continued for the remainder of
the day steadily to sail on its southerly course,
keeping sufficiently far from land to command a
scope of vision on either side nearly forty miles in
breadth, so that any vessel following the shore
northwardly, if within ten or twelve leagues of the
land, could not escape observation.
Two hours before sunset of the same day, in
the entrance of one of the numerous inlets that,
like a chain of marine lakes, line the eastern shore
of Jersey, lay a brig of war at anchor, her upper
sails clewed down and her topsails furled. She
was lying so close to the wooded shore, that the
branches of the trees that grew on the verge of its
high banks hung over and mingled with the rigging,
while from the main yard it was easy to step on the
rocks that towered above the water. On her decks
lay several deer recently killed, while sailors were
engaged in bringing on board, across a staging that
extended from the ship to the shore, a noble stag,
with antlers like a young tree. On the summit of
a rock that overlooked the scene stood two young
men habited as hunters, one leaning on a rifle, the
other with a hunting-spear in his hand. Two noble
stag-hounds lay panting at their feet. The scene
that lay outspread around them was picturesque as
it was boundless.
On the east, rolling its waves towards a silvery
beach of sand that stretched north and south many
leagues, spread the ocean, without a sail to relieve
its majestic bosom, which, save here and there a
gull with snowy wing skimming its breast, was as
lonely and silent as on the day it was created.
North, extended a vast forest of foliage, the surface
of which, as the winds swept over it wave after
wave, was not less restless than the sea. West,
lay interminable woods; and nearer slept the lagoon,
running northwardly and southwardly in a line with
the coast on the outside, broken into many little
lakes by green islands, on the sides of which
browsed numerous deer. Immediately at their feet
was the vessel of war, which, with its busy decks,
gave life and variety to the scene.
The two who were enjoying the prospect
strikingly
contrasted in appearance. One of them was
dark and strikingly handsome, with black,
penetrating
eyes, and a fine mouth characterized by much
energy of expression. His hair was jetty black;
and, parted on his forehead, fell in natural ringlets
about his neck, descending even to his shapely
shoulders. His figure was noble and
commanding
,
and his air strikingly dignified. His age could
not have been above twenty-three. There was a
hue on his cheek, and a certain negligent ease in
his air and manner, that showed that his profession
was that of the sea. Yet his costume was by no
means nautical. He leaned on a short rifle, with
a black velvet hunter's bonnet in his hand, shaded
by a sable plume. He wore a green embroidered
frock, with buff leggins of dressed deerskin richly
worked by some Indian maid, and on his feet were
buskins of dressed doeskin. Around his waist was
a black leathern belt containing a hunting-knife,
with a drop or two of fresh blood still upon its
blade, and a hunting-horn curiously carved and
richly mounted.
His companion was less in height and of lighter
make. His face was less browned, nay, scarcely
tinged by the suns that had left their shadows upon
the other's cheek. His forehead, though partly
concealed beneath a hunting-cap of green cloth
from which drooped a snow-white feather, was so
fair and beautiful, that through the transparent skin
of the temples were seen the azure veins tinting the
surface with the most delicate lights of blue. The
eyes were of a dark hazel, with a merry light
dancing
in them, which gave promise both of ready wit
and good nature, and his cheeks had a bright,
glowing
colour, doubtless caused by the recent exercise
of the chase. His mouth was extremely beautiful,
with a winning smile playing about it like sunlight
of the heart. The chin beneath was exquisitely
rounded, neither too full nor too square, but of that
faultless symmetry of which a sculptor would have
made a model. About his neck and shoulders
flowed glossy waves of auburn hair, while his
upper
lip was graced by a luxuriant mustache of the
same, or, perhaps, of a little darker hue. He wore
no cravat, and the collar of his green hunting-coat
was turned back, displaying a throat and neck
of dazzling whiteness and beauty. Through the
bosom of the frock, which was folded back,
appeared linen of the finest cambric, richly
tamboured
,
as if done by the fair fingers of some
tasteful maiden. The wristbands over his finely
shaped and gloved hands were tamboured in the
same beautiful manner, and fringed with lace of
the most costly texture. Around his waist was
bound a crimson sash for a hunting-belt, in which
was stuck a
couteau du chasse
, with a hilt sparkling
with jewels. Oriental trousers, ample in width
and of snowy whiteness, fringed at the bottom with
tassels depending from a hem of network,
descended
just below the calf of the leg, between which and
the ankle appeared flesh-coloured silken hose of the
finest texture and material. Boots of dressed
doeskin
,
soft and smooth as a glove, nicely fitted the
feet and ankles, and, divided at the top in two parts,
were turned over like the buskins of his
companion
,
but, unlike his, fringed with gold and
ornamented
with tassels. In his hand he carried a light
hunting-spear, which he held with a spirited air,
braced against the rock, his attitude being at the
same time graceful and gallant. His age appeared
to be less than seventeen. The two had gazed
upon the noble and extended prospect spread out
before them for some time in silence, when the
elder
,
turning to his companion with a condescending
yet courteous air, spoke.
A fair scene, Edwin! I scarcely know which
impresses me most, the majesty of the ocean or that
of these boundless forests of the New World. Both
are alike illimitable. Perhaps the sea has more of
the sublime, for it is associated with the tempest in
its terrible power, and its ever-heaving bosom seems
to me the pulse of the earth.
You give language to the thoughts which were
passing in my own mind. The world seems to me
a vast being everits flowing rivers like veins and
arteries in the human systemits subterranean
fires like the passions slumbering in our hearts
its ocean heaving like a bosom lifted by a heart
beneath
it. See! the stag has leaped the bulwarks
into the water!
His companion turned and beheld the noble
monarch
of the wood, who had broke away from his
captors at a bound, parting the flood with his broad
breast, and swimming across the lagoon towards
the opposite shore, tossing his branching antlers
in the air as if in defiance, and rejoicing at obtaining
his wild freedom. A dozen pistols and handguns
were instantly levelled at him, when the taller of
the two cried out from the cliff,
Hold! Fire not, on your lives! He has nobly
won his freedom!
Every weapon was lowered obedient to his voice,
and proudly the enfranchised animal breasted his
way towards a wooded isle a few hundred yards
off.
We have venison enough, and the princely
creature shall escape, he added, turning to the
other. By the bow of Diana! we have well
done for a four hours' hunt with but a brace of
dogsthough ye are noble brutes, both Chasseur
and Di! The dogs seemed to comprehend
instinctively
his words of praise, and, with a glad
whine sliding along to his feet, at a sign of
encouragement
bounded upon him with joyful barks.
Hist! be still! Ye are over rude because I give
ye a word and a nod.
They must come in for a portion of our thanks
from the earl when he gets his game.
And a feast they shall have, for they have
shown their true Irish blood.
You speak of Ireland often, sir. You must
love it.
I do. He then said quickly, You alone must
he thank, Edwin, that he gets even a haunch instead
of nearly a score of fat bucks such as strew our
decks yonder. It was well thought of, as this
bucanier had escaped us on this cruise, to put in
at this famous deer island, and, by supplying the
governor's table for the month to come, make him
forget our failure. I would the stag had not
escaped
,
nevertheless, for I would gladly have made
a present of it to his fair daughter. You sigh,
Edwin!
Did I?
By the bow of Dan Cupid, did you! You are
full young to think of maiden's love.
Am I? said the youth, absently, and with an
abstracted air.
Truly thou must be in love, Edwin, said the
other, with a kindly laugh, that became his manly
and open features. I marvel who it may be.
You shake your head! Well, he added,
laughing
,
so long as it is not my noble Kate, I care not
who it be. I knew a maiden once whom I would
have lovedso gentle, fair, and good, besides
noble-born
and generous was sheif I had not loved
anoth
Whowho this maiden? he said, abruptly
interrupting him, and laying his hand upon the arm
of the speaker with surprising energy.
Thou art over quick in thy speech, said the
other, turning and speaking coldly.
Nay, pardon me, sir, I did forget my station,
said the other, bending his head and crossing his
hands upon his bosom.
Nay, Edwin, you go too far! I do not like
this manner, and this, I know not what to call it,
way you have of assuming an attitude, when
reproved
,
becoming a bashful girl rather than the
manhood thy mustache, if not thy years, challenges
thee to assert. I will answer thy question. It was
a fair and gentle creature, whom in my boyhood I
knew only as the humble sailor knows the stars
that burn nightly above him. I gazed on her afar
off, and dared not approach her nearer, for she was
noble, and, as thou knowest, I was lowly born.
She was gentle, kind, and good; gratitude fills my
heart when I speak of her, for I owe her much;
she first awakened ambition in me, and pointed me
the way to make myself noble. Her eloquence I
shall never forget. Its effect upon me is indelible.
I will some day tell thee how first I met her, and
the interest she took in me.
Did you see her often?
No. But once we spoke together! But that
once produced the seeds of the fruit of happiness
I since have gathered.
Strange that seeing her but once should have
had such an effect upon thee.
It was like sunlight first let in upon the man's
vision who is born blind.
If such the influence she held over youif thus
you speak of her now, why did not her image take
a deeper hold in your heartnay, why did you not
love her, sir?
Because I loved another.
The youth sighed, and then said, What motive
induced her to take this interest in you?
Save that it was prompted by her own gentle
and good spirit, I know not, he said with
frankness
.
May it not have been love? said the other, with
hesitation.
The elder started, and turned and gazed on the
speaker an instant with surprise before he replied:
Love! How could she love a lowborn boy like
me? 'Twas pity, rather.
Nay, 'twas love.
Nay, I will not have the vanity to think so, nor
will I do her motives so much wrong.
Said you she was fair?
As maiden ever was.
Gentle?
As a seraph, if it should come to earth to habit
in woman's form.
Good?
As an angel.
Fair, gentle, and good?
All three.
And yet you loved her not?
I loved
another!
therefore, if she had been
indeed
an angel, I could not have loved, though I
might have worshipped her.
The young man bent his head low till the snowy
plume hid his face, and a deep sigh escaped his
bosom. Her thou wouldst have me love, then?
he asked, after a moment's silence, during which
the eyes of the other were habitually scanning the
horizon.
I would.
Wherefore?'
Because I love thee!
Love me! he cried, starting.
As a brother do I. In truth this chase has
fevered
you, and you are not yourself, Edwin. Let
us aboard!
They were about to descend to the ship, when
the elder, glancing once more around the horizon,
suddenly fixed his eyes in a northwardly direction,
and, after a moment's steady look, exclaimed,
A sail!
The younger arrested his descending footstep,
and also turned his eyes in the same direction, and
discerned a white dot on the extreme verge of
water and sky, the stationary appearance of which,
though neither form nor outline was
distinguishable
at the distance it was from them, indicated it
to be a vessel.
It may be a merchantman! he said.
It may be the bucanier! Craft of any sort are
so scarce in these colonial seas at this season, that
the chances are full three to one for the pirate.
We must on board and make sail.
Vol. II.O
As he spoke they descended, followed by their
dogs, the precipitous rock, and the next moment
stood on the vessel's deck. A few brief orders
were given by the elder of the two, who, it was
apparent, was the commander of the brig; the
anchor
was weighed, the topsails loosened and set,
and, catching a light breeze that blew through the
mouth of the lagoon seaward, she soon left the
wooded shores, and rode gallantly over the billows
of the open sea in the direction of the sail they had
seen from the cliff. What had first appeared a
white speck on the rim of the sea now grew into
shape and form, and, with the glass, the upper sails
of a brigantine could be seen down to her courses,
her hull still being beneath the horizon.
Swiftly the brig of war cut the blue waves, all
her light and drawing sails set. Her armed deck,
on each side of which bristled seven eighteen
pounders, with their armament, presented an
appearance
of that order and propriety which, even
on the eve of battle, characterizes the interior of a
British ship of war. The weather-beaten tars, who
had all been called to quarters, leaned over the
forward
bulwarks, and watched with interest the
distant
sail, but made their remarks in a subdued tone
to each other. All was ready for action in case
the stranger should prove to be an enemy. The
helmsman, with his eyes now dropped on the
compass
,
now directed ahead towards the sail, stood
cool and collected at his post; the officer of the
deck paced with a thoughtful brow fore and aft in
the waist, every few seconds stopping to survey the
chase, while the junior officers, each at his station,
silently
regarded the object, their eyes sparkling with
excitement as each moment brought them nearer
to it. In a magnificent upper cabin or poop,
constructed
on the quarter-deck, and gorgeous with
curtains of crimson, sofas, ottomans, and rich
Turkish
rugs laid over the floor with latticed windows
opening on every side to the water, were the two
hunters. They had now changed their costume
for one more appropriate to the sea and the
quarter-deck
of an armed vessel. The youthful
captain
wore the undress uniform of his rank and
profession
,
his hunting-knife replaced by a small sword,
and his bugle by a brace of pistols. He was
standing
by the window with his eyes upon the vessel
ahead. The other had substituted a plain suit of
black velvet for his former rich costume, and an
elegant rapier hung at one side and a silver inkhorn
at the other. He was seated at an ebony escritoir
writing, and, from his pursuit and apparel, evidently
held the rank of private secretary.
He is standing south by east, Edwin, said the
youthful captain, turning from the lattice and
addressing
the youth with animation; we shall
intercept
him by sunset if this wind holds. But
methinks
,
he added with interest, fixing his eyes
upon him as, with his rich hair drooping about his
cheeks, he leaned, forgetful of his occupation, over
the sheet, that of late you are getting sad and
absent
.
This station does not suit your ambition,
perhaps. You would be an officer instead of a
clerk.
Nay, sir, I would be as I am; I am not
discontent
so that I can be near here he checked
himself, bent his head to his writing, and did not
look up until he felt a hand gently laid upon his
shoulder. He started, while the colour came and
went in his cheek with confusion, and he shrunk
instinctively away.
Beshrew me, fair youth! I know not what to
make of thee, said the young captain, taking a
seat beside him, and resting one arm familiarly
upon his shoulder. Thou hast some deep, untold
grief at thy heart. If it be a love secreta tale of
love unrequitedof cruel maids and broken
promises
,
he said, gayly, why, then, out with it; make
me your confidant; I will tell you how to make
her heart ache, and to wish thee back again. Come,
Edwin, unburden thy thoughts. Unspoken, they
will feed upon the cheek and eye, and the grave
have thee ere thou hast attained manhood.
The youthful secretary was silent a few
moments
,
and then said, with an attempt to smile,
I have a tale of love, but not of mine.
I will hear it, and then tell thee if I think it
thine or no.
There was once a noble maiden, the heiress of
an earldom, who loved a peasant youth, handsome
and brave, and the nobility he gat not by birth
nature
endowed him with. The maiden was proud
and independent of spirit, and loved him for
himself
for
title, wealth, and rank she thought not!
A generous creature. And this humble youth
loved her in return?
No.
No! then, by Heaven, he was ignoble indeed,
and her love was ill placed, poor lady!
Nayhe
loved another!
Ha, was it so? he said, with a peculiar smile;
then I must pardon him! But did she tell him
of her love?
Never!
Who was this village maiden that supplanted
her?
She was no lowly maid! but noble as herself.
He was full ambitious! Did she love him in
return?
Nay, not then, said he, hesitatingly.
Edwin, you are giving my very history! You
hang your head! What, is it I of whom you
speak? he exclaimed, with animated interest.
I gave no name.
Nay, he said, blushing, I will not think,
though the tale tallies in some parts so well with
my own, that a noble maiden e'er could have
regarded
me with sentiments beneath her station.
Go on.
Time went on, and her love grew. Unseen,
unknown, she exerted her influence, and had him
(for he took to the seas) elevated from rank to rank,
though his own prowess won for him each grade
ere he rose to it; at length he became a captain.
Many years had elapsed in the interval, and she
had not seen him; but, every few months, rumour
trumpeted to her his gallant deeds, and in her
secret
heart she rejoiced with all the pride of love.
And still she loved him?
Better and better. Absence only increased the
intensity of her passion. At length she resolved
to see him, and, unknown to him, see if she could
not win his love; for she believed, silly girl,
that time had caused him to forget his first passion
for the noble maid who had disdained him for his
low birth. At length an opportunity presented
itself
that held out to her the prospect of
accomplishing
her wish. A nobleman related to her was
appointed
governor of a distant province, and this
youth was appointed to the command of the
vessel
that should convey him to his government
The noble was the father of the highborn maiden
he loved. Love roused
her
fears. She resolved
to go in the same ship, and be a check upon the
renewal of his love.
Your story interests me. Do not pause. Go
on!
So she disguised herself as a page, and, under
the pretence of going to Ireland, to spend a few
O 2
weeks with a maiden aunt, came on board his
vessel
,
and offered herself as his secretary!
Edwin, this is a wondrous tale! he exclaimed,
starting to his feet with surprise. Yet no, it
cannot
be, he said, half aloud, after steadily looking
at him a moment. Proceed!
She was received and sailed with him. Love
excuses much. Yet her friends were on board with
her, and it was not as if she had thrown herself on
this rash adventure alone. The maiden that he had
loved in youth he wooed and won. She knew him
not as the humble youth. He had taken another
name with his better fortunes. In the
noble-looking
officer that commanded the ship, and whose
gallant name had filled the world, she did not
recognise
the humble lad whom she had known in
earlier years. The disguised girl witnessed the
progress of their love with a breaking heart.
Poor maiden! She should have made known
her love, and it might have met return.
No, no, she could not. Yet she could not leave
him, even when she knew he cared not for her
knew not of her existence, or that he was loved by
her with such enduring attachment.
Had it been my case, I would have loved her,
had she made herself known, for her very devotion.
Love begets love, and so does gratitude. I could
not but have loved her.
Nayif you loved another?
Not while I loved that other. But if that love
had met no return, or afterward were crushed and
blighted by adverse circumstances, then my heart
would have turned to this gentle, devoted, heroic
maiden, whose love had been so strong as to lead
her to idolize me, and follow me in disguise even
over the sea.
Wouldst thou have done this?
By my troth! would I. I half love the maiden
now, of whose devotedness you speak so
eloquently
.
If it were my case, Kate would have a
dangerous
rival. I never could resist so much
womanly
devotion. Not I, Edwin.
Would you not rather despise her?
No. True love is sacred and honourable ever.
When it o'ersteps the bounds of maidenly
propriety
?
Yes, Edwin, in a case like this of which you
speak.
At this instant the officer of the deck reported
that the strange sail had suddenly changed her
course from the southeast, and was standing
towards
them.
The captain seized his glass, and, examining her,
said with animation,
Her hull has lifted, and she shows a tier of ports.
A red riband running around her bends! polacca
rigged, and courses up, with a bow as sharp as a
canoe
!
It is `the Kyd,' he cried, with joyful surprise.
Instantly all was animation and intense
excitement
on board. The guns were double-shotted,
the hammock nettings were stowed closer and
firmer than usual, hand-grenades lined the decks,
and every missile and weapon of offence or defence
that could be pressed into service on so desperate
an encounter as that anticipated, was brought forth
and placed ready for use. All that skill and
determination
to conquer could devise was done; and,
under a steady but light wind on her larboard
quarter
,
she fast neared the stranger, who also was
observed
to shorten sail and make other
demonstrations
of a hostile character. They continued to
approach
each other until less space than a mile
separated them, when the youthful captain, who,
with his trumpet in his hand, had taken his place
in the main rigging, shouted,
Hoist the ensign, and pitch a shot from the
weather-bow gun across his fore-foot.
The broad flag of England instantly ascended to
the peak, and unfolded its united crosses displayed
on its blood-red field. At the same time a column
of flame shot from her sides, and the vessel shook
with the loud report of the gun.
It has dashed the spray into their faces, said
the captain, who had followed the path of the ball
with the glass at his eye. Ha! by Heaven, there
goes the black flag, with its silver arrow emblazoned
on it.
It is Kyd
. He has fired!
A puff of smoke at the instant curled up from
the side of the pirate vessel, as it now proved to
be beyond question, and the next moment a twelve
pound shot, with a roaring noise, buried itself deep
in the mainmast, twenty feet above the deck. The
spar trembled from the shock, and even the vessel
reeled to one side from the force of the iron
projectile
.
This is an unlucky hit. It has weakened our
best spar! We must have the weather-gauge of
him, and run down and lay him by the board if he
is so good a marksman at a long shot, said the
captain.
No more shots were fired, and the vessels were
now within hailing distance, when, cheering his
crew by animated words as well as by his example,
and irresistibly communicating to them a portion
of his own spirit, the young captain stood by the
helmsman, and directed him to steer so as to strike
the advancing pirate with the larboard bow just
forward of the fore-chains. He ordered the
hand-grenades
to be in readiness to be thrown on board
as soon as they should come near enough, and the
grappling-irons to be kept clear and cast at an
instant's
notice, while in two dense parties,
commanded
by the chief officers, the boarders were drawn
up, prepared to leap on board cutlass in hand.
Swiftly and with appalling stillness the two
hostile
barks approached each other, both close hauled
on the wind, and moving at nearly equal speed. It
was within half an hour of sunset, and the level
rays of the sun suffused the sea with a flush of
gold and crimson. The wooded shores, which
were two miles distant, were touched with a
brighter
green, and the western sky was as bright and
varied with gorgeous colours as if a rainbow had
been dissipated over it. The hostile companies in
the two vessels saw none of its beauties and thought
only of the sun that gave glory to the scene, as a
light that was to lend its aid to the approaching
conflict. Nearer and nearer they came together, yet
unable, from their direct advance upon each other,
to bring their guns to bear. To fire their bow guns
would have checked their speed: both, therefore,
advanced in silence until each could see the features
of his foe. Conspicuous on their decks stood the
commanders of each brig, directing their several
courses, and giving commands that were distinctly
heard from one vessel to the other: Kyd, with his
light flowing locks, his fair, noble brow and
commanding
figure, on the quarter-deck near the
helmsman
with a stern and hostile expression in his eyes
and the attitude of one impatient to mingle in the
conflict, which he seemed to anticipate with
vengeful
triumph: the young captain, calm, cool, and
commanding
,
his features glowing with the excitement
of the occasion, and animated, as it seemed, with
an honest ambition to punish a lawless bucanier
who had so long filled sea and land with the terror
of his name.
Stand by, hand-grenades! he shouted, as the
vessels were within a few feet of each other.
All ready!
Cast! he cried, with a voice of thunder.
Instantly a score of these missiles were flying
through the air in the direction of the crowded
decks of the pirate. But, ere they had left the hand,
quicker than thought the pirate's helm had been put
hard up, and every sheet and brace being at the
same time let go, she fell off suddenly from the
wind, and presented her broadside to the bows of
the brig; all but one or two of the grenades fell
short and plunged into the water, and those that
struck her were thrown overboard ere they could do
injury. At the same instant the bows of the brig
struck her starboard side nearly midships, and such
was the tremendous force of the shock that her
slight timbers were stove in, four out of six of the
guns that composed the battery dismounted, while,
vibrating with the shock beyond its tensity, the
foremast, with its chain of connected yards,
snapped
off even with the deck, and fell with a terrible
crash and dire confusion and ruin into the sea.
Loud was the shout of success that rose from the
crew of the brig, and, rushing forward, they
prepared
to leap upon the deck of the bucanier.
Back, men! she is filling! cried the young
captain, who had gained the bowsprit of his vessel,
where he stood sword in hand, and, like his crew,
in the act of springing on board.
We are going down! was the universal cry
that rose from the pirate's decks, and the rush of
the waters into her hold was distinctly heard
above the noise and confusion of the scene.
Let her sink! shouted Kyd, bounding
amidships
among his men. Here is a- king's ship
worth three of it!
His appeal was answered by a demoniac yell
from his pirate crew; and, inspired by their
imminent
peril as well as their natural ferocity, they
sprung, as one man, upon the bows of the brig,
and, by mere force of numbers and desperation,
in an instant took possession of the forecastle,
and drove its defenders aft. The last man had
scarcely gained a footing upon it, when, with a
plunge like the dying struggle of a wounded
animal
,
the Silver Arrow, so long the besom of the
ocean, shot down into its unfathomable depths,
finding a grave in the element upon which it had so
long rode in triumph. The brig pitched and rolled
from side to side fearfully as she was received into
the vortex the sinking vessel had left, while she so
far sunk down that the waves rolled a foot deep
over her bows, and flowed in an irresistible torrent
aft to the quarter-deck.
For a few seconds after the disappearance of
the brigantine there was a deep hush over the
human throng. Every soul was touched with
the sublimity of the spectacle, and an impression,
not unlike that with which a child looks on death,
rested for an instant on all. But it was only for
an instant: the situation in which the two parties
were so suddenly and so singularly placed, in such
relative positions to each other, flashed upon their
minds, and every eye lighted up with the fire of
conflict.
Farewell to the brave galley! said Kyd, as he
saw the flag at her peak trail on the water as she
went down. Now, my boys, we have no vessel
save this! Five minutes will show whether it
belongs
to his majesty or `the Kyd.' Let us sweep
yonder honest folk from her, boys, he cried,
pointing aft, where the brig's crew were resolutely
drawn up before the quarter-deck under their
captain
,
by whose side stood, with a resolute eye and
fearless attitude, his youthful secretary. But, on
your lives, spare the captain! Also harm not that
fair youth beside him. I like his face for its
resemblance
to one I once knew. Now at them,
and fight like devils, for either you or they must be
driven overboard!
Receive them steadily and with firm front, my
men, cried the captain of the brig; remember,
your lives depend on retaining your ship. Do not
forget you are British seamen, fighting for your
king and country, your wives and sweethearts! and
that your foes are a set of bloodthirsty bucaniers,
who fight from desperation, and show neither
mercy
nor favour. Edwin, my young friend, your
station
is not here.
I will not leave your side, he said, firmly.
Nay, then, here they come like mad devils.
God and our country! Meet them half way! St.
George and at them!
He was the first to set the example, and met the
desperate charge almost single handed. The
number
of pirates was more than seventy, while the
crew and officers of the brig did not exceed sixty.
Nearly the whole of these were now engaged;
those at a distance, who were unable to mingle in
the mle and use their swords, briskly discharging
their firearms, while those of either party on the
skirts of the fight cheered their comrades on with
loud cries. For a few moments the brig's crew
had the advantage, and pressed their assailants back
on every hand, while from side to side flowed the
heady current of battle, and the human masses
swayed this way and that like an agitated sea; and,
with a roar still more terrible than the ocean in its
wildest fury ever sent up, shouts of onset, cries of
rage or pain, yells, and execrations filled the air,
mingled with the reports of pistols, the clash of
steel, and the strange thunder of a hundred feet
upon the hollow decks. At length the seamen gave
way before their desperate antagonists, whom the
cheering voice of their leader inspired with tenfold
courage and ferocity.
At them. Leave not a man alive! One good
blow and the brig is ours. Bear them down! Give
no quarter! Ha, Fitzroy! Ha! do we meet again!
I have sought thee to enjoy this moment. Back,
hounds, he shouted to his men; will ye press
me? there is meaner game for you! I alone deal
with him.
The same moment, then, crowns my wish and
thine, said Fitzroy, crossing his weapon.
They had exchanged a few fierce passes without
effect, when they were separated by the tide of the
conflict, and borne to opposite sides of the deck.
At this moment Edwin the secretary, who had been
animating the crew by his cheering cries, said
quickly in the ear of Fitzroy,
Make a sudden charge with all your force, save
six men to man the two after guns; drive them back
to the forecastle, if possible, and then retreat, and I
will, at the same moment, turn upon them the pieces
which I have already had loaded with grape.
This was spoken with rapidity and clearness.
It shall be done, was the stern reply. Ho,
my brave tars! one blow for merry England! one
good blow for the king. Charge them all at once.
Follow me. Hurrah for the king!
Hurrah for King Billy, hurrah! shouted the
seamen, with one voice, catching the spirit of their
young captain.
So sudden and well directed was the charge, that
the pirates gave back in a body till they reached
the windlass, when, in a voice like a trumpet,
Fitzroy
shouted,
Every Englishman throw himself upon his
face! Fire!
Down! re-echoed Kyd, instinctively, at the
same moment.
Vol. II.P
Disciplined to obey the lightest order, every
sailor
cast himself upon the deck; but most of the
pirates heard too late the warning command of their
chief, and the same instant, from both of the
quarter-deck
guns, a shower of grape whistled like a
whirlwind over the heads of the crew, while with
the roar of cannon mingled the groans and shrieks
of half a score of bucaniers.
Vengeance! vengeance! Will ye be
slaughtered
like dogs! Upon them! Cut them down!
Leave not one alive! Vengeance!
Loud and terrific was the cry of vengeance,
followed by a rush of the pirates aft that was
irresistible
.
The crew were cut down scarcely ere
they had risen to their feet, and sabred with hellish
ferocity wherever they could be grappled with.
In a moment's space two thirds of the seamen, who
had been seized with a sudden panic at the
demoniac
rush of the pirates, whom they expected to
have seen discomfited by the wholesale slaughter
of their comrades, fell a prey to their savage
ferocity
,
and the decks were deluged with their blood.
Many leaped overboard, and others sprang into the
rigging to fall dead into the sea.
On, on! the brig is ours! shouted the pirate
chief, waving his reeking sabre. Charge the
quarter-deck!
Thither Fitzroy, with Edwin, had retreated with
the remnant of his crew, which were scarcely
twenty in number.
Surrender! demanded Kyd.
With our lives only! was the firm reply.
Dash at them, ye devils! But see ye touch
not the two I have marked as my own game! Let
your blades drink deep; we shall soon be masters
here. Now on!
They were received by a discharge of pistols,
which only increased the ferocity of those who
escaped
the fire, and, cutlass in hand, the
quarter-deck
was carried after a desperate resistance.
Fitzroy was taken prisoner with much difficulty,
and at the cost of several lives of his assailants,
while Kyd himself disarmed the secretary. To a
man the brave crew were slain, either in fair fight
while defending their station, or massacred in cold
blood at the termination of the sanguinary conflict.
The pirates were now masters of the brig, though
its conquest had cost them full half of their
number
.
Clear the decks of both dead and wounded!
said the victor, leaning on his bloody sabre and
gazing over the decks, which wore the aspect of a
slaughter-house.
Of our own men? said he who has before been
named as Lawrence.
Ay! every man that cannot rise on his feet
and walk. We want no hospital of the brig!
At this order one or two of the wounded pirates
attempted to get to their legs; but finding, after
several
ineffectual struggles, that it was out of their
power, fell back powerless, with execrations on
their lips, which had hardly ceased before their
living bodies parted the crimson flood alike with
the dead. The sun still shone upon the scene of
carnage, and, ere he set, the brig was cleared of the
bodies of both pirate and seaman; the decks were
washed; sail was made; the new crew were
posted
at their different stations as they had been, though
in fewer numbers, on board their former vessel;
and, half an hour after the conflict, as the disk of
the sun sunk behind the Highlands of Monmouth,
scarcely a vestige of the terrific contest was
apparent
in the orderly exterior and accurate nautical
appointments of the captured vessel.
The moon rose like a shield of pearl, and flung
her pale, snowy light along the dark waves, and
silvered the sails of the brig as she went bowling
along over the sparkling surges. On the
quarter-deck
sat Captain Fitzroy and his youthful
secretary
.
They were unarmed, and the elder manacled
with heavy irons; but the younger was unbound.
Not far from them, at times stopping to survey
them, walked moodily their captor, his brow knit
with thought, and his lips compressed with fierce
resolution. At length he stopped, and said to an
inferior officer who stood in the waste leaning over
the bulwarks and watching the swift and steady
progress of the vessel through the water,
Griffin, prepare the plank!
You do not mean
It matters not to you what I mean. Obey me!
You are given of late to question my orders too
boldly. Bring the brig to and get out the plank,
he reiterated, in a firm manner.
There has been blood enough shed, said the
man, with dogged determination, folding his arms
and looking his commander in the face. I will
do no more of it.
Ha! by the living spirit! Mutiny?
I will be a butcher no longer, be it mutiny or
not. I am sick of it.
Will you to your duty, sir?
To work the ship, but not to take more life,
said the officer, steadily.
You are mad, Griffin! My authority must not
be questioned, even by you. I would not take
your life, he added, placing his hand on the butt of
a pistol and half drawing it from his belt. You
cannot be alone in this mutinyyou wear too bold
a front.
Nor am I. Ho! lads
a Griffin! a Griffin!
The loud cry of the mutineer was responded to
by the shout of eight or ten pirates, who instantly
placed themselves, with drawn cutlasses, around
him.
By the cross! it is well matured! muttered
Kyd, with terrible calmness. Back, fellows! To
your posts! You, Griffinfor the last timeto
your station, sir, and bring the brig to!
Never, sir! Draw and charge. Now is our
time! he cried to his party.
A cry between a yell and the sound made by the
gnashing of teeth escaped the infuriated bucanier
chief. Like a tiger, he sprung upon them
singlehanded
,
and struck back half a score of blades with
a single broad sweep of his cutlass, while those
who wielded them stood appalled.
Back, dogs! Do ye fear me singly? Oh, ho,
cowards! Stand where ye are! and you, traitor,
he cried, breaking the cutlass of their leader short
to its hilt, go to your duty! I spare your life!
Never!
Then go to the devil with my compliments.
With the words he placed a pistol at his breast
and fired: the man leaped high into the air and fell
backward dead.
Now, fellows, return to your stations, he said,
returning his smoking pistol to his belt. The first
who hesitates or falters lies beside this carcass, he
added, touching, with a contemptuous gesture, the
body with his foot.
The mutineers dropped their weapons and
returned
to their posts without hesitation or a
murmur
.
Lawrence, you are no longer coxswain,
said Kyd. Take this mutineer's rank. See that
my orders are obeyed! Lay the main topsail to
the mast!
Ay, ay, sir! replied the new lieutenant, with
alacrity.
P 2
The helm was put hard down, the vessel came
up into the wind, the heavy sail was reversed
against the topmast, and the vessel became
stationary
.
A plank was then run out over the gangway
bulwarks with the largest end inboard.
Now, Rupert Fitzroy, prepare to die! said
the bucanier, approaching his prisoner, who stood
with folded arms and calm brow gazing upon the
moon walking in her brightness, and looking as if
he anticipated the speedy flight of his spirit through
the starry world. He evidently expected death,
and was prepared to meet it. His companion stood
by him leaning upon his shoulder; his hands were
clasped together, and he was pale and deadly in
aspect, but not less resigned: nevertheless, he
involuntarily
shuddered as the footsteps of the pirate
approached them, and addressed the former.
I will give you a free leap into the other world,
as your blood is gentle, sir, and will set aside the
cravat of hemp; though in a swing at the yard-arm
many a better man has gone to his account than
Mark Meredith.
Ha! do you know me? demanded the other,
starting from his revery, and fixing his gaze upon
him with surprise and curiosity.
Thou hast heard whether I do or not, and what
was but suspicion is now proved by thy manner.
Who, then, art thou?
It matters not. You must die. The last link
that binds you to life is broken. You will soon
learn if the proverb be true that saith there is but
a step between this world and the next, for you
will speedily measure it. The step is rather a wet
one, but there is a fire priests prate about that will
soon dry you. This irony and sarcasm was
spoken
with the most unfeeling manner, while hatred
and malice seemed to dictate each word.
Surely you cannot, you will not be so
inhuman
as to do such foul murder! cried the youthful
secretary, placing himself between Kyd and
Fitzroy
,
and stretching forth his hands deprecatingly.
Who is the blacker murderer, sirthis man
who robs of me my good name, or I, who merely
take his life? inquired Kyd, haughtily.
I robbed you not of it, said Fitzroy. 'Tis
true, I have talked to many of thy deeds. But your
good name! 'twas already gonethrown away by
your lawless acts of piracy.
'Tis false! I had never pirated when I took thee
prisoner. Smuggling a few silks and laces, or
costly wines; defending my ship against officious
gentlemen under king's colours, who fain would
board me, seeking contraband waresthis have
I done, and will do again on like occasion; but
pirated
I had not then.
A distinction without a difference; a mere
quibble
upon words, to cheat thy rankling conscience
into security.
Have it thy own way, said the pirate, with
haughty carelessness. I will not quarrel with a
man who has but five brief minutes to use his
tongue in. Is all ready there at the gangway?
We're losing time here idly. Ho! lead him to his
death!
Impossible, exclaimed Fitzroy, indignantly;
you will not carry out a suggestion so infernal.
Nay, sir, you will not do such cold-blooded
murder, cried the secretary, catching the hand of
Kyd, and kneeling at his feet. Spare! oh, spare
his life, and I will be thy slave!
Silence, boy! and you, sir, if you would use
your speech, husband it in words of prayer. Thy
time has come as surely as the moon now shines
in the east.
All ready, sir! said Lawrence, coming aft a
step or two and addressing his captain.
Will you walk to the gangway, sir, or shall
my men conduct you?
Farewell, my faithful Edwin, he said, with
manly dignity, tenderly embracing the youth. We
shall in a few minutes meet beyond the skies!
The youth cast himself into his arms, and the
next moment Fitzroy unclasped his hold and laid
him upon the deck insensible.
I am ready! he said, calmly.
Perhaps you have a last request to make, said
the pirate chief, sarcastically; doubtless some
wish is lurking in your breast, which, unexpressed,
will add bitterness to death! If so, intrust it to
me. I'll be its executor. Perhaps, he continued,
in the same tone, you have a ring, a lock of hair,
some tender love-token to be returned to the giver.
Perchance some maiden will ask how Fitzroy died.
I'll bear to her a message! Ere to-morrow night
I shall see the peerless Kate of Bellamont; she'll
love me for bringing it, and perhaps yield the
pressure
of her haughty lips. I've had love favours on
my own account of the willing maid ere now.
Villain! thou liest! cried the young man,
goaded to phrensy by his words, and only
restrained
from springing upon him by the weight of the
irons which shackled him.
Ask her when you meet hereafter in the other
world, for you meet no more in this!
Monster! the cup of death hath its own
bitterness
,
and needs not thy impious words to drug it.
Thou hast nothing, then, to ask? said the
bucanier
,
in the same tone of irony he had hitherto
used. I fain would do thee a kindness.
I
have
one request!
Name it.
Take off my irons, and let me freely spring into
the grave you have designed for me!
Knock off his chains! The devil'll have him
bound in double irons ere the waves that gape to
take him in flow smooth again above his head.
The manacles were unlocked and removed,
when Kyd, turning to him, asked with bitter
malice
,
What else?
This broadsword!
Quicker than thought, he snatched a cutlass from
one of the pirates, and attacked Kyd with a sudden
vigour and skill that was irresistible. The
bucanier
retreated on the defensive several paces before
he could rally or return a single blow for the
shower
that rained fiercely and unceasingly upon him.
At length he caught the blade of his prisoner on the
guard of his own, and arrested it. An instant they
stood with their crossed weapons in the air, eying
each other, and then simultaneously stepped back
and resumed the fight. The pirates closed round
and would have struck Fitzroy in the back, but the
voice of Kyd restrained them.
Not a blow, men! He is mine! I will tame
him down ere long!
For a few seconds longer they battled with
terrible
fury, neither having the advantage; now on
one side of the deck, now on the other; now
striding
the body of the insensible Edwin, now
fighting
together in the waste, retreating and advancing
alternately. At length the bucanier began to gain
an advantage over his less athletic antagonist; he
pushed him hard, and, step by step, compelled him
to retreat towards the stern. Finally, by a strong
and sudden stroke, he shivered his sword to his
hand and left him defenceless. The blow with
which he was about to follow up his advantage
was arrested in its descent, and, turning away with
a gesture of triumph, he said, as the other, with
his arms folded, stood passive to receive the blow,
'Tis enough for me that I have worsted thee!
I have struck my game, so now let the pack worry
him! Set upon him, men, and cut him down; he
is yours! he cried, with savage ferocity, pointing
to the young officer.
The pirates, with a yell of joy, rushed aft like a
pack of wolves and leaped upon him. With the
strength and skill of desperation, he wrested the
cutlass from the first who reached him, and,
springing
backward upon the taffrail, defended himself
a few seconds against the fearful odds. But at
length, yielding to superior numbers, he cast his
sword into the air, and, leaping over the stern, amid
the yells of the pirates and the firing of pistols,
sunk from their sight.
Kyd cast a glance into the dark wave, and, after
a few seconds' survey, said half aloud,
He is no more! Henceforward I am sole Lord
of Lester!
These last words gave the clew to his strange
and vindictive thirst for the death of his victim,
and was a key to his otherwise unaccountable
bloodthirstiness. Ho! there, villains! why do
you gaze upon the water? Make sail on the brig!
Man the braces all! Helm hard up! There she
yields! Now she falls off. Steady! belay all!
The after sails swung back to their original
position
as the vessel obeyed her helm; and at first with
scarcely perceptible motion, but gathering
momentum
as she moved, she parted the moonlit waves
before her, and went careering over the sparkling
seas in the direction of New-York.
CHAPTER V.
He then would make the nearest isle,
And go at night by stealth,
To hide within the earth a while
His last ill-gotten wealth.
H. F.
Gould
.
Towards
the approach of evening on the day
following the events related in the last chapter, Kate
Bellamont was walking beneath the noble oaks
that shaded the lawn lying between the front of
White Hall and the water. She had been for some
time watching the slow progress of a brig into the
harbour, which, on first discerning it from the
balcony
,
her spyglass told her was the Ger-Falcon.
Her impatience had drawn her to the water side,
where the thin waves uncurled upon a silvery beach
at her feet.
Slowly it advanced up towards the town, and
the shouts of the citizens, and gun after gun from
the Rondeel, welcomed her return. It was nearly
night when, coming between Governor's Island and
the city, she fired a gun without coming to; the
British ensign was lowered at the same instant, and
up in its place went the black flag of the bucanier.
A loud wail seemed to fill the town.
The Kyd! the Kyd! rung through the streets
and everywhere spread consternation. The
battery
on the Rondeel opened a heavy fire, which was
returned by two broadsides from the brig, which
then stood across towards Brooklyn, and anchored
east of the town out of the range of the guns of the
fort.
Kate had witnessed all this, at first, with surprise,
which grew to terrible anxiety and alarm; and
when the return of the fire confirmed the hostile
character of the vessel, now too plainly captured by
the corsair, a faintness came over her and she
leaned
against an oak for support. Where was
Fitzroy
?
A prisoner or slain? were questions that
she dared not ask herself. Overcome by her
feelings
,
she was ready to sink at the foot of the tree
in almost a state of insensibility, when she saw a
skiff containing two men, which had been making its
way from the direction of The Kills, land not far
from the Rondeel. The twilight was
sufficiently
strong to enable her to see a fisherman step from
it and approach her by the winding of the shore.
She struggled against her feelings, for his manner
seemed to betoken news; and with a quick step she
advanced several paces to meet him.
Do you bring news of Captain Fitzroy, or come
you to confirm my suspicions? she cried, as he
came near her.
Sweet lady, he said, wrapping his ample
jacket
closer about his person, I am but a poor
shipwrecked
mariner. Yet I do bear sad news for
thee.
Of whom? she asked, quickly, vainly
endeavouring
,
in the dusk of evening, to read in his shaded
features all he had not revealed.
Captain Fitzroy!
Ha! speak! Words! words! why are you
silent? I will hear thee.
He has been captured by a pirate.
I knew it.
And is now prisoner to his captor in yonder
brig.
His own courage should have kept it.
Nay, lady, he did all he could to save his
vessel
.
What fate met he? What became of him,
seaman? There is life and death in your answer!
Lives he?
We were captured by Kyd, who now holds our
vessel, and all were condemned to walk the plank.
Ha! and he?
Nay, lady, he lives! He, besides myself, alone
escaped the death designed for us.
Lives, lives! 'Tis happiness to know it!
How escaped you?
I took the leap into the sea. By floating and
swimming I was half an hour afterward picked up
by a fisherman, who brought me hither.
And Edwin, his secretary?
Alas, I know not.
Direful, dreadful news! Fitzroy, Fitzroy! oh
that I had died ere this sad news of thy
dishonour
,
perhaps thy death, had reached me!
Merciful
God! sustain me in this hour!
She buried her face in her hands, and seemed
overcome by grief.
Nay, Kate, dearest Kate, I am here! Fitzroy
is before you; it is your Rupert who clasps you to
his heart. Speak! I am by you, and fold you in my
arms!
He cast off his fisherman's coat and bonnet as
he spoke, and she looked up revived at his voice,
and beheld, indeed, the face of him whom she had
mourned as dead or lost to her for ever.
Fitzroy!
Fitzroy, and none else, dearest Kate!
How could you put me to such a trial? she
cried, almost weeping on his shoulder.
Nay, forgive me! I planned it not beforehand;
but seeing, as I approached you, that you knew me
not, the fisher's coat and cap I borrowed of him who
fished me from the water having disguised me even
to your keen-eyed love, I was tempted to try your
affections.
Vol. II.Q
Nay, Rupert, did you doubt it?
I have no cause, he said, embracing her.
And did you escape as you just now said?
Yes. My brig was taken by a strange
fatality
after I had sunk the pirate vessel. All my
men were slainnone, save Edwin and myself, left
alive. I, from some strange thirst for blood that
possesses Kydfor I can divine no other motive
was condemned by him to walk the plank. I
succeeded
in snatching a cutlass, for the purpose of
selling my life dearly as might be, but at length
was driven overboard. I had, before sunset, seen
a fisher's skiff a mile off at anchor; and, rising far
from the vessel towards her bows, struck out, when
she had passed me, towards it. It so chanced that
he had seen the brig lying to, and pulled towards
her to find a market for his fish, when I hailed him
and was taken on board. Knowing that the pirate
would steer directly to this port, I bribed the man
to bring me hither through the Staten Island Sound:
and here I am once more in your loved presence.
She mused while he spoke, and then, as if
unconscious
of his presence, said,
Robert, poor Robert, to what height of crime
has passion led theeto what abyss will it plunge
thee! Thou wert my first, my only love! As
some wild vine clings around a stately trunk,
curling
its tendrils about its topmost limbs, as if in one
embrace 'twould clasp it all, so did I entwine my
heart around thee, taking thy shape! But, at last,
the tempest came and swept my stately oak away.
Lonely and lost, I stretched my wounded tendrils
on every side, seeking some branch to cling to;
then fell down, and lay in ruins along the ground.
Ha, Fitzroy! Why is thy eye with such fierce
scrutiny fixed upon me?
The lover started, and then a moment or two
hurriedly paced the sward ere, with hesitation and
embarrassment, he said,
It has reached my earshow, it matters not
that, since my departure, you and this freebooter
Kyd have met in private. From his own lips there
fell dark words of favours given or received! The
thoughts (forgetful of my presence) you now gave
tongue to put to this, together, the one
strenghtened
by the other, give
Fitzroy, cease! why will you seek to cast a
cloud over the heaven your presence makes so
bright?
Forgive me, but some demon tortures me with
suspicion, spite of my confidence in thy love!
Ha, dost thou know this Kyd?
Only as a pirate! There is meaning in your
question, he said, earnestly. Who is he other
than he seems?
To keep the secret from thee would be doing
injustice to my pride of spirit. I have pledged my
father to marry thee; I look upon thee as my
husband; I will keep nothing from thee.
Do you not love me, Kate?
If I had never loved till now, I should love thee,
Rupert, next to my life. I have told thee the secret
of my former love, and thou didst say thou wouldst
take the half of my heart if thou couldst get no
more!
I did, dearest Kate! The intensity of my love
is alone my apology for intruding upon the
sacredness
of an earlier passion! Yet I thought thou
hadst forgotten this
I hadI but speak of it now. It is forgotten.
She now seemed to struggle with some powerful
emotion, and then said quickly,
The Kydisis Lester!
By Heaven! your words have solved a strange
feeling that governed me when I was in his
presence
to call him by a familiar name! But
He is Lesterand Lester is `the Kyd.'
He fled to sea I have learned, strangely
leaving
his title, wealth, and home. A pirate?
A pirate.
How learned you this?
Through the sorceress Elpsy, and, more
recently
,
through himself.
You have met him, then?
I have, Rupert.
He pressed upon thee his former passion?
He did.
And you
Fitzroy, enough; I will not be interrogated.
If you doubt me, I am unworthy your love; you
to suspect my truth, unworthy mine.
Forgive me, Lady Catharine! Yet you met?
For a moment. I told him I was betrothed to
thee, and he left me, as I believe, to pursue thee.
This accounts for his vindictiveness. Pardon
me if I have wronged thee. You do not hear.
I was thinking of Lester, she said, with
unsuspecting
frankness.
He gazed upon her absent countenance a few
seconds, struck his temples with vehemence, and
groaned with anguish. Suddenly he turned
towards
her and said, with the sternness of grief
mingled
with reluctant jealousy,
Lady Catharine of Bellamont, answer me in
pity, by the love I bear you, by the troth you have
plighted me! With all his insatiate avarice and
thirst for blood, his moral baseness and his
numerous
crimes, does there not linger in the embers of
your earlier passion one single spark a proper wind
may kindle into flame?
There is deeper meaning beneath your words
than floats upon the surface, she replied, with
dignity
;
my woman's pride should rise in my
defence
,
and meet with scorn the foul suspicion that
lurks beneath them! But I will excuse you. I
will think you soured by the recent loss of your
brig, and so forgive you.
This is no answer, lady! This Lester or Kyd, I
well know, loves you! Thinking me dead, he soon
will press his suit. By soft words, vows, and deep
protestations of innocence and promises of reform,
will he seek to reinstate himself in your affections
if perchance they are forfeited! He is rich,
noble
,
and smooth-tongued. I am, as now you see
me, a shipwrecked mariner, with only my
commission
and my sword! Nay, you have even cast the
loss of my vessel in my teeth!
The handsome young man, with clouded brow,
grieved and goaded spirit, turned away as he spoke,
and, folding his arms, gazed moodily on the waves
as they unrolled at his feet, tossing liquid diamonds
upon the sand. Each word he uttered only served
as weapons against him. Suspicion and jealousy
will never turn back the current of woman's love if
it has once flowed a contrary way. Gentleness will
govern it and guide it; but violence opposed to it
will, like a dam, convert it into an ungovernable
cataract
.
The attachment between Kate Bellamont
and Fitzroy was properly, so far as impassioned
love was concerned, only on one side. Fitzroy, or
Mark Meredith, had held her from youth in his eye
as the star both of his ambition and his love; and
when, by a fortuitous circumstance, five years
after
his departure as an humble lad from the
fisherman's
hut at Castle Cor, he found himself
commander
of the vessel destined to convey her to the
New World, he, unrecognised by her, and under
the name he had assumed, wooed her with
diffidence
,
Q 2
yet with the perseverance of a love that had
strengthened with his strength and grown with his
growth. She, in the mean while, was pleased by
his attentions, flattered by his devotion, and not
insensible
to his love. She knew him only as
Captain
Fitzroy, who had been knighted for his
gallantry
on the sea, and whose youth only prevented
him from attaining the highest rank in the navy.
The earl (for the lovely Countess of Bellamont
had deceased the year before) seconded the young
hero's addresses, anticipating for the youthful knight
the highest name and rank.
At length, on the day they arrived in New-York
Bay she gave him the promise of her hand, though
her heart went not with it. It was her father's wish
that she should marry, and she herself believed
Lester
no longer lived. Fitzroy was therefore
accepted
;
and though she did not regard him with the
devotion
of love, she esteemed him as a friend; while
the gratitude she felt for his attachment he mistook
for love. Although such second attachments are
not altogether consistent with the character of a
true heroine, yet they are not inconsistent with the
character of a true woman!
The betrothed lady looked upon her lover with
surprise as he concluded, and said mildly,
This is strange! You are not wont to yield to
moods of jealousy, Fitzroy!
Jaundiced and jealous I confess I am, until you
answer me! he said, with nervous impatience.
Thou art ill, I fear, she said, laying her hand
upon his shoulder tenderly; and what at other
times I might take deep offence at, having given no
cause, I'll now regard as the workings of disease
tinging your speech, which else were fair and
worthy
of you.
I am not sick unless at heart, he said, burying
his face in his hands. She loves me not, he
uttered
to himself; she loves me not! I have been
blinded by my own deep passion! She loves me
not! The hopes, the dreams of years are
dissipated
!
She loves me not!
All at once he turned to her and said,
Once more forgive me, dearest lady! I was
not myself just now; I knew notI knew not what
I said! 'Tis over now; forget it!
I knew thou wert not thyself, and felt not thy
words, she said, with sweet dignity. Nay,
shrink not from my embrace, Rupert.
I am unworthy!
Nay, Rupert, I know your thoughts! You do
yourself injustice. So far as my love can be
bestowed
on any one, it is bestowed on thee. That I
think of Lester as he once was with tenderness, I
do not deny; that I now pity and fear him, you
need not be told. Still I do confess to you, that,
were he Lester now, and worthy of his name, my
love would be his did he claim it. But we can
never
be aught to each other more. Be jealous no
longer! 'Tis unworthy thee; and I will henceforth
give thee no cause.
Nay, lady, he said, with seriousness, kneeling
and taking her hand, though I love thee truly and
tenderly; though I have loved thee since my heart
was first awakened to passion; and although this
hand has been the goal of my ambition, and is at
length surrendered to me, and is thus clasped in
mine, yet I resign it, and here tender back to thee
thy reluctantly given troth, and leave thee free!
Thou wilt not, then, she said, playfully, after
hesitating in what vein to reply, deign to accept
my heart, while one little corner is reserved for the
memory of a youthful passion?
Nay, if that little corner alone were wholly
mine, and the rest were sacred to that youthful love,
I should feel myself most happymost blessed.
But not that I may be free, but that thou mayest be,
do I make this sacrifice.
Then it need not be made, Rupert. For it
would be also a sacrifice to me.
Do you say that truly? he asked, with warmth.
Truly.
I am then happy.
You will not be jealous again?
No. But it was my love.
I confess you had cause. But it exists no
longer. Let us return to the Hall.
I will escort thee there, and then, as I should
have done ere this, aid the earl in preparing to
defend
the town, for it doubtless will be attacked
ere morning by Kyd. LesterLester, said you?
How strange, how very strange! An earldom
thrown away; the haughty, highborn noble! Nay,
I can scarce believe it. Yet, now I call him to
mind, I do recognise the noble in `the Kyd.' At
another time, fair Catharine, you must explain this
mystery to me!
They advanced towards the Hall as he was
speaking, and were soon lost in the shadows that
were cast by the trees, that stretched their gnarled
limbs on every side, covering the lofty roof of the
White Hall with a canopy of the densest foliage.
They found in the library the Earl of Bellamont,
attended by the captain of the Rondeel and two or
three of his council, who were also the principal
citizens of the town, in some excitement on
account
of the reappearance of the Ger-Falcon
under
the pirate flag. In a few words Fitzroy
informed
them of the particulars of his meeting with
the pirate, the loss of his vessel, and his own
escape
.
To the Rondeel, Captain Van Hooven! said
the earl to the commander of the fort, with
animation
,
as he ended. We shall doubtless be
attacked
.
Let nothing be wanting to defend your
position and protect the town. Attended by these
gentlemen and Captain Fitzroy, I will visit the
other forts and stir the citizens to arms. Watch
any movement from the brig, and fire at whatever
moves on the water.
They instantly separated: the captain hastening
to his fort, the governor and his party to visit the
town and the two other forts, situated the one at the
Countess's slip, and the other at the foot of the
Wall-street, and Kate was left alone. When their
departing footsteps had died away, she felt an
undefinable
curiosity to watch the motions of the
vessel, the appearance of which created such a
sensation
in town and hall. She therefore hastened
to her boudoir and took her station upon the
balcony
.
The night had already set in, and the brig lay
dark, still, and indistinct where she had at first
anchored
.
All was silent in that direction, and her
nicest sense of hearing could not detect a ripple on
the water. Did she listen for one? Did she
expect
one? Did she hope, yet fear; doubt, yet
believe, that the outcast Lester would seek her
presence once more? There is a difficulty in
saying
what emotions passed through the maiden's
mind. It is puzzling to tell which way the beam
of a lady's thoughts will turn when a lover is in
each scale! Yet it by no means requires a skilful
analyzer of the female heart to tell which of two
loversa first one unforgotten, though discarded; a
second unloved, though enduredwill be most in
her thoughts. It has ever been a noble, yet weak
trait in woman, to love unworthiness, and rarely has
there been found a man, however black with crime,
however despised by his fellow-men, who has not
been, in his lowest estate of guilt and degradation,
the object of some woman's devoted and undying
love. Such love for such beings seems to be
allied
to the tender pity with which angels regard
the whole erring race of mortals! It is not
intended
by these reflections to say anything of Kate's
feelings that can be construed into disloyalty
towards
Fitzroy: they are only intended to show
that women are good, kind, forgiving, charitable, and
somewhat capricious creatures, and that, in loving,
they obey the heart rather than the head.
Kate, after watching the still waters of the bay
for some time, and catching no sign of movement,
hostile or otherwise, on board the vessel, descended
the steps of the balcony to the lawn, and,
advancing
across it, approached the gate that led
towards
the inn of Jost Stoll, in the direction of which
she heard the voices of many citizens congregated
there and discussing the crisis of affairs. As she
came near it it was opened, and a person hastily
entered and closed it after him. She started at the
intrusion, and was about to turn towards the Hall,
when the stranger called her by name in a low tone.
She stopped and surveyed him an instant as he
slowly approached.
Edwin Gerald, is it you? You are then safe!
I congratulate you with all my heart!
I am, lady, said the youth, sadly. But
and he hesitated.
You bring me news of Fitzroy's death.
You speak full lightly of it, he said, with
surprise
,
did you believe such my message. I know
not whether he lives or not. Our vessel was taken
by Kyd, who now holds it. Captain Fitzroy and
myself alone were spared. He for a dreadful death,
I for the more dreadful fate of surviving him.
You were attached to him?
I was. Now that he is no more, I have no
longer reason for this disguise, and here
Nay; do nothing rashly, fair sir; if you were
about to tell me he loved me, I can tell you he has
told me so himself within the half hour.
How? Explain!
He is alive and well.
Alive. Heaven, thou art kind! most kind!
How was it?
He was driven overboard, as you believe, but
was saved in a fisherman's boat. He will be
rejoiced
to learn of your escape. How was it, fair
sir?
Kyd retained me prisoner to bear a courteous
message to his lady love. I swore, to purchase
my life, to be its bearer when he came to port.
For this purpose I was landed above the town on
the western side, and guided by him to this gate.
He now awaits an answer to this billet. This done,
I am released from my solemn oath to him.
Fitzroy
lives, said you, lady?
She heeded not his words, but snatching the
note from his hands, said hurriedly,
Wait my return.
She flew to the balcony and shut herself in her
boudoir, and, drawing the curtains close, half
opened
the letter, when she hesitated.
Nay, it must not be! 'Tis wrong. I will
return
it.But perhaps it contains something I should
know! I should like to hear what the lost Lester
can say. He comes, too, in such gentle guise! I
will read it!
The next moment it was open in her hand, and
she read with a fluttering pulse,
Dearest Kate
,
Let me see you for a brief moment just as the
moon rises, by the linden that grows at the foot of
the Rondeel. My temporal, nay, spiritual welfare
hangs upon your answer. I am penitent. I
appeal
to you as to a heavenly intercessor! Refuse
not this request, lest the guilt of my suicidal blood
fall on your soul.
Lester
.
She looked at the lines till they seemed
composed
of words of fire. Her brain reeled, her heart
swelled, and she seemed torn by emotions of
terrible
power.
Heaven guide me in this strait! she cried,
falling impulsively on her knees and clasping the
letter in her folded hands. Sudden and strange
events crowd thick upon me, with tales of murder
foul, and this newborn jealousy of Rupertwhom
I know not if I love or no, yet whom I should love
had
he
not risen from the grave, as 'twere, to step
between me and my newly-plighted troth! My
brain is crazed!
She rose to her feet and walked the room
thoughtfully
,
with the letter in her hand, now looking at it
with tenderness, now crumpling it with disdain.
Suddenly she stopped and said with energy,
The struggle is over! I will meet him.
She stepped to the balcony, beneath which the
young secretary stood, and said calmly,
Return, and say I'll come.
She withdrew herself hastily into the boudoir as
she spoke, and the youth left her to bear the
message
back to the bucanier, and thereby redeem his
oath and regain his liberty.
The moon was just rising above the Heights of
Brooklyn, when, wrapped in a mantle, her face
concealed by its folds, thrown over her head in the
shape of a hood, Kate Bellamont left her boudoir
by the door that communicated with the main body
of the house. With light and hasty footsteps she
traversed a long passage that led to the library.
She cautiously opened the door, and, evidently to
her surprise and pleasure, found no one within.
She crossed it to an opposite door, which she
opened
with the same caution, and found herself in the
family chapel, dimly lighted by two wax tapers
placed upon a small stand before a crucifix. She
gathered the folds of her mantle closer about her
form, and, looking round the obscure apartment to
see if she was observed, kneeled a moment in
silent
prayer before the altar, looking heavenward as
she prayed, as if she sought guidance and
protection
.
She then rose to her feet, and hastily
walked towards a door partly concealed by
tapestry
,
and passed through it into a conservatory
verdant
and fragrant with rare plants. A little wicket
inserted in the Venetian blinds which surrounded
this floral gallery she pushed open, and issued into
the open air and upon a lawn that extended close
up to the foot of the glacis that environed the
Rondeel
.
She paused an instant ere she crossed the
green, as if hesitating. The delay was but for an
instant; for she directly afterward moved forward
with a rapid pace towards a lofty tree, the topmost
branches of which towered above the walls of the
fort. Its foot was buried in deep shadow, the
rising
moon having only touched, as yet, the upper
wall. Beneath it walked a man with a hasty and
impatient tread, who at every third step stopped
and looked towards the Hall with anxious scrutiny.
'Tis past the hour; the moon is mounting high
in the heavens, and yet she comes not! he said, as
he paused and surveyed the darkly-shaded lawn that
stretched between him and the mansion. Cursed
oversight in making this boy my messenger! He
has doubtless told the tale of Fitzroy's fate, and
Vol. II.R
she'll not meet his murderer. Ha! a form! Hers
in a thousand! She comes! Now aid me, all
good angels!
He advanced to meet her as she came near the
tree, and said in a low tone, lest he should be
over-heard
by the sentry on the parapet above,
Most kind, dear Kate! Forgive the rude and
angry haste with which I last left you! You are
indeed kind! My strong love told me my appeal
would not be made in vain.
He kneeled at her feet as he spoke and
attempted
to take her hand. She drew back with dignity,
and said with firmness,
Let this distance be between us. You have
desired to see me!
I have. Is there no hope for me, Kate?
How mean you?
Do you believe me so far steeped in guilt that
heartfelt penitence for what is past will not
replace
me in the seat of your affections, which I do
confess most justly I have forfeited? Is there no
hope of pardon for the penitent?
The thief found mercy on the cross. Heaven
still forgives the penitent.
And will you be less indulgent? I speak not
now of heaven. The seat I have lost is in your
heart! It is there, sweet Kate, I would be
replaced
!
Cease, sir. I came not hither, Robert, to hold
converse on this theme. Your epistle, which
brought me here against my will and better
judgment
,
discoursed other language; atonement to
Heaven, not to me. If other than your soul's weal
be your aim, then is our conference ended.
She turned to leave him as she spoke, but he
caught her hand.
Stay! be not so hasty! I do confess there is
some ground for Rumour's widespread tales, but I
am not so guilty as she'd make me. Is there no
pathway to your forgiveness?
Yes, when you have atoned to Heaven!
None to your love?
None!
Nothing's proved! he cried, with animation;
I bear the king's commission against piracy.
The more guilty then, that, under cover of it,
you commit piracies. This king's commission!
Do not all men know 'twas given thee because you
knew the haunts of a dangerous horde of pirates in
the Indian seas, having been one of them, though
now their foe and rival; and, by giving thee
employment
,
to keep thee out of mischief?
'Tis false!
I've heard enough. More I could tell thee of
recent occurrence.
Ha, dost thou knowhas the boy told
Nothing. I know enough. Your guilt is
written
out upon the sky! He that runs may read it!
Go on; slay and pillage. You have a love of
human
blood, and, like the wolf, who, once tasting it,
will touch no other, glut thyself till satiate.
Kate!
Away, sir! Speak not, come not near me!
Thy touch, thy very glance is pollution.
She turned to fly towards the Hall as she spoke,
but, darting forward, he caught her by the arm.
By the cross! if you will act the queen, then
will I play the king. I have been an angler, and
have learned from it a lesson in love. My letter to
thee was but a hook cunningly baited with a
gilded
fly I knew you would snap at! I have given
thee line enough, and now will draw thee in
captive
!
He threw his arm about her as he spoke, and
was bearing her around the bastion of the fort
towards
his boat, which, by making a circuit from his
vessel round the bay and approaching the town on
the North River side, he had succeeded in running
into a little cove west of the Rondeel unperceived.
The surprise of the maiden was at first so great
as to deprive her of the power of speech. But, as
she was borne round the fort by his strong arm,
she said, in a tone of perfect self-command,
Unhand me, Lester! Release me. I forgive
you.
You are
mine
, proud beauty! he replied,
through his clinched teeth. I have been the
plaything
of thy pride full long.
Unhand me, sir.
Pardon me if I am somewhat rough, he said,
ironically; on shipboard I will atone for it.
Heaven, then, has given me this in my hour of
need, she cried, snatching a pistol from his belt,
and by a sudden effort disengaging herself and
springing away from him several feet. As she
spoke she levelled it against his person.
Ha, ha! my pretty one, you do the heroine
excellently. Give me that pretty toy, sweet Kate,
he said, advancing towards her; it becomes not
a lady's fingers.
Back, sir, she replied with resolution,
presenting
it full at his breast.
Nay, nay, then.
He sprung upon her at the same instant to
secure
the weapon, when she cried,
God forgive me, then! and fired.
Instantly he released her wrist, which he had
seized, with a cry of pain mingled with an
exclamation
of rage and disappointment.
The report of the pistol was answered by the
roll of a drum on the Rondeel, and was followed
by the noise of alarm and confusion in the town.
Kate fled like a deer towards the Hall, while Kyd,
wrapping his cloak about his left arm, which was
bleeding freely, glided beneath the locust-trees that
surrounded the Bowling Green, and gained his boat.
Shall we pull back by the way we came?
asked the coxswain.
No. Give me the helm.
The man obeyed his stern voice, and, after the
boat had cleared the rocks, he steered her directly
across the line of fire from the Rondeel towards
his vessel.
Without hesitating, the men pulled steadily and
in silence in the face of the fort, and, as the moon
was now up, they could not remain long
undiscovered
.
In a few seconds they were challenged from
the battery. There was no reply. A second time
they were hailed, but still the boat kept on her
course straight for the brig.
Fire! cried a voice. 'Tis `the Kyd.'
Instantly, one after another, the heavy guns
opened
upon them from the parapet, but the balls went
roaring through the air high above their heads.
Still steadily and silently the boat kept on her
course. A discharge of firearms followed with
more effect. Three of the eight oarsmen were
shot dead as they sat, and scarcely one escaped
unhurt. The desperate helmsman sat stern and
silent, and only with an impatient wave of his hand
bid them row on. A second volley reached them,
and but three oarsmen remained seated and
labouring
faintly at their oars. Kyd left the helm and
caught the fourth oar as the dead man dropped it,
and, cheering them on, soon reached his brig, amid
a third volley that rattled around him like hail.
Ship your oars, he cried, as they came
alongside
,
rising to his feet.
R 2
Not a man moved.
Spring to the bows and fend off! he shouted.
There was no reply; the men sat upright, and
swayed their bodies to and fro, and still pulled at
their sweeps!
The boat, at the same instant, came against the
brig's counter with a shock, and the three men
were thrown from their seats backward to the
bottom
of the boat. They were dead! He had been
pulling an oar the last few seconds with corpses.
He shuddered and sprung up the side.
Instantly the brig got under weigh, and, sailing up
East River to Hell Gate, passed through the
dangerous
pass, and came to, not far from the Witch's
Isle. A boat was lowered, and Kyd descended
into it and landed there. As he entered the hut
the witch was seated on the ground over a fire,
rocking
her body to and fro, and chanting a wild song.
Welcome, Robert Kyd, she said, without
turning round. Umph! I smell blood! she cried
the instant after. Thou hast been at thy old trade.
Hast thou had revenge?
I have. His vessel is mine. Him I have
slain.
Did I not promise thee this? she said, rising
and speaking with triumph. Now thou art come
to do my will and to fulfil thy oath.
I have seen her within the hour, he said, with
settled hate.
And she has scorned thee?
Yes. I tried love at first, but it would not do,
and
You then tried force?
I did, he said, ferociously.
And she is now in thy state-cabin?
No. I bore her part way to my boat, when she
drew a pistol from my belt and shot me here.
And she
The garrison was instantly in arms; the town
rose clamorous; she fled like a deer, and mocked
pursuit. I barely escaped to my boat, and reached
my brig with the loss of every man. By Heaven!
I believe a score of balls struck my person, yet
they seemed to fall from my cloak harmlessly like
hailstones.
It was the amulet!
True, woman! Yet I was wounded by a
pistol
in this girl's hand. Your charm here failed.
No. Did I not tell theeif not, be it known
to thee, Robert Kydthat ne'er devil wrought a
charm a woman may not undo. Ball from men
can harm thee not, but if a woman use the weapon
the charm is naught. What wilt thou now do?
Return to Ireland and lay claim to the
earldom
.
Perhaps, when I leave my present course of
life, she will listen to me. By the cross! I am
ashamed to woo a noble maiden whom I have
loved, and still love, so roughly.
I will woo her for thee.
Nay.
I will not heed thy nay! She must be thine.
Yet I like this determination to assume your
earldom
.
Go bury your treasures that are here, in
some safe place, and sail for Ireland. After thou
art become Lord of Lester, they can then be
removed
,
and enable thee to support thy rank with
princely state.
I will take them with me, Elpsy.
Thou wilt lose them, then, if pursued by a
cruiser
and forced to desert your vessel. Bury them
here, and, when thou art an earl, thou canst come
for them thyself, and bear them home without
suspicion
.
Perhaps you are right; none will see in the
Earl of Lester the outlaw Kyd. Save thyself and
Kate of Bellamont, the secret is locked from all
human knowledge.
Her pride will keep her from revealing it, and
my projects for thy aggrandizement seal my own
lips, said the sorceress. Here are the treasures
which for three years thou hast accumulated, she
added, removing a stone from a crevice in the rock
against which her hut was built, and exposing, by
a torchlight, a cavity therein filled with vast piles
of gold and silver coins, countless rings for the ears
and fingers, cups of chased gold set with precious
stones, bracelets, ducal coronets sparkling with
diamonds, and innumerable jewels of every
description
.
He surveyed the valuable deposite, and then,
shaking his head, slowly said,
They have cost much blood, Elpsy.
Therefore should they be well kept. Take
them with thee, and hide them in some secret place,
easy of access from the sea, till thou hast need of
them.
I know a spot where three tides meet, which
will be a safe repository for them.
Call thy men and bear them to thy vessel.
Wilt thou go with me to perform the rites?
I have other things to do in town. I have
made a discovery there that has filled my soul with
joy! Ho, I will tell it you when you return, for
it concerns you, boy. Cusha shall go with thee.
Slave, appear!
From an obscure corner of the hut the hideous
African made his appearance, his malicious and
cunning features glowing with the hateful look they
habitually wore.
Slave, take with thee thy charms and follow
thy master here! See that the gold is buried with
all the rites of our mystic art.
He prostrated himself to the floor, and left her to
obey her commands.
In a short time the pirate's crew had conveyed
the treasure from the hut to their boat, and thence
on board the brig, and before daybreak the vessel
was many leagues up the Sound, steering an
easterly
course. The succeeding morning she doubled
the easternmost cape of Long Island, and, altering
her course to the southwest, stood towards Sandy
Hook under a stiff breeze from the southeast. By
night she entered the Sound between Sandy Hook
and the south side of Staten Island, and, steering
directly across the mouth of the Raritan, anchored
close to an elevated peninsula that formed the
northern shore of the river.
The report of the pistol fired by Kate Bellamont
not only alarmed the garrison and the town, but
brought out the earl from the library, whither he
had just retired with his friends, after having taken
the rounds of the threatened town.
What means this, dearest Kate? he cried,
meeting her flying across the lawn.
Nothing, nothing, father! she gasped, flinging
herself into his arms.
My child is not injured? What is this firing and
sudden alarm? Why are you here, and flying as if
for life? he asked, with anxious solicitude.
The Kydthe pirate! she exclaimed, with
indignation.
Ha! he cried, bounding forward towards the
Rondeel, and thence instinctively to the nearest
shore where he anticipated he should meet him.
A boat was just putting off. Without delay he
hastened back to the Rondeel, and, taking the
commander
by the arm, led him to the rampart, and said,
There is the pirate's cutter. Bring your guns
to bear upon her.
The result of the fire is already known. When
he saw that the boat reached the brig, and that she
immediately got under weigh, he left the fort and
returned to the Hall to seek his daughter. On his
way he met Fitzroy, who had just arrived at the
Hall, after having, through the governor, chartered
a Bristol ship that was lying in the East Dock
ready for sea, with the intention of putting on board
of her the guns of the Rondeel, and attacking Kyd
as he was at anchor in the harbour.
She can be got ready for sea in twenty-four
hours, my lord, he said with animation, as he met
the earl. But what is this confusion and heavy
firing?
You are well met, Fitzroy! Go to my
daughter
,
while I return to the fort! The bucanier has
landed, so far as I can learn, and like to have
carried
Kate off, I believe. But I have had no time
to inquire.
I will see her at once, said Fitzroy, leaving
him hastily.
You will find her in her boudoir. I will
remain
and see that our defences are kept up! Ha!
the pirate is under sail, and is moving up the Sound.
He is going to sea again, doubtless; but, as
our guns command both the channels out, he has
taken the way by Long Island Sound.
Heaven grant it be so! said the earl, as he
entered
the Rondeel.
Kate Bellamont was walking her room with a
rapid pace, a flushed cheek, and a flashing eye as
Fitzroy entered.
Ha, Fitzroy, you have come, she said, with
the tone and bearing of Elizabeth of England
when insult had touched her pride. I am glad
to see you! I have been insulted.
Then you shall be avenged! he said, taking
her hand.
Do you promise it?
By the love I bear you, I swear it!
Avenge mewipe out the stain my woman's
pride has suffered, and I will be thy slave!
Nay, dearest Kate, I would rather thou wouldst
be my bride, he said, smiling and kissing her
cheek.
Rupert Fitzroy, touch me not! Think not
of love! When thou hast captured this freebooter
when I behold him bound at my feet so low that
I can place my foot upon his neck, I will then be
thy bride. Ay, to the music of his clanking chains
shall be performed the marriage rites.
If not my own honour, thine at least demands
his capture and death. Catharine of Bellamont,
he said, kneeling before her and solemnly elevating
his hands, I swear by the cross that is the
emblem
of our holy faith that thou shalt be avenged!
She looked on his animated features a moment
steadily with her full black eyes, and then said,
'Tis enough! By thy urgency in this matter
thou wilt show thy love for me, and by my
determination
to press it to its issue thou mayest
construe
mine for thee. I am now calm. Here is
the flag I have worked for thee. It bears thy
initials
,
with the arms of my house, conjoined. Take
it, and beneath it win thy bride.
Lady, it shall be done, or I will never see thy
face more!
Ay, it should be for the world's weal that it
should be done, she said, with eloquent fervour,
when every breeze comes tainted with the smell
of blood; when wondering crowds, each with a
tale that outweighs that his fellow bears, in nimble
speech deal out to one another hourly marvels!
When in bolts, bars, and locks before unknown in
this peaceful land, each household, for leagues
along the coast, seeks ill security against midnight
dangers! When the fisherman fears to launch his
boat, and towns count their strength and weigh the
odds (as if a foe were thundering at their gates)
against sudden surprise. When he who spreads
such terror is captured, I will then be thine!
For this very enterprise am I now preparing.
Within this last half hour I have got a ship that
sails like the wind, which, with arms and
ammunition
on board, will place me on a better deck than
that I have lost.
Why did you delay to tell this, and lead me to
blame you in my thoughts for supineness?
I would have kept it secret from thee till I had
sailed.
Wherefore?
Having, he said, with hesitation, some
regard
for your former lovefriendship, I should
say.
Love it once was, therefore speak out and call
it love!
I feared this might lead you to dissuade me
from it. But this sudden attitude you have
assumed
fills me with surprise and admiration.
Rupert Fitzroy, have you not been told from
what peril I was but now saved? Have you
forgotten
how, in a jealous fit, you have unawares let
drop that Robert Kyd, with his false lips, had said
no matter whatbut, being false, can never be
forgiven? Until this man is captive and lying at her
feet in chains, Catharine of Bellamont's hand shall
not be given in marriage. You have heard me,
Fitzroy? she added, retiring to the farther part of
her room, as if she would be left alone.
I have, and you shall be obeyed, he replied,
leaving the boudoir.
The next morning but one a merchant-ship was
hauled from the dock in which she had been
several
weeks lying, undergoing repairs; and two guns
from the Rondeel, and several from the other forts,
were placed on board of her, making eight in all.
With a bold and willing crew, most of whom had
volunteered on the service, at sundown she got
under
weigh, under the command of Fitzroy,
accompanied
by Edwin his secretary, and put to sea in
search of the bucanier. She sailed through the
Narrows
instead of Hell Gate, a fisherman having
informed
him, as they were getting under weigh, that
he had seen a vessel answering the description of
the pirate sailing towards the mouth of the
Raritan
;
and as sufficient time had elapsed to have
enabled
him to sail up through the Sound and double
Montauk Point, Fitzroy determined to go in
pursuit
of the vessel mentioned by the fisherman.
The promontory off which Kyd had anchored at
the mouth of the Raritan, now called Perth Amboy,
descended on the south side to the river above
named, with a gentle inclination. On the east it
was washed by the waters of Staten Island Sound,
and the island which gives name to it stretched
east of it, with its high wooded bank far towards
the north, till it terminated in New-York Bay. On
the summit of the promontory was a small rustic
church, with a slender spire towering high above
the surrounding trees and humble hamlets. Around
the church was a primitive graveyard, with here and
there the unpretending tombstone which
designated
the last resting-place of some English
Protestant
or French Huguenot. From this rural
cemetery
was a wide view of island, main, and ocean.
It was twilight when the bucanier's vessel
anchored
beneath this promontory. At midnight
the little churchyard presented a singular scene.
In a deep shadow cast by the moon on the west
Vol. II.S
side of the lonely church, were gathered a group
of menthe pale light shining broadly upon their
rude costume and savage features, mingled with
the red flame of dark lanterns, giving them a
singularly
wild appearance. They were standing with
superstitious awe round an open grave, from which
the fresh body had just been dishumed and was
now lying white and glaring in its shroud upon the
ground not far off. Over the grave stood the
wizard
Cusha, and beside it glittered heaps of treasure.
Apart walked Kyd in thought, occasionally
turning
to the grave, and then walking with quicker pace
and uttering his thoughts half aloud:
Though reason tells me there is nothing in it,
and laughs at charms, spells, and incantations
curling her lip with incredulity, I cannot get the
mastery o'er this superstition, but live its very
slave, using the instruments of her dark craft as if
my destiny and they were linked, yet scorning
while I use them.
All's ready, sir, black wizard and all, said
the mate, approaching him and interrupting his
meditations.
You treat too lightly these ceremonies, mate!
There may be deeper meaning in them than you
dream of.
If the infernal pit is at the bottom of them,
they are deep enough! This negro wizard looks
ugly enough to be the devil's grandfather.
No more, Loff. Is all prepared?
All.
Then give orders to the men.
Ay, ay, sir. All hands to bury money!
The pirates gathered round the grave, part of
their number thrown into the shadow cast by the
tower of the church, the remainder exposed to
the full light of the moon. And moon scarcely
ever shown on stranger or wilder scene. The
negro was seated sullenly, with his head on his
knees, upon the pile of grave-dirt, nor had he spoken
until Kyd now approached and addressed him.
If, as thou dost profess, dark slave, power to
thee is delegated, by her whom thou hast served,
to deal with beings of another world, by this
amulet
I wear I command thy service and
obedience
!
As he spoke he held the amulet up to his view.
The wizard crossed his hands on his breast, and
bowed himself to the ground.
Cusha is thy slave. Speak.
There lies heaped beside thee countless
treasure
jewels,
stones of price, gold and silver coin
untoldeach ounce of which has been purchased
by its weight of human blood. What is so dearly
bought should be safely stored and guarded.
Perhaps
some future day, awearied of the ocean, we
may give up our roving life and settle down honest
country gentlemen. We shall then need it to buy
men's tongues and memories! Now perform the
mystic orgies prescribed for such occasions.
The wizard slowly rose to his feet, and walked
deliberately three times around the grave, the
pirates
giving back as he walked in superstitious
alarm. The third time he began to chant, in a low
key, unintelligibly; but, gradually rising in
wildness
and distinctness, he, with strange gestures
and contortions of form and face, broke forth into
the following chant:
Beelzebub, prince of air!
Mortals worship thee.
He elevated his arms as he sung this in an
attitude
of wild devotion.
Apollyon, prince of sea!
Mortals worship thee.
He stretched his arms towards the sea as he
chanted, and a sudden dash and roar of its waves
upon the beach rose to the ears of the listeners
with an appalling sound.
Sathanas, prince of earth!
Mortals worship thee.
He struck the earth with his foot as he repeated
the words, and then, prostrating himself, kissed the
ground.
Lucifer, prince of air!
Mortals worship thee.
The wind seemed to sigh through the trees and
to howl about the church tower as he recited the
mystic verse. Then, with a singular union of all
the gestures and ceremonies he had hitherto used,
he chanted, in a tone that echoed like a chorus of
demons through the surrounding forests,
Prince of air, earth, sea, and fire!
Mortals bow and worship thee!
It's an accursed lie! suddenly cried Loff, the
mate, who, with the pirate crew, had been an
appalled
listener and spectator of the scene.
Hist! exclaimed Kyd, in a suppressed voice,
forcibly grasping his arm; a word of incredulity
will destroy the spell.
I have too much respect for my soul, captain,
to let this black son of darkness sell it to the devil
so glibly.
Silence! Observe him!
The wizard again began to chant, acknowledging
the presence of each element by some appropriate
gesture as he named it:
By thy four great names we call thee!
By the power thou hast conferr'd,
Let our voices now be heard!
By fire we call on thee!
He then seized a torch held by one of the men,
and waved it to and fro above his head.
By water we call on thee!
From a cruise that he had placed beside him, he
took up water in his palm and cast it into the air.
By air we call on thee!
He waved his arms upward, and a sound like
the rushing of wind passed over them, and every
torch flickered with the sudden agitation of the
atmosphere
.
By earth we call on thee!
He cast into the air a handful of the grave-dirt,
which fell back to the ground with a hollow noise
like the rumbling sound of an earthquake.
Every man stood appalled. Suddenly he ceased,
and took, with much form and ceremony, a black
cat from a pouch slung at his waist. He elevated
her in one hand, while in the other he held a drawn
knife above her, and chanted, turning the animal
slowly round,
No spot of white
Must meet the sight!
Thrice shall it wave
Above the grave!
At a single blow
The blood must flow!
He waved his knife at the repetition of the
second
couplet thrice above the grave, and at the close
of the last line severed the head of the animal,
which, with the body, he dropped into it.
Instantly
there issued flames and dense smoke from
it, which first lighted up the scene wildly for a
moment, and then left it in murky darkness.
When the black volumes of vapour rolled away,
the wizard was standing astride the grave in the
S 2
attitude of a sacrificer, his blood-dripping knife in
his outstretched arm: he then began to chant,
'Tis kindled, kindled!
Lucifer our prayer has heard!
In his name
Feed the flame!
If dies the fire, the charm is broken!
Then turning to Kyd, he cried,
The book with name not to be spoken!
The book, the book to feed the flame,
The book, the book none dare to name!
Think he means the Holy Bible, Captain Kyd?
demanded Loff, with religious horror.
Silence! cried the pirate chief.
He took from the folds of his cloak as he spoke
a thick book, and gave it to the wizard, who
received
it with three several prostrations. He then
tore it in pieces and cast the leaves into the grave.
Instantly blue flame rose from it to a great height,
thunder rolled in startling peals, while the most
vivid lightning hissed and glared around them; at
the same instant the bell in the church tower tolled
without human aid with a sound so deep and
solemn
,
so wild and unearthly, that every man was
filled with consternation and horror. The wizard
alone stood unmoved; and standing with one foot
upon the treasure, chanted,
One half the sacrifice is o'er,
In the grave your treasure pour!
He who seeks must seek again,
He who digs will dig in vain!
Thus much is over, said Kyd, advancing.
Pour the coin and jewels into the grave.
Shiver my timbers! if I understand this!
exclaimed
Loff. There is more of Old Hoofs to
do in the matter than I expected, or you wouldn't
have caught me here. Umph! this black wizard
smells of brimstone!
After all the treasure was poured into the grave,
the wizard, looking, as the moon shone upon his
form and features, more like a demon than human,
stood across it, and looked around malevolently
upon the pirates as they leaned upon their spades
prepared to refill it. After a moment's silence he
began, in the same wild, monotonous chant:
Safe from every human eye
Shall this gold securely lie;
When a mortal who has seen
The treasure placed the grave within,
Shall in the grave alive be thrown:
This done, the spot shall ne'er be known.
And finish'd then the rites will be,
Mortal, thou hast sought from me!
If I had my doubts before about his being
leagued with Beelzebub, not one have I left now,
said Loff, with indignation. I can see a fellow
walk a plank or seized up to the yardarm, but I
am too tender-hearted to see such a thing done as
he hints at in his infernal rhymes.
The whole pirate crew seemed to be animated by
the same feelings. At first general consternation
prevailed; but, gathering confidence, they whispered
together, casting the while revengeful looks towards
the wizard. Suddenly, by one impulse, they laid
their hands, without speaking, upon him, and cast
him headlong into the grave; and then, acting as
one man, filled it up with its living occupant in a
moment of time. The first action of Kyd was to
spring forward and rescue him; but the
determined
attitude of his men, whose minds were too
highly
wrought up to be held under control, checked
the impulse. He stood by till the grave was
smoothed over, so that not a vestige of it
remained
,
and was then about to command them to
return
to the brig, which was seen through the trees
lying at her anchor near the land: but ere he could
give the order, the flame of a gun fired from her
flashed upon his eyes, followed by a loud report, that
echoed in many a deep, rumbling note along the
wooded shore.
A signal of alarm! he cried; to your boats
all!
He hastened forward to the verge of the
promontory
where the prospect was unobstructed, and,
casting
his eyes down the narrow strait that opens
seaward
between Staten Island and Sandy Hook, beheld
not a mile off, coming round the headland, a large
ship, her tall sails glancing like snow in the
moonlight
.
Loud and clear rung his voice hastening his
men to the brig, while gun after gun flashed and
thundered from her, calling them on board to her
defence
.
In less than five minutes three boats loaded
with the pirates put off from the shore and pulled
swiftly in the direction of the brig. Kyd stood up
steering the foremost one. But the wind blew
steadily and strong in from sea, and the strange ship
came on so fast that she was soon no farther off
from their vessel than they themselves. It was
plain she knew what she was about.
Strain every nerve, men! he cried, in an even,
determined voice that reached every ear, while its
coolness was more effectual in inspiring confidence
than loud shouts would have been. Pull
together
and steadily! She must not reach the brig
before
us. Now, all together! Lively, lively! A
few strokes and we shall reach her.
But they were yet several hundred yards from
her, and the stranger came ploughing his way down
without taking in a sail or altering his course, save
just enough to enable him to cut off the boats, the
approach of which, as well as the relative position
of the brig with the shore, he was able to discern by
the aid of the moon, which filled the atmosphere
with brilliant light. In the mean while the brig cut
her anchor, and, swinging round, with her
diminished
force directed a feeble and irregular fire towards
her. But she kept on her course in majestic silence,
without returning it and without apparent injury;
and, ere the boats could reach their vessel, she
sailed
in between it and them, and poured a broadside
into each. The brig felt the fire in every spar; but
the boats, being so low in the water, escaped
without
injury, the shot flying high above the heads of
the pirates, and crashing among the forests on the
shore. The brig was now evidently in the power of
the ship; and Kyd, finding that it would be
impossible
to reach her, shouted through the smoke, that
settled thickly over the water, to his mate Lawrence
whom he had left on board with but a dozen men,
Let them not take her! Blow her up, and to
your boat!
His voice was distinctly heard by every man
both in the brig and ship.
Hard up! hard, hard! was instantly heard in
the clear voice of Fitzroy; and the ship, which was
steering so as to lay the brig aboard, fell off and
stood in towards shore. The moment afterward
a small boat was seen to put off from the brig,
which a few seconds afterward blew up with a
terrible explosion, suddenly turning night, for many
miles around, into broad day, and shaking the earth
with the tremendous concussion. For an instant
the air was filled with a shower of missiles, and
trains of fire lighting up sea, forest, and boats with
a momentary and wild glare; then all sunk into
darkness, and the pale moon once more struggled
to assert her right to the empire of her own gentle
light, which had been so suddenly invaded.
Now, my men, we are left to our own
resources
,
said Kyd. There is not water enough
for this ship to pass up this narrow sound. Let
us pull through it. Who our pursuer is I have no
idea: a small corvette, sent expressly by the king
in pursuit, doubtless. But let us do our best to get
off. We shall find some trader in the harbour, and
will cast ourselves on board of her. There is no
other chance!
His address was received with a shout, and the
four boats, Lawrence having now joined them,
began
to pull northward through the Staten Island
Sound. The ship, in the mean while, after
recovering
the ground she had lost in avoiding the
explosion
,
stood steadily on after the boats, which were
not a quarter of a mile ahead, occasionally firing a
bowchaser at the little fleet. The chase continued
for half an hour, the pirates keeping the lead
gallantly
,
and, being enabled to cross shoals by their
lighter draught, occasionally they got far ahead,
while the ship was slowly following the circuitous
channel.
She has a pilot who knows the ground, said
Kyd, as he beheld the ship navigate safely an
intricate
reach of the narrow passage. If he clears
the Red Bank we have just come across, he will
do what ship has never done beforego through into
York Bay! Now she comes to it! he cried, with
animation, rising in his boat and watching the
advance
of the ship across the shoal. Suddenly he
exclaimed, while a shout went up from the men,
who were so interested at this crisis of the pursuit
that they forgot to pull at the oar,
She has struck, and heavily too! There goes
her fore-topgallant-mast like a pipestem!
She will off with the flood, said Lawrence.
It is full flood now. She will stick there as
long as two timbers hold together, unless they
pitch their guns overboard, said Loff.
Ho, my lads, all! suddenly cried Kyd,
addressing
them; she is now ours. Back water!
Let us carry her as she lies!
He was answered by a loud hurrah, and the
boats' heads were instantly turned towards the ship,
which was about half a mile off. The boats shot
forward with velocity, pushing before them vast
surges which their ploughing bows turned up from
the surface. They had got within half their
distance
of her, when boats were lowered from every
part of her, and, as if by magic, filled with men.
They are on the alert! He who commands
her knows his business! said Kyd, who, as his
boats approached, had stood up in the stern of his
own, with his drawn cutlass extended towards the
vessel, inspiring his men and panting for the
conflict
.
But, at this indication of their readiness to
receive him, he suddenly cried, turning and waving
his hand to the boats in the rear,
Hold on!
He then surveyed the enemy, and said in a calm,
deep tone, every accent of which was expressive
of his determined purpose,
There are six boats, with at least twenty men
in each; we number fifty or sixty only.
Nevertheless
,
we must fight them!
This proposition, notwithstanding the previous
ardour of the crew, was received with a universal
murmur of dissent.
We are willing to pull towards New-York
Bay, Captain Kyd, said Loff, and take
possession
of some of the craft there; but there are too
many odds against us to risk fighting yonder
barges. Besides, on the bows of the largest boat
I can see a gun relieved against the wake of the
moon.
It is too true. We shall be likely to have the
worst of it, said Kyd, suppressing his rage, which
was ready to burst forth at the refusal of his men,
and satisfied on a second glance that it would be
useless to attempt, with his ill-armed crew, to
capture
a flotilla of boats so well prepared both for
attack and defence. Put away, and let us get
through this narrow sound at our best speed! If
they pursue us we will lead them a long chase.
He was answered by a cheer from his men and
a simultaneous dash of the numerous oars into the
water, under the force of which the boats moved
up the strait with direct and rapid motion. At
the same instant a gun of heavy metal was
discharged
from the bows of the headmost boat of
their pursuers, loaded with grape; but the leaden
shower fell far short of them; while, at the same
instant, with loud cheers, all the barges left the side
of the ship and commenced hot pursuit of the
pirate
boats.
A twelve-pounder, by its report, said Kyd,
and it would have done mischief if it had been
elevated
half an inch higher. Pull, men! they will
shoot better the next time! he shouted, waving his
sword with animation and cheering them on.
Away they flew, pursuing and pursued! At one
moment the ship's boats would be almost upon them,
when the pirates would shoot from the main channel
into some creek or bayou intersecting the marshy
shores, and re-enter the Sound far above them. At
intervals the twelve-pounder broke with a loud roar
upon the night, echoing among the woods of Staten
Island and the Jersey shore in multiplied
reverberations
;
and, like a hurricane, its cloud of bullets
would rush along the air, or plough and skip along
the surface of the water, but with little effect. On
they went, pursuing and pursued, neither yielding
or showing signs of fatigue. At length the moon
hung low over the western horizon, and shone with
a cold, watery look; in the east flakes of light
spotted the sky, and the darkness began to break
before the dawn. Gradually the ashy hue of the
sky became clearer, and changed to a delicate pink;
and then, waxing brighter, grew to vermillion, till
the whole eastern sky blushed with the incipient
dawn. The clouds that hung about the path of
the coming sun began to turn out edges of gold,
and the sky to the zenith to radiate with beams of
glorious dies. The whole heaven, even down to
the low west, had changed its livery of blue for the
rose, while the jealous moon, disdaining to look on
a rival whose coming was so gorgeously heralded,
threw a snowy veil over her brow, and sunk, scarce
visible on the brow of morning, beneath the
horizon
!
Suddenly up rose the sun and filled the
world with light!
As the day approached the hostile parties became
plainly visible to one another, and were able to count
each other's force. At sunrise the pirate's boats
entered the bay of New-York, leaving Staten
Island
on the right, and closely followed within a
third of a mile by their pursuers, pulled directly
towards
the town, which, with its wall and Rondeel,
was seen rising from the water a league distant.
Not far from the shore, between the Governor's
Island and the town, lay three or four small Dutch
yachts at anchor, waiting for the change of tide
to take them up to Albany. It was evident, from
the course he took, that it was the intention of Kyd
to throw himself on board one of these vessels,
and effect the escape of himself and crew. This
seemed to be the idea suggested to the mind of the
leader of the pursuing boats, and he urged his men
forward in the most animated and eager manner.
At the stern of his launch, which took the lead,
Vol. II.T
and in the bows of which was mounted a
twelve-pound
carronade, floated a silken flag, on which
were conspicuous the initials of his name and the
crest of the house of Bellamont.
By the cross! exclaimed Kyd, as the sunlight
struck on this flag, and a passing breeze unfolded
it to his eye as he turned to watch the chase, 'tis
the same flag!
What flag? inquired Loff, taking a pocket
spyglass from his jacket.
Ha! you have a glass! Give it me! he cried,
hastily. By Heaven! he cried, after a moment's
surveying, 'tis the same! The very initials.
Now the wind opens it. 'Tis the same with the
earl's crest! What can it mean? This youth
Edwin
may have become her champion since I so
foolishly gave him his liberty! He, and none else,
commands the barges! But there is too much skill
displayed in directing the pursuit to emanate from
a boy like him! Yet why this flag? Among the
dense mass of heads beneath I cannot distinguish
the leader's features!
Shall we board the nearest yacht? asked Loff.
We shall soon be close upon them.
Kyd turned and found that he was within a mile
of three sloops that lay under the guns of the
Rondeel
.
He looked back and saw that the barges
were coming with increased speed, and would be
up with him by the time he could reach the
vessels
.
He cheered on his men with every gesture
and word of encouragement; but, with all their
exertions
,
he perceived that at every dip of their
sweeps his pursuers gained on him.
At length the carronade from the leading boat
opened upon them for the first time since sunrise
and with terrible effect upon the nearest boat,
commanded
by Lawrence. Nearly every bullet told in
the plank or flesh; and the ill-fated boat, which
seemed to have received the whole charge from
the piece, instantly went down, leaving (so
effectually
had it been converted into their coffin) only
Lawrence and one of his comrades floating
wounded
upon the surface.
For the yachtnever stop to pick him up! for
the yacht! Your lives depend on your reaching
it! shouted Kyd, with desperation. Pull, ye
dogs! Strong! together all! Bend to your
sweeps like devils! In five minutes we'll be on
board.
But the crew of the sloop, consisting of three or
four men only, were already aware of their danger;
and, cutting their cable, hoisted their jib and
mainsail
with what haste the occasion demanded, and,
aided by the wind and tide, moved swiftly down
the harbour beyond their reach. The other
vessels
followed this example as rapidly as possible;
and, ere the pirates could get alongside, they were
sailing away at a rate that defied pursuit.
We are foiled by the devil's own aid! said
Kyd. He paused a moment. His pursuers were
close upon him, and, save the shore, there was no
avenue of escape. To delay and fight with his
reduced
number, even if his jaded and dispirited men
would consent to it, would have been certain
capture
and death. For an instant he paused, and
then said, in the calm, deliberate tone he was
accustomed
to use in times of most imminent peril,
We must pull in shore and fight our way
across the town to the East River, where we can
cut out one of the vessels in the dock. There is
no alternative! The town's people will scarce
resist
us! Will you land and let me lead you,
men?
Ay, to the shore! was the general cry; and
swiftly the boats cut their way towards the foot of
the Rondeel, which they approached on the western
side, out of the range of its few remaining guns.
Close in hot pursuit came the barges, pouring in
upon them a constant and fatal discharge of
fire-arms
.
The carronade was no longer fired, as its
rebound so materially checked the speed of the boat
that it soon fell behind all the others.
Leave your oars and draw your cutlasses!
cried Kyd, as the boats struck the beach near the
spot where he had landed when he attempted to
convey Kate Bellamont to it. It was not far from
the Rondeel, on the west of the governor's house.
With a shout the pirates bounded on shore, about
forty in number, and, hastily forming in a body,
headed by Kyd, with drawn sabres and pistols,
were rapidly led by him around the base of the fort
and across the lawn in the direction of Jost Stoll's
tavern and the West Dock. The garrison in the
Rondeel was so taken by surprise at the boldness
of the bucaniers, that, before they could prepare to
dispute their landing, they were moving at a rapid
and steady pace across the grounds in front of the
White Hall towards the wicket that led into the
town. But here they were met with unexpected
resistance. At the head of full eighty burghers,
whom he had hastily armed and assembled to
oppose
this strange invasion from the sea, the Earl of
Bellamont advanced upon them through the gate.
Be men! cried the earl to his command.
Remember
,
though unused to arms, you now fight for
your homes, your wives, your children, your own
lives, and all ye hold dear. Charge them ere they
can form their body!
The governor himself rushed forward, sword in
hand, as he spoke, the sturdy burghers with a shout
pressed on, and the two parties were immediately
engaged in a sanguinary conflict. The pirates
fought with demoniac fury, while the townsmen,
excited by the smell of powder and the clash of steel,
dealt blows that told wherever they fell.
Nevertheless
,
the bucaniers, by long habit, discipline, and
indifference to danger, got the better of them, though
scarcely numbering half their force, and drove them,
in spite of the cries and commands of the earl,
towards
the gate. Everywhere Kyd was present,
and high above the sounds of conflict was heard
his voice cheering and encouraging. But, though
victors for the moment, they were soon confronted
with a fresh and better disciplined foe. The barges
had by this time landed their crews, and they now
advanced upon them with loud cries and in
overpowering
numbers.
Face them! Fight each man for his own life!
shouted Kyd, as, on turning from the discomfiture
of the burghers, he beheld the advance of his
pursuers
.
The combat was now waged with terrific fury.
Now the victor, now the vanquished, Kyd attacked
and defended with a degree of skill and courage
that, employed in a better cause, should have had
a better result. At length his men, being broken
into small parties, were overpowered, and either
slain or disarmed. He alone defended himself
against a numerous division that had pressed him
towards an oak, the branches of which grew near
the window of Kate Bellamont's boudoir. They
would have cut him down by mere force of
numbers
if they had not suddenly been restrained by
the commanding voice of Fitzroy, who hitherto had
been engaged in another part of the field.
Hold, men! Back, and leave him to me! he
cried, advancing towards Kyd through the lane
opened to him by his men.
T 2
Ha! does the sea give back its dead? cried
Kyd, with horror, dropping his red cutlass and
gazing upon him with mortal fear. Can it be!
Speak, I conjure thee, if thou art flesh and blood!
Monster, this day shall terminate thy career
of crime! replied Fitzroy, preparing to cut him
down.
By the mass! flesh or blood, I'll have a bout
with thee! cried Kyd, reassured by his voice,
seizing a sabre from one of the men he had slain.
Ho! for Kate Bellamont!
Ha, villain! For
thyself
, then!
A fierce broadsword combat ensued between
them, and continued for a few seconds with equal
skill and energy. At length the sword of Fitzroy
caught in the strand of hair about Kyd's neck and
severed it. Instantly the amulet it sustained
dropped
to the ground. Kyd's confidence and courage
seemed to fail him at once, and, striking at random,
he was soon disarmed by his cooler adversary, and
his life placed at his mercy.
Strike! said the bucanier, despondingly.
The victor was about to obey, when his uplifted
arm was arrested by a shriek from the balcony, and
the voice of Kate Bellamont crying,
Spare him! save him, Fitzroy!
The point of his weapon sunk at his feet, and he
bent low to her in acquiescence; then turning to
his men, he said,
Bind him. My lord, what shall be done with
him? He is at your disposal.
Bear him to the prison of the Rondeel, there
to await his trial!
Silent and desponding, yet still holding himself
with a dignified and lofty bearing, the captive pirate
chief was borne, with his few surviving followers,
to a dungeon in the Rondeel, while the earl,
Fitzroy
,
and Edwin (who had not participated in the
contest) together entered the Hall, leaving their
victorious
party to clear the ensanguined field of the
melancholy traces of the morning's fight.
CHAPTER VI.
When guilt had prospered with him, all the love
She bore him faded, as the floweret fades
Before the simoom's breath. But when the tide
Of fortune turned, and on its bosom bore
His barque, dismantled by misfortune's blast,
To ruin's coast, youth's warm affections came
Once more with freshened vigour, and the heart
That in a happier hour deigned not to save,
Now felt it leaned on him, and him alone,
And broke when that support was gone.
M`Leod
.
Three
weeks after the events just recorded, in a
cell built within the massive wall of the Rondeel,
sat the terrible pirate chief whose name had so long
spread terror throughout the world. It was nearly
midnight. He stood by a grated window, that
looked
towards the moonlit bay, in deep meditation,
occasionally
starting, with clanking chains, as some
burning thought set his brain on fire. All at once
he fancied he heard a noise, as if some one was
carefully turning the lock in the door of his cell,
wherein was set a grated wicket, through which
the jailer could communicate with him. He
started
and fixed his eyes in the direction whence it
proceeded, when he saw it slowly open and a
muffled
figure enter. The intruder then closed it
carefully
and threw off the mantle. It was Kate
Bellamont
.
She was pale, and her noble features wore
a sad and anxious look.
Thou hast sent for me, Lester? so thy jailer told
me.
I have, he said, in the subdued tones of a
chastened
spirit. I would kneel at thy feet and ask
forgiveness for all the wrongs I have done thee!
Thou hast wronged thyself, not me, Lester! I
forgive thee.
Thanksa thousand thanks, kind lady! he
said, overpowered by his feelings. I dared not
hope you would come to see me. Oh, lady, let me
not presume too much. To-morrow morning I am
to be led forth to receive my sentence. It will be
death.
Oh, speak not of it. I know it. Oh God, that
I could stay the hand of justice!
Do you feel so much for me?
Feel? my heart bleeds for you, she cried, with
eloquent pathos. Oh, Lester, Lester, why have
you brought this on yourself?
Will you forgive me?
May Heaven forgive as freely.
LadyKatedearest Kate! I am about to
die. The approach of death fills my soul with
wondrous thoughts, while penitence, like gentle
dew, has strangely softened my heart. The
thoughts of youth come over me like a last-night's
pleasant dream, and I feel as I did when we were
children together! Can you have forgotten our
childhood?
Lester, no! Robert, Robert, you will drive me
distracted.
Nay, but did you not love me then? he said,
tenderly taking her hand and drawing her
unresistingly
to his heart.
Oh, sustain me, my good angel! she cried,
burying her face in her hands; my heart, my
poor heart!
Kate, this world and I have parted, and we
soon must part. I will therefore address you
frankly. I love you even as I first loved you! You
have for years been the spirit of my dreams, the
sun of my waking thoughts. Tell me at this
solemn
hoursee, the dawn of the last morning I shall
ever know on earth is streaking the eastspeak,
and let the thought of it bless my dying hourdo
you love me still?
Oh, Robert, ask me not. I am betrothedI
Nay, I ask not for the confession of thy love
for me; I look not upon you with human love; but
with the feelings of a dying man, who longs for
some cheering word to sweeten the draught of
death. Tell me, sweet Kate, that you love me
still!
She could not resist the solemn earnestness of
his appeal:
Yes, yes! she cried, bending her head upon
his shoulder and bursting into tears.
He gazed on her fair cheek fondly, but his
penitent
lip sought not to profane it. His thoughts too
plainly were subdued by contemplation of his
approaching
fate. He felt as he spoke. But a ray
of grateful pleasure at her words illumined his
haggard
features, and, speaking softly to her, he said,
I know not how to thank you for this, dearest
lady!
Oh, Lester, must you die? she cried, without
heeding his words. Your immortal spirit! Oh,
I tremble for its fate!
I have thought much of it of late! It seems
now, as I look back, as if the last five years of my
life had been passed under a spell. I am penitent,
it is true, but feel there is no hope for me!
There is, there is!
I know the boundless arms of your holy faith
will reach even to the gates of perdition; but I am
beyond their reach. Yet I die composedly, since
you have told me you love me still!
Talk not so, Robert; I will pray with you!
she said, earnestly.
And he knelt beside her as, with impassioned
fervour, she addressed to the Virgin a simple and
eloquent prayer for the soul of him who was so
soon to become a habitant of the world of spirits.
Both remained silent a few moments after she had
ceased. Their souls seemed to have blended in
one by flowing upward together on the holy tide of
prayer. Suddenly, prompted by the gentle
feelings
that filled his heart, he turned to her and said,
Dearest Kate, one thing I would ask of you;
'tis bold, but there is no earthly feeling or human
emotion united with it. Consent to unite yourself
to me herenot by words of marriagenot as an
earthly bridebut that our souls may be one
hereafter
!
Robert, tempt me not; the current of my young
love has rushed back upon me in an irresistible
flood; therefore, if you love me, tempt me not!
Nay, Kate, dearest, 'tis but a word, and the last
request you can have the power to grant me. Let
me take your hand; 'twill be a spiritual union only.
He gently took her passive hand in his as he
spoke, and said in a voice of love, that vibrated
along every chord of her heart,
Will you be mine?
Yes, yes! she replied, with great agitation.
He kissed her cheek as she answered, and at
the same instant a deep voice said,
I pronounce you man and wife! Those whom
God hath joined together let no man put asunder!
The maiden shrieked and would have fallen to the
floor but for the support of
her husband's
arm, who,
turning in the utmost surprise, beheld Father
Nanfan
standing without and looking upon them through
the grated window of the cell.
CONCLUSION.
The
morning sun shone brightly into the
court-chamber
in the White Hall where the Earl of
Bellamont
was wont to administer justice. It com
municated with his library, and occupied the whole
of the western wing. Its windows opened to the
ground on two sides, while on the other two doors
communicated both with the library and chapel.
Surrounded by the chief citizens and dignitaries of
the law sat the governor at a table, on which lay
the papers relating to the piracies of Kyd. Before
him stood the pirate chief in chains, silent,
composed
,
and dignified, if not somewhat haughty in
his bearing before his foes. He was there to
receive
his sentence. The lawn was crowded with
curious spectators, and the windows filled with
those most anxious to be close to the scene. In
the back part of the room, whither she had silently
stolen through the window, stood Elpsy, gazing
on the proceedings with folded arms and lowering
brows. Through the half open door that led to
the chapel was a tall dark lady of majestic person,
dressed in widow's weeds, her countenance marked
with the deep lines of long-continued sorrow. It
was the Dark Lady of the Rock. Not far
removed
from her, within the hall and near where
the earl was seated, stood Fitzroy, and by his side
Edwin his secretary. At a small desk covered with
black velvet, on the right of the earl, sat the priest
Nanfan.
At length everything was prepared, and the
prisoner
was commanded to stand forth and receive his
sentence. The noble judge addressed him briefly,
recapitulating the numerous crimes that had made
his name a by-word of terror throughout the world,
and which had been proved upon him, and then
proceeded to execute the death-warrant. By
accident
,
there was no pen within his reach. The
bonnet of the bucanier lay on the desk before him,
and caught his eye as he turned for one.
Ha, said he, I will pluck one from this
sable
feather, which has been the terrible pennon
under
which his dark crimes have been perpetrated.
'Tis a fit instrument to seal his doom.
He drew from the bonnet a falcon's plume, and
with a few rapid strokes of the knife prepared it
for use. He was about to sign the paper, when a
solemnly prophetic voice, whence no one could tell,
said,
Beware of the black plume!
The earl arrested his hand, and every eye
turned
in the supposed direction of the voice; but,
discovering
no one, they turned again towards the earl.
A second time he bent his head to sign the paper;
but, ere he had touched the sheet, a wild scream
curdled the blood in every man's veins, and Kate
Bellamont rushed from the library into the hall,
and cast herself upon the shoulder of the prisoner.
Father, hold! she cried, lifting her face and
fixing her wild eyes upon him with a terrible gaze,
hold! you shall not murder him! He is my
husband
!
Thy
husband! repeated Fitzroy, springing
forward to release her from the affectionate
embrace
of Kyd.
Her
husband, earl! said the priest, rising and
speaking with triumphant malice.
Woman, said Fitzroy, with forced calmness,
art thou his wife?
Who speaks? she cried, wildly, putting her
hair back from her face and staring at him as if she
recognised him not. Ha, Fitzroy, is it thou? Oh,
I thought I loved thee! Yet I would have been
thy bride if Heaven had not made me his! Yes,
Robert, I am thinethine! she added, with wild
passion.
My child wedded to a pirate
Who calls him a pirate? He is Lester's earl!
cried the poor maiden.
Lester's earl! cried the countess, rushing
forward
.
'Tis my son, thenmy son!
Nayback. Listen, all of ye! said the
sorceress
,
striding into the midst. I can tell ye a
mystery and solve it, my lord! This pirate was
the Earl of Lester; but, being convinced that he was
a bastard and the son of a fisherman, fled from home
and became what you see him!
This young Robert of Lester? exclaimed the
earl; now do I recognise his features!
Interrupt me not! she said, harshly. The
true Lord of Lester was a lad called Mark Mere
dith, and there he stands, a third time risen from
the sea to thwart my schemes! Countess of
Lester
,
in him behold your son!
The lady looked a moment and scanned his
features
with increasing amazement.
My lordhimself!
The mother's heart owns
her son!
And Fitzroy, to his surprise, found himself
clasped
for the first time in a mother's embrace.
In a few brief words the sorceress explained
everything that has already been unfolded in the
preceding pages in reference to the characters, save
her own relation to two that were present.
And who art thou, woman? asked the
wondering
earl.
The fisher's daughter, and the leman of
Hurtel
of the Red-Hand, and the mother of Robert
Kyd!
My mother? repeated the pirate.
The fisher's daughter? exclaimed the priest,
rising with astonishment.
Ay, Hurtel of the Red-Hand! I was thy
leman
!
This pirate is the fruit of my illicit love and
of your guilt. Ha, ha! do you not know me?
Earl of Lester, behold before you, in Father
Nanfan
,
Hurtel of the Red-Hand! Ho, ho! when I
told thee yesterday that Kyd was thy son, and that
thou must join me to make him wed the noble
heiress
of Bellamont (as the devil has given thee an
opportunity of doing), I did not tell thee that I was
the mother of him. So, so, thou wilt swing for it!
And thou shalt die for it! he cried, snatching
the sword from its sheath at Fitzroy's side and
rushing
upon her. Ere his hand could be arrested the
point entered her bosom.
If I hang I am well avenged on thee for it! he
cried, drawing forth the reeking blade as she fell,
with a curse upon her lips, and expired.
A few words will bring the story to a close. Kyd
was sent to England and executed; but Kate
Bellamont
died of a broken heart ere the vessel that
bore him had half crossed the Atlantic.
Fitzroy was not long in discovering in Edwin
his secretary no less a personage than Grace
Fitzgerald
;
and, his affection for Kate Bellamont being
chilled by her singular marriage with Kyd, he the
following year, as Earl of Lester, made her his
bride. Thus her true love was rewarded; and it
cannot be denied that, although she loved him very
much as lowborn, yet she was by no means sorry
that he had proved noble.
THE END.Dearest Kate
,
Let me see you for a brief moment just as the
moon rises, by the linden that grows at the foot of
the Rondeel. My temporal, nay, spiritual welfare
hangs upon your answer. I am penitent. I
appeal
to you as to a heavenly intercessor! Refuse
not this request, lest the guilt of my suicidal blood
fall on your soul.
Lester
.