HENRY HOWARD.
CHAPTER I.
Henry Howard
, the hero of our tale, was a young Bostonian of
fortune
and education, endowed by nature with a fine person and
unexceptionable
address, character and position in society. At the period
of our tale he was twenty-seven years of age, and when, besides his
youth, his other advantages just enumerated are taken into
consideration
,
it is not surprising that the bright eyes and gentle regards of more
than one marriageable belle were turned towards him. But in spite of
their charms, Henry passed unscathed through the winter assemblies
and the summerings at Saratoga and Nahant, each autumn's return
finding him as free as the spring had found him.
But our hero was not a marrying man! That is, he had no mind,
as he said, to sacrifice his independence to a wife's silken restraints.
He found some others of his particular friends in the same
liberty-loving
mood, and one convivial evening a few months prior to the
opening of our story, they combined to stand together in a war of
resistance
against matrimony! This anti-marrying club consisted
besides
Henry, of five others, all of them young men of high
respectability
,
and all equally opposed to the nuptial bondage. They held their
meetings once a week, and over wine and cigars strengthened each
other's resolutions, and rejoiced in their mutual independence of Hymen.
Our hero no doubt thought that this compact would render him
forever
secure from the toils of matrimony, and that, armed with the
panoply of his resolutions, he might safely trust himself amid the blaze
of beauty and bid defiauce to the archery of Don Cupid. But the
little love-God had no idea of suffering a conspiracy of this kind to
exist against his legitimate power; and placing himself within the
bright eyes of a charming girl named Louise Lintot, she shot a shower
of arrows from behind her eye lashes, as from the covert of a
chevaur
de frise
, and penetrated his heart in a hundred places!
The result was, that Henry found himself over head in ears in love,
and after in vain trying to subdue and conquer the passion, he
submitted
to it, and forgetting his resolutions and his club, he made a
declaration
at the feet of his lovely conqueror! This event took place at
Portland, that city renowned for female grace and beauty, where
Harry was on a visit at the time, and so beyond the immediate
protection
of his brothers in the vow; if it had been in Boston, their presence
and the fear of their ridicule possibly might have restrained him from
going so far. But the first they heard of it was from the following
letter, written by him to his friend, Charles Lester, the most inveterate
of the anti-matrimonialists, with whom he had been touring, until
Charles and his other friends left him in Portland to proceed to Boston;
for the party of anti-conjugalists had been travelling together to the
White Mountains. It will be seen, by the letter, that Harry resolved
to be precipitate and to get through with the matter before he could
receive any remonstrances from his friends:
Portland
,
August  184-.
My dear Charles,
Within a week, my dear friend, I shall be a married man!
I can see you burst into a fit of the loudest laughter at this
unexpected
revelation! Joke me as much as you please, my friend; remind
me of my bitter diatribes against matrimony, and of the oaths by which
I, with you, bound ourselves never to augment the list of its victims!
But how has it turned out? I surely have not changed my opinion; I
only act contrary from what I think! Shall I be the first one whose
actions have been in complete opposition to his words, or, at least, who
has not the courage to sustain his opinion? You already know that
my past history has been romantic and adventurous enough to make
me a fit hero for a novel or a comedy! What I am about to relate
will not lessen in your mind this idea.
I will not say that Louise is beautiful! for you yourself saw her when
here, and she appeared to you so perfect, that when you parted from
me at the depot you recommended to me careful vigilance over myself!
I
have
struggled like a hero! but I have finally yielded to my fate, and
in imitation of the ancient paladin knights, I have chosen to surrender
my arms to the most formidable of my enemies, MATRIMONY. Thus in
my fall, I have fallen with honor!
Indeed and in truth, my friend, it was impossible for me to resist!
I will not bring into account by way of extenuation of my fault, the
lively desire of my poor father, who was highly displeased on
discovering
my anti-conjugal ideas. This consideration, although powerful,
would not have been sufficient to determine me to this step; but I
love
Louise! I confess it to my disgrace that what filial love and the tears
of my father could not achieve has been brought about effectually by
my own passion, by the egotistical desire of my own personal felicity.
In vain have I invoked and arrayed against my weakness, the
remembrance
of our convivial, anti-conjugal meeting, and recalled to my aid
the ardent and once sincere repugnances I once entertained with you
and among you! In deed and in truth, my dear Charles, I still do most
cordially
hate
matrimony, but I
love
Louise
more!
I have just written to my father, asking his consent. I question
whether his business added to his obstinate gout will suffer him to come
and bring it to me in person. But I am quite confident he will not long
delay a reply. There is one thing that is in my favour. Louise is the
daughter of his most intimate friend, and, as you are aware, being an
orphan my father had taken a deep intesest in her. It was, I begin to
mistrust, a trap of his to get me to call on her with the letter of
introduction
he gave me! If so, I can only say I am fairly taken captive!
My father, I know, is greatly attached to her; for I have often heard
him speak of her with the most paternal interest! Therefore I know
that in marrying her I am going to make my excellent parent happy!
The idea of his joy consoles me something for the sadness
yes
, for the
sadness which a certain discontent of myself causes me in the midst of
my happiness! Truly and frankly, Charles, I am the most miserable
man that ever was known. I am about to marry freely and voluntarily,
and if Louise should come to me and say, `No longer do I love you!'
I should be in utter dispair and misery, and be tempted to blow out my
brains! Nevertheless, the idea of matrimony makes my turn pale, and
before taking the first vacillating step I  Ah! my Charles! I
feel a faintness seize me at the heart. I have already shown myself a
coward in retreating from the firm resolution never to marry: and I will
not now be one also in now refusing to marry!
I have had a bad head-ache and must close. Fortunately my heart
is firm. Adieu.
HARRY HOWARD.
P. S Just as I had signed the foregoing letter, the consent of my
father arrived, and I at once hastened to convey it to Louise. You will
suppose that the interview was as tender as the circumstances required!
Nothing like this. On her receiving the news I observed glancing
from underneath her eye-lashes certain glances of secret triumph that
confounded and alarmed me! It appeared to me to be a wicked joy!
In imagination I saw her writing to all her female friends, invariably
beginning every letter, `I am married!' Then follows a thousand
comments
,
and at the end I saw myself figuring in this style,
`P. S. I had almost forgotten to tell you something about my
husband
!'
`Yet ought I not to be flattered by even such a notice? If indeed
Louise loves my person, I think she ought to be happy with my love
which no ceremony will increase! How then, or why then should I
manifest joy when I see myself on the verge of a union which will not
make me love her more than I do now? Will it not be that, like all
the rest, she will be more pleased with the matrimony than with the
husband! This idea has tormented me atrociously, and has given a
lukewarmness to our interviews. I know this idea is a foolish one, be
cause I cannot doubt of the purity and of the reality of the love of
Louise for me. But I am tortured, I hardly know wherefore. I am
agitated while I write, and feel a fever in my veins.
If you were at my side, Charles, I think I should hardly dare to be
married.
[A letter from Mr. Howard, the father of our hero to Miss Lintot.]
Boston,
August184.
`How can I thank you, my dear daughter  for in anticipation I
give you this name! What a fine triumph for you to have reduced my
son to a treaty to which, I know not from what false and ridiculous
ideas, he has been so adverse. I assure you that he has cost me great
solicitude, and in conquering him you have restored to me happiness
and life. I have loved you as a daughter of an old and dear friend; but
now I shall love in you equally my daughter and the tutelar angel of
my son.
I will write you again soon,
Your affectionate friend and
father
,
E. HOWARD.
[A letter from Charles Lester, to Henry Howard.]
Dear Harry,
You, yourself, have said it! you
are
a coward.
But you have told me no news. When we left Portland I presayed
your fall; and in order to reinforce your courage, if it was yet time,
(for I saw how it went with you the moment you sat eyes on Miss
Lintot
!)
or in order to make more open and apparent your
perjury
, I
invited
thee to a banquet where alone were admitted bachelors:
bachelors
,
you will understand.
It was at the Cumberland Hotel! We were six! enemies all of
matrimony! and when, at that time, I hinted, in jest, that you would
be our first deserter, you cried out, exclaiming loudly, `Calumny!' and
when we alleged, in proof, your passion (apparent to all) for Louise
Lintot, you denied it, saying, `If I could be so base as to let love for
woman cause me to break my word, then should I deserve to be
broken
upon the wheel as I break this glass!..' and the fragments
of the crystal fell upon the table in the midst of the thunder of our
applause
!
Our oaths, those oaths of which you speak in your letter, were then
renewed with all due solemnity, and when the champagne appeared,
you sang the popular song,
`Liberty, dear liberty! man's best and highest gift!'
and we repeated and re-echoed the chorus with formidable enthusiasm.
Of the six friends that joined that day their hands and their pledges,
four are, at this moment, while I am writing you, seated in my room,
and your letter has given us a subject to laugh at for a whole rainy day!
As for the sixth, his marriage bans are being published and he is
getting
ready his wedding garments! Ah, what a fall is there.
Harry! if you are a man, break through every thing, take the cars
the very evening you get this letter, come to us and repeat the oaths of
the first of July. If not, leave us and we will compose a dirge for thee,
and at our next meeting chant it over the vacant chair you once
occupied
in our midst.
Requiescat in pace
.
CHARLES LESTER.
CHAPTER II.
We now give a letter from the heroine of our tale, to her particular
friend Miss Florence Weldon, of Boston.
Portland,
August 20, 184-.
`I have scarcely time, my dear friend to write you a few lines.
To-morrow
will be celebrated my marriage! The ceremony will be
limited
to a few friends to be present in the church; as this privacy will
be more appropriate with my condition as an orphan, especially so, as
the parents of my husband will not be present. I have already told
you that Henry, on the subject of matrimony, was a most incorrigible
rebel, whom it has been my good fortune to compel to submission.
Yet he shows still, from time to time, symptoms of insurrection; but his
love for me represses them.
`Here ends the last letter you will ever receive from Louise Lintot!
Mrs. Howard
will write you to-morrow, although it may be no more
than a word after the ceremony has been performed.
Yours truly,
LOUISE LINTOT.
[From the same to the same, one day later.]
Portland,
Aug. 21, 184-.
`I know not how I can write you, neither how I can be alive after
the abominable scene which has just taken place. I have but now
returned
from church!  Insult most cruel and mortifying! Soon I
will write all to you, Florence: I have now only strength to weep!
Your distressed,
LOUISE.
[Henry Howard to his friend Charles Lester.]
Portland,
Aug. 21. (5, P. M.)
`You have triumphed, Charles! but at what a sacrifice! I tremble
to contemplate it!
Yes, I have conquered the enemy; I have triumphed over
matrimony
,
like a true knight, I have yielded on the very field of battle. If I
have been fairly slain, it is not my fault!
Listen to my dream, for such you will see it is;Yesterday I
received
your letter precisely at the hour at which we were to proceed
to church. Your cool raillery penetrated my heart, depositing there a
chilling frost, deadening the warm glow of my love! Did I need this
new instigation, when, tortured by my memories and resolutions, I
was already wavering. The hour fixed for the ceremony was as dark
as my new suit of black broadcloth, and I seemed to be attired for my
own burial! Did I need your letter, Charles?
Louise at length appeared attired in virgin white; yet I scarcely
glanced towards her. I thought upon my dear independence, upon
the infinite delights of the life of a bachelor; and of innumerable in
estimable privileges which never appeared to me so valuable till just as
I was about to lose them forever! On crossing the vestibule of the
Church, I thought I eould see you five laughing at my expense; and
when the clergymaR began to read the words of the ceremony, I found
myself again in imagination one of the banquet of
six!
Till then, absorbed in my reflections, I had stood and listened
mechanically
;
but when the clergyman put to me directly and roundly
the question, I had to rouse myself from my lethargy in order to hear
and respond.
`Henry will you have this woman to be thy wedded wife, to live
together after God's holy ordinance, in the holy estate of matrimony?
Wilt thou love her, comfort her, honor, and keep her, in sickness
and health; and, forsaking all others, keep thee only unto her so long
as ye both shall live?'
When he put this formidable compound of interrogatories to me, I
stood confounded and felt that my destiny was consummated! The
repugnance with which the scandal and infamy of a negation inspired
me was struggling in my heart with the idea of compromising myself
irrevocably with an
affirmation
. In this terrible state of agitation I
stood silent, while a cold sweat bathed in huge drops my forehead. I
was going to look at Louise in order to inspire myself with the courage
necessary to say `
Yes
!'when suddenly I heard a street organ
without playing an air that made me start, while the clear voice of the
organist sang the song we had sung at our banquet:
`Liberty, dear Liberty!'
It was a powerful, irresistable appeal? I turned round my head to
the priest and firmly responded,
`No!'
What subsequently occurred I have scarcely any distinct recollection
of. I saw nothingheard nothing! Before those present could
recover
from their first surprise I had flown from the churchflown like
a criminal! I traversed street after street without any definite purpose,
and scarcely knowing where I was going. But, at length, composed
by the open air and having in some degree walked off my excitement,
I comprehended that it was necessary I should at once leave the town.
I turned my steps towards the depot, but found on my arrival there that
the cars had already left. I then hastened back to my hotel after two
hours wanderings, and have taken my pen to address you and let you
know what has occurred!
Ah, Charles, do not too much applaud my valor, for I have
lacerated
my heart! I love Louise! I love her more than ever, and I see
that I have lost her forever! Henceforward an impassible abyss will
separate us  the remembrance of an infamous injury, an
unpardonable
affront! I have destroyed the peace and happiness of this
poor girl who has been guilty of no other fault than loving me! I am
very miserable!
It is necessary that I leave this city; although it will be only to
transfer my wretchedness without removing it. I am coming to see
you in Boston, if
I can!
If I can! because, shall I have courage and resolution to exile
myself
from the air which Louise breathes! she, alas, from whom I am
exiled forever!
HENRY HOWARD.
[A letter from Mr. Howard, the father of our hero, to Miss Lintot.]
Boston
,
22d August.
Last night, I learned, my daughter, the horrible scene in the church,
and I have suffered so much, I have shed so many tears for you, that
it has been impossible for me to write to you earlier. My son is a vile
and despicable being! Not only has he deceived you in the most
infamous
manner, but he has also deceived me, his father, knowing well
that this ignoble conduct would destroy my last hope, and shorten my
life. From this time I have no son; because the person to whom I
have this name is a miserable insensate and a detestable parricide!
But you remain to me, my child, you to whom I have been accustomed
to give the sweet name of daughter. The air of the place where you
are, filled, as it must be, with memories which will be poisonous to the
wounds yet fresh in the heart, will prove injurious to you. Come, then,
to my house; come and seek the old friend of your father. I invite
you, not only for your own sake, but also I ask it for my own
advantage
.
Come, then, with your aunt, if you do not wish to be separated
from her; or if you prefer going into the country, say so, and I will
close my business and in spite of the bad state of my health, I will go
with you wherever you command.
Alas! I that hoped in this union a felicity so great, so perfect! let
me, Louise, enjoy at least a part of it!
Your friend and parent,
E. HOWARD.
[A letter from Miss Lintot, to her friend Florence Weldon.]
Portland
,
Aug. 30, 184-.
`I am to-day more tranquil, my dear Florence, and I now feel that
if the
conduct
of Mr. Howard towards me has been most odious, his
heart
is less culpable! His head has been elevated in one of those
crimes of rebellion which I have indicated to you. If, in the moment
of the fatal question, his hand had been in mine, only a `
yes
' would
have gone from his lips. But his disordered imagination had carried
him a hundred miles off from me at the moment: materially he was
but a step from me; morally but half a second from matrimony! The
terror of matrimony was, at the instant, more powerful than his love for
me, and he said `NO.'
But well am I avenged! Never has he given such proofs of his
tenderness
as now! He looks pale and wan as if just convalescing from
a long sickness. Twice a day he has written me excuses the most
humble, mingled with protestations the most ardent. Not daring to
present himself at the house, well knowing he would not be received,
he has taken rooms directly opposite the way, where I see him seated
all day, myself invisible, with his eyes constantly fixed upon my closed
windows. I have learned that three times he has taken tickets in the
cars for Boston, and three times his resolution has failed him and he
has remained. How he loves me! How happy we should have been!
His father is in despair; and writes me letters that make my heart
bleed. Oh, my friend, what a chance has he thrown away!
Your attached
LOUISE LINTOT.
[A letter from Charles Lester, to Henry Howard.]
Boston
,
Aug
. 31.
My dear Harry,
What has become of you? We have been daily looking for your
arrival
and still we neither see nor hear from you! If you had blown
your brains out, we know the papers would give the intelligence and
particulars of the horrible catastrophe. But, as they are silent, the
presumption
is that you are still living. So I write to you, not as to
a dead man, but one in good bodily condition. Pray, what has become
of you? We have had several club-meetings at which we expected
your presence. Your courage in saying
no
we have all commended
and cannot give you too much praise. It is a pity it was not given
before
you got to church; for to have one of our number so nearly
meshed
as to escape only from the very altar, reflects something upon the
stability and good faith of the rest of us. I write this to assure you,
that unless you report yourself to the club before three days expire, we
shall take the cars in a body and come for you; for know you, we
already
begin to have doubts of your constancy; and fear that your
feelings
of remorse may lead you to penitence and ultimate submission.
We have voted you President of our club, and we believe you will
render
yourself worthy of our confidence.
Your friend,
CHARLES LESTER.
CHAPTER III.
In
the continuation of our story, which we have written after the
manner of a Spanish tale with a similar title, we shall proceed to give
our readers a letter from the father of Henry Howard to Miss Lintot;
as, in this way, we can better illustrate events than by giving them in
the usual order of narration.
Boston
,
September 3d
, 184-.
My Daughter
,
I have just received a letter from the unhappy Henry! I will confess
to you, that, in spite of my just anger against him, it has moved me
profoundly. He repents of his conduct with the liveliest contrition,
does you merited justice, and is in fine under such deep affliction that
he has awakened my pity and sympathy in his behalf. He says he
cannot leave Portland until he has first received from your mouth that
pardon which is now the only object of his desires. He rightly
conceives
that you will not wish to see him; but, notwithstanding, if to
give him some degree of repose, a single word of yours would suffice,
which, perhaps, he merits by his expiation, would you obstinately
refuse
it?
I do not advise you, my daughter.You have too much judgment
and prudence not to know precisely what is necessary in a juncture so
delicate. Consult your own sense of what is right. But think, that
upon your determination will hang, perhaps, the moral cure of that
poor youth who, if he cannot be to me the source of the felicity I had
hoped for, may not be to me so bitter a cause of affliction. Who can
tell? that this interview may not be a prelude to a reconciliation!
Pardon me, Miss Lintot my unreasonable hope may appear to you
ridiculous; but it is that of a father who loves you tenderly and who
prays for the privilege of being able to
love him with you
.
I confide in your heart, my daughter!
Your friend and parent,
E. HOWARD.
[Louise Lintot to Florence Weldon.]
Portland
,
Sept
. 8.
`What a noble heart has Henry! How his very defects, themselves,
reveal qualities, that badly directed, have led to the gravest of faults,
but well directed would have made a wife happy. All that is wanting
in him to make him the best of husbands is decision! It is already
clear to me that he has been impelled to this inconceivable
negative
by
an excess of loyalty and frankness.Foolish notions have inspired him
with fear of matrimony, fear which he knows not how to shake off. He
loves
me: I am sure that he loves me with all his heart. Without me
his life will be miserable and desolate; but through the effect of habit
that word
matrimony
inspires him with fear, and he does not wish to
consign to me a heart where I reign, because this feeling of doubt
exists, though only in his imagination. Only that marriage is
necessary
,
he would live at my side as a husband most tender and loving
but matrimony exists!
It were certainly a deed of charity to cure him, as much on his own
account, as he will always be miserable, as for his father's sake whom
I love as if he were my own. Mr. Howard has hinted to me that if I
desire I can easily tie the knot broken once by the imprudence of
Harry
.
I see that this may be possible: but the difficulty is in
undertaking it. As with you, Florence, I am frank, I confess to you
that the will is not wanting on my part; and if Henry should say to
me to-day:
`Forget the past, pardon my faults and give me an opportunity to
repair them,'
perhaps
, from friendship to his father, through charity to
him, I would let him conduct me anew to the presence of the
clergyman
.
But this he has not yet done; and for reasons I pointed out at
the beginning of this letter, I think will not do! He cannot find
happiness without marrying me; but he is not yet reconciled to me,
and if he were, he might not so soon be with the idea of matrimony.
It is a rare case; but it is as you see! His letters are as expansive, as
loving as I could desire; but he does not explain himself
categorically
;
nor does he propose anything. Now you see how peculiar my
situation is, wishing to act without the power! I will meditate upon
the matter; for it would be so gratifying to me to do a favor to that
good Mr. Howard, his father.'
LOUISE LINTOT.
[A Letter from Miss Lintot to her friend Florence Weldon.]
Portland
,
Sept. 16.
I have taken a great step, from which I am yet in a very
disturbed
state.
Mr. Howard, Henry's father, full of ingenuity to affect the
reconciliation
which he has so much at heart, enclosed to his son a letter for
me, with instructions
to hand it to me in person
! It was for the
purpose
of affording the poor youth a pretext for taking a step for which he
had not the necessary courage.
He came, and in the absence, or with the consent of the servant,
entered
my presence and tremblingly presented the letter of his
father
:
`Miss Lintot,' he said, `your silence and disdain are but a light
punishment
for my abominable fault. Yet, must my punishment be
eternal
?
Will my repentance never disarm your displeasure? I was not
worthy of being your husband; but, setting aside matrimony and love,
cannot we be
friends?
Since with my heart or without it, you would
not dare to surrender yourself as the wife of a man prejudiced against
matrimony, and since for this reason he has renounced your love, does
it necessarily follow, (the manner of my rejection being forgiven) that
we ought always to be separated from each other, antagonists, when our
characters sympathise so perfectly?'
I was moved and cast down my eyes. He continued:
`Pardon me, Louise, and give me permission to visit you! Inasmuch
as my conscience may not be reconciled with matrimony, I swear to
you that you shall never hear from my lips a word that a sister may not
hear from her brother! Do you doubt? He, who loving as I have
loved you, has had the strength to sacrifice his love to exaggerate
scruples
,
ridiculous if you choose to call them, will he not have strength, if
not to conquer it, at least, to prevent its outbreak? Permit me,
Louise
,
permit me, for the love of Heaven, to see you sometimes! To
deny
me will be to consign me again to the horrible madness which I
have endured for the last eight and twenty days, and which has only
left me since I have been in your presence. Louise, reflect, reflect
deeply before you reply!'
What could I do when my heart cried
pardon
, when I held even in
my hand the supplicating letter he had brought me from his father?
To grant it would be to resist my own self-love: to refuse it was
repugnant
to
another
love! A capitulation was necessary!  and a
singular
idea suddenly flashed ugon my mind.
`Mr. Howard,' I said to Harry, `after what has occurred it is
impossible
for me to preserve the least relation with you. I have receieved
an affront, and while it remains uneffaced .'
`My repentancemy excuses'
`It is not sufficient. You have outraged my feelings by indignantly
responding `
No
,' before the clergymen and the witnesses present. I
wish to stand in a precisely equal position. Consent to return with
me to the church once more: there you shall respond `
Yes
,' and I
publicly before the same minister and the same witnesses will return a
round `
No
!' Then the affront will be reciprocal, the revenge equal to
the injury, and, as you men say, honor will be satisfied! Afterwards
we can, if you desire it, meet accordingly as our relatives may consent.
And since, then, nothing requires we should be husband and wife, at
least nothing shall impede our being good friends.'
Now know, my dear Florence, that this proposition, although made
in a serious tone of voice, was irresistably accompanied by a certain
smiling air; my smile encouraged Harry, he accepted also smiling,
and made the contract in the presence of my aunt.
To-morrow morning this odd affair will be arranged, unless
something
intervenes now unforseen. I will astonish you, certainly; but I
mean to carry out to the end my idea.
Adieu, as ever,
LOUISE.
We give below the letter from Mr. Howard, of which Henry was
the bearer
Boston,
Sept. 15, 184,
My dear daughter,
Since yesterday I have been in bed with a fever. My malady
proceeds
from the heart! I can scarcely write you these few lines. The
breaking off of the marriage upon which I had set my heart was too
severe
a blow for an old man, broken in health like me. The hope of
seeing the union take place would have sustained me, and my health
would have been better for it; but now I feel only quiet and
repose
can restore me. Take compassion on me, and be pitiful to my
poor boy; for in being merciful to him, you are blessing me. Adieu.
E. HOWARD.
[A letter from Henry Howard, to Charles Lester.]
Portland,
Sept. 18th, 184-.
Dear Charles,
I know not whether I am sleeping or waking; but it appears to me
that I dream! I told you in my last of the singular compact I had made
with Louise. Yesterday was the day fixed; and I went to her house,
resolved to perform my part, if she still was in earnest, as I thought she
proposed it but in jest. The creature was serious!
She was dressed in the same white robes, and her virgin veil was
disposed
so bewitchingly, yet modestly.  Heavens! how beautiful
she was, my friend; a thousand times more lovely than on the first day!
We entered the carriage and reached the church. The clergyman
began to read the service, and when he put to me the question he had
put on the former occasion I answered `
Yes
' with a smile upon my lips.
When he put the same question to Louise my heart throbed with
violence
....
I glanced with enamoured eyes upon my beautiful
companion, and the `
no
' we had prepared beforehand all at once
appeared
to me to be a species of blasphemy and culpable sacriledge!
But I had no time to reflect.
Louise appeared deeply moved, and the clergyman had to repeat the
interrogation.
Louise raised her head, looked him full in the face and responded in
a firm voice:
`
Yes
.'
We were married?
To tell you what my sensations were at that moment is superior to
my powers. A movement of Louise to hand me a paper caused me to
return to myself. It was a lerter from my father she had just a few
minutes before the hour received, and which decided her to change one
article of our programme in order to save the infirm old gentleman's
lifeas she averred!
Uneasy, Louise watched the expression of my face as I finished
reading
the letter.... I let drop a tear upon the paper, caught her
hand and pressed it to my lips!..... My wife is divine!
Within a quarter of an hour we were on on our way to the house of
her aunt, and in an hour we started in the cars for Boston to my father!
As soon as he embraces us in his arms he will be cured.
With regard to you, my friends anti-conjugal, you cannot complain
of me; because, if I am married, it has not been my fault. I have been
made a husband by surprise, and in the only thing wherein I fail in my
compact with you is in being very contented with my lot. I have not
been false to celibacy; it is matrimony that has played me a trick!
I am then married!!! You may pity me, my friend, pity me all of
you.... I am the most fortunate of men.
Your Benedictine,
HARRY HOWARD.
THE END.
TROUT-FISHING:
OR, WHO IS THE CAPTAIN.
BY J. H. INGRAHAM, ESQ.
Author of `Captain Kydd,' `The Quadroone,' `The Beautiful Cigar Vender,
`Frank Rivers,' `Forrestal,' `The Clipper-Yacht,' &c
.
PART I.
Having
learned from my friend Larry McNeal, Esq., whom I knew
to be an
amateur
in lake and brook fishing, that there was, certainly,
trout to be had in a beautiful pond about sixteen miles from town, I
equipped myself with a pliant jointed rod, strong silken lines, square
hooks and covered basket, &c., and took the cross-road stage for the
place the very next morning. Larry saw me into the coach, but was
to his great affliction unable to accompany me, as his lady a few days
before presented him with a `little Larry,' and would by no means
consent
he should leave her to undertake such a perilous excursion,
especially
as no body but he could keep the baby quiet.
`Good morning, my dear boy,' said Larry, with a long face, shaking
me heartily by the hand; enviable fellow, to be able to go where you
choose without leave! Heigho!' he sighed, looking comically serious;
`I fear my fishing and liberty days are over! Han't been a fishing but
once since I was marrieda whole yearand then my anxious wife
hired two men and a boy to follow me and stand on the bank of the
stream to watch me lest I should get drowned! It's all up with me!
I mean to make a will and dispose of my fishing tackle among my
friends. Once in a while they may remember me and send me a seven
pound avoirdupois `speckler' for my dinner!Good bye, dear boy,
and take warning from the fate and folly of the trouts themselves as
they take your hook, and as you fish, moralize deeply on the dangers of
hook baited with a woman's bright eyes! I was caught that way and
now I am strung by the gills on the string that has for ages received all
that suffer themselves to be thus caught! Good bye! There comes
Dick, the boy, to tell me the baby is crying!'
Here Larry gave me another shake of the hand, and with a look of
ludicrous resignation turned away, to hurry homeward, and the coach
drove on. The ride was beautiful and invigorating. The month was
October, and the woodlands were gorgeous in their autumn silks and
ribbons, and a smiling sky and a warm hazy atmosphere gave to all the
scenes around the charms of an Italian painting.
The road at its last part wound around the borders of a wide brook,
or what Isaac Walton would have termed a `river.' It went brawling
over stones as if scolding them for being in the way; and then again
flowed smoothly beneath trees gay in orange and crimson foliage,
smilingly
reflecting their brilliant dyes upon its mirror in return for
adorning
its banks. As we rode on it would sometimes be enclosed by steep
precipices jagged and dark with pines that frowned down upon the gay
garniture of the maples and elms below like stern visaged deacons in
the gallery looking down upon the scarlet trimmed bonnets and yellow
scarfs the village maidens come to church in the fall, as if they would
rival the hues of the field and woods.
After emerging from a dark gorge where there was but just space
sufficient for the narrow road and the torrent, we came into a pleasant
vale with farms on either hand, and the spire of a village church in the
distance. Gently hillsides arose on either hand finely cultivated, each
farmer leaving a piece of woodland on his place, the effect of which,
spreading over the landscape with pleasant hay fields and pastures
between
,
was strikingly agreeable. As we left the gorge we parted from
the stream which turned to the left. Being well assurred that it must
come from the pond Larry had sent me too, I was prepared to see on
rising to a small eminence over which the road wound, an extensive
sheet of water, like a lake, stretching away to the west for half a league,
on one side well wooded hills as glorious in their autumnal dyes as if
a sunset closed, all gold and purple, rested upon them, the bright water,
which not a zephyr stirred, reflecting them in the softest beauty. There
were headlands jutting into the lake, and green islands and single rocks
just where Codman's* pencil would have placed them, and just the
height for the size of the water and the surrounding scenery. Away
to the left it narrows to a dark recess overhung by rocks; and I know
from the direction in which it was that there was the outlet of the stream
which we had been following for the last half hour, and which turned
away from us a mile back. On the east side of the beautiful sheet of
water stood the village we were approaching, surrounded by green
meadows
and groups of trees. There were three or four pleasant and
tasteful
villas on the borders of the little lake with gardens reaching to the
water. But one spot particularly attracted my attention. It was a
small island near the shore on which stood a white cottage surrounded
by a verandah and placed in the midst of a lewn, dotted with trees. It
was a perfect paradise. From the stage window I could see two deer
grazing on the lawn, and a large dog drawing a carriage along a gravel
walk, in which was a child driving him. As we approached, the head
of the island opened, and to my surprise, and which was only wanting
to complete the picture, I discovered a fairy schooner of about twelve
tons riding at her anchor under a rock.
`Whose beautiful residence is that?' I enquired of the driver.
`It belongs to the Cap'n!' he answered, precisely in a way as if there
had been but one individual in the world who appropriated to himself
this very rare title. He then whipped up his horses as if perfecily
satisfied
that my curiosity had been perfectly satisfied.
`But what Captain?' I persevered in asking.
`Don't you know the Cap'n!' he retorted with a nasal twang to the
word. He then braced himself upon his box, and drawing his lash
through his fingers, as a doctor feels his lancet before phlebotomizing
his patient, he made the air resound with a crack of the whip like the
report of a pistol. Off flew the horses, crack, crack, rung the whip
about the heads of the leaders, and the next three minutes we were
whirling
through the village street at the rate of ten miles an hour, doubtless
to give the good folks the idea that such was the speed with which he
had come the sixteen miles. I cannot vouch that any of the good
people
were ever deceived by this
ruse;
if they were, the delusion would
have been removed from their minds on the very first occasion their
pursuits should call upon them to make the journey.
I alighted before the inn door, and just as I was receiving from the
driver's hands my covered basket and fishing rod, I heard the landlord
say with admiration,
`There goes the Captin's new turn-out! Ain't it a beauty, sir?'
This last expression was addressed to me. I however did not reply
instantly, for my attention was attracted by a very elegant phaeton to
which a pair of spirited white horses were harnessed, rolling with
delightful
ease and celerity through the village, past the tavern, its wheels
flashing in the sun; and the sunshine of a very beautiful woman's face
in it bewildering my gaze.
`Yes, sir, it is a tasteful equipage!' I now replied, it having
disappeared
.
`But to whom does it belong, and who is the charming woman
in it?'
`It is the Capting's carriage, and that was the Capting's lady!'
answered
mine host. `Shall I take your basket, sir, and rod?'
`Captain
who?
'
`Why I thought every body know'd who the Capting was,' he
answered
,
precisely in the way the driver had done before; and fairly
ashamed
of my ignorance I followed him into the bar room.
From the window I had a fine view of the lake, with its painted shores,
its beauteous isles, and, above all, of the island on which stood the
`Cap'n's' or `Capting's' charming abode. It was now quite near me,
and I saw that the distance from which I had before viewed it had not
lent an enchantment to the view it did not merit on closer inspection.
The house was a spacious verandah-cottage, built partly in the Chinese
style, partly in the Turkish, with a green latticed colonnade, at one end,
and a trellised conservatory on the other, giving the whole exterior a
singular lightness and grace. A light bridge of a single arch
connected
the island with the main.
`Will you have a room, sir?' asked Boniface. `I see you have come
for trout in our lake, and will want to stop a few days of course! Nice
salmon trout here, sir! The Capting caught one last Friday that
weighed nine pounds!'
`Pray who is this Captain, landlord?'
`He lives over on the island, opposite, sir!'
`And whose villa is that?' I asked, hoping to get an answer.
`The Capting's, sir!'
`And who the dl
is
the Capting?' I demanded with some
asperity
.
But the landlord had been addressed by a person who came in and
left me to speak with him.
`Well, I will let the `Capting' go for the present; I shall no doubt
find out by some accident who he is, before I have been here two days.
I won't ask again!'
I now made preparations for trouting, and engaged as my guide to
the lake a black man who owned a boat, and had come into the tavern
to offer me his services, on hearing `a gemman,' as he said to me
afterwards
,
had arrived with fishing tackle; for it was Banjo's profession to
wait on the amateurs that from time to time visited the lake. As Larry
had told me particularly to commit myself to Banjo, I did not hesitate to
give the old negro my full confidence at once.
`Do the trout bite freely, Banjo?' I asked, as we walked down a
green lane towards the lake shore, which was but a quarter of a mile
from the inn. I walked on before carrying my rod and two bundles
wrapped up in brown paper, and the black trudging behind with the
basket and two bottles of `Root Beer.'
`Bite?' repeated Banjo, taking a longstride that brought him nearly
abreast of me, and rolling round his eyes in as much surprise as if I
had asked him who the Captain was; `guess 'em does bite. Trouf's
am de hungridest fishes as ever wos seed. Dey snap at de sinker wid
no hook on. Yah! yah! I cotch one so, onct, massa? the sinker get
stuck in he frost and I haul him out! You see dat island ober dar!'
`Yes, Banjo.'
`Well, dat am whar we fish dis time ob day. By an' by when the
sun come roun' dat way we pull ober under dat hill side whar you see
dat blood red maple tree.'
`You change your ground on account ofkeeping in shadowy water,
hey, Banjo?'
`Gi! I sees, Massa, you is perfectly on'stand trout fishin'! Now I
ken al'ays tell by the little questions geemmen axes me if dey know any
ting ob de sciense ob trouf-fishin'. I sees you knows.'
`Thank you, Banjo. I feel flattered by your penetration.'
`Dat am a genteel sentens, massa,' said Banjo, scratching his head,
`but I don't thinks I'se precisely onstan' ebery word in him. Truf is,
my eddikation wos omitted in my yout and I only picks up wot I knows
from hearin' gemman talk. Sometimes, yah, yah, yah; and Banjo
laughed till his sides shook, `sometimes, massa, get mitey puzzled!
De worst perplexer ob words I ever seed wos massa Larry McNeal!
ki! He al'aye puzzle dis nigger. He know'd I'se al'ays a larnin' and
savin' up de great words ob de gemmen, and so he wos mitey pertiklar
and kind to talk in de most tickler perlite style afore me. I listens and
listens, but debble ting I onderstand. Massa Larry's language al'ays
stump dis sinner. Did massa, eber happen to know massa Larry?'
`Oh, he's my particular friend, Banjo. He particularly
recommend-you
to me as a companion and guide on the lake,' I replied, smiling,
but not wondering at Banjo's perplexity to understand the fabricated
words of the ever quizzing McNeil.
`Den I takes you under my 'ticklar charge, masssa,' said Banjo,'
taking
down two bars to let me pass from the lane to the beach; and
looking quite delighted at the discovery he had made. Am massa
Larry
well?'
`Quite so, Banjo. I suppose you heard he had a fine son. Banjo
slowly shook his wooly head with a look of great wisdom while he said
in a tone of amusing commiseration,
`Sins massa Larry got hisself married, he am not de same man. He
used be here twelve times in de year; but he jist come down onct arter
he got a wife, and never cotch not one trouf, nothing but quohogs an
yallar perch. He stay two hour and go home agen. I seed then
somting
was ail him. He neber cotch quohog afore. 'Sides dere wos no
more ob his high word conversation. Ebbery ting he say I onderstan'
perfectly. De fac wos he wos all broke up for fishin'. I'se
nebber
seed it turn out contrary, and I'se lived man and boy sixty-one
year on dis pond, and I nebber know'd a good sportsman get married
dat it did'nt spile his luck fishin'. I hope you aint married, master.'
`No, Banjo.'
`Dat am 'greeable 'telligence,' said Banjo, with great emphasis and
satisfaction. `Dare nebber was such a lucky man as massa Larry, he
sighed; `de werry troufs know'd when he wos on the lake, and dey'd
al'ays come in scools round has line jist as if dey tuck it an honor to be
cotch by him. Gorra! if I don't b'lieve dey used to fight to get furst
at de hook.'
We were now in a beautiful water-side path along the curving shore,
with trees overshadowing it, and white sparkling sand at our feet.
After winding along the lovely shores we turned round a projecting
rock and came upon a sheltered, romantic nook, in which was a little
boat with two oars and a sail lying across the thwarts. It was a neat
skiff painted green, and with the stern seats cushioned.
`I hab to keep my boat keeley'd off on account ob de boys,' seeing
I was trying to discover how we should get into it, as it was anchored
full two rods from the rocks; `but Dick 'll be here in a minnit. Dar
de young nigger goes now,' he cried, as a little darkey ten years old
came scrambling down the precipitous bank. Before I asked how Dick
could help the matter, the young black-ball had slipped off his shirt
and trowsers, the only two garments that encumbered his limbs, and
took to the water like a frog. He rose to the surface a rod from the
shore, and shaking his wooly locks swam to the boat and scrabbled up
to the side of it.
`Shuck yourself, nigger, afore you gets in dar,' cried Banjo,
authoratively
,
as the shining urchin was getting over the gunwale.
Dick `shuck' first his head and then swinging his heels into the
air shook the water out of them, and making a summerset landed upon
his feet in the bows. He soon had the keeley up, and with an oar sent
the boat towards us. We got on board, and Banjo taking an oar, and
Dick, who had resumed his shirt and trowsers, another, we pulled out
of the inlet into the lake.
The hour was delightful for the excursion. It was late in the
fore-noon
of an October day, and the air was as soft and mellow as the
sun-set
hour in one of Murillo's Spanish `evenings.' The surface of the
water was like plate-glass. The golden hill sides, the orange and green
mantled islands, the black rocks, and even the slender spire of the
village
church were all reflected upon it with the similitude of an inverted
painting. By turning my head and eyes downward I could see beneath
the water a perfect counterpart of the scene above, only, if possible,
softer and more lovely.
As we got farther from the inlet, out of which we had emerged, the
island with the verandah cottage opened before us, having been at first
hidden by a low promontory of pines and oaks. For some moments I
sat with my cheek resting in my hand admiring the beauty of the fairy
scene it presented to my eye, with an irresistible curiosity to know who
could be the person so well known to everybody but myself, and so
much respected, whose taste and wealth had created that charming spot.
I finally resolved to put the question to Banjo.
`Beautiful situation on the island there, Banjo,' I said, carelessly.
Banjo stopped pulling his oar and gazed in the direction of the spot.
But Dick, who kept on rowing, began to send the boat round in a
circle
;
at which Banjo knocked him on the head with a pin:
`Stop dat oar, nigga! Wha' you keep rowin in dat debble fashun?
Yes, massa, dat am beau'ful place, dat ob de Cappem!'
`Banjo!'
`Massa!' replied the black, looking me full in the face with surprise
at my impressive manner.
`
Who
is the Captain?'
Banjo opened his eyes till the whites looked like two new-laid eggs
with a shining black wafer stuck upon each. It was a look of pure
astonishment
mingled slightly with contempt.
`Ki! am possiblum massa don' know whoo de Cappum am.'
The nigger Dick also, the villain, turned round his ebony
countenance
,
and thrusting his tongue into his cheek, looked at me steadily
half a minute and then emitted a shrill `whew!' I felt like taking the
boat's tiller and knocking the rascal overboard.
`What is the Captain's name, Banjo?' I demanded with
considerable
irritation yet hardly keeping from laughing outright.
`Massa Cappem!' answered Banjo emphatically.
`His wife's then?' I said exultingly, thinking I should get it now,
without fail.
`She am de Cappen's lady!'
`But has she no nameis she Mrs Nobody?'
`I'se nebber hear noting ob one, 'cept dey calls her Cap'ns lady.'
I internally vowed that I would not rest till my curiosity was
satisfied
in this matter which seemed oddly enough to be involved to me in
such mystification.
`Does the Castain now fish for trout?' I enquired of Banjo, who was
once more pulling his oar.
`He had de torches out ob nights and spears 'em! He likes dat
sport! He nebber miss one!'
`I should like to join in such sport.' I said with animation, having
heard of the intense excitement of trout-spearing by torch-light, but
never having yet participated in it.
`Massa Cappem 'll hab his boats out first night de moon go away,'
answered Banjo.
`It will be three or four nights hence, before the moon will be gone.
I shall then have a chance to witness the sport at least. There is a
boat putting out from the island!' I said eagerly as I discovered a skiff
emerging from the dark shadow of a group of water oaks.
`Dat am de Cappem, I knows him by his flappin' hat!' said Banjo,
looking an nstant in the direction of the island Paradise, which was
about a third of a mile north of us. Our boat was just entering the
shadow of a large black rock or wall, with a crevice ten yards wide
through which the water rushed with a swift current, as the inclination
of the plane of water towards the outlet began at this place. Here
Banjo had said our fishing ground was to be. After a few strokes of the
oar the keeleg was dropped under the face of the rock, and I prepared
my rod and tackle for the sport that a place so well chosen, promised.
I still watched the boat that had put off into the lake, and soon had the
satisfaction of seeing it advance in a direction towards our
anchorage
.
`I shall soon know who the Captain is,' I said to myself with some
exultation, as I took from my pocket and placed to my eye a small
telescope I always carried. This instrument brought him in close
proximity to my vision; and I could see an elegant, fanciful boat,
painted green, with a gilded head, and light as a shell, containing a
single person in a sort of grey pea-jacket or
blouse
, fashionably cut, and
a West Indian grass hat with the brim a foot wide. His back was
towards
me, for he was pulling; but I saw that he was a well-made,
athletic
man, with black whiskers.
`The Captain is a seaman,' said I mentally; and after taking a
steadier look at his mode of pulling his oars I was satisfied of the fact.
His boat skimmed the transparent surface of the lake with the grace
of a swallow on the wing; and he soon came so near that I closed my
spy-glass, and casting my line into the black water, occupied myself
with it while he approached; for he pulled directly to our nook under
the shadow of the rocks. I had hardly cast my line ere the bob
disappeared
with a sharp dive from the surface, and my pliant rod curved
like an arch while the end was drawn a foot beneath the water! I
knew from the strain that I had hooked a trout of the heaviest size. I
began to play him and having a reel to my line I let him run till he had
unreeled a hundred, when I gave him this much to play with. It was
a beautiful game? Banjo was in raptures, and only wished massa
Larry
was `dar!' After my captive had exhausted his mettle a little, I
began gradually to reel him in till I had him within ten feet of the boat,
when, with a skillful movement of the rod, which bent almost double
under the weight of the fish, I transferred him from his element to the
boat! It was a perfect salmon in sizethe largest lake fish I had ever
seen!'
I had been so much occupied with playing and taming my prize, that
I had paid no attention to the advancing boat. But a hearty, frank
voice drew my attention in its direction, when I saw in it at rest, a talf,
handsome, dark man, standing up in it looking towards us. He had
evidently been watching the sport.
`That is the finest trout ever taken out of this lake, sir, and you have
played him beautifully!' he said. `He must weigh full eight pounds
and a half. A perfect salmon!'
`While he was speaking in this frank way, like an old acquaintance,
I was occupied in endeavoring to recall his features, which were as
familiar
as my brother's, though time had dimmed their impression upon
the memory. All at once I recognized him. I had discovered who
`the Captain' was! But he too, had taken to surveying me! We both
spoke in the same breath.
`The devil!' he exclaimed, with a rich glow of generous pleasure,
`is it possible that this can be you!'
`And you, Captain! Can it be possible we meet again!' I cried
with equal surprise and pleasure.
He impelled his skiff towards our boat with a half dozen nervous
strokes, and hands were clasped in a warm grasp that six years before,
far beyond the seas, had parted under circumstances of the most
interesting
nature. But we defer them to the next chapter.
PART II.
The Captain insisted that I should exchance Banjo's canoe for his
elegant, light boat, an invitation which I at once accepted, greatly to
the chagrin of Banjo, who saw that his sport was up for that day.
`Ah, master, de trout 'll kno' you jiss as well as they did master
Larry, you ony fish two, tree hour more.'
`I'll be out again on the lake to-morrow, Banjo, and engage you to
meet me here, for I dare say my friend, the Captain, will come out with
me here.'
`Yes, with great pleasure,' said he.
I saw by Banjo's eye that he was desirous of speaking to me out of
hearing of the Captain, so I stepped towards the end of the boat to give
him an opportunity.
`Master,' says he, touching his hat and looking over his shoulder at
my friend, `I'll forgib you dis time if you tell who am de Capting!
You
kno'. But debble any oder soul kno' in all de place.'
`It's a secret,' says I looking very mysterious.
`Yes, sar, I 'speck it am,' answered Banjo, gravely.
`Can you keep a secret, Banjo.'
`Sart'n, master,' he replied, rolling his large round eyes, and
anxiously
waiting for the announcement.
`Won't you mention it, Banjo?'
`Sart'n nebber to say a word, master, true as De Book!'
`It would injure him you know, Banjo?'
`Would it tho'?' he asked with a look of surprise and disquiet as
he glanced at the `Capting,' who was engaged looking at a contest
between
a hawk and king-bird in the air over his head.
`Most certainly,' I rejoined.
`You can trust dis nigger, master.'
`Well, did you never hear of Lafitte
Captain
Lafitte?' said I.
`The bloody pirate, master?' he cried, turning blue, which was his
nearest approach to pale.
I smiled, but made no reply, and the next moment the Captain by a
stroke of his oar had sent his boat far away from that of the negro,
whom I saw standing till we were out of sight looking after us, in the
very attitude in which I had left himan attitude of mingled
astonishment
,
fear and horror. Little was I aware what my quizzing of poor
Banjo, touching the Captain's name, was about to bring upon my
friend.
We rowed out into the lake and rested on our oars. We then
lighted a Regalia each. He was disposed to converse and I to listen;
and he thus related to me his adventures since we had last met, after
satisfying himself that his regalia promised to draw well:
`You will remember the day you left Monte Video to go to Colonia
by land, under the escort of the Banda Oriental Cavalry Llavalleja
politely offered you and your party, I took leave of you under the gate
of the Calle del Rey. Well I returned slowly back towards the
posada
,
after having seen your Cavalcade go out of sight, under full speed into
the defile just beyound the gates. Well it was a fortunate departure
for you, though I heard you had a severe time of it and more than one
pretty fight with the Guachos horse-men. The very next day old
Admiral
Lobo enforced an embargo. There I was with my fine ship, locked
up as safe as you could wish. I had a very valuable cargo selected
expressly for the Buenos Ayrean market, where you know I was to
proceed with the vessel after getting through with my sales in Monte
Video. Well I won't talk of this till I speak of Dona Francesa Garcia.
You remember her,' said the Captain smiling and looking mysterious,
`the beautiful Spanish girl who was visting at Don Juan's opposite
our Posada.'
`I shall never forget her,' I answered. `She was exceedingly
beautiful
.
She was a Buenos Ayrean and on a visit to the Portuguese family
of Don Pedro with whom she was related. I believe her father had
been President of the Banda Oriental country, a man of great wealth
and influence!'
`Yes. Well as I was returning from seeing you depart I was about
to enter the posado when I saw Dona Francesa appear on her balcony
and look towards me most entreatingly. She did not speak, but
waved her hand. I would have replied by throwing her a kiss in
return
but I saw her face expressed alarm and grief. I immediately
crossed over and passing under the heavy arched passage leading into
the
patio
, I ascended the steps to the inner corridor. She met me at
the head with her finger on her lip and an air of painful anxiety and
distress pervading her whole manner. I became deeply interested.
You know I had had so much dealings with Don Pedro that I visited
them very freely and had seen much of her.'
`I remember,' said I, laughing, `that you were over head and ears
in love with the beautiful Banda Oriental.
The Captain looked significant and smiled in the same manner he
had done before.
`Well, she led me into the little room that opens upon the veranda
that room filled with flowers, where we used to eat fruit.'
`I remember ita beautiful and cool retreat.'
`She closed the door! I was surprised! She then went to her
escritoire and took from it a note and in her sweet, flute-like sounding
Spanish, said to me while her hand as she gave it to me trembled.
`Senor Captain, I know that you are a brave mana generous
friend! You are an Americana native of the land of freedomof
that liberty for which my own unhappy country is now struggling. I
have, therefore, sent for you! I can confide in no one else. My father's
couzin, Don Pedro, is a Brazilian and  but read Senor!' I
opened it and read:
`
Dear Lady Francesa
,
This is hastily sent to you to warn you that I have received
certain
intelligence that there will be at sunrise to-morrow an embargo
enforced upon the port and that the river will be occupied for the
purpose
of blockading Buenos Ayres. The Brazilian General  D
now in command here, whose overtures you have repeatedly rejected,
I am assured from a certain source, will avail himself of this embargo
to detain you in the city that he may, by having you in his power,
compel
you to accept his hand. You know his character and that no
principle would deter him from his will. Your father being so high in
position among the enemy will be an excuse for keeping you under
close surveillance, under the pretence that you may correspond with
him in the character of a spy. Therefore, fly! dearest Francesca!
Ask not for a passport, for General D will throw detentions in
the way till the embargo is enforced, and then
you are his
prisoner!'
Your friend,
MARIA.
`This is surprising,' said I; but I thought less of my ship and cargo
at that moment than of the peril and distress of the lovely Buenos
Ayrean. `This kind note then is written by the Governor General's
niece?'
`Yeswe are friends! She had risked her own personal liberty to
aid me.'
`And I,' I responded warmly, `will sink my life to serve you further.'
I thought she would have cast herself at my feet when I said this.
`Oh Senor, God bless you! Save me from a fate to me worse than
death. To be a prisonernay to be bound in chains would not make
me fear! but I can never be in the power of the hateful General D.
I can now see why he had thrown obstacles in the way of my return to
Buenos Ayres, for the last six weeks.'
I reflected a moment. All my chivalry was awakened and all my
heart was enlisted in her cause. My position was this: In the port
lay my vessel with only about two thirds of her freight for Monte
Video discharged, and about sixty thousand dollars of freight destined
for the Buenos Ayreau Market. There was no time to discharge the
freight that belonged there, and I did not like to weigh anchor and
carry it away! for I had instantly resolved to start that night in advance
of the embargoand to take with me the lovely Spanish maiden.
My plan was soon formed. I noticed that my silence and
thoughtfulness
was watched by her with intense anxiety.
`I have a plan to rescue you, Senorita Francesa,' said I, `from the
fate which alarms you. Will you trust yourself confidingly to me?'
`I have no one else! I dare not trust Don Pedro! Yes, oh yes!'
she said with a sincerity and fervor that made me feel very happy about
the heart, and more than ever confirmed me in my purpose to devote
myself unreserved, and at whatever sacrifice, to her safety. You smile.'
`Go on, my dear Captain, I was only wondering if you had ever
told this animated story to your wifefor I understand you are
married
!'
`Ask her, when we get home,' he said quietly. He then resumed.
`I said, Dona Francisca,
`My ship is in port, but not ready for sea! But I shall get under
weight to-night. I shall at once proceed to make arrangements
privately for departing. In the meanwhile you do the same. But
you will need a disguise. General D will possibly have an eye
on you, and it would be impossible to get you on board in the attire of
a female without suspicion!'
She coloredlooked embarrassed and then said, `I will be guided
by you Senor.'
`Then I will send you, nay,' I said, fearing to trust any one, `I will
bring you a suit of seamen's clothes. I have a lad on board who has a
suit he has never worn that will fit you. Your hair, if possible, should
be gathered up under the hat!
`I will cut it off, she said.
`Not for the world,' I cried. `You remember, what beautiful hair
she had, half the length of a ship's holiday pennon! She promised to
put on the clothes and conceal her rich cloud of hair, and I told her I
would be ready for her at eight o'clock when it was dark. I was to
call for her and she was to meet me in the patio with a bundle, and
follow me as one of my own men to the quay.
`This was a rare plan, if there had not been so many of these guard
houses to pass, at every one of which we were challenged. `Quien va
la?' must have met you at every corner!'
`I had got everything arranged, but did not tell any one of my
intended
departure but our Consul, who said he would acquit me to the
owners; for he supposed I had only one project in view that of saving
my vessel. I did not make him a confidant touching the new hand I
was to ship. Well, at eight o'clock precisely I made my appearance
at
porte cochere
of Don Pedro's house. It was lighted only by the
faint glimmer of a lamp hung over the inner arch. The sound of the
falling waters of the fountain in the pateo covered my footsteps as I
walked carefully in. I glanced up at the corridor and saw a figure
moving in the shadow of the gorgeous tropical plants that adorned it
The next moment the fluttering hand of the charming Banda
Orientalist
was in mine! The family of Don Pedro consisted only of himself,
who was all the time in his counting room at one corner of his
casa
,
his wife and two daughters of eighteen and twenty. Neither of them
had she made her confidant, because the eldest had lately become her
rival touching General D which the latter was too volatile, and
would, doubtless, have insisied on running away too!'
`But how did you converse the first time so long with Dona Francisca
undiscovered?'
`The young ladies were walking on the alameda with some young
Brazilian officers, and Don Pedro was casting accounts as usual in
his
casa de comercio
.'
`As we passed beneath the light of the lamp I was surprised as
well as pleased and greatly relieved to see how like a young sailor
she looked. She had suffered one or two short ringlets to fall on
each cheek, and the suit fitted her as if it had been made for her.
I saw she blushed deeply as she caught my eye and strove to
conceal
her face by dropping her countenance towards the ground. Well,
she followed me, after I had encouraged her confidence in herself,
and I answered all the challenges with the usual `Camarada,' but
was not stopped. I reached the quay and got into my boat. To
avoid suspicion, for the guard had lights looking at us pull off, I
gave Francisca the helm, as if she were my coxswain, and we then
pulled for the ship. We got on board in safety, and I immediately
escorted her to a state room which I had fitted up for her reception,
whence soon afterwards she re-appeared in the cabin in her graceful
Castillian costume. Her first act was to kneel and kiss my hand,
which her tears of gratitude also bedewed. I assured her of my
protection
,
while in my heart I felt I would give world's to be under hers!
The two mates, fine fellows both as you remember, had got every
thing ready. There was a light wind blowing right out of the
harbor
.
You remember it was full of vessels. Above me lay at least
forty merchantmen, to the captains of seven of which, all my
acquaintances
,
I had communicated the information of the coming
blockade. They were also doing their best quietly. Out side of me
were anchored at least twenty vessels of war, besides the guard ship
seventy four anchored in the mouth of the harbor and the two fort s!'
`I remember them all! What a risk to run!'
`At eleven o'clock the tide set out. Every man went about our
decks in bare feet noiseless as kittens. It was a cloudy star light
night, with the wind blowing about five knots from the North. At
a few minutes after eleven our topsails and top gallant sails were loosed.
Every block that creeked was greased. The sheets were hauled
home without noise, and the jib and spanker set. This precaution
was necessary, as on our starboard quarter not two cables length lay
a Brazillian corvette, and on the other beam a sloop of war was
anchored
.
We held on to our ancher until the wind began to help us
and then we slipped cable and let her fall off. I had marked my course
out by day light and now took the helm myself. Donna Francisca
I had prevailed upon to retire, assuring her of her safety now that
she was on board. It was a pretty ticklish affair steering in a
dark night through a dense armed fleet. But it was to their being
so thick that we owned our escape. We passed the corvette and
then a brig of war, hailed first by one and then by the other. I
gave in reply the name of the Brazillian corvette, `Alceste,' which
you remember was anchored far up the harbor. So I passed on,
followed as I saw by two or three of the merchantmen. As it so
happened they gave suspicious answers, one of them actually giving
`The Alceste.' Instantly an alarm gun was fired. It was
answered
from the guard ship, for which I was very much obliged to
them, as but for its flash I should have steered right into a
Portugese
frigate. It also showed me the true position of the guard ship.
The frigate taking the alarm hailed me, and I replied as before
answering
back in Portugese that I was in pursuit of a vessel running
out. My ship you know was of large size with painted ports and
black sides, and altogether having a very warlike look. If they
suspected me they feared to fire, for many vessels and the town lay
in range. I soon saw them signalizing with colored lights from the
sloop of war I had passed. Answering lights appeared in the guard
ship, and I knew I should get it as I went by her without a ruse.
Firing of musketry now began to take place astern and I saw that
some of the merchantmen were getting it roughly. Making
my men lie down, I kept on and when I came near I ranged up
close under the stern of the guard ship, and with my trumpet first
hailed her!'
`A bold step!'
`It proved a successful one! I denominated my vessel the `
Alceste
,'
and said that I was in pursuit of a boat that had passed out of
the harbor. I was suffered to pass on, when if they had burned a
blue light they would see what I was at a glance. In ten minutes
more I was beyond range of her guns and stretching away under all
sail I could carry for Buenos Ayres.
PART III.
THE CONCLUSION OE THE CAPTAIN'S STORY..
`
After
we had cleared the guard-ship which a few moments
afterwards
opened her fire upon a Portuguese brigantine on our quarter
instead
of upon us, the fort on the point began to blaze away, but not
knowing exactly what to fire at, her shot did more mischief than it did
our vessel.'
`I am surprised,' I remarked, on hearing his extraordinary account,
`at your remarkable escape. I remember how well guarded the
harbor
was; that it was crowded with vessels of the enemy; that the
entrance
was not a quarter of a mile across, a third of which was taken
up by the huge hulk of the guard-ship, with a fort on either shore. It
was a great risk.'
`Not greater than remaining behind. Besides you must not forget
the beautiful Buenos Ayrean and the perils from which I rescued her,
as well as my ship and cargo. One will do a great deal where a
lovely
woman is interested,' added the Captain with a mixture of
sentiment
and courage.'
`And for one so eminently beautiful as Senorita Garcia.'
`Yes. Well, we got but one shot from the guard ship which passed
through the fore topsail, and two shots from the fort, one of which
knocked our starboard cat-head overboard and the other glanced along
the main yard, splintering a place six feet long and parting the earing.
The wind now blew stronger as we cleared the land, and the ship went
bowling along with every thing drawing at the rate of seven knots.
We rapidly left the harbor and its lights far behind us, for they kept
up an irregular hammering away from the fort for half an hour after we
were safely beyond gun shot, probably at the other vessels coming out
two of which only escaped. You remember the British frigate
`Dorris.'
`Commanded by Sir John Sinclair? She lay at anchor in the outer
roads, six miles from town.'
`Yes. Well I soon came up with her, and on account of the shoal
water had to run pretty close to her. I was hailed and gave my ship's
name and rounded to under her stern, and went on board. Sir John
whom I knew was in his birth but was called and after expressing his
surprise at seeing me at that time, invited me into his state room, where
I communicated to him what I had learned in relation to the blockade.
He was very indignant and swore if a single British merchant-man was
detained he would lay his frigate before the town and cannonade it.
I advised him, as there was yet four hours to daylight, to send in to
the Captain's of the merchant-men and give them orders to get out
the best way they could. I understood afterwards that he went
directly
on shorewaited on General D before he was up, and demanded
and obtained permits for the vessels to depart before the blockade
should be enforced. After taking a glass of wine with Sir John and
his `First,' I returned on board my ship. I found Senorita Garcia
awaiting me on the deck, very much alarmed at my delay, and fearful
of our being pursued. Her fears were not without foundation as I
very soon discovered. I had hardly filled away when my mate asked
me to look astern in the direction of the port. I took my glass and
saw plainly a large ship standing out and stretching after us. I could
not tell whether she was a large sized merchant-man or a ship of war.
I resolved, however, to act on the safest side, and gave orders to have
every thing set that would hold wind. I had not been running in this
way more than twenty minutes and was not more than two leagues
from the frigate Dorris, when the look out in the bows called out
suddenly
,
`sail ho.'
`Where away?' I asked.
`Dead ahead. There's two sir. The other a point off the lee bow.'
`I sprang forward, and standing on the heel of the bowsprit, saw
not a mile distant two vessels directly ahead. I well knew the river
was full of cruizers, and it was the part of discretion for me to believe
these to be such and act accordingly. I stood on for a few minutes,
till I was able to make them out to be two large ships, laying to within
a half a mile of each other, but whether vessels of war or not I could not
tell. But taking it for granted that merchant vessels would be likely
to be in a hurry in such dangerous waters and could have no business
laying to in a seven knot breeze, I made up my mind that they were
a part of old Admiral Lobo's fleet, which was in the river, though I
supposed lower down. So I took the bearing of both with the compass,
and giving my mate the helm I took my station on the heel of the
bowsprit
and directed him how to steer so as to give the suspicious fellows
an equal birth on either side of my ship.
`We were now within half a mile of them. The firing in the
direction
of the town had ceased, and the ship which had followed us out
was scarcely visible astern. I had, therdfore, nothing to fear save from
these two bull-dogs that lay in my path. Confident that they had no
more knowledge of my character than I of their's, I kept boldly on,
keeping a hair-line between them.
`Steady,' said I to the mate.
`Steady it is!' `Port a little!' `Port a little!' answered Brown
in his deep voice. `As you are!' `As we are.' `Starboard!'
`Starboard, 'tis!' I now made them out to be both ships of war.
One of them was a large frigate and the other a corvette. Both of them
were under their three topsails with the main laid to the mast, and with
jibs and spankers set. I now went aft and sent Senorita Garcia to her
state room, who left the deck with reluctance, wishing with noble
generosity
to share the danger, `that,' as she said, `menaced her deliverers!'
`Brown, you might as well sit down on the deck and steer,' said I,
`we are likely to have a shot if we don't heave to, which I have no
intention
of doing. I wouldn't like to have you made a head shorter.'
`Hadn't I better go below and keep the lady company, Sir?' said the
mate dryly. `I shall stand and steer, Sir!'
`Well, then have your own way.' I then sent below every man I did
not want on deck and took my place in the weather fore-rigging.
The ships were now nearly abeain, looking dark and sullen, and
showing
no signs of motion. Each was a quarter of a mile from me on
either
bow. I had every thing set, to royals and lower and top mast
studdensails, and looked as if I was making the best of my legs.
They doubtless thought so too; for all at once the frigate was
illumined
with a flash like lightning, and then came a report that told me they
had no intention of letting me go past without scraping an
acquaintance
with me. The gun was, I well knew for me to heave to. But I
only replied by giving an order to Brown to keep her `steady.' In a
moment afterwards came another gun with a sharp, hard report which
told me that it was shotted. The missile went between my main and
mizzen not ten feet from the deck, and the next instant I heard it
distinctly
plunge
pung!
into the ribs of the corvette opposite. The
frigate
evidently saw that her shot endangered her consort and waited
until we had passed out of range and then she opened her bow guns
smartly. The corvette followed her example and for a few minutes I
was exposed to as heavy a fire as I should ever wish to be. I owed
my escape from entire destruction, from being fairly blowed out of
water partly to the darkness of the night, the constant onward motion
of my vessel and the fact that they could at first only bring their bow
guns to bear upon me.
As it was I was hulled in half a dozen places; my main yard was
shot out of the slings and came down upon the deck, the lee quarter
boat was stove, and three of my men were wounded between decks,
not one being hurt on deck except Brown whose right arm was severely
bruised by a splinter; but he dryly said he could steer quite as well
with his left and would not quit the wheel. Running as we were at
full eight knots an hour I was soon beyond reach of their shot. The
corvette now ceased firing, and filling away began to make sail. In a
few minutes she was covered with clouds of canvass and came after us
barking from her bow-guns as savage as a mastiff. The frigate, after
firing a little longer and finding she did not disable us, imitated the
example of the corvette and also made sail. By this time I was half a
mile ahead, and had every way the advantage. Rapidly increasing the
distance between us, in an hour I was two mile ahead of them and at
daylight I had the pleasure of seeing them a league astern. I then set
the American colors and fired one only eighteen pounder gun to
windward
,
and bade them a good morning.
`I afterwards understood that Admiral Lobo had placed his fleet in
the river three days before with the intention of turning back all
vessels
even before the blockade should be enforced, and that there were
two vessels of the squadron, which amounted to sixty sail, stretching
from shore to shore where the river is about sixty-five miles wide, laying
to or anchored a mile or so apart. So you see I have fairly run the
guantlet of this illegal blockade.
`It was a bold act.'
`What could I do! Well, all that day I kept on, the frigate and
corvette giving up the chase; and about four in the afternoon I
discovered
a fleet of a dozen sail ahead. With my glass from the fore top I
made out the Buenos Ayrean colors, and knew they were friends!'
`It was admiral Browne with his squadron going down to attack
Lobo
,
was it not?'
`Yes. He had heard this morning as he lay below Ensanada, by a
Baltimore schooner that had run through the fleet, that Lobo had
brought his squadron up. Whereupon he resolved to drive him from
his position. He had but a single sloop of war, that had once been a
New York merchantman, four brigs, a half a dozen schooners and gun
boats. But Browne never counted guns or numbers. He possessed
that indomitable energy which conquers where it wills to. It was just
sun-set as we met his fleet. I came to and waited for the flag ship to
approach, when I was hailed by the admiral in person, told him what
had transpired. He requested me to come on board. He met me at
the gangway, and gave me a hearty shake of the hand and invited me
into his cabin. I then gave him an account of my escape and where I
had left the two Brazilians. He told me that he was on his way to break
the blockade, and felt confident that he should do it. Browne is an
Irishman and had once been an officer in the British navy. He is you
know, for he is still in commann in the La Plata, bold and full of
courage
.
He was then about fifty, and limped from a wound he had got in
battle. After a little further conversation I left him and he made sail,
and I did the same, standing up the river while he went down. You
have probably heard the result of his expedition. Te found the two
vessels that had cannonaded me at anchor, and laying his ship between
them before they could weigh he let them have it right and left,
dismasting
the covette, and hulling the frigate so badly that she had to put
into Monte Video, all the time kept afloat only by the pumps. His
other vessels acted with equal gallantry. The blockading force was
dispersed and several merchant vessels that were waiting below went up
with their freights.'
`I remember the account of the action. It was a brave affair. But
now your own adventures! What has become of Dona Garcia?'
`The next day I reached Ensanada, and put in there for safe harbor.
From this port to Buenos Ayres is but thirty miles. This I pulled in
my long boat, making a nice little apartment in the stern with awning
and mattresses for the Senorita Francisca. On the afternoon of the
third day after leaving Monte Video we came in sight of Buenos Ayres.
It has eight or nine domes as large as that of the State House in
Boston
,
crossing its cathedrals, and to every dome there is from three to
four stately towers. The buildings have flat roofs and battlements and
are ornamented with urns and turrets. Altogether it is one of the
finest cities in South America. As we pulled along the green shores
towards the city, Senorita Garcia grasped my hand and with tears of
eloquent gratitude thanked me for her life and happiness. Shall I tell
you,' said my friend slightly embarrassed and smiling, that I discovered
in her eyes and in the tones of her voice a deeper and tenderer
sentiment
than mere gratitude!'
`I should have anticipated this,' I said.
`I felt myself a happy fellow, when I discovered it; for I was already
in love with her as deeply as one could be with a pretty woman.'
`Ah, I see you have never told this story to your wife, my dear
Captain
.'
A significant, yet to me mysterious smile was his only reply; and he
then continued,
`We got opposite the town, but as the water was so shoal I was not
able to get within a quarter of a mile of the shore with the boat, and
run aground in two feet and a half of water. But there was no danger
of not getting to the land; for we had hardly struck the bottom when
a troop of the guacha hackmen, you so well know, mounted on their
little wiry horses, gallopped into the water and came splashing towards
us at full speed, their red pouchas flying in the wind, looking like a
troop of grotesque savages. They came near, shouting like devils, and
would have splashed the boat full of water if I had not presented a
pistol
to keep them off. I then called two of them, one of whom wanted
to mount me behind himself, and the Senorita Garcia on the horse
behind
his companion. But I objected to this arrangement. I made him
get behind his companion, and taking his horse mounted Francisca
behind
me, and in this style galloped ashore, followed by the whole troop.
At the landing I found a
volante
, and getting into it, we drove to the
dwelling of the happy girl.
I will pass over the joyful meetingthe grateful expressions of joy
with which I was overwhelmed. While I was in Buenos Ayres I
became an inmate of General Garcia's family. In fine, never was a
man better rewarded for an act of benevolence than I was. When at
length I left Buenos Ayres, it was with the impression that the
Senorita
Francisca was the most charming creature on earth!'
`And you the most insensible,' said I, `to leave behind one so
every
way worthy of you! I should like to see your wife, to know
who could surpass Senorita Francisca in your estimation. Upon my
word, I thought you were going to give me a regular love story with
a marriage at the end.'
The Captain smiled. The next moment we reached the cove near
his villa and landed. His wife was seen approaching with a little
girl of three. As she came nearer I uttered an exclamation of
surprise
and pleasure. It was Dona Garcia!
This sketch now ends in a few words. The captain had come into
possession of great wealth by his union with the beautiful Buenos
Ayrean, and retired to his native village, where he had erected the
handsome villa already described, and improved the ground, living in
a state of perfect happiness. He kept on the lake a beautiful little
brig of ten tons to remind him of his former pursuits, and for the
purpose
of making parties on the water.
`And why are you known only as the Captain? I asked the next
day as we were smoking in the verandah together.
Before he could reply, a servant announced a visiter, and I obtained
no answer, and to this moment I am in as much mystery as any of
my readers.
THE END.