2
THE
SOURCES OF THE HUDSON.
I.THE LAND OF LAKES.
The
Land of Lakes, as the region of country
which now forms the state of New York is termed
in one of our aboriginal dialects, could hardly be
characterized by a more appropriate name; as,
without
counting the inland seas which bound her
western
shores, or pausing to enumerate the willowy
ponds which freshen the verdure of her lowlands,
or these deep and cauldron-like pools which are so
singularly set here and there upon the summits of
her mountains, New York may still count a thousand
lakes within her borders. Upon some of these, fleets
might engage in battle; and their outlets, broken at
first by cataracts which Switzerland alone can rival,
soon swell into rivers, upon which the voyager may
safely glide to climes a thousand miles away; while
the Ohio, the Susquehannah, the Delaware, Hudson,
and St. Lawrence, whose tributaries all interlace
within a circle of a dozen miles in the heart of the
state, give him a choice between the frozen shores
of Labrador and the tropic seas of Mexico, in
selecting
the point where he would emerge upon the
Atlantic
main.
In connecting these wonderful links of internal
navigation, whose union an enlightened policy has
now effected, it is singular that in the various
topographical
reconnoissances
of the state the sources of
so important a stream as the Hudson should only
during the last year have been fully and satisfactorily
explored. One would think that, however the
subject
might be overlooked by the legislature, it could
never have escaped the Argus eyes of our
inquisitive
,
fidgety, and prying countrymen, until the year
of grace '37.
Everybody was, indeed, aware that the Hudson
rose among a group of mountains in the northern
part of the state of New York; and if you looked
upon the map, some of the lakes which formed its
head-waters seemed to be laid down with sufficient
particularity. Few, however, until the legislature
instituted the geological survey which is now in
progress
,
had any idea that the mountains upon which
this noble river rises, overtopped the Katsbergs and
the Alleghanies, and were among the loftiest in the
United States; or that the lakes from which it draws
its birth were equally remarkable for their prodigal
numbers, their picturesque variety, and their wild
and characteristic beauty.
Tourists steamed upon the estuary of the Hudson,
or loitered through the populous counties between
the cities of New York and Albany, and, ignorant or
unmindful that in ascending to the head of tide-water
they had not seen quite one-half of the lordly stream,
discussed its claims to consideration with an amiable
familiarity, and, comparing its scenery with that of
other celebrated rivers, they settled its whole
character
after a most summary fashion.
The worthy Knickerbockers were, therefore, not a
little surprised when they learned from the first
official
report of the surveying corps that their famous
river was fed by mountain snows for ten months in
the year;
[1]
[1]
Snow remained on the high peak of the Adirondacks until the
17th of July, and appeared again on the 11th of September, 1837.
and that there were a dozen cascades
about its head-waters, to which Glen's Falls, however
endeared to association by the genius of Cooper, must
hereafter yield in romantic interest and attraction.
Many were disposed at once to visit the sources of
the Hudson; and, having in very early youth been
much in the then savage district where some of the
northern branches take their rise, the writer was so
eager to penetrate farther into the same region, and
behold
the real head of the river, that he found himself
rambling among the Adirondack Mountains of Essex
county within a few days after the state geologist had
pronounced upon it as now distinctly ascertained.
The Hudson is formed by three mountain torrents,
which unite within a few miles of their birth-place.
The source of the highest fork is proved, by
observation
,
to be nearly 3000 feet above tide-water. It
rises in an open mountain meadow, with two adjacent
mountains swelling in easy slopes from its sides.
There is a still larger fountain-head west of this, in
the same vicinity, rising in a singular gorge called
The Pass of the Adirondack Mountains: while
the northernmost source is in Lake Colden, or rather
Avalanche Lake; a small mountain tarn separated
from the former by heavy earth-slides from the
adjacent
mountain summits, whose granite rocks glitter
where the soil and trees have been swept down their
denuded sides. The elevation of these two lakes,
which have a fall of eighty feet between them, is
between 2900 and 3000 feet above the ocean; being
undoubtedly the highest lakes in the United States
of America.
[2]
[2]
Emmon's ReportRedfield, &c.
II.THE EXCURSION.
It
was early in September when, accompanied
by a friendthe companion of more than one
pleasant
rambleI started upon the brief, but novel, tour.
The winter sets in so early in the high mountain
region for which we were bound, that, deeming we
had no time to lose, we struck for it by the nearest
route; and, instead of following the various windings
of the riverwhich offer a delicious summer
excursion
for the man of leisurewe left tide-water at
Lansingburgh, and, passing eastward of Lake George,
went directly north by the way of Lake Champlain.
Embarking upon this lake at Whitehall, a few
hours brought our steamer abreast of Port Henry, a
small village which heaves in sight immediately after
passing the crumbling fortifications of Crown Point.
A pretty cascade tumbles from the rocks near the
landing, and is the first thing that strikes you when
approaching the shore. Several wooded hills rise
in succession behind it, and give a picturesque
appearance
2*
to a straggling hamlet along their base.
Our route hence was due westward; and, the evening
being fine, we engaged a conveyance to carry us on
at once some twenty miles, through an almost
unbroken
forest, into the interior.
The autumnal moon was shining brightly as we
commenced ascending the hills in the rear of Port
Henry, rising continually until we reached the village
of Moriah, situated about three miles from the lake.
The rearward view, in the meantime, was
exceedingly
fine. Indeed, I do not hesitate to say that
Lake Champlain, as seen from those hills, presents
one of the very finest lake views in the United States.
Broad enough for majestic effect, yet not too broad
for the picturesque character, which, I think, is
worth everything else in scenery, the placid sheet
of the lake lay, silvered by the moonbeams, below us.
The promontory of Port Henry, with a headland of
rival rock and forest opposite, nearly locked it upon
the north. On the south the narrow peninsula of
Crown Point, projecting longitudinally several miles
into the lake, divided it into two friths, which
gradually
disappeared amid hill and forest, far in the
distance
;
while immediately in front, though far beyond
the broad, bright expanse of water, a dozen spurs of
the Green Mountains, and a dozen main peaks
beyond
them, loomed in the dewy atmosphere of
evening
,
like some vast Alpine chain.
It was after midnight when we stopped at a log
cabin about twenty miles from the lake. The
hospitable
settler, although his house was already filled
with neighbours, who had come in to help him with
his harvest, seemed to take very kindly the being
roused from his slumbers at that late hour, to
accommodate
us. A log cabin and a pair of
saddle-bags
are never so full but that room can be found for
something more, and we were soon packed beneath
the same roof with the rest.
Let me here initiate the reader into a mode of
travelling which is much in fashion about the sources
of the Hudson. Did he ever see a teamster riding
upon a buckboard? a stout, springy plank, laid upon
the bare bolsters of a wagon! Well, now, just
spread a buffalo-skin upon that buckboard, and rig
the iron chain from the fore and aft stakes, so as to
form a stirrup for your feet, and you have the best
sort of carriage that can be contrived for rough roads.
Upon such a convenience our luggage was lashed
about six o'clock the next morning; and the active
little settler, our host of the log cabin, taking his axe
in hand, to remove any fallen tree that might obstruct
our road through the woods, whistled to his dog,
Buck, jumped on the board beside us, cracked his
whip, and off we went into the forest. Our driver
was a right merry, stout-hearted, dashing little
fellow
:
he had been brought up in the Schroon
country, as he called it, and had cleared every acre
upon his thriving farm with his own hand; and,
after roughing it for several years in his log cabin,
was now prepared to build a snug frame-house upon
his own ground. Our road was the worst that I ever
saw, except a
turnpike
through the bed of a
mountain
torrent, which I once travelled in Eastern
Kentucky
.
But stony declivities, stumps, quagmires,
or fallen trees had no terrors for our little Schroon
hero; and his lean, but mettlesome, horses dashed
through everything. Such was the road, however,
that, as it slammed about among trees and logs, the
motion of our vehicle was as much lateral as
forward
,
and we were several hours in making the
first eight miles.
Accomplishing this stage at last, however, we
came to an opening in the forest, where, upon the
bank of a lake, and in the midst of a clearing of
about a hundred acres, stood the log cabin of a
settler
,
at which we stopped to dine. The lake, or pond,
as the people call it, was a limpid pool upon the top
of a mountain, or rather an immense globular hill,
flattened at top like an old-fashioned goblet, and
surrounded with mountain peaks from which it stood
wholly isolated.
Upon the outlet of this lake was a saw-mill; and
we here saw a model of a wooden railroad, contrived
by a forester who has never seen a specimen of
either, but whose ingenuity has found a field for its
exercise, even in the depths of the woods.
After refreshing ourselves and our horses at this
place, we started again, and by nightfall
accomplished
twenty-three miles more, the whole distance
being through a continuous forest, with not a single
house by the way.
About twilight we emerged from the forest, at the
base of a lofty, cleared, and grassy hill, with a log
cabin on the summit, prettily situated in front of a
grove of tall maples, called, in the language of the
country, a sugar bush. This grassy domainfor
the whole clearing of several hundred acres
produced
hay onlyhad a most singular effect in the
bosom of a dark forest, surrounded, as it was, upon
every side by mountains, which lapped each other
as far as the eye could reach.
This farmif so neglected a tract could be thus
characterizedpresented a scene of solitude and
desertion not uncommon in this part of the state.
It had been cleared some ten or fifteen years since;
but the original settler, seized with the emigrating
fever which carries so many from our woodland
region to the prairies of the far-west, had long
deserted
his mountain home: and the place had been so
neglected until the present season, that it was in
danger of relapsing into the half savage and almost
irreclaimable state of what, in the language of the
country, is called a dead clearing. That is, when
thickets and briers so overrun the land, and spread
their roots and tendrils through the soil, that they
become more difficult to eradicate than the original
forest growth, which yields at once to the axe of the
woodman.
The new owners of the property, however, had
now sent in some labourers from a more flourishing
settlement, to harvest the wild hay, the native grasses
of these mountains being peculiarly fine; and the
overseer of the proprietors being presenta frank,
intelligent yeoman, to whom we had a letter from his
employersour reception was as hearty and
hospitable
as he could make it with the rude appliances
about him. There was no womankind about the
establishment; and, after eating a hearty supper of
fried pork and potatoes, cooked by a hunter, of whom
I may speak hereafter, we made a bed of fresh hay
in a corner, and, stretching a buffalo-skin over, by
way of ticking, threw ourselves down and slept with
a soundness that would have been commendable in
either of those celebrated disciples of Morpheus,
the seven sleepers.
During the last day's drive we had crossed many
of the streams which form the head-waters of the
Hudson; and on the morrow we for the first time
saw one of the most beautiful of the lakes which
form its sources. Hereafter, therefore, I shall copy
the scenes that came under my observation as taken
down separately in my note-book upon the spot.
III.LAKE SANDFORD.
Striking
the outlet of Lake Sandford where it
flows through a forest of dark cedars, our luggage
was shifted from the buckboard, and transferred, with
ourselves, to a canoe: we embarked at the foot of a
steep hill, but our course lay for some time through
low, swampy ground, where the canoe could
sometimes
with difficulty find a deep-enough channel
through the sedge and water-lilies that by turns
covered the surface. This amphibious track,
however
,
soon disappeared where the hills again coming
down to the edge of the stream confined and
deepened
its current; and now, after a pull of a few
hundred yards through a straight narrow passage,
we launched out upon the bosom of one of those
beautiful lakes with which this region abounds. Not
a sign of a house or a clearing, nor any mark of the
handiwork of man, was to be seen anywhere, save in
the rude shallop that bore us. The morning was
still and lowering. There was not breeze enough
to lift the fog from the mountains round. Every
rock and tree was reflected, with each leaf and wild
flower however minute, in the glassy surface; the
islands among which we wound our course floated
double; the hermit-like loon that glanced from
beneath
their embowering shelter, and sent his wild
cry with a dozen echoes far among the hills, was
the only object that moved or gave a sound of life
across the waters.
We landed upon one islet, and I paused to observe
what I have never been wearied with studyingthe
manner in which nature effects her work of clothing
the barren crags with soil.
Here, on this rocky islet, some fifty feet in
diameter
,
the whole process may be seenthe first
covering
of moss and lichens; the larger growth of the
same; the light black soil that is formed from their
decay; the taller plants that again, in succession,
are doomed to die and be decomposed, and afford
earthy nourishment to the first hardy forest growth;
still, in its turn, to be succeeded by softer woods,
may all be traced upon Inch-Hamish.
On this little spot too, where you can run a stick
some three feet down, through the primitive mosses
which form the first covering of the rock, you have
also the towering spruce, the ragged arbor-vit, and
several other hardy evergreen varieties; while a
single delicate white ash has put forth its deciduous
leaves, and hung its scarlet berries over the lake.
An accomplished botanist has, I am told, found
upward
of a hundred varieties of plants and trees upon
this islet, which is less than an acre in extent.
Cruising leisurely up the lake in this way
pausing
ever and anon to admire the change of prospect
as we wound round some green headland, or lying
upon our oars while trying the fine echoes which the
mountains gave back to our voices whenever our
course lay far from the marginit was afternoon
before
we reached the point for debarking, which we
attained by piercing deep within a forest that
over-shadows
the inlet. Our canoe left the cheerful lake,
and, floating beneath the boughs of ancient trees that
sometimes interlaced above our heads, startled the
trout from the black pools which bathed their roots,
and grated at last upon a gravelly bank, where it was
drawn up and secured.
Not far from this point a portage of a few hundred
yards enables the hunter to launch again upon Lake
Henderson, and strike the first link in a chain of
lakes which, with a few more brief portages, will float
his shallop all the way to the St. Lawrence.
IV.M`INTYRE.
The
portage to Lake Henderson is occasioned by
rapids which extend for about half a mile between
that water and Lake Sandford. They run over a
bed of iron ore which ribs the sides of two mountains
that overhang the valley through which the Hudson
flows from one lake into the other.
This little valley, which is already cleared and
under partial cultivation, is the site of a projected
manufacturing town; and here we made our
head-quarters
at a comfortable farm-house. We were
inducted into them by the overseer already
mentioned
,
and, under his cordial auspices, my friend and
myself for some days enjoyed the hospitality of the
proprietors of the Adirondack iron-works. The
situation, abounding, as it does, in excellent iron ore,
and affording a dozen mill sites, is admirably
adapted
for a manufacturing town, and might form the site
of one of the most romantic villages in the Union.
The newness of the improvements, and the large
clearings, marked only by stumps, give the place,
as yet, a somewhat desolate appearance: care and
capital will, however, soon remedy this; and when
the legislature does justice to this much-neglected
portion of the state, and opens a good road or canal
along the beautiful lakes with which it abounds,
M`Intyre will become one of the most favourite
places of resort near the sources of the Hudson.
Its present loneliness and seclusion, however,
would render M`Intyre not less pleasing to some
tastes; while, though the hand of improvement may
soon make the district in which it lies more
accessible
than it now is, and add some features of
cultivation
to the adjacent scenery, it can never soften its
wildness. In fact, a partial clearing of the country
will, in this region, only serve to heighten the bold
features of the landscape. For the trees whose
3
foliage now softens the sharper outlines of the
mountains
,
and curtains many a tall crag and deep fell
from view, will, when swept away, reveal scenes of
desolate grandeur, which no culture can rob of their
sternness. In some places the hunters' fires have
already bared the pinnacles of some of these granite
mountains: and earth-slides, caused by frequent
rains, or slight earthquakes, which still prevail in this
region, strip them here and there of their verdurous
vesture, leaving only parapets of naked rock
frowning
upon the deep forests below them.
V.AN INKLING OF AN EARTHQUAKE.
Apropos
to earthquakes, we had an inkling of one
on the first night of our arrival at M`Intyre. The
shock, if so slight a tremour may be thus
characterized
,
took place about midnight; and, though it woke
me, I deemed it at the time the effect of fancy, until
I compared notes in the morning with my
fellow-traveller
,
who, having experienced the sensation
while in Caraccas some years since, could readily
recognise it now. We occupied two rooms
communicating
with each other; the outer one, where
my friend had his bed, opened upon the clearing.
The door of this latter chamber, being badly hung,
shut with great difficulty, and was generally left ajar;
but on this occasion, the night being cold and frosty,
I too particular pains to secure itdriving it to by
planting my foot against it, and forcing the latch
completely
home. We retired early that night, and the
fatigue of travelling made our sleep particularly
sound, when suddenly, about an hour after midnight,
both of us were awakened at the same moment, and,
notwithstanding both were struck by the
circumstance
,
the cause did not occur to us till the morning;
though our surprise was expressed after the wonted
manner of sleepy men when startled from their
slumbers.
Hallo!
Hallo!
What's that?
Are you up?
No! are you?
My bed shakes!
It's that infernal hound; he's pushed my door
wide open, and I must get up and shut it.
There's no dog here, in my room.
The rascal's cleared out, then. Confound the
door, I can't get it close again.
How's the night?
Clear and starry, and still as one in the tropics,
but devilish cold.
With these words, my friend commenced
jamming
at the door, secured it anew, jumped into bed
again, and we were soon after dreaming as before.
No noise accompanied this tremour; but they tell
us here that a sound like that of a heavy wagon
upon a frozen road is often heard among these
mountains
,
where there are no roads which a wagon can
traverse. I need hardly add that no dog could have
opened the door which it cost me so much trouble
to shut; nor, in fact, would the well-trained hound
have ventured upon leaving his quarters to disturb
ours.
VI.AN UNFINISHED COUNTRY.
Admitting
the existence of occasional slight
earthquakes in this region, I am not enough of a
naturalist to surmise what may be their effect upon
the geological features of the country. They seem,
however, among other things, to indicate the
unfinished
state of the country
, if I may so express
myself
.
They are among the agents of nature, still at work
in completing a portion of the world hardly yet ready
to pass from her hands into those of man. The
separation of the water from the land, which classic
cosmogonists tell us followed the birth of light, in
evolving the earth from chaos, is not here completed
yet. There are lakes on the tops of the
mountains
,
and swamps among wildernesses of rocks,
which are yet to be drained by other means than the
thick exhalations which carry them into the
atmosphere
,
or the dripping mosses through which they
ooze into the valleys, where day by day the new soil
for future use accumulates.
Had our New York Indians, who now find it so
difficult to hold on to their level and fertile lands in
the western part of the state, but located their
reservations among these mountains, they might have
escaped the cupidity of the whites for centuries yet
to come, and have hunted the deer, the moose, and
the bear, or trapped for the martin, the sable, and the
ermine, all of which still abound here, without
molestation
,
save from the occasional white hunter that
might intrude upon their grounds when chasing the
wolf or panther from the settled regions to the east
and west of them. There are settlements upon some
of these lakes which were commenced more than
thirty years since, and which can now boast of but
two or three families as residents, and these are
isolated
from the rest of the world, with twenty miles
of unbroken forest between them and more
prosperous
hamlets. But the immense beds of iron ore and
other minerals recently discovered, with the increased
demand for timber in our Atlantic cities, and of
charcoal
to work the mines here, must now bring the
country into general notice, and hasten its settlement.
The demolition of the pine forests, and the
conversion
of less valuable wood into charcoal, will rapidly
clear the country, and convert the lumber-men and
charcoal-burners into farmers; while the old race of
hunters already begin to find a new employment in
acting as guides to the owners of lands, and
projecting
roads for them through districts where an ordinary
surveyor could hardly be paid for the exercise of his
profession. One of these hunters, a sturdy original,
by the name of Harvey Holt, a redoubtable hunter
and celebrated axe-man, has already marked out a
road for some of the large landed proprietors through
the very heart of the region. He is said to have
run his lines with the skill and accuracy of an
accomplished engineer; and, before another year
elapses, the road will probably be opened.
3*
Other foresters, again, finding their ancient haunts
thus invaded by the pioneers of improvement, have
fled to wilds beyond the Wisconsan; and a friend
who hunted lately upon a tract a little to the
north-west
of this, in Hamilton county, told me that he
heard a veteran hunter of seventy complaining
bitterly
that he was too old to move, now that the
settlers
had pushed within thirty miles of him. It seems
strange to find so wild a district in one of the old
thirteeners, the empire state of New York. But
the great western canal, in facilitating emigration to
the new states, has retarded the improvement of this
region for at least one generation, in luring off the
young men as fast as they become of an age to choose
a home for themselves. Some, however, like the
mountaineer who is the subject of the following
sketch, are so attached to the woods and streams of
their native hills, that no inducement could lure them
to the prairies.
VII.A MOUNTAINEER OF THE HUDSON.
I WAS lately looking over Cooper's pioneers,
and, re-reading it after the lapse of years, found
myself as much delighted as ever with the best
character
he ever drewThe Leather-stocking. If
it did not involve an anachronism, I could swear that
Cooper took the character of Natty Bumpo from my
mountaineer friend, John Cheney. The same silent,
simple, deep love of the woods; the same gentleness
and benevolence of feeling toward all who love his
craft; the same unobtrusive kindness toward all
others; and, lastly, the same shrewdness as a
woodman
,
and gamesomeness of spirit as a hunter, are
common to both; and each, while perhaps more
efficient, are wholly unlike the dashing
swash-buckler
of the far-west, the reckless ranger of the
prairies. In appearance, dress, language, and
manner
those two varieties of the
genus venator
are
totally
different. Mr. Irving, in his account of Captain
Bonneville's expedition, has given the best
description
of the latter; but, though the pen of Cooper
has made the former immortal, I think his genius
might gather some new touches from John Cheney,
Worthy John! if he chances to see himself thus
drawn at full length, I hope he will not take it amiss.
I had heard of some of his feats before coming into
this region, and expected of course to see one of
those roystering, cavorting, rifle-shirted blades
that I have seen upon our western frontier, and was
at first not a little disappointed when a slight-looking
man of about seven-and-thirty, dressed like a plain
countryman, and of a peculiarly quiet, simple
manner
,
was introduced to me as the doughty slayer of
bears and panthers; a man that lived winter and
summer three-fourths of the time in the woods, and
a real
bon fide
hunter by profession. Nay, there
struck me as being something of the ridiculous about
his character when I saw that this formidable Nimrod
carried with him, as his only weapons and insignia
of his art,
a pistol
and
a jack-knife!
But when,
at my laughing at such toys, I was told by others of
the savage encounters which John, assisted by his
dog, and aided by these alone, had undertaken
successfully
not
to mention the number of deer which
he sent every winter to marketmy respect for his
hunting-tools was mightily increased, and a week in
the woods with him sufficed to extend that respect
to himself.
We were on a fishing excursion one day on a lake
near M`Intyre; and, after storing our canoe with a
good supply of brook and lake trout, we weighed
anchor, and pulled for a romantic promontory,
commanding
a delicious prospect, where we lay under
the trees for hours, enjoying our pic-nic, and
listening
to hunters' stories. The air being cool and
bracing, did not make the fire by which we cooked
our dinner unacceptable. Our cloaks were stretched
beneath a clump of cedars, and, after taking a plunge
into the lake, which I was glad to make as brief as
possible, I lay by the fire, watching the blue smoke
curl up among the trees, or listening to my
fellow-traveller
as he discoursed curiously with John about
his cooking, or plied him from time to time with
questions that elicited some anecdotes of wild-wood
sports, of which my quiet friend has been no feeble
practiser himself.
Well! said Cheney, after he had cooked the
trout to a turn, and placed a plump, red, juicy fellow
upon a clean cedar chip before each of us, with an
accompaniment of roast potatoes and capital wheaten
bread; now, isn't this better than taking your
dinner
shut up in a close room?
Certainly, John, said I. A man ought never
to go into a house, except he is ill, and wishes to use
it for a hospital.
Well, now, I don't know whether you are in
airnest in saying that, but that's jist my way of
thinking
.
Twice I have given up hunting, and taken to
a farm: but I always get sick after living long in
housen. I don't sleep well in them; and sometimes
when I go to see my friends, not wishing to seem
particular-like, I jist let them go quietly to bed, and
then slip out of a window with my blanket, and get
a good nap under a tree in the open air. A man
wants nothing but a tree above him to keep off the
dew, and make him feel kind of home-like, and then
he can enjoy a raal sleep.
In Tanner's narrative, that singular character
makes nearly the same remark, when speaking of
the usages which annoyed him while trying to
abandon
the habits of a free hunter, and conform to the
customs of civilized life.
But are you never disturbed by any wild animal
when sleeping thus without a fire or a camp? one
of us asked.
Well, I remember once being wakened by a
creetur. The dumb thing was standing right over
me, looking into my face. It was so dark that
neither
of us, I suppose, could see what the other was:
but he was more frightened than I was; for, when I
raised myself a little, he ran off so fast that I couldn't
make out what he was; and seeing it was so dark
that to follow him would be of no account, I laid
down again and slept till morning, without his
disturbing
me again.
Suppose it had been a bear?
Well, a bear isn't exactly the varmint to buckle
with so off-hand; though lying on your back is about
as good a way as any to receive him, if your knife
be long and sharp; but afore now I've treed a bear
at nightfall, and, sitting by the root of the tree until
he should come down, have fallen asleep, from being
too tired to keep good watch, and let the fellow
escape
before morning; but if I had such luck as to
have a good fat bear come to me in that way, I would
never let him go as that man did down at Ti.
I asked the story of this unworthy follower of
the chase at
Ti
, into which familiar monosyllable
Cheney abbreviated the celebrated name of
Ticonderoga
,
and give it here to the reader as nearly as
possible in worthy John's own words.
VIII.A BEAR STORY.
I DON'T want to say anything against any man;
but some people, till they get lost in them, seem to
think a knowledge of the woods a mighty small
matter; but this is neither here nor there though,
but it's a fact that, however big they may talk at
home, folks that ain't used to the woods sometimes
get mightily flurried when they meet with these wild
animals. There now's a man in the next town who
went out after moose, and, when he heard one
trotting
along the same trail he was travelling, squatted
behind a stump to shoot him; but the fellow, having
never seen a moose, had no idea of the sort of game
he was after; and when a great bull six-year-old,
bigger than a horse, with horns that looked for all
creation as if they never could pass between the
trees of these woods, came crashing the branches
with his broad hoofs, the man kinder shrunk behind
a log, and says he to the moose, `If you'll only let
me alone, I'll let you alone.'
Now, this other fellow in Ti only knew about
bears as he had heard us trappers speak of them, as
carrying a half a dozen balls in their bodies, and
sometimes killing our dogs for us when we go to take
them out of our traps, after being held there by the
paw, starving, you don't know how many days.
Well, this man was on a lake watching in his boat
for deer, when, hearing a plunge and a splash, he
pulls round an island, and finds a great she-bear
swimming straight across the lake. Being a good
fellow with his oars, he pulls at once to cut off the
bear from the opposite shore, which made the creetur
change her course, and try and swim round the boat.
The man, however, again turned her, and the bear
once more altered her course, but still kept for the
same shore to which she had been steering. Gathering
spunk now, the man, in turning the third time, rowed
nearer to the beast, expecting in this way to drive
her back a little, so as to keep the bear out in the
middle of the lake until some one could come to help
him. But when the starn of the boat, in swinging
round, came near the bear, she put her paws upon
it, and raised herself right into the boat, and there
she sat on eend, looking the man in the face jist as
quiet, now, as a bear could look. Well, the man,
if he'd only know'd where to hit a bear, might have
brought one of his oars down on the back of her
skull jist as easy as say so; and tough ash is better
than a rifle-ball with these varmint. But he didn't
like that kind o' quiet look the creetur gave him;
and there they sat, the bear looking at the man, and
the man looking at the bear. At last, when he got
over his fright a little, he began to move his oars
slowly, in order to creep toward the shore from which
the bear had started; but the creetur wouldn't allow
this; she moved from her seat a little toward the
man, and showed her teeth in a way he didn't like;
but as soon as the man turned the boat, the bear took
her old place again, and sat there jist as contented as
you please; so the man pulled for the shore to which
the bear had been swimming, watching the bear's
face all the while. And would you believe it, now,
that bear made him back his boat in toward a rock,
upon which the creetur stepped from the starn, and,
turning round, gave the man a growl for his pains
afore she walked off into the woods. Tormented
lightning! to be bullied so by a bear! Why, I
would have died upon the spot afore that bear should
have left the boat without our trying which was the
best of us.
IX.LAKE HENDERSON.
Leaving
the cleared fields of M`Intyre one
morning
under the guidance of John Cheney, we struck
the arm of a lake entirely surrounded by primitive
forest, and locked up in mountains wooded to the
summit. The frith upon which we embarked was
the outlet of Lake Henderson; and, emerging from
its shadowy embrace as we laid our course up the
lake, we soon shot out upon the bosom of that
beautiful
water.
The form of the lake, for want of a better simile,
I can only compare to that most respectable ancient
head-gear, a three-cornered hat a little knocked out
of shape. Its several friths, too, strike in among the
mountains with the same sort of devil-may-care air
that a fiercely-cocked beaver did whilome put on.
Yet so completely do the dense woods around soften
away all the harder lines of the landscape, that the
general effect is that of beauty rather than
savageness
in the picture. We pulled for about two miles
through this lake, where at each boat's length some
new fold of mountain scenery was unfurled upon our
left, while the two peaks of the Indian Pass and the
Panther Gap kept their bold heights continually in
view upon our right. We landed upon the margin
of a heavy swamp, near the inlet of the lake, floating
some twenty yards within the forest, and mooring
our boat at last among ancient trees, whose long
moss sometimes swept the water.
We were bound for The Indian Pass, one of
the most savage and stupendous among the many
wild and imposing scenes at the sources of the
Hudson
.
It has been visited, I believe, by few, except
the hunters`of these mountains; but it must at some
day become a favourite resort with the lovers of the
picturesque. It is a tremendous ravine, cloven
through the summit of a mountain, presenting the
finest piece of rock scenery I ever behelda cradle
worthy of the infant Hudson.
4
Many of the difficulties in exploring this scene
will probably vanish in a few years; but as the
wildness of the approach now adds not a little to its
majesty, I can best convey the true character of the
place by leading the reader thither in the mode I
reached it.
X.A ROUGH TRAMP.
The
walk to the Indian Pass is difficult enough
at any time; but soon after leaving our boat at the
inlet of Lake Henderson, the morning, which had
hitherto been cloudy, broke into a cold rain, which,
wetting our clothes through, increased the weight
that we had to drag through a primitive swamp;
where each step was upon some slippery log,
affording
a precarious foothold, some decayed tree, into
whose spongy body you would sink knee-deep, or
upon quaking mosses, that threatened to swallow one
up entirely. Here, however, while wading through
the frequent pools, or stumbling over the fallen boughs
which centuries had accumulated, I would often
pause to admire some gigantic pine, which, drawing
vigour from the dankness and decay around it, threw
its enormous column into the air, towering a hundred
feet above hemlocks and cedars near, which would
themselves seem forest giants when planted beside
the modern growth of our Atlantic border.
After a mile of such walking, the ground began
to rise, and, instead of wading through pools, we
now crossed several brisk streams, which murmured
among the rocks as their pellucid waters ran to join
the main inlet of the lake. Our path lay next along
the border of this inlet, which is one of the chief
branches of the Hudson. Sometimes we would
ascend for several hundred yards among mossy
rocks, thickets of white cedar, and an undergrowth
of juniper; then we would come to a sort of plateau
of swampy land, overgrown with moose maple, or
tangled with fern and interspersed with cranberry
bogs. Another slope of rocky ground, seamed with
numerous rills, that gurgled beneath the roots of
hoary birches or amid thickets of young maple,
succeeded; while again and again we crossed and
recrossed the main stream, upon fallen logs,
generally
lying either immediately upon or below one of
the numerous cascades which diversify the river.
Now we scaled some rocky hill-side, and heard the
torrent roaring far beneath us; and now we found a
narrow passage-way between its border and the
impending
cliffs.
In the meantime, though winding up and down
continually, we were in the main ascending gradually
to a lofty elevation. The number of the swamps
were diminished, the frequent rills flashed more
rapidly amid the loose boulders of rock, which soon
began to cover the soil entirely; while the boulders
themselves became lofty hillocks of solid stone,
covered with moss, and sustaining a vigorous growth
of the birch, the mountain ash, or clumps of the
hardy white cedar upon their summits.
Wet, bruised, and weary, we sat down beneath
one of those enormous masses of displaced rock
after scaling a difficult ascent, and purposed to
encamp
there for the night; but, looking up through
an opening in the trees, we saw the cliffs of the
Indian Pass almost immediately above us. They
were swathed in mist, and the heavy scud, impelled
by the wind which drew strongly through the gap,
drifted past the gray precipice, and made the wall
look as if in motion to crush us when just entering
the jaws of the ravine.
But there were still two hours of daylight left;
and, though the mile that was yet to be traversed
before we gained the centre of the pass, was the
most arduous part of the whole route, we again
commenced the ascent. It took the whole two hours
to accomplish this mile; but as the glen narrowed,
our farther progress was animated by a new object
of interest, in the shape of a fresh moose track; and
we followed the trail until it broke off abruptly in a
rocky gorge, wilder than any I had ever yet beheld.
XI.  A WILD GORGE.
It
was new to me to find the footprints of so large
an animal among rocks that seemed only accessible
to a goat. We saw several places where the moose
had slipped upon the thin and slimy soil, or dashed
the moss from the crags with his hoofs as he leaped
a chasm. Following on the trail with caution, our
guide held himself in readiness to shoot, confident
that we must soon overtake our noble quarry, as no
animal of the kind could possibly make his way
completely
through the defile; but we soon came to a
passage among the rocks, where the discreet brute,
perceiving that there was but one way of returning
if he ascended higher, had, after making a slight
attempt
to force himself through, struck into a lateral
ravine, and sought some other path down the
mountain
.
I must adopt a homely similitude to give the
reader an idea of the size of the rocks and their
confused appearance in this part of the defile: he
may imagine, though, loose boulders of solid rock,
the size of tall city dwelling-houses, hurled from a
mountain summit into a chasm a thousand feet in
depth, lying upon each other as if they had fallen
but yesterday; each so detached from each that it
is only their weight which seems to prevent them
from rolling farther down the defile: their corners
meeting in angles that defy the mathematician to
describe, and forming caverns and labyrinthine
passages
beneath them that no draughtsman could
delineate
.
The position of these tremendous crags
seems so recent and precarious, that, were it not
for other indications around them, you would almost
fear that your footsteps might topple over the
gigantic
masses, and renew an onward motion that was
but now arrested. But Time has stamped the date
of ages in other language upon their brows. Their
tops are thatched with lichens that must be the
growth of centuries; ancient trees are perched upon
their pinnacles, and enormous twisted roots, which
form a network over the chasms between them, and
save your limbs from destruction when stepping over
4*
the treacherous moss that hide these black abysses,
prove that the graceful hand of nature has been
here at work for ages in veiling over the ruin she has
wrought in some one moment of violence.
But we are now in the bosom of the pass, and the
shadows of night are concealing the awful precipice
which forms the background of the picture. We
have climbed the last ascent, more steep than all the
rest, and here, in a clump of birches and balsam firs,
surrounded by cliffs and precipices on every side, is
our place to bivouac for the night.
XII.  CAMPING OUT.
It
ain't so bad a place for camping out, said
John Cheney, as he rose from slaking his thirst at
a slender rill which trickled from beneath the
roots of a rifted cedar over which he leanedit
ain't so bad a place to camp, if it didn't rain so like
all natur. I wouldn't mind the rain much nother,
if we had a good shantee; but you see the birch bark
won't run at this season, and it's pretty hard to make
a water-proof thatch, unless you have hemlock
boughs: hows'ever, gentlemen, I'll do the best by
ye.
And so he did! Honest John Cheney, thou art
at once as stanch a hunter, and as true and gentle a
practiser of woodcraft as ever roamed the broad
forest; and beshrew me when I forget thy services
that night in the Indian Pass.
The frame of a wigwam used by some former party
was still standing, and Cheney went to work
industriously
tying poles across it with withes of yellow
birch, and thatching the roof and sides with boughs
of balsam fir. Having but one axe with us, my friend
and myself were, in the meantime, unemployed; and
nothing could be more disconsolate than our
situation
as we stood dripping in the cold rain, and
thrashing
our arms like hackney-coachmen, to keep the
blood in circulation. My companion, indeed, was
in a much worse condition than myself. He had
been indisposed when he started upon the expedition,
and was now so hoarse that I could scarcely hear
him speak amid the gusts of wind which swept
through the ravine. We both shivered as if in an
ague, but to his troubles a fever was soon
superadded
.
We made repeated attempts to strike a fire,
but our friction matches would not ignite; and
when we had recourse to flint and steel, everything
was so damp around us that fire would not kindle.
John began to look exceedingly anxious.
Now, if we only had a little daylight left, I would
make some shackleberry-tea for you; but it will
never do to get sick here, for if this storm prove a
north-easter, God only knows whether all of us may
ever get away from this notch again. I guess I had
better leave the camp as it is, and first make a fire
for you.
Saying this, Cheney shouldered his axe, and
striding
off a few yards, he felled a dead tree, split it open,
and took some dry chips from the heart. I then
spread my cloak over the spot where he laid them
to keep off the rain, and, stooping under it, he soon
kindled a blaze, which we employed ourselves in
feeding until the camp was completed. And
now came the task of laying in a supply of fuel for
the night. This the woodman effected by himself
with an expedition that was marvellous. Measuring
three or four trees with his eye, to see that they
would fall near the fire without touching our
wigwam
,
he attacked them with his axe, felled, and
chopped them into logs, and made his wood-pile in
less time than could a city sawyer, who had all his
timber carted to hand. Blankets were then produced
from a pack which he had carried on his back; and
these, when stretched over a carpeting of leaves and
branches, would have made a comfortable bed, if the
latter had not been saturated with rain. Matters,
however, seemed to assume a comfortable aspect,
as we now sat under the shade of boughs, drying
our clothes by the fire; while John busied himself
in broiling some bacon which we had brought with
us. But our troubles had only yet begun; and I
must indulge in some details of a night in the woods,
for the benefit of gentlemen who sit at home at
ease.
XIII.A NIGHT IN THE WOODS.
Our
camp, which was nothing more than a shed
of boughs open on the side toward the fire, promised
a sufficient protection against the rain so long as the
wind should blow from the right quarter; and an
out-lying
deer-stalker might have been content with our
means and appliances for comfort during the night.
Cheney, indeed, seemed perfectly satisfied as he
watched the savoury slices which were to form our
supper, steaming up from the coals.
Well, said the woodsman, you see there's
no place but what, if a man bestirs himself to do his
best, he may find some comfort in it. Now, many's
the time that I have been in the woods on a worse
night than this, and, having no axe, nor nothing to
make a fire with, have crept into a hollow log, and
lay shivering till morning; but here, now, with such
a fire as that
As he spoke a sudden puff of wind drove the smoke
from the green and wet timber full into our faces, and
filled the shantee to a degree so stifling, that we all
rushed out into the rain, that blew in blinding
torrents
against us.
Tormented lightning! cried John, aghast at this
new annoyance. This is too pesky bad; but I can
manage that smoke, if the wind doesn't blow from
more than three quarters at a time. Seizing his
axe upon the instant, he plunged into the darkness
beyond the fire, and in a moment or two a large tree
came crashing with all its leafy honours, bearing
down with it two or three sapling to our feet. With
the green boughs of these he made a wall around
the fire to shut out the wind, leaving it open only on
the side toward the shantee. The supper was now
cooked without farther interruption. My friend was
too ill to eat; but, though under some anxiety on
his account, I did full justice to the culinary skill of
our guide, and began to find some enjoyment amid
all the discomfort of our situation. The recollection
of similar scenes in other days gave a relish to the
wildness of the present, and inspired that complacent
feeling which a man of less active pursuits sometimes
realizes when he finds that the sedentary habits of
two or three years have not yet warped and
destroyed
the stirring tastes of his youth.
We told stories and recounted adventures. I
could speak of these northern hills from having, as
a rollicking younker, enjoyed my best-remembered
college vacations among the famous trouting lakes
which bathe their western spurs; while the
mountain-hunter
listened with interest to the sporting
scenes that I could describe to him upon the open
plains of the far-west; though I found it impossible
to make him understand how men could find their
way in a new country where there were so few trees.
With regard to the incidents and legends that I
gathered in turn from him, I may hereafter enlighten
the reader. But our discourse was suddenly cut
short by a catastrophe which had nearly proved a
very serious one. This was nothing more nor less
than the piles of brush which encircled our fire to
keep the wind away, suddenly kindling into a blaze,
and for a moment or two threatening to consume our
wigwam. The wind at the same time poured down
the gorge in shifting, angry blasts, which whirled the
flames in reeling eddies high into the air, bringing
the gray cliffs into momentary lighttouching the
dark evergreens with a ruddy glowand lighting up
the stems of the pale birches, that looked like
sheeted
ghosts amid the surrounding gloom.
A finishing touch of the elements was yet wanting
to complete the agreeableness of our situation; and
finally, just as the curtain of brush on the windward
side of the fire was consumed, the cold rain changed
into a flurry of snow, and the quickly-melted flakes
were driven with the smoke into the innermost parts
of our wigwam. Conversation was now out of the
question. John did, indeed, struggle on with a
panther
story for a moment or two, and one or two
attempts
were made to joke upon our miserable
situation
;
but sleet and smoke alternately damped and
stifled every effort, and then all was still, except the
roar of the elements. My sick friend must have
passed a horrible night, as he woke me once or twice
with his coughing; but I wrapped myself in my
cloak, and, placing my mouth upon the ground, to
avoid choking from the smoke, I was soon
dreaming
as quietly as if in a curtained chamber at home.
The last words I heard John utter, as he coiled
himself
in a blanket, were
Well, it's one comfort, since it's taken on to
blow so, I've cut down most of the trees around us
that would be likely to fall and crush us during the
night.
XIV.THE INDIAN PASS.
The
ringing of Cheney's axe was the first sound
that met my ear in the morning, which broke
excessively
cold. The fire had burnt low, though
frequently
replenished by him during the night; and he
was now engaged in renewing it, to cook our
breakfast
,
which was soon ready, and for which the frosty
mountain air gave me a keen appetite. The kind
fellow, too, prepared some toast and a hot draught
for my companion, whom nothing could prevent from
farther exploring the pass.
With this view we began descending a precipice
in the rear of our camp, to a place called the ice-hole.
The trees on the side of this precipice have a secret
for growing peculiarly their own, or they could never
flourish and maintain their place in such a position.
The wall, some sixty or eighty feet high, and almost
perpendicular, is covered with moss, which peels off
in flakes of a yard square, as you plant your heels in
it in descending; yet this flimsy substitute for soil
supports a straggling growth of evergreens, that will
bear the weight of a man as he clings to them to
avoid being dashed to pieces in the glen below.
The snow of the last night, which covered the
mountain-tops
,
made the stems of these saplings so
slippery
and cold, that our hands became numb in
grasping
them before we were half-way down the descent.
The river runs through the bottom of the ravine; but
its passage is so cavernous, that it is only by letting
yourself down into the fissures between the immense
boulders, which are here wedged together in
indescribable
confusion, and crawling beneath the rocks,
that you can obtain a sight of its current. From this
chasm you view the sky as from the bottom of a well.
A pair of eagles, that have their nest in the cliff above,
showed like swallows as they hovered along its face.
The sun never penetrates into this gloomy labyrinth;
and here, unless the waters are unusually high, you
may find cakes of ice at midsummer.
Emerging from this wild chaos of rocks, we
clambered
a short distance up the sides of the glen, and
penetrated a few hundred yards farther into the pass,
to a sloping platform amid the rocks, where the
finest view of the whole scene is to be obtained.
And here, within a few yards of its first well-springs,
you behold one of the strongest features of the mighty
Hudson developed even in its birth. It has already
cloven its way through a defile as difficult as that
through which it rushes near West Point, and far
more stupendous. A rocky precipice of twelve
hundred feet rises immediately in front of you, and
the jaws of the pass open barely wide enough to
admit
the egress of the stream at its highest stages of
water. The cliff opposite looks raw and recent, as
if riven through but yesterday; and ponderous blocks
of stone, that would almost make mountains
themselves
,
wrenched from their former seat, in what is
now the centre of the pass, stand edgewise leaning
down the glen, as if waiting some new throe of this
convulsion of nature to sweep them farther on their
terrific career. Many of these features of the place
you have already seen while climbing to the point
where we stand; but now, upon turning round as
you gain the head of the pass, and look out from its
bosom upon the mountain region below, a view of
unequalled beauty and grandeur greets the eye.
The morning sun, which will not for hours yet reach
the place where you stand, is shining upon airy peaks
and wooded hills which shoulder each other as far
5
as the eye can reach, while far down the glen, where
the maple and beech find a more genial soil to
nourish
them, the rainbow hues of autumn are glistening
along the stream, which, within a few miles of its
fountain-head, has already expanded into a
beautiful
lake.
XV.TA-HA-WUS.
The
group of wild hills among which the Hudson
rises, stands wholly detached from any other chain in
North America. The highest peak of the
Adirondachs
,
or the Black Mountains, as some call them,
from the dark aspect which their sombre cedars and
frowning cliffs give them at a distance, was
measured
during last summer, and found to be nearly
six thousand feet in height.
Mount Marcy, as it has been christened, after the
public functionary who first suggested the survey
of this interesting region, presents a perfect
pyramidal
top, when viewed from Lake Sandford. Its
alpine climate is very different from that prevailing
in the valleys below; and I observed its cone
sheathed
in snow one day, when I found the water
temperate
enough to enjoy swimming in the lake. The
effect was equally beautiful and sublime. The frost
had here and there flecked the forest with orange
and vermilion, touching a single sumach or a clump
of maples at long intervals; but generally the woods
displayed as yet but few autumnal tints: and the
deep verdure of the adjacent mountains set off the
snowy peak in such high contrast, soaring, as it did,
far above them, and seeming to pierce, as it were,
the blue sky which curtained them, that the poetic
Indian epithet of
Ta-ha-wus
(
he splits the sky
) was
hardly too extravagant to characterize its peculiar
grandeur. The ascent of Ta-ha-wus, or Mount
Marcy, and the view from the summit, will hereafter
puzzle many an abler pen than mine in the attempt
to describe them.
The wild falls of
Kos-kong-shadi
, (
broken water
,)
the bright pools of
Tu-ne-sas-sah
, (
a place of
pebbles
,) and the tall cascade of
She-gwi-en-daukwe
,
(
the hanging spear
,) will hereafter tempt
many to strike over to the eastern branch of the
Hudson, and follow it up to Lake Colden; while the
echoing glen of
Twen-un-ga-sko
, (
a raised voice
,)
though now as savage as the Indian Pass already
described, will reverberate with more musical cries
than the howl of the wolf or the panther, whose
voices only are now raised to awaken its echoes.
The luxurious cit will cool his champaign amid the
snows of Mount Marcy; and his botanizing daughter,
who has read in Michaux's American Sylva of pines
some two hundred feet in height, will wonder to
pluck full-grown trees of the same genus, which she
can put into her reticule.
At present, however, the mountain is a desert.
Wolverines, lynxes, and wild cats, with a few
ravens, who generally follow in the track of beasts
of prey, are almost the only living things that have
their habitations in these high solitudes; and, save
when their occasional cry breaks the stillness, the
solemn woods are, on a calm day, as silent as the
grave. The absence of game birds and of the
beasts of chase, which give his subsistence to the
hunter, prevents him from wasting his toil in
climbing
to the loftiest pinnacles: and, so far as I learned,
it is only lately that curiosity has prompted those
who have passed a great part of their lives in the
neighbourhood, to make the ascent. The view,
however, when once realized, seems to strike them
not less than it does more cultivated minds. It
makes a man feel, said a hunter to me, what it
is to have all creation placed beneath his feet.
There are woods there, over which it would take a
life-time to hunt; mountains that seem shouldering
each other up and away, heaven only knows where.
Thousands of little lakes are let in among them.
Old Champlain, though fifty miles off, glistens
below
you like a strip of white birch bark; and the
Green Mountains of Vermont beyond it fade and
fade away, till they disappear as gradually as a cold
scent when the dew rises.
XVI.A WOLF ENCOUNTER.
The
hunter, Holt, of whom I have before spoken,
has had some strange encounters with wild animals
among these lonely defiles which I have attempted
to describe: and John Cheney had, some time since,
a fight with a wolf, which is almost as well worthy
of commemoration as the doughty feat of old
Putman
.
It was in winter: the snows were some four or
five feet deep upon a level; and the hunter, upon
whom a change of seasons seems to produce but
little effect, could only pursue his game upon
snow-shoes
;
an ingenious contrivance for walking upon
the surface, which, though so much used in our
northern counties, is still only manufactured in
perfection
by the Indians, who drive quite a trade in
them along the Canada border. Wandering far from
the settlements, and making his bed at nightfall in
a deep snow-bank, Cheney rose one morning to
examine his traps, near which he will sometimes lie
encamped for weeks in complete solitude; when,
hovering round one of them, he discovered a
famished
wolf, who, unappalled by the presence of the
hunter, retired only a few steps, and then, turning
round, stood watching his movements.
I ought, by rights, quoth John, to have
waited
for my dogs, who could not have been far off; but
the creetur looked so sarcy, standing there, that,
though I had not a bullet to spare, I couldn't help
letting into him with my rifle. He missed his aim,
the animal giving a spring as he was in the act of
firing, and then turning instantly upon him before he
could reload his piece. So effective was the
unexpected
attack of the wolf, that his forepaws were
upon Cheney's snow-shoes before he could rally for
the fight. The forester became entangled in the
deep drift, and sank upon his back, keeping the wolf
only at bay by striking at him with his clubbed rifle.
The stock was broken to pieces in a few moments;
and it would have fared ill with the stark woodsman,
5*
if the wolf, instead of making at his enemy's throat
when he had him thus at disadvantage, had not, with
blind fury, seized the barrel of the gun in his jaws.
Still the fight was unequal, as John, half buried in
the snow, could make use of but one of his hands.
He shouted to his dogs; but one of them only, a young,
untrained hound, made his appearance; emerging
from a thicket, he caught sight of his master lying
apparently at the mercy of the ravenous beast,
uttered
a yell of fear, and fled, howling, to the woods again.
Had I had one shot left, said Cheney, I would
have given it to that dog, instead of despatching the
wolf with it. In the exasperation of the moment,
John might have extended his contempt to the whole
canine race, if a stancher friend had not opportunely
interposed to vindicate their character for courage
and fidelity.
All this had passed in a moment: the wolf was
still grinding the iron gun-barrel in his teeth; he
had even once wrenched it from the hand of the
hunter, when, dashing like a thunder-bolt between
the combatants, the other hound sprang over his
master's body, and seized the wolf by the throat.
There was no let go about that dog when he once
took hold. If the barrel had been red-hot, the wolf
couldn't have dropped it quicker; and it would have
done you good, I tell ye, to see that old dog drag the
creetur's head down in the snow, while I, jist at my
leisure, drove the iron into his skull. One good,
fair blow, though, with a heavy rifle-barrel, on the
back of the head, finished him. The fellow gave a
kind o' quiver, stretched out his hindlegs, and then
he was done for. I had the rifle stocked afterward,
but she would never shoot straight after that fight;
so I got me this pistol, which, being light and handy,
enables me more conveniently to carry an axe upon
my long tramps, and make myself comfortable in
the woods.
Many a deer has John since killed with that pistol.
It is curious to see him draw it from the left pocket
of his gray shooting-jacket, and bring down a
partridge
.
I have myself witnessed several of his
successful
shots with this unpretending shooting-iron,
and once saw him knock the feathers from a wild
duck at eighty or a hundred yards.
XVII.THE DOG AND THE DEER-STALKER.
The
deer-stalkers, or still-hunters, as they
are called in this part of the country, are very
inveterate
against those who hound the deer: for even
in these woods, where you travel through twenty
miles of unbroken forest in passing from house to
house, people array themselves in factions, and
indulge
their animosities by acting in separate bodies
with true partisan spirit. In fact, the deer-drivers
and the still-hunters only want their poet or
historian
,
to make their interminable bickerings as
celebrated
as those of the Guelphs and Ghibbelines, or
any other redoubtable bone-breakers whose feudal
yesterdays have lighted fools the way to dusty
death.
What business has a man got in the woods,
quoth the still-hunter, who can't take home a piece
of venison to his shantee without scaring all the deer
for ten miles around before he gets at it. The flesh
of the poor creeturs is worth nothing neither, after
their blood is heated by being driven to death with
dogs.
How can a man sleep sound in the woods, saith
John Cheney, on the other side, when he has the
heart to lure the mother of a fawn to the very muzzle
of his rifle by bleating at her: or who has shot down
the dumb brutes by torchlight, when they come to
the water-side to cool themselves at nightfall? It
ain't nateral, and such huntingif hunting they call
itwill never prosper. Honest John! whatever
may be the merits of the question, he has reason to
feel sore upon the subject, from the sad and ignoble
death which the hound who played so gallant a part
in his wolf encounter, met with at the hands of the
still-hunters.
Some of the best hounds in the country having
been killed by these forest-regulators, Cheney would
never allow his favourite dog to wander near the
streams most frequented by them; but it chanced
one day that the poor fellow met with an accident
which withdrew his care from the dog. The trigger
of his pistol caught against the thwart of a boat while
he was in the act of raising it to shoot a deer, and
the piece, going off in a perpendicular direction, sent
the whole charge into his leg, tearing off the calf,
and driving the ball out through the sole of his foot.
With this terrible wound, which, however, did not
prevent him from reloading and killing the deer
before
he could swim to the shore, Cheney dragged
himself fifteen miles through the woods, to the
nearest
log cabin. A violent fever, and the threatened
loss of the limb, confined him here for months. But
his dog, to whom, while idling in the forest, he had
taught a hundred amusing tricks, was still his
company
and solace; and, though Tray looked wistfully
after each hunter that strayed by the cabin, no
eagerness
for the chase could impel him to leave his
master's
side.
At last, however, upon one unfortunate day, poor
Cheney was prevailed upon to indulge a brother
sportsman, and let him take the dog out with him
for a few hours. The hunter soon returned, but the
hound never came back. Under his master's eye,
he had been taught never to follow a deer beyond a
certain limit; but now long confinement had given
him such a zest for the sport, that he crossed the
fatal bounds. The mountain-ridge of a more
friendly
region was soon placed between him and his
master
;
the deer took to the treacherous streams
infested
by the still-hunters, and the generous hound
and his timorous quarry met the same fate from the
rifles of their prowling enemy.
XVIII.CRUSTING MOOSE.
Crusting
is the term applied to taking large
game amid the deep snows of winter, when the crust
of ice which forms upon the surface after a slight
rain is strong enough to support the weight of a man,
but gives way at once to the hoofs of a moose or a
deer; while the animal, thus embarrassed, is easily
caught and despatched with clubs. In our northern
states more game is destroyed in this way than in any
other; and you may read in the newspapers every
winter some account of the inhabitants of a whole
village turning out and butchering hundreds of deer
when thus entrapped. Only a few years since, it
was said that more than a thousand were so
destroyed
in the township of Catskill in one season. All
true sportsmen, however, hold crusting deer in
contempt and abhorrence; for the venison is
generally
not in season at the time of year when it is thus
procured; and this mode of taking it belongs rather
to the butcher than to the hunter.
Crusting moose is rather a different thing, as it
requires both skill and courage on the part of the
hunter, and the animal has a chance at least of escape
or resistance. Still, as the law will not, or cannot,
protect this noblest of all forest game from
destruction
in this manner, it must at no distant day become
extinct within the boundaries of New York. The
broad west has no moose ground so celebrated as that
in our northern counties; and when you leave the
sources of the Hudson, you must travel westward
to those of the Mississippi before you find the
gigantic
moose as numerous as they were in our forests
but a few years since. The woods of Maine,
however
,
are probably richer in this noble game than any
within the United States territories.
The moose, who is both more shy and more
sagacious
than the deer, has his favourite haunts in the
depths of the forest. He moves about, not like the
elk, in roving gangs, but stalks in lonely majesty
through his leafy domains; and when disturbed by
the hunter, instead of bounding away like his
kinsman
of the forest and prairie, he trots off at a gait
which, though faster than that of the fleetest horse,
is so easy and careless in its motion, that it seems
to cost him no exertion. But, though retreating thus
when pursued, he is one of the most terrible beasts
of the forest when wounded and at bay; and the
Indians
of the north-west, among some tribes,
celebrate
the death of a bull-moose, when they are so
fortunate as to kill one, with all the songs of triumph
that they would raise over a conquered warrior.
The deepest snows of winter of course offer the
best occasion for moose-hunting. The sagacious
animal, so soon as a heavy storm sets in, commences
forming what is called a moose-yard; which is a
large area, wherein he industriously tramples down
the snow while it is falling, so as to have a space to
move about in, and browse upon the branches of
trees, without the necessity of wandering from place
to place, struggling through the deep drifts, exposed
to the wolves, who, being of lighter make, hold a
carnival upon the deer in crusting-time. No wolf,
however, dare enter a moose-yard. He will troop
round and round upon the snow-bank which walls it,
and his howling will, perhaps, bring two or three of
his brethren to the spot, who will try to terrify the
moose from his 'vantage ground, but dare not
descend
into it.
But when the hunter, prowling about on his
snow-shoes
,
discovers a moose-yard, he feels so sure of
his quarry, that he will sometimes encamp upon the
spot, in order to take the game at his leisure; and,
when there have been several hunters in company,
I have heard of their proceeding patiently to fell the
neighbouring trees, and form a lofty fence around
the yard, which enabled them to take the animal alive
when subdued by long confinement and starvation.
An opportunity of doing this occurred near M`Intyre
last winter, when a yard with three moose in it, an
old cow-moose and two yearlings, was discovered
and surrounded by a band of hunters. Some of the
party were desirous of taking them alive, as one of
the proprietors of this extensive propertya
gentleman
of great public spiritwishes to make an
attempt
to domesticate the animal, and, if possible,
introduce the use of it to agricultural purposes.
This is an exceedingly interesting and hardly
doubtful
experiment, for the moose has been frequently
tamed, and, unlike the common deer, can be
halter-broken
as easily as a horse.
The hunters, however, were too excited with their
good luck to listen to any suggestion of the kind;
few of them had ever killed a moose. Their rifles
were in their hands, and they were bent upon having a
shot at the game, which dashed to and fro, snorting
and whistling, within the snowy bounds of the yard.
The whoops and shouts of their enemies, redoubled
by the echoes from the adjacent mountains, made
them furious at being thus beset; and at each
discharge
of a gun they would plunge at the assailing
marksman so desperately, that he would be
compelled
to take refuge behind the nearest tree. The
scene became thus so exciting, that all order was
lost among the huntsmen. Each fired as fast as he
could load, hardly waiting to take aim, lest some
quicker-sighted comrade should bear off the prize.
The moose, though repeatedly wounded, would
charge again and again into the snow-banks around
them, and drive their enemies from the brink,
retiring
,
at each turn, to a corner of the yard where
they were least molested, and there rally at once for
another charge. Faint with the loss of blood,
however
,
they were successfully discomfited and borne
down by the hunters, who, retreating upon the crust
when pursued, would turn upon the moose the
moment
they tried to retrace their steps, and assail them
with axes and bludgeons while floundering in the
snow to recover the 'vantage ground of the yard.
The two yearlings, with their dam, after making a
most gallant resistance, were ultimately despatched.
Such was the description which I had one day
from a veteran hunter, while lying round a fire
discussing
a venison-steak cut from a fine buck, whose
death had been compassed after the curious fashion
described as follows.
XIX.WITHING A BUCK.
After
a week of fine trout-fishing, alternated by
such picturesque rambles as I have attempted to
describe, we could not leave the sources of the
Hudson without devoting our last day to a deer-hunt,
6
which had only been hitherto deferred from Cheney's
hounds being absent with a brother hunter.
Taking an early breakfast, my friend and I,
accompanied
by John Cheney, another forester of the
name of Linus Catlin, and our hospitable host,
separated
at the inlet of Lake Sandford, to take our
different
stations. Cheney, with three hounds, was to
rouse the deer from his lair upon an adjacent
mountain
;
Catlin was to take post in his skiff, behind one
of the islets of the lake; and the rest of us were to
watch in the canoe, under the shelter of a bold
promontory
,
opposite to which the deer was expected to
take the water.
Before entering his boat, Catlin, who appeared to
be one of those quiet fellows that say little and do
much, having no gun with him, proceeded to cut
down a birchen sapling, and strip it of all its branches
except two, the elastic wood of which he twisted
together
,
so as to form a large noose upon the end of
the pole. As he was laying this weapon in the stern
of his skiff, and preparing to push off, his
preparations
did not seem to meet the approbation of his
friend, Cheney.
What, Linus, you are not agoing to withe the
deer?
And why not? answered Catlin, taking his seat
and placing the oars in the rowlocks.
Because I never see any good in withes: a
man that can't
tail
a deer, oughtn't to hunt him.
Why, John, you couldn't hold a fat buck by his
tail long enough to cut his throat with your
hunting-knife
.
Can't I? I'd like to see the time! Well, if I
know'd I could never tail another, as I have
thousands
,
the creetur might go, afore I'd be the man to
drown him with a withe.
The quiet Linus only replied by pushing off into
the current and dropping down the stream; and we
immediately followed, while Cheney, whistling to
his dogs, plunged into the forest and disappeared.
The boats kept near each other for some time,
and we landed together upon a sunny point, to
deposite
a basket of bread and vegetables, an iron pot,
and some other kitchen fixins which we had
brought with us, under the confident promise of John
that we should surely have a venison dinner in the
woods that day, if he had to drive a dozen deer
before
we could kill one. Our craft being lightened
of her lading, Catlin pulled for the islet, which was
yet a mile off down the lake; and we, after watching
his oars flashing in the sunshine for a few moments,
embarked anew and paddled round a headland;
when running the canoe under the trees, whose
morning shadows still hung over the lake, we
stretched ourselves upon the grass, listening and
looking with the most eager attention for the first
intimation of approaching sport.
There was a slight ripple upon the lake, which
was not favourable to our seeing the deer should he
take the water at any great distance from us; and
the incessant call of the jay, with the ever-changing
cry of the loon, created so many noises in the woods
generally so still, that the opening of the hounds
might have escaped us unheard. These early
sounds, however, soon ceased as the sun came
marching up above the mountain-tops, and spread
the silver waves from the centre of the lake far and
wide, into all its sheltered bays and
wood-embowered
friths. The faint ripple of the waters upon the
rocky shore was the only murmur left.
My companions were conversing in a subdued
voice, and I was lying a little apart from them,
revelling in the singular beauty of the scene, and
sketching in imagination the peculiar outline of the
Dial Mountain opposite, when I heard the faint
crashing of a bough upon the other side of the lake,
and, running my eye along the water, discovered a
noble buck, with fine antlers, swimming beneath the
bank. My comrades caught sight of him a moment
afterward, and we all waited with eager anxiety to
see him put out far enough for us to row round him
and cut him off from the shore. But the buck had
evidently no idea of making a traverse of the lake at
this time. He was far in advance of the hounds,
and had taken the water at this place, not from being
hotly pursued, but only to throw them off the scent,
and then double on his own track. He therefore
kept swimming along the shore, close under the steep
bank, looking up at it every now and then, as if in
search of a runway which would carry him back
again in the depths of the forest. This runway was
in a little cove immediately opposite to us; and,
though it was almost impossible now to cut him off
from reaching it, yet the moment we saw his object
we determined to make the effort.
The position of each in the canoe had of course
been previously arranged; we accordingly crept into
our seats, and pushed out into the lake, without
making
a sound that could attract the attention of the
deer. The little islet of Inch-Hamish lay but a few
yards out of our course, and we slid along as quietly
as possible, until we could get under cover of this, and
then gave way with all our strength. The lean craft
glanced like an arrow through the rippling waters.
We were all three familiar with the use of oar or
paddle
,
and the buck would have had no chance of
escape from that canoe had we been a hundred yards
nearer. Our hopes were high in the brief moments
that the islet shut him from view; but he had just
reached the shore when we shot from its cover. We
now threw up our paddles in despair, and paused to
take a fair view of him as he escaped from the lake.
It was beautiful to see him lift his arching neck from
the water when he first touched the bottom; and his
whole form was brought to view while he made a
few steps through the shallow waves, as leisurely as
if no pursuers were near. Throwing his antlers,
then, upon his shoulders, to clear the boughs above
him, he bounded over a fallen tree near the margin,
and disappeared in the forest.
Looking now to the point where he had entered
the lake, we saw one of the hounds standing out on
a rock, with nose uplifted to catch the vanished scent
of his quarry. The dog saw us pulling for the
runway
,
and, dashing into the lake, swam for the point
to which we were steering, and reached it just as
our boat grated upon the beach. A moment
sufficed
to put him again upon the scent. He opened
6*
with a joyous yell; his mouthing soon became
deeper
and more distant; it neared again; and the two
other hounds, who, while following some other trail,
had now, for the first time, struck his, joined in the
chorus. The echoes in the upper part of the lake
are the finest that I ever heard; and, as the morning
breeze had now lulled, they were all awakened by
this wild music. The deer was evidently making
for the inlet; and, indeed, before we could pull out
far enough to command a view of the point where
be would probably cross, he had made the traverse,
and we only caught a glimpse of the dogs thrashing
through the wild grass upon a tongue of land upon
the opposite side of the inlet.
You may give up that buck, said our host;
he has gone over to Lake Henderson, and the best
thing we can do is, to start another.
Almost as he spoke a clear whoop rang through
the forest, and soon after we saw John Cheney
waving us to the shore we had just left.
Tormented lightning! what are ye doing there,
when the deer is going down the lake?
Down! why, he has just crossed at the upper
end, and gone over to Lake Henderson.
I tell you he hasn't. No deer will go there when
the water's so high that he would be entangled in
the bushes before he could swim beyond his depth.
I know the natur of the creetur; and that deer has
gone round the lower end of the lake, to cross back
to the mountain where I started him.
With these words Cheney waded into the water
without waiting for us to approach nearer the shore,
jumped into the canoe, seized a paddle, and away
we sped again over the waves. The event proved
that he was right. The buck, after crossing at the
inlet, made a circuit of a mile or two, and, before we
could pull half-way down the lake, took the water at
a runway opposite to the islet behind which Catlin
was watching in his skiff.
Cool and experienced in the sport, this hunter
never broke his cover until the deer got fairly out
into the lake, when he launched out and turned him
so quickly, that the buck made for the island which
his pursuer had just left. Linus, however, was too
quick for him, and threw his withe over the deer's
antlers before he could touch the bottom with his
feet. But the buck was a fellow of great weight
and vigour; and, feeling himself thus entangled, he
made a lateral spring into deeper water, which
dragged
the hunter out of the boat in an instant. Linus
fortunately seized one of the oars, which, being
rigged
with swivels instead of rowlocks, still kept him
connected with the skiff. But his situation was a
very precarious one; the buck becoming the
assailant
,
struck at him with his forefeet, and got him
again fairly under water. He rose this time,
however
,
with the oar between himself and his
antagonist
,
and, while clutching the gunwale of the boat
with one hand, seized the withe, which had escaped
from his grasp, in the same moment that the buck
made a pass at him with his horns, which ripped up
the bosom of his shirt, and was within an inch of
goring him to death. But before the desperate
animal
could repeat the thrust, the hunter had gained
the skiff, now half-full of water, and, seizing the first
missile that came to hand, he dealt the buck a blow
upon the head, which, followed up by a slash from
his hunting-knife, put an end to the encounter.
The conflict was over before we could reach the
combatants; but the carcass was still warm when
we relieved the leaky boat of Catlin by lifting the
buck into our canoe; and his eye was so bright, his
skin so smooth and glossy, and his limbs, not yet
stiffened in death, folded so easily beneath him, that
it was difficult to imagine life had departed.
When we landed at the spot before selected, it
required the united strength of the whole party to
lift the buck up the steep bank, and suspend him
upon the timbers, which Cheney prepared,
secundum
artem
, for scientific butchery. The eloquent
Bucklaw
,
by whose learned discourse upon this branch of
the gentle science of venerie the reader has been
enlightened when reading Scott's Bride of
Lammermoor
,
could not have been a more thorough
practitioner of the art than John Cheney.
A group worthy of Inman's pencil was collected
around the roaring fire, by which the dripping
Catlin
was drying himself; while Cheney, with the fat
buck before him, and the dogs licking the blood at
his feet, as ever and anon he paused in his operation,
and turned round to us to point out some graceful
line of fat with his hunting-knife, would have formed
the prominent figure of the picture.
The potatoes, in the meantime, were roasted
whole, or sliced up with various savoury matters,
which were put into the kettle to boil; and, though
we had omitted to bring tumblers with us, Cheney's
axe hollowed out and fashioned some most
ingenious
drinking-cups, which were ready by the time
divers choice morsels of venison had been grilled
upon the coals. There were a few drops at the
bottom of an old flask of cogniac for each of us;
we had Mackinaw blankets stretched upon balsam
branches, to recline upon; there was no call of duty
or business to remind us of the lapse of hours; and
stories and anecdotes of former huntings in these
mountains, with practical discussions as to what part
of a deer afforded the most savoury venison,
prolonged
the repast till sunset.
The haunch of the buck, wrapped in its clean skin,
was left untouched for future feasting. Well,
John, said I, as I tried in vain to lift it into the
boat by the short, fat tail, how could you ever
have taken such a fellow as this by `tailing him,'
as you call it?
It's all knackit's being used to the thing
u
nly.
Not but that I always said that withing is a good
way.
No, no, John! we all exclaimed; you said
just the reverse.
Well, perhaps I did, and, without meaning to
discredit Linus, who, for certain, has been the man
among us this day, I still say that withing only does
for those that don't know how to tail a deer. And
now let's take the old hounds in the boats, and pull
homeward.
XX.THE DEPARTURE.
The
hunters with whom we had enjoyed our last
day's sport upon Lake Sandford, accompanied us
some forty miles through the woods, when we
started
next day upon our homeward journey. John
Cheney, like the rest, trudging along on foot, found
an opportunity of shooting several partridges by the
way, picking them from the trees with his pistol with
as much case as an ordinary sportsman could have
effected with a fowling-piece, (admitting the thick
cover to give the bird such a chance of life as to
warrant
a
sportsman
to take him sitting.) After killing
three or four partridges, however, John could not be
prevailed on to shoot at more. I several times
called
his attention to a good shot, but he always
answered
,
shaking his head, It's wrong, it's wrong,
sir, to use up life in that way; here's birds enough
for them that wants to eat them; and that saddle of
venison on the buckboard will only be wasted, if I
kill more of these poor things.
About noon we halted by a brook which ran through
the forest near a clump of maples which grew so
widely apart as to let the sunshine down upon a
grassy spot, where we spread our table upon a fallen
tree, and, kindling a fire, proceeded to cook our
dinner
.
All found something to do while this was in
preparation; one attended to the comfort of the
horses, another kept the fire supplied with fuel,
some shot at a mark with Cheney's pistol, while
worthy John himself watched with the most
sedulous
care over the venison and partridges, which he
roasted after a fashion peculiarly his own, and which,
with four or five large trout that we had brought from
the lake, and the customary accompaniment of roast
potatoes and wheaten bread, all being flavoured with
good humour and keen mountain appetites, made the
repast a delicious one.
The day was fine, the air clear and remarkably
bland for the season, and I don't know how long we
should have protracted our woodland revel, as
Cheney
exercised his skill and ingenuity, serving up
every moment some tempting morsel of venison,
pressing my friend and myself particularly to eat, as
we didn't know when again we might have a raal
nateral dinner in the woods; and it was a comfort to
him to see gentlemen from the city take things in the
woods as if they liked them.
No town-adoring cockney, nor patriotic villager,
nor proud Castellan could imagine himself more
identified with all the honours and glory of his
distinct
and especial dwelling-place, than does this
genuine forester with everything that appertains to
the broad woods through which he ranges. Cheney
was now, as he told me when walking by my side
after resuming our journey, going out of the woods
for the first time in many months, to visit his father,
who lived some sixty miles off. He was very old,
and John had not seen nor heard from him for some
time previously to his last visit to the settlements
which we were now approaching, and from which
his father lived still another day's journey distant.
He seemed quite anxious as to the tidings he might
hear about his venerable parent, and talked of
remaining
to spend a month with him. Such was the
complexion of the hunter's feelings when we came
out of the forest at nightfall upon what is called the
Schroon-road, where we found a good inn to receive
us. Here my friend and I, after securing a
conveyance
which should enable us to follow down the
course of the Hudson instead of returning home
through Lake Champlain, invited Cheney to take a
seat in our wagon, which would carry him some
thirty miles on his next day's journey. He was so
eager to see his father, that the proffer was at once
accepted, and all our mutual arrangements were
completed for the morrow. But just as we were on
the point of starting, and had shaken hands with our
hearty host of M`Intyre and his party, Cheney was
hailed by a brother hunter, who, rifle on shoulder,
trudged up to the inn-door upon the road we were
about to travel.
Hullo, Bill! cried the filial John, advancing to
shake hands with him. Come up from Ti, eh?
and how's the old man?
Right well, I tell ye, replied Bill; he's killed
six bear this fall; and, thinking the creeturs must be
pretty well routed out among our mountains, I've
struck over the ridge to see what I can find among
your'n.
Tormented lightning! six bear! quoth John.
Why, the raal old chap; his grain is as tough and
springy as ever. Well, Bill, if you'll hold on till I
can speak a word to these gentlemen in the wagon,
I'll turn round with you, and back into our woods
again.
Saying this, cheney came up to us, and repeating
what we had just overheard as the reason for
changing
his intentions, he shook hands with us, and we
parted upon our separate journeys.
We reached Lake George that night, our road
winding side by side with the Hudson for many
miles, passing several picturesque lakes, crossing
mountain-ridges commanding the most superb bird's
eye views, or descending into valleys where the
painter might find an ever-varying novelty for the
exercise of his art. But as the reader is perhaps
already fatigued with these loose sketches, and as the
prominent figure which gave them animation has
disappeared from the scene, I will here conclude my
notes upon
The Sources of the Hudson
.
7
The
scenes, characters, and incidents detailed in
the foregoing pages were noted down upon the spot;
and the particulars, being copied since nearly
verbatim
from letters written by the author to his
friends, are perhaps as accurate as it was in his
power to make them.
The reminiscences which follow, dating many
years back, have less pretension to authenticity:
nor, indeed, has the writer, in attempting to illustrate
the rich scenic and legendary resources of the state
of New York, aimed at more than weaving a mingled
yarn of fact and fiction. His object being rather to
commend those resources to more diligent hands,
than accurately to develope them by any labour of
his own.
The reader, therefore, may give just as much
credence
to the remaining contents of these volumes
as he finds it most agreeable to attach to them.
THE
SACONDAGA COUNTRY.
THE HUNTING-GROUNDS OF THE MOHAWKS.
I HAVE wandered about considerably in my
timesome five or six thousand miles perhaps
over the northern parts of the Union on either side of
the mountains, and all for the sake of seeing Nature in
what poets call her wild retreats: of beholding
her in those unmolested fastnesses where, like a
decorous female, as she is, she may freak it about in
dishabille without being subjected to that abashing
scrutiny which always awaits her when architects
and landscape-gardeners assist at her toilet in those
places where wealth compels her sometimes to hold
her court. Like all the rest of her sex, she is
capricious
enough in her choice of what she likes, and
leads her admirers many an idle dance with but
slight reward; while her choicest favours often
await him who stumbles upon her at her retiring
moments, in spots where he would least expect such
good fortune. Certes, I have never found her more
propitious than within a day's journey of Saratoga,
among lakes, mountains, and forests; where,
notwithstanding
the vicinity of one of the gayest haunts
of dissipation, my only rivals for her favours were a
sportsman or two, who had stumbled upon these
retreats as I did.
[3]
[3]
The mountains of the Sacondaga Country are the
western
spurs of the Adirondach group. In general the peaks of
Hamilton County are less lofty and broken than those of Esser.
It was many years since when in early youth I
went upon my first hunting excursion in that
unsettled
region about the sources of the Sacondaga River,
generally known as Totten and Crossfield's
Purchase
,
never in very great repute at land-offices,
and selling at that time for sixpence an acre; the
Sacondaga Country, as it was called, being, most
unjustly, as noted for barrenness as the Genesee
County was famed for fertility.
The deer, at the time of which I write, were
so abundant that they were often destroyed by the
few settlers for their skins alone; and wolves, and
bears, and panthers prowled the thick forest
unmolested
,
save by a few Indians who once or twice
throughout the year would straggle in from the
Iroquois
reservation on the Canadian frontier. This
district (a debateable territory between the Iroquois
of New York, and the Hurons and Adirondachs of
Canada) was in old times a favourite hunting-ground
of the Mohawks. The greater part of this warlike
tribe, soon after the Revolution, migrated with their
famous leader, Brant, to Upper Canada: but a
number
long lingered around the ancient seats of their
people; and the salmon-trout, which abound in all
the head-waters of the Hudson, would still sometimes
tempt a straggling Mohawk thither at the spearing
season in July; while the moose, which is even now
7*
occasionally shot in this district, used generally to
lure them thither in the winter season.
There was one old Mohawk, yclept Captain Gill,
who alone kept there all the year round, and was a
sort of sylvan sultan of the whole region about. His
daughter, Molly Gill, who led a kind of oyster life
(though no one would have mistaken her for a peri)
in their wigwam on the outlet of Lake Pleasant,
used to make his moccasins, gum the seams, sew
up the rips of his birchen canoe, and dress his
venison
for him, while the captain roved far and near in
search of whatever might cheer the home enlivened
by these two only inmatesa tender fawn cutlet, a
trinket sent by some good-natured settler to Molly, or
a stoup of vile whiskey secreted in the captain's
hunting-pouch
for his especial refreshment and delight.
Gill, notwithstanding this unhallowed league with
bad spirits, was a capital guide upon sporting
excursions
whenever the larger kinds of game were the
object; and a college chum, whom we called The
Counsellor, from his having just entered on the
study of the law, took as much pleasure as myself
in wandering about among the mountains, or cruising
from lake to lake, and camping out on their banks,
with the old Mohawk for our
decus et tutamen
.
A hunting-party of Iroquois Indians from St.
Regis was at that time in the country; and, uniting
with these, we turned out a pretty stout band upon
our principal excursions; our company being often
strengthened by a queer original, hight Major Jake
Peabody, and several other white hunters that may
still be living somewhere along that border.
As I took no notes of our different tramps, it
is impossible now to trace their various routes through
rocky glens and over sagging morasses, amid the
labyrinth
of lakes that are linked together by
innumerable
streams and waterfalls among these mountains;
and I may be sufficiently inaccurate while trying to
recall some of the tales and anecdotes with which our
party used to while away the evenings between the
hours of making our camp-fire and the moment of
retiring to repose: but neither shall prevent me from
attempting to sketch some of these scenes from
recollection
,
and relating the legends with which they
are associated, as I now remember them.
Embarking one morning on a small lake called
Konjimuc by the Indians, we entered its outlet, and
floated many hours down a stream scarcely a
pistol-shot
in breadth, where, from the rapidity of the
current
,
the steering-paddle alone was necessary to keep
our canoes on their course. The brook wound
generally
through a wooded morass, where the dense
overhanging foliage excluded even a glimpse of the
neighbouring mountains; at times, however, it would
sweep near enough to their bank to wash a wall of
granite, from which the hanging birch and hemlock
would fling their branches far over the limpid tide;
and then again it would expand into a broad, deep
pool, circled with water-lilies, and animated by large
flocks of wild-fowl that would rise, screaming, from
the black tarn as we glided out from the shadow
of the forest and skimmed over its smooth surface.
Innumerable streams, the inlets and outlets of other
lakes, mingled their waters in these
frequently-occurring
ponds; and about sunset we struck one so broad
that we determined to change our course, and,
heading
our shallops now against the current, we soon
found ourselves upon the outlet of a considerable
lake. The water gradually became deeper and more
sluggish, and then a pull of a few hundred yards,
with a sudden turn in the forest, shot us out upon
one of the most beautiful sheets of water I ever
beheld
.
It was about four miles in length, with perhaps
half that breadth; the shores curved with the most
picturesque irregularity, and swelled high, but
gradually
,
from the water; while their graceful slopes
were held in strong contrast by a single islet which
shot up in one bold cliff from the centre, and nodded
with a crown of pines, around which an eagle was at
that moment wheeling. There were then, I believe,
but two farms upon the banks of Lake Pleasant, a
couple of small clearings on the brows of
opposite
promontories, each covered with grain-fields,
whose brown stubble smiled in the light of the
setting
sunthe only cultivated spots in an unbroken
wilderness. Everywhere else the untamed forest
threw its dusky shadow over the lake, while beneath
the pendant branches, which in some instances swept
the wave, a beach as white as the snowy strand of
the ocean glistened around the clear blue water.
The sun was setting in heavy, though gorgeous
clouds, which at each moment lost some of their
brightness in a volume of vapour that rolled along
the mountains; and, by the time we reached the
upper end of the lake, the broad drops that began to
descend warned us to hurry on our course and gain
a shelter from the coming storm. We had reached
the inlet of the lake, which was only a narrow,
crooked
strait, a few hundred rods in length, connecting it
with another sheet of water that covered about the
same surface as that over which we had passed; the
promontory between affording, as I afterward
experienced
,
a commanding view of both the sister lakes.
Our destination was the farthest side of the upper
lake, and the management of a canoe was no boy's
play when we left the sheltered strait and launched
out upon the stormy water. The shores were bold
and rocky, and, as the wind had now risen to a
tempest
,
the waves beat furiously upon them. The rain
blew in blinding sheets against us, and it was almost
impossible, while urging our way in its teeth, to
keep our canoes from falling off into the trough of
the sea; in which case they would inevitably have
been swamped. Our flotilla was soon separated and
dispersed in the darkness. A pack of hounds had
been distributed among the different boats, and some
of the younger dogs, alarmed by the shouting and
confusion, would raise a piteous howl at parting
company with the rest. We called long to each
other as the lightning from time to time revealed a
boat still within hail; but our voices were at last
only echoed by the dismal wailing of the loon, whose
shriek always rises above the storm, and may be
heard for miles amid its wildest raging.
The night was far spent before we all again
united at our place of destination; the different boats
straggling in one by one so slowly, that they who
first arrived passed an hour in great anxiety for the
fate of the last that made a harbour.
Sacondaga, the lake we were on, the
fountain-head
of the river of that name, is shaped, as an
Indian
hunter phrased it, like a bear's paw spread
out, with an island between the ball of each toe;
[4]
[4]
It is called Round Lake by the land surveyors, probably
quasi lucus
, &c.
and the different bays and islets, resembling each
other to an unpractised eye, might, on a dark night,
mislead even the skilful voyageur in making any
given point on the shore: more than one of our
canoes must have coasted the greater part of it
before
they were all successively drawn up on the
beach at the place we had fixed on for our
rendezvous
.
God's weather! but this is quite a night, quoth
Major Jake, peering out upon the storm which was
still raging an hour afterward.
Yes; I may say that the Flying Head is abroad
to-night, replied the old Mohawk, in good round
English, as he lighted his pipe and looked
contentedly
around the bark shantee, wherein each of our
company, having cheered himself with a hearty
supper of dried venison, was lounging about the fire
in every variety of attitude. The remark seemed
to attract the attention of no one but myself; but
when I asked the speaker to explain its meaning,
my mongrel companions eagerly united in a request
that the captain would tell them all about the
varmint
of which he spoke, be it
painter
(panther) or
devil. Gill did not long hesitate to comply; but
the particulars, not to mention the phraseology of
his narrative, in the years that have since elapsed,
have almost escaped me; and I may fail, therefore,
in preserving the Indian character of the story while
trying to recall it here.
KO-REA-RAN-NEH-NEH; OR, THE FLYING HEAD.
[A Legend of Sacondaga Lake.]
The Great God hath sent us signs in the sky! we have heard
uncommon noise in the Heavens, and have seen HEADS fall down
upon the earth!
Speech of Tahayadoris, a Mohawk sachem, at
Albany, Oct.
25
th
, 1689.
Colden's Five Nations
.
It hath tell-tale tongues;this casing air
That walls us inand their wandering breath
Will whisper the horror everywhere,
That clings to that ruthless deed of death.
And a vengeful eye from the gory tide
Will open, to blast the parricide.
The
country about the head-waters of the great
Mohegan, (as the Hudson is sometimes called,)
though abounding in game and fish, was never, in
the recollection of the oldest Indians living, nor in
that of their fathers' farthers, the permanent
residence
of any one tribe. From the black mountain
tarns, where the eastern fork takes its rise, to the
silver strand of Lake Pleasant, through which the
western branch makes its way after rising in
Sacondaga
Lake, the wilderness that intervenes, and all
the mountains round about the fountain-heads of
the great river, have, from time immemorial, been
infested by a class of beings with whom no good
man would ever wish to come in contact.
The young men of the Mohawk have, indeed, often
traversed it, when, in years gone by, they went on
the war-path after the hostile tribes of the north;
and the scattered and wandering remnants of their
people, with an occasional hunting-party from the
degenerate bands that survive at St. Regis, will yet
occasionally be tempted over these haunted grounds
in quest of the game that still finds a refuge in that
mountain region. The evil shapes that were
formerly
so troublesome to the red hunter, seem, in
these later days, to have become less restless at his
presence; and, whether it be that the day of their
power has gone by, or that their vindictiveness has
relented at witnessing the fate which seems to be
universally overtaking the people whom they once
delighted to persecutecertain it is, that the few
Indians who now find their way to this part of the
country are never molested, except by the white
settlers who are slowly extending their clearings
among the wild hills of the north.
The
Flying Head
, which is supposed to have
first driven the original possessors of these
hunting-grounds
,
whosoever they were, from their homes,
and which, as long as tradition runneth back, in the
old day before the whites came hither, guarded them
from the occupancy of every neighbouring tribe, has
not been seen for many years by any credible
witness
,
though there are those who insist that it has
more than once appeared to them, hovering, as their
fathers used to describe it, over the lake in which it
first had its birth. The existence of this fearful
monster, however, has never been disputed. Rude
representations of it are still occasionally met with
in the crude designs of those degenerate aborigines
who earn a scant subsistence by making birchen
baskets and ornamented pouches for such travellers
as are curious in their manufacture of wampum and
porcupine quills; and the origin and history of the
Flying Head survives, while even the name of the
tribe whose crimes first called it into existence has
passed away for ever.
It was a season of great severity with that
forgotten
people whose council-fires were lighted on the
mountain promontory that divides Sacondaga from
the sister lake into which it discharges itself.
[5]
[5]
A hamlet is now growing up on this beautiful mountain slope,
and the scenery in the vicinity is likely to be soon better known, from
the late establishment of a line of post-coaches between Sacondaga
Lake and Saratoga Springs.
A long and severe winter, with but little snow,
had killed the herbage at its roots, and the moose
and deer had trooped off to the more luxuriant
pastures
along the Mohawk, whither the hunters of the
hills dared not follow them. The fishing, too,
failed
;
and the famine became so devouring among the
mountains, that whole families, who had no hunters
to provide for them, perished outright. The young
men would no longer throw the slender product of
the chase into the common stock, and the women
and children had to maintain life as well as they
could upon the roots and berries the woods afforded
them.
8
The sufferings of the tribe became at length so
galling, that the young and enterprising began to talk
of migrating from the ancient seat of their people;
and, as it was impossible, surrounded as they were
by hostile tribes, merely to shift their
hunting-grounds
for a season and return to them at some
more auspicious period, it was proposed that if they
could effect a secret march to the great lake off to
the west of them, they should launch their canoes
upon Ontario, and all move away to a new home
beyond its broad waters. The wild rice, of which
some had been brought into their country by a
runner
from a distant nation, would, they thought,
support
them in their perilous voyage along the shores
of the great water, where it grows in such profusion;
and they believed that, once safely beyond the lake,
it would be easy enough to find a new home
abounding
in game upon those flowery plains which, as
they had heard, lay like one immense garden beyond
the chain of inland seas.
The old men of the tribe were indignant at the
bare suggestion of leaving the bright streams and
sheltered valleys, amid which their spring-time of life
had passed so happily. They doubted the existence
of the garden regions of which their children spoke;
and they thought that if there were indeed such a
country, it was madness to attempt to reach it in
the way proposed. They said, too, that the famine
was as courge which the Master of Life inflicted
upon
his people for their crimes; that if its pains were
endured with the constancy and firmness that became
warriors, the visitation would soon pass away; but
that those who fled from it would only war with
their destiny, and that chastisement would follow
them, in some shape, wheresoever they might flee.
Finally, they added that they would rather perish
by inches on their native hillsthey would rather
die that moment, than leave them for ever, to revel
in plenty upon stranger plains.
Be it so; they have spoken! exclaimed a fierce
and insolent youth, springing to his feet and casting
a furious glance around the council as the aged chief,
who had thus addressed it, resumed his seat. Be
the dotard's words their own, my brothers; let them
die for the crimes they have even now
acknowledged
.
We know of none; our unsullied summers
have nothing to blush for. It is they that have drawn
this curse upon our people: it is for them that our
vitals are consuming with anguish, while our
strength wastes away in the search of sustenance
we cannot find; or which, when found, we are
compelled
to share with those for whose misdeeds the
Great Spirit hath placed it far from us. They have
spokenlet them die. Let them die, if we are to
remain to appease the angry Spirit; and the food
that now keeps life lingering in their shrivelled and
useless carcases, may then nerve the limbs of our
young hunters, or keep our children from perishing.
Let them die, if we are to move hence, for their
presence will but bring a curse upon our path:
their worn-out frames will give way upon the march;
and the raven that hovers over their corses will
guide our enemies to the spot, and scent them like
wolves upon our trail. Let them die, my brothers;
and, because they are still our tribesmen, let us give
them the death of warriors, and that before we leave
this ground.
And with these words the young barbarian,
pealing
forth a ferocious whoop, buried his tomahawk
in the head of the old man nearest to him. The
infernal
yell was echoed on every side; a dozen flint
hatchets were instantly raised by as many
remorseless
arms, and the massacre was wrought before
one of those thus horribly sacrificed could interpose
a plea of mercy. But for mercy they would not
have pleaded, had opportunity been afforded them;
for even in the moment that intervened between the
cruel sentence and its execution, they managed to
show that stern resignation to the decrees of fate
which an Indian warrior ever exhibits when death
is near; and each of the seven old men that
perished
thus barbarously, drew his wolf-skin mantle
around his shoulders and nodded his head, as if
inviting
the death-blow that followed.
The parricidal deed was done! and it now became
a question how to dispose of the remains of those
whose lamp of life, while twinkling in the socket,
had been thus fearfully quenched for ever. The act,
though said to have been of not unfrequent
occurrence
among certain Indian tribes at similar
exigencies
,
was one utterly abhorrent to the nature of most
of our aborigines; who, from their earliest years,
are taught the deepest veneration for the aged. In
the present instance, likewise, it had been so
outrageous
a perversion of their customary views of
duty among this simple people, that it was thought
but proper to dispense with their wonted mode of
sepulture, and dispose of the victims of famine and
fanaticism in some peculiar manner. They wished
in some way to sanctify the deed, by offering up the
bodies of the slaughtered to the Master of Life, and
that without dishonouring the dead. It was,
therefore
,
agreed to decapitate the bodies and burn them;
and as the nobler part could not, when thus
dissevered
,
be buried with the usual forms, it was determined
to sink the heads together to the bottom of the lake.
The soulless trunks were accordingly consumed
and the ashes scattered to the winds. The heads
were then deposited singly, in separate canoes, which
were pulled off in a kind of procession from the
shore. The young chief who had suggested the
bloody scene of the sacrifice, rowed in advance, in
order to designate the spot where they were to
disburden
themselves of their gory freight. Resting
then upon his oars, he received each head in
succession
from his companions, and proceeded to tie
them together by their scalp-locks, in order to sink
the whole, with a huge stone, to the bottom. But
the vengeance of the Master of Life overtook the
wretch before his horrid office was accomplished;
for no sooner did he receive the last head into his
canoe than it began to sink, his feet became
entangled
in the hideous chain he had been knotting
together
,
and, before his horror-stricken companions
could come to his rescue, he was dragged, shrieking,
to the bottom. The others waited not to see the
water settle over him, but pulled with their whole
strength for the shore.
8*
The morning dawned calmly upon that
unhallowed
water, which seemed at first to show no traces of
the deed it had witnessed the night before. But
gradually, as the sun rose up higher, a few gory
bubbles appeared to float over one smooth and
turbid
spot, which the breeze never crisped into a
ripple
.
The parricides sat on the bank watching it
all the day; but sluggish, as at first, that sullen blot
upon the fresh blue surface still remained. Another
day passed over their heads, and the thick stain was
yet there. On the third day the floating slime took
a greener hue, as if coloured by the festering mass
beneath; but coarse fibres of darker dye marbled
its surface; and on the fourth day these began to
tremble along the water like weeds growing from
the bottom, or the long tresses of a woman's scalp
floating in a pool when no wind disturbs it. The
fifth morning came, and the conscience-striken
watchers thought that the spreading-scalpfor such
now all agreed it washad raised itself from the
water, and become rounded at the top, as if there
were a head beneath it. Some thought, too, that
they could discover a pair of hideous eyes glaring
beneath the dripping locks. They looked on the
sixth, and there indeed was a monstrous HEAD
floating
upon the surface, as if anchored to the spot,
around which the waternotwithstanding a blast
which swept the lakewas calm and motionless as
ever.
Those bad Indians then wished to fly; but the
doomed parricides had not now the courage to
encounter
the warlike bands through which they must
make their way in fleeing from their native valley.
They thought, too, that, as nothing about the head,
except the eyes, had motion, it could not harm them,
resting quietly, as it did, upon the bosom of the
waters. And, though it was dreadful to have that
hideous gaze fixed for ever upon their dwellings,
yet they thought that if the Master of Life meant
this as an expiation for their phensied deed, they
would strive to live on beneath those unearthly
glances without shrinking or complaint.
But a strange alteration had taken place in the
floating head on the morning of the seventh day.
A pair of broad wings, ribbed, like those of a bat,
and with claws appended to each tendon, had grown
out during the night; and, buoyed up by these, it
seemed to be now resting on the water. The water
itself appeared, to ripple more briskly near it, as if
joyous that it was about to be relieved of its
unnatural
burden; but still for hours the head
maintained
its first position, At last the wind began to
rise, and, driving through the trough of the waves,
beneath their expanded membrane, raised the wings
from the surface, and seemed for the first time to
endow them with vitality. They flapped harshly
once or twice upon the billows, and the head rose
slowly and heavily from the lake.
An agony of fear seized upon the gazing
parricides
,
but the supernatural creation made no
movement
to injure them. It only remained balancing
itself over the lake, and casting a shadow from its
wings that wrapped the valley in gloom. But
dreadful
was it beneath their withering shade to watch
that terrific monster, hovering like a falcon for
the stoop, and know not upon what victim it might
descend. It was then that they who had sown the
gory seed from which it sprung to life, with one
impulse
sought to escape its presence by flight.
Herding
together like a troop of deer when the panther is
prowling by, they rushed in a body from the scene.
But the flapping of the demon pinions was soon
heard behind them, and the winged head was
hence-forth
on their track wheresoever it led.
In vain did they cross one mountain barrier after
another, plunge into the rocky gorge, or thread the
mazy swamp, to escape their fiendish watcher. The
Flying Head would rise on tireless wings over the
loftiest summit, or dart in arrowy flight through the
narrowest passages without furling its pinions:
while their sullen threshing would be heard even in
those vine-webbed thickets where the little ground
bird can scarcely make its way, The very caverns
of the earth were no protection to the parricides
from its presence; for scarcely would they think
they had found a refuge in some sparry cell, when,
poised midway between the ceiling and the floor,
they would behold the Flying Head glaring upon
them. Sleeping or waking, the monster was ever
near; they paused to rest, but the rushing of its
wings, as it swept around their resting-place in
never-ending circles, prevented them from finding
forgetfulness in repose; or if, in spite of those
blighting pinions that ever fanned them, fatigue did
at moments plunge them in uneasy slumbers, the
glances of the Flying Head would pierce their very
eyelids, and steep their dreams in horror.
What was the ultimate fate of that band of
parricides
,
no one has ever known. Some say that the
Master of Life kept them always young, in order
that their capability of suffering might never wear
out; and these insist that the Flying Head is still
pursuing them over the great prairies of the
far-west
.
Others aver that the glances of the Flying
Head turned each of them gradually into stone; and
these say that their forms, though altered by the
wearing of the rains in the lapse of long years, may
still be recognised in those upright rocks which
stand like human figures along the shores of some
of the neighbouring lakes; though most Indians
have another way of accounting for these figures.
Certain it is, however, that the Flying Head always
comes back to this part of the country about the
times of the equinox; and some say even that you
may always hear the flapping of its wings whenever
such a storm as that we have just weathered is
brewing.
The old hunter had finished his story; but my
companions were still anxious that he should
protract
the narrative, and give us the account of the
grotesque forms to which he had alluded as being
found among these hills. These, however, he told
us more properly belonged to another legend, which
he subsequently related, and which I may hereafter
endeavour to recall.
It was a tale of certain STONE GIANTS that were
invulnerable to the weapons of the Iroquois. I
remember
well that it struck me at the time as
favouring
the wild theory of some writers, that De Soto
ascended the Ohio, and penetrated with his mailed
followers into western New York. Since then,
however, I have thought that the singular tradition
might refer to that memorable invasion of European
Musqueteers and Men-at-arms led on by French
knights and noblemen, which is commemorated in
the following story:
THE LAST ARROW.
The
American reader, if at all curious about the
early history of his country, has probably heard of
that famous expedition undertaken by the vicegerent
of Louis XIV., the governor-general of New France,
against the confederated Six-Nations of New York;
an expedition which, though it carried with it all the
pomp and circumstances of European warfare into
their wild wood haunts, was attended with no
adequate
results, and had but a momentary effect in
quelling the spirit of the tameless Iroquois.
It was on the 4th of July, 1796, that the
commander-in-chief
,
the veteran Count de Frontenac,
marshalled the forces at La Chine, with which he
intended to crush for ever the powers of the
Aganuschion
confederacy. His regulars were divided into
four battalions, of two hundred men each,
commanded
respectively by three veteran leaders, and the
young Chevalier de Grais. He formed also four
battalions of Canadian volunteers, efficiently
officered
,
and organized as regular troops. The Indian
allies were divided into three bands, each of which
was placed under the command of a nobleman of
rank, who had gained distinction in the European
warfare of France. One was composed of the Sault
and St. Louis bands and of friendly Abenaquis;
another consisted of the Hurons of Lorette and the
mountaineers of the north; the third band was
smaller, and composed indiscriminately of warriors
of different tribes, whom a spirit of adventure led to
embark upon the expedition. They were chiefly
Ottawas, Saukies, and Adirondachs, and these the
Baron de Bekancourt charged himself to conduct.
This formidable armament was amply provisioned,
and provided with all the munitions of war.
Besides
pikes, harquebusses, and other small arms then
in use, they were furnished with grenades, a mortar
to throw them, and a couple of field-pieces, which,
with the tents and other camp equipage, were
transported
in large batteaux built for the purpose. Nor
was the energy of their movements unworthy of this
brilliant preparation. Ascending the St. Lawrence,
and coasting the shores of Lake Ontario, they
entered
the Oswego River, cut a military road around the
falls, and, carrying their transports over the portage,
launched them anew, and finally debouched with
their whole flotilla upon the waters of Onondago Lake.
It must have been a gallant sight to behold the
warlike pageant floating beneath the primitive forest
which then crowned the hills around that lovely
water. To see the veterans who had served under
Turenne, Vauban, and the great Cond, marshalled
with pike and cuirass beside the half-naked Huron
and Abenaquis; while the young cavaliers, in the
less warlike garb of the court of the magnificent
Louis, moved with plume and mantle amid the
dusky files of wampum-decked Ottawas and
Algonquins
.
Banners were there which had flown at
Steenkirk and Landen; or rustled above the
troop-ers
that Luxemburgh's trumpets had guided to
glory, when Prince Waldeck's battalions were
borne down beneath his furious charge. Nor was
the enemy that this gallant host were seeking
unworthy
of those whose swords had been tried in some
of the most celebrated fields of Europe. The
Romans of America, as the Six-Nations have been
called by more than one writer, had proved
themselves
soldiers, not only by carrying their arms among
the native tribes a thousand miles away, and
striking
their enemies alike upon the lakes of Maine, the
mountains and morasses of Carolina, the cane-brakes
of Kentucky,
[6]
[6]
The Dark and Bloody Ground of Kentucky, though
generally
supposed to be so called from the slaughter of its white
pioneers
,
dates its name from a much earlier period; when the
Iroquois
,
lured thither by the abundant game, would descend the Ohio
in their canoes, and battle with the hostile tribes of the Lower
Mississippi.
and the prairies of the Missouri; but
they had already bearded one European army
beneath
the walls of Quebec, and shut up another for
weeks within the defences of Montreal, with the
same courage that, half a century later, vanquished
the battalions of Dieskau upon the banks of Lake
George.
Our business, however, is not with the main
movements of this army, which we have already
mentioned were wholly unimportant in their results.
The aged Chevalier de Frontenac was said to have
other objects in view besides the political motives
for the expedition, which he set forth to his master,
the Grand Monarque.
Many years previously, when the Six-Nations
had invested the capital of New France and
threatened
the extermination of that thriving colony, a
beautiful half-blood girl, whose education had been
commenced under the immediate auspices of the
governor-general, and in whom, indeed, M. de
Frontenac was said to have a parental interest, was
carried off, with other prisoners, by the retiring foe.
Every effort had been made in vain during the
occasional
cessation of hostilities between the French
and the Iroquois, to recover this child; and though,
in the years that intervened, some wandering Jesuit
from time to time averred that he had seen the
Christian captive living as the contented wife of a
young Mohawk warrior, yet the old nobleman seems
never to have despaired of reclaiming his
nut-brown
daughter. Indeed, the chevalier must have
been impelled by some such hope when, at the age
of seventy, and so feeble that he was half the time
carried in a litter, he ventured to encounter the perils
of an American wilderness, and place himself at the
head of the heterogeneous bands which now invaded
the country of the Six-Nations under his conduct.
Among the half-breed spies, border scouts, and
mongrel adventurers that followed in the train of
the invading army, was a renegade Fleming, of the
9
name of Hanyost. This man in early youth had
been made a sergeant-major, when he deserted to
the French ranks in Flanders. He had subsequently
taken up a military grant in Canada, sold it after
emigrating, and then, making his way down to the
Dutch settlements on the Hndson, had become
domiciliated, as it were, among their allies, the
Mohawks
,
and adopted the life of a hunter. Hanyost,
hearing that his old friends, the French, were
making
such a formidable descent, did not now hesitate
to desert his more recent acquaintances; but
offered
his services as a guide to Count de Frontenac
the moment he entered the hostile country. It was
not, however, mere cupidity, or the habitual love of
treachery, which actuated the base Fleming in this
instance. Hanyost, in a difficulty with an Indian
trapper, which had been referred for abitrament to
the young Mohawk chief, Kiodago, (a settler of
disputes
,)
whose cool courage and firmness fully
entitled
him to so distinguished a name, conceived
himself
aggrieved by the award which had been given
against him. The scorn with which the arbitrator
met his charge of unfairness, stung him to the soul,
and, fearing the arm of the powerful savage, he had
nursed the revenge in secret, whose
accomplishment
seemed now at hand.
Kiodago, ignorant of the hostile force which had
entered his country, was off with his band at a
fishing
station or summer-camp, among the wild hills
about Konnedieyu;
[7]
[7]
Since corrupted into Canada creek,Beautiful water;
probably
so called from its amber colournow Trenton Falls.
and, when Hanyost informed
the commander of the French forces that, by
surprising
this party, his long-lost daughter, the wife
of Kiodago, might be once more given to his arms,
a small, but efficient, force was instantly detached
from the main body of the army, to strike the blow.
A dozen musqueteers, with twenty-five pikemen, led
severally by the Baron de Bekancourt and the
Chevalier de Grais, the former having the chief
command of the expedition, were sent upon this
duty, with Hanyost to guide them to the village of
Kiodago. Many hours were consumed upon the
march, as the soldiers were not yet habituated to
the wilderness; but just before dawn on the second
day, the party found themselves in the
neighbourhood
of the Indian village.
The place was wrapped in repose, and the two
cavaliers trusted that the surprise would be so
complete
,
that their commandant's daughter must
certainly
be taken. The baron, after a careful
examination
of the hilly passes, determined to head the
onslaught, while his companion in arms, with
Hanyost
to mark out his prey, should pounce upon the
chieftain's wife. This being arranged, their
followers
were warned not to injure the female captives
while cutting their defenders to pieces; and then, a
moment being allowed for each man to take a last
look at the condition of his arms, they were led to
the attack.
The inhabitants of the fated village, secure in their
isolated situation, aloof from the war parties of that
wild district, had neglected all precaution against
surprise, and were buried in sleep when the
whizzing
of a grenade, that terrible, but now superseded,
engine of destruction, roused them from their
slumbers
.
The missile, to which a direction had been
given that carried it in a direct line through the
main row of wigwams which formed the little street,
went crashing among their frail frames of
basket-work
,
and kindled the dry mats stretched over them
into instant flames. And then, as the startled
warriors
leaped all naked and unarmed from their
blazing
lodges, the French pikemen, waiting only for a
volley from the musqueteers, followed it up with a
charge still more fatal. The wretched savages were
slaughtered like sheep in the shambles. Some,
overwhelmed with dismay, sank unresisting upon
the ground, and, covering up their heads after the
Indian fashion when resigned to death, awaited the
fatal stroke without a murmur; others, seized with
a less benumbing panic, sought safety in flight, and
rushed upon the pikes that lined the forest's paths
around them. Many there were, however, who,
schooled to scenes as dreadful, acquitted themselves
like warriors. Snatching their weapons from the
greedy flames, they sprang with irresistible fury
upon the bristling files of pikemen. Their heavy
war-clubs beat down and splintered the fragile spears
of the Europeans, whose corslets, ruddy with the
reflected fires mid which they fought, glinted back
still brighter sparks from the hatchets of flint which
crashed against them. The fierce veterans pealed
the charging cry of many a well-fought field in other
climes; but wild and high the Indian whoop rose,
shrill above the conflict, until the hovering raven in
mid air caught up, and answered, that discordant
shriek.
De Grais in the meantime surveyed the scene
of action with eager intentness, expecting each
moment
to see the paler features of the Christian
captive
among the dusky females who ever and anon
sprang shrieking from the blazing lodges, and were
instantly hurled backward into the flames by fathers
and brothers, who even thus would save them from
the hands that vainly essayed to grasp their
distracted
forms. The Mohawks began now to wage
a more successful resistance; and just when the
fight was raging hottest, and the high-spirited
Frenchman, beginning to despair of his prey, was
about launching into the midst of it, he saw a tall
warrior who had hitherto been forward in the
conflict
,
disengage himself from the mele, and,
wheeling
suddenly upon a soldier, who had likewise
separated from his party, brain him with a
tomahawk
before he could make a movement in his
defence
.
The quick eye of the young chevalier, too, caught
a glance of another figure, in pursuit of whom as
she emerged, with an infant in her arms, from a
lodge on the farther side of the village, the luckless
Frenchman had met his doom. It was the Christian
captive, the wife of Kiodago, beneath whose hand
he had fallen. That chieftain now stood over the
body of his victim, brandishing a war-club which he
had snatched from a dying Indian near. Quick as
thought, De Grais levelled a pistol at his head, when
the track of the flying girl brought her directly in his
9*
line of sight, and he withheld his fire. Kiodago in
the meantime had been cut off from the rest of his
people by the soldiers, who closed in upon the space
which his terrible arm had a moment before kept
open. A cry of agony escaped the high-souled
savage, as he saw how thus the last hope was lost.
He made a gesture, as if about to rush again into
the fray, and sacrifice his life with his tribesmen;
and then, perceiving how futile must be the act, he
turned upon his heel, and bounded after his
retreating
wife with arms outstretched, to shield her from
the dropping shots of the enemy.
The uprising sun had now lighted up the scene;
but all this passed so instantaneously, that it was
impossible for De Grais to keep his eye on the
fugitives
amid the shifting forms that glanced
continually
before him; and when, accompanied by
Hanyost
and seven others, he had got fairly in pursuit,
Kiodago, who still kept behind his wife, was far in
advance of the chevalier and his party.
Her forest training had made the Christian
captive
as fleet of foot as an Indian maiden. She heard,
too, the cheering voice of her loved warrior behind
her, and, pressing her infant in her arms, she urged
her flight over crag and fell, and soon reached the
head of a rocky pass, which it would take some
moments for any but an American forester to scale.
But the indefatigable Frenchmen are urging their
way up the steep; the cry of pursuit grows nearer
as they catch a sight of her husband through the
thickets, and the agonized wife finds her onward
progress prevented by a ledge of rock that impends
above her. But now again Kiodago is by her side;
he has lifted his wife to the cliff above, and placed
her infant in her arms; and already, with renewed
activity, the Indian mother is speeding on to a
cavern among the hills, well known as a fastness
of safety.
Kiodago looked a moment after her retreating
figure, and then coolly swung himself to the ledge
which commanded the pass. He might now easily
have escaped his pursuers; but as he stepped back
from the edge of the cliff, and looked down the
narrow
ravine, the vengeful spirit of the red man was
too strong within him to allow such an opportunity
of striking a blow to escape. His tomahawk and
war-club had both been lost in the strife, but he still
carried at his back a more efficient weapon in the
hands of so keen a hunter. There were but three
arrows in his quiver, and the Mohawk was
determined
to have the life of an enemy for each of them.
His bow was strung quickly, but with as much
coolness
as if there were no exigency to require haste.
Yet he had scarcely time to throw himself upon his
breast, a few yards from the brink of the declevity,
before one of his pursuers, more active than the rest,
exposed himself to the unerring archer. He came
leaping from rock to rock, and had nearly reached
the head of the glen, when, pierced through and
through by one of Kiodago's arrows, he toppled from
the crags, and rolled, clutching the leaves in his
death-agony, among the tangled furze below. A
second met a similar fate, and a third victim would
probably have been added, if a shot from the fusil
of Hanyost, who sprang forward and caught sight of
the Indian just as the first man fell, had not disabled
the thumb-joint of the bold archer, even as he fixed
his last arrow in the string. Resistance seemed now
at an end, and Kiodago again betook himself to flight.
Yet anxious to divert the pursuit from his wife, the
young chieftain pealed a yell of defiance, as he
retreated
in a different direction from that which she
had taken. The whoop was answered by a
simultaneous
shout and rush on the part of the whites;
but the Indian had not advanced far before he
perceived
that the pursuing party, now reduced to six,
had divided, and that three only followed him. He
had recognised the scout, Hanyost, among his
enemies
,
and it was now apparent that the wily traitor,
instead of being misled by his
ruse
, had guided the
other three upon the direct trail to the cavern which
the Christian captive had taken. Quick as thought,
the Mohawk acted upon the impression. Making
a few steps within a thicket, still to mislead his
present pursuers, he bounded across a mountain
torrent, and then, leaving his foot-marks dashed in
the yielding bank, he turned shortly on a rock
beyond
,
recrossed the stream, and concealed himself
behind a fallen tree, while his pursuers passed within
a few paces of his covert.
A broken hillock now only divided the chief from
the point to which he had directed his wife by
another route, and to which the remaining party,
consisting of De Grais, Hanyost, and a French
musqueteer, were hotly urging their way. The
hunted warrior ground his teeth with rage when he
heard the voice of the treacherous Fleming in the
glen below him; and, springing from crag to crag,
he circled the rocky knoll, and planted his foot by
the roots of a blasted oak that shot its limbs above
the cavern just as his wife had reached the spot,
and, pressing her babe to her bosom, sank exhausted
among the flowers that waved in the moist breath
of the cave. It chanced that at that very instant
De Grais and his followers had paused beneath the
opposite side of the knoll, from whose broken
surface
the foot of the flying Indian had disengaged a
stone, which, crackling among the branches, found
its way through a slight ravine into the glen below.
The two Frenchmen stood in doubt for a moment.
The musqueteer, pointing in the direction whence the
stone had rolled, turned to receive the order of his
officer. The chevalier, who had made one step in
advance of a broad rock between them, leaned upon
it, pistol in hand, half turning toward his follower;
while the scout, who stood farthest out from the
steep bank, bending forward to discover the mouth
of the cave, must have caught a glimpse of the
sinking
female just as the shadowy form of her husband
was displayed above her. God help thee now, bold
archer! thy quiver is empty; thy game of life is
nearly up; the sleuth-hound is upon thee; and thy
scalp-lock, whose plumes now flutter in the breeze,
will soon be twined in the fingers of the vengeful
renegade! Thy wifeBut hold! the noble
savage has still one arrow left!
Disabled as he thought himself, the Mohawk had
not dropped his bow in his flight. His last arrow
was still griped in his bleeding fingers; and, though
his stiffened thumb forbore the use of it to the best
advantage, the hand of Kiodago had not yet lost its
power.
[8]
[8]
The European mode of holding the arrow is not common
among our aborigines, who use the thumb for a purchase.
The crisis which it takes so long to
describe
,
had been realized by him in an instant. He
saw how the Frenchmen, inexperienced in
woodcraft
,
were at fault; he saw, too, that the keen eye
of Hanyost had caught sight of the object of their
pursuit, and that farther flight was hopeless; while
the scene of his burning village in the distance
inflamed
him with hate and fury toward the instrument
of his misfortunes. Bracing one knee upon the flinty
rock, while the muscles of the other swelled as if
the whole energies of his body were collected in that
single effort, Kiodago aims at the treacherous scout,
and the twanging bow-string dismisses his last arrow
upon its errand. The hand of
The Spirit
could
alone have guided that shaft. It misses its mark!
But
Waneyo
smiles upon the brave warrior, and
the arrow, while it rattles harmless against the
cuirass of the French officer, glances toward the
victim for whom it was intended, and quivers in the
heart of Hanyost! The dying wretch grasped the
sword-chain of the chevalier, whose corslet clanged
among the rocks as the two went rolling down the
glen together; and De Grais was not unwilling to
abandon the pursuit, when the musqueteer, coming
to his assistance, had disengaged him, bruised
and bloody, from the embrace of the stiffening
corpse!
The rest is soon told. The bewildered
Europeans
rejoined their comrades, who were soon after
on their march from the scene they had desolated;
while Kiodago descended from his eyrie to collect
the fugitive survivers of his band, and, after burying
the slain, to wreak a terrible vengeance upon their
murderers; the most of whom were cut off by him
before they joined the main body of the French army.
The Count de Frontenac, returning to Canada, died
soon afterward, and the existence of his half-blood
daughter was forgotten. And though among the
score of old families in the state of New York who
have Indian blood in their veins, many trace their
descent from the offspring of the noble Kiodago and
his Christian wife, yet the hand of genius, as
displayed
in the admirable picture of Chapman, has
alone rescued from oblivion the thrilling scene of the
Mohawk's
Last Arrow
!
The storm of the last night had not subsided on
the morrow, and Major Peabody proclaimed,
authoritatively
,
that it was folly to leave our comfortable
quarters in such weather. The major presented a
singular appearance as I first viewed him engaged
in taking an observation, when I awakened in the
morning. Being in his stocking-feet, he had
avoided
the disagreeableness of stepping upon the wet
ground without the shantee to study the elements,
by raising his tall body erect upon the place where
he had slept, and thrusting his head through the
bark roof much after the fashion of a man in the
pillory. Hearing his voice on the outside of the
wigwam, I had stepped through the doorway
without
observing his lean and Quixotic figure within:
and when this lantern-jawed countenance, reposing,
as it were, upon the roof, first met my eyes, I rubbed
them in doubt whether the Flying Head of which I
had heard the night before was not yet bewildering
my senses.
Our party generally was disposed to abide by the
counsels of Major Jake, and remain within doors,
amusing themselves by putting their various hunting
accoutrements in order for the morrow. One or two,
however, went off to catch some lake-trout for our
dinner; and as the Indians philosophically got rid
of a rainy day by sleeping like hounds before the
fire, the major had but a small audience, when, after
calling in vain for another Iroquois legend to amuse
us, my friend and I prevailed upon him to relate
the principal adventures of his own life, which he
did in nearly the following words:
THE MAJOR'S STORY.
For earthly goods he cared not more, because
He went to work to carve his proper share
From out the common stock, as coolly as
You would a morsel from a pippin pare.
A shrewd, but wild and wayward chap he was;
Cautious, but danger ready still to dare
(If by it he could rise or win) on field or flood;
A pedler even of his heart's best blood!
You
mustn't think, because you're hear'n me
called major by all the folks round the country, that
I'm much stuck up by the title, for it's only a militia
one, which, you know, is not of much account to a
man who has once been a breveted captain in the
regular
service. This, however, is neither here nor there;
for, though I have worn Uncle Sam's livery for some
years, and smelt gunpowder upon more than one
occasionay, and killed my man too, in a duelyet
natur never meant me for an officer. I never took
to the thing in the best of times, and I never now
can account for my luck in getting an epaulet on my
shoulder, and being thought the fire-eater, which
some of my old comrades will describe to you when
you ask them about Jake Peabody. But this again
is neither here nor there; let me begin with the
commencement
of my story, which, when it tires you,
you will please to interrupt just as you please.
I was born in Albany, in Old York state, in a
small house, which is, perhaps, still standing at the
north end, down by Fox Creek. My father was a
Connecticut horse-doctor, or, as he more politely
styled himself in latter years, a veterinary surgeon.
My mother was born of Yankee parents, in
Rensselaer
County; but she was the widow of an old
Dutchman
up in the
colonie
when my father took her to
wife, and stepped into mynheer's property along
the creek.
Being the youngest son, I came into the world
after my father had got his head pretty well above
water, and had, therefore, greater advantages of
ed
i
cation than the rest of my family. The old
gentleman
,
who took particular delight in being
addressed
10
as Doctor Peabody, hoped that the son who bore
his name might some day turn out a real M.D.;
and, as the first step toward such a consummation,
I was taken from the academy when a boy of eleven,
and placed in a druggist's shop.
The person to whom I was apprenticed kept
his office upon the water-side, near the skirts of the
town, where, what with keel-boatmen from the
Mohawk
,
Schenectady teamsters, Sacondaga raftsmen,
and an occasional North River skipper for
customers
,
he contrived to drive a pretty brisk trade in
certain
medicines, and initiate his pupil in a branch of
practice which had a wonderful tendency to give
me an insight into what, in larger cities, is called
`life.' You will not wonder, therefore, that, in
exchange
for the vegetable and mineral nostrums,
which it was my duty to vend to our customers, I
readily imbibed a moral poison, hardly less
pernicious
;
nor that I was sent a packing by my bos
before
I was fifteen, because he had discovered that I
was too old to continue longer the playmate of his
daughter Nautie, and he knew not how otherwise
to break off an intercourse which had ripened into
too great familiarity.
I was in no want of friends, however. My
father
,
indeed, was dead; and, my mother having taken
unto herself a third helpmate, my brothers troubled
themselves but little about such a scapegrace as they
considered me. But among raftsmen and skippers
I was favourably known; and one of the latter readily
took me on board of a coasting schooner, until
something
better should offer.
Our first voyage from Albany was to a port in
Long Island Sound, whither the skipper was bound
with a cargo of shingles. Here I met with a
Connecticut
medicine pedler, who was about starting to
Georgia with a large supply of a patent carminative,
of which he attempted to force some sales among
our crew. This fellow conceived a fancy for me
from the moment I exposed his quackery, and was
very solicitous to employ so cute a lad, as he called
me, in the manufacture of an article which I seemed
to understand so well. But I declined his overtures,
from having higher things in view. The truth is,
upon our first landing at the place I had seen a
newspaper in the bar-room of an inn, which set my
ambition all on fire. It was an advertisement, which
ran as follows:
`To young gentlemen wishing to travel
`A middle-aged gentleman, engaged in an
agreeable and lucrative business, which leads him
to take extensive tours over various parts of the
Union, is desirous of a young and intelligent
companion
,
whose duties would be merely nominal, and
who, in forming a most improving connexion, would
have an opportunity of visiting the most interesting
cities and towns of the United States, without
incurring
a particle of expense. Applicants for the
situation will address
Viator
, at this office; and
none but young gentleman of the first respectability
need apply.'
You may think me presumptuous in preferring
a claim to such a place; but, nevertheless, I
immediately
answered the advertisement by asking an
interview with Viator at such time and place as he
should choose to designate. I confess I thought that
I was attempting a pretty high flight, and, therefore,
kept my hopes and schemes to myself. Indeed, it
required all the ingenuity of the pedler, who thought
I must have some prospect in view, from so
peremptorily
declining his offerit required all his skill,
I say, to worm my real purpose out of me. I did,
however, communicate it to him, and you may judge
of my surprise when, upon my telling him that I
hourly expected an answer to my note, he produced
it from his pocket, and, quietly announcing himself
as the `middle-aged gentleman' with whom I had
been treating anonymously, added, that there was
now no difficulty in at once arranging matters. The
first castle in the air I had ever built was thus
demolished
in a moment. But I suppressed the
mortification
of my feelings; and, having now made up
my mind to see the world in some way or other, I
closed at once with the overtures of the pedler. The
connexion, it is true, did not elevate me in the world,
but it might open the means of rising.
I passed two or three years in travelling with
this man through the south-western states: he was
frugal, kind, and considerate, and of the most
scrupulous
honesty in every respect, save where the
disposal
of his patent medicine was concerned; and I
verily believe that he would have sold a bottle of
this to his best friend, though the use of it might
destroy the purchaser in an hour afterward. With
regard to me, he exhibited ever the care of a father,
until his stock in trade becoming one day exhausted
while at a thriving village in East Tennesee, I
became
exceedingly ill shortly afterward, and had good
reason to believe that my worthy master had
induced
the sickness by experiments upon me with
some simples, from which he hoped to prepare a
new compound that might enable him to supply his
customers. I kept the suspicion to myself,
however
;
and, after seeing some fifty persons in the
neighbourhood hurried off by what in that country
is called the milk-sicknesswhose worst symptoms,
by the by, were always aggravated by the vegetable
remedies which my associate exhibitedwe
decamped
one night, and took our way along the
mountain-ridge which enters Virginia not far north
of this point. But here I and my master were
doomed to part company, in a way that makes us
unlikely to meet again in the United States.
A disbanded regulator of the Georgia guard,
with a Lynch-ing corn-cracker from that state,
accompanied
by a couple of enterprising
counterfeiters
lately thrown out of employ in Kentucky, had
scented the contents of my master's saddle-bags,
and dogged our steps to the wild mountain-passes
about the Cumberland Gap. Here, in a woody
ravine, to which we had withdrawn to take our
noonday meal, apart from the dust of the highway
and the heat of the sun, these worthies joined our
society in a way which, to say the least of it, was
exceedingly abrupt. The first intimation of their
presence was a couple of shots, which killed the
pedler's fine Kentucky horse, and wounded my
Indian
tackey. The latter was a tough and spirited
10*
little animal, for which I had exchanged a
broken-down
nag while passing through the Creek nation.
He was not wounded so badly, however, but that he
bore me quickly out of danger when I leaped upon
his back as the robbers rushed from the bushes upon
the unarmed pedler.
I have often since believed that my patron might
have escaped the dreadful fate which overtook him
a few moments afterward, if he had kept a quiet
tongue between his teeth; but his Connecticut
notions
of justice impelled him to mutter something
about the law of highway robbery when he saw the
plump saddle-bags which his legs had so often
caressed
,
in the possession of the freebooters. There
was then but a brief parley, the words of which I
could not make out, though I still hovered near,
having secured my pony in a thicket: its purport,
though, was soon apparent. They seized the
pedler
,
and, reckless of his cries, dragged him up a
rocky hill, thick-set with bushes, to the mouth of
one of those lime-stone caverns with which this part
of the country abounds. Here they paused for a
moment, but not to listen to the passionate
pleadings
for liberty, which were redoubled by the victim;
who, however, seemed to anticipate nothing more
than confinement in so dreary a place.
`Strike a light, Jim,' cried one, who appeared
to be the leader.
`You don't want no light,' said the other; `it's
not far from the mouth, and Angus, who has been
in a dozen times, can take your hand and guide
you.'
At the word, a carroty-headed fellow stepped
forward, and, taking the hand of the leader, moved
in advance as his pioneer, while the two assisted
him in dragging the pedler within the cave. The
mouth was thick-grown with tall weeds, and much
obscured with fallen boughs and brush of one kind
or another, which had from time to time accumulated
over it. Supple and active, I did not hesitate to
worm my way through this screen, and penetrate
into the dark region beyond, which once gained, I
knew I must be safe. The struggles and outcry of
the pedler prevented the robbers from observing
any rustling I might make in moving through the
thicket beside them, and I gained the cover of the
cavern before their forms had wholly darkened the
entrance. The pedler did not struggle much as
they pushed and dragged him through the passage;
indeed, he seemed rather to catch at their garments,
lest they should suddenly retrace their steps and
close up the entrance; and he besought them, in
the most piteous terms, not to imprison him in the
vault without a chance of escape.
`I shall starveI shall certainly starve in this
cavern! For God's sake, if you would murder me
by inches, gentlemen, let me be tied to a tree, and
die in the light of day!'
He spoke; but his pleadings did not for an
instant
defer a fate more appalling than any he yet
anticipated: a fate which Providence alone
prevented
me from sharing, as the nearness of the ruffians
now was all that hindered me from penetrating
farther
into the cavern, when my instant doom would
have been that which was intended only for my poor
patron. But, fearful of my footfalls being heard, I
remained still; placing my body in a cleft of the
rock, while the whole party groped their way along
the wall, so near to me that, while by a miracle
they failed to touch me, it seemed as if the beatings
of my heart must have been audible. They paused
within two yards in advance of where I stood.
`Are we near it, Angus? cried the captain.
`Hand me a stone, and I'll try; or do you chuck
one before me from where you stand.'
The stone was thrown. It seemed long in
coming
to the earth, but at last, after one or two rebounds,
which sounded hollowly against the sides of a deep
pit, it reached its destination, and the last faint echo
seemed to rise from beneath the very spot were we
were standing.
`By Gd!' cried the ruffian pioneer, `I am
on the brink of the precipice myself; one step more,
and I should have pulled you all to hl along with
me! Stand exactly where you are, Captain; and
you and Humphrey take the Yankee nigger by his
shoulders. Jim, do you move this waystep
carefully
though, Gd dmn you, and seize the other
leg.'
`Ah, I take the idea.'
`Are you all ready?' said the captain, when the
victim was secured in the manner indicated, and
swung like a pendulum between the four; `have
you got a fair hold, Jim?'
Yesbut we'd better yet have a light; my
place here in front is cursed pokerish.'
The suggestion awakened the hope of a
moment's
respite in the pedler's bosom.
`Yes, a lighta light in the name of Jesus the
merciful, gentlemen! let me look on my death!
let me see your faces! Ye are changed into fiends,
are ye, since we came into this horrible place!
I cannotI will notI' Here his struggles
became so violent that I lost the rest that he said.
A burst of merriment, that rung like the laughter
of demons through the vault, told that this last
effort for liberty was fruitless; and, overcome with
exhaustion, he lay, panting, upon the floor of the
cavern.
`Now for a game of Alligator, Jim.'
`As quick as you please, Captain; he'll launch
easily, now, if you'll give the word at once.'
`Lift,' said the captain.
`All up,' was the answer.
`Now, then, together, boys.'
`One to make ready.'
`Two to show.'
`Three to make ready.'
`And four to go!'
A hideous yell of more than mortal agony
drowned the last word. To give force to the heave,
they had swung the pedler's body so far back the
fourth time, that the hair of his head actually grazed
my body. The cry of his parting soul seemed to
spring at first from my own bosom; it swelled to
its highest pitch in the moment that he was
launched
over the brink of the abyss; and it died away in
a hissing moan a thousand feet below me. A dull
reverberation from the falling body followed, and
then all was still.
`Well, Yankee, you'll tell no tales,' said the
ruffian called Humphrey, who had not before spoken,
and who seemed more of a novice at such business
than the others. The party then left the cavern in
silence, as if the affair, once despatched, was not
worth an afterthought. I stood for some time
transfixed
with horror. The whole scene had passed
amid total darkness, the dropping vault of the cavern
near the entrance not allowing the light of day to
penetrate thus far into these now accursed chambers;
and I felt like one who had intruded upon some
doings of the damned, deep within the bowels of the
earth. At last, moved by better feelings, reckless
whether or not any of the gang might hear me, if
still loitering about the place, I shouted to my
ill-fated
friend, as the idea flashed across me that life
might possibly yet linger in his mutilated form. I
screamed to him at the top of my voice, and a dismal
howl seemed to answer from the gulf; I shrieked
again, but heard only, as before, the same fearful echo
to my own voice. The place had been turned into
a grave, and
that
gives no reply. A superstitious
terror seized upon me; I felt as if something were
dragging me backward to that horrid chasm, and,
groping anxiously till I met a ray of light from the
entrance of the cavern, I rushed from it in an agony
of fear, the bitterest I have ever known.
The land pirates had disappeared, without
molesting
my tackey, who soon carried me to a safer
region farther east. Abingdon, in Washington
County
,
Virginia, was the first place where I ventured to
stop and seek employment. The valley used to be
a beautiful green basin among the hills in those days;
and here the principal hotel being in want of a
bar-keeper
,
I was glad to fill a station, among people
who knew nothing about me, which, at the same
time that it was comfortable in itself, gave me an
opportunity of mixing, after a fashion, with all the
young bucks and politicians. There were, too, at
that time, many of your real old-fashioned Virginny
gentlemen in Abingdon; good fellows, who wouldn't
disdain to hold a chat with a white man while mixing
a julep, though he did stand behind a bar. Well,
during all the two years I was there, I never let out
where I came from, nor where I was going to.
Jacobs was the name I bore, and under this name I
used to mingle with all sorts of people during
court-week
,
and pick up something about books and
manners, which has served my turn ever since. For
you may depend, that a man can never play
gentleman
well, unless he has served some sort of
apprenticeship
to it; and that, I take it, is the reason why
in our northern cities, where fortunes are made so
quick, you so often see servants better bred than
their masters. Well, after I had laid up a little
money, and learned how your quality folk conduct
themselves toward each other, I left Abingdon, and
made my way to Charleston, on the Kenhawa,
where I fitted myself out with some new clothes,
and took my passage in a salt-boat to Cincinnati.
Here I provided myself with a pair of saddle-bags,
and a stock of medicines to fill them, crossed over
into Kentucky, and bought a good horse at
George-town
,
and then, returning to Ohio, took up my line
of march for the interior.
Now, it chanced that about this time the
breaking
out of the war had brought some levies of
western volunteers and drafted militia, on their way
to the frontier, to the village of Urbanna, where I
had put up, announcing myself as Dr. Peabody.
Well, most of the officers were real harem-scarem
fellows; they seemed to be marching in loose
detachments
,
loitering from day to day for the baggage
to come up, and drinking confusion every night to
those in authority, who had as yet not even made
any medical provision for so large a body of men.
Indeed, disease had already broken out among them,
from robbing the orchards as they came along; and
during a halt of three days I made myself so useful
and agreeable, in prescribing for the sick and
frolicking
with the well, that by the time the general and
his staff came up with the fourth regiment of infantry,
who joined us at this point, every officer had signed
a paper, which I soon set afloat, recommending me
as an army surgeon. And, in fact, soon after I
received a demi-official appointment as
assistant-surgeon
of the drafted forces. I was already
mounted
,
and my blue coat was soon converted into a
uniform, by clapping a collar of black velvet on it,
and sticking a button on either side. I appropriated
the sword of a dead drummer as my fee for easing
him off handsomely during an attack of cholera
morbus, which compelled him to beat his last tattoo:
and now Surgeon Peabody, who was already a
favourite with the officers, could ruffle it with the
best of them. My tavern experience had given me
a knowledge of the kitchen, which made my services
highly valued by some of the old cocks in catering
for the mess; and I had a sort of knowledge of life,
which took mightily with the younkers.
The presence of so large a body of regulars
infused something like discipline into our ranks, and
our men reached the Miami of the lakes in such
good condition, that I began to have quite an opinion
of my medical skill; when my talents as a surgeon
were put to their first proof in a way that took the
conceit out of me a little.
I was one day holding a pleasant talk with a
militia colonel, who rode at the head of his division,
when I was suddenly called to the rear, to look after
a man that had been accidentally shot through the
arm by a fellow-volunteer, who, to exhibit at once
his soldiery discipline and skill as a marksman, had
discharged his rifle across the face of the platoon in
which he was marching, at a squirrel that was
skipping
along a log by the road-side. The wounded
man was sitting upon the log when I reached the
spot, and all so covered with blood, that I could
hardly find the place of his hurt. Not knowing
exactly how to treat a gunshot wound, I still thought
common sense dictated that the first thing to be done
was to plug up the hole which the bullet had made,
and I therefore tried very hard to fill it with a
pledget of tow; but all my squeezing and pushing
only made the blood flow the faster; the tow was
forced out as fast as I stuck it in, and at last I saw
11
that nothing could be done until I had got this
effusion
of blood under. I had more than once assisted
my old masters at ordinary bleedings, and had
sometimes
helped to tie the bandages afterward: and
these, I remembered, always stopped the flow of
blood from the veins, by being tied below the
venesection
;
and God forgive me! but I never dreamed
of there being such a thing as an artery, much less
did I know anything of the circulation of the blood
when I clapped a tourniquet below the wound, upon
that poor fellow's arm. He bled like an ox; and,
seeing that I could do nothing to stop it, I told his
friends, who had left the ranks to gather round him,
that he was mortally wounded, and beyond the reach
of surgery. I helped to place him upon a smooth
stump, that he might go off with some comfort, and
felt mightily relieved at the kind manner in which
he welcomed his fate; especially when I used to
think afterward of the tomahawking upon the River
Raisin, which he thus escaped. The last thing I
heard him say, before I left him to his friends, and
resumed my place in the line, was addressed to the
man that shot him, in these terms: `Well, Evert,
don't be cast down now, because you've done for
me; I'll allow it was a nation bad shot at the
squirrel
,
and that's enough to make you feel ugly; but
as for your hitting me, why, that was all along of my
bad luck; only tell the old man that I died game.
Kiss Nan for me, and take good care of my mare;
poor creetur, she'll break her legs between some of
these cursed logs, afore the campaign's over.'
The last word was uttered with a sort of hiccough,
and the backwoodsman fainted, never to revive again,
as they told me afterward.
My next case was rather more fortunate, being
taken off my hands before I could enter fairly upon
its treatment. I had been left in the rear with some
sick men, who, as soon as convalescent, joined a
company of Ohio volunteers, who, under the
command
of Captain Brush, had arrived at the River
Raisin with- supplies for the army. Major Van
Horn, you may remember, was sent with a
detachment
from Detroit to escort Brush's company to
head-quarters, but was used up by Tecumseh, near
Brownstown, before he could join us. A larger force
was, therefore, sent to perform this duty; and when
I learned from a scout that Colonel Miller, with three
hundred regulars of the gallant 4th, the old
Tippecanoe
regiment, was marching toward us, I
volunteered
to push through the woods and warn him that
Major Muir of the Britishers was waiting for him
at Magagua, with a large force of Indians and
regulars
.
Making a circuit through the woods, I reached
Muir's position just as Captain Snelling, who
commanded
the American advance, had entered the
ambuscade, and the Indians broke their cover. The
red-skins had a cool chap to deal with in Snelling.
The painted devils came yelling upon him as if they
had their fingers already twisted in the scalps of his
men. ButLord, it's pleasant to see regulars fight
why, Snelling did not even think it worth while
to fall back on the main body. His little corps there
kept its ground until Miller came up, and made the
British regulars, who had moved to the support of
the Indians, give way before his solid charge; i'faith,
it was Greek meeting Greek. There are no troops
better with the bayonet than the British, but Miller
is just the fellow to lead men of blood as good as
theirs. The battle, though, was not yet over.
Tecumseh
drew off his Indians to the woods on each
side of our people, and fought from tree to tree, and
bush to bush, as if he meant to make each inch of
ground his last halting-place. The British regulars
rallied with desperate rivalry of their Indian allies;
and then came a sight I have never seen but that
once, though they tell me the same thing happened
at Bridgewaterbayonet crossed bayonet, and the
opposing columns met and waved to and fro for a
moment in one reeling line of bristling steel; while
near them the painted Indians, who yelled like
demons
as they rushed from the forest to aid in turning
the fortunes of the day, were fighting hand to hand
with the grim backwoodsmen. It was strange, when
the crisis of the instant was over, to see the order
that came out of such confusion, when the British,
though borne down by the furious charge of Baker,
Sarabie, and Peters, kept closing up their ranks, and
retreated to their boats as coolly as if upon
field-parade
.
The stars and stripes never had a braver
sword to guard them than that wielded by Ensign
Whistler on that day; but old England's banner
waved hardly less proudly even in defeat.
Ah! it's a pretty sight to see real soldiers cut
each other's throats in a business-like way; and I
was peskily worried when they called me off as I
sat upon the breastwork from which the reserve of
the enemy had been driven, to look after the poor
devils whose business had been only half done for
them. The first wounded man they brought me
had been bored through the thigh by a British
bayonet
.
It was but a boy, and I did not wonder that
he howled like a wild Indian when I applied the
probe to his hurt as he lay upon the rampart. Not
knowing what next to do, I told a couple of fellows
to move him, when, just as one had raised his head,
a ball took him right through the throat, and freed
me at the same time from patient and assistant.
The man that was helping him threw a kind o'
back somerset from the breastwork. He seemed to
think at first that nothing but the shock of the fall
disabled him so suddenly. He floundered about
so curiously in trying to regain his feet, striking out
the while for all the world like an awkward
swimmer
,
or a chicken that beats his wings when the cook
wrings his head off, that I could not forbear from
laughing; though I tell you it made me feel all over
when, with a wriggle of his neck, he suddenly came
to a stand-still, with eyes broad open, and so
sot
in
death upon my own face, that they appeared to look
me through and through. I have often heard
soldiers
laugh in battle when a gunshot wound makes
a comrade cut these antics in dying; and you know
we do become kind o' heathens about such matters;
but, seeing that I was not then a soldier, I never
could forgive myself for laughing at that poor
fellow's
expiring agonies.
The regular surgeon, who accompanied
Miller's
detachment, took the worst cases off my hands
11*
that day, and my next opportunities of practice were
in the fever-hospital of Detroit, where I had not
been many days before the vacillating movements
of Hull upon the opposite side of the river began
to dispirit the whole army, which, as is always the
case, soon swelled the sick list, and I was
superseded
in my duty by an older and more capable
surgeon. My patients were spread out upon the
floor in their blankets when this officer came to
relieve
me of their charge, and examine me as to the
course of treatment I had pursued. `Well, to
business
,
to business, Doctor,' said he, turning up his
nose and filling it with a huge pinch of snuff, as he
first scented the apartment upon entering it; `you
get along with these poor fellows, eheh? Not
lose many of them I hope, eh, Doctor, eh?'
`Why, sir, when the river is at as low a stage
as it is now, with no wind from the lower lakes to
prevent the water from running out and exposing the
decomposing matter upon the banks, they tell me
that this country-fever is incurable. My Creole
assistant
the other day told me that a man who had
just died, introduced him to a New Orleans
acquaintance
in going off; and since then we have
had ten other cases of black vomit.'
`Ehindeedhumhahweehwe must
be mum about all that sort o' thingbad, very bad
plenty of calomel in the medicine chest though, I
suppose?'
`Yes, sir, some; also some salts. In
exhibiting
my remedies, I administer both medicines in
equal quantities, in order that one shall not become
exhausted before the other. This I call the saline
side of the room, and the row of patients opposite
are all under the influence of calomel.'
`Ahehindeedstrange mode of treatment,
but military, eh? Doctor, you draw your men up
in regular lines for their last march. Good! ha!
ha! ha! hum! But from which platoon do you
count off the most convalescent?'
`The average of cures is about the same, sir,
upon either side; is it not, Alphonse?' said I,
turning
to my Creole assistant, who at that moment
approached
us.
`Oui, Monsieurcertainementwe buries
about de same from both rows every day.'
But confound those hospital days; it always
makes me gloomy to talk them over. I had been
making interest for a commission long before I was
relieved from my disagreeable duty in this place;
a friendly representation of one or two little things
which I had done in the way of knocking down an
Indian or so while mingling as an amateur in the
affair of Magagua, procured me an ensign's
commission
,
which I received just in time to include me
among the regulars as a prisoner of war in Hull's
capitulation; but, as the militia were allowed to
return
to their homes after the fall of Detroit, I thought
it better to pocket my unseasonable honours, and
march off as plain Dr. Peabody. The circumstance
afterward gave rise to a dispute as to the actual date
of commission, and my consequent place in the line
of my promotion; but the only officer whose rank
thus jostled with mine was fool enough to force a
hostile meeting upon me two years afterward, when,
you know, a proper regard to the situation of my
name upon the army list compelled me to shoot
him.
Poor Raffles, we were at one time more
intimate
than any two men in the mess. We both of
us played the flute, and were in the habit of
practising
duets together; and, though our fight was all
arranged six weeks before it took place, yet we kept
up our music as usual till the last. The thing
happened
pretty much in this way: You see, one night,
out of sheer kindness, I had volunteered to carry a
challenge for a poor devil, whom his brother officers
had put in Coventry because he was seen taking a
scalp, like a wild Indian, upon the field of battle.
He came and told me of having been grievously
insulted
,
without ever letting on that my friend Raffles
was the man who had put upon him; and, knowing
that no officer in the regiment would stand by the
forlorn creetur, I, out of sheer kindness, offered to
carry his message. The paper was written right
off hand; several other officers were standing by at
the time, and, though it made me feel a little
ridiculous
when I saw my principal coolly put the name
of my most intimate friend upon the back of the
note, you know it was too late to withdraw from my
pledge.
Poor Harry, how he stared when I gave him the
note.
`Why, Jake,' he cried, `dmn it, what's the
meaning of this? you don't mean to stand in that
fellow's shoes, do you?'
`In his shoes? why, God's weather! Harry,
you will meet the man, won't you?'
`My dear Jake, can you expect me to put
myself
upon a level with a scoundrel who has actually
scalped a British officer? What the devil
possessed
you to thrust yourself into such a business as
this?'
`That is neither here nor there, Mr. Raffles;
the person of whom you speak stands in the relation
of my friend at present, and I cannot hear you talk
in that style about him.'
`Mr. Raffles! your friend? Well, sir, you
know best how to play your own game, and for my
part I shall use the privilege which the laws of
honour
allow in these matters. I will meet the
representative
of your friend, sir. I willbut stay
dmn it, Jake, let the thing lie over till to-morrow
morning, and I'll try and make up my mind to meet
your principal.'
It is for your pleasure to determine that matter,
Raffles. My friend, you know, is no shot, and I'
`And you are the best in the regiment. I see
the inference that may be drawn. I thank you for
the hint. Mr. Peabody, I will send a friend to you
in the morning. I wish you a good-night, sir.'
Now blister my blundering tongue, I never
meant my friend to give such a turn to this last
suggestion
;
I merely intended to hint that he might
meet my scalping friend, and tap him gently in the
shoulder without exposing himself to any
inconvenience
,
and so the affair might pass up to the
satisfaction
of all parties; but Raffles, when his honour
was concerned, was just one of those fiery fellows
that will go off upon a half-cock in the hands of the
friends who try to guide him.
Well, the morning came, but the affair was still
in abeyance. My principal had been ordered off,
with a detachment for supplies, in the course of the
night. He was not expected to return for a month,
and all the officers agreed that Raffles ought not
to make public any decision in regard to his choice
of an antagonist until Scalpy, as he was generally
called, should return among us. In the meantime,
when the first sensation of this affair had blown over,
our winter quarters were as dull as ever, and, for
want of something else to amuse us, Raffles and I
resumed our flute practising. Occasionally, too,
when the weather would permit, we took our
fowling-pieces
and went out together after wild ducks.
I don't think, however, that we were exactly the
same to each other as formerly; neither of us would,
of course, show any concern as to what might
happen
,
before the other officers; but we had mighty
little to say to each other when alone. We became,
somehow, cooler and cooler, until it was no longer
`Jake' and `Harry,' but `Mr. Raffles' and `Mr.
Peabody.' Still, however, we kept up our fluting
until the source of all this mischief came back to
camp. And sorry enough were both of us, I guess,
to see him. He had been on a long tramp, through
woods alive with out-lying Indians, and the chances
were ten to one that some of Tecumseh's people
would have made dogs' meat of him. But your bad
penny, somehow, always comes back to hand. The
fellow did return safe and sound, and we had to
make the best of it. He had been living all the
while hand and glove with the vilest of his rangers,
and returned more coarse and vulgar than ever.
Raffles could not bring himself to acknowledge
such a chap as his equal; and I, though I wished
the varmint to the devil, was obliged to fight his
battles for him. We metpoor Harry and I. His
pistol snapped, and I threw away my first fire; but
I did it so unskilfully, that he saw I meant to let
him off, and became furious for another exchange
of shots. The truth is, the man was mad. The
doom of bad luck had gone out against him, and his
eyes were
sot
upon hurrying to his fate. I shot my
friend through the heart, sir, and rose one on the
army list.
The major here gave a dry cough, while a slight
trembling of his eyelids betrayed that he was not
the wholly emotionless being that he would paint
himself.
It was soon after this that General Winchester
had orders to break up his cantonment near the
mouth of the Au Glaize, and push forward to the
Rapids, which we reached through the deep snows
of mid-winter, with about one thousand effective men.
Here we received those expresses from the
inhabitants
of Frenchtown urging us to march upon the
enemy near that point. The appeal fired the souls
of our officers, who burned for action. The gallant
Colonel Allen, who took a conspicuous part in
Winchester's
military council, advocated an immediate
movement. A corps, composed of regulars and
Kentucky volunteers, was organized, and the
command
given to Colonel Lewis. We reached the River
Raisin, which was covered by thick and strong ice.
The British and Indians were posted among the
straggling houses along the banks. They were
apprized of our approach, and we displayed and
marched forward under the fire of musketry and
howitzers. The battalions of Graves and Maddison,
preceded by Ballard's light infantry, charged across
the river, and dislodged the enemy from the houses
and pickets. The Indians fought like fiends
incarnate
,
and Reynolds twice rallied his Englishmen to
the charge; but Allen, with the Kentucky brigade,
dashed amid a shower of bullets upon his left, and
the fortune of the day was soon ours.
But never was a victory attended with such
disastrous
consequences. Infatuated with our success,
we determined to maintain our position, though no
provision had been made by our commander-in-chief
to strengthen us in a proper manner. We had not
a single piece of artillery; and, though General
Winchester
himself joined us with two hundred and fifty
men, yet the most ordinary precautions to keep our
troops together were neglected; nor did he even
place a picket guard upon the only road by which
our position could be conveniently approached. Our
force consisted altogether of only seven hundred and
fifty men, and many of those lay encamped in open
field, when, on the morning of the fatal twenty-second,
Proctor came down upon us with a combined force
of fifteen hundred British and Indians, and six pieces
of artillery. The body of men belonging to the
encampment were instantly overpowered, and my
company and another, which sallied out to their
rescue, were at once cut off; I only, with a couple
of privates, making good my retreat within the line
of our picketing defences. The artillery in the
meantime opened upon this slight breastwork of
pickets, while the British forty-first charged under
cover of the fire; no soldiers could come on more
coolly and steadily, but the British bayonet was no
match then for the Kentucky rifle. They made
three successive assaults, but at each time were
driven back with heavy loss. The terrible
slaughter
in his ranks now made Proctor pause. The
general, and half of our little force, were already in
his hands; and, though he had the means of crushing
the rest of us, it could only be done with immense
loss to himself. He sent a flag proposing a
surrender
,
but we rejected his terms.
Our volunteers consisted chiefly of gentlemen
young lawyers, physicians, Kentucky planters, and
other people of condition, each of whom, though
serving as a private, had an individual character, as
well as his country's honour, to sustain; and all of
us were well armed, and elated with the repulse we
had already given the enemy. We had yet
thirty-five
officers and four hundred and fifty men, after
fighting six hours against artillery and five hundred
British troops, backed by a thousand savages.
Proctor sent another flag, with better terms; but
his message hinted something about the fate we were
likely to meet at the hands of his red allies in case
he was compelled to carry the place by assault;
I 2
while the Indians yelled, during the brief conference,
like wolves ravening for their prey. This, however,
instead of scaring us into compliance, only served to
riley our men. It was, in fact, only a roundabout
way of bullying, to say the best of it. We again
rejected his terms, and resolved to make a die of it.
But Proctor was too many for us; it was in his
power to use us up, and he was determined to do it,
only after his own fashion. He now sent a third
flag, with a communication from our general, that he,
General Winchester, had surrendered us as prisoners
of war, under an explicit engagement that we were
to be protected in our persons and private property,
and have our side-arms returned to us. And now
came the first dissensions among our little force.
Some were wearied out with the toil of the day, and
ready at once to adopt the terms of capitulation;
others were more full of fight than ever, and eager
to go ahead; some argued that it was mutinous not
to come into the terms which our commanding officer
had made for us; and others, again, insisted that,
being a prisoner in the hands of the enemy, he had
no right to make terms for us. But Winchester,
though wanting in conduct as a general, was as
benevolent
as he was brave, and had still the love and
confidence of most of us: his advice, rather than his
order, prevailed, and we surrendered. Never did
men do a weaker thing than surrender themselves,
with arms in their hands, to such an enemy as
Proctor
,
with the hope that a fellow whom Tecumseh
afterward rowed up Salt River, as well as for his want
of faith as his inefficiency in using injuns, could pro
tect them against a horde of infuriated savages.
[9]
[9]
When General Proctor began to prepare for retreating from
Malden, Tecumseh, having learned his intention, demanded an
interview
,
and, in the name of all the Indians, remonstrated in these
terms:
Summer before last, when I came forward with my red brethren,
and took up the hatchet for my British father, you told us to bring
our women and children to this place, and we did so; you also
promised to take care of themthey should want for nothing, while
the men would go and fight the Americans. You also told your red
children that you would take good care of your own garrison here,
which made our hearts glad.
Father, listen! Our fleet has gone outwe know they have
foughtwe have heard the great gunsbut we know nothing of
what has happened to our father with one arm.
**
**
Commodore Barclay, of the British flotilla on Lake
   Erie.
Our ships have
gone one way, and we are much astonished to see our father tying
up everything and preparing to run away the other, without letting
his red children know what his intentions are. You always told us
to remain here, and take care of our lands; it made our hearts glad
to hear that was your wish. Our great father, the king, is the head,
and you represent him. You always told us you would never draw
your foot off British ground. But now, father, we see you are
drawing back, and we are sorry to see our father doing so without
seeing the enemy. We must compare our father's conduct to a fat
dog, that carries its tail upon its back, but, when affrighted, it drops
it between his legs and runs off.
Father! You have got the arms and ammunition which our
great father sent for his red children. If you have an idea of going
away, give them to us, and you may go and welcome for us. Our
lives are in the hands of the Great Spirit. We are determined to
defend our lands; and, if it be his will, we wish to leave our bones
upon them.
Thatcher's Indian Biography
.
I
don't know whether or not the man quailed before the
ferocious demands of his allies; but,
notwithstanding
the humane remonstrance of his own officers,
he did not leave a guard of British soldiers for his
prisoners, as he had pledged himself. The Indians
were set on drinking blood, and he marched off with
his regulars, leaving them to revel in it. Contrary
to express stipulations, the swords were taken from
the sides of our officers, and then, unarmed, and
stripped almost naked, our prisoners were left to be
driven by the Indians in the rear of the English
forces upon their retrograde march to Malden. Few,
however, ever reached that British garrison. Many
were slaughtered upon the spot. Some were
carried
off to be roasted at the stake by the bands of
savages that from time to time dropped off from the
main body, and stole home to make merry with their
captives at a feast of blood. But the most gallant
and distinguished of our officers perished upon the
spot. I saw Colonel Allen, with four kinsmen of
the same name, the youngest a boy of seventeen,
butchered within a hundred yards of the Raisin.
Simpson, the member of congress, with Majors
Madison and Ballard, and Captains Bledsoe,
Hickman
,
Mason, Woolfolk, Kelly, M`Cracken, Williams,
and Hamilton, with many a private who had the best
blood of Kentucky in his veins, all perished in that
field of slaughter. Young Hart, the kinsman of
Harry Clay, who claimed the protection of an old
college chum that he met in the British ranks, was
dragged, wounded, from his horse, and tomahawked
and scalped like the rest. It made my flesh crawl
to hear the shrieks of those dying men as they
howled
curses upon the unheeding Proctor, mingled with
bitter imprecations upon their own folly in trusting
to the mercy of such a foe. But this was not the
worst scene which that day presented.
There were about sixty of our people who,
being
wounded or ill, had sought shelter from the cold
in the house of a Canadian on the banks of the
Raisin. Some had crawled thither amid the
confusion
of the fight; others had been conveyed there by
friends immediately after the surrender; and a few,
like myself, had sought the place to look after a
wounded comrade. The rear guard of the British
regulars had scarce taken up their line of march
before this house was beset by the savages, and fired
in a dozen places. I was kneeling on the floor in
an upper story beside a poor fellow, who, fevered
with his wounds, was swallowing eagerly a handful
of snow which I had just reached to him from the
window-sill, when I heard the Indians whooping
beneath the window, and smelt the smoke coming
up the passage-way. Almost at the same moment
there was a simultaneous cry among the wounded in
the room below us, followed by a rush toward the
door, and yells and groans of agony, as the savages,
rushing into the entry, brained those who attempted
to escape, with their tomahawks. A heavy burst of
smoke, which seemed to come up from the cellar,
succeeded; and, looking out, I saw the Indians
springing by dozens from the window below me.
But while these thus hastened to escape from being
stifled, as many more were pouring into the house
to snatch their scalps from the inmates before the
fire could consume them. The fire had as yet only
burst into flame in the cellar, and the wet clap-boards
on the outside of the house smoked like a pile of
green timber with live coals beneath it. The
Indians
12*
as yet had not come up to where we were; and
when we heard the live flames roaring below, some
prayed for the fate of their friends who had but now
perished with the tomahawk; others, though half
stifled with smoke, seemed only to dread the Indians,
who yelled like wild devils as they glanced in and
out from the building. But now came a grand crash,
which seemed to tell that their fate, whatever it
might be, was at hand. The floor in the room below
gave way, and the sharp yells of sudden agony
which mingled with the moans of the dying
prisoners
,
told that some of the savages must have gone
down with it. I could hear some of them, too,
exhorting
each other as they clung to the steep
stair-case
above them, and tried to mount to the place of
momentary safety where we were. But two
succeeded
;
and the shaven crowns and begrimed faces
of these emerged through the well of the stair-case
along with a burst of flame, which seemed, as it were,
to hoist them into our room like demons lifted upon
their native element. God's weather! had you seen
those horrible faces glowering upon you from out
the fire, you would have cowered in a corner as I
did.
The devils! instead of making at once for the
window, and escaping from the house, as I thought
they would, they began at once to pay about them
with their scalping-knives. They never stopped to
tomahawk men who were too feeble to resist, but
peeled their heads as readily as you would strip the
skin from a ripe peach. Accident, or the eddying
smoke-wreaths, which came thicker and thicker into
the apartment, prevented their seeing me until one
of them had engaged in a death-grapple with a stout
sergeant, who, being only wounded in his knee-pan,
could make good fight with the fellow who threw
himself upon his body to take his scalp.
The first sound of resistance put new life into
my limbs, and I braced myself for a tussle with the
other savage in the same moment that a puff of
wind, wrapping the combatants from view, revealed
me to the Indian who was springing to the
assistance
of his comrade. He turned upon me so
abruptly
that he stumbled over a dead body by my
side, and I flung myself upon him, and plucked his
scalping-knife from the floor, as it stood quivering
where his hand had drove it in falling. He was a
stout and heavy savage; and, though not slow
myself
at wrestling, he turned me under him at the first
grapple, and planted his fingers at my throat with a
grip like an armorer's vice. The knife was still in
my hand, but it was bent nearly double; and if I
had lifted my arm, he would have wrenched it from
me to a certainty. I pretended, therefore, to be
quite spent, while straightening the knife by
pressing
the blade beneath my wrist against the floor.
The next moment I made another strugglethe
Indian raised himself a little to get a better hold,
and then, as he came down with his full weight upon
my body, I slipped aside so adroitly that the knife,
which I had raised on the butt-end, entered his
bosom
clean up to the haft, and the warm blood,
spouting
over my face, made it as red as his own.
All this, as you may conceive, passed in less
time than I take in telling it. Yet even in that space
of time the fire had gained upon us fearfully, and
put an end to the fight of the sergeant and his
Indian
in the same moment that I despatched mine.
The rafters on the opposite side of the room gave
way; and the white and red man, with hands
clutched in each other's hair, were plunged amid
the roaring flames below.
Now, the sight of those flames was just what
saved my life after all. I seized my Indian's
blanket
,
to shield me from the fire until I could reach
the window, and sprang, with it wrapped around me,
among the crowd of devils who were howling for
blood below. I fell into a deep snow-bank, which
covered my boots and trousers, as did the blanket
my body. My hair was burnt off, and my face, red
with blood and begrimmed with smoke, made me
look so much like a real Indian, that, having plenty
to do on their own account, the others let one of
their comrades, as they thought me, lie there like an
old log. The roof fell in soon afterward; the flames
shot high into the air, and the smoke and embers
rolled far and wide, as the sides of the house came
crashing down in the midst of the flames. The
savages gave an exulting yell, as if contented that
they had done their worst, and then trooped, like a
pack of ravening wolves, after the detachment of
prisoners which followed in Proctor's rear. Few of
them, as we know, ever reached Malden; and for
a fact, I thought at the time, when I crawled
half-frozen
from that snow-bank, that my chance was
probably the luckiest in all the army that was
captivated
on the River Raisin.
The wolves had succeeded their Indian brothers,
and were already busy upon the dead when I crept
from my hiding-place. The night was raw and
gusty, and the snappish growl of the creeturs, as they
quarrelled over the food, when there was enough
for all of them, the varmints! sounded on the fitful
blast like the wrangling of Christian men. There
was no need of making a circuit to avoid them; for,
though by the light of the snow we could see each
other as plain as day, they did not even stop to look
at me as I crossed the clearings to get to the woods
in the rear of Frenchtown. This I didn't do though,
without meeting with a sort o' interruption which
was queer, to say the least of it. There was a little
knoll near the banks of the Raisin, which I rather
chose to go round than to cross over the top,
thinking
that it was not best to bring my body clean
against the sky as a mark for any loitering drunken
Indian that might still by possibility be out-lying near
the scene of his hellish orgies. Well, as I wound
round the hillock and got within a hundred yards of
the forest, which was close upon it, what should I
meet upon the other side but a great buck bear, who
had just dragged a body around the opposite side of
the knoll, and was under full sail for the woods in
the very direction that I was steering for them.
The brute might have been a few paces in advance
of me when I stumbled upon him, and he seemed
considerably taken aback, though he had no idea of
dropping his prize. A half-starved, half-frozen man
has not much active courage to spare; but if he has
gone through scenes such as I witnessed that day,
he feels pretty indifferent as to what next may turn
up on his hands. It seemed to warm my natur, too,
within me, to have something upon which I could
pour the vengeful feelings that I felt just then ag'inst
all creation; and, though armed with nothing but my
dead Indian's scalping-knife, I made a spring toward
the bear and planted my foot upon the body he was
dragging. The creetur let go the other end, and sat
right up on his hinderparts, looking first at me and
then at the dead body, but never offering to harm
me. The moon at that moment broke through a
cloud, and, for the first time, I saw that it was only
an Indian that my opposite neighbour was carrying
off for his supper; and I thought there was such a
sort of gravity about his appeal in looking from me
to the Indian, and from the Indian to me, as if the
dumb brute know'd that I had only made a mistake,
and didn't mean to molest him wantonly, that I took
off my foot, stepped backward a pace or two, and let
him pass on. But bears have their hour of fate as
well as men; for this one had not gone twenty steps
farther when I heard the crack of a rifle, and he
tumbled over in the snow, scratching his head with
his fore-paws in a way that showed a bullet must
have gone through it. In a moment afterward,
leaving time only to reload, a white hunter stepped
from the edge of the forest, and, levelling his rifle
upon me, beckoned with his forefinger for me to
come into him, addressing me at the same time in
the half French, half Indian lingo at that time
prevailing
in this district`Venez ici needji.'
`Throw up your shooting-iron, and don't call me
needji
, old gumbo, unless you mean friend, and not
Indian, by it. I'm a half-starved white man, and
should like a bit of your bear that you knocked
over so handsomely.'
`Nesheshinchemocomon! ah! c'est bon,
Monsieur, c'est un Americain,' he rejoined,
advancing
from the edge of the wood and giving me his
hand. I saw at once that it was an old gumbo
hunter, and, knowing what a guileless set they are,
I felt instantly at ease, for one of his class was the
only man who could now help me out of those infernal
woods, and guide me to the nearest United States
post.
I helped him to drag the wounded bear within
the forest so soon as he had despatched him with his
tomahawk. A few moments sufficed to flay him,
and then, after cutting some tender bits from the
carcass, we retired deeper into the woods to sup
upon bruin, who, half an hour before, might have
made a supper of me. The wood we were in was
only a narrow belt dividing the Frenchtown
settlement
from a large wet prairie, which we were
obliged to circuit for some miles before taking up a
direct route for the Rapids, whither I prevailed upon
the Frenchman to guide me. In summer-time the
tall reeds of this prairie would have afforded ample
shelter in traversing it, if, indeed, it be possible; but
it was now only a frozen, snowy waste, where the
figure of a man might have been descried for miles;
and I felt considerably relieved when we had safely
navigated along the borders, and got in the deep
forest
to the south. I needn't tell of all I suffered in
struggling through the heavy snows until I reached
Carrying River, to which Harrison, after hearing of
the disaster of Frenchtown, had retreated, for the
purpose of forming a junction with the troops in the
rear. I arrived here in such a condition that I was
placed at once upon the sick list.
After that I was pretty much useless to myself
and to all others till after the war; when, at the
reduction of the army, I was dropped like many a
more deserving fellow, who, like myself, lacked the
education to do his country credit upon her peace
establishment. Uncle Sam gave me some broad
lands in the far-west, however; but, though one of his
territorial governors promised to commission me in
a corps of rangers in case I settled upon them, I
somehow could never
go
them flat western prairies.
I longed for the woods and mountains of Old York
State. I swapped my bounty lands for one thing
and another that I could turn into ready money, until
I was able to buy me a farm down among the
hills of Montgomery County, from which I can
easily take a run up among these mountains
whenever
it jumps with my humour; and that's all I've
got to tell you about Old Major Jake Peabody.
He's not so old though neither, except from his
experience
in studying human natur.
Though sometimes losing the phraseology of the
worthy major in repeating the history he gave of his
adventures, the conclusion, being precisely in his
own words, will give the reader some idea of the
conceit that was blended with a character at once
shrewd and simple, and often recklessly, if not
gamesomely
,
bold amid much habitual and inborn
selfishness
.
There were many such men who raised
themselves from the ranks in our quickly-created
army of 1812-13; and being, like the major, suddenly
dropped from the list on its reduction, or gradually
weeded out from the service by a more
accomplished
and high-minded race of officers, fell into penury
and intemperance, and finished their lives so
deplorably
that the gallantry of their early career has been
too often forgotten in the debasement that sullied
its close.
The broils and battles which enhanced the major's
narrative, led naturally to the relation of many an
anecdote illustrative of our fierce border warfare,
which I now think would be invaluable to a
professional
story-teller; though at that time I would
have shuddered at any mercenary use of the wild
themes which seeming to me so rich in poetry, and
wearing a sort of virgin grace about them, from the
very fact that they had never been sung; a grace I
was then willing to believe far more winning to me
than the prodigal associations which cluster around
the classic scenes and time-honoured traditions of
the old world. There was one incident particularly
reminding me so strongly of some passages in the
Lady of the Lake, that I used to think, with a kind
of fevered impatience, that the vigorous pen of
Scott
should be for ever wanting to do it justice. And
albeit but a college rhymer myself, I ventured
at last to attempt picturing it in a boyish imitation
13
of his glorious verse, which subsequently found its
way into print many years since, in the form in which
it is copied here from a daily newspaper.
[10]
[10]
The New York American, June, 1830.
THE AMBUSCADE.
The
mountain-tops are bright above,
The lake is bright beneath
And the mist is seen, the rocks between,
In a silver shroud to wreathe.
Merrily on the maple spray
The red-breast trills his roundelay,
And the oriole blithely flits among
The boughs where her pendent nest is hung;
The squirrel his morning revel keeps
In the chestnut's leafy screen,
And the fawn from the thicket gayly leaps
To gambol upon the green.
Now on the broad lake's waters blue
Dances many a light canoe;
And banded there, in wampum sheen,
Many a crested chief is seen:
Now as the foamy fringe they break,
Which the waves, where they kiss the margin, make,
The shallops shoot on the snowy strand,
And the plumd warriors leap to land.
They bear their pirogues of birchen bark
Far in the shadowy forest glade,
And plunge them deep in covert dark
Of the closely woven hazle shade;
Then stealthily tread in each other's track,
And with wary step come gliding back.
And when the water again is won
Unlace the beaded mockason,
And covering first with careful hand
The footmarks dash'd in the yielding sand,
Round jutting point and dented bay
Through the wave they take their winding way.
Awhile their painted forms are seen
Gleaming along the margin green,
And then the sunny lake is left
Where issuing from a mountain cleft
Above whose bold impending height
The dusky larch excludes the light,
The current of a rivulet
Conceals their wary footsteps yet.
Scaling the rocks, where strong and deep
Abrupt the waters foaming leap,
Along the stream they bending creep,
Where the hanging birch's tassels sweep,
Thrid the witch-hazle and alder-maze,
Where in broken rills the streamlet strays,
And reach the spot where its oozy tide
Steals from the mountain's shaggy side.
Now where wild vines their tendrils fling,
From crag to crag their forms they swing,
Some boldly find a footing where
The mountain cat would hardly dare;
Others as lightly onward bound
As the frolic chipmunk skips the ground,
Till all the midway mountain gain
And there once more collected meet,
Where on the eagle's wild domain
The morning sunbeams fiercely beat.
There's a glen upon that mountain-side,
A sunny dell expanding wide,
Where the eye that looks thro' the green arcade
Of cliffs in vines and shrubs arrayed,
Sees many a silver stream and lake
Upon its raptured vision break;
That sunny dell has its opening bright,
Almost within an arrow's flight,
Of a fearful gorge, whose upper side
Rank weeds and furze as closely hide,
As if some frolic fays had plied
Their skill in weaving osiers green,
And thus in elvish freak had tried
Its gloomy mouth to screen.
'Tis a chasm beneath the wooded steep,
Where the brain will swim and the blood will creep
When its dizzy edge is seen,
And the Fiend will prompt the heart to leap
When the eye would measure the yawning deep
Of that hideous ravine.
Far down the gulf in distance dim
The bat will oft at noontide skim,
The rattlesnake like a shadow glides
Through poisonous weeds in its shelvy sides,
While swarming lizards loathsome crawl
Where the green damp stands on the slimy wall,
And the venomous copper-snake's heard to hiss
On the frightful edge of that black abyss.
Here, in the feathery fernbetween
The tangled thicket's matted screen,
Their weapons hid, save where a blade
From straggling ray reflection made,
The Adirondach warriors lay.
The morning sees them gather there
And crouch within their leafy lair
The scorching beams of noontide hour,
If boughs should lift, would only play
On bronzed and motionless array
Within that silent bower:
Still silent when the mantle gray
Of sombre twilight slowly fell
O'er rocky height and wooded dell,
Those men of bronze all silent they
Still waited for their prey!
How slow the languid moments move,
How long to him their lapse appears
In whom remorse, or fear, or love,
Concentres griefs untold by tears,
The gathered agony of years!
But o'er the Indian warrior's soul
Uncounted and unheeded roll
Long hours, like these in watching spent,
The moments that he knows within,
When on the glorious War-Path sent,
Are calm as those which usher in
The thunders of the firmament!
13*
The moose hath left the rushy brink
Where he stole to the lake at eve to drink,
And sought his lair in thicket dark,
Lit only by the fire-flys spark.
Now myriad stars are twinkling through
The vaulted heaven's veil of blue,
And seem reflected in the wave
With golden studs its bed to pave.
Now as upon the western hills
The moon her mystic circle fills,
Against the sky each cliff is flung,
As if at magic touch it sprung;
And as the wood her beam receives,
The dew-drop in that virgin light
Pendent from the quivering leaves,
Sparkles upon the pall of night.
Deep in the linden's foliage hid,
Complains the peevish katydid.
And the shrill screech-owl answers back
From tulip-tree and tamarack.
At times along the placid lake
A solitary trout will break,
And rippling eddies on the stream,
In trembling circles faintly gleam;
While near the sedgy shore is heard
The plash of that ill-omened bird,
Whose dismal note and boding cry
Will oft the startled ear assail,
When lowering clouds obscure the sky,
And when the tempest gathers nigh
Come quivering in the rising gale.
Oh, why cannot that loon's wild shriek
To them a feeble warning speak,
Whose proudly waving banner now
Comes floating round the mountain brow;
Whose gallant ranks in close array,
Now gleam along the moon-lit way;
And now with many a break between,
Are winding through the long ravine?
Oh, why cannot that loon's wild shriek
To them a feeble warning speak,
Who careless press a foeman's sod,
As if in banquet-hall they trod;
Who rashly thus undaunted dare
To chase in woods the forest child,
To hunt the panther to his lair,
The Indian in his native wild?
Unapprehensive thus, at night
The wild doe looking from the brake,
To where there gleams a fitful light
Dotted upon the rippling lake,
Sees not the silver spray-drop dripping
From the lithe oar which, softly dipping,
Impels the wily hunter's boat;
But on his ruddy torch's rays,
As nearer, clearer now they float,
The fated quarry stands to gaze,
And dreaming not of cruel sport,
Withdraws not thence her gentle eyes
Until the rifle's sharp report
The simple creature hears and dies.
Buoyant with youth, as heedless they
Pursue the death-besetted way,
As cautionless each one proceeds,
Where his doomed steps the pathway leads,
As if the peril of that hour
But led those steps to beauty's bower.
They come with stirring fife and drum,
With flaunting plume and pennon come,
To solitudes where never yet
Hath gleamed the glistening bayonet
Banner upon the breeze hath flown,
Or bugle note before been blown.
The cautious beaver starts with fear,
That strange unwonted sound to hear;
But still her grave demeanour keeps,
As from her hovel-door she peeps
Observing thence with curious eye
The pageant as it passes by;
Pauses the wailing whip-poor-will
One moment, in her plaintive trill,
As echoing on the mountain-side
Their martial music wanders wide;
Then, as the last note dies away,
Pursues once more her broken lay.
At length they reach that fatal steep,
Which, hanging o'er the chasm deep,
With stunted copse and tangled heath,
Conceals the gulf that yawns beneath.
The watchful Indian, from his lair,
One moment sees them falter there
One moment looks, with eagle eye,
To mark their forms against the sky;
Then through the night air, wild and high,
Peals the red warrior's battle-cry.
From sassafras, and sumach green,
From shattered stump, and riven rock
From the dark hemlock boughs between,
Is launched the gleaming tomahawk.
And savage eyes glare fiercely out
From every bush and vine about;
And savage forms the branches throw,
In dusky masses on the foe.
In vain their leaders strive to form
Their ranks beneath that living storm!
As whoop on whoop discordant fell
Loudly on their astounded ears,
As if at once each fiendish yell
Awoke, within that narrow dell,
The echoes of a thousand years!
No rallying cry, no hoarse command
Can marshal that bewildered band;
Nor clarion call to standard, more
Those panic-stricken ranks restore;
Now strown like pines upon the path
Where bursts the fierce tornado's wrath,
Yet some there are who undismayed
Seek sternly back to back arrayed,
With eye and blade alert, in vain
A moment's footing to maintain.
Though gallant hearts direct the steel,
And stalwart arms the buffets deal,
What can a score of brands avail
When each as many foes assail?
Like scud before the wintry blast,
That through the sky comes sweeping fast,
Like leaves upon the tempest whirled
They toward the steep are struggling hurled.
Valour in vain, in vain despair,
Nerves many a frantic bosom there
Furious with the unequal strife,
To cling with desperate force to life.
There, fighting still, with mad endeavour,
As on the dizzy edge they hover,
Their bugle breathes one rallying note,
Pennon and plume one moment float;
Then, swept beyond the frightful brink
Like mist, into the chasm sink;
Within whose bosom, as they fell,
Arose as hideous, wild a yell
As if the very earth were riven,
And shrieks from hell were upward driven.
When the hour of dinner arrived, and pipes and
cigars were laid aside for more substantial
refreshment
,
the introduction of some parched corn among
the condiments of our repast raised a discussion
between the counsellor and myself, as to the
Asiatic, or American origin of this great staple of
our farmers; and, upon asking the opinion of
Captain
Gill as to how the maize was first obtained, the
old chief nodded to one of his dusky satellites, who
straightway set the question at rest for ever by
giving an explanation, of which the following is the
purport:
THE ORIGIN OF INDIAN CORN.
There
is a place on the banks of the
softly-flowing
Unadilla, not far from its confluence with
the Susquehannah, which in former years was an
extensive beaver-meadow. The short turf sloped
down almost to the brink of the stream, whose banks
in this place nourish not a single tree to shadow its
waters. Here, where they flow over pebbles so
smooth and shiny that the Indian maid who wandered
along the margin, would pause to tell over her strings
of wampum, and think the beads had dropped below,
there came one day some girls to bathe; and one,
the most beautiful of all, lingered behind her
companions
,
to gather these bright pebbles from the bed
of the river.
A water-spirit, who had assumed the form of a
musquosh, sat long watching her from the shore.
He looked at her shining shoulders, at her dripping
locks, and the gently swelling bosom over which
they fell; and when the maid lifted her rounded
limbs from the water, and stepped lightly upon the
green sod, he too raised himself from the mossy
nook where he had been hidden, and, recovering his
own shape, ran to embrace her.
The maiden shrieked and fled, but the
enamoured
spirit pressed closely in pursuit; and the meadow
affording no shrub nor covert to screen her from her
eager pursuer, she turned again toward the stream
she had left, and made for a spot where the wild
flowers grew tall and rankly by the moist margin.
The spirit still followed her; and, frightened and
fatigued, the girl would have sunk upon the ground
as he approached, had she not been supported by a
tuft of flags while hastily seizing and twining them
around her person to hide her shame.
In that moment her slender form grew thinner
and more rounded; her delicate feet became
indurated
in the loose soil that opened to receive them;
the blades of the flag broadened around her fingers,
and enclosed her hand; while the pearly pebbles that
she held resolved themselves into milky grains,
which were kept together by the plaited husk.
The baffled water-spirit sprang to seize her by
the long hair that yet floated in the breeze, but the
silken tassels of the rustling maize was all that met
his grasp.
THE HUES OF AUTUMN.
A GLORIOUS sunset succeeded the day of storms;
and, all our arrangements being completed for a
grand hunt on the morrow, I sallied out to observe
the effect of the golden light upon the rainbow foliage
of autumn still dripping with the shower.
Accompanied
by Major Jake, and guided by one of the
Indians, we made our way to an elevation some
distance from the lake, commanding an extensive
view of the unbroken forest that rose in billowy
masses on every side. The hillock where we paused
was surmounted by the slight remains of one of
those singular mounds which, though not
unfrequently
found in the state of New York, are beheld in
such variety and perfection upon the prairies of the
far-west; where there enormous size, not less than
their profusion of numbers, astounds and bewilders
the speculations of the antiquary. In ascending to
the top of this one, I chanced to trip over some bones
projecting from the side of the mound, where some
wild animal had removed the turf while making his
burrow, and I paused to ask the Indian guide if he
knew anything about them.
Those old bones! cried Major Jake, turning
round; why, that ignorant varmint can tell you
nothing about them, Squire: they were the
frame-work
of men who kicked their shins against these
knobs a million of years a'fore his people came here
to scare game and scalp white folks.
The Iroquois evidently understood the words of
14
the rough hunter, though he did not vouchsafe a
reply to the slur upon his race. He did not seem,
however, to take offence at the rude and officious
answer to a question addressed to himself, but,
waited
patiently until the other had finished speaking,
he drew his blanket around him, and, turning with
his face westward as he planted his last steps upon
the summit, stood erect upon the mound. The light
of the setting sun was thrown full upon his
attenuated
features, and lit them up with almost as ruddy
a glow as that which bathed the autumnal foliage
around him. He was mute for some moments, and
then spoke to this effect:
Yes! they were here before my people, but they
could not stay when we came, no more than the red
man can now bide before the presence of the
Longknife
.
The Master of Life willed it, and our
fathers
swept them from the land. The Master of
Life now wishes to call back his red people to the
blessed gardens whence they first started, and he
sends the Pale-faces to drive them from the
countries
which they have learned to love so well as to
be unwilling to leave them.
It is good. Men were meant to grow from the
earth like the oak which springs in the pine barren,
or the evergreen that shoots from the ground where
the tree with a falling leaf has been cut down.
But listen, brother! Mark you the hue that
dyes every leaf upon that sumach? It is born of
the red water, with which its roots were nourished a
thousand years ago. It is the blood of a murdered
race which flushes every autumn over the land when
yearly the moon comes round that saw it perish from
this ground.
A SACONDAGA DEER-HUNT.
Up, comrades, up! the morn's awake
Upon the mountain-side;
The wild drake's wing hath swept the lake,
And the deer has left the tangled brake,
To drink from the rippling tide.
Up, comrades, up! the mead-lark's note
And the plover's cry o'er the prairie float;
The squirrel he springs from his covert now,
To prank it away on the chestnut bough,
Where the oriole's pendent nest high up
Is rocked on the swaying trees,
While the humbird sips from the harebell's cup
As it bends to the morning breeze.
Up, comrades, up! our shallops grate
Upon the pebbly strand,
And our stalwart hounds impatient wait
To spring from the huntsman's hand.
The
September dawn broke brilliantly upon
Sacondaga
Lake. The morning did not slowly awake
with a yellow light that gradually warmed into the
flush of day; but, ruddy and abrupt, the bold streaks
shot from behind the mountains high into the
heavens
,
spreading themselves on their path like the
fires of the aurora borealis, and dying the lake, in
which they were reflected, with hues as vivid as
those of the painted forests that walled its waters.
We had left our camp, however, long before the
stars grew dim.
The hunt was divided into three parties, each
with different duties assigned to them by one who
took the direction.
The first, who were the drivers, had the hounds
in charge; they were to take three different routes,
and slip their leashes, after a certain time had
elapsed, wherever they might find themselves. They
had light guns, and, from knowing every creek and
swamp in the country, could follow the dogs to
advantage
,
even when on a fresh track. The second
party, who were all armed with long rifles, were to
go on the stations; these were old foresters, who
knew every runway for miles about, and each of
whom might be relied upon as stanch at his post,
should the chase last for hours. The third party
took the skiffs and canoes; a number of the latter
being easily shifted to the adjacent waters, so that
every lake within several miles of our rendezvous
had two or more boats upon it. Lastly, upon a hill
overlooking the cluster of lakes, was placed a
keen-eyed
lad, furnished with a horn, whose duty it was
to sound a signal the moment he saw the deer take
the water.
My friend and myself were attached to the boat
party; a skiff with light sculls fell to my lot alone,
but my companion, more fortunate, was assigned to
a bark canoe with one of the Indians. These
arrangements
,
having been made the night before, were
put in action in a very few moments. The strand
seemed alive with figures, for a minute only, as we
emerged from the thicket wherein our wigwam was
secreted; and then, while some plunged into the fo
rest, and others glided in their gray shallops around
the dusky headlands, the scene of our last night's
revels became as silent as if nothing but the chirp
of the squirrel or the scream of the jay had ever
awakened its echoes. So still, indeed, was it at that
early hour in the morning, when the birds had hardly
begun to rouse themselves, that I was almost
startled
by the click of my own oars in the rowlocks as
they broke the glassy surface of the lake while I
pulled with an easy stroke for a little islet, which I
had ample leisure to gain before the dogs would be
let slip. Here the drooping boughs of a tall
hemlock
,
which seemed to flourish not less luxuriantly
because the towering stem above them was scathed
and blasted, screened my boat from view as I ran
her under the rocky bank. Having deposited my
gun in the bow, with the breech still so near me that
I could reach it from midships in so small a craft,
I arranged the wooden yoke or halter, with the pole,
at my feet, and the noose hanging over the stern;
so that I was prepared for action in any way that it
might offer itself. This yoke is nothing more nor
less than a forked sapling, with a noose of rope or
grape-vine at the end, to throw over a wounded
deer's horns when your shot does not stop his
swimming
.
If unskilfully managed, the animal is likely
to upset your boat in the effort to take him thus;
but there are men upon these lakes so adroit in the
use of this rude weapon, that they prefer it to
fire-arms
,
when a hunting-knife is at hand to give the
game the
coup de grace
.
[11]
[11]
See chap. xix, p. 66.
14*
There is nothing in the world like being a few
hours on a hunting-station, with every sense upon
the alert to familiarize one with the innumerable
sounds and noises that steal up in such creeping
murmurs from the stillest forest. A man may
walk the woods for years, and be conscious only of
the call of birds or the cry of some of the larger
animals
,
making themselves heard above the rustling
of his own footsteps. But watching thus for young
quarry in a country abounding in game, and when
it may steal upon you at any moment, interest
approaches
almost to anxiety; and intense eagerness
for sport makes the hearing as nice as when fear
itself lends its unhappy instinct to the senses.
Myriads of unseen insects appear to be grating
their wings beneath the bark of every tree around
you, and the piled leaves, too damp to rustle in
the breeze, give out a sound as if a hundred rills
were creeping beneath their plaited matting. It is,
in fact, no exaggeration to say that the first bay of
a hound at such a moment breaks almost like
thunder
upon the ear. So, at least, did it come now
upon mine, as a long, deep-mouthed yell was
pealed
from a valley opposite, and echoed back from hill
to hill around me. The sharp crack of a rifle
followed
,
and then cry after cry, as some fresh dog
opened, the stirring chorus came swelling on the
breeze. Each second I expected to hear the
signal-horn
,
or see the chase emerging from the forest
wherever the indented shore indicated the mouth of
a brook along its margin.
Not a bush, however, moved near the water; the
mountains were alive around, but the lake was as
untroubled as ever, save when a flock of ducks
feeding near me flapped their wings once or twice
at the first outcry, and then resumed their
unmolested
employment. The sudden burst had died away
in the distance; the chase had probably been turned
by the single piece that was discharged; and now,
leading over the farther hills, its sounds became
fainter and fainter, until at last they died away
entirely.
An hour elapsed, and, damp, chilly, and
somewhat
dispirited, I still maintained my motionless
position. A slight breeze had arisen upon the lake,
and the little waves, rippling against my boat, made
a monotonous flapping sound, that almost lulled me
asleep. I was, indeed, I believe, fairly verging upon
a most inglorious nap upon my post, when a sharp,
eager yell started me from my doze, and made me
seize my oars in a moment. It came from a broad,
deep bay locked in by two headlands on my right.
The farther side of the bay was a marsh, and there,
bounding through the tall sedge, I beheld a noble
buck, with a single hound about a gunshot behind
him. Strangely enough, he seemed to have no
disposition
to take the water, but, leaping with
prodigious
bounds over the long grass, kept the margin
for a few moments, and then struck into a tamarack
swamp that fringed the opening. It was but an
instant
that he was lost, however; a simultaneous cry
from half a dozen hounds told that he was turned in
that direction. He appeared again upon a rocky
ledge, where some lofty pines, with no underwood,
were the only cover to screen him. But now his
route carried him unavoidably out of the line of my
station. I knew that there were those beyond who
would care for him; but, in the vexation of my heart
at losing my own shot, I could hardly help cursing
the poor animal as I saw him hurry to destruction.
The height of the cliffs seemed alone to prevent him
from taking the water; and I could almost fancy that
he looked hurriedly around, while bounding from
crag to crag, for a spot where he might best make
his plunge. The dogs were now silent; they had
not yet issued from the covert; but the moment
they emerged from the wood, and caught sight of
the game, they opened with a yell which made the
deer spring from the high bank as if he were leaping
from the very jaws of his pursuers. Now came my
first moment of action; I might even yet, I thought,
be not too late: I seized my oars, and the tough ash
quivered in my hands as I sent the skiff flying over
the water.
The buck was swimming from me, but he had a
broad bay to cross before he could gain the opposite
side of the lake. In this bay, and between me and
his direct track, was a wooded islet, and, by taking
an oblique direction, I tried, as well as possible, to
keep it between myself and the hard-pressed animal,
in order that, not seeing me, he might still keep on
the same course. I must have been nearly abreast
of the islet. The route of the deer was only a few
hundred yards in advance, and directly at right
angles to that which I was steering: I might yet
cut him off the opposite shore; the dogs would
prevent
him returning from that he had left; and I would
certainly overtake him, should he attempt to make
for the bottom of the bay, which was still distant.
The moisture started thick upon my brow from
exertion
,
and the knees of my frail shallop cracked as
I impelled her through the water.
But there were other players in the game besides
myself; cooler, more experienced, equally alert,
and better situated for winning. The canoe in
which was my friend, The Counsellor, with the
Indian, was concealed on the opposite side of the
islet, and, having watched the whole progress of the
chase, waited only for the buck to come in a line
with it before launching in a pursuit sure to be
successful
.
The moment for striking arrived just as I
passed the islet; and then, swift as a falcon on the
stoop, the arrowy bark shot from its covert, and
darted
across the water. The effect was more like a
vision than any scene I can recall. My friend was
nearly concealed from view as he lay on his breast,
with his piece levelled directly over the prow of the
canoe, waiting for the Indian to give the word to fire;
but the person of the latter was fully exposed, and
with the most striking effect, as he stood erect in
the stern, stripped to the waist, and with every
muscle
in his swarthy frame brought into action as he
plied his flashing paddle. His long hair streamed
on the wind, and, with the piercing eyes and
features
strained with eager and intense excitement,
gave an almost unearthly aspect to his countenance.
The dogged and listless look which characterized
him a few hours before, seemed to have been
thrown off with the tattered garb that disguised
without covering his person; and the keen-eyed,
clean-limbed hunter now revealed to view, bore no
more resemblance to the sullen and shabby vagrant
of yesterday, than does a thorough-bred and
mettlesome
racer, spurning the green turf with glowing
hoof, to the rickety and broken-down hackney that
steals through the dirty suburbs of a city. The
ludicrous cries, however, that broke from him at
every moment, afforded a most whimsical contrast
to his picturesque appearance. Yarh! white
man?San Marie! no fire!Howh! diable
Poagun!
[12]
[12]
Poagun, or Tmewawgun, Pipe, was a name he gave my
friend, The Counsellor.
Dame de Lorette! Corlaer,
New Yorker.
be ready
SacreWeenuc! and a dozen other epithets
and exclamations, Catholic and heathen, Indian,
English, and Canadian, burst in a torrent from his
lips. Suddenly, however, discovering he had
gained
sufficiently upon the buck, he stopped paddling,
and, in good calm English, gave his directions to his
companion as coolly as if now certain of the prize.
The other then covered the deer's head with his
rifle as he swam directly from him, but still he
waited for the proper moment. It came just as
the buck touched the ground with his fore feet; a
projecting rock received him, and he reared his
antlers
high above the water, while his hinderparts
were yet submerged in making good his landing.
Fire! cried the hunter, and at that instant the
ball struck him in the spine, a few inches behind
the ears. The animal bent forward beneath the
blow, and then, endeavouring to raise his head, he
toppled over backward, and slipped off the rock
into the lakean unresisting carcass.
My skiff shot alongside the canoe at that instant;
but, though within hearing of all that passed, I was,
of course, too late for a shot. The buck, which
proved a noble fellow, was soon lifted into the boat,
while together we pulled leisurely for the rendezvous
on the opposite side of the lake. There the
different
members of the hunt came gradually dropping
in, one after another. A yearling, with its horns yet
in the velvet, and a doe in tolerable condition, were
the only other fruits of the hunt. But all were loud
in praising the buck as the finest and fattest that had
been taken near the lake during the season. For
several hours the woods rung with merriment, as,
kindling our fire upon a broad rock, we feasted upon
the spoils of the chase; and our revel was only
brought to an end by the close of the day, when,
embarking leisurely to steer for our camp, the
echoing halloo of the last loiterer faded over the
hills as his boat rounded the nearest headland, and
finally left the shore to solitude and silence.
The hunt is up
The merry woodland shout,
That rung these echoing glades about
An hour agone,
Hath swept beyond the eastern hills;
Where pale and lone
The moon her mystic circle fills.
And now from thicket dark,
Where by the mist-wreathed river
The firefly spark
Will fitful quiver,
And bubbles round the lilies cup,
From lurking trout come coursing up
The doe hath led her fawn to drink,
While scared by-step so near,
Uprising from the sedgy brink,
The lonely bittern's cry will sink
Upon the hunter's ear;
Who, startled from his early sleep,
Lists for some sounds approaching nigher
Half-dreaming liststhen turns to heap
Another fagot on his fire;
And then again in dreams once more,
Pursues his quarry by the shore.
The next day's hunt I took no share in, owing to
an indisposition incurred while lying at my station,
in a wet boat, inactive for hours. I therefore amused
myself in writing out a narrative which forcibly
struck my fancy as told by one of the party during
our row homeward the evening before, and which,
upon my visiting the scene of its chief incident some
years afterward, assumed in my portfolio the shape
of the following story:
THE DEAD CLEARING.
Schroon Lake
is one of the largest, and perhaps
the finest, body of water among the myriad lakes
which form the sources of the Hudson. The
Schroon, as it is called by the country people, has,
indeed, been likened by travellers to the celebrated
Lake of Como, which it is said to resemble in the
configuration of its shores. It is about ten miles in
length, broad, deep, and girt with leafy mountains,
which, though not so lofty as the more sterile peaks
of the Adirondachs, are still picturesque in form,
while they enclose a thousand pastoral valleys and
sequestered dells among their richly-wooded defiles.
[13]
[13]
These mountains are the
eastern
spurs of the Adirondach group.
In one of the loveliest of these glens, near a fine
spring, well known to the deer-stalker, there
flourished
,
a few years since, a weeping willow, which, for
aught I know, may be still gracing the spot. The
existence of such an exotic in the midst of our
primitive
forest would excite the curiosity of the most
casual observer of nature, even if other objects
adjacent did not arrest his attention, as he emerged
from the deep woods around, to the sunny glade
where it glew. On the side of a steep bank,
opposite
to the willow, the remains of an old fire-place
were to be seen; and blackened timbers, with
indications
of rough masonry, could be discovered by
turning aside the wild raspberry bushes that had
overgrown the farther side of the knoll. These ruins
betokened something more than the remains of a
hunting-camp; and the forester who should traverse
an extensive thicket of young beeches and wild
cherry trees, within a few hundred yards of this spot,
would be at no loss to determine that he had lighted
upon the deserted home of some settler of perhaps
forty years back: a scene where the toil, the
privation
,
and the dangers of a pioneer's life had been
once endured, but where the hand of improvement
15
had wrought in vain, for the forest had already closed
over the little domain that had been briefly rescued
from its embrace; and the place was now what, in the
language of the country, is called a dead clearing.
The story of this ruined homestead is a very
common
one in the private family annals of the state of
New York, which has always been exposed to the
perils of frontier warfare, and which, for twenty
years, at the close of the seventeenth century, and
throughout the whole of that which followed it, was
the battle-field of the most formidable Indian
confederacy
that ever arrayed itself against the Christian
powers on the shores of this continent. The broken
remains of that confederacy still possess large tracts
of valuable land in the centre of our most populous
districts; while their brethren of the same colour,
but of a feebler lineage, have been driven westward
a thousand miles from our borders. And when this
remnant of the Iroquois shall have dwindled from
among us, their names will still live in the majestic
lakes and noble rivers that embalm the memory of
their language. They will live, too, unhappily, in
many a dark legend of ruthless violence, like that
which I have to relate.
It was in the same year when Sullivan's army
gave the finishing blow to the military power of the
Six-Nations, that a settler, who had come in from
the New Hampshire Grants to this part of Tryon
County, (as the northern and western region of New
York was at that time called,) was sitting with his
wife, who held an infant to her bosom, enjoying his
evening pipe beside the hearth. The blaze of the
large maple-wood fire shone warmly upon the
unpainted
beams above, and lighted up the timbers of
the shantee with a mellow glow that gave an air of
cheerfulness and comfort to the rudely-furnished
apartment. From the gray hairs and weather-beaten
features of the settler, he appeared to be a man
considerably
on the wrong side of forty; while the young,
bright-haired mother by his side had not yet passed
the sunny season of early youth. The disparity of
their years, however, had evidently not prevented
the growth of the strongest affection between them.
There was a soft and happy look of content about
the girl, as she surveyed the brown woodsman, now
watching the smoke-wreaths from his pipe as they
curled over his head, now taking his axe upon his
lap and feeling its edge with a sort of caressing
gesture, as if the inanimate thing could be conscious
of the silent compliment he paid to its temper, when
thinking over the enlargement of the clearing he had
wrought by its aid during the day. Nor did the eye
of the young mother kindle less affectionately when
the brawny pioneer, carefully depositing the simple
implement, which is the pride of an American
woodsman, behind the chimney, turned to take the
hand of the infant, which she pressed to her bosom,
and shared at the same time with her the caresses
which he bestowed on the child.
That boy's a raal credit to you, Bet. But I
think, if he cries to-night as he has for the last week,
I must make a papoose-cradle for him to-morrow,
and swing him somewhere outside of the shantee,
where his squalling can't keep us awake. Your
face is growing as white as a silver birch, from loss
of sleep o' nights.
Why, John, how you talk! I'm sure Yorpy
never cries; never, I mean, worth talking of.
As the mother spoke she pressed the unhappy
little youngster somewhat too closely to her bosom,
and he awoke with one of those discordant outbreaks
of infant passion with which the hopeful scions of
humanity sometimes test the comforts of married life.
Babywhy, babytherethere now! what
will it have? does it want to see brother Ben?
Hushhushhe's coming with something for baby!
Hush, now, darling! Will it have this?
Why, Bet, my dear, said the father, don't
give the brat Ben's powder-horn to play with; for
thof he does like you as much as he did my first
missus, his own mother and flesh and blood, the lad
doesn't love to have his hunting-tools
discomboborated
.
God's weather! where can the tormented
chap be staying? he ought to be home by this time.
With these words he walked to the door, and stood
for a moment commenting upon the mildness of the
night, and wondering why Ben did not return. But
the mother was too much engaged in soothing the
infant, by rocking him to and fro in her arms, to
reply.
Now don't, don't, gal, continued the
kind-hearted
woodsman, turning from the door, which he left
open; you'll tire yourself to death. Let me take
himthere, nowthere, said he, as she
relinquished
the child to his arms; and, addressing the last
words to the poor, perverse little thing, he walked
up and down the room with it, vainly trying to lull
its gust of passion or peevishness.
Hush! you little varmint, you! said the father
at last, growing impatient; hush! or I'll call in the
Indians to carry you offI will.
The settler was just turning in his walk, near the
open threshold, as he uttered the ill-omened words,
when a swarthy hand, reaching over his shoulder,
clutched the child from his arms, and brained it
against the door-post in the same moment that the
tomahawk of another savage struck him to the floor.
A dozen painted demons sprang over his prostrate
body into the centre of the room. The simple scene
of domestic joy, but a moment before so sheltered
and homelike, was changed on the instant. The
mummied nursling was flung upon the embers near
the feet of its frantic mother, who slipped and fell
in the blood of her husband as she plucked her child
from the coals and sprang toward the door. It was
a blow of mercy, though not meant as such, which
dismissed her spirit as she struggled to rise with
her lifeless burden. The embers of the fire soon
strewed the apartment, while the savages danced
among them with the mad glee of the devil's own
children, until the smoke and blaze, ascending to
the roof-tree, drove them from the scene of their
infernal
orgies.
The next day's sun shone upon that mouldering
ruin as brightly as if unconscious of the horrors
which its light revealed. So complete had been
the devastation of the flames, that little but ashes
now remained; and the blue smoke curled up
15*
among the embowering trees as gently as if it rose
only from a cottager's hospitable fire. The oriole,
perched upon a cedar-top, whistled as usual to his
mate, swinging in his nest upon the pendent branches
of a willow which had been planted by the ill-fated
settler near a spring not far from his door; while
the cat-bird from the brier-thicket replied in mocking
notes more blithe and clearer than those he aimed
to imitate. The swallow only, driven from her nest
in the eaves, and whirling in disordered flight around
the place, seemed in sharp cries to sympathize with
the desolation which had come over it.
There was one human mourner, however, amid
the scene. A youth of sixteen sat with his head
buried in his hands upon a fallen tree hard by. So
still and motionless he seemed, that his form might
almost be thought to have been carved out of the
gray wood, with which his faded garments
assimilated
in colour. It would not be difficult to surmise
what passed in the bosom of the young forester as
at last, after rising with an effort, he advanced to
the funeral pyre of his household, and, turning over
the dry embers, disengaged a half-burned cloven
skull from among them. He threw himself upon
the grass and bit the ground with a fierce agony,
that showed some self-reproach must be mingled
with his sorrow.
My father! my father! he cried, writhing in
anguish; whywhy did I not come home at once,
when I heard that the Black Wolf had gone north
with his band! A burst of tears seemed to relieve
him for a moment; and then, with greater bitterness
than ever, he resumed, Foolthrice accursed fool
that I was! I might have known that he would
strike for these mountains, instead of taking the
Sacondaga route, where the Palatine-Ygars were
out and on the watch for him. To die so like a
brute in the hands of a butcher, without one word
of warning! to be burned like a woodchuck in his
hole! stricken to death without a chance of dealing
one blow for his defence! My father! my poor
father! Oh, God! I cannot bear it!
But the youth knew not the self-renovating spirit
of life's spring-time, when he thought that his first
sorrow, bitter as it was, would blast his manhood
for ever. A first grief never blights the heart of
man. The sapling hickory may be bowedmay
be shattered by the stormbut it has an elasticity
and toughness of fibre that keep it from perishing.
It is only long exposure to a succession of harsh and
biting winds that steals away its vigour, drinks up
its sap of life, and sends a chill at last to the roots
which nourished its vitality.
That day of cruel wo, like all others, had an end
for the young forester; and, when the waning moon
rose upon the scene of his ruined home, her yellow
light disclosed the boy kneeling upon the sod
wherewith
he had covered up the bones of his only earthly
relatives. She, too, was sole witness to the vow of
undying vengeance which he swore upon the spot
against the whole race of red men.
There are but too many traditions surviving in
this region to prove the fulfilment of this fearful vow.
But I leave the dire feats of Bloody Ben, by
which name only is the avenger now remembered,
to some annalist who finds greater pleasure than I do
in such horrible details. My business here is only
to describe the first deed by which he requited the
murderous act of the Indians.
The seasons had twice gone their round since
destruction had come over the house of the settler,
and his son had never yet revisited the spot, which,
with the exuberant growth of an American soil, had
partly relapsed into its native wildness, from the
tangled vines and thickets which had overgrown the
clearing. The strong arm of the government had
for a while driven the Indians beyond the reach of
private vengeance; but now they were again
returning
to their favourite hunting-ground north of the
Mohawk, and around the sources of the Hudson.
Some even had ventured into Albany to dispose of
their packs and skins, and carry back a supply of
powder and other necessaries of the hunter of the
wilderness. It was two of these that the orphan
youth dogged from the settlements, on their way
through the northern forests, to the spot where his
oath of vengeance had been recorded. The sequel
may best be told in the words of an old hunter, under
whose guidance I made my first and only visit to
the Dead Clearing.
It was about two o'clock of a hot August
afternoon
that Ben, after thus following up their trail
for three days, came upon the two Injuns jist where
the moose-runway makes an opening in the forest,
and lets the light down upon you willow that still
flourishes beside the old hemlock. The Injuns were
sitting beneath the willow, thinking themselves
sheltered
by the rocky bank opposite, and a mass of
underwood which had shot up round the top of an
oak, which had been twisted off in a tornado in some
former day, and then lay imbedded in weeds beneath
the knoll. But a few yards from this bank, in that
thicket round the roots of yon mossy old beech, Ben
found a shelter, from which, at any moment, he could
creep up and cover either with his fire from behind
the knoll. But, as he had only a one-barrel piece,
it required full as cool a hand as his to wait and take
both the creeturs at one shot. Bloody Ben, though,
was jist the chap to do it. Like enough he waited
there, or manuvred round, for an hour to get his
chance, which did come at last, howsumdever. The
Injuns, who, in their own way, are mighty talkers,
you must knowthat is, when they have really
something to talk aboutgot into some argerment,
wherein figures, about which they know mighty
little, were concerned. One took out his
scalping-knife
to make marks upon the earth to help him;
while the other trying to make matters clearer with
the aid of his fingers, their heads came near each
other jist as you may have seen those of white
people
when they get parroiching right in airnest. So
they argufied and they counted, getting nearer and
nearer as they became more eager, till their skulls,
almost touching, came within the exact range of
Ben's rifle: and then Ben, he ups and sends the ball
so clean through both, that it buried itself in a
sapling
behind them. And that, I think, was pretty
well for the first shot of a lad of eighteen; and
Bloody Ben himself never confessed to making a
better one afterward.
The tourist, who should now seek the scene of
this adventure, would, perhaps, look in vain for the
graceful exotic that once marked the spot. The
weeping willow, which was only a thrifty sapling
when the Indians met their death beneath its fatal
shade, was changed into an old decayed trunk, with
but one living branch, when I beheld it; and a
ponderous
vine was rapidly strangling the life from this
decrepit limb. The hardy growth of the native
forest
had nearly obliterated the improvements of the
pioneer. The wild animals, in drinking from the
spring hard by, had dislodged the flat stones from
its brink; tall weeds waved amid the spreading
pool; and the fox had made his den in the rocky
knoll upon whose side once stood the settler's cabin
of
The Dead Clearing
.
Upon the return of the party, the close of evening
found us seated around the fire discussing the day's
sport, while the older hunters enlightened those less
versed in woodcraft with the detail of various feats
and adventures, of which, in bygone days, the
forests
around us had been the scene, and themselves
the heroes. Moose, panther, and bear hunting were
their favourite themes; and I took an opportunity,
when the latter was mentioned, to ask the old
Indian
,
who was the most intelligent of the party, if any
grizzly bears had ever been found in this region,
as some naturalists have asserted. His reply indi
cated that there was a tradition of that ferocious
animal being known to his ancestors, by whom its
race was said to have been extirpated. The
information
was, however, so mixed up with what was
evidently
fable, that it was impossible to tell how much
of his account was true; and not the least extravagant
portion of it was imbodied in a story to which I have
already alluded, the strange tissue of which I can by
no means recall to my own satisfaction.
OTNE-YAR-HEH; OR, THE STONE GIANTS.
[A Legend of Tseka Lake.
[14]
[14]
A large and beautiful sheet of water, lying a few miles to the
south-west of Lake Pleasant and Sacondaga Lake, in Hamilton
County, New York. Its name is sometimes written Pseka, and
more often
Piseka
.
Alas! when he told of the flinty heel
That trampled his tribesmen down in wrath,
To the hearts of flint would he make appeal,
That saw them swept from the white man's path!
They
who have hunted over the wild lands that
lie between the sources of Moose River on the west,
and the Talking Water,
Commonly called Jessup's River, a famous trouting brook,
that forms one of the tributaries of the Hudson.
where it falls into the
northern branch of the great Mohegan on the east,
tell of certain strange forms, resembling men, that
appear to be carved out of the solid rock, as they
stand like sentinels along the shores of some of the
lakes which are so numerous in this region. The
stunted hemlocks, which are occasionally rifted
among their fissures, and the wild vines that here
and there are tangled among their groups, prevents
a close examination of their shape; and some white
people insist that these upright rocks bear little or
no resemblance to the human figure. But it is
probable
that they who undertake to speak thus
positively
upon the subject, have never seen the
particular
cliffs with which the Indian hunter is familiar;
and which, though with the lapse of every year
assuming more and more the aspect of the common
rocks around them, still preserve so much of their
original appearance as to be easily identified. Few,
however, would suspect that these mute forms were
once animated, and gifted with powers of
destruction
proportionate to their huge size; and yet, if
tradition
can be believed, such was formerly the case.
The wars with Otne-yar-heh lasted for many
generations
before they were utterly subdued and reduced
to their present harmless condition; and the century
of continual conflicts with Ononthio (the French)
was not half so destructive to the warriors of the
Aganuschion
[15]
[15]
Thus the confederated Five-Nations called themselves.
Clinton's
Discourse before the New York Historical Society
.
as a single battle with these
monsters
.
It was on the shores of the Tseka Lake that they
were first discovered; though some say that they
came originally from the great salt water, and had
cut their way through the Mahikanders and other
river tribes, up to this point. But they who talk thus
confound these giants with a band of strangers that
were destroyed upon this lake the year before, and
whose bodies afterward became, as it were, the shells
in which these monsters were hatched.
These wanderers had encamped upon the
sand-beach
of Tseka, about a gunshot from the cove
where the inlet of Oxbow Lake flows from it into
the swamp that lies between them: being discovered,
they were set upon by a war-party of the
Aganuschion
on its way to strike a blow at the Abenaquis.
The warriors of the confederacy, mistaking them for
Hurons or some other hostile band of the north,
attacked
them with such fury, that every one of their
number was either killed or wounded before the
headlong assailants could be brought to a parley. It
was then discovered, when too late, that they had
never been among the foes of the Five-Nations, and
were, in fact, strangers, of whom no one could give
an account. The assailing party were overcome
with confusion; but the victims of their rashness
were so completely cut up, that sympathy was of no
avail, and they were wholly at a loss what to do
with the wounded survivers. They had not a
single
medicine-man in their own party to assist
them on the spot; and, if they undertook to carry
the strangers back to their own towns, they must
have perished on the way; while the delay would
be fatal to the enterprise upon which these fierce
warriors had left their homes.
Some proposed to tomahawk those of the
strangers
who were most badly wounded, to put them
out of their pain, and to carry forward the others
upon the expedition. This, however, was
strenuously
opposed by the hot-headed young men upon
16
whom the task of carrying the disabled would have
fallen: and, after several other propositions had been
made with the same effect, it was determined to
leave the victims to their fate upon the spot where
their calamity had overtaken them.
The vengeance of the Master of Life was as
summary
as it was enduring. That war-party marched
on its way, and reached the Cadaraqui, but not one
of their number ever after returned to the lodges of
the Aganuschion; while for many a long year their
tribesmen suffered for the judgment they had brought
upon their people, and the butchered strangers were
made the instruments of the punishment.
The bleeding band, left with their raw wounds
upon the open beach, would crawl to the water's
edge to quench the thirst that consumed them; and
then, as they suffered new anguish in reviving for a
moment, they would roll and twist upon the sand,
until, adhering to the gore that covered them, the
flinty particles covered the whole surface of their
bodies; and, as their limbs stiffened in death,
congealed
almost like solid rock around them. But
their cruel thirst remained to the last. And they
drank and drank, until each one expired where he
lay; while their bodies and limbs became swollen
into frightful bulk before they gasped out their last
breath.
The winter, which soon set in, preserved these
crusted remains from decay; and when the snows,
which are very deep and lasting in this mountain
region, had subsided, each stark and grim corpse
had gained still more in size; while the waves of
lake, in washing its shells and pebbles over them,
appeared, in the lapse of a few months, to have
turned the giant sleepers into solid masses of stone.
This was not the case, however, as the grizzly bears
knew full well when the last troop of these monsters,
driven from the low country by the hunters of the
Iroquois, scented them for prey upon that shore.
At first, however, their prize availed them nothing;
for the bodies were so protected by their shell of
stone, that it seemed impossible to get at them. But
the grizzly bear is the keenest hunter of his kind,
and, when half famished as now, his cunning is equal
to his strength. These animals then commenced at
the soles of the feet, where the hard casing was
thinnest, and, being of a supple nature, they eat their
way forward until the body and limbs of each were
completely enclosed within those gigantic moulds.
The bears at first wished to withdraw from their
strange dwellings, thinking after all they might be
nothing but some new kind of traps which their
enemies
had been setting for them: but, in struggling to
turn round, they found that the flinty casing upon
their limbs yielded so to each motion, that, provided
they only stood erect, they could walk as formerly.
And then it was that, for the first time, he who
looked upon that shore would have seen those
unearthly
monsters raising themselves one by one from
the ground, until, tall as a thrifty pine, with frames
proportioned to their height, and cased from head
to heel in shining flint, the terrible band of the
Otne-yar-heh
was marshalled by their leader.
My brothers, said the chief, in a voice that
sounded like the wind rushing through a mighty
cavern, we are not tortoises, though we have
shells; nor need we wait here until our enemies set
the swamp on fire and smoke us out like musk-rats!
Let us move to the lodges of the Aganuschion, and
see how they will receive us.
The woods cracked as if a tornado had been let
loose among them as the hard-heeled giants strode
from mountain to mountain, crushing the stoutest
saplings like rushes beneath their feet. Their trail
was as broad as that of a gang of moose; but the
trampled and twisted trees lay so thick upon it, that
man with mortal limbs could never have followed
upon their path. Straight as the flight of a pigeon
was the road they took. The swollen torrent or
dizzy precipice was no obstacle to their footsteps;
they stepped from the tall crag or stalked through
the raging stream with equal ease. The trees which
their leader trampled beneath him, afforded a firm
passage for his followers over the deep morass, and
they waded the lakes in storm and tempest, while
the waves that lashed their sides as they advanced,
broke into foam against their rocky ribs as if it were
the very mountain cliffs that opposed them.
What could the warriors of the Five-Nations do
against such an enemy? They were not then,
indeed, though they hunted and fought together, a
united people; and the wars with the Stone Giants,
devastating as they were, were at least the cause of
one happy event, in giving rise to the league that
was formed against them, and producing in the
Aganuschion a race of men that surpasses all
others.
[16]
[16]
Onwe-honwe
, or the men that surpass all others, was a title
arrogated by the Five-Nations.
Colden's History
.
But hundreds of brave men were
destroyed
before this grand end was accomplished, and the
Mohawks and Oneidas, who met the first descent of
the Otne-yar-heh, were vanquished again and again
in battle. Their weapons seemed to produce no
effect upon their terrible opponents. They tried
first to cut off the chief of the band, but their arrows
would rattle like hail against his marble hide; and
when a score of hatchets at a time were aimed at
his head, though they made the fire shower from its
flinty hood as if a flame-stone from the moon
An aereolite is thus called by some
tribes.
were
bursting near, yet it seemed to produce no effect
upon the giant.
At length it was determined that all the chief men
of the Five-Nations should meet at Onondaga, in
order to take measures for acting in concert against
the common enemy; and then that famous league
was formed, whose power for centuries afterward
was acknowledged alike by the white and red man,
wherever its name was know.
Tradition has preserved no exact record of the
mode of warfare it was then determined to employ
against the Stone Giants; but it is generally
believed
that the Master of Life himself looked so
benignantly
upon the councils of this band of brothers,
that he interposed his arm to shelter so heroic a
people from destruction. It is said that he sent his
lightnings among the Otne-yar-heh, which drove
them back to the glens from which they first
16*
emerged, and, drawing there a circle of thunderbolts
around the unhallowed region, so that no game ever
traversed it, the Stone Giants perished in the
fastnesses
where they had sought a refuge. Their only
traces are now the uncouth forms of rock that are
scattered here and there among these hills, and those
monstrous shapes which, as your paddle divides the
water, may be seen looking up at you from the bottom
of more than one of our deep lakes: nor since that
time has a grizzly bear been seen within a hundred
miles of these lakes; and the last of the race is
supposed
to have animated the forms, and perished with
the band of the
Otne-yar-heh
.
God's weather! cried the major, when the
story was ended, but I have never seen those
sculptured rocks of which the old fellow tells us,
and I know every stone of the size of a flint in the
country.
Captain Gill replied to the discredit that was thus
thrown upon his narrative, only with a look of scorn
at the party who thus sought to disparage it; but a
young Iroquois hunter took up the matter more
feelingly
,
by observing that the white man never saw
with the same eyes as the Indian, and that the
traces of The Spirit, alike in trees, and stones,
and running streams, were never discovered by him
who only studied how he could best turn these
objects
to purposes the very reverse of those for which
Owaneyo intended them.
Well, well, said the major, good-naturedly,
you are more than half right, young un; for what
with mining among the mountains, damming the
rivers, and turning the timber into shingles, they
will soon play the mischief with all the trout and
deer in the country. But we've had enough of
Injun
matters now; I want a story with a gal in it. By
your leave, sir, added he, turning to my friend, the
Counsellor, we've not had a word from you yet,
though, being a lawyer, you ought to be as slick with
your tongue as you are with your rifle. Here's the
last night we are to be togetherthe very last,
perhaps
,
you will ever spend in the woods with old Jake
Peabody; so do turn us out something nice in the
way of a story, something that has plenty of women
in it; for, thof we never see the creeturs in these
parts, we like to hear about 'em sometimes.
Thus eloquently besought, my friend could not but
comply; and, promising that he would take the major
at his word, and make the story entirely about
women
,
he related the particulars of a remarkable
law-case
,
which are imbodied in the following version of
The Counsellor's Story.
ROSALIE CLARE.
Men have died, and worms have eaten them,
But not for love.
So saith the poet! meaning by his speech not
men in a numeric sensenot mankind at large, but
only the males of the
genus homo
. Shakspeare,
perhaps, was right in regard to men; but had he
spoken of women, he would have told a different
story. Love, indeed, is the worm i' the bud,
which hath devoured the life-germ in many a female
bosom, leaving only a frail and hollow shell for
death to crush between his iron fingers. Truly hath
Byron said, that woman's love is a fearful and
dangerous thing; for it is both mystical in its birth
and perilous in its being. It maketh realities out of
a shadow. It linketh things unsubstantial with
things real, until they become part of woman's very
being, making a tangible substance of that which is
in its nature an essence incorporealrooting its
fibres in the heart, and interweaving them with the
very filament and texture of the brain.
The personal memories of former times, not less
than the periodicals of our own day, are rife with
records proving this. But one of the most
extraordinary
instances of misplaced affection, clinging to
its object until reason was extinct, is one which,
though often repeated in society, has never yet, to
our knowledge, found its way into print.
I allude to the singular story of Miss * * * * *, (the
Rosalie Clare of our tale,) the niece of that eccentric
old tory, Mrs. C * * * *, of Nova Scotia, who, after
emigrating to New Brunswick during the revolution,
made herself so conspicuous in our courts of law,
when she returned hither to recover some forfeited
estates, about the year 179. The family is, I
believe
,
now extinct; and I have, therefore, less
hesitation
in speaking here of events which must already
be familiar to many of my readers.
The estates, to recover which Mrs. C. embarked
in such expensive litigation, were claimed only in
behalf of her son, to whom they had been devised by
the will of his maternal grandfather. With regard
to the identity of this son, there were strange
surmises
abroad from the moment he landed with his
supposed mother in New York. It seems that Mrs.
C., when she retired to Nova Scotia at the breaking
out of the revolution, had carried her two orphan
children with her from their native city. These
were a little girl, and a boy still in petticoats, and
one of them never reached their destination. The
child was lost overboard at sea; and, when the
vessel
landed, the provincial papers announced the
melancholy
loss which Mrs. C. had met with in the
untimely fate of her only daughter. Such a
misfortune
,
one would think, were enough to gratify the
vindictiveness of the old lady's enemies, at least for
a season; yet there were many who had the malice
to whisper doubts as to which of the two children
had actually perished. It was easy, amid the
confusion
of the times, said they, for one leading so
unsettled a life as Mrs. C., to find, in her various
journeyings, some male infant of similar age, which
she might readily substitute for the lost heir. She
had then only to keep the daughter out of the way,
and his fortune was made. This gossip, however,
was soon swallowed up by more exciting themes;
and when, years afterward, Mrs. C. appeared in
New York with a handsome youth of eighteen, whom
she called her son, those were few who hinted that
the boy was hers only by adoption, and that Mrs. C.
had done what history proves has often been
attempted
in the assertion of higher claims than hers
namely
,
to pass off the son of another as her own.
Young Ludlow C., so was the youth called, was
not the less popular, however, on account of such
surmises, if they did exist. He was a young man
of exceeding beauty and accomplished manners,
with a voice gentle and soft as a woman's, and an
eye brilliant with all the fire of opening manhood.
His, indeed, was just the union of qualities that most
readily captivate the female fancy. He had that high
flow of spirits which is often mistaken for talent in
youth, and which is generally so attractive to those
who are thrown much in the society of the fortunate
possessor. This constitutional blessing gave him
an agreeableness which those who know more of the
subject than I affect to I know, aver as
all-important
in pleasing the sex. But agreeableness,
however
it may entertain, is not the quality to interest a
woman; and young C. had another arrow in his
sheaf, which, perhaps, flew the farther from being
seldom shot. There was at times a shade of
sadness
about hima melancholy so deep and
absorbing
,
that it made the subject of this altered mood
differ for a season not less from himself than he did
at other times from all around him. This, as the
cause of the depression was wholly unknown, threw
a veil of mystery over his character, and completed
the list of lover-like qualities which are the source of
so much bedevilment to girls of nineteen; and
nineteen
was just the age of Rosalie Clare when for the
first time she became acquainted with her
all-conquering
cousin.
Some female writer has said that none of her sex
reach the age of sixteen without having had at least
one affair of the heart. If there were ever an
exception
to the rule, it was in the case of Rosalie Clare.
Love, like wonder, is half the time the child of
ignorance
.
It is an exhalation that springs from young
hearts, and settles upon the nearest object, however
unsuited by character or imperfect sympathies,
as Charles Lamb expresses it, to inspire or to
reciprocate
true affection. Perhaps there is no greater
protection against these idle fancies than the placing
those who may become the subject of them, early in
the world of reality. Rosalie, as the only female of
her father's family, had been thrown into society so
early that she could hardly remember the time when
she had not been surrounded by admirers. A petted
and half-spoiled child of six or seven, she had often
taken her mother's place, and sat in mock dignity at
the head of her father's table; while, as a girl of
twelve, she had habitually done the honours of his
house during the time that New York was occupied
by the British troops. Living thus in the very vortex
of gay society, and surrounded by the handsome
cavaliers, who are only known in the day-dreams of
girls of her age, imagination had never a chance to
act. She became habituated to the compliments
and attentions of the other sex before the feelings of
womanhood began to assert themselves in her bosom;
and the flatteries which had always been received
as a matter of course by the forward child of twelve,
made no impression on the blooming girl of
seventeen
.
Some dispositions would have been entirely
ruined by such an education, whose tendency would
seem to make the whole character artificial. It was
not thus, however, with Rosalie Clare, whose candid
and happy temperament resembled one of those
easily-raised plants that seem to flourish equally well
in the conservatory or the parterre, adapting
themselves
alike to the free exposure of the atmosphere
or the measured heat of the forcing-house; and
exhibiting all their characteristic properties in either
situation. Such natures must be either very
superior
to, or below, the general standard. They are
either so elevated as to be independent of
circumstances
,
or so common that no training can much
alter or improve them; and so far as mind is
concerned
,
it must be confessed that Rosalie did not
soar above the latter class. Yet, while the ill-natured
observer might have confounded her with those of
her sex whom Pope tells us have no character at
all, her fond and most unchanging affectionateness
of disposition would, not less than her rare beauty,
have entitled her to sit for the original of any of
Byron's heroines but Gulnare.
It was this affectionateness, this disposition to cling
to, and rely upon, whatever seemed loveable and
reliable, that made Rosalie become attached to her
cousin almost from the moment she knew him. The
nearness of their relationship, united to the frank,
winning manners of Ludlow, was an immediate
passport to her confidence. The idea of regarding
him as a lover she did not dream of, but they were
friends from the moment they met. There would,
indeed, be occasionally some little interchange of
lively sensibilities between them, but it could hardly
be otherwise with two young persons of different
sexes, who were thrown so continually together. If
Rosalie ever thought of the tendency of such an
intercourse when she was rallied about it by others,
she always had an answer which fully satisfied
herself
.
Ludlow was scarcely a year older than herself,
and was, therefore, a boy, with whom it was no
harm to be upon the easiest terms of familiar
acquaintance
.
Besides, was he not her cousin? a first
cousin! and where's the harm of a good-humoured
flirtation with a cousin? if flirtation it might indeed
be called. Yet it was strange that Rosalie Clare did
not like cousin Ludlow to flirt with any one else
but her!
What! cousin, you are not going to dance again
with that horrid Laura T. to-night? said she,
pettishly
,
laying her hand upon our hero's arm as he
passed her in a crowded ball-room.
And why not, Rosalie? I am engaged to walk
a minuet with Miss T., and you know it is
impossible
now to withdraw.
Why, you have hardly spoken to me yet to-night,
Ludlow!
The youth answered only by taking a single flower
from the
bouquet
which the beaux of that day wore
in their button-holes, and gracefully placing it in the
high head-dress of the pretty pleader. The next
moment he took the hand of his partner, the band
struck up the inspiriting
gavotte
, and he stepped off
in the featly minuet with an air that would have
done honour to a courtier of Versailles; while, half
17
pleased and half provoked, his deserted cousin
looked
on with the admiring crowd.
This was but one of a thousand little passages
between the cousins that marked the progress of a
flirtation which soon assumed the appearance of a
serious entanglement. And now one would have
thought that some coolness had arisen between them
they met, comparatively, so seldom. The air of
Ludlow, too, when they did meet, was absent and
dejected, as he walked by the side of the radiant girl,
who rattled away with all the thoughtless vivacity
of a triumphant belle who has the preferred admirer
of her train for a listener. Rosalie, however, had
also her hours of listlessness, if not of dejection; and
while her cousin lost his wonted flow of spirits when
with her, she, on the contrary, seemed happy only in
his society.
Nor did Rosalie want for other lovers; as that
little ballad which goes by her name, and which may
not inaptly be introduced here, to show how her
beauty fired the gallants of the day, is a genuine
record of the otherwise forgotten belle.
SONG.ROSALIE CLARE.
Who owns not she's peerless? who calls her not fair?
Who questions the beauty of Rosalie Clare?
Let him saddle his courser and spur to the field,
And, though harnessed in proof, he must perish or yield;
For no gallant can splinter, no charger may dare,
The lance that is couched for young Rosalie Clare.
When goblets are flowing, and wit at the board
Sparkles high, while the blood of the red grape is poured,
And fond wishes for fair ones around offered up
From each lip that is wet with the dew of the cup
What name on the brimmer floats oftener there,
Or is whispered more warmly, than Rosalie Clare?
They may talk of the land of the olive and vine
Of the maids of the Ebro, the Arno, or Rhine;
Of the Houris that gladden the east with their smiles,
Where the sea's studded over with green summer isles;
But what flower of far-away clime can compare
With the blossom of oursbright Rosalie Clare?
Who owns not she's peerless? who calls her not fair?
Let him meet but the glances of Rosalie Clare!
Let him list to her voicelet him gaze on her form
And, if hearing and seeing, his soul do not warm,
Let him go breathe it out in some less happy air
Than that which is blessed by sweet Rosalie Clare!
It was to her, too, during some desponding
moment
,
that a forgotten provincial poet addressed that
lively impromptu that we have more than once seen
copied in the albums of our fair acquaintance, by
some admirer who would rally their pettishness in
the language of another.
TO A BELLE WHO TALKED OF GIVING UP THE WORLD.
You give up the world? Why, as well might the sun,
When tired of drinking the dew from the flowers,
While his rays, like young hopes, stealing off one by one,
Die away with the Muezzin's last note from the towers,
Declare that he never would gladden again,
With one rosy smile, the young morn in its birth;
But leave weeping Day, with her sorrowful train
Of hours, to grope o'er a pall-covered earth.
The light of that soul, once so brilliant and steady,
So far can the incense of flattery smother,
That at thought of the world of hearts conquered already,
Like Macedon's madman, you weep for another!
Oh! if, sated with this, you would seek worlds untried,
And fresh as was ours, when first we began it,
Let me know but the sphere where you next will abide,
And that instant, for one, I am off for that planet.
But all this idolatry of the gay world was
unheeded
by her who cared for one only worshipper;
and a careless little song of her cousin's, which we
have seen as copied out in the faded characters of
Rosalie's own fair hand, was dearer to her than all
the more elaborate compliments of others; for she,
fond girl, imagined that none other than herself had
inspired Ludlow's muse when he ventured upon so
confident a strain as that which prompts the
conceits
of the following
CHANSONETTE.
I know thou dost love meay! frown as thou wilt,
And curl that beautiful lip,
Which I never can gaze on without the guilt
Of burning its dew to sip:
I know that my heart is reflected in thine,
And, like flowers that over a brook incline,
They toward each other dip.
Though thou lookest so cold in these halls of light,
'Mid the careless, proud, and gay,
I will steal like a thief in thy heart at night,
And pilfer its thoughts away.
I will come in thy dreams at the midnight hour,
And thy soul in secret shall own the power
It dares to mock by day.
Such an affair seldom proceeds far in any circle
without there being many who discover its existence,
and watch its progress with as lively an interest as
if their own welfare were identified with that of the
parties chiefly concerned. The two cousins, as
time wore on, were not exempted from this
disinterested
surveillance, and manifold were the
speculations
about the termination of their loves. There
was that in the conduct of Ludlow which puzzled
the most acute of these gossips. In the first place,
they were certain that he must be conscious of
possessing
the affections of the guileless Rosalie, whose
heart was reflected too faithfully in her speaking
countenance to admit of the concealment of its
feelings
.
Ludlow, in the course of six months, must
certainly have found out what, in the first six weeks
of their acquaintance, was apparent to every one
except the lovely and unconscious betrayer of her
own gentle emotions. Why, then, did he not claim
the hand when the heart was beyond all question
his own? True, he was very young, and his
precarious
fortunes, with the fact of his never having
been brought up to any profession, might make his
youth an objection when thinking seriously of
matrimony
.
But yet, when other circumstances seemed
to remove every real obstacle, why should such
fancied impediments be allowed to prevail? They
might become engaged at least; and, supposing even
that they waited until the family lawsuit was decided,
they had still some years of youth to spare, and his
cousin's means were sufficiently ample if the cause
were decided against Ludlow and his mother. But,
17*
then, again, did Ludlow love Rosalie? Did he
seriously return her attachment; or, if requiting it,
did he give up the whole tide of his heart, in all its
warmth and fulness, to this one only object? It
seemed impossible to tell how far his feelings
actually
did go. If he thus loved her, there was
something
unaccountably irresolute, not to say
inconsistent
,
in his conduct. The capricious youth certainly
preferred the society of his cousin to that of all other
women. Though not apparently enjoying it, he
always courted it, or rather, almost without any act
of volition on his part, he seemed to find himself
constantly near her. He had been seen to watch
Rosalie with more than a lover's solicitude, when
some of the gay and dissipated young men of his
acquaintance hovered round her in society. He
listened
when they engaged her in conversation, and
her slightest tone of kindness filled him with strange
agitation. Still, on the other hand, he allowed the
most trivial engagement to take him from her
company
;
and it was observable that, though often, of
his own accord, addressing Rosalie in terms of
affection
,
he never returned any of those little
endearments
attentions,
perhaps, we should rather call
themwhich a guileless girl cannot help showing
toward the man of her choice when deeming
herself
secure of his affection.
It was remarked, too, that none of the reports
which were occasionally circulated about Rosalie
and her other admirersfor she was still a belle
seemed to awaken any jealousy in her eccentric
cousin. He scrutinized every one who approached
her in the guise of a lover; yet his watchfulness was
more like the discreet care of an affectionate and
considerate brother, than the anxiety of an earnest
and passionate admirer. But if he were not such
an admirer, what became of Ludlow's honour as a
gentleman, what of his principles as a man, when he
allowed a dreaming and fond-hearted girl to yield up
her whole soul to him, in the delusive belief that he
was all hers in return? True, he had never told
Rosalie that he loved her. True, he had not even
passed those trifling complimentsthe light currency
of fancyso often mistaken for the sterling coinage
of the heart: yet Rosalie treasured up a thousand
little proofs of tendernessexpressions which told,
from day to day, how often he thought of her when
absent; looks which spoke how much he felt for her
when near. How often had she caught herself
smiling in her heart at what she believed to be the
jealous mood of her lover as he watched her, while
talking with others, with that expression of sadness
in his eyes which often betokens the overflow of a
heart filled up with feeling! He watched her when
he spoke not; and when he did speak, his voice took
ever a softer tone, that surely was reserved for her
alone!
There had, then, been no moment when Rosalie
had said to herself, Now, surely, he loves me, for
she believed in Ludlow's affection before she ever
dreamed
the question. Her trust grew from her
own heart; it was not founded upon his actions.
She loved too sincerely to reason about her own
feelings; too devotedly to scan those of her lover.
It seemed as if they had been always meant for each
other, and must, of necessity, be united; and so little
could the doting girl conceive the void in her heart
which bereaved affection might create, that she
looked
upon the love of her cousin as something belonging
to her from the first, and of right exclusively her own.
But the day was now at hand when all that was
enigmatical about the character of young Ludlow C.
was to be fully solved in the eyes of the world.
Mrs. C.'s long-protracted civil suit was at length
brought into court. The trial involved a large amount
of property, and the celebrity of counsel on both
sides had drawn together an unusual assemblage of
spectators. It was said that
Hamilton
would speak;
and the name of that great man, already becoming
as distinguished at the bar as he had been in the
cabinet, had attracted a great many ladies to the
court-room in the old City Hall. Among the most
beautiful of theseyet peerless in her own
loveliness
might
be seen the happy and blooming
features
of Rosalie Clare.
The court was opened, and the trial proceeded,
exhibiting but little in its progress to gratify the
expectations
of the larger part of the audience, who
became wearied with the dry and technical details
which were minutely entered into by the
old-fashioned
lawyers, most of whom had studied their
profession
under the English regime. An incident soon
occurred, however, which effectually dispelled the
insipidity of this scene, and which can never be
forgotten by those who were so situated as fairly to
witness the whole circumstance. An exclamation
of General Hamilton was the first thing that called
general attention to what was going forward.
Hamilton
had as yet taken but little part in the conduct
of the causeleaving the drudgery, perhaps, to some
less distinguished member of the professionwhile
he reserved himself for the cross-examinations and
the summing up. At a particular point of the
testimony
for the C.'s, however, he interrupted the
witness upon the stand, by exclaiming, That is only
hearsay evidence: may it please your honour, (rising
and bowing to the judge,) this evidence is
inadmissible
;
let the young gentleman alluded to by the
witness be himself produced in court. The remark
created instant confusion upon the opposite side of
the table, at which the counsel were sitting. Old
Mrs. C. bustled forward and whispered to her lawyer,
who instantly rose and stated to the court that The
son of the plaintiffthe young gentleman alluded
tohad left town the evening before, and, as the
point in question was quite unimportant, he was
willing to waive it in behalf of his client, rather than
have the cause delayed until the averment of the
person on the stand could be substantiated by what
he, the counsel, admitted was the only proper
evidence
.
Mrs. C. in the meantime seemed much agitated,
and forthwith despatched a note to Ludlow, who,
notwithstanding the statement which had just been
made in his name, she believed to be at the moment
reading quietly at home. But her message was
never doomed to reach that unconscious victim of
parental tyranny and all-grasping avarice; for, even
while the case in point was still under the advisement
of the court, the name of young C. was pronounced
by one of the marshals, who, with officious politeness,
ushered him to a seat near his mother, within the
bar. The announcement of the name caught the
quick ear of Hamilton in a moment.
Let that young gentleman take his place on the
stand, cried he, with great presence of mind,
before
his antagonist could recover from the infectious
embarrassment into which the confusion of his
client, at this untoward appearance, had thrown him.
Swear him, Mr. Clerk. The oath was
administered
.
It probably was the first time that
Ludlow had gone through this solemnity, which
might account for his seeming perturbed. His eye
roamed uneasily around the court, as if in quest of
something to rest upon.
Young gentleman, you will please to look me
steadily in the face, said the experienced barrister.
Now, sir, the question I am about to ask you
affects only a simple act of recollection; and you
can, therefore, use what deliberation you please in
your reply, provided it be explicit. The witness
who has just left that stand, stated that yourself and
another personthe name is immaterialwere
present
when your mother delivered the paper which I
hold in my hand to the gentleman who sits opposite
to you. Now, without stopping here to identify this
third individual, I ask you whether it be true that
yourself and another man The features of the
youth became much agitated, and the examiner,
pausing an instant, resumed, as he fixed his eye
keenly upon himI say, another person and
yourself
Ludlow was again reassured, but only to
be more completely overwhelmed the next moment;
as the deliberate lawyer, interrupting himself again
to remind the witness of the solemnity of his oath,
at last brought the question out in a shape that
admitted
of no prevaricationAnswer me, in a
monosyllable, Ay! or No! were there, when your
mother so delivered that paper to the gentleman who
received it, two other MEN present, and were you,
or were you not, one of thoseMEN?
The last words were pronounced with a significant
whisper, that was heard in every part of the
crowded
court-room. The witness hesitated for a moment,
and turned deadly pale. His lips were slightly
convulsed
,
as if unable to syllable the words his tongue
would fain record. His mother leaned forward with
clasped hands and an appealing, agonized
expression
,
that was wholly indescribable. The youth
caught her eager and anxious eye, uttered an
indistinct
cry, and fainted upon the spot.
Stand back!stand back! cried the agitated
mother; my child! my child! let me take care
of my own child! And she struggled through
the crowd to get near the insensible object of her
anxiety.
One moment, madam, exclaimed the lawyer,
feelingly, but with firmness, as he stretched across
the table and held her back with an air that was not
the less decided from being perfectly respectful.
Dr. Hosack already has his hand upon the pulse
of the youth, and the swoon will be over the moment
his lungs have play. And even as he spoke, the
physician had thrown open the frilled bosom of poor
Rosalie's lover, while a cry of astonishment filled
the court as the fair and feminine proportions of a
beautiful WOMAN were disclosed!
It has never been known exactly what became of
the accomplished female who so long figured in the
society of New York under the name of Ludlow C.
Few thought it strange, however, knowing the
eccentric
and unprincipled character of old Mrs. C.,
that she should thus have trained her only daughter
to play an unconsciously dishonest part in her legal
intrigues. As for the mere fact of a girl thus acting
in male character upon the theatre of life, the
example
of the celebrated Chevalier D'Eon had found
too many imitators, both among ladies of the best
families in Europe and among the enthusiastically
patriotic of her sex in our own country, to make this
feature of the case at all remarkable.
[17]
[17]
One of these Amazons, who had for fifty years drawn the pay
of a revolutionary pensioner, died at an advanced age lately in New
England. The new work of the Duchess d'AbrantesThe Lives
and Portraits of Celebrated Womenrecords many remarkable
instances of women thus unsexing themselves; and Mr. Henry
Bulwer, in his work on France, avers that, among the slaughtered
conscripts of Napoleon's fields, the bodies of females were found
after almost every battle.
And what became of poor Rosalie Clare?she
whose kind and gentle heart had withstood so many
assaults from the other sex, only to be yielded up at
last to the delicate arts of a spoiler of her own. The
false lover, who doted upon her like a sister, is said
to have had all the painful emotions which her career
might well have excited, swallowed up in contrition
for the ruin she had so unintentionally wrought upon
the happiness of the confiding Rosalie; but the
heart of that unfortunate had been too completely
thrown away ever to be recalled, or again to beat
aright. Her brain was either blasted by the sudden
blow, or else it became so perverted that she could
never fully comprehend the circumstances by which
she was overwhelmed, so as to reconcile them to
each other, and think rationally upon the subject.
In a word, her mind, which had never been a strong
one, was broken completely. The presence of her
cousin, who, for some weeks, was not withdrawn by
her mother from the scene of her disgrace, seemed
only to increase the malady. She shrank from her
nursing and feminine endearments as if they were
the caresses of a monster; yet she was observed to
listen to her masculine step upon the stair, and hail
her approach with eagerness; while her colour
would come and go when she heard her voice in
another room, as if its tones awakened her softer
sensibilities. But when Ludlow, as she still
called her cousin, was forbidden by the physicians
to see her more, and Rosalie was told that she had
embarked with her mother, for another land, the spirit
of the faded and pining girl sank completely, and her
mind lost its last gleams of intelligence.
Happy would it have been for her then if death
had intervened to close the scene! But no! the
resources of an excellent constitution did not yet
18
give way, and Rosalie Clare, for many a long year,
still lived on. But how? Reader, were you ever
at the Bloomingdale Asylum? Did you ever look
down into the enclosure, where the unhappy inmates
may be seen at a certain hour amusing themselves
as each one listeth? Did you ever look in vain
among that motley crew for the piteous, yet
picturesque
,
air of distraction with which poets and
painters have so often gifted the maniac? You have
gazed there in vain, if you hoped to find the romantic
madness of a Hamlet or an Ophelia! And yet,
among those common-looking creaturesfor all
human creatures do look
common
when the spirit of
mind that once ennobled their forms hath
departed
,
and left them animated only by the instincts of
senseamong those common-looking creatures are
many who have once been the loveliest of the land.
Ay! among those who are at this moment gathered
in that very yard is one whoBut mark her as she
sits crouched in yon sunny corner! Those livid and
sunken eyes have once matched heaven's own blue
in colour, as they beamed with heavenly purity and
feeling! The fresh-blooming rose, in fulness, and
softness, and colour, was once rivalled by that sallow
and shrivelled cheek! Freely did the eloquent blood
though disease hath now
Starved the roses on that cheek,
And pinched the lily tincture of her skin,
freely did it once course through the blue veins of
those shrunken temples! Those leaden lips
feveredwithered as they arethey
But why dwell upon this appalling picture? The
original was but now before us in all the light of
youth and loveliness. Alas! that the copy, so
strangely disfigured, should still be true to all that
remains of poor Rosalie Clare! Reader, if thou
knowest what woman's love is, thou wilt not wonder
that one who had thus wooed a cloud, could not be
released from its embrace without being scathed by
its lightning.
Well, said Major Jake, when the Counsellor had
ended the narration, (which he gave in language
relishing still more of the intensive school than
that which I have ventured to adopt,) that is indeed
a raal gal story. It's nothing
but
galas the fellow
said down in Herkimer, when his wife brought him
a twentieth daughter! And now let's take a cup all
round, swear etarnal friendship, and bid good-by, in
case we separate to take an early start to home in
the morning.
And thus end my early reminiscences of the
Sacondaga
country. I have frequently been there since,
upon a trouting excursion, but the gay idlers of
Saratoga Springs have broken in upon those mountain
fastnesses. The speculators have got hold of the
sixpenny acres; old Captain Gill has been many
years dead, and none of the new people remember
Major Jake, who is likewise no more: nor should
I, perhaps, have attempted to recall their memory, if
my recent visit to the other branches of the Hudson,
recalling those early days on the Sacondaga, had not
awakened a vivid recollection of scenes which,
enjoyed
when life was new, possess far more interest
for me in association than I can hope they will have
for others.
END OF VOL. I.B
SCENES OF THE PRAIRIE.
NIGHTS IN AN INDIAN LODGE.
I.
Neshin Wikiewun
, exclaimed White-plume,
after kindling our fire in the deserted shantee of
some roving hunter which we found in one of these
deep ravines, through which the brooks of the
north-west
discharge themselves into the Wiskonsan. A
good house, said he, rubbing his hands, and looking
around with an air of satisfaction.
Aneendee, growled Che-che-gwa, (
the
Rattlesnake
,)
with Indian sententiousness, while his less
dignified friend sliced off a couple of steaks from the
moose he had just killed, and left the Canadian to
prepare the supper, which was soon despatched by
all four of us.
It was still early in the evening; and, though
somewhat
fatigued, as I was not at all sleepy, I should
have had a pretty tedious time of it, after the
Rattlesnake
had coiled himself to rest, if left alone with so
laconic a companion.
But the White-plume, who had been a great
traveller in his day, and was noted for his
talkativeness
and story-telling, seemed seized with a more
than usual fit of loquacity. The other Indian
appeared
at first much inclined to repose; but his
disposition
to sleep was gradually dispelled by the
vivacity of his comrade. He soon raised himself on
his elbow, and yielded attention to the waggish sallies
of the other. Finally, sitting erect, he carefully
filled his pipe with kinnekinic, and, placing his back
against the rough timbers of the lodge, seemed
prepared
for a long siege, as his friend entered upon one
of those rambling legends of which the Indians are
so fond. The story-teller also, clearing his throat,
asked for some milk from the `Mokomuan's'
black
cow!
and, emptying the whiskey-bottle which the
Canadian handed him, at a draught, he pursued his
tale without farther interruption, except from the
guttural expression of satisfaction which now and
then escaped from the deep chest of his companion,
or the loud snoring of my guide, whose slumbers
were as noisy as if he were sleeping against time.
My knowledge of the language used by the
story-teller
was so slight, that the meaning of his words
often escaped me altogether; and it was only from
his frequent repetition of the same ideas, enforced
by the most animated and expressive gestures, and,
perhaps, from my having before heard of the wild
tradition upon which it was founded, that I was at
all able to follow him in the narration. It would be
affectation in me to attempt to give the style and
mode of expression in which the tale I am about to
relate was conveyed to me; but the main tissue of it
was as follows:
THE GHOST-RIDERS.
[A Legend of the Great American Desert.]
Away!Away! My breath was gone,
I saw not where he hurried on!
'Twas scarcely yet the break of day
And on he foam'dAway!Away!
And my cold sweatdrops fell like rain
Upon the coursers bristling mane;
But snorting still with rage and fear,
He flew upon his far career.
Mazeppa
.
The
hunters of the far-west, who trap for beaver
among the defiles of the Oregon Mountains, regard
no part of their long journey, from the borders to their
savage hunting grounds, where the fur-bearing animals
are still found in the greatest profusion, with more
aversion than that which leads over the great desert,
where the tributaries of the Padouca, the Konzas,
and the Arkansaw Rivers are half absorbed by the
arid sand. Lewis and Clarke, Major Long, and
other scientific explorers of this desolate region,
suffered
much from the want of water while passing
through it on their way to the Rocky Mountains;
and they often mention the disheartening effect it
had upon their followers, when, after traversing the
scorching plain for weeks, it still lay stretched in
unbroken and monotonous vastness before them.
This portion of country, which extends along the
base of the Rocky Mountains as far as we have any
acquaintance with their range, is said to have an
average width of six hundred miles. In the north
the surface is occasionally characterized by
water-worn
pebbles and hard gravel; but the predominant
characteristic is sand, which, in many instances,
prevails to the entire exclusion of vegetable mould.
At the south the arid plains are profusely covered
with loose fragments of volcanic rocks, amid whose
barren bosom no genial plant has birth; and, indeed,
throughout the whole region, large tracts are often to
be met with which exhibit scarcely a trace of
vegetation
.
In some few instances sandy hillocks and
ridges make their appearance, thickly covered with
red cedar of a dwarfish growth; but in general
nothing
of vegetation appears upon the uplands, but
rigid grass of spare and stunted growth, prickly pears
profusely covering extensive tracts, and weeds of a
few varieties, which, like the prickly pears, seem to
thrive the best in the most arid and steril soils.
The Indians who inhabit this extensive region,
are composed of several roving tribes, who, unlike
the nations to the east and west of them, have no
permanent villages nor hunting-grounds which they
claim as peculiarly their own. They hunt the
buffalo
and antelope, and, dwelling only in tents of
leather, migrate from place to place in pursuit of the
herds of those animals; and so extensive is their
range, that, while they exchange their skins for
blankets
and strouding, with the British traders on the
Cheyenne River of the north, they also trade their
mules and horses for vermilion and silver ornaments,
with the Spaniards of Mexico on the Colorado of the
south. The Arapahoes, Kaskaias, Kiaways, and
Ietans, which are the chief of the desert hordes, are
B 2
ferocious and predatory in their habits, and
are
continually
at war with various tribes of the
Menomon
Indians, who inhabit the fertile countries which
lie
between them and our western frontier. The
grizzly
bear, the king of the American wilds, shares
these dreary domains with the savages, hardly less
ferocious than himself, and roams the west in quest
of living prey. Here, too, the illusive
mirage
of the
desert cheats the parched traveller with its refreshing
promise; and the wanderers in these solitudes often
tell of those monstrous shapes and unnatural forms
which, like the spectre of the Brocken, reflected on
the heated and tremulous vapour, are magnified and
distorted to the eye of the appalled and awe-stricken
traveller.
[1]
[1]
As the day advanced, and the heat of the sun began to be felt,
such quantities of vapour were seen to ascend from every part of
the plain, that all objects at a little distance appeared magnified
and variously distorted. Three elks, which were the first that we had
seen, crossed our path at some distance before us. The effect of
the mirage, with our indefinite idea of the distance, magnified those
animals to the most prodigious size. For a moment we thought
we saw the mastodon of America moving in those vast plains which
seem to have been created for his dwelling-place.
Major Long's
Expedition to the Rocky Mountains
.
Strange fires, too, are said to shoot along
the baked and cracking earth; and the herds of wild
horses that can be seen trooping along the horizon,
seem at times to be goaded on by gigantic and
unearthly
riders, whose paths are enveloped in wreaths
of flame.
Luminous appearances, like those mentioned in the text, are
also said to be common in some of the mining districts west of the
Mississippi. Dr. Edwin James, of the army, the accomplished
naturalist
and traveller, received several accounts of them from the
residents in that region, though neither he nor any of his party
witnessed
any such phenomena. A settler told them of two itinerant
preachers, who had encountered an indescribable phenomenon at a
place about nine miles east of Loutre-lick. As they were riding
side by side at a late hour in the evening, one of them requested
the other to observe a ball of fire attached to the end of his whip.
No sooner was his attention directed to this object, than a similar
one began to appear on the other end of the whip: in a moment
afterward their horses and all objects near them were enveloped
in a wreath of flame. By this time the minds of the itinerant
preachers were so much confounded, that they were no longer
capable of observation, and could, therefore, give no farther account
of what happened. He also stated as a fact, authenticated by the
most credible witnesses, that a very considerable tract of land near
by had been seen to send up vast columns of smoke, which rose
through the light and porous soil as if it had been the covering of a
coal-pit.
The
scientific explorer readily calls philosophy to
in examining these strange appearances:
explains the phenomena of which he is
himself
a witness, and reason rejects the
preternatural
images, which he only knows from the
representations
of others. But the nomadic tribes, who
make their dwelling upon the desert, or the
uneducated
adventurer, who wanders thither from some
more smiling region, are differently affected. The
monstrous shapes and unearthly appearances that
present themselves to his excited vision, are
regarded
through the medium of superstitious awe. The
wild imagination of the Indian and the credulous
fancy of the Creole and Canadian hunter people
these mysterious solitudes with actual beings; while
the grotesque figures, drawn upon the mocking
mirage
,
after presenting themselves frequently to the
eye, assume at length an individuality and a name;
and it is said that the Indian and Canadian
wanderers
become at last so familiar with the images
represented
,
as even to pretend to recognise the features
and swear to the identity of shapes which are
continually
changing, and which probably never present
themselves more than once to the same person.
Among those most often mentioned, there are none
whose identity has been more completely
established
,
and whose names are whispered with deeper
awe, than those of the
Ghost-riders
. The
Canadian
Engag always crosses himself when he utters
the name, and the Otto, or Omaw-whaw warrior, who
may have skirted the desert in a war party against the
Cheyennes, or the Pawnee-Loup, who has crossed
it in his battles with the Crow and Kiawa Indians,
invariably places his hand upon his Metawaann, or
repository of his personal manitto, when he speaks
of these fearful apparitions.
Those who affect to have seen these strange
dwellers of the desert, describe them as two
gigantic
figures, representing a man and woman locked in
each other's arms, and both mounted on one horse,
which is of the same unearthly make as themselves.
Some pretend to have been near enough to discover
their features; and these assert that the countenance
of the man, though emaciated and ghastly, and
writhed with the most fearful contortions, by an
expression
of shrinking horror, can plainly be identified
as the face of a white man; while the features of the
woman, though collapsed and corpse-like, are
evidently
those of an Indian female. Others insist that
no one can ever have been near enough to the
phantoms
to remark these peculiarities; for the
Ghost-riders
,
say they, are for ever in motion, and they
scour the desert with such preternatural velocity as
to mock the scrutiny of human eyes. They appear
to be goaded on for ever by some invisible hand,
while the phantom charger that bears them,
over-leaps
every obstacle as he flies on his mysterious
and apparently aimless career.
There is a tradition among the Indians accounting
for the origin of these fearful apparitions, to which
universal credence is given. It is a story of love
and vengeance; of gentle affections won by gallant
deeds, and Eden-like happiness blasted by unholy
passion; of black-hearted treachery and ruthless
violence, that met with a punishment more horrible
even than itself.
And thus the story runs:
Upon the western borders of the great desert
already
described, and somewhere about the
head-waters
of the Padouca and Arkansaw Riverswhere
they approach each other among those broken
sandstone
ledges which lift their gray parapets and
isolated
columnar rocks of snowy whiteness from
copses of hazel and shrubby oaksthere stood,
many years since, the lodge of Ta-in-ga-ro,
The-first-thunder-that-falls
.
The hunter, though no
one knew whence he came, appeared to be upon
friendly terms with all the allied tribes of the desert;
and he was said to have recommended himself to
them on his appearance in those wilds, by bringing
a dozen scalps of different tribes of the Missouri
Indians at his saddle-bow, when he first presented
himself in the skin tents of the roving Kaskaias.
So rich an offering would have placed the chief at
the head of an independent band of his own, had he
wished to become a partisan, or leader of
warriors
;
but the habits of Ta-in-ga-ro were unsocial
and secluded; and the only object that claimed the
solicitude, or shared the sympathies of the bold
stranger, was a beautiful femalethe sole
companion
of his exile.
The name of the hunter was evidently of
Omaw-whaw
origin, but there was nothing about his
person
to mark him as belonging to that distant nation;
and it was equally difficult to identify the partner of
his wandering with any neighbouring tribe. Some,
from the fairness of her complexion, insisted that
she must belong to the Rice-eaters, (
Menomons
,)
or White Indians of the north, who dwell near the
country of the Long-knives; others, that she must
be a
Boisbrul
, or daughter of a Sioux mother by
some Sakindasha (British) trader; but no one, after
a while, troubled themselves about the origin of
Zecana, or
The Bird
, as she was called in the
Yanckton language. Indeed the lonely couple lived
so completely by themselves, in a spot but seldom
visited, that they were soon forgotten among a
people
so scattered as the dwellers of the desert. The
only object of Ta-in-ga-ro appeared to have been
to find a home where he could place his wife in
safety; and the broken mounds, and hillocks, and
angular tables of sandstone now heaped upon the
soil, like the plates of ice often piled upon each other
in the eddies and along the banks of rivers, and now
raising themselves in solitary pyramids and obelisks,
along the grassy vales in which he sought an
asylum
,
made this the country, of all others, wherein
the outlaw might find a secure fastnessespecially
when the whole breadth of the desert lay between
him and his people. Secure amid these wild and
picturesque retreats, the sole care of the exile was
to keep a few wild horses in training near his lodge,
and to hunt the game that was necessary for the
subsistence of his small household. The soul of
Ta-in-ga-ro appeared to be completely wrapped up
in the being who had united her fate with his. He
seldom allowed her to go out of his sight; and when
the disappearance of the buffalo and antelope from
his immediate neighbourhood extended the range of
the chase, Zecana always accompanied him on his
more distant expeditions. Indeed, the love which
the hunter bore to his wife was not like the ordinary
affection of an Indian to his squaw: it resembled
more the devotion which distinguishes those who, in
some tribes, are coupled out as friends, to be nearer
to each other than children of the same father, in all
the concerns that mark the pathway of life. It was
like the mystic tie which unites together the fated
brothers of The Band of the Brave.
[2]
[2]
Nanpashene
The Dauntless, or Those who never retreat.
The different members of this singular and romantic association are
generally coupled out in pairs; and incredible instances are told of
the exclusive devotion to each other of the friends thus uniteda
devotion that extends even to death when made terrible by all the
horrors of Indian torture.
The genial months of summer had passed away,
and the first moon of autumn still found the exile and
his bride dwelling in their sequestered valley. His
success in the chase had enabled Ta-in-ga-ro to
exchange
a pack of skins for a few simple comforts,
with a Spanish trader on the Mexican border; and,
by merely shifting his lodge to the mountain
recesses
near, when the winter called for a more
sheltered
situation, he was easily enabled to strike the
wild goats of the Oregon highlands, and, by trapping
for beaver among the adjacent glens, supply all the
wants of himself and Zecana. It was necessary,
however, in disposing of the latter, to be frequently
brought in contact with the Spaniard; and his
unwillingness
to leave his wife unprotected, induced
Ta-in-ga-ro often to take her with him on his visits
to the trading-post. The consequences were such
as are continually occurring on our own frontier, in
the intercourse between the licentious whites, who
are bound by no ties except those of interest and
passion, and the confiding and simple-hearted
In-dians
.
The Spaniard, whose cabin was already shared
with two wives, taken from the adjacent tribes with
whom he traded, soon conceived a partiality for the
fairer features of the northern girl; and, with that
disregard of moral obligations which is but too
characteristic
of his order when the welfare of one of
the aborigines is concerned, he determined that she
should become the victim of his unbridled passions.
His advances were received by Zecana with
indignation
and scorn; but, notwithstanding the disgust
which his persevering in them awakened, she feared
to tell her husband of the insults she received, lest
his impetuous disposition should embroil him with
all the renegado whites, villanous half-bloods, and
degraded Indians that usually hang round a
trading-post
,
and become the pliant creatures of its master.
The return of spring, too, was near, and Zecana
thought that its earliest blossoms would find her once
more alone with her lover, enjoying the sequestered
privacy of their summer retreat together; and,
confident
in her own purity and strength, she contented
herself with repelling the advances of the trader in
silence. But the wily and profligate Spaniard was
not to be cheated so easily of his victim; and, after
meditating a variety of designs, he at last brought
both cunning and force to the accomplishment of his
purpose. He succeeded in luring the unsuspecting
Indian into an agreement, by which a pack of skins
was to be delivered within a certain period. In
order that Ta-in-ga-ro might be completely
unshackled
in his efforts to procure them, and rove as
far as possible in his dangerous quest, the trader
prevailed upon him to leave his wife in his
guardianship
,
while her husband went upon an expedition
into the inmost recesses of the Rocky Mountains.
The hunter, according to the custom of the Indians,
departed upon his errand without giving Zecana
the slighest intimation of his distant mission, or of
the arrangements which he had made for her care
during his absence.
In one of the most romantic valleys on the eastern
side of the mountains, at the foot of that
snow-capped
peak which is called after the first white man
that ever planted his foot on the summit,
[3]
[3]
Edwin James's U. S. A.
there is a
C
large and beautiful fountain, whose transparent water,
highly aerated with exhilarating gas, has procured it
the name of The Boiling Spring, from the white
hunters, who trap for beaver in this lonely region.
This fountain is one of the first you meet with after
crossing the Great Desert; and its grateful beverage,
not less than its singular situation, causes it to be
regarded with deep veneration by the roving natives
of the mountain and the plain. The Indian hunter,
when he drinks from the rocky basin, invariably
leaves an offering in the refreshing bowl; and the
clean bottom is paved with the beads and other
ornaments
which the aborigines have left there as
sacrifices or presents to the spring.
By the side of this fountain, one sultry April
noontide, reposed an Indian hunter. His mantle of
blue and scarlet cloth, beaded with white wampum,
was evidently of Spanish manufacture, and indicated,
perhaps, the gay and predatory rover of the
south-west
;
but the long-plaited and riband-twined locks
of the Ietan, or Kaskaia, were wanting: and the
knotted tuft on his crown, with the war-eagle's
feather
as its only ornament, characterized more truly
the stern and less volatile native of the north; while
the towering form and prominent aquiline nose were
combined with those features and proportions which
more particularly distinguish the Pawnees from
other tribes of the Missouri Indians. It was, in fact,
impossible to say to what nation the hunter
belonged
.
The best blood of the noblest band might
channel
,
unmingled with any baser current, in his veins;
but, whatever might be the totem of his tribe, it was
evident that he now held himself identified with no
particular clanand was, perhaps, indeed, an outlaw
from his people. The expression of dauntless
resolution
that dwelt around his firmly-cut mouth, and
the air of high command discoverable in his piercing
eye, revealed, however, that the hunter was no
common
man; that, in fact, whatever might now be his
pursuits, he was once a warrior and a chieftain.
Weary with the chase, and exhausted by the
noontide
heat, Ta-in-ga-ro was reposing upon the rich
greensward which carpeted the spot. He had
thrown off the gay Mexican blanket, or cloth mantle,
as it might rather be called, and was occupied in
stripping the beads from the woven garters of his
metasses, for an offering to the divinity of the place.
One after another the bits of wampum were dropped
by him into the bubbling well over which he leaned.
But each as it struck the bottom was thrown again
to the surface by some boiling eddy, and, after
dancing for a moment on the brim, it toppled over the
lips of the fountain, and disappeared in the stream
which swept down the valley. The heart of an
Indian
is the abode of a thousand superstitions; and
Ta-in-ga-ro, though more enlightened than most of
his race, was still, so far as fancy was concerned, a
genuine child of the wilderness. The sudden onset
of a score of Blackfeet he had met without dismay,
and their charging yell would have been flung back
with his own whoop of defiance; but the soul of the
intrepid savage sank within him as he beheld the
strange reception of his reverential rite. Danger
and death he feared not for himself; but there was
another whose existence was bound up in his own,
and misgiving thoughts of her condition floated wildly
through his brain at this moment. A strange mist
swam before his dizzied sight, and he saw, or deemed
that he saw, the reproachful countenance of Zecana
reflected in the mysterious pool. The appalled lover
sprang like lightning to his feet, and riveted his
piercing gaze intently upon the fountain. But the
apparition was gone. The wampum-strewed bottom
was all that met his eye within the sacred bowl, and
he knew not whether the mocking semblance just
presented on its surface was distorted by pain, or
whether the motion of the unstable mirror changed
those lineaments from their wonted sweetness. A
startling train had been given to his ideas, however,
which fancy rudely followed up without the aid of
new images to quicken her power. A sudden
resolve
and instant execution was the result. The
call of the chief brought his horse in a moment to
his side; another served to readjust his few
equipments
,
and, leaping into his seat, he at once bade
adieu to the scenes where he had hardly yet
commenced
his new employment, leaving his fur-traps,
and all they might contain, to the first fortunate
hunter that should chance to light upon them.
Ta-in-ga-ro had a journey of some length before
him along the base of the mountains; but at last the
Spanish Peaks hove near, and the impatient
voyager soon after appeared before the trading-post
of the Spaniard. He found it occupied by a small
force of provincial soldiers, who had been ordered
thither on account of some hostile movements of the
neighbouring Cumanches; and a good-natured
Mexican
,
who was one of the sentinels on duty, apprized
him that Zecana was there no longer, and warned
him that imprisonment and death would be the
certain consequence, should he present himself before
the commandant. The anxious husband waited not
to learn whether the trader was still at the station;
but, thinking that Zecana might have sought a refuge
in his own home during the existing difficulties upon
the border, he struck the spurs into his jaded horse,
and, wheeling from the inhospitable gate, his
lessening
form soon disappeared over the rolling prairie.
Never had the road seemed so long to the retreat
where he had known so many happy hours, and
where, in spite of some misgivings at his heart, he
still hoped to realize many more. After winding his
way for some time among the singular pieces of
table-land which rise in such formal mounds from
those plains, he descended at last into the little vale
where his lodge was situated. All looked as still
and sheltered as when last he left it; and his heart
rose to his lips when, reclining beneath the dwarf
willows which bent over the stream near his door,
he saw the loved form of Zecana. There was
something unpleasant to him, however, in the singular
listlessness of her appearance. The tramp of his
horse appeared not to startle her; and when at last
his figure met her eye, she looked at him as
carelessly
as if wholly unconscious of his presence. She
appeared to be busied in watching the ingenious
labours of a group of prairie dogs, one of whose neat
villages was clustered around a small mound near the
c 2
spot where she sat; and as the little animals would
move in and out of their burrows, and sport in the
warm sunshine, she sung to them snatches of strange
airs, such as had either originated among her own
people, or been caught in other days from some
wandering
Mexican or Canadian trader. The chieftain
threw himself from his horse, and stood over the
insane female in agonized horror. The wild words
that she murmured appeared to have no allusion to
him; and, though in her fallen and emaciated
features
he could still recognise the face of her whom
he had loved, yet the being before him could hardly
be identified with his own Zecana. But the strange
superstition of his race in relation to those afflicted
with the loss of reason, began soon to influence his
mind, and, dropping on one knee before the maniac,
he listened as solemnly to her ravings as if he had
the art of a
ouabineau
, or wizard, to interpret them.
They were incoherent and wandering, but they
seemed ever and anon to hover near some revelation
too horrible even to pass the lips of insanity. The
Indian sprang from the ground as if a bullet had
pierced his heart when the conviction of their import
first flashed upon his brain, while the soul-piercing
cry he uttered summoned back for a moment the
reason of the desolated woman before him. But the
gleam of mind was instantly lost in a darker eclipse
than that from which the voice of her lover had
evoked it. She gave him a look of anguish, more
piteous even than the ravings of her previous
distraction
;
and thenwhile her lips seemed convulsed
with the effortshe shrieked forth the name of the
Spaniard in the same instant that a knife, which she
clutched from her husband's belt, laid her a gory
corpse at his feet.
It would be impossible to describe the emotions
of Ta-in-ga-ro at the spectacle which had just passed,
like some dreadful vision, before his eyes. The very
soul within him seemed blasted with horror and
dismay
at the frightful desolation that had overtaken his
happy home. The casket in which he had garnered
up his hopesthe being in whom he had merged his
existencelay an irretrievable ruin, a desecrated
corpse, before him! And he that had wrought this
stupendous injuryhe, the author of this fiendish
destructionwas the trusted friend of his bosom, the
appointed guardian and protector of all it prized on
earth or in heaven!
The lapse of hours found the wretched husband
still standing in mute stupefaction where the
knowledge
of his calamity had first burst upon his
agonized
senses. But some new feeling seemed now to
be at work within him; a wild and sudden impulse
gleamed fearfully over his fixed and haggard
countenance
.
He became an altered beingchanged on
the instantchanged in heart, soul, and character, as
if the spell of an enchanter had passed through his
brain. Till now he had been either more or less
than an Indian. The plastic hand of love had
moulded him into a different creature from the stern
and immoveable children of his race. The outlawed
warrior had loved Zecana; he had loved her, not as
the sons of pleasure, the slaves of sordid toilnot as
men enervated by the luxuries, and fettered by the
interests, the prejudices, the soul-shackling bonds of
civilizationnot as the artificial creature of society
can only love. He loved with a soul that knew no
dividing caresthat was filled with no hollow dreams
of pomp and power. He loved with a heart that was
tenanted by one only passion. He worshipped her
with a mind that bowed to no image beneath the sun,
save that which was graven on his own bosom. Nor
was Zecana unworthy such a passion. Gentle as
the antelope that skimmed the green savannas near,
she was still a being, fond, warm, and doting; and
the deepest passions of her woman's nature had been
called into action by the wild devotion of her lover.
The flower of her young affections had budded and
matured to life, like the quickly-blowing blossoms of
an arctic spring, while the fruits it bore were rich,
and full, and glowing, as those which a tropic summer
warms into existence. And, though no conflicting
feeling had ever come athwart the fulness of their
love, think not that the ties of association were
wanting to knit the memory of every look and word
of hers to the heart-strings of Ta-in-ga-ro. The
radiant face of Nature speaks ever to the Indian of
the being that on earth he most adores. Her sigh
will whisper from the leafy forest; her smile will
brighten on the blossom-tufted prairie; the voice
that murmurs in the running stream syllables her
name in tuneful eloquence for ever. And they were
happy. The brook that sang beneath the willows
near their lodgethe flowers that kissed its current
the bird that warbled on the spray above them, were
all the world to themthose lonely lovers. And
now this bower of bliss was blastedthis home of
peace and simple joys was desolatedruined and
desecrated, as if the malice-breathing fiat of some
unhallowed and fabled monster had gone forth against
the happiness of its owner.
The pulse of no living being beat with sympathy
for the master of that lonely wreckbut the soul of
Ta-in-ga-ro was sufficient to itself. The
indomitable
pride of an Indian chief filled its inmost recesses
with new resources for battling with his fate. Love
and sorrowlike the snow-drift which smooths the
rocky casing of a volcanomelted in a moment
before the fires that glowed within his flinty bosom,
and his original nature asserted itself in every fibre
of his frame. His mien and his heart alike were
altered. His features petrified into the immobility
of a savage, while his brain burned with a thirst for
vengeance, which only gave no outward token
because
its fiendish cravings were unutterable through
any human organ.
Calmly now, as if nothing had occurred to ruffle
the wonted placidity of his disposition, Ta-in-ga-ro
proceeded to occupy himself, for the rest of the day,
in the few concerns that required his attention. The
still warm body of Zecana, after being carefully
wrapped in a buffalo-skin, was disposed of for the
time in the sunjiwun, or
cach
, wherein his few
valuables were usually kept: then, carefully
adjusting
everything to ensure its concealment, he
occupied himself in taking care of his favourite
horse, which, after the late arduous journey, required
both attention and refreshment. When these
necessary
duties were fulfilled, the solitary, at the approach
of evening, tranquilly lighted his pipe, and, passing
several hours under its soothing influence with as
much equanimity as if nothing had occurred to
interrupt
his customary enjoyment, he at last wrapped
himself in his wolf-skin robe, and was soon sleeping
as soundly as if a dream of human ill had never
thrown a shadow over his slumbers.
It was two nights after this that the Spanish trader
lay securely asleep within the guarded walls of his
station. His repose was apparently as unmolested
as that which has just been ascribed to Ta-in-ga-ro;
and at the foot of his bed sat the dusky form of the
Indian warrior, watching the sleep of his enemy with
as mild an eye as if he were hanging upon the downy
slumbers of an infant. All was as quiet as the
tenantless lodge of the lonely watcher. The
chamber
,
or cabin, stood on the ground-floor, in an angle
of the blockhouse. It was guarded by sentries, both
within and without the station; and how this strange
visitant had penetrated within the walls, no human
being has ever known; but there, by the flickering
light of a low fire, could be seen the wily and daring
savage, sitting as calm, cool, and collected as if
patience were all that was required to effect the
purpose that had brought him thither.
The tramp of armed men was now audible near
the gate of the fort, while the customary relief of
sentinels was taking place. The slight commotion
incident to the occasion soon ceased, and all around
the post became again perfectly silent.
A considerable space of time now elapsed, and the
Indian still maintained his statue-like position. At
last he sank noiselessly from the couch to the floor,
and, placing his ear to the ground, listened for a
whileas if assuring himself that all was as he
wished. His measures were then instantly taken:
he first loosed the wampum-belt from his person,
and possessed himself of a long cord, or
lariat
, which
he had either brought with him or found in the
chamber
of the Spaniard; placing now his scalping-knife
in his teeth, he glided like a shadow to the head of
the bed, and at the same moment that the noose of
the
lariat
was adroitly thrown over the neck of the
sleeping trader with one hand, the belt of beaded
woollen was forced into his mouth with the other, and
his waking cries effectually stifled. The ill-starred
Spaniard made but a short struggle for release; for
the arms of the sinewy savage pinioned him so
closely, that the saw in a moment his efforts were in
vain; and the threatening motion of his determined
foe, in tightening the noose when his struggles were
more vigorous, intimidated him into deferring the
attempt to escape to some more promising
opportunity
.
He submitted to be bound in silence; and the
Indian swathed his limbs together till he lay utterly
helpless, an inanimate log upon the couch whereon
he had been reposing.
Having thus secured his prize, Ta-in-ga-ro went
to work with the same imperturbability to place it
beyond the danger of recapture. He first displaced
a portion of the bark roof of the rude chamber, and,
lifting his unresisting captive through the aperture,
carefully placed his burden beside the wooden
chimney
of the primitive structure, where it projected
above the timber-built walls of the station, and threw
its shadows far over the area of the fort. Returning
then to the room from which he had just emerged,
he took an arrow thickly feathered from the
combustible
pods of the wild cotton tree, which grows
profusely along the river-bottoms of this region, and,
lighting it by the dying embers before him, he
swung himself once more above the rafters, and,
standing in the shadow of the chimney, launched
the flaming shaft far within the window of a cabin
which opened upon the central square of the station,
immediately opposite to the shantee of the trader.
The fiery missile performed its errand with speed and
fidelitythe sleeping apartment of the commandant
was instantly in a blaze, and the ill-disciplined
sentinels
,
eager to make up for their want of vigilence
by present officiousness, rushed from their posts to
shield their officer from the danger which had so
suddenly beset him. The exulting savage availed
himself of the commotion, and the fettered trader
was lowered instantaneously on the outside of the
fort. One dozing sentry only, who had hitherto
been unobserved in the deep shadow of the wall,
witnessed the daring act, and he started aghast at the
inanimate form which was placed so abruptly at his
feet; but the Indian dropped like a falcon on his
prey beside it, and a half-uttered cry of astonishment
died away in a death-groan as the knife of the
descending
savage buried itself in the chest of the
unfortunate soldier. The disappearance of the trader
was not observed amid the pressing concern of the
moment. The fire spread rapidly among the
inflammable
buildings, and the incendiary, who had a
couple of horses waiting for him in a slight ravine
which traversed the prairie, mounted by the light
of the blazing cabins, and was far on his journey
before the flames which had been kindled from his
captive's chamber were extinguished.
Arriving at his own lodge by several short turns
through the broken country, known only to himself,
Ta-in-ga-ro unbound the trader from his horse, and,
keeping his hands still tied behind him, attentively
ministered to his wants, while refusing to reply to a
single question, or to heed the pleadings of the
anxious
Spaniard for liberty. At length, being fully
refreshed
,
the Indian left him for a few moments to his
reflections, while he went to select a large and
powerful
charger from a herd of half-domesticated horses
that were grazing near. The animal was soon caught
and tethered by the door of the cabin. Ta-in-ga-ro
then proceeded to strip his captive, and, compelling
him to mount the horse, he secured him to the wooden
saddle by thongs of elf-skin, attached to the surcingle,
which girt it in its place. The wretched man
trembled
with apprehension, and, with a choking voice,
offered all he was worth in the world to be redeemed
from the fate to which he now believed he was to be
devoted. But the doomed profligate had not yet
begun to conceive the nature of the punishment to
which he was destined, or his pleadings for
immediate
death would have been as earnest as his prayers
for life were now energetic.
Slave of a Pale-face! thundered the Indian
D
while the only words that had yet passed his lips
betrayed a momentary impatience to the craven cries
of the otherthink not that I am about to
commit
thee alone
to the desert! A murmur of thanks
escaped the faltering tongue of the Spaniard, but
died away in a cry of horror as the Indian placed a
gory and disfigured corpse astride the horse before him.
When he recovered from the swoon into which
the recognition of Zecana's features had thrown him,
the unhappy trader found himself bound to the stark
and grim effigy of her that was once so soft and
beautiful. So closely, too, was he bound, that the
very effort to free himself only rendered nearer
the hideous compact. Trunk for trunk, and limb
for limb was he lashed to his horrible companion.
His inveterate foeman stood ready mounted beside
him, and waited only to feast his eyes with the first
expression of shrinking horror evinced by the trader
when he should regain his consciousness. A blow
from his tomahawk then severed the halter by which
the horse of the Spaniard was tethered; and the
enfranchised animal, tossing his mane in fury as he
snuffed the tainted burden, bounded off in full career,
followed by the fleet courser of the vindictive savage.
Instinct taught him to make at once for the Great
Desert, on whose borders lay the little prairie from
which he started; and on he went with the speed
of an antelope. The dreary waste of sand was soon
gained, and the limbs of the steed seemed to gather
new vigour as they touched once more his native
plains. But not so with his hapless rider. The
fierce sunbeams, unmitigated by shade or vapour,
beat down upon the naked person of the Spaniard,
while the moisture that rolled from his naked body
seemed to mould him more intimately into the
embraces
of the corpse to which he was bound. Night,
with its blistering dews, brought no relief, and
seemed only to hasten the corruption to which he
was linked in such frightful compact. The cessation
of motion at this time, when the horse, now
accustomed
to his burden, was recruiting upon the rough
grasses which form the subsistence of his hardy
breed, seemed even more horrible than the flight by
day. The gore that oozed from the limbs of the
trader stiffened around the cords which bound him,
while his struggles to release himself, when the
Indian was no longer by his side, served only, by
farther excoriating his skin, to pollute the surface
beneath it with the festering limbs which were
twining around him. Sleep was allowed to bring
no intermission to his sufferings. His head would
indeed droop with languor and exhaustion, and his
eyes would close for a moment in grateful
forgetfulness
of his situation. But the next moment his
untiring and ever-vigilant enemy was before him.
A cry, like the curses of a damned spirit, pealed in
his dreaming ears; the startled charger bounded off
in affright: and the break of dawn still found the
remorseless pursuer howling on his track.
And day succeeded to day, and still those
ill-matched
riders speeded on their goadless journey.
At length the pangs of hunger, which were soon added
to the other tortures of the fated Spaniard, became
too excruciating for endurance. His thirst being
always, with ingenious cruelty, quenched by the
proffered
cup of the savage when their horses stopped
to drink, the vitality of his system was still as
exacting
as ever. The gnawing torments to which his
body was now subjected, surpassed even those with
which its more delicate senses were agonized. In
vain did he try to stifle the cruel longing that
consumed
himin vain did he he turn with loathing and
abhorrence from the only subsistence within his reach.
An impulse stronger than that of mere preservation
wrought within his phrensied bosom. An agony more
unendurable than that which affected his revolting
senses, consumed his vitals. A horrid appetite
corroded
every feeling and perception, that might have
stayed the vulture-like eagerness, with which he
came at last to gloat upon the hideous banquet
before
him. A demoniac craving, like that of the fabled
ghouls of eastern story, impelled him to
But why protract these harrowing details of
super-human
suffering? The awful vengeance exacted
from the foul-hearted and treacherous trader, like
all things mortal, had its end. But the implacable
Indian still hovered near, and feasted his eyes with
the maddening anguish of his victim, until his last
idiotic cry told that reason and nature were alike
subdued, that brain and body were alike consumed
by the fearful, ceaseless, and lingering tortures which
ate them away by inches.
The subsequent fate of Ta-in-ga-ro has never been
known. Some say that he still dwells, a harmless
old man, in the wandering tents of the Cheyennes;
others that he leads a predatory band of the
ferocious
and untameable Blackfeet: but there are those
who insist that he has long since gone to the land of
spirits; and these aver that, when the
Ghost
-RIDERS
are abroad, the grim phantom of the savage warrior
may be seen chasing them over the interminable
waste of the
Great American Desert
.
NIGHTS IN AN INDIAN LODGE.
II.
A
February
thaw had set in, and, as the rising of
the brooks compelled us to move our camp from the
ravine in which we had slept for the last week, the
chase was abandoned earlier than usual, in order
that, after choosing a new location, we might have
time to make ourselves comfortable for the night. A
clump of trees on the upland offered the most suitable
spot, as a few evergreens were scattered among them,
and the loose heaps of stone which lay upon the edge
of the prairie, might be made useful in more ways
than one, should we determine to remain long in the
same place, and be at any pains in constructing our
lodge. An accidental pile of these, against which
the Canadian at once commenced building the fire,
furnished the leeward side of our new cabin; and a
couple of upright crotches being planted in the
ground opposite, two saplings were laid transversely
from them to this rude wall; the other sides were
then enclosed with dried brush; and, when a few
cedar boughs had been laid across the top, we found
D 2
ourselves in possession of very comfortable quarters.
The Crapeau then commenced picking a wild turkey
and some prairie chickens, which were the only
spoils of our day's hunt, while one of the Indians
went off to bring some parched corn from the cach
near our old camp.
He had not been gone more than ten minutes
before
I heard the crack of a rifle, and the Plume, who
was already engaged before the fire mending his
moccasins, sprang to his feet, and, seizing his
tomahawk
,
rushed out of the cabin, exclaiming,
Ah-wessie
hi-ah-wah-nah bah-twa-we-tahng-gah?
Mukwaw
ewah bah-twa-we-tahng-gah.
[4]
[4]
A beast comes callingwhat beast comes calling?a beast
comes calling.
And true
enough, I had not followed him a hundred rods
before
we saw needji Mukwaw desperately wounded
beneath a tree, while Che-che-gwa was coolly
loading
his rifle within thirty paces of his sable enemy.
The moon was shining as bright as day, and, there
being still a little snow upon the ground where the
bear was lying, his huge black limbs were drawn in
full relief upon its white surface. The poor animal
seemed unable to move; but, though the groans he
sent forth were really piteous, yet he ground his
teeth with such rage, that it seemed undesirable to
venture too near him; especially as, though his
hinderparts were paralyzed from the shot having
taken effect in his spine, his forepaws were still
almost as dangerous as ever. The claws of these
were now continually thrust in and out with a
convulsive
motion as he writhed about and tore the
ground with wrath and agony. Formidable as he
appeared, however, the Plume did not wait for his
tribesman to throw away another shot upon him,
but, rushing up with his uplifted tomahawk, he
paused within a few paces of his mark, and, poising
the weapon for a moment, hurled it with unerring
aim at the head of the ferocious brute. The whize
zing hatchet cleft his skull as if it had been a ripe
melon, and buried itself in the bark of the tree
behind
him.
Ah c'est bon, Needje-naubi; vere good,
sauvage
,
shouted the Canadian, coming up with a
half-picked
grouse in his hands, and his mouth full of
feathers; the bourgeois will tell his people what
a great hunter is La Plume Blanche. But the
Indian
only answered by running up to his dead enemy,
and, taking him by the paw and shaking it with a
ludicrous and reverential gravity, he asked his
pardon
for having killed his uncle. Che-che-gwa at
the same time unsheathed his scalping-knife, and,
drawing it across the throat of the animal, he filled
his hand with blood, exclaiming, as he poured it upon
the ground toward the four cardinal points:
Ma-mo-yah-na miskwee, mamoyahna.
Hi-a-gwo
ne-ma-na-ho-gahn-nah-we-he-a!
Whe-a-ya
?
[5]
[5]
That which I take is bloodthat which I takeNow I have
something to eat.
The fat steaks that were soon broiling before our
fire made no mean addition to our supper; the birds,
indeed, were not touched by my companions, who,
I thought, would never tire of cutting piece after
piece from the huge carcass that hung in the
doorway
.
At last they seemed filled to repletion, and
in capital humour from the brilliant winding up of
the day's sport. Even Che-che-gwa became quite
talkative and facetious, and broke out into a half
dozen songs, all laudatory of himself as a great
hunter. As for White-plume, he dubbed his
tomahawk
,
incontinently, A Medicine; while together
they made up a sort of duet, which, if hammered
into English verse, might rhyme to this effect:
They fly onyou know the clouds
That fling their frowns o'er rock and river:
They fly onyou know the clouds
That flee before the wind for ever!
But Ithough swift as them he rushes;
Or though like them he scowls in wrath,
Am one whose charmed weapon crushes
Whoever dares to cross his path.
[6]
[6]
Nonogossin nahga ahnaqu,
Nonogoss'n nahga ahnaqu,
Messahgoonah au ain-ne-moy-au
En enowug an ain nemo-wo
Neen bapah-messaghau negoche ahweisie neen-gah-kwa-tin ahwaw,
Heo-win-nah hannemowetah neengetemahhah bochegahaue Moetah
neengetemahhahnah.
Literally
.
1st
Voice
.They fly onyou know the clouds.
2nd
Voice
.They fly onyou know the clouds.
Both
. Truly I esteem myself
As brave men esteem themselves.
1st
Voice
.I fly about, and if anywhere I see an animal I can
shoot him.
2nd
Voice
.Anything I can kill with it, (this medicinehis
tomahawk
,)
even a dog I can kill with it.
Yes, continued Che-che-gwa, still maintaining
a kind of chant when the song was ended, though
it were a bear concealed under the ground, I could
find him.
Yes, pursued his comrade, in the same sort of
recitative, aided by the Manitoag, and armed with
the weapons of Nannabozho, what animal shall be
able to escape from the hunter?
Nannabozho, as the reader must know, is the chief
of the Manitoag or genii of fairy lore, among the
Indians of the lakes. The more learned in these
matters pretend to identify him (under the name of
The Nannabush of the Algonkins) with the
Iswara
of India and the Saturn of ancient Italy.
Mr. Schoolcraft considers him as a sort of terrene
Jove, who could perform all things, but lived on
earth, and excelled particularly in feats of strength
and manual dexterity.
The introduction of his name induced me now to
ask some account of this worthy personage from my
companions; and, among a number of desultory
anecdotes, I elicited the following nursery tale from
Che-che-gwa, which is given as nearly in his own
words as possible, a literal translation from the
Chippewa
or Ojibbeway dialect.
NANNABOZHO: HOW HE CAME TO MAKE
THIS EARTH.
[An Ojibbeway Legend.]
Once
upon a time, a great many years ago, when
Nannabozho was at war with the Mibanaba, or
Manitoag
of the water, it happened, on one very warm
day, that several of these spirits came out of a lake
to bask upon the beach. They were followed by
a train of animals of various kinds, each the largest
of its species, waiting upon them. When they had
all lifted themselves from the water, and gained the
shore, the two chiefs of the band appointed sentinels
to keep watch while the rest should sleep.
Nannabozho, their great enemy, said they,
was always vigilant, and this would be a good time
for him to steal upon them and injure them.
The otters were, therefore, ordered to act as
watchers
,
while the others gave themselves up to repose;
and soon the whole company, both spirits and
animals
,
were sleeping on that shore.
Now, the weather, which was at first excessively
warm, became gradually hotter and hotter, and the
otters, after keeping awake for a while, were at last
overcome with languor; and when they saw all
around them basking so comfortably on the sand, these
sentinels, too, nodded on their posts, and were soon
dreaming with the rest.
The chiefs, finding the otters could not be depended
upon, next commanded the loons to keep watch;
they were permitted to swim about in order to keep
themselves awake, but they were ordered not to go
far from the group of sleepers.
Now, it chanced that at this time Nannabozho was
travelling about in search of these very Manitoag;
nor was it long before he found out where they were.
He knew at once what precautions they had adopted
for their safety, but he was determined to destroy
some of them before they could leave the place
where he found them. Having carefully examined
the position in which they were lying, he caught up
his puggamaugun, or war-club, and sprang toward
them. But the loons were on the watch, and the
moment Nannabozho came in sight, they gave a
scream that awakened the whole band of sleepers.
The chiefs were, of course, first upon their feet, while
the rest of the Manitoag, and all the animals, rose
in equal alarm. But when they looked around, there
was no enemy to be seen, for Nannabozho had fled
instantly, and hid himself in the long grass through
which he had stolen toward the shore.
The chiefs said it was a false alarm, and after a
while all again betook themselves to repose.
When Nannabozho saw that all around was quiet
once more, he raised himself slowly from the ground,
and was again about to rush upon them, when again
did the loons give warning of his approach the
moment
he appeared in sight.
It seems that the loon, who, some say, is a
manitou, has the power of sleeping with but one eye
at a time, and, when most overcome by slumber, he
can always keep one eye open, to watch for an
enemy, while the other takes its necessary repose.
But now, when they awakened a second time, and
saw no enemy near, the chiefs were angry with the
loons for giving a false alarm; and the otters, who
were jealous of them for pretending to be more
sharp-sighted
than themselves, said that it was not
Nannabozho
who hovered around, for if it had been, they
would have seen him as well as the loons.
After much disputing, at last the otters were
believed
,
and all, excepting the loons, once more closed
their eyes in sleep.
Nannabozho was pleased with this.
The weather was very warm, and he wished it
might become yet warmer. It was so.
Then Nannabozho crept forward, and took his
station close by the group of sleepers; and the very
moment the loons gave their warning cry, he wished
he might be turned into an old stump, and
straightway
the wish was granted.
A rough bark raised itself in a moment all round his
body, which stiffened into the hard fibres of a tree;
his toes separated, and, twisting among the loose soil,
spread into roots on every side, while his hair
became
matted into ancient moss, that clung to the
brown stump as if, moist and green as now, it had
always mantled its decayed top.
The enemies of Nannabozho were completely at
a loss when, having again shaken off their drowsiness
at the signal of the loons, they cast their eyes about
the place. They looked in every direction, but there
was nothing to be seen near, save the stump of a
shattered tree, which apparently had once flourished
upon the edge of the water.
The loons told the chiefs that there was no stump
there when they first came to the shore, but that it
was Nannabozho himself who had taken this
semblance
.
Some believed them and others did not;
and, to settle the question, the chiefs ordered the
great water serpents to go and entwine themselves
around him, and try and crush him to death, if,
indeed
,
it were Nannabozho.
These serpents then straightway glided out of a
slimy pool in which they had coiled themselves
to rest, and, twisting their folds around the stump,
they knotted their bodies together so as to press
with all their might against every part of it. But it
was all to no purpose. Nannabozho kept a strong
heart, and did not betray the pain he suffered by the
least sign or sound.
The fire serpents were next ordered to try if they
could not destroy him. They had been basking
upon the hottest part of the beach until each scale
had become like a coal of fire; and as their
scorching
folds, coil after coil, were twisting around him,
Nannabozho suffered the greatest tortures. The
stump became black from the heat that was applied
to it; but, though the wood smoked as if about to
burst into a blaze, yet the slime which the water
serpents left upon it prevented it from actually taking
fire. No one but Nannabozho could have kept quiet
under the pain which these serpents inflicted. The
stump had a little the shape of a man, and the
serpents had a good place to twist around the part
which represented the neck. Several times
Nannabozho
,
finding himself choking, was upon the point
of crying out, when the snakes would loosen
themselves
to apply their efforts in some other place.
After repeated attempts in this way, the serpents at
last desisted from their endeavours, and told the
chiefs that it was not Nannabozho, for it was
impossible
that he could endure so much pain.
The hostile spirits, however, were not yet satisfied,
and the chiefs commanded the great red-nailed
E
bears
[7]
[7]
Ma-mis-ko-gah-zhe Mukwaw
.The great red-nailed bear lives
in woods and rocky places, and, according to Dr. James, is more
dreaded by the Indians than even the
Manitou-mukwaw
, or great
grizzly bear of the prairies.
to go and scratch the stump with their long
claws. Nannabozho was all but torn to pieces by
these ferocious creatures, but was still able to
support
the agony he endured.
The bears at last gave up, as the serpents had
done, and went back and told that it was not
Nannabozho
;
for he, they said, was a coward, and could
not quietly endure so much pain. It was then
decided
that it was not Nannabozho, and all went
quietly to sleep as before.
Nannabozho wished they might sleep very sound,
and it was so: then he assumed his natural shape,
and began cautiously to approach the sleepers. He
stepped lightly over the bodies of the animals, and,
passing by all the lesser Manitoag, he placed himself
near the heads of the two chiefs. Planting his foot
then upon the throat of the one nearest to him, he
dealt a blow with his war-club, which crushed the
head of the other. Another blow, and his companion
was likewise dead.
But now that the deed was done, Nannabozho
found himself surrounded by dangers, and nothing
but his swiftness of foot gave him any chance of
escape from his revengeful foes, who were
immediately
in full cry after him. But soon the spirits,
finding they could not overtake him by running,
adopted a new device for getting Nannabozho in
their power. They commanded the water to rise
and flow after him; and straightway the lake began
to swell until its waves rushed along his path so
rapidly that it seemed impossible to escape them.
Nannabozho did not know what to do in this
emergency
;
but at last, just as the water was about
overwhelming him, he saw a crane, and determined
to claim his assistance.
My brother, said Nannabozho, will you not
drink up this water for me?
The crane replied, What will you give me in
return?
I will give you the skin of one of the chiefs that
I have killed, answered Nannabozho.
The crane was satisfied with the promise, and he
commenced drinking up the water. He drank, and
he drank until he had nearly drank it all, when he
was unable longer to stand up. His body had
swollen to an immense size, and as he went toddling
along on his thin shanks, with his long neck bobbing
about, he presented such a ludicrous appearance that
Nannabozho burst out a laughing to see brother
crane make such a figure. Nannabozho, indeed,
must have been mad with merriment; for when he
saw the crane's body become bigger and bigger,
while his skin was stretched so that he could not
bend his legs as it tightened around his jointshe
could not withstand the temptation of pricking the
bloated mass. He drew his bow, and the arrow
went through the crane's body. But quickly was
he punished for his wanton sport. At once the
waters began to rise again, and so fast did the big
waves increase, that Nannabozho was compelled to
ascend the highest mountain he could find, and still
the waters followed him there. He then climbed
the highest tree on the mountain. But the flood
kept rising and rising: the branches on which he
stood were soon dipping in the waves, which at last
rolled completely over his head.
Just as they swept finally over him, Nannabozho
chanced to look up, and saw the shadow of an object
floating near him; he stretched out his arm and
seized it. It proved to be a piece of wood buoyant
enough to sustain him, and he placed himself upon it.
Nannabozho now floated about for some time.
The water encompassed him on every side. It had
covered up everything. The rocks, hills, and trees
had all disappeared. The flood seemed to ripple
against the sides of the sky all around, and
whichever
way he looked, there was nothing to be seen
but a never-ending succession of waves, that had
nothing but the wind to play against.
At last he saw a musquash swimming about alone,
and he asked him to go down to the earth and bring
him a little of it. The animal obeyed, and plunged
toward the bottom, but it was soon seen on the
surface of the water perfectly dead. Nannabozho,
however, did not yet despair. He immediately after
saw a beaver paddling toward him, and as soon as
the beaver got near enough to hear, he said to him
My brother, will you not dive and get me some
earth?
The beaver dived, but did not appear for a long
time. The beaver, it seems, when he dives, can
carry down so much air entangled in his coat, that,
when compelled to stay long under water, he can
thrust his nose into his fur and breathe for some
time. At last he appeared again upon the surface,
nearly dead with exhaustion; he brought up a very
little piece of mud on the flat end of his tail, which
he gave to Nannabozho. Nannabozho scraped every
particle of it carefully together, and placed it in the
palm of his hand to dry. When it had become
perfectly dried, he blew it out into the water, and
straightway a portion of the earth upon which we
now live was created. The dust, too, in the hand
of Nannabozho kept increasing the longer he blew,
until more and more of the earth was made; and at
last the whole world was finished just as large as it
now is.
When Che-che-gwa had finished his legend, I
could not help asking him whence came the plants
and animals which had sprung into existence since
the days of this Chippewa Deucalion. These, he
answered, had been subsequently created in various
ways. Many of the larger trees had been produced
from the piece of wood upon which Nannabozho had
floated in the deluge; and several shrubs, brought
up by the loons in diving, had taken root again upon
the shores to which they drifted. A shell lying upon
the strand was transformed into the racoon, and many
of the other animals had come into existence in a
similarly miraculous manner; while different kinds
of birds had their origin in some metamorphosis like
that of the pious, but faint-hearted, youth who, when
E 2
his ambitious father wished him to go on the
war-path
,
pined away and was changed into a robin;
[8]
[8]
See Life on the Lakes, by the Author of Legends of a
Log Cabin. New York. 1836.
his guardian spirit permitting him to cheer his parent
with songs to console him for the glory that had thus
departed from his family. The habits of the
whippoor-will
,
who, like the robin, delights to linger near
the lodge of the hunter, were accounted for in the
following simple manner:
WAW-O-NAISA; OR, THE ORIGIN OF THE
WHIP-POOR-WILL.
The
father of Ranche-wai-me, the Flying Pigeon
of the Wiskonsan, would not hear of her wedding
Waw-o-naisa, the young chief who had long sought
her in marriage; yet, true to her plighted faith, she
still continued to meet him every evening upon one
of the tufted islets which stud the river in great
profusion
.
Nightly through the long months of summer
did the lovers keep their tryste, parting only after
each meeting more and more endeared to each other.
At length Waw-o-naisa was ordered off upon a
secret expedition against the Sioux: he departed so
suddenly that there was no opportunity of bidding
farewell to his betrothed; and his tribesmen, the
better to give effect to his errand, gave out that the
youth was no more, having perished in a fray with
the Menomones, at the Winnebago portage.
Ranche-wai-me
was inconsolable, but she dared not show
her grief before her family; and the only relief she
knew for her sorrow was, to swim over to the island
by starlight, and, calling upon the name of her lover,
bewail the features she could behold no more. One
night the sound of her voice attracted some of her
father's people to the spot; and, startled at their
approach, she tried to climb a sapling in order to hide
herself among its branches; but her frame was
bowed with sorrow, and her weak limbs refused to
aid her.
Waw-o-naisa
, she cried,
Waw-o-naisa
!
and at each repetition of his name her voice
became shriller; while in the endeavour to screen
herself in the underwood a soft plumage began to
clothe her delicate limbs, which were wounded by
the briers, and lifting pinions shot from under her
arms, which she tossed upward in distress; until her
pursuers, when just about to seize the maid, saw
nothing but the bird, which has ever since borne the
name of her lover, flitting from bush to bush before
them, and still repeating, Waw-o-naisa
Waw--o-naisa
.
NIGHTS IN AN INDIAN LODGE.
III.
Returning
from an unsuccessful hunt about dusk
on the succeeding day, we found, upon entering the
lodge, that the wolves had paid it a visit during our
absence on the previous night. The
pukwi
, or mats,
which had formed quite a comfortable carpeting for
the humble chamber, were torn to pieces; and the
voracious animals had devoured whatever articles of
skin or leather they could lay their teeth upon. A
pair of moccasins belonging to the Rattlesnake, the
carrying-straps of the Canadian, and a shot-pouch
of my own, had all been spirited off in this audacious
burglary.
Wah!
ejaculated Che-che-gwa, with a
ludicrous
intonation of dismay, as he followed me into
the shantee.
Wha-nain-ti-et
Whose dog is this?
echoed White-plume, thrusting his head over the
shoulder of the other as his companion paused on
the threshold to observe the extent of the mischief.
Kitchi-que-naitch
It is very well, added
he, drily, upon observing that a large piece of moose
meat, suspended from the rafters, had escaped the
long-haired pilferers.
I could not but sympathize with him in the
self-gratulation
,
for I remembered once, while
spending
a day or two with a settler in Michigan, having
gone supperless to bed when equally sharp set, after
a severe day's hunt, owing to a similar neighbourly
visit. The prairie wolf, though a much less ferocious
and powerful animal than the wood's wolf, makes
up in sagacious impudence for his want of size and
strength. On the occasion alluded to, one of these
fellows had climbed into the window of a shantee,
and actually carried off a whole saddle of venison
which had been prepared for cooking, before the
settler and myself had started, soon after dawn, on
our day's tramp.
White-plume now deposited his rifle in a corner
of the lodge, and, leaving the Canadian to put our
disarranged household to rights, he proceeded to the
sunjiwun
, or cach, which was made in the bank of
a rivulet near the door, and soon returned with a
gourd of bear's fat and a sack of hard corn. The
latter, when pounded and duly mixed with the snowy
lard, made a crisp and inviting dressing for the moose
meat, and enabled the Frenchman, who acted as
cook, to turn out some
ctelettes panes
, that, for
flavour
and relish, would not have discredited the
cuisine
of Delmonico. I confess, however, that my
appreciation of the luxurious fare was not enhanced
by the dexterity with which White-plume would ever
and anon thrust the ramrod of his short north-west
rifle into the dish, and flirt the dripping slices into
his expectant mouth; nor was the marksman-like
precision with which Che-che-gwa launched his
scalping-knife into the kettle, that served us for both
frying-pan and platter, less refined and elegant. It
was not their fault, however, that we had no silver
forks at table; and they certainly committed no
greater breach of decorum in their eating than
certain
travellers affect to have seen on board some of
our Atlantic steamers.
Caw ke-we-ah m' woi-gui-nah-needji
Will
you not eat, my friend? observed White-plume
more than once, offering me a
moreau
from the
point of his chopstick. In spite of the example of
Lord Byron and Sir John Malcolmaccepting the
reeking pilau from the greasy knuckles of Turk and
PersianI thought myself at liberty to decline the
proffered civility, inasmuch as I was not partaking
of the particular hospitality of the Indian, but felt
myself as much at home in the entertainment as he
was himself.
The customary pipe succeeded; and, there being
no more fire water
skuta-warbo
in the flask
of the Canadian, we added an additional quantity of
tobacco to the willow-scrapings from the kinnekinic
bag, in order to make the smoking mixture more
potent. The fumes of the inebriating weed very
soon began to act upon the excitable system of
White-plume, and he regaled us with a number of
songs, which were anything but musical. There
was but one of them that appeared to me to have
anything poetical, either in sentiment or imagery,
to recommend it. It was a
Mezi-nee-neence
, or
Medicine Song, of a lover, in which he is
supposed
to have some magical power of knowing the
secret thoughts of his mistress, and being able to
charm her to him from any distance. In English
it might run as follows:
I.
Who, maiden, makes this river flow?
The Spirithe makes its ripples glow
But I have a charm that can make thee, dear,
Steal o'er the wave to thy lover here.
II.
Who, maiden, makes this river flow?
The Spirithe makes its ripples glow
Yet every blush that my love would hide,
Is mirror'd for me in the tell-tale tide.
III.
And though thou shouldst sleep on the farthest isle,
Round which these dimpling waters smile
Yet I have a charm that can make thee, dear,
Steal over the wave to thy lover here.
[9]
[9]
1. O-wa-nain ba-me-ja-waunga? Manito o-ba-me-je-waunga
Me-nee-sing, a-be-gwain neen-ge-wun-naitch
Che-ha-ga-toga
Me-ne-sing a-be-gwain Whe-he-yah!
2. O-wa-nain ba-me-ja-waunga? Manito o-ba-me-je-waunga
Neen-dai-yah gutche-hah hi-e-qua-waw-hah,
neen-noan-dah-waw
sah-ween a-ye-ke-tote whe-i-ah-hah Whe-he-yah.
3. Waus-suh wa-keem-me-ga ora-bah-gwain, whe-a whe-hah-a
Yag-gah-ming-go na-bah-qua, neen-ge-wun-naitch
Che-hah-ga-toga
.
In the fragments of rude, and often insipid, poetry
with which the singer followed up this specimen of
his art, there were occasional allusions which
interested
me, and for which I attempted to get an
explanation
.
But it was almost impossible to obtain
a direct answer; for White-plume, though a great
talker for an Indian, had no faculty for conversation
that is, there was no such thing as exchanging
ideas with him; and even when I asked him the
names of particular things, in order to increase my
slight vocabulary of his language, his replies were
equally rambling.
Among other objects, the Evening Star, which
glows with remarkable effulgence in the clear frosty
atmosphere of these regions, attracted my eye, as its
silver rays, pouring through an opening of our lodge,
exhibited even more than their wonted virgin purity
when contrasted with the red glare of our fire. He
mumbled over some unpronounceable epithet when
I asked the name of it, which was wholly lost upon
my ear. But the question gave a new and more
steady turn to his wandering ideas; and, with the
occasional assistance of my Canadian interpreter, I
was able to follow him out in a very pleasing story,
founded upon an Indian superstition connected with
the planet. The tale will, of course, lose much on
second-hand repetition, for no writer has as yet
succeeded in his attempt to infuse the true Indian
character into his narrative, when he speaks in the
person of a red man. The figurative phrascology
of the luxurious Asiatic, and the terse conciseness
of expression that survives in some relics of the
poetry of the ancient Northmen, are sometimes so
curiously reconciled and blended in the language of
our aborigines, as to defy even the most ingenious
and gifted pen to imitate it. I cannot, perhaps,
better begin the narrative than by recalling Major
Long's account of the barbarous Indian ceremony,
which gave rise to the historical incident which is
here commemorated.
PETALESHAROO; OR, THE LAST OFFERING
TO THE GREAT STAR.
So light to the croupe the fair lady he swung,
So light to the saddle before her he sprung!
She is won! we are gone, over bank, bush, and scaur;
They'll have fleet steeds that follow,' quoth young Lochinvar.
Scott
.
The
Pawnee-Loups, or
Ske-re
, as they call
themselves, not many years since, and within the
memory of persons now living, exhibited the
singular
anomaly, among the North American aborigines,
of a people addicted to the revolting superstition of
making propitiatory offerings of human victims upon
the altars of idolatry.
Mekakatungah
, The Great
Star, was the divinity to whom the sanguinary
worship had been, from time immemorial, ascribed.
The barbarous ceremony was performed annually.
The Great Star was supposed to preside over the
fruits of the earth; and, on each return of the season
of planting, the life-blood of a human being was
poured out in libation upon the soil. A breach of
this duty, the performance of which they believed
was required by the Great Star, it was supposed
would be succeeded by the total failure of their
crops of maize, beans, and pumpkins, and the
consequent
privation of the supply of vegetable food,
which formed half the subsistence of the tribe. To
obviate a calamity so formidable, any person was at
liberty to offer up a prisoner, of either sex, of whom,
by his prowess in war, he had become possessed;
and the horrid rite was accompanied by all the solemn
F
ceremonies which characterize the superstitious
idolatry of an ignorant and barbarous people. The
devoted individual was placed under the care of the
Ouabi-neaux
, or magi of the tribe, who anticipated
all his wants, while they cautiously concealed from
him the real object of their sedulous attentions, which
was to preserve his mind in a state of cheerfulness,
with the view of promoting obesity, and thereby
render the sacrifice more acceptable to their Ceres.
When the victim was pronounced sufficiently
fattened for immolation, a suitable time was
appointed
for the performance of the rite, that the whole
nation might attend. When the appointed day of
his fate arrived, he was clothed in the gayest and
most costly attire, and led out to the spot where he
was to suffer. Here he was bound to a cross, in
presence of the assembled multitude, and a solemn
dance was performed around him. A number of
other ceremonies followed, and then the warrior
whose prisoner he had been, stepped forth into the
open space, and assumed the inglorious task of his
execution. Generally a single blow with the
tomahawk
despatched the victim; but if the first throw
failed to cleave his head, the speedy death of the
person immolated was insured by a shower of arrows
from a band of archers, who were always in
attendance
.
The abolition of this revolting custom was
brought about in the manner here related.
[10]
[10]
The account of this singular and sanguinary superstition, as
well as the interesting historical incident which follows it, and the
description of the dress and personal appearance of the heroic Indian
who abolished the barbarous rite, will be found in Major Long's
Expedition to the Rocky Mountains, with but little variation from
the text. The portrait of the youthful and handsome Petaleshroo
is preserved in the Indian Gallery at Washington.
The season of planting was at hand: the
Pawnee-Loups
,
in order to call down a blessing upon their
labours in the field, prepared for their wonted
sacrifice
to the cruel divinity, who they believed presided
over the genial fruits of the earth. There was more
than the usual bustle in the principal village of the
tribe. The faces of some of the seniors wore a look
of anxiety; and the young people, for several days
preceding the ceremony, could be seen grouped
together before the scattered lodges, with an air of
curiosity and impatience seldom observable in their
little community. The fact was, that there chanced
to be at this moment not a single captive in the band
to offer up in sacrifice. The last that had been
takena pretty Ietan girl, of the name of Lataka
had escaped the horrible fate which awaited her, by
perishing, as was thought, in a fray which had
occurred
at nightfall, soon after her arrival in the village.
The young partisan, Petaleshroo, the son of the old
Knife-chief, Latelesha, had interfered at the moment
that the maid was about to be consigned to the hands
of the magi, to be by them prepared for their annual
rite; and in the confused broil which ensued the
prisoner disappeared, and was represented by the
principal magician to have perished by falling, while
her hands were yet bound, into a stream near the
village, during the commotion which took place upon
its immediate banks. The old crones, in gossiping
from lodge to lodge, had circulated a story that the
officious interference of Petalashroo was caused by
his being suddenly enamoured of the captive damsel;
and they were very much incensed at the idea that
the stripling might be the instrument, possibly, of
cheating them out of their yearly festival, in which,
unless tradition has belied them, they took no passive
part. But it was more generally believed that the
act was prompted by less exceptionable motives on
the part of the young chief; that it was, in short,
nothing more nor less than a manifestation of his
determined purpose to put an end to a custom which
he had already attempted, by argument, to do away
with, and which, it was known, that his less daring
father was but too solicitous to root out from among
his people.
As the time now approached when the
Great
Star
would expect his victim, and not a single
captive
was to be had, the incident of the previous
autumn was called up afresh to memory.
There was a great deal of murmuring and
discontent
among the tribesmen; and nothing but the
personal
popularity of the warrior who had taken so
prominent a part in the occurrence, would have
prevented some violent outbreak of popular feeling:
day after day elapsed, and no captive appeared to
supply the place of the victim that Petaleshroo had
snatched from the sacrifice. Several warriors, who
had been out on war parties, returned one after
another to the village. They almost all claimed to
have struck the dead body of an enemy, and some
could show more than one scalp at their belt; but no
one brought in a live prisoner. There was yet one
more to come back; and, though The Running Fox
had no great repute as a brave, yet the whole hopes
of the tribe were now fixed upon his address alone.
He had not left the village until after almost all the
other warriors that were out had returned from the
war-path; but there was strong confidence in the
success of his expedition, because he had been seen
in close consultation with the magi before be
departed
,
and a favourable result was said to have been
propitiated, by their having a
Mezi-nee-nence
, or
medicine hunt, together. Indeed, the chief magician
had given out that the Fox would certainly return
with the wished-for prey. The Great Star, he said,
had promised him that a victim should be
forth-coming
;
and he had invited Petaleshroo to meet
him at a lonely place, remote from the village, where
he said that the young man might witness how the
God he served would keep his promise.
Let us be present at that memorable
conference
!
It was a close and sultry night, and nothing but
the swarms of moschetoes, which were continually
rising from the wet prairie, could have induced one
to tolerate the fire that was blazing on an isolated
table-rock, in the midst of a lonely savanna. The
singularly exposed situation, however, of this fire,
which shone like a beacon over the waste, would
seem to imply that it could hardly have been kindled
for mere purposes of comfort or convenience, for
cooking the rude meal of a hunter, or for driving off
the insects that might molest his slumber; and the
two swarthy figures that were crouched beside it,
though evidently belonging to that wild race who
find their chief subsistence in the chase, were
characterized
F 2
by some marks which indicated that they
were not exclusively devoted to the pursuits of
common savages.
The eldest of the two, whose attenuated features,
projecting forehead, and screwed, sinister-looking
mouth imparted a mingled expression of fanaticism
and knavery to his countenance, was perfectly naked,
with the exception of an
azeeaun
, or apron of
congar-skin
,
secured, by a curiously-ornamented belt, about
the middle of his person; but his limbs and body
were so completely covered with various devices
tattooed in strong black lines upon his
copper-coloured
skin, that, to a slight observer, he would appear
to be dressed out in some elaborate and
closely-fitting
apparel. The prominent device in the
tattooing
was an enormous doulbe-tailed serpent whose
flat head appeared to repose upon the chest of the
Indian, while his scaly folds were made to twine
themselves around his extremities with a fidelity to
nature that was equally ingenious, grotesque, and
hideous.
The high, uncouth shoulders, long skinny arms,
and squat figure of his person as he sat stooping
over the fire, with his legs folded under him, were
strikingly contrasted with the fine proportions, the
rounded and agile limbs, and lion-like port of a young
warrior who was reclining along the rock on the
opposite side of the fire. The features of the youth
were naturally of an open and generous, almost a
careless, cast; but they now wore a troubled
expression
of impatience and curiosity, occasionally wrought
up to anxiety and awe. At times, as the subsiding
of an ember would make the fire flash up and fling
its fitful light far over the plain, the young man would
spring eagerly to his feet, and throw a restless glance
upon the shifting gloom around him, as if he
expected
some one to emerge from its shadow. His
companion
,
however, calmly maintained his sitting
posture, and seemed only to busy himself in
occasionally
turning over a collection of roots, seeds,
pap-pous, and powders which were deposited upon
a piece of wolf-skin before him, and which he never
touched without mumbling over some of those
strange phrases which are only found in the mouths
of necromancers and magicians, and which are said to
be unpronounceable by any but a true medicine-man.
I tell thee, Wahobeni, said the youth at last,
flinging himself upon his bison-skin, as if his
patience
was at length wholly exhaustedI tell thee
the Fox will never more return. The Master of Life
wills not that this accursed rite should ever again
be performed by his red children.
The words of the young chief are less than his
years, replied his senior. The Great Star must
have his offering. The season of planting is at
hand; and, unless the Spirit of fruits be propitiated,
there will be no maize in the lodges of the She-re.
Think'st thou, Magician, that, should even the
crafty Fox produce his victim, my father will allow
the ceremony to proceed? I tell thee no!
Latelesha
sheds no blood, save that which is poured out
in battle.
The sire of Petaleshroo is a great chief; but
he has no power over his people, to step between
them and the god of their worship. The heart of
the Knife-chief is no more with his tribe, and his
son hath learned to speak with the tongue of the
Pale-face.
The eyes of the young man flashed fire, while,
clutching his tomahawk, he made a sudden
movement
as if about to brain the magician. But the
impulse was instantly checked, and he resumed his
former position, with only a slight ejaculation of
contempt at the reproach of an old man whom he
despised.
The Spirit will keep Wahobeni from bad things,
said the medicine-man, observing the movement.
Wahobeni is a great magician; the
Great-underground-wild-cat
[11]
[11]
Gitche-a-nah-mi-e-be-zewThe Devil yard-long-tailed.
is his friend, and he walks with
serpents along the ground. Myselfknow me, my
son, the servant of the Great Star. Believe my
words when I interpret the will of my master.
Behold
the parched and cracking earth! Behold the
crowded thunders in yon blackening sky, which even
now refuse to break the clouds and let the showers
through! Behold
A sudden flash lit up the waste, and gave an
unearthly
glare to the forbidding features of the
magician
as the bolt went rattling by.
Manito Sah-iah
There is a God! exclaimed
the youth, as he reverently took a handful of tobacco
from his pouch and threw the offering upon the fire.
The Master of Life himself replies to thy impious
mummery, Wahobeni. The God that answered
thee but now, is the only one that can send
blossoms
and fruits to the gardens of our tribe.
The medicine-man was silent; and the young
chief, folding his arms thoughtfully, contented
himself
with this brief rebuke. But the stolidity of a
bigot and the cunning of a hypocrite were to subtly
and actively blended in the composition of the other,
to allow him to feel more than a moment's confusion,
or to rob him of the resources with which a life of
successful imposture had stored his mind. The
few broad drops which succeeded the single
thunder-clap
,
were not followed by the shower that seemed
impending; and the magician cast a malignant
glance of triumph at the youth, when, after adjusting
the machinery of his trade in some new form upon
the skin before him, and passing his hands
repeatedly
over his bat-skin skull-cap, the clouds suddenly
parted, and the evening star shone forth redly above
the horizon. The Great Star blushes for my son,
said he, stretching forth his bony arms toward the
planet. The God of planting scowls in wrath
upon his minister who listens to the ravings of a
boy. The Running Fox
will
keep his promise, and
the Ske-re will make their annual offering.
Not sonot so, old man, replied the youth,
firmly; and then, while a sudden change came over
his features, Not unless a Jebi steps from its grave,
and the shadows of men's souls (
ojee-chaugomen
) are
sent on earth to mock your bloody ceremony. And
the young man placed his hand convulsively upon
his sacred metawaun, while his eyes, dilating with
horror, became fixed upon a well-known face which,
even as he spoke, peered above the ledge of the rock
opposite to where he sat.
And what, rejoined the medicine-man, calmly,
as if unobservant of the agitation of the speaker
what if the Great Star, in kindness to his red
children
,
should call back one of those who have already
passed the
je-be-ku-nong
, (road of the dead,) to enable
Wahobeni to fulfil the sacrifice for which, till now,
a victim has never been wanting. I tell thee, son of
Latelesha, that a shaft of maize has never yet hung
forth a tassel above the ground, that was not watered
with the blood of an enemy. But now the warriors
of the Ske-re are squaws; there are no captives in
their lodges; and the Great Star, who wills that there
must be a victim, will send one of his own choosing
from among those who have already passed the
swinging tree, and attained the gardens of the
happy.
With these words the magician rose, and,
stamping
upon the ashes, the shook some combustible
powder from the congar-skin that enveloped his
loins. A dozen forks of yellow smoke curled up
in shreds from the fire, and seemed to wreath
themselves
with the coils of the serpent that was twined
round his bodyeach bursting into flame before it
reached his head. There was a sudden flood of
lurid light about the place; and, when its
bewildering
glare subsided, the form of the Ietan maiden
was fully disclosed to the awe-struck gaze of her
lover, as she stood with her hand locked in that of
the terrible being before him.
A thousand conflicting feelings tugged at the
heart-strings of the noble youth; a thousand changing
images of love and fear, hope and horror, shot in
maddening confusion across his brain. His senses
reeled in the effort to rally their flying powers; and
Petaleshroo, the dauntless partisan of the
Pawnee-Loups
he
whose heart had never quailed, whose
nerves had never shrunk in the wildest horrors of
savage warfareswooned at the feet of the sinking
damsel.
The day of the sacrifice to the Great Star had
arrived. It was a beautiful morning in April when
the misguided children of the wilderness were
assembled at the call of the magi, to celebrate the
anniversary of their cruel deity.
The scene of their infernal orgies was a tall grove
upon the edge of the prairie, an islet of timber which,
viewed at a distance, seemed rather to repose upon,
than to spring from, the broad green surface. It
was a grand festival day with the Pawnee-Loups,
and the wonted military watchfulness of this warlike
tribe was dispensed with upon the occasion of
general
relaxation, the usual sentinels of the camp were
scattered round in groups among the rest of the
people; and their horses, which generally were
tethered
,
ready saddled, near the lodges of the guard,
were now scattered over the prairie with the other
cattle of the tribe. There were two chargers only
that did not seem to share the general liberty; and
these stood fully equipped, pawing the ground as if
impatient of confinement, behind a small copse not
far from the scene of the sacrifice. One of them, a
light and graceful palfrey, was tied to a sapling which
grew upon the spot, while the reins of the other were
held by as gallant a cavalier as ever crossed a saddle.
He was a young man, of not more than
three-and-twenty
,
of the finest form, tall and muscular, and of
a most prepossessing countenance. His head-dress
of war-eagle's feathers descended in a double series
over his back, like wings, to his saddle-croup: his
shield was highly decorated, and his long lance was
ornamented with a plaited casing of red and blue
cloth. The steed he backed was every way worthy
of such a rider.
It was the partisan, Petaleshroo and his charger,
Leksho
, the Arrow. The large dark eye of the
young warrior wore an expression of seriousness
and concern but little in unison with the festivities
of the day. And ever and anon he turned to look
along the edge of the thicket, and grasped the
handle
of his tomahawk, as if as restive as the champing
courser beneath him. But his lips were
compressed
in resolution rather than anger, and the nervous
bracing of his feet in the stirrups gave an air of high
determination to his whole figure.
At length the different groups of Indians were
collected around one central spot, where a cross was
erected upon a slight elevation in the prairie, and
the captive Lataka was led forth among them, to be
offered up as a sacrifice to the Great Star. Her
youth and beauty were lost upon the sterner part of
the assemblage; but her gorgeous apparel, rich with
wrought ornaments of the precious metals, and gay
with the woven texture of beads and feathers of the
most elaborate and costly workmanship, drew a
murmur
of admiration from those of her own sex who
mingled with the crowd.
[12]
[12]
The gala dresses of the Indians in some tribes are very costly.
The minute embroidery of wampum and porcupine quills, and the
profusion of silver ornaments, with the high value placed upon the
war-eagle's feathers and other favourite materials make a full
festival
suit command a price of several hundred dollars.
The multitude were
generally
overawed by the solemnity of the occasion,
and preserved a decorous silence as the principal
Meta, with his train of Ouabineaux, led on the
captive
.
A few, however, would thrust their heads
over the shoulders of their neighbours, and fix their
savage eyes as eagerly upon the victim as if, by
reading her feelings in her face, they could enjoy in
anticipation the horrid festival. But Lataka was an
Indian maiden, and her soul was too proud to let the
enemies of her tribe guess the feelings which
swelled
in her bosom as she moved with the step of an
empress to the spot on which she was to be
immolated
.
The Ouabineaux now, under the direction
of the Meta, entered at once upon their barbarous
office; and, rudely seizing the fragile girl, her limbs
were bound to the stake almost before she discovered
the full extent of the fate that awaited her. Still
not a murmur was made by the Indian maiden; not
a sob nor a sigh escaped the lips that quivered in
the effort to repress the thrilling emotions of the
moment
.
Her eye wandered mildly around the dusky
circle of faces, as if seeking rather for sympathy
than rescueas if she wished only for some one
being to appreciate the fortitude with which she
could offer up her life. The grim gaze of a
motionless
multitude was all that met her view. There
was no one there who could have an emotion
kindred
to her own. There was no one there who
could care for Lataka; and, raising her eyes to
heaven
,
she commended her spirit to the
Wacodnah
,
who cares for all.
And now the solemn dance commenced around
the prisoner, slowly and silently at first, but
gradually
G
increasing in rapidity, as, with savage yells, they
encouraged each other, until the fiendish faces of
her executioners whirled around her in one
continuous
chain of glaring and demoniac glances. The
motion ceased, and the chief of the magi stepped
into the open space to make his sacrificial prayer to
the Great Star.
Myselfmyself. Behold me, and see that I look like myself.
I sit down in the lodge of the Metathe lodge of the spirit.
I am a magician; the roots of shrubs and weeds make me a
magician
.
Snakes are my friends.
I am able to call water from above, from beneath, and from around.
I come to change the appearance of this ground. I make it look
different in each season.
Notwithstanding you speak evil of me, from above are my friends,
my friends.
I can kill any animal, because the loud-speaking thunder helps me
I can kill any animal.
Thus have I sat down, and the earth above and below has listened
to me sitting here.
The eye of Lataka had been cast heavenward
during the utterance of this prayer; and, when it was
concluded, she merely murmured the plaintive,
Dadainsh-ta-a
,
Oh! alas! for me, and resigned
herself once more to her cruel fate. The master of
the infernal rite then turned round to give the signal
for her tortures to begin, and the deep roll of the
Indian drum commanded silence while he spoke
again for the last time. The murmur of the
multitude
was hushed, and the melancholy dirge died
away in the distant prairie.
The Meta had raised his arm to give the fatal
signal, when forth from the thicket, like an arrow
from the bow of the thunder-god, shot the war-like
form of Petaleshroo. With one hand he couched
his quivering lance, and waved his gleaming
tomahawk
high above his head with the other. His
bridle
floated loose on the neck of his charger. On
on he came like a bolt from heaven, while his
charging
cry speedily made a lane for him through the
multitude as his courser bounded into the midst of
it. A blow from his tomahawk severed the thong
which bound Lataka, in an instant, and, before his
startled and astounded tribesmen could recover from
their surprise, he had gained anew his greenwood
covert with the sinking form of the rescued damsel.
A moment sufficed to place her on the fleet palfrey
that bowed his neck to the beautiful rider; in another
they were speeding like the wind over the smooth
prairie; while, before his disappointed and baffled
countrymen could mount in pursuit, Petaleshroo
had placed a broad strip of forest between them;
and the infuriated yells of the baffled multitude died
upon the breeze which whispered naught but hope
and confidence to the flying lovers.
The Pawnee and his bride enjoyed the blessings
of summer in another land. But before the snows
of the next season had come again, his tribesmen
had invited him back to the lodges of the Ske-re.
Nor since that day have they ever offered up a
human victim to the Great Star.
[13]
[13]
This story was written several years since, and I grieve to say
that since the first edition of this work the Ske-re have again
compromised
their character in the matter of human sacrifices to the
Great Star; and that so lately as April, 1839.
SCENES
AMONG THE ALLEGHANIES.
A NIGHT ON THE ENCHANTED MOUNTAINS.
It haunts me yet! that early dream
Of first fond love;
Like the ice that floats on a summer stream
From some frozen fount above:
Through my river of years 'twill drifting gleam,
Where'er their waves may rove!
It flashes athwart each sunny hour
With a strangely bright but chilling power,
Ever and ever to mock their tide
With its illusive glow;
A fragment of hopes that were petrified
Long, long ago!
There
are few parts of the United States which,
for beauty of scenery, amenity of climate, and, I
might add, the primitive character of the inhabitants,
possess more peculiar attraction than the
mountainous
region of Eastern Tennessee.
It is a wild and romantic district, composed of
rocks and broken hills, where the primeval forests
overhang valleys watered by limpid streams, whose
meadowy banks are grazed by innumerable herds of
cattle. The various mountain-ridges, which at one
point traverse the country almost in parallel lines,
while at another they sweep off in vast curves, and
describe a majestic amphitheatre, are all more or
less connected with the Apalachian chain, and
share the peculiarities which elsewhere characterize
those mountains. In some places the transition from
valley to highland is so gradual, that you are hardly
aware of the undulations of surface when passing
over it. In others, the frowning heights rise in
precipitous
walls from the plains, while again their
wooded and dome-like summits will heave upward
from the broad meadows like enormous tumuli
heaped upon their bosom.
The hills also are frequently seamed with deep
and dark ravines, whose sheer sides and
dimly-descried
bottom will make the eye swim as it tries
to fathom them; while they are often pierced with
cavernous galleries, which lead miles under ground,
and branch off into grottos so spacious that an army
might be marshalled within their yawning chambers.
[14]
[14]
The great limestone cavern of Kentucky, which has been
explored
twelve miles in one direction, is said, in the current phrase
of the country, to extend under a
whole county
.
Here, too, those remarkable conical cavities whioh
are generally known by the name of sink-holes
in the western country, are thickly scattered over
the surface; and so perfect in shape are many of
them, that it is difficult to persuade the ruder
residents
that they are not the work of art, nor fashioned
out as drinking bowls for the extinct monsters whose
fossil remains are so abundant in this region. Indeed
G 2
the singular formation of the earth's surface, with the
entire seclusion in which they live amid their
pastoral
valleys, must account for, and excuse, many a
less reasonable belief and superstition prevailing
among those hospitable mountaineers. The
Enchanted
Mountains, as one of the ranges I have
been attempting to describe is called, are especially
distinguished by the number of incredible traditions
and wild superstitions connected with them. Those
uncouth paintings along their cliffs, and the footprints
of men and horses stamped in the solid rock upon
the highest summits, as mentioned by Mr. Flint in
his Geography of the Western Country, constitute
but a small part of the material which they offer to
an uneducated and imaginative people for the creation
of strange fantasies. The singular echoes which
tremble through these lonely glens, and the shifting
forms which, as the morning mist rises from the
upland, may be seen stealing over the tops of the
crags and hiding themselves within the crevices, are
alike accounted for by supernatural causes.
Having always been imbued with a certain love
of the marvellous, and being one of the pious few
who, in this enlightened age of reality, nurse up a
lingering superstition or two, I found myself, while
loitering through this romantic district, and
associating
upon the most easy terms with its rural
population
,
irresistibly imbibing a portion of the feeling and
spirit which prevailed around me. The cavernous
ravines and sounding aisles of the tall forests had
airy tongues for me as well as for those who are
more familiar with their whisperings. But as for
the freakish beings who were supposed to give them
utterance as they pranked it away in the dim retreats
around, I somehow or other could never obtain a fair
sight of one of them. The forms that sometimes
rose between my eyes and the mist-breathing
cascade
,
or flitted across the shadowy glade at some
sudden turn of my forest-path, always managed to
disappear behind some jutting rock, or make good
their escape into some convenient thicket, before I
could make out their lineaments, or even swear to
their existence at all. My repeated disappointments
in this way had begun to put me quite out of conceit
with my quickness and accuracy of vision, when a
new opportunity was given me of testing them, in
the manner I am about to relate.
I happened one day to dine at a little inn situated
at the mouth of a wooded gorge, where it lay tucked
away so closely beneath the ponderous limbs of a huge
tulip tree, that the blue smoke from the kitchen fire
alone betrayed its locality. Mine host proved to be
one of those talkative worthies who, being supplied
with but little information whereon to exercise his
tongue, make amends for the defects of education
and circumstance by dwelling with exaggeration
upon every trivial incident around him. Such people
in polished society become the scandal-mongers of
the circle in which they move, while in more simple
communities they are only the chroniclers of every
thing marvellous that has occurred in the
neighbourhood
within the memory of the oldest inhabitant.
I had hardly placed myself at the dinner-table, before
my garrulous entertainer began to display his
retentive
faculties by giving me the exact year and day
upon which every chicken with two heads or calf
with five legs had been born throughout the whole
country round. Then followed the most minute
particulars
of a murder or two which had been
perpetrated
within the last twenty years; and after this I
was drilled into the exact situation and bearings of a
haunted house which I should probably see the next
day by pursuing the road I was then travelling;
finally, I was inducted into all the arcana of a
remarkable
cavern in the vicinity, where an ouphe, gnome,
moon-elf, or water-sprite had taken up its residence,
to the great annoyance of every one except my
landlord's
buxom daughter, who was said to be upon the
most enviable terms with the freakish spirit of the
grotto.
The animated, and almost eloquent, description
which mine host gave of this cavern, made me
readily
overlook the puerile credulity with which he
wound up his account of its puculiarities. It
interested
me so much, indeed, that I determined to
stable
my horse for the night, and proceed at once to
explore the place. A fresh and blooming girl, with
the laughing eye and free step of a mountaineer,
volunteered
to be my guide on the occasion, hinting, at
the same time, while she gave a mischievous look at
her father, that I should find it difficult to procure a
cicerone other than herself in the neighbourhood.
She then directed me how to find the principal
entrance
to the cave, where she promised to join me
soon after.
A rough scramble in the hills soon brought me to
the place of meeting, and, entering the first chamber
of the cavern, which was large, and well lighted from
without, I stretched myself upon a rocky ledge which
leaned over a brook that meandered through the place,
and, lulled by the dash of a distant waterfall,
surrendered
myself to a thousand musing fancies.
Fatigue from an early and long morning ride, or
possibly too liberal a devotion to the good things
which had been placed before me at table, caused me
soon to be overtaken by sleep. My slumbers,
however
,
were broken and uneasy; and, after repeatedly
opening my eyes to look with some impatience at
my watch as I tossed upon my stony couch, I
abandoned
the idea of a nap entirely, momentarily
expecting
that my guide would make her appearance, and
contented myself with gazing listlessly upon the
streamlet which rippled over its pebbled bed beneath
me. I must have remained for some time in this
vacant
mood, when my idle musings were interrupted
by a new source of interest presenting itself.
A slight rustling near at hand disturbed me, and,
turning round as I opened my eyes, a female figure,
in a drapery of snowy whiteness, appeared to flit
before
them, and retire behind a tall cascade
immediately
in front of me. The uncertain light of the place,
with the spray of the waterfall, which partially
impeded
my view of the farther part of the cavern, made
me at first doubt the evidence of my senses; but
gradually a distinct form was perceptible amid the
mist, apparently moving slowly from me, and
beckoning
the while to follow. The height of the figure
struck me immediately as being about the same as
that of the buxom daughter of my landlord; and,
though the proportions seemed more slender, I had
no doubt, upon recalling her arch expression of
countenance
while her father was relating to me the wild
superstitions of the cavern, that a ready solution of
one of its mysteries at least was at hand. Some
woman's whim, I had no doubt, prompted the girl to
get up a little diversion at my expense, and sent her
thither to put the freak in execution. I had been
told that there were a dozen outlets to the cavern,
and presumed that I was now to be involved in its
labyrinths for the purpose of seeing in what part of
the mountain I might subsequently make my exit.
He is no true lover of a pair of bright eyes who will
mar the jest of a pretty woman. The maiden
beckoned
,
and I followed.
I had some difficulty in scaling the precipice over
which tumbled the waterfall; but, after slipping
once or twice upon wet the ledges of rock, which
supplied a treacherous foothold, I at last gained the
summit, and stood within a few yards of my
whimsical
conductor. She had paused upon the farthest
side of the chamber into which the cavern here
expanded
.
It was a vast and noble apartment. The
lofty ceiling swelled almost into a perfect dome, save
where a ragged aperture at the top admitted the
noonday
sun, whose rays, as they fell through the vines
and wild flowers that embowered the orifice, were
glinted back from a thousand sparry points and
pillars
around. The walls, indeed, were completely
fretted with stalactites. In some places small, and
apparently freshly formed, they hung in fringed rows
from the ceiling; in others they drooped so heavily
as to knit the glistening roof to the marble floor
beneath it, or rose in slender pyramids from the
floor itself until they appeared to sustain the vault
above.
The motion of the air created by the cascade gave
a delightful coolness to this apartment, while the
murmur of the falling water was echoed back from
the vibrating columns with tones as rich and
melodious
as those which sweep from an olian harp.
Never, methought, had I seen a spot so alluring.
And yet, when I surveyed each charm of the grotto,
I knew not whether I could be contented in any one
part of it. Nothing, indeed, could be more inviting
to tranquil enjoyment than the place where I then
stood; but the clustering columns, with their
interlacing
screen-work of woven spar, allured my eye
into a hundred romantic aisles which I longed to
explore
;
while the pendant wild flowers which
luxuriated
in the sunshine around the opening above,
prompted me to scale the dangerous height, and
try what pinnacle of the mountain I might gain by
emerging from the cavern through the lofty aperture.
These reflections were abruptly terminated by an
impatient gesture from my guide, and for the first
time I caught a glimpse of her countenance as she
glided by a deep pool in which it was reflected.
That glance had a singular, almost a preternatural,
effect upon me; the features were different from
those I had expected to behold. They were not
those of the new acquaintance whom I thought I
was following; but the expression they wore was
one so familiar to me in bygone years, that I started
as if I had seen an apparition.
It was the look of one who had been long since
deadof one around whose name, when life was
new, the whole tissue of my hopes and fears was
wovenfor whom all my aspirations after worldly
honours had been breathedin whom all my dreams
of earthly happiness had been wound up. She had
mingled in purer hours with all the fond and
home-loving
fancies of boyhood; she had been the queen
of each romantic vision of my youth; and, amid
the worldly cares and selfish struggles of maturer
life, the thought of her had lived separate and apart
in my bosom, with no companion in its hallowed
chamber, save the religion learned at a mother's knee
save that hope of better things which, once
implanted
by a mother's love, survives amid the storms
and conflicts of the worlda beacon to warn us
more often, alas! how far we have wandered from
her teachings, than to guide us to the haven whither
they were meant to lead.
I had loved her, and I had lost her: how, it
matters
not. Perchance disease had reft her from me
by some sudden blow at the moment when
possession
made her dearest. Perchance I saw her fade
in the arms of another, while I was banned and
barred
from ministering to a spirit that stole away to
the grave with all I prized on earth. It boots not
how I lost her; but he who has centred every thought
and feeling in one only object, whose morning hopes
have for years gone forth to the same gaol, whose
evening reflections have for years come back to the
same bourne, whose waking visions and whose
midnight
dreams have for years been haunted by the
same image, whose schemes of toil and
advancement
have all tended to the same end
he
knows
what it is to have the pivot upon which every wheel
of his heart hath turned, wrenched from its centre
to have the sun, round which revolved every joy
that lighted his bosom, plucked from its system.
Well, it was her face; as I live, it was the
soul-breathing
features of Linda that now beamed before
me, fresh as when in dawning womanhood they first
caught my youthful fancyresistless as when in
their noontide blaze of beauty I poured out my
whole adoring soul before them. There was that
same appealing look of the large lustrous eyes, the
same sunny and soul-melting smile which, playing
over a countenance thoughtful even to sadness,
touched
it with a beauty so radiant that the charm
seemed
borrowed from heaven itself.
I could not but think it strange that such an image
should be presented to my view in such a place;
and yet, if I now rightly recollect my emotions,
surprise
was the least active among them. I cared not
why or whence the apparition came; I thought not
whether it were reality or mocking semblance, the
fantasy of my own brain, or the shadowy creation
of some supernatural Power around me. I knew
only that it was there; I knew only that the eyes
in whose perilous light my soul had bathed herself
to madness, beamed anew before me; that the lips
whose lightest smile had often wrapped me in elysium;
that the brow whose holy light But why should
H
I thus attempt to paint what pencil never yet hath
reached? why essay a portrait whose colours I
have nowhere found, save in the heart where they
are laid so deeply that death alone can dim them?
Enough that the only human being to whom my
spirit ever bowed in inferiorityenough that the
idol to which it had knelt in adoration, now stood
palpably before it. An hour agone, and I would
have crossed the threshold of the grave itself to stand
one moment in that presenceto gaze, if but for an
instant, upon those features. What recked I now,
then, how or whence they were conjured up? Had
the
Fiend
himself stood nigh, I would have pressed
nearer, and gazed and followed as I did. The figure
beckoned, and I went on.
The vaulted pathway was at first smooth and
easily followed; but, after passing through several
of the cavernous chambers into which it ever and
anon expanded, the route became more and more
difficult
;
loose masses of rock encumbering the floor,
or drooping in pendant crags from the roof, rendered
the defiles between them both toilsome and
hazardous
.
The light which fell through the opening
behind
us soon disappeared entirely, and it gave me
a singular sinking of the spirits, as we passed into
deeper and deeper gloom, to hear the musical sounds,
which I have already noted in the grotto from which
we first passed, dying away in the distance, and
leaving the place at last in total silence. Long,
indeed
,
after they had ceased to reach my ear with
any distinctness, they would seem at times to swell
along the winding vault, and break anew upon me
at some turn in our devious route. So strangely, too,
do the innumerable subtle echoes metamorphose
each noise in these caverns, that I continually found
myself mistaking the muttered reverberations for
the sounds of a human voice. At one moment it
seemed in gay tones to be calling me back to the
sparry grotto and bright sunshine behind, while the
very next it appeared, with sudden and harsh
intonation
,
to warn me against proceeding farther. Anon
it would die away with a mournful cadence, a
melancholy
wailing, like the requiem of one who was
beyond the reach of all earthly counsel or assistance.
Again and again did I pause in my career, to
listen
to this wild chanting, while my feelings would for
the moment take their hue and complexion from the
sources which thus bewildered my senses. I thought
of my early dreams of fame and honour, of the singing
hopes that lured me on my path, when one fatal
image
stepped between my soul and all its high
endeavour
.
I thought of that buoyancy of spirit, once so
irrepressible in its elasticity, that it seemed proof
alike against time and sorrow, now sapped, wasted,
and destroyed by the phrensied pursuit of one object.
I thought of the home which had so much to
embellish
and endear it, and which yet, with all its
heart-cheering
joys, had been neglected and left, like the
sunlit grotto, to follow a shifting phantom through a
heartless world. I thought of the reproachful voices
around me, and the ceaseless upbraider in my bosom,
which told of time and talents wasted, of
opportunities
thrown away, of mental energies squandered,
of heart, brain, and soul consumed in a devotion
deeper and more absorbing than Heaven itself exacts
from its votaries. I thoughtand I looked at the
object for which I had lavished them allI thought
that my life must have been some hideous dream,
some damned vision in which my fated soul was
bound by imaginary ties to a being doomed to be its
bane upon earth, and shut it out at last from
heaven
;
and I laughed in scornful glee as I twisted my
bodily frame in the hope that at length I might wake
from that long-enduring sleep. I caught a smile from
the lips; I saw a beckon from the hand of the
phantom
,
and I wished still to dream, and to follow for
ever. I plunged into the abyss of darkness to which
it pointed; and, reckless of everything I might leave
behind, followed wheresoever it might marshal me.
A damp and chilling atmosphere now pervaded
the place, and the clammy moisture stood thick
upon
my brow as I groped my way through a labyrinth
of winding galleries, which intersected each other
so often both obliquely and transversely, that the
whole mountain seemed honeycombed. At one
moment the steep and broken pathway led up
acclivities
almost impossible to scale; at another the
black edge of a precipice indicated our hazardous
route along the brink of some unfathomed gulf;
while again a savage torrent, roaring through the
sinuous
vault, left scarcely room enough for a foothold
between the base of the wall and its furious tide.
And still my guide kept on, and still I followed.
Returning, indeed, had the thought occurred to me,
was now impossible; for the pale light which
seemed
to hang around her person, emanating, as it were,
from her white raiment, was all that guided me
through these shadowy realms. But not for a
moment
did I now think of retracing my steps or
pausing
in that wild pursuit. Onward, and still onward
it led, while my spirit, once set upon its purpose,
seemed to gather sterner determination from every
difficulty it encountered, and to kindle again with
that indomitable buoyancy which was once the chief
attribute of my nature.
At length the chase seemed ended, as we
approached
one of those abrupt and startling turns
common in these caverns, where the passage,
suddenly
veering to the right or left, leads you, as if by
design, to the sheer edge of some gulf that is
impassable
.
My strange companion seemed pausing for
a moment upon the brink of the abyss. It was a
moment to me of delirious joy, mingled with more
than mortal agony; the object of my wild pursuit
seemed at length within my grasp. A single bound,
and my outstretched arms would have encircled her
person; a single boundnay, the least movement
toward hermight only have precipitated the
destruction
upon whose brink she hovered. Her form
seemed to flutter upon the very edge of that horrid
precipice, as, gazing like one fascinated over it, she
stretched her hand backward toward me. It was
like inviting me to perdition. And yet, forgive me,
Heaven! to perish with her was my proudest hope,
as I sprang to grasp it. But, oh God! what held I
in that withering clasp? The ice of death seemed
curdling in my veins as I touched those clammy and
pulseless fingers. A strange and unhallowed light
H 2
shot upward from the black abyss; and the features
from which I
could
not take my eyes away, were
changed to those of a DEMON in that hideous glare.
And now the hand that I had so longed to clasp,
closed with remorseless pressure round my own,
and drew me toward the yawning gulf; it tightened
in its grasp, and I hovered still nearer to my horrid
doom; it clenched yet more closely, and the
phrensied
shriek I gaveAWOKE ME.
A soft palm was gently pressed against my own;
a pair of laughing blue eyes were bent archly upon
me; and the fair locks which floated over her
blooming
cheeks revealed the joyous and romping
damsel
who had promised to act as my guide through
the cavern. She had been prevented by some
household cares from keeping her appointment
until the approach of evening made it too late, and
had taken it for granted that I had then returned to
my lodgings at the inn. My absence from the
breakfast-table in the morning, however, had
awakened
some concern in the family, and induced her
to seek me where we then met. The pressure of
her hand in trying to awaken me will partially
account
for the latter part of my hideous dream; the
general tenour of it is easily traceable to the
impression
made upon my mind by the prevalent
superstition
connected with the cavern; but no
metaphysical
ingenuity of which I am master, can explain how
one whose daily thoughts flow in so careless, if not
gay, a current as mine, could, even in a dream, have
conjured up such a train of wild and bitter fancies;
much less how the fearful tissue should have been
so interwoven with memories of the
dream-love
of
boyhood as to give new shape and reality to a
phantom
longlong since faded. And I could not but
think that, had a vision so strange and vivid swept
athwart my brain at an earlier period of life, I should
have regarded it as something more than an
unmeaning
fantasy. That mystical romance, which is the
religion of life's spring-time, would have interpreted
my dream as a dark foreboding of the future,
prophetic
of hopes misplaced, of opportunities
misapplied
,
of a joyless and barren youth, and a manhood
whose best endeavour would be only a restless effort
to lose in action the memory of the dreary past.
If half be true, however, that is told concerning
them, still more extravagant sallies of the
imagination
overtake persons of quite as easy and indolent a
disposition as my own, when venturing to pass a
night upon the Enchanted Mountains.
THE MAGIC GUN.
And
Mitchi-manitou
, in tricksy mood,
Which evil spirits only may indulge,
'Tis said will oft enchant the warrior's gun.
Travelling
on horseback is generally the most
agreeable mode of seeing a country. But it is only
in a broken mountain region that one fully enjoys it.
The prairies, so delightful to scamper over with a
fresh horse, become tedious and monotonous when
obliged to jog along at the easy pace to which you
must restrain your roadster in a long journey: and
when one reaches a well-travelled mail route, you
are incessantly put out of conceit of your slow
travel of thirty or forty miles a day only, as a
stage-coach ever and anon whirls by you on the
dusty road. It is when rugged steeps are to be
climbed, hill-side torrents to be forded, and, amid
narrow ways in the deep woods along the edges
of precipitous paths, obstructive and perilous, if not
wholly impassable to a wheeled carriage, that the
horseman enjoys his full sense of independence,
and, I may add, of
Power
sheer animal power:
a source of pleasure, by the way, which in this
pre-eminently intellectual era many of my
countrymen
seem to regard as excessively vulgar.
Reader, put your horse aboard of a North River
steamer, land at Kingston on the Hudson. Ride to
Paltz
, at the base of the Shawungunk Mountains,
the same night. Mount on the morrow, and, with
trouting-rod in hand, trace the sources of the
Delaware
among the peaks of the Katzbergs. The whole
range of the Alleghanies can give you nothing
better
in the way of animated riding, choice fishing, or
exquisite scenery. But to return to our mutton.
Still wandering among these mountains, I had
passed from the beautiful pastoral region described
in the opening of the previous story, to a gloomier
district of Eastern Tennessee. After a harsh and
lowering day, the evening closed in dull and thick
with that stagnant heaviness of the atmosphere which
often precedes a storm. There was a moon, but its
face was veiled by the leaden clouds; and its light,
dissipated through the murky air, created that kind
of darkness visible which gives a drearier aspect
to the landscape than when it is wholly obscured.
The only cabin in sight lay in the midst of a
desolate
clearing, which, though completely walled
round by the forest of firs from whose depths I had
just issued, bore not a trace of shrubbery to relieve
the waste of blackened stumps. A well of
primitive
construction, with the bucket dangling at the
end of a grapevine attached to a long lever pole,
crowned a naked knoll where the stumps had been
cleared away. The pole, from which the bark had
never been stripped, was nearly covered with that
pale green moss which will often collect upon the
dry rails of a fence which have not for years been
disturbed; and this, with the night wind whistling
through the parted staves of the decrepit bucket,
proved sufficiently that the well, if not dried up
entirely
,
was still no longer used. A low shed, built
of logs and roofed with bark, was the only other
outward appurtenance of the cabin.
The whole picture, it will be acknowledged, was
a dreary one. Comfortless, monotonousalmost
heart-depressing! A scene of wildness without
beauty, of solitude without dignity, a woodland
home without one attribute of rural cheerfulness.
An abode in the wilderness utterly destitute of
forest
shelter and security.
The spirits of evil, which in some lands are
believed
to take up their abode in every deserted
palace
or ruinous castle, methought would straightway
migrate hitherward, did they dream of a spot so
utterly
lonely, and, as it seemed, so man-forsaken!
I say seemed, for, though the traces of what are
called
improvements
were about me, I could scarcely
realize that the hands which had once wrought there
might still be busy near. The man who had made
such an opening in the forest must, I thought, have
been frighted at his own work the moment he ceased
from his toil, and became aware how uncouthly
he had given shape and form to the spirit of solitude
which still sighed among the tall trees around him.
I dismounted near the cabin, and scarcely touched
the door with the butt of my riding-whip, when it was
flung open from within by some one who instantly
retired from the threshold. The abruptness of the
act did, I confess, startle me. Though not easily
alarmed, my mood of mind at the moment was such
as to prompt some mystic association with the scenes
and circumstances already detailed. I am a perfect
barometer of the weather, and the approach of a
thunder-gust always weighs down my spirits with
undefinable oppression, in the same degree that a
driving snow-storm exhilarates them. The low
mutterings
of the oncoming tempest, which were now
beginning to be audible, would, then, be sufficient
to account for my present sensibility to gloomy
influences
;
but I might also mention other things
which, perhaps, added to the present anxiety of
feeling, if the phrase be not too strong a one. It
will suffice, however, to state merely that I had not
heard the sound of human speech in the last two
days, and that which now met my ears was harsh
and discordant. It was the croaking tone which you
may sometimes catch from a sour-tempered virago
as she strolls from the conventicle.
I thought you'd a been here afore, said this
ungracious voice; which, upon entering the
apartment
,
I recognised as belonging to its only occupant.
She was a heavy-built woman, of coarse, square
features and saturnine complexion. She wore her
straight black hair plainly parted over her eyebrows,
which were bushy and meeting in the middle. One
elvish lock had escaped from behind her ears as she
stooped over the hearth, holding a tallow-candle to
the ashes, which she was trying to blow into a flame,
when my summons interrupted the process.
You thought I would have been hear before?
I exclaimed at last, in reply to her singular
salutation
;
why, my good woman, I have lost my way,
and only stumbled upon your house by accident
you must take me for somebody else.
I'm no good woman. Don't good woman me,
she replied, with a scrutinizing glance, which had
something, I thought, of almost fierceness in it, as,
shading the now lighted candle with one hand, she
turned scornfully round and fixed her regards upon
me.
Yes! yes, strannger, you are the man, the very
man that was to come at this hour. I dreamed ye
I dreamed yer hossyer brown leggins and all, I
dreamed 'emand now go look after yer critter
while I get some supper for ye.
Those who are so good as to follow me in my
story, will, perhaps, be vexed and impatient when I
tell them here that the whole of this singular scene
has no immediate bearing upon its denoument.
Why, then, it may be asked, do you delay
and embarrass the relation with the detail of matters
that have no connexion with the incident for which
you would claim our interest?
I did not say they had no
connexion
with it!
They have an intimatea close connexion. It was
these very circumstances which still farther
fashioned
the mood of mind under which I became an
observer
,
and partially an actor, in the startling, though
grotesque, events which followed, and I wish to place
the reader in exactly the same position that I was in.
I wish to win him, if possible, to perfect sympathy
of feeling with me for the hour, and let him exercise
his judgment, if he care to, from precisely the same
point of mental observation.
We have returned, then, to the cabin; he (the
reader
)
or I are again alone in the midst of the
wilderness
;
in that dreary room; alone with that
weird-looking
woman. The storm is now howling
without
,
but it does not chafe savagely enough to excite
the dispirited temper of our feelings, or offer a
contrast
of any dignity to the gloomy influences within.
Supper was already prepared for me when I
returned
from looking after my horse. The coarse
bacon and hoe cakes were placed before me
without
another word being spoken between my hostess
and myself. I drew a rude stool to the table, and
was in the act of helping myself from the wooden
platter
Stop! I hear them coming! cried the woman.
Hear them! who? said I, turning round sharply
as some new, though undefinable, suspicion flashed
upon me.
Them as will have to share that supper with
ye, stranngerif hows' be 't they let ye eat any of
it.
I had no time to weigh farther the meaning of her
words, for at this instant there was a sharp flash of
lightning, the door was dashed suddenly open, and
three armed men strode into the apartment, the
storm pelting in behind them as they entered, and a
terrific thunder-burst following instantly the
lightning
amid whose glare they crossed the threshold.
The palor of their countenances, set off by their long
black, dripping locks, seemed measurably to pass
away when that livid light was withdrawn; but from
the moment that the door was flung open there was
an earthy smell
in the room, which, whether coming
from the reeking soil without or from the garments
of these wild foresters, was most perceptible. Those
I
less familiar than myself with the raw-savoured odours
which sometimes travel out with the rich perfume of
the woods, would, I am persuaded, have identified it
with the grave-damps which our senses will
sometimes
take cognizance of in old churchyards.
The aspect of two of these men was sufficiently
formidable, though in point of stature and an
appearance
of burly strength they were inferior to their
companion. They were square-shouldered,
blackbearded
fellows, armed both with hatchet and
bowie-knife
in addition to the short rifles, which they still
retained laid across their knees as they settled
themselves
side by side upon a bench and looked coldly
around them. The third was a full-cheeked,
heavy-featured
man, of about eight-and-twenty, bearing a
strong resemblance to my hostess, both in
complexion
and countenance, save that his eyebrows, instead
of being square and coal-black, like hers, were
irregularly
arched and of a faded brown. His mouth
also lacked the firmness of expression which dwelt
around her thin and shrewish lips.
This man bore with him no weapon save a huge
old German piece, a Tyrolean rifle as it seemed to
me from the enormous length of the barrel and the
great size of the bore, as well as the outlandish and
cumbersome ornaments about the stock and
breeching
.
It was evidently a weapon intended for the
great distances at which the chamois hunter claims
his quarry, and, though serviceable for a long shot on
our western prairies, was ill suited to the thick woods
of the Apalachian Mountains. Inconvenient,
however
,
as the length and size of the piece might make
it in some hands, it seemed to be nothing in the grip
of the sturdy mountaineer, (who had probably bought
it from some passing emigrant from the old world,)
for I observed even as he entered that he held the
gun vertically at arm's length before him. Still he
seemed glad of relieving himself of the weight as
soon as possible, for he instantly advanced to the
farthest corner of the room, where he placed the
piece with some care in an upright position against
the wall.
Well! what for now? said the virago; why
do you stand looking at the gun after you've sot it
down? you think she'll walk off of herself, do ye?
The youth looked gloomily at hertook a stool on
the opposite side of the hearth to his companions
leaned his head doggedly upon his hand, but said
nothing.
I thought I had never fallen in with a more strange
set of people.
What! Hank Stumpers, haint ye a word to
fling to a dog? cried the woman, advancing toward
him; is that the way you treat yer dead father's
wife?
The young man looked up stupidly at her, gave a
glance with something more of intelligence at the
gun, but still said nothing.
Yes, yer nateral-born mother, ye
chuckle-head
yeand she a widder. Can't ye speak up to
herwhere's the deer? the turkeys? the
squirrels
?
haint ye got even a squirrel to show for your
day's work? speak you, John Dawson; what's the
matter with the boy? He be n't drunk, be he?
It's a matter of five hours, Mother Stumpers,
since either of us touched a drop, replied one of
the men briefly, and he, too, gave a furtive glance
at the old firelock.
Wellwell, why don't ye go on? is any one
dead? are ye all distraught? Jackson Phillips,
youyou've felt the back of my hand across yer
chaps, afore now, for yer imperanceI know ye,
man, and that sober possum-look means something!
Do ye think to gum it over me afore this strannger
speak up, and that at onst, or it'll be the worst
for some of ye, or my name's not Melinda
Washington
Stumpers!
(I did not smile, reader, as you do, at Mrs. S.'s
sponsorial dignity; I did not
dare
to smile.)
You know we wouldn't offend you, no how,
Mother Stumpers, deprecatingly replied the man
whom she addressed as Phillips. Hank's misfor
tun, you see, has made us dull-like, as it were, and
And what in the name of Satan is his
misfortun
?
interrupted the mother, now for the first time
moved with concern as well as anger.
That's itthat's it, mammy, cried Hank,
with something of alertness; she's druv the very
nail on the head
Satan
is at the bottom of all of it.
At the bottom of all of what? screamed the
virago, and even as she spoke the ancient piece in
the corner, untouched by any onewithout the
slightest movement of the lockdischarged itself
toward the cealing.
At the bottom of the bar'l of my gunhe speaks
for himself, replied Hank, moodily, while his
mother
started back and I sprang to my feet at the
sudden
report so near me.
Your gun must be foul, I said, resuming my
seat, very foul, to hang fire so long. I suppose
she made a flash in the pan when attempting to
discharge
her just before entering.
Stumpers looked vacantly at me, shook his head,
muttered something about he and his mother being
ruinated, and then more audibly said, Strannger,
you may have more book larnin than me, but I tell
ye, onst for all, that Satan's got into that gun!
And
bang!
at that moment again went the gun,
as if to prove that his words were sooth.
This is certainly most extraordinary, I
exclaimed
,
as I rose to examine the gun for myself.
You'd better not touch her strannger, cried
Phillips.
I tell you she's got Satan in her, repeated
Hank.
I looked at Dawson inquiringly.
Fact! strannger, every word of it. Hank's not
been able to get that gun off since noon; but about
a hundred rod afore we struck the clearing, she
begun
firing of her own accord, just as you see
Bang!Bang!
went the gun.
I told you that Satan was in her! ejaculated
Hank.
That's the way with her, said Phillips, in a
tone of solemn sadness; sometimes she'll not speak
for a matter of ten minutes or so; sometimes she
gives two little short barks like those; and
sometimes
she gives a regular rip-snorter
I 2
(
Bang
! thundered the gun.)
like that!
I told you she'd got Satan in her! still
repeated
Hank.
I confess that it was now only the calmness of
those around me which prevented some feeling of
superstitious terror being disagreeably awakened in
me. The men, however, appeared sad and
awe-struck
,
rather than alarmed; while the womana
thing not uncommon with resolute minds disposed
to believe readily in the supernaturalseemed at
once to accept the fearful solution of the mystery
which had been proffered to her, and ready to meet
it with an unflinching spirit. Still, puzzled and
bewildered as I was, I could not but smile at the
manner in which her emotions now manifested
themselves.
Well! she cried, impatiently, and what a
poor skimp of a man you must be to let Satan get
into the piece when you had her all day in yer own
keeping.
I
a skimp of a man? answered her son, with
spirit; there isn't another fellow in these diggins
who'd 'a brought that gun home as I did, after he
diskivered that sich goings on were inside of her,
And if she'd tell her own story
Bang!bang!bang!
pealed the gun,
That's Satan who speaks now
Bangphizzbang!
It's Satan, I say, and no mistake. But if she'd
tell her own story, she'd own I never let her go out
of my hands this blessed day, save when Jackson
Phillips tuk Dawson's piece and mine to watch for
deer on the runway while we went down the branch
to see if we couldn't get a big sucker or two for
supper
out of the deep hole where I cotched so many
fish last fall. No! if she'd speak for herself
BANG! thundered the gun, with a report so
tremendous that I involuntarily put my hand to my
ears.
Gim me the tongsgim me them 'ere tongs,
shouted Mrs. Stumpers in great wrath; while
Dawson
turned pale, and even Phillips seemed a little
disturbed as he muttered, if the old thing should
bust, it might be a bad business for us.
Hank, however, doggedly handed his mother the
tongs; and before I could interpose, or, indeed,
before
I was aware what the courageous woman was
about to do, she had grasped the gun with the tongs,
near the lock, and, bearing it before her with a strong
arm, she moved toward the door. Why don't ye
open
Bang!phizz!bang!bang!phizz!phizz!
bang!
alternately pealed and sputtered the gun;
but still the intrepid virago went on. I sprang to
the door and flung it wide before her.
The light from within was reflected upon the
hollow
buttonwood trunk which formed the curb of the
well opposite, and in another instant the gun was
plunged to the bottom.
Thar! said Mrs. Stumpers, clapping the tongs
in true housewife fashion as she replaced them in the
chimney-corner. Now one can hear hisself talk
without the bother of sich a clatter.
Bang!
moaned the gun at the bottom of the well.
Can't stop Satan that way, mammy, said Hank,
his stupid face sicklying over with an unhappy smile.
The mystery had now deepened to the highest
point of interest; that last discharge was wholly
unaccountable; and for my own part, my curiosity
was wound up to a pitch that was positively painful.
I remembered, though, the shattered bucket, and
be-thought
myself of asking if there were any water
in the well.
About enough to come up to a lizard's ear,
answered
Hank; but there's a smart chance of mud
under it, I tell ye, strannger. That old gun will
keep sinking for a week yet.
She's stopped, said Dawson.
Yes, answered Phillips, and we'd better fish
her out before she sinks beyond our reach.
Don't I tell ye Satan's in the gun, cried Hank,
almost furiously; downdownshe'll keep going
down now till he has her in his own place all to
himself
.
I lost an axe myself in that well onst; and if
half that father used to tell about it be true
Spluchuchuch. Bubbleublebang! ble
Bang!SplublebangbangBANG!!!
We listenedwe looked long at each other.
With the last report, which was almost overpowering,
I was convinced that the explosion must have been
aided by inflammable gas at the bottom of the well,
for the blue flame, as it rose from it, flashed through
the only window of the cabin, and showed the
features
of its ignorant inmates, for the first time,
distorted
with real terror. At least Phillips and
Dawson
,
upon whom my eye was fixed at the time,
looked
perfectly aghast with fright.
Hank's supposition of the ultimate destiny of his
famous gun (viz., going to the sporting dominions of
the Great Hunter below) could hardly be true,
however
,
inasmuch as a piece of the blackened muzzle
was found next morning driven half through a
fragment
of the well-curb which lay shattered around,
broken to splinters by the explosion of the fire-damp.
The poor young man fairly wept outright when it
was shown him by Phillips; who, with a generosity
I could not sufficiently admire at the time, insisted
upon replacing the hoary weapon of Hank's
affections
with his own light Easton rifle; saying at the
same time that he had a Kentucky tool at home
which he much preferred to the Pennsylvania yger.
This same Phillips, by the way, very civilly
offered after breakfast to put me on my road, which,
from the number of Indian trails along the borders
of the Cherokee country, I had wholly lost.
I say, strannger, said he, the moment we had
got out of earshot of the house, you were devilish
cool when that well blew up! tell me the trick of it
u
nly, and I'll tell you the trick of the gun, which
rayther skeared you a few, as I think.
I explained the fire-damp to him.
Raally, now, he exclaimed, wells is almost
unknown in this country, for we either settle down
by a spring, or get our water from the branch. But
the fust well I fall in with I'll draw up a bottle of
that
gas
, as you call it, and have some raal fun with
the fellers. But look here, said he, stopping and
tearing off some dry fungus from an old stump,
when you want to play a chap sich a trick as made
music for us last night, you've only to put twenty
charges in a gun, with sich wad as this atween each
of eman ascotch now and then instead of
dry-powder
will be all the better; ram each down well; let
the chap carry his gun about for an hour or so,
unbeknowing
jist
as that simple Hank didand
choose your own time for dropping a piece of lighted
touch-wood into the muzzle.
Upon my word I was not sorry that I was to part
company before night with this practical joker;
who, for aught I knew, might seize some tempting
opportunity to slip a snake or so into my boots, stuff
my saddle with squibs, or play off some little piece
of facetiousness like that with which the jocular
Captain Goffe, in Scott's novel of the Pirate, used
now and then to indulge his humour; the said
captain
having a funny way of discharging his pistol
under the mess-table, merely to pepper some one's
shins with a half-ounce ball.
THE INN OF WOLFSWALD.
Tramptramp on the oaken floor!
Heard ye the spectre's hollow tread?
He marches along the corridor,
And the wainscot creaks beside thy bed
As he tracks his way through the jarring door,
Which the wild night-blast has opened.
There
is many a long day's ride between the
limestone waters, whose limpid depths deceive one
so when fording the frequent streams of Eastern
Tennessee
,
many a changing landscape 'ere, following
northwardly the same continuous vales, you reach
the hoarser torrents of Western Pennsylvania; yet
the Apalachians, though changing their name to the
Alleghanies, still preserve much the same features
as you trace them through that picturesque region
of Virginia whose romantic beauty I have elsewhere
delighted to describe.
[15]
[15]
See A Winter in the West, vol. ii.
But what cares the reader
where next I unlace my saddle-bags for him, or
how
I get over the intervening ground?
My horse had cast a shoe; and, stopping about
sunset at a blacksmith's cabin in one of the most
savage passes of the Alleghanies, a smutty-faced,
leather-aproned fellow was soon engaged in enabling
me again to encounter the flinty roads of the
mountains
,
when the operation was interrupted in the
manner
here related:
Pardon me, sir, cried a middle-aged traveller,
riding up to the smithy, and throwing himself from his
horse just as the shaggy-headed Vulcan, having taken
the heels of my nag in his lap, was proceeding to
pare off the hoof preparatory to fitting the shoe, which
he had hammered into shape and thrown on the black
soil beside him. Pardon me, sir, repeated the
stranger, raising his broad-brimmed beaver from a
head remarkable for what the phrenologist would
call the uncommon developement of ideality,
revealed
by the short locks which parted over a pair of
melancholy gray eyesmatters of moment make it
important for me to be a dozen miles hence before
night-fall, and you will place me, sir, under singular
obligations, by allowing this good fellow to attend to
my lame beast instantly.
The confident, and not ungraceful, manner in which
the stranger threw himself upon my courtesy,
sufficiently
marked him as a man of breeding, and I, of
course, complied at once with his request by giving
the necessary order to the blacksmith. His horse
was soon put in travelling trim, and, leaping actively
into the saddle, he regained the highway at a bound.
Checking his course for a moment, he turned in his
stirrups to thank me for the slight service I had
rendered
him, and, giving an address which I have now
forgotten, he added that, if ever I should enter's
valley, I might be sure of a cordial welcome from
the proprietor.
An hour afterward I was pursuing the same road,
and rapidly approaching the end of my day's journey.
The immediate district through which I was
travelling
had been settled by Germans in the early days
of Pennsylvaniaa scattered community, that had
been thrown somewhat in advance of the more
slowly-extended
settlements. In populousness and
fertility
it could not be compared with the regions on
the eastern side of the mountains; but the immense
stone barns, which, though few and far between,
occasionally
met the eye, not less than the language spoken
around me, indicated that the inhabitants were of the
same origin with the ignorant, but industrious,
denizens
of the lower country.
One of these stone buildings, an enormous and
ungainly edifice, stood upon a hill immediately at
the back of The Wolfswald Hotel, a miserable
wooden hovel, where I expected to pass the night;
and, while descending the hill in the rear of the
village, I had leisure to observe that it presented a
somewhat different appearance from the other
agricultural
establishments of the kind which I had met
with during the day. The massive walls were
pierced here and there with narrow windows, which
looked like loop-holes, and a clumsy chimney had
been fitted up by some unskilful mechanic against
one of the gables, with a prodigality of materials
which made its jagged top show like some old
turret
in the growing twilight. The history of this
grotesque
mansion, as I subsequently learned it, was
that of a hundred others scattered over our country,
and known generally in the neighbourhood as
Smith's, or Thompson's Folly. It had been
commenced upon an ambitious scale by a person
whose means were inadequate to its completion, and
had been sacrificed at a public sale when half
finished
,
in order to liquidate the claims of the mechanics
employed upon it. After that it had been used as a
granary for a while, and subsequently, being rudely
completed without any referenceto the original
plan, it had been occupied a sa hotel for a few years.
The ruinous inn had, however, for a long period, been
abandoned, and now enjoyed the general reputation
in the neighbourhood of being haunted; for ghosts
and goblins are always sure to take a big house off a
landlord's hands when he can get no other tenant.
We have not room pfor mynheer, said mine host,
laying his hand on my bridle as I rode up to the door
K
of a cabaret near this old building; while three or
four wagoners, smoking their pipes upon a bench
in front of the house, gave a grunt of confirmation to
the ungracious avowal of the boorish landlord. I
was too old a stager, however, to be so summarily
turned away from an inn at such an hour; and,
throwing
myself from my horse without farther parley, I
told the landlord to get me some supper, and we would
talk about lodging afterward.
It matters not how I got through the evening
until
the hour of bed-time arrived. I had soon
ascertained
that every bed in the hostelry was really
taken up, and that, unless I chose to share his straw
with one of the wagoners, who are accustomed to
sleep in their lumbering vehicles, there was no
resource
for me except to occupy the lonely building
which had first caught my eye on entering the
hamlet
.
Upon inquiring as to the accommodation it
afforded, I learned that, though long deserted by any
permanent occupants, it was still occasionally,
notwithstanding
its evil reputation, resorted to by the
passing traveller, and that one or two of the rooms
were yet in good repair, and partially furnished.
The good woman of the house, however, looked very
portentous when I expressed my determination to
take up my abode for the night in the haunted ruin,
though she tried ineffectually to rouse her sleeping
husband to guide me thither. Mine host had been
luxuriating too freely in some old whiskey brought
by a return wagon from the Monongahela, to heed
the jogging of his spouse, and I was obliged to act as
my own gentleman-usher.
The night was raw and gusty, as, with my
saddle-bags
in one hand and a stable-lantern in the other, I
sallied from the door of the cabaret, and struggled up
the broken hill in its rear, to gain my uninviting place
of rest. A rude porch, which seemed to have been
long unconscious of a door, admitted me into the
building; and, tracking my way with some difficulty
through a long corridor, of which the floor appeared
to have been ripped open here and there in order to
apply the boards to some other purpose, I came to a
steep and narrow stair-case without any balusters.
Cautiously ascending, I found myself in a large hall
which opened on the hill-side, against which the house
was built. It appeared to be lighted by a couple of
windows only, which were partially glazed in some
places, and closed up in others by rough boards
nailed across in lieu of shutters. It had evidently,
however, judging from two or three ruinous pieces of
furniture, been inhabited. A heavy door, whose
oaken
latch and hinges, being incapable of rust, were
still in good repair, admitted me into an adjoining
chamber. This had evidently been the dormitory
of the establishment, where the guests, after the
gregarious and most disagreeable fashion of our
country
,
were wont to be huddled together in one large
room. The waning moon, whose bright autumnal
crescent was just beginning to rise above the hills,
shone through a high circular window full into
this apartment, and indicated a comfortable-looking
truckle-bed at the farther end before the rays of my
miserable lantern had shot beyond the threshold.
Upon approaching the pallet I observed some
indications
of that end of the apartment being still
occasionally
occupied. The heavy beams which
traversed
the ceiling appeared to have been recently
whitewashed. There was a small piece of carpet
on the floor beside the bed; and a decrepit table
and an arm-chair, whose burly body was
precariously
supported upon three legs, were holding an
innocent
tte--tte
in the corner adjacent.
I've had a rougher roosting-place than this,
thought I, as I placed my lantern upon the table,
and, depositing my saddle-bags beneath it, began to
prepare myself for rest.
My light having now burned low, I was
compelled
to expedite the operation of undressing, which
prevented me from examining the rest of the
apartment
;
and, indeed, although I had, when first
welcoming
with some pleasure the idea of sleeping in
a haunted house, determined fully to explore it for
my own satisfaction before retiring for the night, yet
fatigue or caprice made me now readily abandon the
intention just when my means for carrying it into
execution were being withdrawn; for the candle
expired
while I was opening the door of the lantern
to throw its light more fully upon a mass of drapery
which seemed to be suspended across the farther
end of the chamber. The total darkness that
momentarily
ensued blinded me completely; but in the
course of a few moments the shadows became more
distinct, and gradually, by the light of the moon, I
was able to make out that the object opposite me
was only a large, old-fashioned bedstead, prodigally
hung with tattered curtains. I gave no farther
thought to the subject, but, turning over, composed
myself to rest.
Sleep, however, whom Shakspeare alone has had
the sense to personify as a woman, was coy in
coming
to my couch. The old mansion wheezed and
groaned like a broken-winded buffalo hard pressed
by the hunter. The wind, which had been high,
became soon more boisterous than ever, and the
clouds hurried so rapidly over the face of the moon
that her beams were as broken as the crevices of
the ruined building through which they fell. A
sudden gust would every now and then sweep
through the long corridor below, and make the
rickety stair-case crack as if it yielded to the feet of
some portly passenger. Again the blast would die
away in a sullen moan, as if baffled on some wild
night-errand; while anon it would swell in
monotonous
surges, which came booming upon the ear
like the roar of a distant ocean.
I am not easily discomposed; and perhaps none
of these uncouth sounds would have given annoyance,
if the clanging of a window-shutter had not been
added to the general chorus, and effectually kept me
from sleeping. My nerves were at last becoming
sensibly affected by its ceaseless din, and, wishing
to cut short the fit of restlessness which I found
growing upon me, I determined to rise, and descend
the stairs at the risk of my neck, to try and secure
the shutter so as to put an end to the nuisance.
But now, as I rose from my bed for this purpose,
I found myself subjected to a new source of
annoyance
.
The mocking wind, which had appeared to
K 2
me more than once to syllable human sounds, came
at length upon my ear distinctly charged with tones
which could not be mistaken. It was the
hard-suppressed
breathing of a man. I listened, and it ceased
with a slight gasp, like that of one labouring under
suffocation. I listened still, and it came anew,
stronger and more fully upon my ear. It was like
the thick suspirations of an apoplectic. Whence it
proceeded I knew not; but that it was near me I was
certain. A suspicion of robberypossibly
assassination
flashed
upon me; but was instantly
discarded
as foreign to the character of the people
among whom I was travelling.
The moonlight now fell full upon the curtained
bed opposite to me, and I saw the tattered drapery
move, as if the frame upon which it was suspended
were agitated. I watched, I confess, with some
peculiar
feelings of interest. I was not alarmed, but
an unaccountable anxiety crept over me. At length
the curtain parted, and a naked human leg was
protruded
through its folds; the foot came with a numb,
dead-like sound to the floor; resting there, it
seemed
to me at least half a minute before the body to
which it belonged was disclosed to my view.
Slowly, then, a pallid and unearthly-looking figure
emerged from the couch, and stood with its dark
lineaments clearly drawn against the dingy curtain
beside it. It appeared to be balancing itself for a
moment, and then began to move along from the bed.
But there was something horribly unnatural in its
motions. Its feet came to the floor with a dull, heavy
sound, as if there were no vitality in them. Its
arms hung apparently paralyzed by its side, and
the only nerve or rigidity in its frame appeared
about its head: the hair, which was thin and
scattered
,
stood out in rigid tufts from its brow, the eyes
were dilated and fixed with expression of ghastly
horror, and the petrified lips moved not as the
hideous
moaning which came from the bottom of its chest
escaped them.
It began to move across the floor in the direction
of my bed, its knees at every step being drawn up
with a sudden jerk nearly to its body, and its feet
coming to the ground as if they were moved by some
mechanical impulse, and were wholly wanting in the
elasticity of living members. It approached my
bed; and mingled horror and curiosity kept me still.
It came and stood beside it, and, child-like, I still
clung to my couch, moving only to the farther side.
Slowly, and with the same unnatural foot-falls, it
pursued me thither, and again I changed my position.
It placed itself then at the foot of my bedstead, and,
moved by its piteous groans, I tried to look calmly
at it; I endeavoured to rally my thoughts, to reason
with myself, and even to speculate upon the nature
of the object before me. One idea that went through
my brain was too extravagant not to remember. I
thought, among other things, that the phantom was
a corpse, animated for the moment by some galvanic
process in order to terrify me. Then, as I
recollected
that there was no one in the village to carry
such a trick into effectsupposing even the
experiment
possibleI rejected the supposition. How,
too, could those awful moans be produced from an
inanimate being? And yet it seemed as if
everything
about it were dead, except the mere capability
of moving its feet and uttering those unearthly
expressions
of suffering. The spectre, however, if so
it may be called, gave me but little opportunity for
reflection. Its ghastly limbs were raised anew with
the same automaton movement; and, placing one of
its feet upon the bottom of my bed, while its glassy
eyes were fixed steadfastly upon me, it began
stalking
toward my pillow.
I confess that I was now in an agony of terror.
I leaped from the couch and fled the apartment.
The keen-sightedness of fear enabled me to
discover
an open closet upon the other side of the hall.
Springing through the threshold, I closed the door
quickly after me. It had neither lock nor bolt; but
the closet was so narrow that, by placing my feet
upon the opposite wall, I could brace my back
against the door so as to hold it against any human
assailant who had only his arms for a lever.
The sweat of mortal fear started thick upon my
forehead as I heard the supernatural tread of that
strange visitant approaching the spot. It seemed an
age before his measured steps brought him to the
door. He struck; the blow was sullen and hollow,
as if dealt by the hand of a corpse; it was like the
dull sound of his own feet upon the floor. He struck
the door again, and the blow was more feeble and
the sound duller than before. Surely, I thought,
the hand of no living man could produce such a
sound.
I know not whether it struck again, for now its
thick breathing became so loud that even the
moanings
which were mingled with every suspiration,
became
inaudible. At last they subsided entirely,
becoming
at first gradually weaker, and then audible
only in harsh, sudden sobs, whose duration I could
not estimate, from their mingling with the blast
which still swept the hill-side.
The long, long night had at last an end, and the
cheering sounds of the awakening farm-yard told me
that the sun was up, and that I might venture from my
retreat. But if it were still with a slight feeling of
trepidation that I opened the door of the closet, what
was my horror when a human body fell inward upon
me, even as I unclosed it. The weakness,
however
,
left me the moment I had sprung from that
hideous embrace. I stood for an instant in the fresh
air and reviving light of the hall, and then proceeded
to move the body to a place where I could examine
its features more favourably. Great heaven! what
was my horror upon discovering that they were
those of the interesting stranger whom I had met on
the road the evening before.
The rest of my story is soon told. The
household
of the inn were rapidly collected, and half the
inhabitants of the hamlet identified the body as that
of a gentleman well known in the county. But
even after the coroner's inquest was summoned, no
light was thrown upon his fate, until my drunken
landlord was brought before the jury. His own
testimony
would have gone for little; but he produced
a document which in a few words told the whole
story. It was a note left with him the evening
before
by Mr. , to be handed to me as soon as I
should arrive at the inn. In it the stranger briefly
thanked me for the slight courtesy rendered him at the
blacksmith's, and mentioning that, notwithstanding
all percaution, his horse had fallen dead lame, and he
should be obliged to pass the night at Wolfswald,
he would still farther trespass on my kindness, by
begging to occupy the same apartment with me. It
stated that, owing to some organic affection of his
system, he had long been subject to a species of
somnambulism, resembling the most grievous fits of
nightmare, during which, however, he still preserved
sufficient powers of volition to move to the bed of
his servant, who, being used to his attacks, would of
course take the necessary means to alleviate them.
The note concluded by saying that the writer had
less diffidence in preferring his request to be my
room-mate, inasmuch as, owing to the crowded state
of the house, I was sure of not having a chamber to
myself in any event.
The reason why the ill-fated gentleman had been
so urgent to press homeward was now but too
apparent
;
and my indignation at the drunken innkeeper,
in neglecting to hand me his note, knew no bounds.
Alas! in the years that have since gone by, there
has been more than one moment when the
reproaches
which I then lavished upon him have come
home to myself; for the piteously appealing look of
the dying man long haunted me, and I sometimes
still hear his moan in the autumnal blast that wails
around my casement.
[END OF SCENES AMONG THE ALLEGHANIES.]
QUEEN MEG.
[A sketch near home.]
An
American, Washington Irving tells us, need
not cross the Atlantic to see Nature in her beauty
and grandeur; and we Manhattanese (by Mr. Cooper
so called) certainly need not wander far from our
brick and mortar homes to behold her under her
most wild and picturesque aspect.
It was thus at least I thought as one summer's
morning, a year or two since, I surveyed a scene
in one of the river counties a few hours' sail from
New York. It was an extensive morass, grown up
with thickets of alder and other amphibious shrubs,
and marked by some peculiarities equally desolate
and singular. I viewed it, indeed, from a hill-side
of fine pasture land, but on my left there was only
an unreclaimed moor, and a tall, heavy forest
bounded
it upon the right; while immediately before me
a rocky knoll rose from the midst of the swamp, with
a single pine tree crowning its summit. An Indian
lodge, built of loose stones, and roofed with withered
brush, was illy sheltered by its high branches; and
a tall Indian woman, a last surviver of the old tribes
of the Hudson, stood beside the lonely tree, so
emblematic
of herself. A troubled sky formed the
background
of the picture, which wanted but the hues
of autumn to make it one of the most peculiar and
characteristic that ever I beheld.
My guide from the highway to this lonely spot
was an English ditcher, a hardy, active little fellow,
who had recently been set to work by the
proprietor
to reclaim the swamp, and beneath whose labours
and those of a grizzly headed negro, who acts as
his aid-de-camp in drawing lines of circumvallation
around the Indian fastness, the morass before another
season will probably be converted into a green
meadow
,
and its present tenant be compelled to seek
some new retreat. The little Englishman was very
communicative as he piloted me through field and
wood to the scene of his improvements, which he
informed me the Indian woman regarded with a
jealous eye. She belonged, he told me, to a tribe
that had once owned all the region hereabouts, and,
when they sold their land to the ancient Dutch
family, who were the earliest white proprietors in
this part of the country, they reserved the right of
hunting over it until their last descendant was no
more. Queen Meg, as he called her, was the
only full-blood remaining, but she had a brood of
half-breeds around her, who had long lived from hand
to mouth in this place; and with all his profesional
zeal for reclaiming an unprofitable waste, the worthy
ditcher had some very grave doubts about the
propriety
of driving these poor wretches out of their
last fastness. As I knew that some of the old
families
on the south side of Long Island hold their
extensive
possessions by some such tenure, and that, till
within a very few years, there were some of the
aborigines remaining, with whom they religiously
observed it, I gave all credence at the time to the
peasant's account; though I subsequently
ascertained
that there was not the least foundation for his
story: the present incumbents having wandered
hither from another part of the country, and squatted
upon this tract, much to the annoyance of the
neighbourhood
,
whose poultry-yards and corn-cribs they
are suspected of laying occasionally under
contribution
.
They had taken possession of the spot,
however
,
several years before the English peasant had
emigrated, and his story was probably made up,
almost unconsciously, of his own game-law
reminiscences
and the idle talk of the country people around.
In the meantime we had entered upon the morass,
and, coming out from a thicket, found ourselves
within
two hundred yards of the cabin, for which I was
about to make in a direct course.
Lord, sir, exclaimed my guide, you'd be up
to your neck in the moss in a moment, if you
attempt
to go that way! You've got a good distance
to go yet before you reach that knoll, if you really
wish to take a nearer look at the old woman.
He then added that there were two ways of
approaching
a bridge which communicated with a
winding path leading ultimately to the retreat. One,
the longest, led around through the pasture, from
which I have already said there was such a
picturesque
view of the solitary hut; the other, which was
shorter, was only over a bit of bog, and gave you
no stone walls to climb. The bog he thought no
obstacle, but the stone walls, which on my return I
leaped with ease, he considered worthy of going
through a mile of mud to avoid. I don't think that I
L
ever did a more simple thing than take the opinion of
a ditcher as to the most feasible path with such a
choice. But I did take it, and, jumping from one tuft
of rushes to another, but missing my foothold half
the time, I plunged now in mud up to my knees,
and then slipped in swamp water that spattered me
from head to foot; while splash and tramp my
amphibious
conductor went on, as coolly and
unconcernedly
as if treading on a turnpike. I would as
soon have followed a
Jack-o'-lantern
. At last we
came to the bridge he had spoken of. It was a single
stick of timber laid over a brook which crept through
the marsh, and, pointing out a path which led to the
left, my conductor entered upon one which ran in
an opposite direction, and, bidding me good-morning,
disappeared in the forest.
My route continued to wind through close thickets
over the marsh. It was strewn here and there,
however
,
with furze and dead branches, which prevent
one from sinking into the oozy soil, and soon led to
the knoll which formed the centre of the labyrinth.
Before reaching it, I was overtaken by the
gentleman
to whom the property belonged, and with whom
I had parted a half an hour before on the highway.
The inmates of the hovel were all gathered around
the door as we approached, and some of them, at
sight of my friend, seemed to slink away like guilty
things. Certain reminiscences of devastated timber
and peeled saplings in the adjacent forest were
probably
at the moment operative with them. A more
wretched-looking set of objects I never saw. Three
generations were represented among them. The
youngest, most numerous and most squalid, were
stupid-looking negroes, with perhaps a few drops of
Indian blood in their veins. The second were negro
and Indian half-bloods; one of whom only wore a
knife in his belt, and stepped so lightly over the sod
that his forest descent was not to be mistaken. But
the old crone, who was the progenitress of the gang,
was as fine a looking specimen of her race as I have
seen at her years. She was at least six inches taller
than any of her degenerate descendants; and her
features had that haughty hawk-like cast which is
recognisable in all the portraits of the extinct
aborigines
of New York, and which I have but seldom
seen among the more mercurial tribes of the west.
The forehead was lofty and massive, though
somewhat retreating; the nose strongly aquiline,
but broad at its base, with the open nostril so
characteristic
of the Indian; the mouth rather large,
and the chin full, but neither of them giving that
square and wolf-like expression to the lower features
which characterizes the Winnebagos and other tribes
of the north-west.
The old woman, who probably stood somewhat
in awe of my companion, received us very
graciously
;
but when we followed her into the cabin, she
resumed her employment of basket-weaving, which
our approach had interrupted, as assiduously as if it
were her only means of support. Upon entering
into conversation with her, I found that she knew
nothing of the tribe to which she originally belonged,
much less could she speak its language. She had
been adopted into some white family in her infancy,
when her father's people moved off to the west.
Upon the death of her protectress, she had married
an Indian belonging to a band that had refused to
join the emigrating tribes. He dwelt some twenty
miles from this place, on the opposite side of the
Hudson, in the Forest of Deane, (a name which
carried my memory away to the bright Ohio, and
the graves of two hunters who once followed the
chase in this district.
[16]
[16]
See A Winter in the West, vol. i., letter.
) He, too, with all his
associates
of the same race, soon disappeared from the
earth; and Old Meg, the last of the full-bloods
in this region of country, after maintaining herself
for many years by making baskets, took another
husbanda mulattoto cheer her solitude. With
him she had roved the country after a sort of gipsy
fashion for many years, and when he too died and
left her, she came with her grandchildren to this
secluded spot, where, for some ten years past, the
fences of the adjacent fields, and possibly the orchards
and hen-roosts of the neighbouring farmers, had
suffered not a little for their vicinage. My friend,
who both felt it his duty to abate such a nuisance
to the neighbourhood, and was, besides, unfeignedly
desirous of bettering the condition of the poor
wretches, made a proffer of immediate and
permanent
employment for her children. But, half-naked
and poverty-stricken as was each member of the
squalid crew, except the old crone herself, she
replied
with haughty impatience to the least suggestion
of the lusty and lazy members of her family going
out to day's labour, while her eye kindled with true
savage ferocity when it was hinted that their
devastations
among the young timber must be put a stop
to. Her pride and prejudices of blood appeared to
be as strong as if she still belonged to some wild
tribe of the wilderness, and both were brought into
play when her confused ideas of what she deemed
her natural rights were trenched upon. I diverted
her feelings, by telling her something of the
condition
of her people in more remote parts of the country,
about which she seemed almost painfully curious; and
then, taking up a basket which she had just finished,
I slipped a dollar into her hand, and, thridding the
swamp once more, resumed the public road.
The scene thus described was in Dutchess county,
in the midst of a long-settled and highly-cultivated
district; and, neglected as the tract had been for
years, the hand of improvement had at last seized it
within its plastic gripe. The summer tourist who
looks for it, in another season will probably find
smooth meadows where I encountered a tangled
swamp, or seek in vain amid the ploughman's
furrows
for the Indian trail of this miserable remnant
of the aboriginal race. The allusion to the Forest
of Deane, a scene equally wild, and still nearer to
our commercial metropolis, will be best understood
from the details of the following story:
L 2
THE TWIN-DOOMED.
Twin-born they live, twin-born they die; in grief and joy
twin-hearted
;
Like buds upon one parent bough, twin-doom'd, in death not
parted.
The
superstition imbodied in the above distich is
very common in those parts of New York and New
Jersey which were originally settled by a Dutch
population. It had its influence with Dominie
Dewitt
from the moment that his good woman
presented
him with the twin-brothers whose fortunes are
the subject of our story. He regarded them from
the first as children of fateas boons that were but
lent to their parents, to be reclaimed so soon that it
was a waste of feeling, if not an impious
intermed-dling
with Providence, to allow parental affection to
devolve in its full strength upon them.
They were waifs, he thought, upon the waters of
life, which it hardly concerned his heart to claim.
The death of the mother, which soon followed the
birth of the twins, confirmed this superstitious
feeling
,
and their forms were henceforth ever associated
with images of gloom in the breast of their only
surviving
parent. Old Dewitt, however, though a
selfish
and contracted man, was not wanting in the
ideas of duty which became his station as a
Christian
pastor. He imparted all the slender advantages
of education which were shared by his other children,
to the two youngest; and, though they had not an
equal interest in his affections with the rest, he still
left them unvisited by any harshness whatsoever.
The indifference of their father was, in fact, all of
which the twins had to complain.
The consequence was natural; the boys, being
left so much to themselves, became all in all to each
other. Their pursuits were in every respect the
same. At school, or in any quarrel or scene of
boyish
faction, the two Dewitt's were always named as
one individual; and as they shot up toward
manhood
,
they were equally inseparable. If Ernest
went out to drive a deer, Rupert always must
accompany
him to shoot partridges by the way; and
if Rupert borrowed his brother's rifle for the larger
game, Ernest in turn would shoulder the smooth-bore
of the other, to bring home some birds at the same
time. Together, though, they always went.
The Forest of Deane, which has kept its name
and dimensions almost until the moment when I
write, was the scene of their early sports. The
wild deer at that time still frequented the Highlands
of the Hudson; and the rocky passes which led
down from this romantic forest to the river, were
often scoured by these active youths in pursuit of a
hunted buck which would here take the water.
Many a time, then, have the cliffs of Dunderberg
echoed their woodland shout, when the blood of their
quarry dyed the waves which wash its base. Their
names as dead shots and keen hunters were well
known in the country below; and there are those
yet living in the opposite village of Peekskill who
have feasted upon bear's meat which the
twin-huntsmen
carried thither from the Forest of Deane.
Our story, however, has but little to do with the
early career of the Rockland hunters, and I have
merely glanced at the years of their life which were
passed in that romantic region of a state whose
scenic beauties are, perhaps, unmatched in variety
by any district of the same size, in order to show
how the dispositions of the twins were fused and
moulded together in early life. It was on the banks
of the Ohio (Oh-ey-o, or Beautiful River, as it is
called in the mellifluous dialect of the Senecas) that
the two foresters of Deane first began to play a part
in the world's drama. As the larger game became
scarce on the Hudson, they had migrated to this
then remote region; and here they became as
famous
for their boldness and address in tracing the
Indian marauder to his lair, as they were previously
noted for their skill in striking a less dangerous
quarry.
The courage and enterprise of the two brothers
made them great favourites in the community of
hunters, of which they were now members. A
frontier settler always depends more upon his rifle
than on his farm for subsistence during the infancy
of his improvements; and this habit of taking
so often to the woods, brings him continually into
collision with the Indians. It has ever, indeed, been
the main source of all our border difficulties. The
two Dewitts had their full share of these wild
adventures
.
They were both distinguished for their
fears of daring; but upon one occasion Rupert, in
particular, gave such signal proofs of conduct and
bravery, that upon the fall of the chief man in the
settlement, in a skirmish wherein young Dewitt
amply revenged his death, Rupert was unanimously
elected captain of the station, and all the cabins
within the stockade were placed under his especial
guardianship. Ernest witnessed the preferment of
his brother with emotions of pride as lively as if it
had been conferred upon himself; and so much did
the twins seem actuated by one soul, that in all
measures that were taken by the band of pioneers,
they insensibly followed the lead of either brother.
The superstition which had given a fated character
to their lives at home, followed, in a certain degree,
even here; and their characters were supposed to be
so thoroughly identified, their fortunes so completely
bound up in each other, that, feeling no harm could
overtake the one which was not shared by the other,
their followers had equal confidence in both, and
volunteered, with the same alacrity, upon any
border
expedition, when either of the brothers chanced
to lead.
It was about this time that General Wayne, who
had been sent by Government to crush the allied
forces of the north-western Indians, established his
camp upon the Ohio, with the intention of passing
the winter in disciplining his raw levies, and in
preparing
for the winter campaign, which was
afterward
so brilliantly decided near the Miami of the
Lakes. The mail route from Pittsburg to Beaver
now passes the field where these troops were
marshalled
,
and the traveller may still see the rude
fire-places
of the soldiery blackening the rich pastures
through which he rides. He may see, toobut
I must not anticipate the character of my story,
whose truth is indicated by more than one silent
memento.
The western militia, large bodies of which had
been drafted into Wayne's army, were never
remarkable
for miltary subordination; of which, not to
mention the Black Hawk war of 1832, the more
notable campaigns with the British afforded many
an instance. They are a gallant set of men, but
they have an invincible propensity each man to
fight on his own hook; and not merely that, but,
when not employed upon immediate active service,
it is almost impossible to keep them together. They
become disgusted with the monotony of military
duties; revolt at their exacting precision, and,
though full of fight when fight is to be had, are
eager to disperse upon the least intermission of
active service, and come and go as individual caprice
may lead them. General Wayne's camp, indeed,
was for a while a complete caravanserai, where not
merely one or two, but whole troops of volunteers
could be seen arriving and departing at any hour.
This, to the spirit of an old soldier, who had been
bred in the armies of Washington, was unendurable.
But as these flitting gentry constituted the
sharp-shooters
,
upon whom he chiefly depended, the
veteran officer bore with them as long as possible,
in the hope that, by humouring the volunteers, he
might best attach them to the service for which
this species of force was all-important.
At length, however, matters reached such a pass
that the army was in danger of complete
disorganization
,
and a new system must necessarily be
adopted
.
Mad Anthony, as Wayne's men called him,
(who, when he really took a thing in hand, never did
it by halves,) established martial law in its most
rigid form, and proclaimed that every man on his
muster-roll, of whatsoever rank, who should pass
beyond
the lines without a special permit from himself,
should be tried as a deserter, and suffer accordingly,
The threatened severity seemed only to multiply
the desertions; but so keen were the backwoods
militiamen in making their escape from what they
now considered an outrageous tyranny, that, with all
the vigilance of the regular officers, it was impossible
to seize any, to make a military example of them.
Fresh volunteers, however, occasionally supplied
the place of those who thus absented themselves
without leave; and one morning in particular, a great
sensation was created throughout the camp by the
arrival of a new body of levies, which, though
numerically
small, struck every one as the finest company
that had yet been mustered beneath the standard of
Wayne. The troop consisted of mounted riflemen,
thoroughly armed and equipped after the border
fashion, and clad in the belted hunting-frock, which
is the most graceful of modern costumes. Both
horses and men seemed picked for special service,
and their make and movement exhibited that union
of strength and agility which, alike in man and beast,
constitutes the perfection of that amphibious force
the
dragoon;
whose original character, perhaps, is
only represented in modern armies by the mounted
rangers of our western prairies.
The commandant of this corps seemed worthy to
be the leader of so gallant a band. His martial
figure, the horse he rode, and all his personal
equipments
,
were in every respect complete, and suited to
each other. The eagle feather in his wolf-skin cap
told of a keen eye and a long shot; the quilled
pouch, torn with the wampum belt, which sustained
his hatchet and pistols, from the body of some
swarthy foeman, spoke of the daring spirit and iron
arm; while the panther-skin, which formed the
housings of his sable roan, betrayed that the rider
had vanquished a foe more terrible than the red
savage himself. His horse, a cross of the heavy
Conestoga with a mettlesome Virginia racer, bore
himself as if proud of so gallant a master; and as
the fringed leggin pressed his flank, while the young
officer faced the general in passing in salute before
him, he executed his passages with all the graceful
precision of a charger trained in the
mange
.
A murmur of admiration ran along the ranks as
this gallant cavalier paced slowly in front of the
soldiery, and reined up his champing steed before
the line of his tall followers as they were at length
marshalled upon the parade. But the sensation
which his air and figure excited was almost equally
shared by another individual, who had hitherto ridden
beside him in the van, but who now drew up his
rough Indian pony apart from the rest, as if claiming
no share in the lot of the new comers.
It was a sunburnt youth, whose handsome features
afforded so exact a counterpart of those of the leader
of the band, that, were it not for the difference of
their equipments, either of the two might at first be
taken for the other; and, even upon a narrower
inspection, the dark locks and more thoughtful
countenance of Ernest would alone have been
distinguished
from the brown curls and animated
features
of his sanguine and high-spirited brother. The
former, as we have mentioned, had drawn off from
the corps the moment it halted and formed for
inspection
.
He now stood leaning upon his rifle, his
plain leather hunting-shirt contrasting not less with
the gay-coloured frocks of his companions than did
the shaggy coat of his stunted pony with the sleek
hides of their clean-limb coursers. His look, too,
was widely different from the blithe and buoyant one
which lighted their features; and his eye and lip
betrayed a mingled expression of sorrow and scorn
as he glanced from the lithe and noble figure of his
brother to the buckram regulars, whose platoons
were marshalled near.
The new levies were duly mustered; and, after the
rules and articles of war had been read aloud to them,
several camp regulations were promulgated; and
among the rest the recent order of the
commander-in-chief
,
whereby a breach of discipline, in going
beyond the chain of sentinels, incurred the penalty
of desertion.
No, by heaven! shouted Ernest, when this was
read; Rupert, Rupert, my brother, you shall never
bear such slavery! Awayaway from this roofless
prison, and if your life is what they want, let them
have it in the woodsin your own way. But bind
not yourself to these written laws, that bear chains
M
and death in every letter. Away, Rupert, away from
this accursed thraldom! And, leaping into his
saddle
before half these words were uttered, he seized
the bridle rein of his brother and nearly urged him
from the spot while pouring out his passionate
appeal.
By the soul of Washington! roared old Wayne,
what mad youngster is this? Nay, seize him not,
added he, good-humouredly, seeing that Rupert did
not yield to his brother's violence, and that the other
checked himself and withdrew abashed from the
parade, as a coarse laugh, excited by his Quixotism,
stung his ear. By the soul of Washington, cried
the general, repeating his favourite oath, but ye're
a fine brace of fellows; and Uncle Sam has so much
need of both of you, that he has no idea of letting
more than one go. And, calling Rupert to his side,
he spoke with a kindness to the young officer that
was probably meant to secure a new recruit in his
brother; who had, however, disappeared from the
scene.
The parade was now dismissed, and, so soon as
Rupert had taken possession of his quarters, and
seen that his men and horses were all properly taken
care of, he parted from his comrades to take a
farewell
of Ernest, who awaited him in a clump of trees
upon the bank of the river, a short distance from the
camp. Ernest seemed to have fully recovered his
equanimity; but though, youth-like, ashamed of the
fit of heroics which had placed his brother in a
somewhat
ridiculous position a few hours before, he had
not altered the views which he had entertained from
the first about Rupert's taking service under General
Wayne.
You will not start homeward to-night? cried
Rupert, at length changing a subject it was useless
to discuss.
Yes, to-night I must be off, and that soon, too,
Rupert. Little Needji must pace his thirty miles
before midnight. I don't know that I have done
wisely in coming so far with you; but, in truth, I
wanted to see how our hunters would look among
the continentals Mad Anthony has brought with him.
Wait till we come to the fighting, Ernest, and
the old general will soon find out who's who. His
regulars may do in civilized war, but a man must
live in the woods to know how to fight in them.
Ay, ay, that's it; a hound may do for a deer that
isn't worth a powder-horn stopper upon a panther
track. But you must remember, continued his
brother, fixing his eyes sadly upon Rupert, that you
will have to fight just in the way that the general
tells youwhich means, I take it, that real manhood
must go for nothing. Why, there's not a drummer
in the ranks that will not know his duty better than
you; ay, and for aught I see, be able to do it, too, as
well.
A flush of prideperhaps of paincrossed the
countenance of the young officer as his brother thus
spoke; and, laying his hand upon his arm, added,
with the indignant tone of a caged hunter, Why,
Rupert, you must not dare even, soldier that you
now are, to take the bush, and keep your hand in by
killing a buck occasionally.
Believe it not, Ernest, My men will never
stand that for all the Mad Anthonys or mad devils in
the universe.
You must, you must, my brother, answered
Ernest, shaking his head; and now you begin to
see why I would not volunteer upon this service. I
am quieter than you, and, therefore, saw farther into
matters than you did, when you chose to come hither
rather than give up the command of your company.
But where's the use of looking back upon a cold trail?
You are now one of Uncle Sam's men, and Heaven
knows when he will let go his grip upon you.
Conversing thus, the brothers had walked some
distance. The moon was shining brightly above
them, and a silver coil of light trailing along the
rippling
Ohio seemed to lure them onward with the
river's course. At length, however, the more
considerate
Ernest deemed it prudent that they should
part; and, catching the pony, which had followed
them like a dog, he mounted and prepared to move
off. But Rupert would not yet leave his brother and
retrace his steps to camp. It might be long before
they should meet againthey who had never before
thus partedwho had been always inseparable, alike
in counsel and in action, and who were now about, for
the first time, to be severed when stout hearts and
strong hands might best be mutually serviceable.
I don't think I will leave you just yet, Ernest,
I may as well walk with you as far as the branch;
and we are hardly without shot of the soldier who
is standing sentry yonder. What a mark the
fellow's
cap would be from that clump of pawpaws!
Yes, said Ernest, lifting his rifle from his lap
as the musket gleamed in the moonlight. I am
almost tempted to pick that shining smooth-bore out
of his fingers, just to show how ridiculous it is to
carry such shooting-irons as that in the woods. But
come, the time has gone by for such jokes; if you
will go farther with me, let us push on. They
reached the branch, or brook, and crossed it; and
still they continued increasing the distance between
themselves and the camp.
Well, I suppose we must now really bid
goodby
,
exclaimed Rupert at last, seizing the hand of
his brother. But here, Ernest; I wish you would
carry home my Indian belt and these other fixins;
they will remind you of old times if I'm kept away
long, and the sutler will give me something to wear
more in camp fashion. As he spoke thus he tied
the wampum sash around the waist of his brother,
and, while throwing the Indian pouch over his
shoulder
,
their arms met in the fold of brotherhood, and
the twins parted with that silent embrace. Rupert,
rapidly retracing his steps toward the camp, soon
reached the brook, and a half hour's walk might yet
have enabled him to regain his quarters in safety;
but the finger of Fate was upon him, and he, who had
already been led away from duty by the strong lure of
affection, was still farther induced to violate it by an
instinct not less impulsive in the bosom of a borderer.
Pausing to drink at the rivulet, Rupert, in
stooping
over the bank, thought that he discovered a fresh
moccasin-print, and, bending down the branches
which embowered the spot, so as to bring the rays
M 2
of the moon full upon it, a more thorough
examination
fully satisfied him that an Indian had lately
passed that way. A regular soldier, upon thus
discovering
traces of a spy in the neighbourhood of the
camp, would at once have reported it to the officer of
the day, and allowed his superior to take measures
accordingly. But such an idea never occurred to
the backwood ranger. He had discovered an Indian
trail, and there were but two things, in his opinion,
to be done: first to find out its direction, and then
to follow it to the death. A sleuth-hound upon the
scent of blood could not be impelled by a more
irresistible
instinct than that which urged the fiery
Rupert
on that fatal chase.
It boots not to tell the various chances of his hunt;
how here he missed the trail upon rocky ground,
where the moccasin had left no print; how there he
was obliged to feel for it in some tangled copse,
where no betraying moonbeam fell; and how at last,
when the stars grew dim, and the gray dawn had
warmed into ruddy day, he for the first time rested
his wearied limbs upon the banks of a stream, where
the trail disappeared entirely.
Let us now follow the fortunes of the doomed
Ernest, who, like the hero of classic story, bore about
his person the fatal gifts that were to work his
destruction
.
Not a half hour elapsed from the time that
he parted from his brother, before he found himself
the prisoner of a sergeant's guard, which had been
despatched to take or slay the deserter, Rupert
Dewitt.
Apprehending no ill, Ernest allowed himself to be
seized; the equipments he had just received from
Rupert, not less than the similitude of likeness to his
twin-brother, in the opinion of the party that captured
him, fully established his identity; and the
horror
which he felt at discovering how Rupert had
for-feited
his life, was almost counterbalanced by a thrill
of joy, as it suggested itself to the high-souled Ernest
that he might so far keep up the counterfeit as to
become
a sacrifice in place of the brother on whom he
doted. The comrades of Rupert, who might have
detected the imposition, chanced to be off on fatigue
parties in different directions; and this, together
with the summary mode of proceeding that was
adopted upon his reaching camp, favoured his
design
.
A drum-head court martial was instantly called to
decide upon the fate of a prisoner to whose guilt
there seemed to be, alas! too many witnesses. The
road that he had taken, the distance from camp, the
time of night he had chosen to wander so far from
the linesnay, the fact of his leaving his
blood-horse
at the stable, as if fearing detection through
him, and stealing off upon an Indian ponyall
seemed to make out a flagrant case of desertion.
But why dwell upon these painful details of an affair
which was so amply canvassed in all its bearings,
throughout the western country, long afterward?
Let the reader be content with the bare historical
fact, that the ill-starred militiaman was condemned
to be shot to death as a deserter, under the
circumstances
as I have stated them. It seemed a terrible
proceeding when these attending circumstances were
afterward reviewed; but, though at the time
General
Wayne was much censured for signing that young
man's death-warrant, yet both military men and
civilians, who knew the condition of his army, have
agreed that it was this one example alone which
prevented that army from falling to pieces.
The heart of Ernest was so thoroughly made up
to meet the fate which was intended for his brother,
that his pulses did not change in a single throb when
he was told that he had but an hour to prepare
himself for death. The sooner that it be over, the
better for Rupert, exclaimed he, mentally. And
then, man as he was, his eyes filled with tears when
he thought of the anguish which that darling brother
would suffer at learning the fate which had overtaken
him.
Oh, God! he cried, aloud, clasping his hands
above his head as he paced the narrow guard-room
in which he was now immuredGod of Heaven!
that they would but place us together with our rifles
in the forest, and send this whole army to hunt us
down. And the features of the wild bush-fighter
lighted up with a grim smile as he thought of keeping
a battalion at bay in the greenwood, and crippling it
with his single arm. The proud thought seemed to
bear with it a new train of views. If Rupert knew,
said he, pausing in his walkif he but dreamed
how matters were going, he would soon collect a
score of rifles to strike with, and take me from
beneath
their very bayonets. But this is madness
Ay! that it is, my fine fellow, answered the
sentinel who guarded his door, and who now, hearing
the last words uttered while the steps of those who
were to have the final charge of the prisoner were
heard upon the stair, thought it incumbent upon him
to remind the youth where he was. Ernest
compressed
his lip, and, drawing himself to his full height as
he wheeled and faced his escort, motioned to them
to lead on. He was at once conducted to the
esplanade
in front of the camp, upon the river's bluff.
The morning was gusty and drizzling, as if nature
shuddered in tears at the sacrifice of one who, from
his infancy, had worshipped her so faithfully. The
young hunter scarcely cast a glance at the military
array as he stepped forward to take the fatal position
from which he was never to move more. Pride
alone seemed to prompt the haughty mien and
averted, but unblenching, eye, that were, in fact,
governed by a nobler impulsethe fear of a personal
recognition by some of the soldiery before his
substitution
as a victim to martial law was completed;
but of the many in his brother's band who had so
often echoed his own shout upon the joyous hunt,
or caught up his charging cheer in the Indian
onslaught, there was now not one to look upon the
dying youth. Considerations of feeling, or the fear,
perhaps, of exciting a mutinous spirit among those
hot-headed levies, had induced the general to keep
the comrades of the twin-brothers at a distance from
the fatal scene. As already stated, they had
originally
been detailed upon some fatigue duty, which
took them to a distance from the camp, and
measures
had been since adopted to prolong their absence
until the catastrophe was over. Once, and once
only, did Ernest trust himself to run his eye along
the formal files of stranger faces; and then, while
the scenes of his early days by the bright river of
the North flashed athwart his memory, he felt a
momentary sinking of the heart to think there was
no home-loved friend who could witness the manner
of his death; and yet, when he remembered that
one such witness might, by identifying him, prevent
his sacrifice and endanger the life of Rupert, he was
content that it should be thus.
A platoon of regulars was now drawn up in front
of him, and waited but the word of their officer;
when suddenly a murmur ran along the column,
which was displayed upon the ground in order to give
solemnity to the scene. It was mistaken for a
symptom
of mutiny, and precipitated the fatal moment.
Fire
! cried the officer; and, even as he spoke,
a haggard figure, in a torn hunting-shirtwith
ghastly look, and tangled hair that floated on the
breezeleaped before the line of deadly muzzles!
He uttered one piercing shriekwhether of joy or
agony it were impossible to telland then fell
staggering
with one arm across the bosom of Ernest,
who breathed out his life while springing forward to
meet the embrace of his brother!
They were buried in one grave; and the voyager
upon the Ohio, whose boat may near the
north-western
shore, where the traces of Wayne's
encampment
are yet visible, still sees the shadowy buckeye,
beneath which repose THE TWIN-DOOMED FORESTERS
OF DEANE!
[17]
[17]
Vide A Winter in the West, vol. i.
SCENES
ON
THE MISSISSIPPI.
HOW TO RELISH A JULEP.
And first behold this cordial
Julep
here,
Which flames and dances in his crystal bounds,
With Spirits of balm and fragrant syrups mixed;
Not that Nepenthes, which the wife of Ihone
In Egypt gave to Jove-born Helena,
Is of such power to stir up joy as this,
To life so friendly, nor so cool to thirst.
Milton
Comus
.
There
are national drinks as well as national airs;
and who can tell, when
Tetotalism
shall have
placed the festive song as well as the festive bowl
among the things
that were
who can tell but what
the antiquarian will resort to beverages as well as
ballads to trace historic truth! Talk of our
glorious
English heritage, language, law, and letters!
what is Milton to the theme he sang! what the
trial by jury, what the whole alphabet of poets, to
that liquid realization of poetry itselfthat
delicious
soul-fact which first had its being in
the
origin
of mint juleps!
Was Milton aware of that ori
gin? Did he, when his awful muse would hymn
the inspiring themedid he knowingly filch from
old Anacreon? did he remember what time the
Teian voluptuary turned from the rosy-fingered
grape-gatherers and abjured the Samian wine to
sing the latest, sweetest draught of the Olympian
revellers?
'TIS SAID THAT THE GODS.
[18]
[18]
The original Greek of this ode of Anacreon must be very rare.
A pains-taking friend has hunted in vain for it among the editions
of Mataire, of Barnes, and of Brunck.
'Tis said that the gods, on Olympus of old,
(And who the bright legend profanes with a doubt,)
One night, 'mid their revels, by Bacchus were told
That his last butt of nectar had somehow run out!
But determined to send round the goblet once more,
They sued to the fairer immortals for aid
In composing a draught, which, till drinking were o'er,
Should cast every wine ever drank in the shade.
Grave Ceres herself blithely yielded her corn,
And the spirit that lives in each amber-hued grain,
And which first had its birth from the dews of the morn,
Was taught to steal out in bright dew-drops again.
Pomona, whose choicest of fruits on the board
Were scattered profusely in every one's reach,
When called on a tribute to cull from the hoard,
Expressed the mild juice of the delicate peach.
The liquids were mingled while Venus looked on
With glances so fraught with sweet magical power,
That the honey of Hybla, e'en when they were gone,
Has never been missed in the draught from that hour.
Flora then, from her bosom of fragrancy, shook,
And with roseate fingers pressed down in the bowl,
All dripping and fresh as it came from the brook,
The herb whose aroma should flavour the whole.
The draught was delicious, each god did exclaim,
Though something yet wanting they all did bewail;
But
Juleps
the drink of immortals became,
When Jove himself added a handful of hail!
A handful of hail! and truly what is a julep
without that finishing excellence from the hand of
Thunderer himself! Therefore is it that the short,
fierce summers of the north are so happy in
affording
naturally the beverage itself and the aptitude to
relish it over all other climes. Naturally, I say;
for of late years hath not the great Boston
Ice-king
taught men how to float away the crystal
treasure to dissolve on tropic lips? Hath not the
art of man naturalized juleps upon the Equator?
It was the cholera season of 1834, and such
were my cogitations as I reclined upon the settee
of a steamer, sipping the balmy corrective of the
drastic Mississippi waters, whose yeasty current
foamed around me. Methought, as I looked
upon what many then considered the great fluid
agent of the pestilence throughout the growing
south-westmethought a man must be there, in
that greasy-fumed, over-crowded boat, beneath that
scorching skythere, where the great gloomy river
writhed its turbid way amid endless swamps of
cypress
a
man must be there, in that desolate
wilderness
,
alone(for that heated, random crowd was
not
society
, though it robbed one of the elevating
N
sense of solitude in a scene so vast)aloneanxious
and ailing, and but now almost completely
disheartened
by a long struggle amid jostling
passengers
to get his chance for a cooling draught at the
bar; he must, in short, be situated exactly as I was,
to realize the full and perfect relishment of a julep!
I had yet to learn that I knew not the consummate
condition of julep drinking.
There was a buz among the passengers, as if
some new event had turned up to vary the
monotony
of the day. Are you sure that's
The Flame
over by the shore? asked a man near me, of one of
the deck-hands.
Cer
ting
, manny! I could tell her pipes acrost
the Mazoura.
[19]
[19]
The name Missouri is thus generally pronounced upon the
western waters.
And you will overhaul her?
Won't we though! I tell ye, strannger, so
sure as my name's Ben Blower, that that last tar
bar'l I hove in the furnace has put jist the smart
chance of go-ahead into us to cut off The Flame
from yonder pint, or send our boat to kingdom
come.
The devil! exclaimed a bystander, who,
intensely
interested in the race, was leaning the while
against the partitions of the boiler-room; I've
chosen a nice place to see the fun, near this infernal
powder barrel!
Not so bad as if you were in it, coolly observed
Ben to me, as the other walked rapidly away.
As if he were in it! in what? in the boiler?
Cer
ting!
Don't folks sometimes go into bilers,
manny?
I should think there'd be other parts of the
boat more comfortable.
That's right; poking fun at me at once't; but
wait till we get through this brush with the old
Flame, and I'll tell ye of a regular fixin scrape that
a man may get into. It's true, too, every word of
it, as sure as my name's Ben Blower.
The hoped-for race did indeed, much to my
personal comfort, prove but a brush; and I lighted
a cigar, with a tolerable assurance of being able to
smoke it out in quiet before our boat could have
an other chance of testing the strength of her
boiler
;
while the worthy Ben took up his story with
that spirit and earnestness which is often called out
mesmerically by attentive listening.
You have seen the Flame, then, afore, strannger?
Six year ago, when new upon the river, she was a
raal out and outer, I tell ye. I was at that time a
hand aboard of her. Yes, I belonged to her at the
time of her great race with the `Go-liar.' You've
heern, mayhap, of the blow-up by which we lost it?
They made a great fuss about it; but it was nothing
but a mere fiz of hot water after all. Only the
springing of a few rivets, which loosened a biler
plate or two, and let out a thin spirting upon some
niggers that hadn't sense enough to get out of the
way. Well, the `Go-liar' took off our passengers,
and we ran into Smasher's Landing to repair
damages
and bury the poor fools that were killed. Here
we laid for a matter of thirty hours or so, and got
things to rights on board for a bran new start.
There was some carpenter's work yet to be done,
but the captain said that that might be fixed off jist
as well when we were under waywe had worked
hardthe weather was sour, and we needn't do
anything
more jist nowwe might take that afternoon
to ourselves; but the next morning he'd get up steam
bright and airly, and we'd all come out
new
. There
was no temperance society at Smasher's Landing,
and I went ashore upon a lark with some of the
hands.
I omit the worthy Banjamin's adventures upon
land, and, despairing of fully conveying his
language
in its original Doric force, will not hesitate
to give the rest of his singular narrative in my own
words, save where, in a few instances, I can recall
his precise phraseology, which the reader will easily
recognise.
The night was raw and sleety when I regained
the deck of our boat. The officers, instead of
leaving
a watch above, had closed up everything, and
shut themselves in the cabin. The fire-room only
was open. The boards dashed from the outside by
the explosion, had not yet been replaced. The floor
of the room was wet, and there was scarcely a
corner
which afforded a shelter from the driving storm.
I was about leaving the room. resigned to sleep in
the open air, and now bent only upon getting under
the lee of some bulkhead that would protect me
against the wind. In passing out, I kept my arms
stretched forward to feel my way in the dark, but
my feet came in contact with a heavy iron lid; I
stumbled, and, as I fell, struck one of my hands
into the `manhole,' (I think this was the name he
gave to the oval-shaped opening in the head of the
boiler,) through which the smith had entered to
make his repairs. I fell with my arm thrust so far
into the aperture that I received a pretty smart blow
in the face as it came in contact with the head of
the boiler, and I did not hesitate to drag my body
after it the moment I recovered from this stunning
effect and ascertained my whereabouts. In a word, I
crept into the boiler, resolved to pass the rest of the
night there. The place was dry and sheltered. Had
my bed been softer, I would have had all that man
could desire; as it was, I slept, and slept soundly.
I should mention, though, that, before closing
my eyes, I several times shifted my position. I
had gone first to the farther end of the boiler, then
again I had crawled back to the manhole, to put my
hand out and feel that it was really still open. The
warmest place was at the farther end, where I finally
established myself, and that I knew from the first.
It was foolish in me to think that the opening through
which I had just entered could be closed without
my hearing it, and that, too, when no one was astir
but myself; but the blow on the side of my face
made me a little nervous perhaps; besides, I never
could bear to be shut up in any placeit always
gives a wild-like feeling about the head. You may
laugh, stranger, but I believe I should suffocate in
an empty church, if I once felt that I was so shut
up in it that I could not get out. I have met men
afore now just like me, or worse rathermuch
N 2
worse. Men that it made sort of furious to be tied
down to anything, yet so soft-like and contradictory
in their natures that you might lead them anywhere,
so long as they didn't feel the string. Stranger, it
takes all sorts of people to make a world! and we
may have a good many of the worst kind of white
men here out west. But I have seen folks upon
this riverquiet looking chaps, too, as ever you see
who were so teetotally
carankterankterous
that
they'd shoot the doctor who'd tell them they couldn't
live when ailing, and make a die of it, just out of
spite, when told they
must
get well. Yes, fellows
as fond of the good things of earth as you or I, yet
who'd rush like mad right over the gang-plank of
life, if once brought to believe that they had to
stay in this world whether they wanted to leave
it or not. Thunder and bees! if such a fellow as
that had heard the cocks crow as I didawakened
to find darkness about himdarkness so thick you
might cut it with a knifeheard other sounds, too,
to tell that it was morning, and, scrambling to fumble
for that manhole, found it, too, blackclosedblack
and even as the rest of the iron coffin around him
closed, with not a rivet-hole to let God's light and
air inwhywhy, he'd'a
swounded
right down on
the spot, as I did, and I ain't ashamed to own it to
no white man.
The big drops actually stood upon the poor
fellow's
brow as he now paused for a moment in the
recital of his terrible story. He passed his hand
over his rough features, and resumed it with less
agitation of manner.
How long I may have remained there senseless,
I don't know. The doctors have since told me it
must have been a sort of fitmore like an apoplexy
than a swoon, for the attack finally passed off in
sleepYes, I slept, I know
that
, for I dreamed
dreamed a heap o' things afore I awoke; there is
but one dream, however, that I have ever been able
to recall distinctly, and that must have come on
shortly before I recovered my consciousness. My
resting-place through the night had been, as I have
told you, at the far end of the boiler. Well, I now
dreamed that the manhole was still openand, what
seems curious, rather than laughable, if you take it
in connexion with other things, I fancied that my
legs had been so stretched in the long walk I had
taken the evening before, that they now reached the
whole length of the boiler, and extended through the
opening.
At first (in my dreaming reflections) it was a
comfortable thought that no one could now shut up
the manhole without awakening me. But soon it
seemed as if my feet, which were on the outside,
were becoming drenched in the storm which had
originally driven me to seek this shelter. I felt the
chilling rain upon my extremities. They grew
colder and colder, and their numbness gradually
extended
upward to other parts of my body. It
seemed
,
however, that it was only the under side of my
person that was thus strangely visited. I laid upon
my back, and it must have been a species of
nightmare
that afflicted me, for I knew at last that I was
dreaming, yet felt it impossible to rouse myself.
A violent fit of coughing restored at last my
powers
of volition. The water, which had been slowly
rising around me, had rushed into my mouth; I
awoke to hear the rapid strokes of the pump which
was driving it into the boiler!
My whole conditionno, not all of itnot yet
my
present
condition flashed with new horror upon
me. But I did not again swoon. The choking
sensation which had made me faint when I first
discovered how I was entombed, gave way to a
livelier
,
though less overpowering, emotion. I shrieked
even as I started from my slumber. The previous
discovery of the closed aperture, with the instant
oblivion that followed, seemed only a part of my
dream, and I threw my arms about and looked
eagerly for the opening by which I had entered the
horrid placeyes, looked for it and felt for it, though
it was the terrible conviction that it was closeda
second time brought home to mewhich prompted
my phrensied cry. Every sense seemed to have
tenfold acuteness, yet not one to act in unison with
another. I shrieked again and againimploringly
desperatelysavagely. I filled the hollow
chamber
with my cries till its iron walls seemed to tingle
around me. The dull strokes of the accursed pump
seemed only to mock at, while they deadened, my
screams.
At last I gave myself up. It is the struggle
against our fate which phrensies the mind. We
cease to fear when we cease to hope. I gave
myself
up, and then I grew calm!
I was resigned to dieresigned even to my
mode of death. It was not, I thought, so very new,
after all, as to awaken unwonted horror in a man.
Thousands have been sunk to the bottom of the
ocean shut up in the holds of vesselsbeating
themselves
against the battened hatchesdragged down
from the upper world shrieking, not for life, but for
death, only beneath the eye and amid the breath of
heaven. Thousands have endured that appalling
kind of suffocation. I would die only as many a
better man had died before me. I
could
meet such
a death. I said soI thought soI felt sofelt
so, I mean, for a minuteor more; ten minutes it
may have beenor but an instant of time. I know
notnor does it matter if I could compute it.
There
was
a time, then, when I was resigned to my
fate. But, good God! was I resigned to it in the
shape in which next it came to appal? Stranger, I
felt that water growing hot about my limbs, though
it was yet mid-leg deep. I felt it, and in the same
moment heard the roar of the furnace that was to
turn it into steam before it could get deep enough
to drown one!
You shudderIt
was
hideous. But did I shrink
and shrivel, and crumble down upon that iron floor,
and lose my senses in that horrid agony of fear?
No! though my brain swam, and the life-blood that
curdled at my heart seemed about to stagnate there
for ever, still
I knew!
I was too hoarsetoo
hopeless
,
from my previous efforts, to cry out more. But
I struckfeebly at first, and then strongly
frantically
with my clenched fist, against the sides of the
boiler. There were people moving near, who
must
hear my blows! Could not I hear the grating of
chains, the shuffling of feet, the very rustle of a
rope, hear them all, within a few inches of me? I
didbut the gurgling water that was growing hotter
and hotter around my extremities, made more noise
within the steaming caldron than did my phrensied
blows against its sides.
Latterly I had hardly changed my position, but
now the growing heat of the water made me plash
to and fro; lifting myself wholly out of it was
impossible
,
but I could not remain quiet. I stumbled
upon somethingit was a mallet!a chance tool
the smith had left their by accident. With what
wild joy did I seize itwith what eager confidence
did I now deal my first blows with it against the
walls of my prison! But scarce had I intermitted
them for a moment, when I heard the clang of the
iron door as the fireman flung it wide, to feed the
flames that were to torture me. My knocking was
unheard, though I could hear him toss the sticks
into the furnace beneath me, and drive to the door
when his infernal oven was fully crammed.
Had I yet a hope? I had, but it rose in my
mind side by side with the fear that I might now
become the agent of preparing myself a more
frightful
deathYes! when I thought of that furnace with
its fresh-fed flames curling beneath the iron upon
which I stooda more frightful death even than
that of being boiled alive! Had I discovered that
mallet but a short time soonerbut no matter, I
would by its aid resort to the only expedient now
left.
It was this: I remembered having a
marline-spike
in my pocket, and in less time than I have
taken in hinting at the consequences of thus using
it, I had made an impression upon the sides of the
boiler, and soon succeeded in driving it through.
The water gushed through the aperturewould they
see it?No, the jet could only play against a wooden
partition, which must hide the stream from viewit
must trickle down upon the deck before the leakage
would be discovered. Should I drive another hole
to make that leakage greater? Why, the water
within seemed already to be sensibly diminished
so hot had become that which remainedshould
more escape, would I not hear it bubble and hiss
upon the fiery plates of iron that were already
scorching the soles of my feet? * * * *
Ah! there is a movementvoicesI hear them
calling for a crow-barThe bulkhead cracks as they
pry off the planking. They have seen the leak
they are trying to get at it!Good God! why do
they not first dampen the fire?Why do they call
for thethe
Stranger, look at that finger! it can never
regain
its natural sizebut it has already done all the
service that man could expect from so humble a
member
Sir, that hole would have been plugged
up on the instant
, unless
I had jammed my finger
through!
I heard the cry of horror as they saw it without
the shout to drown the firethe first stroke of the
cold water pump. They say, too, that I was
conscious
when they took me outbut II remember
nothing more till they brought a julep to my
bed-side
arterward,
And
that julep!
Cooling! was it?
Strannger
!!!
Ben turned away his head and weptHe could
no more.
OLD THINGS WITH NEW FACES.
[An Oriental Legend for Occidental Readers.]
The
great Haroun Alraschid, than whom no
worthier follower of the Prophet ever sat on the
throne of the Caliphs, (peace to his memory,) was,
as all the world knows, a very Miracle of Justice.
With a power over the lives and fortunes of his
subjects
such as mortal man hath scarcely ever swayed
before, his mind was never dizzied by the eminence
to which he had attained; and even the Prophet,
who guided him to such a height of human glory,
could hardly have exercised such absolute rule with
a more steady and equal hand.
But of the thousand instances which the Arabian
annalists give of the discriminating justice of this
great Caliph, there is no decision of his Divan
which hath struck us more than that remarkable, but
almost forgotten, case between
Omri
, the poor
descendant
of the poet of that name, and Mustapha,
the rich vender of manuscripts at Bagdad.
It chanced one day that, as Haroun was about
breaking up his audience of Justice, the quick eye
of the Vizier, the renowned Giafer al Barmeki,
discovered
among the retiring crowd a pale and poorly
clad young man, who was slowly leading away a
blind and aged women from the royal presence.
The youth, as he withdrew, cast ever and anon a sad
and appealing look at the judgment-seat of the Caliph,
while at the same time attending and supporting his
aged burthen with the most assiduous care. As filial
tenderness and veneration for the aged are among
the highest virtues of the Koran, so winning an
instance
of both could not but excite the interest of
the good Giafer; and he straightway pointed out
this retiring pair to the Commander of the Faithful.
The Caliph spoke, and an officer instantly led them
back to the foot of the Divan.
Thy name, young man, said the benignant
monarch, looking kindly on the trembling youth,
who, prostrating himself till he kissed the sacred
carpet, thus replied:
Oh, great King, live for ever. Thou seest
before
thee the meanest of thy slaves; Allah be
praised! It is Omri, the son of Zadok, the son of
Omri the poet, who now breathes the same air
with the vicegerent of the Prophet upon Earth.
And this aged woman?
She, oh light of the Earthshe who should be
willing to die now that she has once heard the voice
of the King, though his face she cannot seeshe is
the mother of Zadok, the grandmother of Omri, who
now stands before thee.
The wife and grandson of Omri the poet reduced
to such wretchedness! Giafer!the Caliph
looked
more sternly than was his wont at that favourite
O
ministerhow can such things be in my
dominions
?
The Vizier prostrated himself before the throne,
and would have replied, but the Caliph, motioning
him to rise before Giafer begun to speak, told the
young man to go on and tell his story.
Premising his speech, then, with all those
worshipful
and dulcet terms which were alike becoming
in a good Mussulman and the descendant of Omri,
the rose-breathed, as he was called form the
sweetness of his strains, the namesake of the poet
thus pursued his tale:
Those poems, oh King, which, as none better than
thou knowest, have filled all the world with fragrancy
and delight, were the only dower and heritage which
the blessed Omri left to Selika, his wife, and her
son Zadok! and yet not poor was their estate, as all
men know who have smelt the incense that once
burned nightly in the palace of Zadok here in
Bagdad
.
People from all parts of the earth thronged
to this great city to buy the poems of Omri from
Zadok, his son, until the banks of the Tigris were
black with the concourse of strangers. Zadok and
his mother in the meantime kept scribesa
multitude
as great in number as the sands of Arabiato
make copies of these poems, which all good
Mussulmen
bought from him only, because the Cadi would
not certify that any others were genuine save those
written out under the immediate eye of the son of
Omri. Now, it chanced that Zadok, who saw no end
to such a source of exceeding riches, and who always
spent all his incomeone-half in contributing to the
splendid hospitality of this great capital, and
one-half
in doing good to the poorit chanced, I say,
that Zadok died one day, and left me, his son, and
this aged woman, his mother, this same estate of
Omri's poems.
ButAllah forgive mewhat ashes had we
eaten, that so much gold should turn to dust in our
hands?
It so happened, oh sire, in Bagdad there was a
man, one Faustiz by name, a cunning worker in
metals, who contrived a machine for copying
manuscripts
so correctly that not one word should be
amiss, and at the same time so rapidly that he could
make ten thousand copies while a common scribe
was completing one; and straightway this Faustiz
commenced the making of books and selling them to
the faithful. At first he used his machine only to
make copies of such poems, tales, and histories as
were composed by himself or his friends, who wrote
them for his special use. But soon, oh! just King,
he began to lay hands upon the property of others.
Men found that all the copies of each book he sold
were so much alike and so true to each other, that
they needed no longer the word of the writer or his
representative, or the certificate of the Cadi, to prove
each manuscript to be a genuine copy of the original;
and Faustiz, knowing this, began to deal with the
works of Omri as if they were not the property of
others. He could make the copies faster and more
cheaply than we did, and he showered them over the
land so profusely that there was no call for ours.
The estate which Omri had, in those poems, built up
with so many years of preparatory studyso many
of subsequent toilthe property so slowly amassed
with such honest and harmless industrywith
such silent, yet indefatigable, painsthe property
which he had bequeathed to his descendants to
support
his honoured name in respectabilitythis all
melted from our possession, and passed into the hands
of others without any fault of our own. We became
stricken in poverty and a reproach among men.
`Whose dog is that? said the faithful, as I
passed them by.
`Behold the beggared wife of poor Omri the
poet!' said they, pointing to my grandmother.
`Words are not things; how could they expect
to hold an exclusive property in mere words, which
belong alike to all men?'
`Faustiz is a great benefactor to the faithful; he
scattereth the good things abroad which these foolish
people would ministrate for their own exclusive use.'
And with a thousand such like taunts, oh! great
King, did men assail us as we begged for alms along
the streets.
The descendant of the great poet paused, as if
much affected. The Caliph stroked his beard and
looked at Giafer, and Giafer shook his head with
that solemn air which (even before the time of Lord
Burleigh) meant so much among counsellors of state.
The poor petitioner gathered fresh confidence from
these important signs, and resumed with spirit
The grandson of Omri would know of the
Commander
of the Faithful if Faustiz the worker in metals,
and other men who now use his cunning machine,
should have the right of using it to make copies of
books which cannot belong to them, seeing that they
neither wrote these books themselves nor did they
pay others to write them, nor were these books
given or bequeathed to them in any way whatsoever.
Their copying machine is doubtless of great use and
benefit to the world in general, and its invention
must contribute to the glories of the great King's
reign. But even if uncommon privileges should be
accorded to Faustiz the inventor, even if his high
merit cannot be fully rewarded without trespassing
in some way upon the conflicting rights of others, is
there any reason why every common man who uses
this machine, should enjoy equal privileges? The
writer who published his books by the old mode of
copying, could always preserve some control over
his property; is this new machine, whose beneficial
use to the world depends wholly upon the writers
who supply it with original worksis it to take the
life-blood from those to whom it owes its vitality?
If its very origin is thus coupled with injustice, what
must its influence be in those ages when the great
Haroun no longer lives to hold the people of the earth
in his guiding hand.
The scholar whose early years are now spent
in toilsome study, retreating often like some holy
Dervish to his cell; the man of genius who, already
skilled in letters, passes his best hours in converse
with our most learned Mufti; the poet who traverses
strange and wonderful lands, and closely studies man
in allthose who now make truth and nature their
guide in preparing works which must benefit
humanity
o 2
and last through all timethose who now,
when once enrolled among our Arabian sages, have
wealth and honours showered upon them, which lift
their souls above the mean and petty struggles of the
crowdthese, if they would still pursue their
profession
and
live
by it, must be vastly changed in
character.
Many of them will be degraded to a class of
intellectual mountebanks, who live upon the breath
of public favour; and he who practises the maddest
antics, will soonest get his remuneration from the
mob. The reward of their labours has hitherto been
slow in coming, but it was permanent in proportion
to the excellence of their works; henceforth the
season for reaping that reward will be so brief that
they must minister instantly to some gust of popular
passion, some passing taste or prejudice, in order to
take advantage of it. Those who thus draw a
temporary subsistence from the public, will of course
be forgotten, though an association of meanness in
connexion with their pursuits will still remain in
the memory of men; while those who will not thus
grovel to get their bread, will be for the most part so
poor that the very name of `Poet' will pass into a
by-word, as belonging to a helpless, shiftless,
poverty-stricken
being. But why do I speak thus to the
Commander of the Faithful, who knows all things
that are just and wise in the sight of Allah, said
Omri, as he concluded his long-winded address with
a deep salaam before retiring back a step or two from
the Divan.
Let Faustiz, the cunning maker of this copying
machine, be brought at once before me, thundered
the Caliph.
Then Giafer, prostrating himself before the
Sultan
,
spoke as follows:
Odour of the universetrampler on the necks of
a thousand monarchs, to whom justice is as a
hand-maiden
,
and mercy ever a shadow, your highness is
not pleased to remember that, by your own order, I
presented this same Faustiz with a thousand sequins,
with which he soon afterward left your dominions
to pursue his craft among some remote nations of
infidels.
Bring before me, then, any of my subjects who
has dared to use this machine to filch from them
the property of others, thundered the Caliph; and
straightway Mustapha, a rich dealer in books, who
had made half his fortune out of the inheritance of
poor Omri, was led up before the king.
Mustapha, the son of Serab, what dirt hast thou
eaten, that the property and rights of Omri should
thus be appropriated by thee without his consent?
Shadow of the Prophet on earth, cried
Mustapha
,
in unfeigned astonishment, thy slave hath
never meddled with the property of the meanest of
thy subjects.
The works of Omri the poethast thou not
been one of those who have robbed this young man,
his grandson and heir, of the property which he
inherited in them?
Property! oh, great King, and where in the wise
laws of thy empire(Heaven only bounds its extent)
where is it written that man may have property
in so unsubstantial a thing as a writing, which, to
preserve, he must either lock up or carry about with
him.
Thou fool, if the nature of property depended
upon the views of minds as narrow as thine, the
Bedouin of the desert might define that wherein a
man's possessions consist as well as thou. Thou
believest in houses and land, and things of such
stability
,
as property. The Bedouin believes that no
man can have an ownership save in the horses and
camels, the tents, arms, and equipments he can carry
about with him. Which, in natural law, hath the
greater show of reason: that a man may call a
part of the earth histhe earth which came from
Allah, and was given alike for the use of all; or that
he may claim an exclusive property in the
contrivances
of his own mindthose workings of his
intellect
which are as much a part of himself, and belong
to him as naturally as does the web which the spider
weaves from his own bowels, belong to the
pains-taking
insect which wove it?
All
men at first
inherited
the earth as common property, but GENIUS is
a gift of God to
individual
men, and God will judge
those who steal its fruits.
Inshallah! the interpreter of the will of the
Prophet can scarce open his lips save to drop
wisdom
;
but oh! Caliph! the Arab of the desert still
dealeth with things substantial, whose possession he
might defend with the strength of his arm, even as
thy slave might be compelled to defend his house
and merchandise against these same wild Bedouins,
if he were not so fortunate as to live under the
shadowing
wings of thy power. Allah grant that it may
never diminish.
Thou
defend! echoed Haroun, with a smile of
mingled merriment and contempt, as he glanced his
eye over the feeble frame of MustaphaThou
defend
!
why, thou paltry slave, knowest thou not that
it is the lawthe power of the law alonewhich
keeps the body and soul of such things as thou art
together. It is the law alone which guards thee,
and the thousands like thee, in their honest
possessions
;
and as for thy dishonest ones, if I mistake not,
it is only the law which could keep this sturdy
youngling
from wresting them from thee, or visiting upon
thy wretched carcass the injury he has received at thy
hands. Answer me thou, Giafer, is it just that the
mantle of the law, which so comfortably covers this
merchant of books, should afford no corner for this
orphan youth to creep under? Should not those
who minister to the mental wants of my people
be as much fostered and protected as those who
supply their physical necessities? Shall we give
them the lot of the Ishmaelite, and thus teach them
to prey upon the society which will not protect
them?
But this youth, oh King, doubtingly interposed
the trembling Mustapha, he did not thus minister
to the wants of thy people; he had no share in
producing
the poems of the great Ormi, which he claims
as his exclusive property!
Hearken, son of Serab, said the Caliph; how
gottest thou the means by which thou wast enabled
to purchase one of these machines from Faustiz, and
furnish thy warehouses, which men say are richly
filled with merchandise?
The grandsire of your slave, oh King,
answered
Mustapha, brightening up with an air of
confidence
at this questionMy grandsire was butler in
the household of the Vizier of one of your royal
predecessors
.
His faithful services after many years
were rewarded with a sum of money, and a house
and garden in the neighbourhood of the city, in which
he spent his declining years, enjoying all the luxuries
that are permitted to a good Mussulman. This
wealth my father inherited, and in turn the greater
portion of it descended to me; and this honestly
acquired
heritage I have employed in trade.
Your grandsire was doubtless a good man, and
deserved his reward, Mustapha. The law is a just
one which transmitted his property safely to you.
But, Mashallah! Giafer, call we this justice? Look
ye once at those two menthat tawdry tradesman
and that half-naked youth.
His
grandsire was a
butler
a
faithful, as it seems, and, therefore, justly
rewarded
one; but a man whose services to his
employer
,
to his fellow-men, ceased and terminated
for ever with his own existence. Of the other the
grandsire was a
Poet
a man whose services to
society in the time when he flourished were at least
equal to those of the butlerbut, unlike him, a man
whose services to mankind did
not
cease and
terminate
with his mortal existence; for, while the fire of
his thoughts can animate, the music of his verses
soothwhile he supplies aliment to the soul, and
actually mingles his intellectual being with the
mental
texture of his reader, mankind are still the poet's
debtors. Now, if a difference is to be made in the
civil rights of these two men, which of them is it
that should have the privilege of bequeathing the
fruit of his labours to his children?
I give it against the butler, said Giafer.
Ever wise and noble Al Barmeki, cried Haroun,
looking affectionately at his Vizier; and straightway
on the spot, they say, the Caliph embraced him for
the righteousness of his decision.
The story goes to tell that Mustapha, who was
slow in comprehending the full force of the Caliph's
illustration, trembled in his shoes, lest every
son-of-a-butler
was about to be outlawed and his own heritage
exposed, to be dealt with as freely as he had invaded
that of Omri. But the magnanimous Haroun, while
restoring a
then
esteemed class to their (anciently)
legal rights, had no idea of accompanying this act by
one of cruelty and oppression to others. His object
was only to give his subjects of all classes and
pursuits
equal protection from the laws of the land.
The legend concludes by mentioningand this is
a fact which it may really interest the reader to know
that the young Omri, restored to the possession
(or what in modern times might be translated THE
COPYRIGHT) of his father's poems, lived long in
great affluence at Bagdad; and, shining forth under
happier auspices, with some of his ancestral fire,
wrote some of the best of those charming stories
which, under the name of the Arabian Nights
Entertainments
,
have made all the world familiar with the
name and fame of the great Caliph Haroun Alraschid.
SCENES
ON
THE HUDSON.
* * *
My
dog had flushed a bevy of quail, and,
though still too early in the season for that game, I
could not resist the temptation to follow the
half-grown
birds into the cover, and see how they
promised
for October. My well-trained nag did not
require
to be tethered as I left him standing for a few
moments in the road. The path which I took led
through a hollow or slight ravine, grown over with
brushwood, which delayed me somewhat in gaining
a knoll on the opposite side. As I would not allow
Blucher to worry the young birds, I lost them
entirely
before reaching the spot; but the view it
commanded
repaid my trouble, and prevented me for
some time from resuming the highway.
I found myself upon the bluff that rises so
beautifully
from the meadow behind Constitution Island.
The gray rocks of West Point, with their
mouldering
fortresses frowning over the modern barracks,
were immediately in front; while the narrow island
appeared to be united to the opposite shore, dividing
the river into two of the loveliest lakes that I ever
beheld
.
The lower one was small, belted with the
mountains, which lapped each other as far as the eye
could reach, and broken by crags and promontories
that pushed into it on every side as if they were
jostling together to see which could reflect the largest
portion of their nodding forests in the glassy water.
The landscape to the north, though different in
character, was hardly less picturesque.
Immediately
below, the river shot like a narrow frith among
the hills, giving back their stern features with
sullen
truth from its dark, though placid, surface. But
miles away, where the sudden opening in the
mountains
opposite Pollipel's Island let in the fair fields
and orchards of Orange County, with the spires and
chimneys of Newburgh rising along the water, the
broad expanse glistened like silver beneath the breeze
that rippled it; while the white canvass and light
spars of the river craft glowing in the sunshine, kept
the scene continually animated. The blue outline
of the Katzbergs bounded the prospect in the
distance
.
I know not how long I lingered gazing upon these
superb landscapes, doubtful to which of the two to
give the preference; but certainly it did not seem
twenty minutes from the moment of my first
dismounting
to that in which I regained the highway,
and, resuming my horse, returned to my lodgings
near the Foundery.
I had hardly entered the unique bachelor
establishment
of the hospitable friend with whom I was
quartered, when he began to rally me about an abrupt
desertion of a lady, and observed that some of her
P
party had stopped, on their way home, to ask why I left
them so singularly. Having neither seen any lady
nor met any party, the jest, as I thought it, was
unintelligible
to me, and I let it pass; as wise people do
all matters which they cannot understand and deem
unworthy the trouble of explanation. The next
morning I rode out to join a party from the
neighbourhood
,
bent upon an excursion to a little lake
which lies in a picturesque situation back of
Break-neck
Hill, whose modest beauties the pencil of Wier
ought to transfer to the canvass. Upon meeting my
friends, they commenced a simultaneous attack upon
me for having, as they averred, left them in a most
eccentric manner the day before. At first I
presumed
it was a repetition of the jest of yesterday as I
then thought it, for I had not actually seen one of
those present since the excursion to Break-neck had
been planned, a week before; and as for being on
horseback with a party at the hour mentioned, I
remember
distinctly, from having heard the
dinner-call
of the cadets on the opposite shore, that at the
very time mentioned I was standing alone upon the
bluff above Constitution Island, about three hundred
yards from the large white dwelling house, formerly
known as the Highland School, looking upon the
landscape I have already attempted to describe. It
was insisted upon, however, that I was mistaken.
A gentleman present swore to the identity of my
horse, described the very dress I wore, and,
appealing
to a lady whom I was said to have accosted
riding by her side in earnest conversation for a mile
or morementioned the very terms in which I had
saluted her party upon first joining them. The lady
in reply only glanced at me with a kind of
bewildered
look as she waited for my answer; and something
of confusion, if not of anger, seemed mingled in her
expression when I flatly denied having seen her
before
for a week.
Why, surely, cried one, you left your name
at Mr.'s yesterday morning, after leaving us.
I could not have left you, I answered,
somewhat
provoked at last at what I regarded as a most
absurd attempt to hoaxI could not have left you, as
I never joined you; and as for the visit at Mr.'s,
it is full as apocryphal as the rest you have been
telling me.
Well, dn it, ahem, boys, interrupted my
uncle
Ben, good-naturedly, this is all, ahem, dn it,
nonsense; you'll never at this rate, dn it, ahem,
get to the lake to-day. Why, Corney, you dog you,
added the bluff old gentleman, slapping me on the
shoulder, for I was a favourite with himCorney,
dn it, ahem, it's only the Spook-visiter that's been
playing this trick upon all of us, ahem, dn it.
Few of those present had heard of this
redoubtable
personage, and he formed almost the only
subject
of conversation during our day's ride, as story
after story was told of his various freaks among these
hills. I did not attempt, however, to write the
following
true history until I had looked in at Mother
Longfield's Inn and talked the whole matter over
with her; and the curious reader who will make a
voyage to Cold Spring, and hold an hour's gossip over
a tankard of her best ale, may test the fidelity of the
following account of
THE SPOOK-VISITER.
[A Legend of the Highlands.]
Among
my favourite places of resort along the
Hudson, there is none which, in years past, I have
frequented more than the romantic neighbourhood
around Spookinsel,
[20]
[20]
Now better known as Constitution Island.
as the bold promontory
opposite
West Point was called in the good old days of
our Dutch ancestors. Although an anciently settled
part of the country, it has, until very recently, been
one of those by-corners of the world where the
intrusive spirit of modern innevation seemed as if it
could never find a foothold. The few inhabitants,
whose cottages were tucked away in the adjacent
dells, allowing their white-washed chimneys only now
and then to peer above the upland, were a
perversely
contented set, who seemed to have been
indigenous
,
as it were, to the few arable spots found among
their broken hills; springing up and flourishing with
the same kind of knotty and stiff-rooted obstinacy as
the stunted cedars that are everywhere rifted among
their mossy rocks.
The adjacent hamlet of Cold Spring, which is the
metropolis of these parts, was always a gay and
galliard sort of a place; the worthy burghers
thereof
being marvellously given to the consumption
of Newburgh ale and Goshen cheese, which, in
former times, was supplied to them by a little vessel
that plied weekly from their long wharf to the former
place. These dissipated habits, however, did in
nowise
extend to the adjacent glens, whose steady and
sober tenants looked down upon the wassailing Cold
Springers with all the dignity of substantial
house-keepers
;
of people who had countless hoards of dried
apples and treasures of home-made cider of their
own, and were not dependent on foreign importers
for the wherewithall to cheer their fire-sides. And
seldom, unless when wishing to purchase a yard of
flannel or replenish their supply of tobacco for the
long winter evenings, did they resort to the stone
store, which still stands immediately opposite the
ferry-stairs upon the main street of the village.
The truth is, if it were all told, that these worthy
people were governed by some other motives than a
mere disrelish to the mixed society of their
commercial
metropolis, to prevent them from
gallivanting
about the country, and venturing forth among
the godless people of the village at all hours. Every
one about there knew that the Spook-visiter, though
he made the island his head-quarters, had still a
most troublesome habit of wandering about among
the adjacent hills, and forcing his company upon
whomsoever might fall in his way, by assuming the
appearance of one of their neighbours. Old Foster,
who, time immemorial, has dwelt upon the island as
lord and governor of the same, and whose cottage
still rears its red gable beneath the pine-covered
knoll on the southern side, was, in his young days, the
only man in these parts who did not fear the
Spook-visiter
;
and people, who
will
talk, used to say that
it was a very equivocal tenure by which he became
lessee of the island. This, however, was an
unrighteous
P 2
scandal upon the worthy governor, who, to our
personal knowledge, owned no other landlords than
the very respectable family in the neighbourhood,
by whose courtesy he still tenants his picturesque
domain.
It was useless, however, for the governer to shake
his head, and pretend to laugh at the idle fears of
his neighbours. Had not the Spook-visiter been
twice met, under the shape of Gill Ten Eyck, by
old Barney Phillipson, the gray-headed negro, while
ploughing in Indian field; and did not the goblin
offer to plough a whole morning for him, if he would
lend him one of his master's horses to ride over to
Deacon Brown's with? Had he not been seen, too,
by the Deacon's people, under the same form, talking
beneath Experience Brown's window, when others
had observed the real Gill that very afternoon at the
landing, and with their own eyes had seen him wave
his straw-hat from on board the sloop as she hauled
off with the turn of the tide on her weekly voyage
to New York? Besides, why did not people go to
Indian Falls any more? did not every one know that
Squire Smith's girls, in coming home from
chestnutting
,
had seen the Spook rowing his skiff straight up
the brook, over rocks and all, to the very foot of the
fall?
Lipsey
, too, (who then had not dreamed of
owning a boat of his own, and becoming the Charon
of these parts)Lipsey had seen the Spook-visiter
under the exact shape of Sergeant Thompson,
bobbing
for eels off The old-woman's rock, when no
one had ever disputed that the sergeant was on duty
that very afternoon at the Barracks, over the river.
No! Col. ***** (peace to the courtly old
gentleman's
memory) might turn the thing into fun if
he chose, but it was not for decent people nor decent
people's children to throw themselves in the way of
such a rantipole character as the Spook-visiter after
dark.
It seemed hard, too, that a being of whom, upon
the whole, nothing bad was ever told, should thus
be placed under the ban of a whole neighbourhood
merely because he chose to assume some harmless
characters for the sake of enjoying their society.
There has always, however, been an inveterate
prejudice
among the people of this world against
associating
with your chance wanderers from the other.
They seem to think that, because a man's body has
gone under the earth, his spirit has no right to
walk over it! and if they do ever allow him to make
a little excursion occasionally from his cramped and
narrow dwelling into the free spots he once delighted
in, he always has to take his airings after nightfall:
while many insist that he must only come out on
such dark and tempestuous nights that no creature
of flesh and bones would wish to be abroad in.
I have, for my own part, been always a sturdy
stickler for the rights of the much injured
Ghost-fraternity
;
and, seeing that the bodyless have such
a great majority over the flesh-framed sons of earth, I
cannot but wonder that there are not more partisans
to uphold their privileges and immunities. It must
be something, when our voices can no longer
commune
with the friends that we loved, and when our
forms are perhaps forgotten by the fire-side we once
helped to cheerIt must be something to revisit,
even in viewless forms of air, the scenes where nature
(the truest of her sex) still meets us with her
caressing flowersstill keeps her spring-time tryste
with a pudency as rosy as when first we
worshipped
her unfolding charmsstill sighs her autumnal
parting with a sadness as unfeigned as when first
we heard her fading footsteps over the rustling
leaves.
In the case of the Spook-visiter I have been at
some pains to learn the cause of his eccentric visits
to my favourite haunts, and, upon my word, after all
my inquiries into his history, I can find no reason in
the world why he should be debarred from the
innocent
indulgence of rambling about the neighbourhood
in whatsoever form he pleases. The circumstances
under which he first appeared here were certainly
distressing enough to enlist the warmest sympathy in
his favour.
Poor Bornt Van Tromp! he little dreamed, when
serving his apprenticeship with old Boss Bogart, the
cracker merchant, now immortalized in the grave
writings of Mynheer Rapelje, that the would ever
become
the subject of a memoir like this! Bornt was
one of those unfortunate characters whom nature
intended to make a figure in life, but whom
fortune
sends into the world in the very worst time for
the exercise of their peculiar talents. How many
a philanthropist is there in this humane age, when
foreign paupers are provided for at the public
expense
and home-judged criminals are regarded as
martyrs instead of victims to justicehow many a
friend of the human race, whose over-running
benevolence
can only find a vent in an abolition tract?
How many a hero is there in these piping times of
peace who can only show his passion for military glory
at a Texian meeting, and whose corked-up valour must
needs explode in a string of fiery resolutions against
the doughty Santa Anna and his myrmidons? Yet
who can doubt that, if prisons were again converted
into pest-houses,
Howards
would be as plenty as
black berries among the first: and that as for the last,
did really grim War erect her brazen front in our
streets, these worthies would meet the virago face to
face, and give the saucy jade just as good as she
brought?
Now, the heart that beat beneath the jerkin of Van
Tromp was not exactly cast in what poets calls the
heroic mould, though it was the heart of as doughty
a Dutchman as ever made our English ancestors
quail when his namesake, the admiral, was
sweeping
the narrow channel with a broom at his
mast-head
.
The bent of his mind lay in an entirely
different
path from that graced by the deeds of
Alexander
,
and Napoleon, and other wholesale killers of
their kind. He had what, in our day, would be
called
peculiar talents for society. To wit, an
irresistible
propensity to make acquaintances, and a
happy
knack of rendering himself agreeable to every
one in whose company he was thrown. Or, to
express
it in the quaint words of a good old author,
he was much disposed for the mirth and
galliardize
of companie, and his parts qualified him to shine
therein.
Bornt could not, in fact, cross the street upon an
errand, however hurried, without stopping upon the
curb-stone to have a chat with some passer-by; and
when his boss sent him upon a mission that carried
him any distance from the shop, he always consumed
about double the usual time in hunting up some idle
crony to go along and talk with him by the way. On
Sundays he used always to lounge about the docks
and slips for the sake of catching a chat with some
indolent skipper, who, having lingered till tired over
his late breakfast below, now loitered about the deck
of his sloop, or lay stretched in full length upon her
lazy boom, enjoying his pipe in the still sunshine.
It was on one occasion of this latter kind, a soft,
sunny, October morning, that, as Bornt sauntered
down as usual to enjoy his weekly dish of gossip, he
saw the sloop just shaking out her mainsail, and in
the act of gliding out of the slip. Van Tromp felt
grievously loth to forego his wonted enjoyment, and,
as the vessel rounded to a moment at the pier-head
while disengaging her forward rigging from that of
a sister craft with which it had become entangled,
he could not resist the temptation just to step aboard
and exchange a parting word with old Yorpe, the
black cook and steward. Yorpe had a world of
things to say, nor would he let our hero depart
without
his stepping down into the cabin to take a
farewell
glass of cider with him. How long their
parrorching
would then have lasted it is difficult to say,
if a sudden lurch of the vessel had not told she was
under way, and warned Bornt quickly to the deck.
But what was his surprise, upon raising his head
above the companion-way, to discover that the sloop
had already shot from the pier, and, having stretched
across the broad bay, was now upon another tack,
and making her way up the river at a rate which
soon sent the spires and gables of the city fading in
the distance. Our hero was at first not a little
disconcerted
at finding himself thus unexpectedly
embarked
upon a voyage which might last, he knew
not how long; for the sloop was bound to a port
above the Highlands, which were thought very remote
in those days. He soon, however, like many other
historical characters who have surrendered
themselves
to their destiny in like emergencies, consoled
himself with the idea that mayhap it was all for
the best; and, stretching himself along a hen-coop
in the stern, he surrendered himself to a thousand
dreaming fancies.
The day was warm for the season of the year,
and the soft haze which mellowed the brilliant tints
of the autumnal foliage, showed the landscape
through an atmosphere more delicious and Elysian
than any other clime can boast of. But one artist
has succeeded in transferring the gorgeous hues of
those dying woods to his canvass, and even his
pencil
has failed in representing the magic tissue which
Nature weaves over the most glorious display of
her charmssoftening the rainbow blending of the
various dyes, even while freshening each individual
colour.
The wind, though so slight as scarcely to ripple
the water, was dead ahead, and the light craft, as
she beat up with the tide, was compelled to stretch
into every cove and inlet where the water was deep
enough to allow her to lengthen her tack. At times
she would glide so near to the steep banks of the
river as to scare the kingfisher from his perch upon
the dead limb that bent over it, while the sound of
dropping nuts would be heard as the squirrel
scampered
from the boughs of some ancient chestnut that
was mirrored with every leaf in the glassy stream.
A thousand times did Bornt, when the sloop would
then slowly luff up in the indolent breeze, while the
huge boom went creaking over, raise himself upon
his elbow and look wistfully on the shore, as if it
were almost impossible to resist the temptation to
leap to land. But he saw no one there to have a talk
with; and, though the skipper's crew were all engaged
about their own affairs, he thought bad company
better
than none.
At last the bold promontory of West Point hove
in sight, and then the headland of the island opposite
was weathered, when, just as they were pushing
deep into the bay beyond, and hugging the northern
shore of the island in order to shun the sunken rocks
upon her windward bow, a tornado burst from the
hills of Orange, and, sweeping down the gorge now
known by the name of Washington's Valley, struck
the broad topsail of the sloop and capsized her in a
moment.
So furious and resistless was the blast, that the
summit of Cro'nest was stripped in an instant of its
crown of pines, which, being carried completely
across the river, has left the mountain bald ever since.
Nor was this all; but the sloop, which was a
round, jolly, Dutch little punchbowl of a vessel,
rolled completely over and over, and that so rapidly
that she came up with all standing, and apparently
nowise affected by the sudden evolution; just as
you may have seen a brimming tankard balanced by
some dexterous tapster within the round of a hoop,
and whirled swiftly about his head without ever
spilling
a drop of the precious liquor, which was to be
his guerdon for the feat. The topsy-turvy process,
however, created some little confusion in the brains
of the voyagers who had so unwittingly thrown this
aquatic somerset; and it was not until the sloop,
having kept on her course as if nothing had
happened
,
had neared Hungry Hollow, and was making
Polipell's Island, that it was perceived that one of
her company was missing. Poor Bornt, as ill luck
would have it, was no more to be seen. He had
disappeared, as if by magic, when no one had seen
him go. The fact was, that his position upon the
hen-coop raised his person just enough above the
line of the gunwale for the friction of the water to
wipe him clean off as the sloop was whirled over;
and, stunned by the movement, he could not make
an effort to swim, but sunk, like a lump of sugar in a
tea-cup, at once to the bottom.
Our hero, upon again recovering his senses, was
very naturally much disconcerted to find himself a
drowned man, and ushered suddenly into the
company
of a hundred others who had been overtaken by
the same fate at different places along the Hudson in
years gone by. They now kept commons in the pass
by West Point, that being the deepest and, to them,
Q
most commodious place in the river; but, as Bornt
soon learned, they enjoyed the jail-liberties of every
part of the noble stream, from its sources to the ocean.
The company, now assembled, was rather various
than select; but incongruity of character appeared
to be no bar to social feeling among The Drowned
of the Hudson. In one corner a Mohickander chief,
whose canoe had been upset by a chance shot from
Hendrick Hudson's artillery, was playing
back-gammon
with one of Hendrick's own sailors, who
had fallen from the yard-arm on his voyage down
the river. In another an English bucanier, whose
iron corselet had carried him to the bottom as he
stepped off a plank one stormy night while landing
merchandise from a plundered galleon at Powles
Hook, was flirting with a buxom Bergen
market-woman
,
whose pung had broken through the ice, where
the deep current along the Jersey shore had swept
her hither; while in a third one of Frontenac's
French gallants, that slipped over Glen's Falls while
reconnoitering them by moonlight, was smoking a
pipe with old Antony Van Corlaer, who was absent
upon leave from his quarters at the bottom of Lake
Champlain. A sentimental Swede, who had
drowned
himself in the Kills out of pure love for
Governor
Risingh, was playing at chuck-farthing with a
grim Spaniard, who had met his fate at Captain
Kidd's yard-arm off Sandy Hook, and with a score
of the captain's own ruffling camerados completed
an assemblage, wherein, though every nation of
Europe was represented, yet all conversed in
exceeding
good Dutch.
The social appearance of the whole circle, with
the companionable air of each individual member,
delighted our hero exceedingly. He slapped the
Swede on the shoulder with the heartiness of an old
acquaintance, shook hands with the Englishman,
bowed to the Frenchman, exchanged a grunt with
the Indian, and, finally, lighted his pipe at the
Dutchman
with the air of a man who was sure of his
welcome, and felt himself at once perfectly at home.
The smell of the kitchen next attracted Van
Tromp's attention; and there, besides the finest
salmon, which at that time abounded in the river,
he found some dish or other supplied from each of
its beautiful tributaries. Trout from the Matteawan,
wind-fish from the Minnissecongo, and beaver's tails
from the Waha-manessing; Walkill eels, Croton
bass, and other varieties of the finny, crustaceous,
and moluscan tribes, boiled, grilled, and stewed, in
the greatest profusion. Of meat, indeed, there was
not so great a variety; though a delicate loin of
seadog
,
secured by a drowned sealer as the animal was
swimming across Newburgh Bay, did look tempting;
as did also some otter cutlets which the Indian had
provided for his own especial eating. But the
removes
consisted only of a steak or two from a stray
turtle, which are still sometimes taken in the mouth
of the Hudson; and a few canvass-backs, which feed
in the season around the coves of the creeks above
the Highlands, and are quite equal in flavour to those
shot on the Susquehannah. These last had all been
pulled under while diving for water-cellery,
[21]
[21]
Vallisnaria
. The plant upon which the canvass-back feeds,
and which abounds upon the flats of the Hudson.
by the
cook, who wore a belt, 'neath which he clapped their
necks when securing these valuable additions to his
larder. As for liquor, and that of the best quality,
Bornt found that it abounded in the subaqueous
cellars. The holds of a hundred merchantmen had,
at different times, been rummaged by the goblin
wreckers, to the great chagrin and disappointment
of certain enterprizing worthies, who from time to
time have often since sent down diving-bells to
explore
for red-seal and black-seal in various parts of
the river.
Where there is wine, there is sure to be song;
and our hero, after doing full justice to the various
good things before him, wiped his mouth upon a
napkin of woven eel-grass, and joined in the chorus,
which a knot of drowned bacchanals were trolling
near.
SONG OF THE DROWNED.
I.
Down
, far down, in the waters deep,
Where the booming surges above us sweep,
Our revels from night till morn we keep:
And though with us the cup goes round
Upon every shore where the blue waves sound,
Yet here, as it passes from lip to lip,
Alone is found true fellowship;
For only the Dead, where'er they range,
'Tis the Dead alone who never change.
II.
What boots your pledges, ye sons of Earth;
Or to whom ye drink in your hours of mirth,
When gathered around your festal hearth?
Ye fill to love! and the toasts ye give
Will hardly the fumes of your wine outlive!
To friendship fill! and its tale is told
Almost 'ere the pledge on your lip grows cold!
For only the Dead, where'er they range,
'Tis the Dead alone who never change.
III.
Then come, when the bolt of death is hurled,
Come down to us from that bleak, bleak world,
Where the wings of Sorrow are never furled:
Come, and we'll drink to the shades of the past;
To the hopes that mocked in life to the last;
To the lips and eyes we once would adore,
And the loves that in death can delude no more!
For the Dead, the Dead, wherever they range,
'Tis only the Dead who never change.
The juxta-position of lips and loves in this uncouth
ditty brought certain tender reminiscences into the
moistening eyes of poor Van Tromp. He thought
of his tight and trim little Manhattanese, with her
plump boddice, and neat ankle and amplitude of
petticoats
above, who used to make his heart flutter as she
tripped across the street before his window when
flitting in and out from the neighbouring houses, ripe
and restless as a bob-link glancing from thicket to
thicket in the mating season. He thought of the rival
beaux, by whom she was probably now surrounded,
when his attentions were cooled at the bottom of the
river for ever; and, when called upon for a solo, the
company were not a little surprised to hear so
unsentimental
a looking personage pour forth a little Dutch
ditty, which Mr. Thomas Moore, had he the same
access to the original that we have, would perhaps
translate as follows:
Q 2
THOSE EYES.
Those eyesthose eyesI watch them so,
While radiant with soul they glow,
To see if one kind glance of feeling
For me is ever from them stealing
If ever one fond thought arise
To fill with tenderness those eyes.
Sometimes a single beamy look
Will make my pulses leap, like brook
Which bounds to meet the sunshine sparkling
Through alders long its current darkling
Then like that brook, in deepening glade,
They're given again to gloom and shade.
Those eyesthose eyesoh, I'll no more
Their cold and fitful light adore!
The flash of mind that's to them given
Is but a borrowed ray from Heaven,
And not the soft, impassioned glow
To warm its worshippers below!
The tender burthen of Bornt's song was not lost
upon a handsome young hunter, who had hardly yet
become reconciled to his banishment from field and
forest; and who, when next called upon, impetuously
broke forth with what he called
A LOVE CHALENGE.
Away to the forestaway, love, away
My foam-champing courser reproves thy delay,
And the brooks are all calling, away, love, away.
Away to the forest, my own love, with me
Away where thro' checker'd glade sports the wind free;
Where in the bosky dell,
While its young leaflets swell,
In spring every floral bell
Tuneth for thee!
Away to the forest, away.
Away to the forestaway, love, away
My foam-champing courser reproves thy delay,
And bird and brook calls theeaway, love, away,
Hark! how the blue-bird's throat, carolling o'er us,
Chimes with the thrush's note floating before us.
Away, then, my gentle one
Thy voice is missed alone;
Awaylet love's murmur'd tone
Swell the bright chorus!
Away to the forest, away.
A Connecticut schoolmaster, who, even at that
early day, had found his way into the land of
promise
watered by the Hudson, sat thumbing a tattered
copy of
Grca Minora
, and sipping switchel from
an old tin cup. His Pierian tap was of the thinnest;
yet, when called on in his turn, the pedagogue
favoured
the company with the following translation of a
Greek ode, which we are sorry to see has been
omitted in the modern editions of this excellent
work:
O! thou who erst to fair Olympia press'd,
Great father Ammon!
Coming paternallycelestial guest!
Her spouse to gammon;
Making King Phil, forsooth, too,
God-father of the youth who
Gave old Darius such a lammin.
Thou, whose enduring, all-embrasive sway is
Acknowledged alike, where, in the wild Tanais,
The red Sarmatian spears the darting salmon,
Or where the rock-hewn altars of Thebais
Bleeds the white bull or sacrificial ram on,
Or sable Ethiop (in his home-economy
Unconscious yet of possum fat and hominy)
Lays his simple yam on!
Ammon! Olympius! Sponsor! Latialis!
Maximus! Victor! Anxurus! Fluvialis!
Or by what title or adjunct thou would'st rather,
We unto thy list of names, great Father,
Here should cram on.
Listen to thy flamen!
The appropriateness of this solemn classical
invocation
seemed to be generally felt by all the
company
,
save a little Dutch singing-master, who, having
been drowned by tumbling over a molasses cask in
Coenties Slip one night after hob-nobbing over some
real
Sciedam
with his dominie, had a religious horror
of switchel, and a great contempt for the tenuous
inspiration that might flow from it. Perhaps, too,
in framing a Pagan-like appeal for the grape, he
had a prophetic eye to the part which this same
Puritan drink of switchel might play in the great
temperance movement of these more enlightened
timesswitchel and root-beer being the penitential
potations of
Baal Alcohol's
converted worshippers.
ANACREONTIC.
Blame not the Bowlthe fruitful Bowl!
Whence wit, and mirth, and music spring,
And amber drops Elysian roll,
To bathe young Love's delighted wing.
What like the grape Osiris gave
Makes rigid age so lithe of limb;
Illumines Memory's tearful wave,
And teaches drowning Hope to swim?
Did Ocean from his radiant arms
To earth another Venus give,
He ne'er could match the mellow charms
That in the breathing beaker live.
Like burning thoughts which lovers hoard
In characters that mock the sight,
Till some kind liquid, o'er them poured,
Brings all their hidden warmth to light
Are feelings bright, which, in the cup,
Though graven deep, appear but dim,
Till, filled with glowing Bacchus up,
They sparkle on the foaming brim.
Each drop upon the first you pour
Brings some new tender thought to life;
And as you fill it more and more,
The last with fervid soul is rife.
The island fount, that kept of old
Its fabled path beneath the sea,
And fresh, as first from earth it rolled,
From earth again rose joyously
Bore not beneath the bitter brine
Each flower upon its limpid tide
More faithfully than in the wine
Our hearts will toward each other glide.
Then drain the cup, and let thy soul
Learn, as the draught delicious flies,
Like pearls in the Egyptian's bowl,
Truth beaming at the bottom lies.
Of the symposia that followed we have obtained
no record; but, what with drowning and drinking,
our hero felt stiff and stupified when he awoke in
the morning. The bright October sun was
streaming
down through the water, and the long river grass,
upon which Bornt was reposing, seemed clothed
with the hues of the rainbow as its feathery spears
termbled upward in the quivering light. Farther
off, the channel of the river was paved with
muscle-shells
,
whose pearly lining showed like a carpet of
silver tissue in the glistening wave. Still more
remote, grottoes of spar, whose incrusted pillars and
crystalline fret-work had been washed hither from the
limestone regions, by which some of the tributaries
of the Hudson are traversed, lifted their airy wreaths
and frosted pinnacles; while cloisters of gloomy
serpentine or isolated columns of basalt, which the
eddies along the Palisades had swept up from below,
were discernible in the dim distance.
The drowned in the meantime were loitering about
in the spacious courts, and amusing themselves
each as he listed. The Frenchman, even at so early
an hour, had found an antagonist at dominos while
sipping his coffee off a marble slab which stood in a
recess. The Spaniard lay twirling his mustachios
in the soft sunshine. The Englishmen were betting
at bowls and shuffle-board, and drinking rum punch;
while the Indians and Dutchmen, pipe in mouth,
looked quietly on. As for the females, having no
husband or children here to care about, their
happiness
seemed to be complete in making knick-knacks
ad libitum
for a fair in aid of a mission to
Sputendeyvil
Creek, the Devil's-danskammer, or some other
satanic and heathenish place along the river. Some
of the more elderly ones, however, passed their time
full as agreeably in teaching some youngsters to
waltz, who in return
Taught them the guitar and other fooleries.
The scene was one after Bornt's own heart; nor
did he find that it lost its charm upon repetition from
day to day. There was, indeed, mighty little
conversation
going on among the water-wraiths; but
this gave our hero a full opportunity of exhibiting his
social powers to the best advantage. He had a
happy
knack of telling a story, and a power of
mimicry
which enabled him to take off his contemporaries
in a manner that would have delighted every one
but themselves; and, like others who have this turn
for anecdote and faculty of imitation, he would never
let his gifts rust from lying idle.
It was not long, however, before Van Tromp's
stock of stories began to run out; and his hearers
somehow would tire of them after listening patiently
to the same thing for the twentieth time. He had
a habit, too, of taking his friends by the button
whenever and wherever he met them; and no matter
what might be the first observation suggested, or
however his victim, like some hapless insect pinned
by an entymologist, might writhe under the infliction,
he would still insist upon boring him with some
story, which he was determined should be in point
to what had been spoken. The consequence was,
that, though by no means personally disliked, our
hero was so much avoided, that he was finally almost
placed in Coventry by the good society of the place.
He pined, and became miserable. His situation was
unendurable to one of his social habits; and at length,
partly out of compassion for him and partly from
concern for themselves, the strict laws that prevail
among water-wraiths were set aside to meet the
occasion, and, contrary to all usages among the
drowned, he was allowed to return to earth
occasionally
,
to recruit his spirits. Upon one only express
condition, however; and this was, that, in order that
he might not bring the lively circle to which he
belonged into disrepute as a community of bores, he
was never to make his appearance among the living,
except under the form and in the guise of some one
who had not yet been disimbodied. His power and
privileges as a ghost enabled him easily to assume
what shape and appearance he pleased; and the
talent for mimicry, which had survived the mishap of
drowning, allowed him to complete the condition upon
which alone he could enjoy the society of the living.
Since that time, the appearance of Bornt Van
Tromp upon earth is so common, that no one is
better
known in the neighbourhood around West Point
than
The Spook-visiter;
while the variety of forms
under which it appears, seems to set detection at
defiance. On one day he will appear in a slouched
hat and weather-beaten features, at the turnpike-gate
on the east side of the river, to delay the passing
traveller with a moment's chat. On another you
may see him as a genteel Southerner, in black,
flirting
with a boarding-school girl on Cozzen's piazza.
On a third he will hang around the
steamboat-landing
,
under the form of a grotesque old woman
picking
up chips; while the chances are two to one that
the next time you see him it will be in the guise of
a beautiful girl pulling a light skiff in the little bay
that lies between the Grange and Spookinsel, right
opposite Giez. The last is one of the most
agreeable
shapes he assumes, and he is partial to it; but
if a singer chances to be in the neighbourhood, the
Spook-visiter is certain to make frequent use of his
character. At such a time he will usurp the voice
of the stranger, and make the woods vocal with his
music. At night particularly, the echoing cliffs
resound
with his madrigals; and that after an
unearthly
fashion, that has brought the neighbourhood into no
good repute with the shoals of retired tradesmen and
fortunate speculators, who have taken to building
villas along the shore, making a great Broadway
of the mighty river. He delights especially,
however
,
to hang around the old mansions of the
Hudson
;
and often, when he pours through some
embowered
window his soft serenade, the notes will
flit around beauty's casement, and then float off upon
the tide so fitfully and Ariel-like, that it is almost
impossible to catch either the words or the music of
a lay which, like that here given, sets the ordinary
laws of composition at defiance.
SERENADE.
Sleeping! why now sleeping?
The moon herself looks gay
While through thy lattice peeping;
Wilt not her call obey?
Wake, love, each star is keeping
For thee its brightest ray,
And languishes the gleaming
From fire-flies now streaming
Athwart the dewy spray.
Awake, the skies are weeping
Because thou art away.
But if of me thou'rt dreaming,
Sleep, loved one, while you may;
And music's wings shall hover
Softly thy sweet dreams over,
Fanning dark thoughts away,
While, dearest, 'tis thy lover
Who'll bid each bright one stay
R
The Spook-visiter is perhaps seen more often,
however, under the form of a cadet, in which guise,
in fact, he generally makes his calls at any agreeable
house within a few miles of West Point; and always
when the young gentleman whose appearance he
assumes must necessarily be restricted to his
quarters
.
In this shape he has more than once made
some well-remembered visits to places in the
vicinity
on either side of the river, whither a pair of bright
eyes attracted him; while sometimes he has
represented
the tastes of the corps not quite so reputably
by his share in certain riotings at a once noted
taproom
in the neighbourhood of Buttermilk Falls. He
is now so well known, however, that no one's
character
suffers from his freaks in the regions
hereabouts
;
and, indeed, his reputation is so light, that it
has more than once had to bear the blame for little
gaucheries
, which were, in fact, practised by some of
the least civilized of the annual Board of Visiters to
the Academy, but which, like everything else that is
strange, unaccountable, or of doubtful propriety, is
always here laid to
The Spook-visiter
.
THE MISSIONARY BRIDE.
Young bride,
No keener dreg shall quiver on thy lip
Till the last ice-cup cometh.
Mrs. Sigourney
.
The
leading circumstances of the following
narrative
may possibly be known to more than one of
my readers; but, if now recognised, notwithstanding
the altered guise in which they are here given, I
trust that they are still so presented to the public as
to infringe upon no feeling of domestic privacy.
In the spring of 18 the Rev. Mr. B, of
, in Connecticut, received a letter from his old
friend and college chum, the Rev. E T,
who had been for some time established as a
missionary
in one of the islands of the Pacific, soliciting
the fulfilment, on the part of his friend, of a most
delicate and peculiar office for him. The request
of T, who, having been long isolated from the
world, had arrived at the age of forty without
marrying
,
was nothing more nor less than that B
would choose a wife for him, and prevail upon the
lady to come out to her expectant husband by the
first opportunity. Strange as it may seem, Mr. B
found but little difficulty in complying with the
request of his friend. The subject of missions at
that time filled the minds of the whole religious
community; and, in some sections of the Union, a
wild zeal wrought so powerfully in the breasts of
individuals, that they were eager to abandon their
homes and their country, and sunder every domestic
tie, in order to do their Master's bidding in strange
and inhospitable lands. Nor was this a mere burst
of enthusiasm, that was to pass off with other fashions
of the day; for its fruits are still constantly
maturing
;
and now, as then, there are not a few instances
of young females of respectability and
accomplishments
educating themselves for the avowed purpose
of becoming the wives of missionaries. With these
preliminary remarks, I will at once introduce the
reader to the subject of the following sketch, with
whom I became acquainted in the manner here
related.
I had been enjoying a week's shooting at Quogue,
on Long Island, when, wishing to return to New
York by steamboat through the Sound, I engaged a
seat one morning in the stage-coach for Sag
Harbour
,
which sometimes stopped for dinner at mine
host's, Mr. Pierson Howell. In the present instance
it was delayed merely long enough to receive my
luggage and myself. The only other passenger
was a female, whom, notwithstanding the effectual
screen of her long cottage bonnet, I knew to be
pretty, from the quizzical look my landlord put on
as he shook hands with me at parting after I had
taken my seat by her side.
The day was warm; and we had not driven far
before, without appearing officious, I had an
opportunity
of obtaining a glimpse of my companion's
face, while leaning before her to adjust the curtains
on her side of the coach. It was beautiful
exceedingly
beautiful. Not the beauty which arises from
regularity of feature or brilliancy of complexion
though in the latter it was not deficient; but that
resistless and thoroughly womanish charm which
lies in expression solely. It evinced that feminine
softness of disposition which is often the farthest
removed from weakness of character, though, by the
careless observer, it is generally confounded with it;
and which, though sometimes it may mislead one in
judging of the temper of the possessor, yet almost
invariably, like the ore-blossom upon the soil that is
rich in mines beneath, bespeaks the priceless treasure
of an affectionate and noble heart. The reader
who would realize the attractions of the countenance
before me, need only call up their most winning
expression in the features he most loves.
I gradually fell into conversation with my
companion
;
and, stopping at South Hampton to change
horses, her first remark upon our again taking our
seats, was, that she feared we should not get into
Sag Harbour until after dark, when she would be
unable to find
the ship
which was expected to sail in
the morning. As I knew that no ships but whalers
lay at that time in Sag Harbour, I could not at first
possibly conceive what a young and delicate female
could have to do aboard of such a vessel; and then,
the idea suggesting itself that she might be the
daughter or sister of the captain, who came to bid
him farewell for his two years' cruise, I asked her
if she expected to remain on board the ship till she
sailed.
Oh, yes, sir, was the reply; I go out in her.
R 2
What! to the South Sea? rejoined I. You
have relations on board, though, I suppose?
No, sir, I don't know any one in the ship; but
I have a letter for the captain, which, I think, will
procure me a safe voyage to the  Islands.
The  Islands! Is it possible you have
friends in so remote a place as the  Islands?
They must be dear friends, toopardon meto
carry you, unprotected, so far.
My hu-us-band is there, she answered, with
some embarrassment, though the growing twilight
prevented me from seeing whether the confusion
extended from her voice to her countenance. The
peculiarity in the young lady's manner, as she
pronounced
the word husband, piqued my curiosity;
but, as it would have been impertinent to push my
inquiries farther, I did not urge the subject, but
merely remarked, that her youth had prevented me
from taking her for a married woman.
Nor am I married yet, was the reply. And,
indeed, she continued, with a slight tremour in her
voice, I have never seen the man who is to be my
husband. An expression of unfeigned surprise, of
a more lively interest, perhapsfor I have said
the maid was fair, and we had now been some
hours
tte--tte
escaped me: I scarcely remember
what followed; but, before we had reached the
inndoor
,
the ingenuous girl had given me a full account
of herself and her fortunes. She was an orphan
child, and had been bred up in great seclusion in a
clergyman's family in Western New York. She
was, in a word, the young enthusiast whom the Rev.
Mr. B had chosen as a wife for his missionary
friend, and prevailed upon to encounter a six months'
voyage through stormy latitudes, for the purpose of
connecting herself for life with a man she had never
seen. I did not express a sympathythat would be
useless in her situation; much less did I give vent to
the indignation with which her story filled me: her
fanatical friends, who permitted a young, a
beautiful
,
and delicate female to take so wild a step, had,
perhaps, after all, acted from the best of motives.
Indeed, the poor thing herself, though not exactly
proud of having been chosen to the station she was
about to fill, seemed determined to enter upon it with
all the exalted feeling of one who fulfils a high
duty, and who is on the certain road to a preferment
which most of her sex might envy. It would
certainly
have been a very equivocal kindness to
interpose
another view of the subject, and disturb the
honest convictions of propriety which could alone
have sustained her in a situation so trying.
I accompanied Alice Verefor such I learned
her name to beto the vessel; and, after bidding
her a kind farewell, I took an opportunity, while
passing over the side, to whisper a few words to the
captain, which might induce him to believe that she
was not so friendless as she appeared to be, and
secure her whatever attention it was in his power to
offer. In the morning, having a few moments to
spare before breakfast, I again strolled down to the
pier; but the whaler had hoisted sail with the dawn,
and a brisk wind had already carried her out into
the Sound: nor was it till years after that I heard
the name of Alice Vere, and learned the issue of her
voyage; though the name, and the features, and
voice of her who bore it, did, I confess, long haunt
me. It was too pretty a name, I thought, to be
changed lightly; and, somehow, when I heard it, I
could not, for the life of me, ask that into which
it was to be merged for ever. The sequel of her
story I learned from a friend, whose vessel, being
driven from her course in coming from the East
Indies
,
stopped at the  Islands to water, where he
casually heard the fate of the missionary girl.
The tender and imaginative temperament of Alice
Vere, though perhaps it impelled her to make the
sacrifice for which she was schooled by those
who called themselves her friends, but badly fitted
her for the cold destiny to which she was
condemned
.
The imagination of any woman, isolated upon
the great deep for six long months, with nothing to
think of but the stranger husband to whose arms she
was consigned, could not but be active, whatever
her mental discipline might be. But with a girl
of fancy and feeling, who had taken a step so
irretrievable
when surrounded by approving and
encouraging
friends, what must have been her
emotions
in the solitude of her own cabin when such an
influencesuch a sustaining atmosphere of opinion
was wholy withdrawn. Doubt and fear would at
first creep into her mind; and, when these
disheartening
guests could no longer be controlled by
factitious
notions of duty, fancy would throw her fairy
veil around their forms, and paint some happy
termination
of a prospect so forbidding. And thus it
was with Alice Vere. Anxiety soon yielded to hope;
her future husband and her future home filled her
mind with a thousand dreaming fancies. She was
no romance reader, and, therefore, could not make a
hero
of the future partner of her bosom; but a saint
he indeed might bea saint, too, not less in form than
in godliness, for the association of physical and
moral
beauty is almost inseparable in the minds of the
young and the inexperienced. She imagined him,
too, as one who, though not looking from Nature
up to Nature's God,for God must be first and all
in all with him,would still be one whose mind would
look from the Creator to his works, with a soul to
appreciate all their excellences. The fancied
portrait
of her future husband was laid in simple, though
impressive, colours; but the background of the picture
was filled with all the splendours of a topical clime,
of groves such as the early Christians wandered
through in Grecian Isles, and skies such as bent
over Him who taught beneath them in the golden
orient. True, she was to be exiled for ever from the
sheltered scenes and quiet fire-side of her youth; but
would she not be content to rove for ever with one
only companion, whose soul could fully sympathize
with hers in scenes so fresh and so Elysian?
With a mind softened, if not enervated, by these
day-dreams, not less than by the bland and
voluptuous
clime in which they had been for some days
sailing, our young enthusiast could scarcely suppress
a cry of delight when, upon coming on deck one
morning, she found that the ship had cast anchor in
the beautiful bay of, where her wildest visions
of tropical scenery seemed more than realized. The
water around the ship was as clear as the mountain
streams of her native country; and the palm trees
and cocoas that bent over it, lifted their slender
columns, and waved their tufted heads against a sky
more purely bright than any she had ever beheld;
while clouds of tropical birds, of the most dazzling
plumage, sailed along the shore, or sported around
the vessel, as if wholly regardless of man.
A number of the natives had launched their light
barks from the shore, filled with bread-fruit, and other
acceptable luxuries, to those who have been long at
sea. Alice was watching their approach with girlish
interest in the novelty of the scene, when a boat
from the opposite side of the crescent-shaped harbour
made the ship, and, almost before she was aware of
its approach, a striking figure, dressed after the
clerical fashion of her own country, in a full suit of
black, presented himself at the companion-way, and,
leaping on deck, instantly hurried toward her. She
turned roundlooked at him intently for a moment
made one faltering step toward him, and fainted
in his arms.
The gentleman laid her carefully upon a flag that
chanced to be folded near; and, still supporting her
head upon one knee, gazed upon her features with
looks of surprise and anxiety, which soon yielded to
complete bewilderment as she addressed him upon
coming to herself.
Thank God! she exclaimed, gradually reviving;
thank God! thank God!how can I ever have
deserved this? and, bending her face forward, she
impressed a reverential kiss upon his hand, and then
covered her face in confusion.
My readers have all read of
love at first sight
,
and some, perhaps, have heard of instances of it
among their acquaintance. The skeptics to the
doctrine, however, I imagine, far outnumber those
who really believe in it. It is the latter, therefore,
whom I will beg to recollect all the circumstances
which preceded this singular scene; when they
cannot deem it unnatural that the wrought-up
feelings
of an ardent and sensitive girl should thus burst
forth upon first meeting, in her affianced husband,
her appointed friend and protector in a strange land,
him that religion and duty taught her that she
must
loveupon meeting in him all that her dreams of
happiness for long, long months of anxious solitude
had pictured. I ought to add, however, that the
interchance of several letters between Miss Vere
and her betrothed before leaving her native shores,
had, while partially removing the awkwardness of
their first meeting, supplied perhaps that food for
young thoughts which, in a nature artless and
enthusiastic as hers, might engender the most
confiding
affections even for an object she had never
seen.
And is this beautiful island to be our home?
Are these my husband's people around us? Oh!
how I shall love everything that belongs to this fair
land! But why do you not speak to your poor
wanderer? Alas! alas! can I ever deserve all
these blessings?
The embarrassment of the gentleman seemed
only to increase as the agitated girl thus poured out
her feelings. He begged her to be calm, and seemed
most nervously solicitous to restrain her expressions;
and the captain approaching at that moment, he made
a hurried and indistinct apology for his abruptness;
and, withdrawing his arm from her waist as she
regained
her feet, moved off to seek the mate in another
part of the vessel.
Ah! Mr. Supercargo, I mistrusted we should
find you at this island! exclaimed the mate, turning
round and shaking hands with him as the
gentleman
touched his shoulder upon joining this officer
near the capstan. All well at home, Mr F.
Here's a letter from your wife.
The other tore open the letter, and devoured it
with evident delight; and then, shaking hands again
with the officer, exclaimed,
Thank you, thank you; all are well at home,
as you tell me. But how in the world came that
beautiful insane creature in your vessel?
A mad woman! The devil a bit of a mad
woman or any other woman have we on board,
except Mrs. T, the wife of Parson Tthat
is to be.
The wife of Mr. T?
Why, yes, as good as his wife. She's a gal
from York State we are carrying out to be spliced
to old Dead-eyes.
The gentlemanlike supercargo seemed struck with
concern; in fact, the true state of the case flashed
upon his mind in a moment. The deep mourning
which he wore out of respect for one of his
employers
,
whose ship he was that day to visit, had evidently
caused him to be mistaken for a clergyman; and
the excited imagination of the lonely girl had prompted
her to see in him the future guardian of her friendless
condition. Nothing, however, could be done: an
attempt at explanation would but betray her secret
to the coarse natures by which she was surrounded.
Her lot in life, too, was cast; his sympathy could
avail her nothing, and a few days' voyage would
consign her to the care of him who might legitimately
received the proofs of tenderness which he had so
innocently elicited in his own behalf. He called for
his boat, and, passing slowly and dejectedly over the
side of the vessel, pulled for the shore.
Alice Vere had, in the meantime, retired to the
cabin, where she expected her loverit was the first
time she had even
thought
the wordto join her.
Her own feelings had so crowded upon her mind
during the brief interview, that they had prevented
her from observing his; and the luxury of emotion
in which she now indulged, and in which she thought
there was not one consideration human or divine to
make it wrong for her to indulge, prevented her from
observing the lapse of time. Simple and
single-hearted
,
with a nature whose affluent tenderness piety
could regulate and delicacy could temper, though
neither could repress, she poured the flood of her
pent-up feelings in what seemed their
heaven-appointed
channel; in a word, she was gone an age in love
while numbering the minutes of her acquaintance
with her lover. His noble and manly figure, his
alert and elastic step in approaching her, and the
S
kindly look of feeling and intelligence his features
wore, a look of intense interest which she, poor
girl, little dreamed was prompted by concern for
another
,
of whom he was about to ask her; nay, even
the hurried tones of his agitated, but still most
musical
,
voice, all, all were stamped upon her heart
as indelibly as if their impress had been the work
of years.
The water, rippling along the vessel's side, first
roused her from this delicious revery, and the mate,
who was a rough, but kind-hearted, seaman, at that
moment came below to make an entry in his log.
Well, Miss, he cried, with this breeze, we'll
soon bring up at the parson's door; and right glad
to be rid of us you'll be, I guess, when we get there.
Only thirty-six hours more, and you'll be home.
This island, then, is not Mr. T's residence?
This?Oh, no. There used to be a Britisher
here, but they have got no missionary man upon it
now.
And does Mr. Thave to go thus from island
to island in the performance of his duty? or did he
only come so far from his people to meet me? she
asked, with some embarrassment.
Come!
exclaimed the seaman, not a little
puzzled
;
why, law bless your soul, Parson T
has not been here, at least that I know on.
Surely he's now on board, cried Alice, alarmed,
yet hardly knowing why: surely I saw him
speaking
to you on deck?
To
me
, Missus! I never cared to exchange
two words with old Dead-eyesaxing your pardon
since I knowed him. Speaking to me! Why, that
that waswhy  my eyes! you have not
taken young Washington F's handsome figure
for old Ebenezer T's mouldy carcass?
The rude, but not unfriendly, mate had hardly
uttered the sentence before he cursed himself to the
bottom of every sea between the poles, for the use
he had made of his tongue. Alice fell lifeless upon
the cabin-floor. The seaman shouted for assistance;
and then, as he and the better-bred captain, who, as
the father of a large and estimable family, was a
more fitting nurse for the forlorn maiden, applied
one restorative after another, she recovered
animation
at intervals. Fit succeeded fit, however; and
then, as the wind rose, and a brewing tempest called
all hands on deck, the captain could only place her
kindly in her berth, in the hope that the new
excitement
at hand might possibly be of service to his
patient.
The ship was driven widely out of her course.
Alice was long indifferent to everything around;
but, as the storm lasted for several days, and finally
threatened to destroy the stout craft in which she
sailed, the near prospect of the death for which she
had but now been longing, called all her religious
feelings into action. She felt that she was the child
of destiny: her gentle piety would not allow her to
wish for a sudden and violent death, though the
peace of the grave was what she most desired. She
prayed, then, not for life, but for an escape from
its horrors; alike from those which raged in the
angry
elements around her, and those which warred so
fearfully in her own bosom.
Weeks elapsed before the vessel reached the
haven
,
of which she had once been within a few hours'
sail. The missionary girl had apparently recovered
from all bodily indisposition, and her features were
again as calm as ever; but they wore the calmness
of rigidity, not of peace. It was a sacrifice of
herself
to Heaven which she had meditated originally.
And why, exclaimed she, mentallywhy should
I shrink from the offering now, when Providence
has enabled me to make it richer and more abundant
to make my soul's triumph more complete as its
trial is more bitter and severe? Still, when the
isle of her destination hove in view, it was with a
shudder that she first looked upon the shore, and
thought of the fate that there awaited her.
Woman's heart is a strange, a wayward thing. In
many a bosom its strongest chords are never touched
by the hand to which it is yielded. It is often
bestowed
with faint consent on him who seeks it
bestowed
in utter ignorance of the power of loving
the wealth of tenderness it hoards within itself.
Circumstance, blind contact, and the strong
necessity
of loving, will afterward mould it to its fate,
and prevent any repining at its choice; but when
once its hidden strings have vibrated, and given out
their full musicwhen once its inmost treasures
have been disclosed to its owner, counted over, and
yielded up with a full knowledge of their worth, to
anotherwhen the pearl of the soul has been once
lavished in the mantling cup of affection, it revolts
from all feebler preferences, and is true, even in
death, to
its one only love
.
The missionary soon came on board to claim his
bride. He was a plain and worthy man, with
nothing to distinguish him from the members of his
profession in our country, who mistake the promptings
of zeal for the inspiration of a special calling, and
who, without minds matured by experience or
enlightened
by education, leave the plough or the
shop-board
to become the instructors of those who, with
feelings as sincere as their own, and understandings
far more exercised in knowledge of good and evil,
are expected to bow to their narrow teachings, and
to receive them, not as humble soldiers of the Cross,
needing guidance like themselves, but as the
captains
and leaders of the church militant, armed in
full panoplya living bulwark against its foes.
Alice Vere had but little experience in society; but
the quickening power of love had lately called all her
dormant perceptions of taste and feeling into play, and
a very brief interview sufficed for her to read the
character of her destined husband. She felt that
she could never love him. Respect him she did,
as she would have done the humblest brother of
her faith; and had she never known what love
was, her regard would perhaps not have been
with-holden
in time; for every woman loves the father
of her children, if he be not essentially ungenial.
But if there be an agonizing thought to a girl of
delicacy
and sensibility, it is the idea of becoming a
bride under such circumstances as surrounded poor
Alice Verethe thought that her heart shall beat
against the bosom of a stranger, when its every pulse
throbs for another. Still, a high, imperious duty, as
she believed, constrained her, and she prepared to
resign herself to her fate.
The nuptial day arrived. It had been arranged
that the master of the vessel, on board of which Alice,
wistfully lingering, had begged to remain, should
perform the ceremony, (agreeably to the laws of the
state of New York, by which marriage is merely a
civil contract, requiring only a formal declaration of
the parties before competent witnesses.) Mr. T
himself commenced the ceremony by a prayer, which,
as giving solemnity to the occasion, was perhaps
most proper in itself; but it was painfully long, and
seemed to refer to almost everything else but the
immediate
subject of interest. At length the bride,
whose languid limbs refused to sustain her so long
in a standing position, sank into a seat, and the
missionary
,
glancing a look of reproval at her, abruptly
concluded his harangue. The worthy seaman was
more expeditious in getting through with his share
of the office. He merely asked the parties
severally
if they acknowledged each other as man and wife.
The missionary made his response in the
affirmative
with a slow and grave distinctness; but Alice
faltered in her reply. A tumult of feelings seemed
oppressing her senses for a moment; she looked to
the untamed forest, whose boughs waved unfettered
on the shore, to the broad main that spread its free
waves around her, and the wild bird that sported over
its bosom:
Then she turn'd
To him who was to be her sole shelterer now,
And placed her hand in his, and raised her eye
One moment upward,
whence her strength did come
.
The certificates, which had been previously drawn
up, being then signed and witnessed, the
missionary
concluded with another homily; and the crew,
who had been allowed to collect upon the
quarter-deck
during the ceremonial, dispersed over the
vessel.
It was now sunset; and, as a heavy cloud, which
threatened rain, brooded over the island, the captain
politely insisted that Mr. T should not think of
returning to the shore, but take possession of his own
private cabin. The rain soon after beginning to fall
in torrents, drove those on deck below. Here the
mates claimed the privilege of having a jorum of
punch to drink the health of the bride; and, the
captain
being willing to unite with them, Alice was
compelled
to retire to the new quarters which had been
just provided for her; while the festive seamen
insisted
upon keeping their clerical guest for a while
among themselves. Their mirth soon became so
uproarious as to mock the tempest without, when a
sudden squall struck the vessel, carrying her over,
even as she lay at anchor under bare poles, upon
her beam-ends. The seamen, followed by the
missionary
,
rushed to the deck, where the glare of the
lightning, as they looked to windward, revealed to
them a female figure standing upon the taffrail, with
arms outstretched toward a huge wave that lifted its
over-arching crest above her, and threatened to
ingulf
the vessel. A cry of horror escaped the
revellers
the
bridegroom breathed a prayer as he clung
to the rigging for safety; and then, as the descending
sea righted the vessel, a suffocating moan was heard
above the surge that swept the body of Alice Vere
like a drift of foam across her decks.
The morning came at last, the sun rose serenely,
the bright waves rippled joyously beneath the stern
of the vessel, and their reflected light, playing through
the sloping windows of the cabin, glanced upon the
unpressed
couch of the Missionary Bride. None could
even tell how she had made her way to the deck in the
midst of the tempest; yet none have ever
whispered
the sin of self-destruction against the lovely, the
lonely, the ill-fated
Alice Vere
.
THE END.