CHAPTER I.
The Collegianand the Story of Edward LambThe Last Day of Term
.
`If this Republic shall escape the catastrophe that terminated the career of
every one of its predecessors in ancient and modern days, it must be by the
prevalence of more just and liberal views in regard to the distinctions
assigned
to BIRTH, MONEY, and OCCUPATION. The people must be made to see and to
feel that the LAW OF REPUTATION, as now observed, has a false basisthat there
can be no such thing as personal merit without virtue and usefulnessand
that no branch of industry which contributes to the general comfort is
intrinsically
degrading. We have, even among the working classes a scale of merit
graduated by occupation, and that fixes, to some extent, the merit of
individuals
.
It is a relic of the absurd prejudices of Europe, by which Aristocracy and
Monarchy are upheld, and shows that, although we are as a nation free, the
marks of the old servitude are not yet obliterated.'
Walter Forward
.
The
false estimate between professions and trades is a subject which we have
twice before treated; once in a Tale called `
Edward Betham
,
or What is
True Respectability
?' published in the Philadelphia Saturday Courier, and a
second time in a story called `
The Two Apprentices
;' also recently
contributed
to the same very excellent paper. We now take it up in a new aspect
in the following Tale, and it is our intention not to let the subject here rest
until
we have done something to draw public attention to an evil that menaces
the stability of our institutions, and the very existence of our liberties. We
have written full enough about pirates, romantic Castilian maidens, and
bearded
and becloaked Spanish Dons, and mean, hereafter, in some degree to atone
for these sanguinary perpetrations by devoting our pen, so long as we can
handle one, to encounter and put to shame this most heartfelt of all errors;
or to speak with more truth,
habits
of the American people. It is a subject
that calls loudly for the itinerant Lecturer and Societies of Reform and
Intemperance
;
for this whole system of
pseudo-respectability
which we combat is
none other than ambitious and wild intoxication of the judgment, and a
debasing
,
contemptible slavery of the understanding.
In a student's chamber, on the second floor of one of the ancient halls of
Yale, sat a young gentleman having his elbow upon a table piled with books
and several open accounts, moodily supporting his cheek in his hand. It was
late at night. The echoing passages had long since ceased to resound with the
tread of the late returning student, and but few doors had lights gleaming from
beneath or streaming through the key-hole upon the opposite wall, showing that
the occupants were still up.
In the chamber of the young man there burned upon the table a single lamp,
shedding a flickering and uncertain light upon the surrounding objects. The
room was plainly if not meanly furnished. A broad pine table, unpainted,
meagerly
covered with a piece of green cloth, stood in the centre, on which were
the lamp and books; a few common chairs were scattered about without
regularity
;
and one large one with arms and a leaf fixed to it for writing, and in
which he was seated, stood by the table. A half-opened door exposed a small
closet or bed-room in which was a rude cot-bed, a single chair, and a scanty
wardrobe, hung about on nails driven into the white-washed walls. The room
in which he sat had two windows, with half-calico curtains, and looked out
upon
the College green, upon which the clear moon shone like noon-day. A flood
of its light streamed in through the window and fell upon the uncarpeted floor,
as if to display that poverty of the apartment which the dim lamp would have
left in obscurity.
In the silence of midnight the solitary occupant of the chamber sat with his
pale cheek resting in his palm, and his eyes thoughtfully fixed upon the ground.
The faintly beaming lamp dimly exposed his countenance, while the silvery
radiance of the moonlight which seemed to infuse itself into the whole
atmosphere
of the chamber, without shining directly upon him, shed over his
features
a soft passive glow that harmonized touchingly with their pale,
intellectual
expression. He was about twenty-two years of age, and so far as could
be ascertained, through a faded and much too small gingham gown, which he
wore, was of manly height and person. His forehead was high, white,
blue-veined
,
and shaded with short brown hair of silky texture. The hand, the
fingers
of which were half hid in it, was delicate, and then, as if from illness, the
cheek that it supported was colorless, save at occasional intervals when a
bright flash would come transiently over it, as if driven hither by some sudden
and painful reflection. The features were regular and strong rather than
handsome
.
His eyes were large and full of intellect, and the shape and fixedness
of the mouth gave indication of energy, which the pervading softness of the
eye qualified with the promise of great sensibility. The general expression of
his face and the impression it would irresistibly convey to an observer, was
that of a frank and generous, but sensitive and proud spirit. He had been
seated
thus since the chapel clock had tolled eleven, and was only roused by its
loud ringing stroke upon twelve.
`Twelve o'clock, and the last day of term has come to an end,' he said,
removing
his hand suddenly and clenching the fingers together with a sort of
despair; `term is closed and in a situation that would drive a man to madness
or to suicide. These accoonts! They stare me in the face like grinning
demons
.
How am I ever to pay one of them and yet I
must
do it. There is
no alternative but infamy. Oh, my father, my good, noble, noble, but
misjudging
father! Would to God your son had died ere he had been brought to
see this heavy hour!'
He rose and paced his chamber with a quick and nervous step, at every turn
pausing a pace before the table and looking as if about to take up one of the
accounts
that lay on it, and then with a shrinking gesture and an expression of
pain writhing his fine countenance, he continued his walk. `Yes, I see
nothing
before me but disgrace. The finger of scorn! the lip of contempt' the
censure
of the good and the severe judgments of those I loved and honored! for
debt is
the
offence which like lost virtue in a woman, involves in the eyes of the
world all other wrongs and errors, and there is no pity or sympathy extended
towards the victim. Even the best man I love and honor would, were I his
debtor, demand his right, nor accept my plea of poverty. Oh, my father, my
misguided father! what a life of misery and woe has your ambition to make me
a professional manyour prejudices against trades, in store for me! But this
complaining of my lot is useless and weak! I must nerve myself to meet the
evil; for difficulties, they tell me which are faced, are half conquered. I will
examine these dread accounts and know justly the height and depth of my
wretched and painful position.'
With this good resolution the young student sat down again by his table and
took the accounts up in his hands. There were seven of them, each one
unreceipted
and written in as varied styles of chirograpy as the pursuits of the
creditors.
Here is Mr. Twining's for my
board in commons, at one dollar and a
half per week; for sixteen weeks up to to-day
, - - - - - $24,00,
though I have been ill for three weeks. Here in St. Leger; the Stationers bill
quills, paper, ink, wafers, and a second hand copy of Eschylus, which I could
not borrow nor beg, $4,87 1-2
This bill must be paid to-morrow, for half of it is of two terms standing, and
one dollar of it of more than a year. He says he needs it, and has indeed been
always very lenient! But what can I do? He is to send in the morning for
it, so says a line on the back. Mr. Twining, the Steward's bill, must be paid
too, as he says, to-morrow! Unhappy morrow! I could wish, were the wish
not wicked, that the time would stand still and never bring the morrow! But
such feelings are unworthy of a man and a Christian! Here is David Mayer's
account! To mending boots, 80 cts.; to heel tapping, 1s.; to sewing up a rip
for the third time, and then patching, 2s.; to a pair of half boots, $1,50; total,
$2,18 cts.and I have not that sum in the world! Here is Mr. Shears, the
Tailor's account! To mending a coat and sewing on three buttons, 25 cts.; to
patching a vest, 12 1-2 cts.; to cleansing, pressing and patching a pair of pants,
50 cts.; to a new black merino waistcoat, $2,00; total, $2,87 1-2. This man
will give me trouble, I fear' He has been twice to-day for his money, fearing
I shall slip off in the early stage! If I do not pay him he may imprison me!
Good God!to go prisonthe idea of which has almost suffocated me the last
three hours, would be the death blow to all my hopes in this life!' He placed
his hand across his brow for a painful minute, and then lifting his eyes upwards
he said fervently, `I humbly beseech thee, oh! Father, mercifully to look upon
me now in this present time of my trouble and adversity; and graciously be
pleased to deliver me from all those evils which the craft or revenge of man may
work against me, that being hurt by no persecutions, I may evermore
gratefully
serve thee in holiness and pureness of living, to thy honor and glory, through
our Mediator and Advocate, Jesus Christ, our Lord.'
Having given utterance to this humble and trusting prayer, his countenance,
became serener, and with more calmness and repose of mind, the inevitable
result
of confidence in God, he examined the remaining accounts, one of which
was for a hat, $2,50, another for medicine, $3,10, and the other and last one for
medical advice and attendance, $6,00
The minuteness of detail into which we have gone, is needful for the moral
of our story. It both shows the economy of the student, and what is equally
important
,
that he had not gone into debt beyond the actual wants of his existence.
The amount of them he now added up and found the sum total to be $45,53.
He looked at the figures which represented the extent of his pecuniary
obligations
,
for a few moments, with an expression of hopeless distress. `And how
am I to liquidate all this? how am I to pay the least sum which contributes to
make up this fearful aggregate! I can see no door of relief! no avenue of
escape
from this fearful responsibility.'
He rose and walked to the window! The still moon lay on the ground and
trees like blessings shed down upon earth, while man slept. The brightness of
the scene, the far off stars in the calm blue heaven, the silent and peaceful
sailing
of the moon away in her own bright home, unruffled by all the changes, and
woes and tears of the earth, she seemed created to serve and beautify, at first
mocked the disturbed and painful nature of his thoughts. But gradually the
silence
and softness of the holy hour of night had its soothing influence upon his
spirits; and soon feeling the effect, he took his hat to walk forth and see if the
lonely beauty of the night might not effectually restore calmness to his bosom,
and give him that resolution and strength he so much needed, to enable him to
meet the morrow.
Before going out, he extinguished, with habitual economy, his faint lamp,
and locking his door, descended the stairs and passed through the hall out of
doors. With a lighter step than his heavy heart gave promise of, he took his
way, the only person moving, across the shining green, the borders of which
were pitchy dark with the shadow of the avenues of elms which surrounded it.
The Colleges, with their long lines of windows and intermediate towers and
spires, rose still and solemn in the moonlight. Here and there a light gleamed
in a window, showing that the occupant was up, either at his studies, or more
probably, preparing his luggage for an early start for the home and friends that
were looking daily for his coming. The young man sighed as he thought of his
own home which he was not
able
to reach.
His footsteps unguided took him in the direction of the beautiful cemetery
which he entered. How lovely and unearthly beautiful was the scene! Green
willows drooping above snowy marble and waved in gentle night wind.
Monuments
rose like the beauteous homes of spirits around him on every side! He
moved slowly and reverently along among these quiet habitations of the dead,
and forgot that he was unhappy. The hour and the scene melted his spirits!
He was all feeling and gentleness and love! Passing by the monumental
mansoleums of the rich and the renowned, he came to an humble grey stone in
a remote corner. Neither the shade of the bending willow nor cypress, nor the
pleasant shadow of flowers lay upon the grave, but green and mound-like it slept
beneath the blue skies in the light of the gentle moon and weeping stars, with a
dew drop glittering upon every spear of grass. The letters carved upon the
humble tombstone at the grave's head, were as follows:
THIS STONE IS ERECTED
To the Memory of
EDWARD LAMB,
OF THE JUNIOR CLASS OF YALE COLLEGE,
WHO FELL A VICTIM TO
A FALSE SYSTEM OF SOCIETY,
IN HIS 20TH YEAR,
By a Friend and Classmate
.
The student stood for a few moments, reading the inscription by the clear
light, and then said, with grief modulating tones of his voice
`Sleep peacefully there where thou liest, dear Lamb! thy day of sorrow is
ended and thou art at rest! I remain, alas, to struggle with the same stern fate
that crushed thy more sensitive and prouder spirit. Sleep on beneath the quiet
stars and holy moon! man cannot reach thee in the grave! the arrows of his
persecutions strike harmlessly against this marble shield that shelters thy head.
Oh, that thy lot were now mine! that beneath this little spot of green sward
beside
thy grave I could lie down and take my rest and know no fearful morrow!
But I am of the living and must still bear on through woe and ill, till God in
mercy calls me as he hath called thee, to rest. Oh, thou, who dost not regard
as beneath thy notice the least sparrow that falls wearied to the earth,
mercifully
strengthen me against the calamities before me, and give me patience to
endure them, and in due time a happy deliverance from them: for my heart
faileth me for fear? I bless thee that when the evils of this life are ended I can
lie down and rest in the calm repose of the grave.'
Upborne with the hope that the quiet of the grave remained for him at last
when all he then suffered would be as if it had not been, he sought to
strengthen
his soul with overlooking the present evils of his condition and contemplate
their sometime, end. `Yes, the time
will
come, when this same moon shall
shine down at midnight upon my grave as it does upon my happy Edward's,
and my spirit be blest beyond the serene depths where sparkle the stars above
me. The certainty of this shall sustain me through all I have to encounter, and,
with God's good blessing, I will try and meet my condition as becometh one
whose hopes are not here but beyond the grave. Rest peacefully, noble spirit
My heart bled for thee while thou wert struggling with the bitterness of life;
it sympathises with thy undisturbed repose. Sad is thy melancholy tale, noble
victim of the heartless ambition of others. Would that it were poured into the
ears of all misguided parents who would sacrifice the happiness of their children
to their parental pride.'
Sad indeed is the story of poor Edward Lamb! and while our student is
seeking to soothe his spirit by rambling farther among the sacred homes of the
dead, we will relate it in a few brief words to the reader. The Rev. Henry
Lamb was the pastor of the Presbyterian church of one of the most rural
villages
that border the romantic Merrimac. The tower of the church rose serenely
amid a venerable grove upon its banks, and near it stood a neat mansion in
which he resided. Domestic peace seemed to dwell side by side with religion,
in that quiet spot, and the passions of man to find there no admission. Yet the
inmates of the dwelling were human and were governed by like passions with
others, though the influence of the christian religion, of which the head of the
household was a minister, exerted its power over their hearts, and subdued and
tempered, if it did not sanctify, the natural evil of their natures. The one most
governed, both in precept and in life, by peaceful and elevating doctrines of the
Gospel was, as ought to be supposed, the minister himself. He was learned,
sensible, and sound in faith and well grounded in doctrine. His life was
blameless
and useful, and his conversation honest in the sight of all men.
Temperate
,
apt to teach, diligent in his vocation and of mild and pleasing manners,
Mr. Lamb was respected, not to say beloved by all. In him the light and
excellency
of Christianity as it affects the social relations was beautifully
exhibited
,
and a kinder father and husband was never known. He had a sweet
Christian
wife, who had in the course of their union, with that generosity peculiar
to poor ministers' ladies, presented him with eight children, one son and seven
daughters. Thus good Mr. Lamb was blessed. His salary, however, was but
nine hundred dollars a year, and the house in which he lived was not a `
parsonage'
that
sacred shelter which the church has so nobly provided for its
servants
.
Often a barrel of flour, or a ham, or a turkey, found its way from some
benevolent hand into the minister's larder, but he found that to get through
the year without debt, required great trusting of Providence. Indeed, the
grocers
and mechanics of his own church generally sent him in their accounts
receipted
at each year's close, trusting to a reward for such good deeds to faith
in that saying, which saith `He that giveth to the poor lendeth to the Lord.'
With all this assistance, Mr. Lamb struggled along with difficulty, and being
no trained economist like the man who gains his livelihood by selling and
saving
,
he seldom had any money in his pocket, and never knew any of the
mysterious
rites that go on in that temple of Mammon, a Bank. We have said that
Mr. Lamb was a sincere Christian, a useful and laborious minister and an
honest
man. But one thingliberality of opinion in reference to tradeswe
regret
to say he lacked in common with most professional men, even though they
may be ministers of that Gospel which had for its first teachers men who while
they preached, sustained their necessities by `laboring with their hands at some
useful trade.' Some of them were net-menders; others were occupied in
finishing
and tanning of hides; and, above all, the sacred founder of our holy
religion
,
reverently be it spoken, worked daily at the carpenter's trade till called
to enter actively upon his mission of salvation. But modern apostles forget
these things.
Mr. Lamb, in common with others of his position in society, was imbued with
a prejudice against mechanic traders! Not that he did not think them useful
for by means of them he was sheltered, clothed, and fed; but he had been
educated in the false and erroneous notion that mechanical employment
involved
something, he or no one else could tell
what
, intrinsically degrading! He
thought that a man's occupation fixed, to some extent, his merit! He could
meet and invite to his table, as an acknowledged gentleman, the `merchant,'
though a retailer of rum, oats, gingerbread, and fish-hooks; the lawyer, though
his meat and drink were salted with the tears of the unfortunate; the doctor,
though a legalized murderer! But the man who made his arm-chair, built his
house, and bound his books, never sat at his board! Out upon such false ideas
of things! shame on such absurd prejudices! fie upon such slavish servitude
of the understanding! When will men, when will christian men, learn to
think and act sensibly in relation to this subject? Generation after generation
is born to trouble enough without having entailed upon it an evil and a sorrow
through the pride of the preceding.
Mr. Lamb, being thus prejudiced did no more contemplate a trade for his son
Edward, when he got to be seventeen, than binding him apprentice to a
smuggler
.
In taking into view his future pursuits, law, physic, and divinity only
filled the narrow scope of his vision. He was like the sailor who uses the
microscope
instead of the far-sweeping spy-glass! taking a limited and
exaggerated
view of objects nearest to him, and neglecting the broad and commanding
prospect that invites his observation.
Edward Lamb was therefore destined for a liberal profession, from the force
of illiberal prejudices. He was an intelligent and high spirited boy, and,
singularly
enough, had the common sense to think differently from his father on
the subject of trades. If he had been consulted he would have preferred being
a printer; and when it was decided in domestic council that he should `go to
college,' he incurred the censure of vulgar propensities for thus expressing his
wishes.
`But how am I to get through college, sir?' he asked frankly and
doubtingly
,
well knowing from experience the narrowness of his father's circumstances.
`As a beneficiary,' answered Mr. Lamb.
`That is as a charity-student, sir,' he repeated with a glow of sensitive pride.
`How much more noble it would be for me to become a printer!'
`You have a position in society to earn and maintain, my son, and can only
succeed as a professional man. As a mechanic you would always be in low
society.'
`It seems to me that no one can be lower than a student of charity. But I
submit sir.'
With difficulty, and much straitening of poverty was Edward sent from the
paternal roof to college. Here he soon gained a distinguished name as a
scholar
;
but being of a high-spirited and sensitive nature, he could ill endure the
dependant situation in which he found himself, which involved in it, beside,
numerous privations that constantly mortified him. He was daily made to feel,
too, his position, by the haughty bearing of the wealthy student, and the sneers
of the unfeeling, whom his higher scholarship filled with envy. Do my
readers
know what it is to be a beneficiary in college? The hapless young man
who has his tuition gratuitously, has the refuse choice of a room for which he
is charged no rent; pays for his three meals in Commons by
waiting
on the
tables of the other students, and sitting down after they have done! His books
of study are loaned him from the library, and his bed and bedding and
furnishing
are got as they may be. His clothing, his fire-wood, his stationary, and
other expenses are obtained by `school teaching' in the vacations. If sickness
should at any time render him incapable of keeping school, then hard is his lot
the succeeding term! He must either go in debt hoping to pay the ensuing
vacation, or go without the necessary items above detailed. In addition to this
he is made, both in the society of the college and that of the town, keenly to
feel his poverty and dependant position. If he is a young man of spirit, he
will either quit college or it will sooner or later break him down. This
condition
is mostly sought and followed by pious young men, who, that ultimately
they may preach the gospel, are willing to undergo the greatest deprivations.
As a school for humility none certainly could be more suitable for a christian!
Such was the position in which Edward Lamb found himself after entering
college. The pursuits of science, the delights of literature, the charm of varied
study could not neutralize in his sensitive and proud mind the sense of his
dependant
condition. He lost his frankness of manner, his pride of spirit, his
manly boldness in addressing others. He at length reached his Junior year,
when his constitution sunk under study, wounded sensibility and the double
labor of school teaching in vacations, and close application in term time. When
the middle vacation came, he was too ill to take a school, and kept his room,
an invalid.
The next term began and he resumed his studies. Debts of the past term
existed
,
and others necessarily accumulated which he had no means from school
money to meet; and at the close of his Junior year, as he was about to leave
college temporarily to take a school in the country, with improved health,
hoping
to earn something to pay his debts, he was arrested by a brute for a debt of
$3,00, and thrown into prison! arrested because he was a beneficiary! for the
man's excuse subsequently was that `no charity student ought to go in debt!'
and what was the debt contracted for? To enable himself to appear with
decency
at church, he had got a new collar and sleeves and a set of buttons put
to the only coat he had. He incurred it with the understanding that he was to
pay it from his first school money Illness prevented him from keeping school,
and Shears, the college tailor, tired of waiting for his money, and finding he
was going out of town, (to earn the very money to pay him) had a warrant
served upon him.
Edward submitted to his fate without a murmur. His spirit had already been
crushed by the sense of debts and dependence. He went to prison; and
within
its stone walls, ere the next sun rose, his proud heart broke, and his noble
and suffering spirit took its free flight! Charles Blackford, our hero, had been
his bosom friend. Kindred circumstances united them by the close bonds of
sympathy. Having heard, not till the next morning of his friends arrest, he
hastened to him. On entering his cell he found that his sympathizing
friendship
had been anticipated by the friendly interference of Death. All that
remained
of Edward Lamb was kneeling, supported by the wall, the hands
clasped
together in the act of prayer!
`
Why
did we not
hear
of this
why did we not know it?
' was the fruitless
question
hundreds both of students and charitable ladies put to themselves when
this melancholy intelligence was communicated. Yes, when the pecuniary
sufferer by the hand of God or his own self-act gets beyond relief,
then
the
purse strings fly and the tongue is filled with vain and wicked regrets. `Would
that I had known it?' is the form which pity takes to express itself, and
if
they
had known it, would the case have been different? No! they must then wait
till the sufferer perishes first before they
can
believe the case is
so
desperate.
Charles Blackford laid by a few dollars by depriving himself of actual wants,
and erected the humble stone at the head of his friend's grave, the inscription
upon
which we have copied. We have recorded the story of the hapless victim to
a false system of society of society, though we are not in favor of episodes in a
narrative! But as we write to illustrate a moral and expose an error, it matters
little what colors we use to fill up the great outline, so that they harmonize, and
the lights and shadows are given with their just effects.
`Alas for Poverty and griping need,
Crushing the spirits of the pure and young!
'Tis crime! 'tis fear! 'tis infamy! 'tis hate!
'Tis cold contempt, and scorn, and houseless want,
And pain and thirst and hunger! nay, 'tis more,
It prints that inward stain, foul self-contempt
Upon the soul whereon it lays its hands,
Blighting the bud of rosy youth, wounding
To its germ fair honor, and tarnishing
The mirror of upright truth; converting
Tears, sweet tears, the heart's fresh dew, to gall,
Then parching them dry forever. Then comes
The hour when life is no more life, and death
I welcomed like some new-born joy!'
CHAPTER II.
The moon was fading into the cold grey sky of the morning, and the first tint
of dawn suffused with a delicate flush the eastern horizon, when Charles
Blackford
retraced his steps towards the Colleges. He had rambled from the
cemetery
far over the meadow and field; and urged on by the restless spirit in his
bosom, had ascended the craggy summit of East Rock, where in the solemn
silence
of the place and hour, with infinite space above him, and the earth and
sea sleeping at his feet, he at length schooled his proud and sensitive heart to
submission.
In his way to the college, on turning a corner of the street, he came
suddenly
upon the stage house. The sun was already flashing the whole sky with his
ascending glories, and the sight of stage and busy passengers upon and around
it, recalled him to the consciousness that he had no longer the world all to
himself, and that the day, the dreaded day of pain and responsibility, had at
length began its round. He would have turned back shrinkingly from the
crowd of students and others about the door, but one of his fellow students of the
class below him, and whom he had often assisted in his studies, and from whom
he had received always warm demonstrations of friendship, saw him, and
approached
him with an umbrella in his hand and a cloak on his arm.
`Are you off too in this stage, Blackford,' he said in an elated tone, at the
idea of leaving behind the scenes of his long confinement, and in the cheerful
anticipations of home.
`No Preston,' said Blackford, with difficulty returning the smile of his
wealthy college friend. `As you will pass through, and probably stay a day
or two in Haverhill, have the kindness to call on my father, and tell him that
you have seen me.'
`But when do you leave?'
`I cannot tell,' said he, with a slight increase of color.
`You look ill, Blackford! I hope that sickness may not detain you in this
dull place all the vacation.'
`No, I shall try a school soon,' answered Charles, smiling faintly.
`Well, its a pity your father is not rich,' said Preston in an indifferent tone.
`Thank fortune I have money enough! Look here and see what my good
kind old uncle has sent me to pay my expenses to Boston!' and the young
Junior
opened his pocket book, which he held in his hand to pay his stage fare,
and displayed to Blackford's eyes a roll of bank notes.
`There seems to be a large sum, and I am glad you are so happily situated in
life,' said Charles.
`There is two hundred dollars! I shall have a little you see, to amuse
myself
with on the route; and this the old gentleman kindly and thoughtfully
provided for, remembering he was once young. Well, good by, Blackford,
we'll meet next term!'
With these words the lively young gentleman shook him warmly by the
hand, but though younger in years and classes, with a sort of patronizing air
which money insensibly assumes over poverty.
`Good bye, Preston, I wish you a pleasant journey, and a happy meeting
with your friends.'
`Thank you,' returned Preston, with a cordial and friendly smile, and
hastened
away to pay his passage to the agent, who stood by the door of the Inn,
with the way-bill in his hand.
Blackford remained for a few moments standing where his young friend had
parted from him. His brow was thoughtful, and an expression of mingled
doubt and hope suddenly gave a new aspect to his hitherto sad features. The
idea that the young Bostonian might befriend him in his great strait, had flashed
upon him like a gleam of hope in his despair. But the idea was no sooner
formed, than pride, shame, and keen sensibility rejected it.
`How shall I open my lips with the first word, to unfold my situation!' he
said mentally; `How shall I endure his cold, collected, listening eye, while I
tell my tale of poverty? How can I humble myself, and then subject myself to
the mortification of a refusal? How, more than all, if he should relieve
me by a loan of fifty dollars, can I
repay
him? I have nothing, I
have no hopes but my school! It would be only transferring my debt, without
lessening it. Yet how much rather would I have one person my creditor, and
that one Preston, than seven of various tempers and dispositions, as I now have!
In justice, too, to them I ought to make an effort to pay them! Truly and
honestly
,
let me ask myself, what it is that withholds me from adopting the
suggestion
,
and applying to Preston? I see plainly, it is
pride!
He
may
befriend
me, and give time to repay him after I get my profession, and my reputation
would not suffer the infamy my creditors will not fail to heap upon it if they
are not paid before night. They need the money, and my reputation is dear to
me! pride alone predominates in the other scale! But I had better risk the
wounding of it by applying to Preston, who is able, and I doubt not would be
willing to aid me on my representing my situation to him, than run the certain
risk of having it wounded by those whom I am unable to pay! I will, therefore,
in behalf of, and in justice to those I owe, and in protection of my own
reputation
and fair name, let no false pride stand in the way of necessity and duty.
I will ask him!
'
Thus reasoned a sensitive and proud young man before borrowing money for
the first time in his life! How humbling is poverty! how it crushes the
generous
spirit! how withering to the finer feelings of his heart! Charles
Blackford
advanced impulsively a few steps towards his friend, and then checked
himself, with a sinking sensation of his heart! Preston was paying his
passage
,
and the agent was inquiring of some one to change a bill to pay him back
a quarter of a dollar in change that was coming to him,
`Never mind the quarter,' said the young Bostonian carelessly `give it to
the hostler; and he approached the stage to get in.
The reply of Preston to the agent gave poor Blackford courage, and awakened
his hope, for such indifference to money, he believed promised also
generosity
.
But he was ignorant of the world, and knew not that a man may be
ostentatious
of liberality before others, to cover an avaricious disposition! We
do not predict this, however, of young Preston, leaving the reader to see and
judge for himself, as he watches the effect of Blackford's application. With a
cheek, the moment before wholly colorless, now glowing with the momentary
blood of sensitive embarrassment he advanced and spoke to Preston as he was
getting into the stage, with one foot already upon the step.
`Mr. Preston, will you permit me to say a word to you,' he articulated with a
nervous rapidity, and insensibly addressing his fellow-student with that forma
respect which is the instinctive prompting of humble lifethe first lesson of the
poor is dependence!
The young Bostonian removed his foot from the step, and taking his arm in a
friendly way, stepped aside with him, supposing he wanted to send some other
message to his friends, or supposing anything but the truth, doubtless; for men
are not wont to take a man's arm and walk aside with him, whom they suspect
is about to ask of them a pecuniary favor.
`I have taken the liberty of intruding upon your departure,' said Blackford,
with a painful effort, which showed how deeply he felt the humiliation of his
pride, as Preston stopped and looked him full in the face, waiting his
communication
;
`to venture to ask a favor of you?'
His friend's countenance changed from its frank and cordial aspect at this,
and Blackford thought he looked as if he suspected what he wanted.
Nevertheless
,
urged forward by his truly distressing condition, he continued, seeing
that Preston was silent:
`You are aware that my father is a poor rector of a country church, and that
I support myself through college by my own exertions. Up to this vacation I
have been able, with the narrowest economy, to meet my expenses. Illness,
the last vacation, prevented me from keeping school, and I entered upon the
term just ended without the usual means, earned by school-keeping, to pay my
way through, hoping to get some scholars in a night school. I commenced;
but my health broke down under combined study and unwonted exertion, and
I was compelled to give it up before I could make it a means of pecuniary
profit
.
The close of the term has now come, and I find my little bills, including
that to the Steward and my physician, has left me debtor to several individuals,
to the amount, in all, of forty dollars. One or two of them may possibly be put
off till the beginning of next term; but the holders of others say they must be
paid this day, and I apprehend, if they are not satisfied, the most fatal
consequences
to my reputation. I have not slept the whole night on account of my
distress of mind, and returning from a walk to East Rock, I met you! The
knowledge of your ability and generous disposition, has prompted me to
confide
my position to you, believing from my knowledge of you, you had only to
be informed of it to afford me temporary relief.'
Preston listened to Blackford's relation without changing countenance, to
the end. He then said, with the look of one who feels he has been uselessly
annoyed, and in a tone of cold sympathy,
`Your situation is, indeed, disagreeable, Blackford, and I am truly sorry for
you. If your reputation
should
suffer, it will be a pity you ever came to
college
,
without the means to go through. I am sorry, upon my soul, and I wish
I could help you. I have money, it is true, but only enough for my own
purposes
and uses. I shall need every dollar in my pocket-book. Perhaps
Robinson
can assist you!'
`No, no,! never mind, Mr. Preston,' said Blackford, feeling as if he should
sink into the earth with wounded pride and mortification. `I am sorry that I
should have intruded my affairs upon you.'
`Not in the least, Blackford. I should be happy to serve you were it in my
power to do so. Good bye!'
Preston smiled and nodded, but did not shake hands, and leaving him,
returned
to the stage, into which he no sooner had got than it drove off.
Blackford
stood where Preston had left him, his eyes mechanically following the
carriage till it disappeared around the corner of the next street. He then
walked
slowly on a little way, with his head depressed to the pavement and his
whole attitude weighed down and sinking. He reached a retired part of the
street, leaned against a fence, and his full and bursting heart found relief in
tears.
Poor Charles Blackford! thou hadst just been taught thy first bitter lesson
in human nature! Thou hadst learned that
when friends are needed they prove
of no use!
That men may treat each other with courtesy; grasp the hand
warmly; smile and talk freely and friendly; dine and ride, walk together and
fulfil towards one another all the outward duties of warm personal friendship!
but that when pecuniary assistance is solicited in a sudden emergency, they
disappoint the hopes that are placed in them, and the substance of the gilded
shadow proves not to exist! that to touch the purse strings of a friend, is to
dispel like magic the smile of his friendship and freeze the warm grasp of
cordiality
.
`Now is the cup of bitterness full,' said Blackford, as he at length grew
calmer. `I needed only this humiliation! and has he listened to the tale that
burned my tongue for shame and mortification as I told it, and treated it with
cold indifference! I did not look for this, at least. Is there no sympathy in
man's heart for his fellow? He has loaned me books, nay, did once loan me a
cloak, when I was ill, seeing that I had none. I should have thought nothing
of asking him the use of his library, during vacation, nor would he have
refused
me. Why is there such a difference between books and money! between
the
thing itself
and the mere
representative
of the thing? There seems to be
none to me, though the world thinks differently. Why is it I felt myself
inspired
with such awe at naming money to him? Why did the naming of it
seem, as it plainly did, so great an offence? Mysterious, indeed, is this
influence
over men's minds. Why should there exist so wide a difference in
asking
the loan of a friend's purse. In both cases it is
the want
, that is the basis
of the request, and the object of need should not in the remotest way effect the
simple premises. But this is idle speculation and administers to me no relief.
I will seek my lonely room and meet this evil day with a firm trust in God, for
vain indeed is the help of man.'
As he was about to proceed, a second stage bound to Hartford, drove up to
the Inn, from which he was not far off, and he paused a moment to see the
passengers, most of whom were students, get in. While thus engaged, he
heard a quick step behind him, and looking round, he beheld approaching, out
of breath, Peter Shears, the tailor, to whom he owed two dollars and
eighty-seven
and a half cents.Blackford felt a pang of he knew not what painful
sensation at seeing him, and somehow conceived himself to be the cause of his
haste and early appearance abroad.
`Good morning, Mr. Blackford,' he said in an ironical and inquisitive
manner
.
`Up early, I see. Last day of term over; happy time for students. Do
you go off in that stage this morning?'
`I shall not leave New Haven without settling with or notifying you,' quietly
answered Blackford, who saw his creditor had suspected that he was about to
leave clandestinely, and painfully augured from this the worst of
consequences
,
from inability to pay before night.
`Oh, oh! I thought you might be going, and came down to see you off.
Always come to see my friends off.'
`I am indebted to your polite attention, Mr. Shears,' said Blackford, coldly,
and walked on towards the college. He had continued on his way some
distance
before he perceived that Shears was shuffling by his side.
`I told you, Mr. Shears, I was not going to leave town without paying you,'
said Blackford, angry at the annoyance.
`How then came you sneaking round the Stage office at this hour in the
morning?' retorted Shears, impertinently and incredulously. Shears would
not have presumed to speak to Blackford in this manner under any other
circumstances
;
but creditors have a peculiar vocabulary of their own in their
intercourse with debtors, in which neither the words of civility nor of
politeness
are to be found. Blackford felt like knocking him down for this rude
insult
to his feelings; but prudence suggested patience, and he answered calmly,
`I have been only walking.'
`I think you intended
marching
, though, if I had not seen you,' answered
the fellow with a chuckle at his heartless wit. `Do you think you can settle
my demand to-day, Mr. Blackford?'
`I have no means at present, but if you will call I will tell you what I can
do, answered Charles, hoping against the hope that he could yet in some way
at least pay him. `How much is your demand?' he suddenly asked.
`Two, eighty-seven and a half;' answered Shears promptly.
`Come then to my room this afternoon and I will settle it, sir,' said Charles,
determined to rid himself of this annoyance by paying him the only two dollars
he had in the world which he had hoped to keep to pay his expenses as he
travelled
on foot in search of a school. To it he hoped to add eighty-seven and a
half cents by selling a few booksfor few indeed he had to sell.
`Well, I'll take your word, Mr. Blackford, and depend on being paid the
money down and no favor. Good morning.'
Blackford made no reply but walked on. As he entered the College green,
he chanced to look back, when he saw Shears watching him from a distant
street corner, to see if he did not mistake the way and take the road for the
Stage-office, instead of his room.
`Humiliating, indeed, are poverty and debt,' he said bitterly. `That fellow
despises me and suspects me to be a rogue. I cannot help feeling something
like self-contempt myself. Another such interview would make me believe
myself the felon they would make me. How poverty and debt degrade the
mind in its own esteem.'
With a heavy heart Blackford entered his room. On his way up he passed
his fellow students descending the stairs, carrying valises and carpet-bags, and
the halls and passages rung with the preparations for departure.
`Yes, all is life, hope and cheering anticipation! I seem to be the only one
desolate and unhappy,' he said, as he locked his door and threw himself,
fatigued
and wretched, into his arm chair. `Now let me contemplate my
position
and how I shall meet my creditors. After breakfast (and at that meal I
shall be expected to pay the steward too) I shall be called upon. Shears I have
resolved to give up my last penny to pay, and I do not fear him. What
excuse
shall I make? Shall I explain all and throw myself upon the clemency
and indulgence of each? God in mercy endow me with firmness and patience
under my trials.'
He remained awhile seated as we first found him the midnight previous, with
his hand to his cheek, thoughtful and heavy. All at once he started and seized
a pen and placed a sheet of paper before him.
`Yes, I will write to my father and urge the necessity of making some
sacrifice
in my behalf. It is through his pride I am here in this situation, and I will
appeal to his pride as well as his affection to do something to rescue me. He
may at least borrow fifty dollars where I could not a penny. He has rich men
in his parish and they would not refuse him. I will write.
With this determination, though on the successful issue he placed but faint
hope, he penned a letter to his father, in which he entered fully into his painful
situation, and eloquently called upon him for immediate relief. In it he
appealed
equally to his pride and to his affection. Having ended it he sealed it
and went with it in person to the Post-office. Leaving the letter to the fate of
the Post, we will introduce the reader to the Rev. St. John Blackford, to whom
it was addressed. This gentleman was the son of a poor physician, in one of
the small towns in Massachusetts. He was the youngest of five brothers, all of
whom the sensible doctor put to useful trades as fast as they became of proper
age. St. John, however, disdained a trade, and after being bound to several,
finally entered, and struggled through College, and his inclinations leading
him to the Church, he studied three years in a manual labor Seminary, and
finally took orders. It cannot be denied that he had made himself a sound
scholar, and that he promised fair to become eminent as a Divine. Yet Mr.
Blackford entered the ministry with a debt of five hundred dollars, which had
followed him through the whole course of study, like a ball of snow, increasing
in bulk as it rolls. He hoped to pay this by laying by a portion of his salary;
but he remained three years a missionary with but 300 dollars a year from the
fund and scarcely a hundred from his preaching. Finally he obtained a
rectorship
worth seven hundred dollars a year and married. His student's debt still
troubled him, and he solicited scholars to fit for College to enable him to
commence
its liquidation. But it so chanced, that the money thus received was
always
needed just at the time, and none of it went to its originally intended
destination
.
By and by Mr. Blackford became a father, and shortly afterwards
changed his parish to one near or in the city of Boston. Here his salary was
larger, but his expenses were larger also, and he gained nothing in a pecuniary
point of view by the exchange. Finally, twelve years after he had taken
orders
,
he was left a bequest of one thousand dollars, by a deceased bachelor
brother
,
who was a cabinet-maker, and died rich. With this he paid principal and
interest of his long haunting debt, which consumed all but about one hundred
dollars. But for this providential aid he would doubtless have gone down to
his grave with the debt contracted in College and at the Seminary, unpaid.
With this painful personal experience before his own eyes, he nevertheless
resolved to entail upon his son the same evil. When Charles, therefore, who
was one of six children, became of a suitable age, he was to be sent to College,
although his two uncles, one a wheelright and the other a machinist, both tried
to persuade their brother of the folly and wickedness of sending a youth to
College
without means to support him there; while both offered to teach him their
trade. Mr. Blackford, however, like the Rev. Mr. Lamb, the Presbyterian
minister, had an idea that trades were vulgar, if not degrading. He felt,
therefore
,
insulted by their proposition.
`Who ever heard of a clergyman's son being put apprentice to a trade,
brothers
?'
he asked, with the pride of
professional position
as little becoming a
sensible
man as a Christian. `You, yourselves, by being tradesmen, do not move
in the same society in which I do, and I wish my son to keep in the class to
which his father belongs.'
`It is a class of beggars, brother, not to wound your feelings;' said David
Blackford, the wheelwright, bluntly. `But I do not wish to say much to
you
,
as you are a minister of God, and God, not I, must judge you. But I would
speak in nephew Charles's behalf. Send him to College, poor as you are, and
he will always be a poor and unhappy man. I prophecy it, brother!'
Thus parted the brothers, and Charles Blackford was sent to College,
eloquently
pleading to be put to a trade with one of his uncles, as if having a
presentiment
of the dark destiny in store for him as a poor student. He went not
as a beneficiary, like poor Edward Lamb, for Mr. St. John Blackford, his
father
,
had too much pride for this. He went with the understanding that he was
to keep school vacationsthe forlorn hope of poor scholars!and be clothed
from home. The first three years it was with Charles Blackford a continual
struggle to keep out of debt, but it was in some degree, a successful one. The
fourth year, his constitution originally strong and healthy, gave way under too
much work, and illness, privation, debt, and a series of painful mortifications
followed. The last day of the second term of his senior year arrived, and he
found himself involved, as we have shown, beyond his ability to extricate
himself
.
Returning from the Post Office, he crossed into a bye street, and entering a
low, dark shop, the door of which was garnished with second hand clothing
hung about it, he took from beneath his arm a small bundle wrapped in a
newspaper
,
and laid it upon the greasy counter. A black man was in attendance
behind
it.
`I have some articles I wish to sell,' said Charles; and the black, without
saying a word, took up the bundle and displayed its contents, viz: a vest very
much worn, and three books.
`What gen'leman 'spec' get for dis ol' rag,' said the negro, opening and
holding
up the garment to the light, with a look of contempt for it.
`I will sell it for ninety cents.'
`Ninety cent! Marcy dear! I would not get twenty cent for him. See! one
button off, and de pocket worn! I buy it for twenty cent.'
`I must have more,' said Charles, to whom towards paying Shears, twenty
cents was of little use.
`I no gib one cent more,' answered the black, decidedly.
`Will you buy the books, then?' asked Blackford, who had taken them with
him as a sort of forlorn hope, in case, as he much feared, his vest should not
bring the full amount he needed.
`Book! I don't want gen'leman's book,' said the negro, with a grin. `I don't
know him value. But what 'll gen'leman take for de books?'
`Twenty-five cents each?
`I'll gib you ten cent apiece.'
`No. I must have somehow ninety cents from them and the vest.'
`I'll gib you tree quarter dollar for de vest you got on,' said the black, coolly
eyeing the plain satin vest he wore.
`Will you?' exclaimed Blackford, and then directly checked himself, as
he looked at his old vest on the counter, which was hardly decent to resume
again.
`Three quarters and done! what gen'leman say?'
Blackford hesitated; but the face of Shears rose before his sensitive
apprehension
,
and he closed the sale. Taking off the vest he resumed the old one
with a sigh. The negro then paid him seventy-five cents for the vest, and
thirty
more for the books, and Charles with eighteen cents in his possession over
and above the debt to Shears, quit the shop of the black and took his way back
to his chambers, with his coat close buttoned, to hide his shabby waistcoat.
But, withal, he felt happy at having it in his power to release himself from the
grasp of the unfeeling Shears.
On entering his room, who should he find there but the tailor himself!
Ah! Mr. Blackford, I beg pardon, but I called to see ifif' and the lying
rogue hesitated and stuttered, for he well knew, as did Charles, also, that he
came there to assure himself that his prey had not eluded him.
`Don't make any apologies at all, Mr. Shears,' said Blackford, ironically; `I
am happy to see you, inasmuch as I have the money ready for you and, as I
shall take great pleasure after paying you the last farthing I owe you, to show
you a new way out.'
Shears turned pale, glanced at the open window, and retreated a step, and
laid his hand on the latch of the door! Charles paid no attention to him, but
selecting his account, counted out the money, and laid it beside it upon the
table
.
The tailor's eye glowed at the sight of the money, but he was afraid to
leave his position at the door, as he felt that the attitude in which he had lately
stood to his debtor, was now changed, and that he had no security (except his
insignificance) against a just retribution for his insults.
`Mr. Shears, there is your money! I will trouble you to receipt this
account
,'
said Blackford, sternly, feeling as forcibly as Shears himself, the change
the small sum of money had made in their relative position to each other.
Shears advanced with evident suspicious of danger, bowing and smirking his
mean cocked up features; `You need'nt have troubled yourself about paying
it just now, Mr. Blackfordthis afternoon, or even to-morrow would have
answered
my purpose just as well.'
`My receipt if you please.'
Shears put his hat humbly down upon the floor, and taking a pen, stood up,
though a chair was convenient, and receipted the account without looking at
the amount of money.
`You see, Mr. Blackford, I don't count the sum. I trusted to your honor
that it is all right.'
`I insist on your counting it, every penny. The sum of your account is $2,
87 1-2. See if I have paid that sum.'
`Yes, sirall right,' said Shears, obeying him and taking up his hat. `I am
exceedingly obliged to you, Mr. Blackford. I wish you a pleasant vacation,
sir,' and as he was speaking, he was all the while edging towards the door.
Charles enjoyed his apprehensions, but the object of his indignation was too
contemptible for him to inflict upon him the chastisement he so richly merited.
`Go, Mr. Shears,' he said, opening the door wide for him to pass; `it only
wanted the exhibition of this craven fear of just punishment, so strongly
contrasting
to your impudence to me this morning, to complete my contempt for
you. Go, and learn from my forbearance, to be merciful to the unfortunate
debtor circumstances may place you in relation with. Go! I would not spurn
you with my foot!'
Shears who had cautiously retreated so as to avoid coming in proximity with
Blackford, from whom he felt he deserved chastisement, made no delay in
taking
advantage of his permission to depart, and darting through the door way,
instinctively shrinking in, as if to evade the kick he seemed still to expect, he
descended the stairs three steps at a time.
`Oh, poverty, poverty! that makes the proud and generous spirit such a man's
bond slave! Alas, my father, to what degredation has your ambition and
wicked
pride brought me! But it is useless to reflect upon him. I have dismissed
one of my creditors, and the most troublesome, as I believe; but I cannot tell
this till the others have been told they cannot be paid. How unfortunate that
this should happen to me so near the end of my College course. One term more
and I should graduate! But how am I to live another term when I don't see
how to live another day! I shall, after all my father's desire to give me a
profession
,
have to throw up my connexions with the College, and if I obtain a
a degree at all, get it only by the courtesy of the Faculty. But if I do not pay
these demands, the rumor of my defalcation will bring my name before them
with a blot that will defeat even this hope! My situation is indeed deplorable.
Ah, there is a step approaching. My palpitating and coward heart tells me
beforehand
,
that it is a creditor's! It is the Steward's clerk.
`Good morning, Mr. Blackford,' said a saturnine looking young man, a
beneficiary
acting clerk. `Mr. Twining, not seeing you at breakfast, desired me
to call for the amount of your board bill.'
`I really forgot breakfast in my other engagements,' said Charles. `Be so
kind, Disbrow, to say to Mr. Twining I will call and see him in the course of
the day about it.'
`This account was presented, and should have been paid according to usage,
on the last day of term. Mr. Blackford, I must have it settled without longer
delay.'
`I will settle it then with the Steward.'
`He has left it wholly with me, Mr. Blackford.'
`Oh, then I can obtain your indulgence, till I hear from my father, to whom
I have written for money,' said Charles, who well knew the cold and turgid
character of Disbrow, who was a hypocrite in religion, a sycophant in manners,
a tyrant in feeling; who, dependant himself, and often made to feel it, when
power was in his hands, delighted to exercise. He disliked, particularly, poor
students who were not, like himself, beneficiaries.
`You can get nothing from that source, for we all know you depend on
yourself
,'
he said doggedly in reply.
`Then if you are aware I depend on myself you should admit this as a plea
and not press me too closely, Disbrow,' said Charles, calmly. `Ah me!' he
added to himself as he heard another step advancing along the passage; `here
is another! God strengthen me! Good morning Mr. Lapstone, you have come
I suppose for the amount of your little bill?'
`Yes, sir,' said the shoemaker looking very serious on seeing Disbrow
standing
with his steward's account which he had taken from the table in his hand
and with a look of dissatisfaction on his homely vissage.
`It is a small amount to be sure, Mr. Lapstone, but I regret to tell you I am
unable to meet it to-day. I have written to my father and hope soon to get
money.'
`He will have to hope, I guess,' said Disbrow, sneeringly.
`I want my money, Mr. Blackford; I have waited a long time and I can't
afford to lose it. It is a small amount as you say, only $2.18, and I hope you
will settle it and let me go to my work.'
`Indeed, sir, I am sorry you are so warm about it,' said poor Charles hardly
knowing how to manage him, as he saw he was quick tempered and promised
to be violent; `if you will wait for me till I can get a letter from Haverhill'
`I shall have to wait till Haverhill comes to New Haven! No, no, I must
have my money. `Aint he paid Mr. Twining yet, Mr. Disbrow, that you are
standing there waiting?' he asked sullenly.
`No, but he will, I rayther think,' drawled the other with a dogged look.
`Here comes another!' cried the victim of parental pride and poverty as he
heard a person advancing rapidly towards his room.
`Oh, you are here,' said a little sharp faced, pale man with a long frame,
stepping quickly into the room and smiling as he discovered the occupant was
present. `I am glad to find you have not left town. My apprentice told me
he was sure he saw you at the stage office, but I was sure it must have
been a mistake and told him so. Indeed I did, Mr. Blackford, I assure you.
Because a man owes me a little money and don't pay the very day due, it is no
reason I should think he may runaway. No, no, I knew I should find you safe
here. So, you have visitors! Very well, I have no secrets, I will just receipt
that little account if convenient, and go back to my pestle and mortar.'
`Really, Mr. Bluepill,' said the embarrassed and confused young man, `I
must request your kind indulgence for a few days.'
`Till he hears from his father,' said Disbrow, sneeringly.
`I should be happy to oblige you, Mr. Blackford,' said the little apothecary
with a fallen countenance; `but really in these times one needs all the money
owing to him. It is but $3.10a mere trifle.'
`Trifle as it is, it is out of my power to pay it to you to-day,' said Charles
with more firmness than he would have believed he could have commanded at
such a moment of humiliating trial. Oh, the anguish and bitter mortification,
and even
self-contempt
that rung his sensitive bosom through that scene! He
stood by his table with his hand resting upon it, pale but outwardly calm.
Scarcely had he replied to Mr. Bluepill, who looked very fierce and very
determined
,
when Dr. Pulsefer entered. He was a mild, soft spoken gentleman,
and had an air of candor and kindness that invited confidence. He stared on
seeing who were his late patient's visitors, and said,
`I was passing, Mr. Blackford, and called to receive that little amount for
visit and prescription. It is a small matter, or I wouldn't trouble you,' said the
Doctor, courteously.
`I am unable to settle it now, Doctor,' said Blackford.
`Ah, very well, another time,' was the careless reply, and the Doctor was
going out when Disbrow shouted in a loud rough tone, `
will
you settle this or
not
, Mr. Blackford?'
`And will you pay mine, sir?' demanded the shoemaker, taking up the key.
`And mine too, if you please?' cried Mr. Bluepill, looking blue with anger.
`Do you owe all these men, Mr. Blackford?' asked the Doctor, gravely.
`Yes, and one more who I see is approaching, Mr. Otterskin the hatter,'
answered
Charles with forced composure.
`Then, sir, if you are so reckless of getting into debt and have so many
creditors
,
I must insist on the immediate settlement of my account,' said the
physician
,
who, though naturally courteous and gentlemanly, was instantly
prejudiced
against his debtor by this array of damning proof of his reckless
extravagance
.
Thus by the greatness of Charles Blackford's misfortune did the world
measure his supposed guilt! The words of his friend the doctor, whom he
really esteemed, cut him to the heart, and he would have wept for grief, but
that the injustice of the reproof sustained him. He felt his cup was full!
Another footstep approached and he looked up expecting to see the face of his
stationer, but to his surprise a stage driver entered, and asking him if his name
was Blackford, handed him a letter.
`I was ordered by the young gentleman to give it to you in person as there is
money in it,' said the coachman.
At the word `money' there was manifested a general sympathetic movement
among Charles's creditors in the room. Blackford who had just then
anticipated
the issue of his levee of angry creditors would be half-a-dozen writs
served upon him, and was weighing in his mind how he should act, hastily tore
the seal. To his surprise it contained a bank note of fifty dollars, which,
slipping
through his trembling fingers, fell fluttering to the floor. The little
apothecary
sprung forward and caught it and politely returned it to his hand. With
an incredulous vision he glanced for explanation at the signature. It was that
of Grayham Preston! Hurriedly and with a joyful heart he read as follows,
written with a pencil.
`
The Ox Head Breakfast Inn
,
12
miles from New Haven
, 9, A. M.
Dear Blackford
:I have been thinking of you and your request and
unpleasant
situation, every turn of the coach-wheel to this place. Your case has
undergone my thorough mental survey, and I am convinced I treated your
confidence and trust in me very unhandsomely. I have no wish to excuse
myself
,
though I might do so. The truth is I have been very often applied to by
students to lend money and seldom refusing, I have been sometimes trifled with
and imposed upon, not that I could suspect any such thing of you! Twice
before
your application this morning I had two fellows ask me for money, which
for certain reasons I declined lending; your request was, therefore,
unhappily
timed
and in the hurry of departure I did not give it that
consideration
,
which your own character and my respect for you, should have challenged
for it. Pardon me, if I gave you offence, or by my refusal added to your
mortifying
position. I would now, in some degree, atone for my indifference to
your request, and beg leave to enclose you a bank note for $50, assuring you I
shall not need it; and I pray you will oblige me by never bringing it to my
recollection
again. Wishing you a happy deliverance from all your difficulties, I
beg leave hastily to subscribe myself,
Yours, truly,
GRAYSON PRESTON.'
The tears rushed to Blackford's eyes but pride in the presence of those around
him, restrained their grateful flow. He felt like kneeling down and thanking
God for this happy issue out of all his afflictions. But the present was not the
time! The moment called for different kind of action. Assuming a composed
countenance, and stilling his glad heart as well as he could, he locked his joy
up in his bosom, from the inquiring eye of those before him, and turning to
Disbrow he asked him with dignified severity to receipt the account he held
and return him twenty-six dollars. The clerk obeyed and tendered him the
receipted
bill.
`Now, sir, leave my room,' said Charles, commandingly, pointing to the door.
Disbrow would have hesitated, but Blackford took him quickly by the collar
and put him out.
`Mr. Lapstone, here is the money I owe you. Receipt your bill. Now, sir,
I respect your favors too much to turn you out of my chamber, though
taking
advantage of my need, you have rudely insulted me. I have nothing
farther
to say to you.
`Mr. Bluepill, you are now paid your demand,' he added, after settling with
that worthy, who looked all the while as if he expected his nose or ears pulled,
or some kind of assault upon his anatomical person; `now as you are beneath
my notice, I shall not trouble myself to escort you down stairs, but I would
recommend
you to make no delay in getting well down to the bottom yourself,
without my assistance.'
Mr. Bluepill took the hint and vanished. Mr. Otterskin, the hatter, who had
come in too late, to have his human charity towards a debtor tested, was next
paid and took his departure, doubtless saving his credit and learning a
cautionary
lesson in courtesy, from the treatment which he had seen his fellow
creditors
receive, at the hands of the indignant Blackford, who had now become
(such is the magic of money!) the judge of his tyrants and masters!
`Now, Dr Pulsefeeler,' said Charles, fixing his calm and penetrating gaze upon
this gentleman, who colored and looked exceedingly embarrassed, and as if he
felt altogether self-condemned and ashamed of his unjust opinion and conduct,
`I take no little pleasure in paying your bill. There are six dollars, the price of
your self respect!'
`Pardon me, Mr. Blackford, I was deceived by appearances, and
`No apologies are necessary, sir,' answered Charles, quietly; `I trust you
have just the amount of your bill!'
`Yes sir.'
`And I have your receipt. Good morning, sir!'
`I would atone, my dear Mr. Blackford, for my injustice to you,' said the
physician
.
`Then, sir,' said Charles, less severely, let it be by charity of opinion towards
debtors; nor believe a young man, because you discover he is in debt, in need,
and surrounded by insulting and heartless creditors, to be unworthy of
confidence
and respect, unentitled to civility, and open and amenable to uncharitable
judgment, unjust suspicion, and the persecutions of the unfeeling; but believe
rather that debt is the eloquent sign of want and of misfortune, challenging the
sympathies of the benevolent and opulent, and enlisting the sweet influence of
gentle pity in its behalf.'
Once more alone in his chamber, the full heart of our poor and now happy
student found vent in tears. He knelt down to thank God for his mercies, and
prayed in the same voice for blessings on the head of his young and generous
benefactor.
The following day Charles Blackford left and took a school in the country.
At the opening of the next and his last term he had earned enough money to
pay his way through, and finally he graduated with an honor as high as one, a
third of whose time was taken up in school teaching, could hope to obtain.
With his dearly-bought diploma in his pocket, and just money enough to reach
Haverhill, he left the classic shades of Yale, where he had experienced so
much privation and sorrow, and sought his home for a few weeks' repose,
before
launching his bark upon the broad, rough billows of life, to sink or swim
with the current.
CHAPTER III.
We
have, in the two preceding chapters, followed our student through his
collegiate life, and drawn a faithful, but not exaggerated, outline of the painful
privations of which he was the subject, through the ill-directed ambition of
misjudging parents. A few weeks' sojourn at home recruited his health, which
care, study, and confinement had, as we have seen, impaired; and he now
began
to look about him for a profession. He had a preference for that of
medicine
,
but the expense of the courses of lectures, he felt he could not meet, and
he rejected the idea as soon as formed; for he shuddered at the thought of
going again into debt, after the mental sufferings he had experienced on the
`last day of the term.'
One morning he returned from a long walk on the banks of the beautiful
river
,
near which the parsonage stood, with a quicker step than usual, and a
flushed
cheek. His father was in his study, and he went at once into it, and sat
down at the table, where the Rev. Mr. Blackford was preparing the heads of his
next Sabbath's morning discourse, and waited till he should notice him.
`Well, my son,' said the rector looking up and surveying him through his
glasses.
`I have come to consult with you, sir. I am determined no longer to remain
idle; the scorn of your parishioners. Every man has something to do but me.'
`You look flushed, my son! what has distressed you?'
`I am mortified. In my walk home, I was passing the village inn, and
over-heard
,
as I got by, some one ask another who I was. `That is gentleman
Charlesold parson Blackford's son, that he's trying to make a gentleman of;
and a fine gentleman he is, for he has nothing to do but walk the streets and
fields,while his father is as poor as Peter Pence, and I have to give him in
my account every year or two, receipted, for he can't pay!
`Who,
who
was so unmannerly and irreverent as to say this?' demanded the
clergyman, with a higher color than usual.
`I turned after I got some distance, as soon as my shame would let me, and
saw farmer Gage standing by the tavern, and, from the voice, I believe it was
he.'
`Yes, yes, I dare say. He is my creditor for hay and other produce, I
believe
.
He has brought all his sons up rude farmers, and thinks every other
man's son should wear homespun, and follow the plough-tail. Never heed him
Charles, it is envy that you have a superior education, and'
`Education! and how did I obtain it? Sir, I would willingly change lots
with either of farmer Gage's sons. They will be comfortably settled in life,
with few careswhile I shall be poor, a wanderer perhaps, and continually in
difficulties. If I am to have a profession, sir, it is time I were commencing its
study. It is three months since I quit college, and my health is now quite
restored
.'
`What do you think of theology, and the church?' asked the rector,
sympathising
in his son's feelings, yet not willing to confess to himself his error in
making him a victim of his own pride and prejudices, against the
industrial
pursuits.
`I cannot think of it sir. My views have never been directed that way, nor
do I think my labor called for the progress of religious truth. As a profession
merely, I can never think of so sacred a calling. Medicine and law only
remain
for me to choose from, for,' added the young man ironically, `I believe
these are the other two great avenues to
respectability
.'
`They are, my son,' answered the Rev. Mr. Blackford, without seeming to
notice the reproof; `in the law I think you have the talent and energy to
distinguish
yourself. You may do well as a doctorbut then this does not
require
such great abilitiesand it were a pity to throw years away, as it were,
when you can put them out to such good interest at the bar. I hope yet, if you
choose this profession, to see you in Congress one day.'
`Medicine I cannot think of, though it has my preterence to the law. The
latter requires too much of an honest man's conscience; it withers the fairer
sensibilities of man's nature; and gives him habits of inhumanity from the
peculiar
persecutions of the unfortunate which necessarily belong to the
protession
.
Yet I may be compelled to choose it against my strong prejudices, for I
can never pay the fees for medical lectures. I have not now a dollar in the
world, and am wholly dependant on your paternal indulgence for my daily
bread.'
`What will be the expenses of attending the lectures for three winters.'
`At least one hundred dollars each course, including board in Boston, and
the fees. How am I to earn this, sir, and at the same time give proper
attention
to my studies?'
`Mr. Blackford mused a few minutes, while Charles, rising from his chair,
walked the room impatiently, and at length stood by the window, gazing forth
upon the winding stream, with its pleasant intervales of verdure, and the
village
of Bradford beyond, till his father essayed again to speak. A boat
containing
two young ladies, or rather misses, just putting off from the foot of a
garden opposite, also drew his attention.
`Well, Charles, I see there is no alternative but the law. This can be
pursued
without expense, in the villageperhaps in Judge Orne's office, and you can
live at home until you are through; so'
Charles did not wait to hear the remainder of his father's remarks, but
suddenly
throwing up the window from which he had been gazing, he sprang out
upon the lawn, and flew with the speed of the deer towards the river.
`Ah, oh! this a strange caper in the boy,' cried the astonished rector,
jumping
up; `what has got into him. The boy must be mad! Heaven have
mercy
,
and give him strength and courage to save them,' he earnestly exclaimed,
as he beheld from the window a boat floating bottom upwards upon the river,
a young lady clinging to it, and another, some distance from it, struggling to
keep above the surface of the water.
The boat had been upset, while Charles was looking at it, by the
thoughtlessness
of one of the young girls, in leaning over to reach after an oar which she
had let fall into the water. He now ran, like the wind, to the shore, which
was about three hundred yards from the house, his ear painfully pierced by
their shrieks, as he made his way through a piece of wood which intervened,
and for some time concealed the river from his view. A few bounds brought
him to the bank of the river, within a few yards of them, and, leaping in, he
swam towards the drowning girl who was unsupported by the boat, and with
difficulty keeping her head above water. She was the fartherest from the shore,
and, in his rapid way toward her, passed close to the upturned boat, to which
the young girl was clinging with wonderful calmness and self possession, and,
forgetful of herself, interested only in the safety of her companion.
`Sustain yourself, Miss Hare, `he said, recognizing her as the daughter of
Colonel Hare, from whose country house near by they had rowed with their
boat. `In a few moments I will reclaim you from your perilous situation.'
`Oh, think not of me,' sir,' I am in safetybut save, oh save Grace! She
will perish before you reach her Oh, she has sunk.'
`Let not go your hold, Miss Hare, or you will both perish,' he cried as he
saw her clasp her hands together in despair. She seized the boat again in time
to prevent the fatal consequence of her imprudence, while Charles exerting all
his strength swam towards the spot where she had gone down. As he came
near it, she rose again with her hands stretched out above the surface. By two
or three nervous strokes of his arms he was enabled to grasp one of her hands
ere she disappeared, and with a strong effort raised her head above the surface.
A loud shriek of joy from Miss Hare, and a shout from the rector on the shore
acknowledged his success.
She was insensible and it was with the utmost difficulty he could sustain the
burden. The abundant tresses of black hair covered his shoulder and her pale
cheek rested unconscious against his. He now swam towards the boat to avait
himself of its aid in supporting her till further assistance should arrive, which
was speedily promised, as the citizens of the village had gathered at the water
side and several boats were putting off from the Haverhill shore. He
succeeded
in reaching the bottom of the boat where Miss Hare still clung though
plainly
under the greatest excitement on discovering the insensible condition of her
companion, and Charles feared she would herself speedily require his support
as well as the other, whom he sustained partly by raising her head upon the
boat He now saw that relief was at hand from half a dozen sources and
encouraging
Miss Hare to preserve her self-possessionsaying that her friend was
by no means lifeless and would soon be restoredhe was so fortunate as to see
her taken safely into the first boat that came up, which she no sooner was
placed
in than she fainted away. Whether because he had been instrumental in
saving the other, and so felt a peculiar interest in her, or whether impressed by
her extraordinary loveliness, which insensibly only modified to a more etherial
tone, but did not destroy, cannot be told, but Charles would not let the men who
had raised Miss Hare into the boat do the same office for her, but getting into
it first, he drew her from the water, refusing their assistance, and gently laid
her upon the stern seats. Recommending Miss Hare to the care of one of the
gentlemen who was in the boat, he bade the men row to the rectory; but
immediately
countermanding the order as he saw Colonel Hare's seat was much
nearer, he supported her all the while chafing her temples, till the boat arrived
at the foot of the garden from which it had sailed. Here they were met by the
agonized family who ignorant whether life yet remained received them as dead.
Colonel Hare took up his daughter and pressing warmly Charles's hand, looked
his thanks. Charles would not resign his charge but bore her after him to the
house. The usual means and restoratives were applied successfully, and after
a few hours the young ladies were so far recovered as to go to the dinner table
and also to give an account of the accident.
`We were,' said Miss Hare, glancing with the smile of affection at Grace,
who with a pale face sat opposite to her in the easy chair, for she was still weak
and invalid from the effects of her late danger, `we were taking a walk in the
garden, and Grace, seeing the boat, said she should like to sail, the water was
so clear and pleasant looking, and so we got into it and cast it off.'
`Not withstanding my wish, Mary,' said Colonel Hare in a tone of mild
reproof
,
`that you should never get into it unless I was with you. Had you
forgotten
your former narrow escape from drowning?'
`No sir, and I thought of it when I was clinging to the boat to-day, and
though I should certainly now be drowned for my disobedience, sir. But
Grace was not under your orders and as she was a visitor, I did not say any
thing to her about your injunctions, and so got in with her.'
`I am sure, dear Colonel Hare,' said Miss Gordon, `I should instantly have
yielded had I been informed of your wishes; but we were both very wild and
foolish, and I shall never feel too grateful to that young gentleman for saving
me from the awful consequences of my imprudence.'
`How did you upset?' asked the Colonel.
`I had let drop my paddle, and in stooping over to reach it, my weight upset
the boat and we were both precipitated into the water. I never shall forget the
fearful sensation I experienced in my mind, as I found myself falling. Mary
clung to the boat and I rose to the surface some distance beyond it. I don't
know how I kept myself so long above the surface; and I should have sunk
sooner than I find I did, if I had not seen young Mr. Blackford running towards
the river. This gave me hope and energy to struggle.'
God be thanked, my dear children both of you for this timely aid,' said
Colonel
Hare with grateful eatnestness.
`Where is he, sir?' suddenly inquired Grace, her large black eyes
expressing
the deepest gratitude, at the remembrance of his courage and humanity.
`I have not seen him.'
He pleaded some engagement and left so soon as he saw you open your eyes
and were out of danger,' answered Mary; `he did not seem to care about me,
though I was worth half a dozen of you full an hour before you came to
yourself
.
I have to thank him for my own life as well as you have, for I never
should have held on that boat after seeing you go down, if it had not been for
his firm and encouraging voice. But you were the one he felt the most
interested
in. Shall I tell Grace, father, how tenderly he bent over her, and watched
with such anxious solicitude for returning consciousness.'
`No, no, you little mischief! Do not tease her!' Miss Gordon fixed her
eyes imploringly upon her friend and then dropped them with a heightened
color.
`You are endeavoring to conceal your own feeling towards our gallant
preserver
,
Mary, by giving me the credit of having awakened an interest in your
lover.
`
My
lover!' repeated the young girl quickly, and with a slight cast of
hauteur
.
`He must be, I think, being your neighbor, and young and handsome, and so
brave too. It is thus you would deceive me, you sly one.'
`I assure you,' answered Mary Hare. `I have no acquaintance with him.
He is the clergyman's son, but is very poor and dependant on his father, and is
no match for me.'
Thus one caste grades the respectability of another, not by trades or
professions
,
but by wealth. This is a new modification of our subject, and shows
that even a profession does not ensure reception into certain
castes
, and that
indigent
members of these professions will be just as much shut out from those
orders of society where wealth is the basis of regard, as if they were
tradespeople
.
The daughter of the rich Colonel Hare could be no fit companion for
the son of the poor pastorthough a
professional
man. Poor, proud parents
who aim to see their sons professional men, should bear this in mind. The only
true basis of respect is an unspotted character!
`I should not care for his poverty, so he bore a noble heart in his bosom,'
answered
Grace Gordon with spirit. `Which of the rich young men in Boston,
of our acquaintance, would have risked their lives as this Clergyman's son has
to day done. I shall be proud to know him, Mary; and I hope Colonel Hare
will call with me, this afternoon at the rectory, that I may have an opportunity
of thanking him.'
`This is a different thing from loving him,' said Mary laughing, `I shall
thank him too, and could almost
love
him for saving your life. But I shall never
look upon him as an equal,' added the aristocratic maiden; a `smith from the
village smithery might have saved us, but this should give him no claim even
to the hospitality of my father's table, much more to the presumption of an
intimacy
with either of us. Do not talk so spirited, dear Grace, I am not
comparing
Mr. Blackford, who is a very respectable and worthy young man, to a
blacksmith; I am merely considering the case in its common sense aspect.'
`Hush, Mary!' said her father, smiling, yet looking a reproof; `you have no
business to be talking so freely, and about marrying too, at your age! Grace
is a sensible girl, and you are a very foolish one. Charles Blackford, Miss
Gordon
,
is an estimable young man, who has recently graduated at Yale with some
credit, I learn. His father is a Clergyman, and of course the young man has
nothing to look to but some profession, which he will doubtless soon decide
upon. His character is irreproachable, and his talents I have heard are of a
high order. I have little or no acquaintance with him, having seen him to-day
for the second time since he returned from College. His noble conduct to-day,
has enlisted for him my warmest gratitude, and I am glad to see I am likely to
be seconded in you. Mary is right enough about the respective conditions in
society of yourselves and himbut this is nothing to the purpose. Neither of
you are seventeen, and have no business thinking about young gentlemen and
matrimony in the same breath, because one chances to snatch you out of the
water. We'll ride over this afternoon to the parsonage, and pay our respect to
your preserver.'
Charles had, as had been intimated, modestly retired from Hare Hall, after
seeing Miss Gordon perfectly restored to consciousness, without waiting to
receive
her thanks. Mary, with the first impulse of her joy at her own escape,
had overwhelmed him with her gratitude, but though he had listened to the
expressions
of her indebtedness to him for her life, and that of her friends, he
could not help feeling, he knew not wherefore, that a single glance from the
eyes of Grace Gordon, would be of more value to him, as a reward, than all
the noble eloquence of Mary Hare. On reaching home his father met him and
embraced him.
`You are a generous and brave son,' he said, with emotion. `I witnessed
your conduct from the river bank, and felt if you had perished, you would have
perished nobly. But God has spared my boy's life and made him the
instrument
of saving the lives of others. You should have been a soldier, and now
I know how brave you are, I wish I had made influence to put you at West
Point or got you into the Navy.'
`I have no ambition, sir, of the like kind,' answered Charles, smiling at his
father's earnestness; `both, doubtless, are noble professions. If every man
who is ready to risk his life to preserve that of others, should have been a
soldier
or sailor, there would be now more epaulettes than civilians in the land. I
must think only, sir, of a civilian's profession, and I have decided on that of
the law.'
`So had I for you, my son, and was telling you my plan when you sprang
out of the window in such style, that till I saw the poor young ladies in the
water, made me think you had suddenly gone mad. How did you leave them?
I trust in no danger of illness, resulting from their morning ablutions. Who
was the other?'
They are out of danger. One of them was Miss Hare, whom I had seen at
Church.'
`But the other with the long black curlsthe one you saved,' asked the
rector
,
as they re-entered the house.
`I do not know, sirshe was very lovely,' answered Charles with an
embarrassment
he could not account for; `but I have neglected to change my
wet clothes. Excuse me sir.'
The image of the beautiful young stranger so filled his mind that it was
abstracted
from every thing else around him. After changing his dress he stood
for some time looking upon the dark flowing river, dwelling upon the late scene,
and recalling every expression of her features, and the sweet moaning tones of
her voice when she revived and looked around her. At length he was recalled
to himself by the question put to his own reason:
`What am
I
, a poor clergy man's son, without means to support myself,
without
a profession or a home, to do with regarding with interest, any young lady,
and permitting the holiest affections of my nature to unfold themselves, to fall
back upon my heart withered. Let me forget that sweet face lest I think of it
so much, that what is now a pleasant subject of the thoughts, shall by and by
become a source of deep misery to me. I will forget herforget that I have
preserved so much loveliness from perishing by a horrible deathforget that
her head has laid upon my shoulder, that her heart has beat against mine, and
her luxuriant hair mingled with mine! Yes I will forget all
all
, all except
that I am a penniless law-student and have to look to in the future, years of toil
and privation; while before her is a vista of joy, peace, and all the soft
pleasures
that wealth and luxury and refined society can afford. She must increase
in loveliness and pride of beauty, be admired, caressed, sued and won, blessed
and blessing, while I must struggle on in mortification and poverty; perhaps
successful in my profession, and commanding even her respect, when she shall
be called by another name; but more likely unsuccessful and indigent, despised,
and suffering, and die in obscurity. I will forget herfor my heart's fears tell
me our orbits will never again meet in the social system of life.'
Having come very resolutely to this most irresolute decision, he spent a few
hours in hunting up law-books in an old book-case. At lengh he left his
father's
study, where he intended to settle finally the course he should adopt in
pursuing his law studies. He was crossing the front hall, the door of which
was open, when a carriage, containing two females, drove rapidly up, and a
gentleman alighted, before he could retreat, as it was his first uncontrollable
impulse to do on discovering that the ladies were Miss Hare and her guestthe
girl with the raven hair who had made such an impression upon him, and whom
he had so firmly made up his mind to forget.
`Ah, my dear Mr. Blackford, I am delighted to find you are at home,' said
Colonel Hare, grasping his hand; `you see our awkward young sailors have
quite got over their ducking, and have come to thank you for so intrepidly
coming to their rescue. Indeed, sir, we are deeply under obligations to you,'
he added with earnest feeling; `but for you I should have been childless. You
deserve our lasting gratitude and esteem.'
Charles felt embarrassed, for his was one of those rare, generous natures, that
feels pained at being complimented for an act of humanity. The young ladies
were still in the phton, and it occurred to him that it would be no more than
civil in him to ask them in to the parsonage. He gave the invitation with
suitable
self possession, though he felt the young stranger's eye scanning his
features
.
The invitation was accepted, and Charles offered his hand to Miss
Hare, while the Colonel assisted his guest to the porch. Now our hero
behaved
very well, as he had resolved to forget the other young person to assist
Miss Hare, and leave her to Col. Hare; but the truth must be told, that his
heart leaped to have the privilege of doing the office for the other,
notwithstanding
his lately formed resolution; but there was a feeling of timidity which
prevented him from enjoying the happy honor of touching her hand, instead of
that of Mary, the contact of whose fingers made no impression, or produced
no sensation, either agreeable or disagreeable.
`Mr. Blackford, this is Miss Grace Gordon, a young lady from Boston, and
daughter of General Gordon, lately of Roxbury. She and Mary are school
fellows at Bradford, and she is passing a holiday with her. She is a good girl,
though something wild and ventursome, as von have had experience of this
morning. She desired me to present you to her that she may thank you in her
own way, for your gallantry in her behalf. There, Grace, I have introduced
you, though an acquaintance began so unceremonious as yours, scarce calls for
a very particular introduction afterwards between the parties.'
Mr. Blackford,' said Grace, taking his hand, and warmly pressing it between
both her own, while tears came into her fine dark eyes, `I feel I owe you my
life. For this thanks are poor return. I shall always gratefully remember this
day. I feel I can never forgive myself for exposing a brave man's life, by an
act of imprudence. If you had perished, and I had been saved, how bitter
would have been my reflections at this moment. I trust you will forgive the
folly of a young girl, who to gratify the idle whim of a moment, placed you in
such great peril.'
`Iat leastyou'hesitated Charles, dropping his eyes beneath her own,
`I mean I shall esteem this idle whim the cause of the happiest moment of my
life.' Unconscionsly, he pressed her hand, and the blood raced through his
veins to his temples, and then rushed in a volume back to his heart. Her hand
was hastily withdrawn. What had he rashly done? He raised his eyes to see
if he had given offence, and they met hers, full and deep. She colored, and
turned so quickly away, that he was at a loss to tell whether the look with which
she met him was that of displeasure, surprise, pity, or, orhe dared not hope
forgiveness and interest. He looked round, met Miss Hare's glance of
unequivocal
surprise, for she had noticed this little scene, and rightly read his
feelings
.
He felt angry with himself for this betrayal of the secret of his heart,
and he firmly believed he had made and lost two friends in one day. His pride
was pained lest they should entertain the humiliating idea that he wished to
take advantage of their obligations to him, by intruding upon their delicacy an
improper expression of light personal admirationan apprehension exquisitely
distressing to a sensitive and high-minded spirit. He, therefore, became
suddenly
reserved, and left the further courtesies of their reception and
entertainment
to his father, and as soon as they departed he hastened and shut himself
up in his chamber.
Here his feelings grew intensely agonising. He feared he had offended Miss
Gordon, and incurred also the contempt of Miss Hare, who, he was innately
conscious had seen his involuntary pressure of the hand which held his, and
had put upon it a construction he could not endure that she or any one else
should for a moment entertain.
Miss Gordon rode back to Hare Hall, silent, and very thoughtful. She was
insensible to the scenery, and indifferent to conversation. She had been struck
with the fine, intelligent face of Charles Blackford, as she looked at him before
she alighted. His modesty of manner impressed her favorably, and though she
saw that he assisted Mary out, in preference to herself, she was satisfied that
his thoughts were upon her.
How a young lady knows when a young man's thoughts are upon herself,
merely by watching the expression of his face, we are at a loss to divine, unless
it be by that mysterious influence which is known as Mesmerism. She saw his
embarrassment as he replied to her, but was by no means displeased at the
earnest
words in which it was conveyed. The pressure of the hand surprised her,
but the expression in her large eyes as Charles met them was very far from
displeasure
.
She knew, thereby, what it made her secretly happy to believe, that
she had created an interest in the heart of her hands orne young deliverer, and
a new feeling was awakened in her soul. It was not delight, for it was sadder;
it was not joy, for it was less buoyant; it was not sadness, for it was a pleasing
emotion; it was not fear, for it was confiding; it was a union of all, and the
sensation was sweet, peaceful, and belonged to hope.
CHAPTER IV.
The
morning after the events narrated in the last chapter, our hero received
a summons, by one of his younger brothers, to wait upon his father in his
study.
`Good morning, my son,' said the Rev. St. John Blackford, as our hero
entered
.
`Your praise is in every body's month for your noble conduct yesterday.
Here is a note for you from Colonel Hare which his servant just left for you.
Yesterday was a fortunate day for you. The acquaintance, under the
circumstances
,
formed with this gentleman may be of service to you. He is rich.
Open it and read what he says.'
Charles took the note, and hesitated an instant before breaking the sealfor
his pride gave the alarm lest it should contain some proposition, the
acceptance
of which would involve the sacrifice of his independence. It read as
follows
:
`
My Dear Sir
,I write to lessen the weight of my obligation to you, by
offering
you any service that is in my power. If, in your outset in life, I can do
any thing for you, you will confer upon me an infinite kindness, by naming it
with the same frankness with which I propose to serve you. The ladies join
me, in an invitation for you to dine with us this afternoon, at Hare Hall, where
you will see none but those whom you have already met with.
Very respectfully and gratefully, yours,
Leslie Hare
.'
To Mr. Charles Blackford, Parsonage.'
`This is what I looked to, Charles, said the Rev. Mr. Blackford, rising up
from his chair, and crossing over and shaking his son by the hand; `did I not
say yesterday was a fortunate day for you! But, what! How is this? You do
not seem to appear so pleased as I should expect to see you under such good
fortune. What is the matter?'
`I feel grateful to Colonel Hare for his kind suggestions in my behalf, sir;
but, but'
`But
what?
'
`I can never receive pecuniary compensation for saving the life of any
person
,
sir.'
`He does not offer pecuniary compensation.'
`He proposes to serve me! How else does he mean, or can I understand him,
sir. His proposition will be to lend me money, or pay my expenses till I get
through with my law studies. No, sir! I owe already money to a friend who
generously extricated me from my difficulties in college, and I cannot repay
him. I cannot incur any further obligations of like nature.'
`But Colonel Hare will never expect you to repay him anything he might
advance
you.'
`I have fortunately too much pride and manly independence in my character
to accept of a gratuity from a gentleman, a stranger to me, because I have,
under
Providence, been instrumental in snatching one of his household from a
watery grave. No, sir, I feel that in accepting his offered services, I should
be sacrificing all the best attributes of my nature, my pride of character and
independence
.'
`You are foolish, Charles, and throw away the blessings Providence has
placed in your grasp,' answered his father with displeasure. `You know that
I am poor, and with difficulty can support your brothers and sisters, and that
your presence at my board for three years to come will be heavy upon me, and
that you have nothing yourselfnot even a dollar or means of earning one.'
`And
whose
fault is this, sir?' demanded the young man, sternly; but
instantly
checking himself, he added, `forgive me, sir! I feel your position and my
own. I have surveyed it on all sides. I know what privation is before me
till my profession is gained. I have not willingly made up my mind to be
dependent
on you, and a drone at your board, till it was completed; and I shall
not be, father, after the expression of your feelings just now made. I will
pursue
my profession independent, not only of Colonel Hare, but of yourself. I
can keep schoolI can live economicallyI can lodge upon a settee in the
office
where I study, and so struggle through!'
`Excuse my hasty words, Charles,' said his father, with emotion. `I did not
mean to reproach you with your indifference, which I begin to feel you may
reflect
upon me forfor if I had given you a trade, as your Uncle David wished
me to do, five years ago, you might have been now, at your age, in a situation,
not only to support yourself, but to marry. But we must make the best of the
fruit of my foolish pride, Charles, to make you a professional man. Brother
David, who is now an alderman in Boston, has convinced me a man can be
respected
and honored, even if he is a mechanic.'
`And most heartily do I wish at this moment I had been one,' said Charles.
`You cannot alter what has past, my son, and must now do as well as you
can. I spoke to you, as I did just now, not because I didn't want you to stay
at home till you got through your studies, but because I was so anxious for you
to take up with the excellent offer of Colonel Hare. He will do something
handsome for you.'
`I am resolved not to be paid for my services of yesterday, sir,' said Charles,
firmly; `and I conceive that Colonel Hare has shown a want of delicacy, in so
soon, and in such a way, signifying his desire to lessen his sense of obligation.
With all due respect and gratitude to Colonel Hare, I must say that he is
clearly
actuated, less by motives of indebtedness to me, than from a desire to pay a
debt to his own conscience, which he confesses will be uneasy until the
obligation
is in part removed from his side.'
`This is idle, Charles. He is actuated only by a desire to serve you He is
a proud and aristocratic man, and I am only surprised that he should have gone
so far as he has done, in not letting his sense of the favor, rest with his call
upon you yesterday. I advise you to accept the invitation to dine, and as he
will probably then make known his intentions in your behalf; suspend your
decision till then, and be guided by the circumstances of the moment. Be
assured
,
Charles, there will be less sacrifice of pride in accepting his offer, than
in submitting, as you must do, in the course of your law studies, to the straits
of poor pockets.'
`No, sir. I can never yield my independence to the patronage of a proud
man like Colonel Hare, patronage extended in payment for the lives of two
members of his family, No, sir, let him labor under the weight of his
obligation
,
and I under the still heavier pressure of the poverty which is my lot.'
The feelings of Charles Blackford were natural enough to a high minded
young man; but it is to be believed that his resolution not to be indebted to
Colonel Hare for assistance, was in some slight degree influenced by a
sensitive
remembrance of the contemptuous look of surprise with which Mary Hare
had witnessed the pressure of the hand of Miss Gordon, and by a fond and
devout
recollection of that sweet girl herself, in whose eyes he felt he should be
despised for accepting, in any way, recompense for saving her life. However
unwise, in a worldly sense, his determination not to be a beneficiary of Colonel
Hare's, might seem, it was in a spirited young man who had not brought his
poverty upon himself by any act of his own, a noble and justifiable one; and
we are glad to record his manly decisions, though we may have to record many
sufferings in consequence of it. When a young man once voluntarily sacrifices
his self-dependence, from that moment, the noblest attributes of his nature,
pride of character, (which involves that open and frank address so engaging in
youth) is lost!
`Far better,' thought Charles Blackford as he ceased speaking to his father,
and awaited his reply; far better to struggle in poverty and be free, than be
the creature of another man's will, under the watchful supervision of his
compulsive
daily charity, and subject to his reproof, perhaps his dislike, and
certainly
his contempt. No, Colonel Hare now respects me, and he should always
do so. Mary Hare may treat me haughtily as a poor dependent, but she shall
never despise me! Grace Gordonbut I dare not think of her!'
`I am sorry, my son,' answered his father, after musing awhile within
himself
;
`I am sorry you have come to such a decision, and are willing to throw
away the patronage of such a man as Colonel Hare. Still I respect your
motives
,
and do honor to your feelings of independence. I now regret that I
should have been so foolish as to have educated you to poverty and placed you
in circumstances where patronage has had to be offered you. I advise you to
go to the dinner out of respect to Colonel Hare.
`I think I will go, sir,' said Charles, who at first resolved to send an excuse,
but on reflection decided on going, that he might have an opportunity of
apologizing
to Miss Gordon, and doing away the unfavorable impression he thpught
he had made upon the mind of Miss Hare; for he felt deeply mortified that the
one should think him imprudent and presuming, and the other harbor for an
instant
the idea that he wished to take advantage of her frankness to abuse it.
`That is wise, son,' said the rector with a look of gratification, foreseeing, in
this compliance with the invitation the certain acceptance on the part of Charles
of any proposition that his wealthy host might make to him. `Now we will
talk of the law. I have seen Judge Orne, and he says he will take you and
would like to have you come to-morrow, as he is going on the Circuit and you
can keep his office in his absence.'
`That is, he wants an office boy, and finds me very convenient,' said Charles
coloring.
`You are too proud, my son.'
`Well, sir, I feel it But I was brought up and educated with the notions of
a gentlemanwith a prejudice against labor and all pursuits that are called
manual. But perhaps an office boy is the first stage towards gentility.'
`You are severe! There is drudgery in every profession. In ancient times
candidates for knighood had to do the duty of esquires, serve knights and
buckle on their spurs and wait upon them like a hired servitor!'
`And so I am to clean Judge Orne's boots and hold his bridle when he
mounts to ride an animal. Well, sir I am content, though I must confess it
will be very odd to be a guest of `the rich Colonel Hare, one day, and Judge
Orne's office boy the next.'
`You will displease me, Charles.
`Pardon me, sir; but I could not help reflecting that the path to `
respectability
,'
though it may terminate in the palace of Gentility at last, runs a long way
through the land of humility and degradation ere it reach it. But I am
silent
,
sir.'
`You are disrespectful, sir. You think you justly blame me that you are
twenty-two years of age and have yet no means of livelihood. I may have been
in error in educating you to a profession, when I was so poor; but blame not
me, Charles, but rather the
system of false respectability
which prevails in the
length and breadth of the land, and of which you are the victim. I but
followed
the custom and prejudices of the times. I begin to see my error. You are
as well aware as I am of the prejudices against trades. Would Col Hare have
invited you to his table had you been a mechanic? Had you been even a
mechanic's
son? It was from my desire to see you respected and take your place
among those who lead society, that led me to send you to college and expose
you to the mortification of being offered, as you have this morning been,
patronage
.
I shall bring up your brothers and sisters differently. The boys shall
have trades, and the girls shall at least pass a few months with a mantua-maker
or milliner till they can learn to be independent should reverses happen to them.
I will no more aim at educating children without means to do it, and keep
them till they can enter upon a profession. Your own painful position, my son,
as well as your frequent forcible conversations with me upon the subject, have
fully convinced me of the profound error into which I have fallen.'
`I am indeed most happy, dear father, to and you have come to this wise and
christian way of thinking.'
It is this false pride which is the cause of so much misery and vice among
young men who are the victims of it. No error can be so great as for parents
to let their sons grow up without trades and send them to college or put them
in stores to make them `respectable.' It is from such young men that the
fashonable
gamblers that fill the cities of the south-west are composed. Business
fails with them; they have no trades to resort to, and `to beg they are ashamed.'
They become, as their easiest alternative, gamblers! I recently saw an extract
from a New Orleans paper, stating that a Dry Goods merchant advertising for
a clerk had before noon the next day one hundred and sixteen applicants for the
vacancy, all of them young men from New England, of genteel appearance,
and all without means to live from day to day; sons of fathers, who, to bring
them up to `respectability,' sent them, ignorant of any trade, from the paternal
roof, armed only with a yardstick and scissors to seek this phantom `
respectability
,'
which too late they find haunts empty pockets, delights in a scanty
wardrobe, and is peculiarly happy in avoiding bailiffs.
`You are severe, Charles. But let us speak no more of what cannot be
remedied
.
You will go this dinner. In the mean while I would recommend you
to call on Judge Orne at his office.'
`I will do so at once, sir;' answered the young man, rising and quitting the
study.
`There goes a foolish, high spirited boy,' said the clergyman to himself as
Charles closed the door. `He is both right and wrong. I hope Colonel Hare
will propose something that he will think it best to consent to. The boy justly
reproves me. I see I should have taken brother David's advice, and he would
then have been happier than he now is, and already useful in society. His
cousin
James, I see by the newspaper, has opened a furniture-warehouse in
Docksquare
,
and advertises for two apprentices. My son Robert, now sixteen, shall
go with him, I am resolved. I will write to brother David this very day about
it. Pride and poverty I have found to my own cost, have always gone, and
always
will go together. I will at least, bring up my other children without
meriting their reproach. I, a grey-haired man, and a minister of the gospel,
have this hour sat in silence and condemned, while my own son was reproving
me. Yet I justly merited it. I wish that other parents could see the folly of
their prejudices against trades as I now see mine; how much misery and guilt
it would spare the coming generation. I will from this time be an advocate
for the industrial pursuits. I will bring the subject into the pulpit. It is a theme
that calls loudly for the denunciations of public eloquence. Paul's second
epsitle
to the Thessalonians, the third chapter, will furnish me with a text. Yes,
I will try and atone for the error of Charles' education, by openly taking side
against that false and mischievous system of respectability, of which I have
made him the innocent victim.
Thus reasoned the Rev. Mr. St. John Blackford, on seeing the fruits of
trying
to do for his son
without money
and
means
, which can only be done
with
money. Let it be understood here that we do not combat collegiate education,
but what we do combat is, that false pride which makes poor men try to give
their sons collegiate educations, without being able to carry them through it,
and so leaving them to struggle on to a profession through penury and want;
harrassed by debt, threatened with disgrace, and oftentimes shipwrecked by
despair. We wish every youth in the land could be blessed with the privileges
of a collegiate course of study. But it grieves us to see young men, thrust upon
it without means, to struggle and suffer as Charles Blackford has done.
On quitting his father's presence, Charles took his hat from the hall table,
and went out to make his call on his future preceptor in law. He took his way
slowly along the green lane that conducted from the parsonage to the main
street of the village, his thoughts changing from subject to subject, as he thought
of Hare Hall, Judge Orne's office, Grace Gordon, and the coming dinner. At
this last thought, his glance fell upon his somewhat worn black coat, and he
blushed to think that perhaps he was too ill-dressed to make his appearance
there. It is true, our hero's wardrobe, as may be learned from his economy in
College, was not any of the best; but since his return, he had enlarged it by
an old coat and vest of his father's which had been turned by Miss Eunice
Thurston, the village tailoress, who worked about from house to house, and by
her skill and industry had been made to fit his shape and appear, as his good
mother said, `good as new, and shining as bright as when the parson first put it
on slick from the shop.' This coat had not been much improved by the water
the day before, but still did very well for a young man `in the country.'
Charles
had some pride of appearance, and the idea of meeting young ladies, made
him, as it does all young men, more sensitive as to the
niceness
of his personal
appearance. He finally consoled himself with the thought that they had seen
him once, and dress only improves on first interviews. No woman looks to see
how a man is dressed the second time she sees him.
`If I feel so annoyed now, how often shall I feel so before I get through my
studies,' said he, to himself. `I could wish I were fellow-workman with
yonder
journeyman house painter, who comes contentedly along with his pots and
brushes, and spotted apron. He earns money and can make a good appearance.
He is independent. He certainly is the more respectable.'
While he was thus reflecting, the young painter came up and joined him.
`Good morning, Mr. Blackford, I hope you took no cold yesterday, getting
those young boarding-school girls out of the river. It was a tight chance
for them.'
`Yes,' replied our hero coldly, slightly drawing up with a touch of the pride
of superior condition which had been instilled into him from his youth up.
`You had quite a struggle for it,' continued the young journeyman, without
seeming to notice his manner, joining him and walking into the village by his
side; `I was painting the belfry of the school house when I saw it, and thought
at one time you'd both go down together. You are a good swimmer.'
`Yes, I have learned to swim,' said Charles, with additional reserve, feeling
a reluctance he could not overcome to be seen entering the village street
walking
with a mechanic, and endeavoring, by slackening his pace, to let him pass
on; quite forgetting all his late resolutions and his hardly uttered wish that he
were in his place. Poor Charles Blackford! how little did he know his own
heart' how little was he aware of the depth in it of that false pride which he
had so lately condemned in his father. All at once he began to view his
conduct
in its true light, and struck with his inconsistency, he smiled and resolved
to conquer a prejudice which had taken such deep root in his heart, and which
had been so lately the theme of his severe invectives. He, therefore, turned
politely towards the young man, who was moving on at a faster pace, as if
desirous
of leaving one who seemed above speaking or walking beside him, he
addressed him in a kind, frank way, upon something connected with his trade,
and so walked by his side conversing with him till he reached Judge Orne's
office
,
when he very civilly bade him good morning, leaving upon the mind of the
other, instead of feelings of dislike, sentiments of respect and friendly feeling,
which would ever be ready to be exercised in his behalf. Charles had found
him intelligent and plainly pleased at the cordial change in his manner.
`There is my first victory,' he said, as he came to the door of the office; `I
have succeeded in conquering a prejudice, and in subduing pride. I have
increased
my self-respect and gamed a friend, whom, by my haughtiness, I like
to have made an enemy. I found my doctrine is very good in theory, but it
requires
some philosophy to put it into practice. What had this journeyman's
apron, paint pots and brushes, to do with the
man?
What has the lawyer's pen,
the physician's lancet, the merchant's ledger, to do with the
man?
Henceforth
I will learn to look only at that respectability which is based on virtue and
usefulness
;
and no longer set up a scale,
graduated by occupation
, by which to fix
the merit (that is gentility) of individuals.'
The office of Judge Orne was in a neat one-story building, built on the
principal
village street, in one corner of the spacious front yard of his own residence.
This latter edifice was the finest house in the village, being a large square
structure
,
two stories in height, with a doric portico and a ballustrade upon the edge
of the roof. It was thrown at noon into dignified shade by four gigantic elms
and sycamores that grew in front between it and the street. It was painted
white, but its hue was grave and time worn, and with its deep green front yard,
and tall pine trees, and handsome white latticed fence, with an arch over the
front gate, it had an imposing, respectable, judge-like look, and plainly told any
stranger who passed by, that some person of importance resided there. At one
corner of this yard, about a hundred feet obliquely from the house, was, as we
have said, the Judge's office, with a door on the street, and a private door on
the side by which his Honor passed out, and by a narrow, well-trodden path,
reached his domicil. On the opposite corner,
vis-a-vis
with the office, was
another
building, containing like it one square room, and in external appearance
its counterpart, showing that the Judge had an eye for symmery. This
opposite
flank to his front yard was let as a millinery establishment, and its front
door and windows were garnished with sundry gay colored articles of Millinery,
by way of sign, although `
Miss Deborah Chickering
,
Milliner and Fancy
Dress Maker
' was painted conspicuously in yellow letters on a small black
signboard
hanging from an iron rod over the window. It had once hung at the
corner
near the yard, but Mrs. Orne had caused the Judge to have it removed, lest
people
might
think they kept the Millinery up at the Mansion-house; and the
Judge very judiciously thinking with his wife that it would be very disgraceful
if they were supposed to be guilty of pursuing any useful occupation, forth with
ordered Miss Chickering to have her sign removed from the corner by the yard,
to the front of her shop. There was no side door letting into the front yard in
this building as in the other, Miss Chickering having no business at the house,
and the Judge no business at the Milliner's.
The door of the lawyer's office was wide open and the window raised, for it
was a warm morning, and the sun was shining brightly in upon the well worn
dust colored-floor, strewed with law books, papers, toru letters, feathered heads
of quills, &c. The office consisted of one room, occupying the whole building.
On two sides of it were bird's eye maple cases, filled with law books in every
attitude, and the tops piled with files of newspapers, old maps, and heaps of
briefs laid awaysad memorials of the past. On one side of the room was an
old fashioned writing table, with a broad leaf, covered with green baize, well
inked, and above it innumerable pigeon holes, labelled with letters of the
Alphabet
,
some empty, others crammed with papers. Near the middle of the
room stood a large square two leafed table, heaped up with books of law, open
and half-open, and shut, some back down, others face down, some with papers
stuck between the leaves, others with penknives and sand-boxes to mark places
to be referred to, and the whole in a scene of confusion such as is only to be
found in a full-practising country lawver's office. This table was drawn up
near the yard door which was open, and through which our hero had caught a
glimpse of the verdant lawn, the old Mansion in the back ground, and Mrs.
Orne, a prim, stately person, setting at the parlor window in her cap and
spectacles
reading.
In a large leather bottomed arm-chair drawn near the door where he could
command a view of his house, and the Milliner's window across the yard, sat his
honor the judge, in the act of examining a deed. Charles nad seen him before,
but now paused to survey the appearance of one who was to initiate him into
the mysteries of the law. He was a goodly sized gentleman, inclined to
port-liness
,
about fifty-two or thereabouts, hale and hearty, and with the looks of a
bon vivant. His hair was gray, slightly powdered, brushed back from his
forehead
and temples, and worn in a queu. He was dressed in a broad skirted
black coat, the collar well besprinkled with powder, a white Valencia vest, of
respectable depth, a plaited ruffle to his shirt, and black small clothes, with
knee buckles. His forehead was high but wrinkled
upwards
like a man who
thought with perplexity, instead of with that steady concentration of the mind
which furrows the brow over the eyes and the nose in the region of
individuality
.
His brows were thick, and long, and grey, and projected over a pair of
quick, shrewd hazle eyes. His complexion was florid and rather higher and
richer than the blood that temperance tints with, and his nose being a tint or
two deeper crimson, the inference was, what the whole village had long since
known, that his Honor loved his glass of brandy and water. But, then, in those
days it was thought no discredit for gentlemen to drink freely. Those were
the days when men were in blindfold ignorance of the sin of intemperance;
when side-boards provided in every mansion; when his worship, the minister,
was asked to take his glass before he was invited to a seat at the fire; when
the decanter was the symbol of hospitality, and a glass drank between two
gentlemen
,
the seal of friendship. We must, therefore, look upon his Honor's
rubieund
nose with allowance, and not condemn him, for how shall a man be
condemned
before that law of condemnationtemperancecame in to condemn
him?
The Judge had one leg resting over the other, and with a pen in his hand,
was perusing the document he held, without his spectacles, which were laid
across his knee. Charles having at length brought his mind to meet the
embarrassment
of the interview, entered the office with a step that arrested his
attention
.
He looked up and inspected his visitor with a keen scrutiny, and
then resumed without a word, his examination of the deed. After waiting full
five minutes our hero managed to throw over a chair, which again drew his
attention, and fixing his glance full upon him he said,
`Well, sir.'
`My name is Charles Blackford, sir, and I'
`Oh, yes, very well. I know all about it! Your father was here! Just
arrange
the books in the case till I have time to attend to you.' And thus
speaking
,
his Honor resumed his deed, while our hero vexed and mortified at his
reception
,
obeyed, though half inclined to quit his office for ever. But prudence
forbade, and he recollected that he had a great deal of pride which it became
him to subdue.
Charles was gratified at this pleasant issue of his interview which had
promised
to be so disagreeable, and after passing an hour looking over law-books, he
took his leave, and hastened to the parsonage, to prepare for his dinner, at the
Hare Hall.
CHAPTER V.
The
hour of dinner was three o'clock, a late hour for the country, but one
hour earlier than Col. Hare had been in the habit of dining in town, and two
hours later than our hero had ever dined in his life; the dinner hour at the
parsonage being half-past twelve, and that at the College commons at one.
Half a dozen times before two o'clock came he made up his mind not to go to
this dinner; for he feared Miss Hare, dreaded her father's offer of patronage,
and trembled at the idea of being seated next to or opposite to Grace Gordon;
a consummation which he would have liked most of all things in the world but
which he of all things most dreaded! Love in its first awakenings is guilty of
many odd and perverse contraricties of temper! The solicitude, however, which
he felt to acquit himself to both ladies of any intention of impropriety, made
him change his determination and resolve to go.
His mother had sent him up from the half past twelve dinner table a lunch
of pie, saying he would need something, it would be so long before he would
get his dinner, and that it was not wise to go long on an empty stomach. The
good woman's pie however remained upon his little table untouched and
unthought
of, for he was in too great perturbation of spirits to think, much more
to set down and deliberately eat a lunch.
`Come, my son,' said the rector, who was deeply interested in the success
of this dining out, entering his chamber with a large silver watch in his hand,
`it is now a quarter to two; and it is polite in going to dine out to be present
an hour before the dinner hour. You had best go, I think.'
Charles received the announcement of the time with a flushed brow, for
Grace Gordon's image rose to his mind on the instant, and his heart beat
tumultnously
at the idea of soon being in her presence. He followed the
clergyman
down into his study and there received from his anxious parent several
axioms of good advice touching his behavior, as follows:
`Now, my son,' said the good man of the old school, `you are to dine in
fashionable society. You will betray no surprise at any luxuries or articles of
furniture or ornament that are unfamiliar to you. You must seem as if you
had always been accustomed to such things. On entering the house a servant
will show you into the sitting room, and remember on entering to pay your
respects first to the ladies; to Miss Hare speak a word or two, bow to Miss
Gordon, and if Colonel Hare offers his hand, shake hands with him, but never
with a lady on such occasions. Are you listening?'
`Yes, sir,' answered our hero demurely amused at this revision of
Chesterfield
from the formal clergyman.
`When dinner is announced, offer your arm to Miss Hareit used to be the
finger tips, but times are changed nowand conduct her to the table. The
lady should always sit at your left. Never pour ont water or hand bread at
such a table as Colonel Hare's, for this is the duty of the servants and probably
these things will be kept upon the side board as they should be. Never when
a plate is handed to you pass it to anotherit is impolitebesides, it is the
servants' duty to hand the plates to the guests. You will be asked to take
wine by Col. Hare. Fill your own glass and drink to him after he has filled
hisfor the one who sends wine fills his glass after the other. Do not be
guilty of the
guacherie
, as the French term it, of asking the ladies to take wine
also, before you fill your glass, this is ill-bred. But after drinking with your
host, wait a reasonable time and then, sending the decanter by a servant to
Miss Hare, solicit the honor of taking wine with her. After the servant has
half filled her glass, be fills your own, and you courteously nod to the lady, but
do not speak, and take half of your wine. The English deem it good manners
to empty the wine-glass on such occasions, but this is not good breeding. Be
careful you do not, (as at home,) keep the same plate for two courses!
Converse
only on subjects of the day, and avoid entering into arguments or
disquisitions
,
or introducing any subject upon which persons present may be
supposed
to differ in opinion, from you, or among themselves. Drink but two
glasses of wine, for temperance is a noble virtue in a young man, and commends
you to older persons, however much themselves may break the rule. After
fruit, the ladies will retire! Do not leave the table to go with them, nor to hold
the door for them to pass throughthis is the servants' duty; but rise when
they do, and slightly bowing, remain standing in your place till they disappear.
You then resume your seat and conversation will now be more free. The
growth of grapes, the age and preservation of wines, the best mode of raising
fruit, the quality of cigars, and anecdotes connected with these, (the subjects
being all before you on the table,) are the usual and most proper themes to talk
about at such a time. You should not therefore neglect to make yourself
something familiar with such subjects, that you may not be at a loss. After a
cigar you will join the ladies, when it will be proper for you to ask Miss Hare
to play, when the conversation, in the intervals, will turn upon music and
composers
,
of which you should know something, to be able to do your part well
and naturally.'
`Why, sir, this is artificial, throughout.'
`And the perfection of art in society is the simplicity of nature. I hope you
will remember these hints, for the ignorance of all that I have now
communicated
to you, was the cause of many a mortifying hour when I was your age,
and first went into society. It is to spare you the shame and pain of personal
experience, that I have been thus particular. But at last, no rules of conduct
can be given that will cover the whole field of behavior, and much must be left
to experience, and much to good sense and judgment. I hope you will get
through your first dinner well, and without the awkwardness that makes the
memory of my first dining out, at this moment, cause my ears to tingle.'
`Indeed, sir, I am obliged to you,' said Charles, `it is true I am quite a novice
in stylish societyperhaps needed your instruction. But I trust I shall be able
to pass the ordeal with the recollection of your hints, with some credit. Good
afternoon, sir.'
`Good morning, you should have said, my son,' said the Rector, calling to
him as he was hastening from the door, `it is `good morning' in good society
always till one has dined. Do not say good afternoon by any means when you
meet them. I wish you to appear well, my boy, and small matters often make
large impressions.'
Our hero at length escaped from his solicitous parent's reiterated charges,
and secretly obliged to him for his advice! for though his good sense and
taste might assist him in going properly through his dinner hour, he felt sadly
the want of experience, and had no objections to profit by his father's.
Hare Hall was a handsome, cottage-like country seat on the bank of the
river opposite the parsonage, with lawns and garden descending from the
piazza
to the water. It fronted also the other way on a road that passed between
the village of Bradford and Haverhill, crossing the river by a long wooden
bridge, elevated on several stone arches, and at that time one of the wonders of
New England. On leaving the lane that led to the parsonage, Charles
entered
the village street, and took his way to the bridge, which he had to cross to
get to his destination. When he was half away across he involuntarily paused
to admire the scenery above and below him; the smiling fields of living green;
the terraced town with its snow white churches and neat dwellings; the pretty
village of Bradford on the hill, with its clumsy spire; and the dark and limpid
flow of the river beneath, which came so near being the grave of Grace
Gordon
,
and perhaps his own! `How strange,' thought he, `the circumstances
that have crossed the thread of my destiny with this bright girl! how
extraordinary
that I should now be so wholly lost in the contemplation of one, of whose
existence, two days since, I had never heard! Why is it that I am so deeply
interested in her? Because I saved her life. I saved Miss Hare's also; yet
she holds no such claim upon my heart!
Heart
did I say' Yes. It is my
heart that is interested in Miss Gordon. I need not attempt to conceal it
from myself! Yet why should I suffer myself to be thus interested in her? I
can never encourage this affection with the hopos of having it reciprocated?
She can never think of me! I can never be anything more to her than a poor
clergyman's sonan object of patronage. I will strive to-day and conquer
forever a passion, (for passion it is becoming,) which is certain to make me
miserable!'
His reverie was interrupted, for he had been pursning his way along the
footpath of the bridge, by the rapid sound of carriage wheels behind him, when,
looking back, he saw a light travelling phaeton approaching him at a fast rate,
containing an elderly gentleman and a young man, in whom Charles
recognized
Grayson Preston. His first emotion was that of pleasure, which was
instantly
followed by a flush of mortification at the idea of his unliquidated debt,
and from that sense of dependence which cannot be overcome. His gratitude
would have made him hail him with delight, while his pride and the
consciousness
of the knowledge the young gentleman had of his indigence and
destitution
,
made him feel like avoiding him. His better feelings, however, prevailed,
and, as the carriage came near, he looked behind with a smile of welcome to
his benefactor; but the young collegian was so intent upon governing his
cream colored ponies along the narrow track of the bridge, that he did not
notice
the foot passenger past whom he wheeled with such speed. Charles
followed
the receding chariot with his eye, till it disappeared in a winding of the
road enveloped in a cloud of dust.
`Why should I feel such mingled emotions of pleasure and shame at
meeting
the man who has done me better service than any other person living?' he
inquired of himself with a feeling of reproach. `How dependence and a sense
of pecuniary obligations poisons the better feelings of the human heart. I
would embrace him, yet shrink from and avoid him, both in the same instant.
If I feel so towards Preston, how shall I feel towards Colonel Haretowards
all associated with him, if I consent to receive his patronage. No, I will not
again part with my free will and frankness of character to any man. I am glad
I have seen Prestonfor I am now firm in my resolution to abide the issue
on
my own poor estate. He is probably going to Boston. I remember now, he
said his father resided, in the summer, at a place he owned near Exeter. They
have now come from thence! How differently Providence has cast my lot
from his! He emerges into manhood, and finds wealth and all its luxuries, laid
at his feet, offered to his hand! That fine, dignified looking gentleman must
have been his father! He has wealth, and was wise in sending his son to
college
;
but better, far better for me would it have been if my indigent father had
educated me for my condition. I have now all the high feelings, the enlarged
views, and cultivated tastes of this rich young Preston, which only serve to
enable me to feel more sensibly my condition. But I will not repine, but
with a strong heart and a trust in God go onward. Talents and industrious
perseverance
may
achieve for me, all that birih and fortune have given to
Preston.'
With this better resolution be pursued his way along the road, over which the
clouds of dust raised by the wheels of his friend, still floated, and after a short
walk, entered a lawn that led by the side of a meadow, towards the south front
of Hare Hall. Noble oaks and proud elms lined the way and gave dignity and
an imposing air to the approach. He at length entered a carriage gate-way,
through which a wide gravelled avenue led to the front of the mansion. On
the right of this carriage path was a foot way bordered with low shrubbery, by
which he proceeded towards the mansion. It presents a handsome appearance
with a graceful Ionic portico, its verandah on each wing and latticed
conservatories
.
Before the door was drawn up a carriage with cream colored horses,
which he instantly recognised to be that in which Preston had passed him on
the bridge. There was an instant rush of blood to his temples, and he suddenly
stopped. The idea of meeting him there was at first disagreeable to him, and he
would have avoided it. But reflection showed him the folly and unmanliness
of his emotions, and he continued on his way to the door.
`How could Preston have known Colonel Hare? He had never heard of his
visiting him! Did he know Grace Gordon?' was then a question that rose
to his thoughts, attended with conflicting and painful feelings. He was now
within a few yards of the portico when the carriage drove off empty towards the
stables. Colonel Hare had ushered in his guests, when seeing Charles
approaching
,
he turned back and met him upon the steps.
`Ah, Mr. Blackford, I am happy to see you,' he said, shaking him heartily by
the hand; `walk in! We have an accession of guests to our table to-day,
whom I did expect. Come in! You will find others here that have to thank
you for your gallantry.'
Without giving him an opportunity of inquiring whom he meant, he ushered
Charles into the drawing room, where, as he entered he saw Grayham Preston
in the act of kissing Grace Gordon with a warmth of affection that, with the
surprise of the deed itself nearly overpowered him. He, however, instantly
recovered himself, persuaded of the folly of encouraging such feelings in
relation
to her as he experienced, and saw Preston surrender her to the embrace of
the elder gentleman, whose eyes were bathed in tears of joy as he pressed her
again and again to his heart.
On seeing Charles Blackford enter with her father, Miss Hare approached
him and offered him her hand with a well-bred frankness that surprised and
pleased him, as he had anticipated a reception from her so different, and
instantly
made him at case with himself.
`You will have a happy welcome here to-day, Mr. Blackford,' she said
smiling
.
`General Gordon has surprised us with a visit.'
`Is that noble looking gentleman the father of Grace Gordon?' asked Charles
with surprise.
`Hither comes Grace to answer for herself.'
Miss Gordon on seeing Charles had released herself from her father's
embrace
and drawn him eagerly forward towards him.
`Mr. Blackford,' she said, extending her hand and beaming upon him a look
of grateful delight, `I have the happiness of making you acquainted with my
dear father, whom, but for you, I should never more have seen. This is Mr.
Blackford, father.'
General Gordon grasped both hands of Charles, and for a moment held them
firmly, and in silence clasped between his own, while the tears fell from his
eyes to the floor. Charles was deeply affected.
`Young gentleman, God bless you,' he said at length, finding utterance.
The blessings of a grateful parent rest upon you. You have restored to me my
child! I cannot reward you. You will find a reward in the praise of your
own heartin the consciousness of having saved the life of one in the bloom
of youth and beauty, and saved from going down to a wretched grave an old
man, who now lives to bless you.'
Charles could not frame any reply to the natural eloquence of a father at
such a moment, and was silent. Grace Gordon met his eye and looked a soul
full of gratitude. He felt that his indiscretion of the day before was pardoned
or forgotten, and he was happy.
`Ah, Blackford! how do you do?' said Preston coming up to him and
speaking
in the frank tone of long standing friendship. `I congratulate you upon
saving my fair cousin Grace from her perilous situation yesterday.'
`Your cousin!' repeated Charles.
`Yes, don't we look alike,' answered he smiling. `Uncle got Colonel Hare's
letter this morning at Exeter, that Grace had fallen into the river from a boat,
and came near drowning, but for a young clergyman who plunged in and saved
her; and so we took carriage and came down. I had no idea that the young
clergyman was yourself until you came in, although I heard the name. When
did you take orders?'
`I wrote, or meant to write clergyman's son,' explained Col. Hare laughing.
`Well, Mr. Blackford, you see you are among friends. I am glad you know
Grayson.'
`We were in College together,' said Preston suddenly assuming a cold
manner
,
which Charles observed, but could not account for; but reading could have
done, however, had he observed the look of grateful interest with which Grace
was at that moment regarding him, and which Preston had detected and chose
for some reason or other to feel displeased at. These male cousins are very
jealous of their pretty female cousins, always.
The dinner hour passed without incident or without any breach of etiquette
on the part of our hero, which happy result was doubtless owing to his father's
careful injunctions before hand. General Gordon was all courtesy and
kindness
,
Colonel Hare, polite and attentive; his daughter gracious; Preston
formal
;
and Grace very silent; but Charles thought her silence very eloquent,
and it pleased him rather than many words. After the ladies had returned,
Colonel Hare gave a very animated narrative of the danger and rescue of his
daughter and Miss Gordon by our hero, which exceedingly embarrassed him.
`You are a lucky fellow, Blackford,' said Grayson, crushing an almond
between
his thumb and fore finger and breaking the meat into his glass of wine;
`I wish my star had been in the ascendant that day.'
`If Grace and you were lovers, Mr. Preston,' said Colonel Hare, laughing,
`you would have good reason to be jealous of our friend here.'
`Jealous,' repeated the young man with a slight touch of haughtiness,
glancing
significantly at Charles, who could not mistake the look of proud
superiority
that met his, and which conveyed to his quick and sensitive mind the
history
of his obligations to him. Yes, Charles Blackford began in earnest to feel
the bitterness of dependence for a pecuniary favor, and to learn that the patron
will never be at a loss for occasion to make the obliged feel his dependence. In
his heart, for a moment, Charles felt as if he would rather have endured all the
evils he had escaped by Preston's loan than experience the sensations of
inferiority
and dependence he did at that moment; and he internally resolved to
use every exertion soon to repay him at the expense of every privation. He
began
to dislike him too, for the interest he took in Grace Gordon. How strange
are the workings of human nature! how opposite and conflicting the feelings
that agitate the heart! How good and evil, love and hatred, gratitude and
dislike
,
struggle for the mastery. Charles was humanhis nature like that of all
humanity. He tried to keep alive his gratitude for Preston; but the other's
evident
uneasiness at his good fortune, as he termed it, in rescuing his cousin,
and his own fears lest he should be favored by her, awakened in him incipient
jealousy which is fatal to gratitude. He also smarted under the
meaning
and haughty glance of his college friend, when Colonel Hare alluded to
rivalship
.
`No,' thought he proudly; `I never will de dependent on Colonel Hare or
any one beneath this roof. It shall be my earliest toil to pay Preston his debt.
I shall thenbut what have I to do with thoughts and hopes of his cousin? If
he loves herbe it so. I can never aspire so high.'
`You look something sad, sir,' said General Gordon to him, interrupting his
reverie. `Allow me the honor of wine with you. Your health Mr. Blackford.
When you visitnayyou must visit Boston on purpose, and make my house
your home. So you knew nephew Grayson in college?'
`Yes, sir,' answered Charles, avoiding Preston's eye which he felt was
seeking
his own, to give him a haughty look of reminiscences; and which he now
felt was intended to intimidate and check him from presuming upon making
his cousin's acquaintance. The moment this idea occurred to him, his pride
was touched, and he no longer stood in awe of his presence. He then added to
General Gordon in a frank open manner, `yes, sir, I have reason to know him.
He generously assisted me in a very trying hour of pecuniary embarrassment
and to this moment I stand in his debt. I shall, however, I trust,' he
continued
,
turning his clear eye full upon the surprised young man, `have it in my
power to release myself from the pecuniary part of my obligation to him.'
Preston was surprised to find Blackford so freely acknowledge what he believed
he was anxious to conceal and what he inwardly had resolved to hold in
terrorem
over him if he should prosecute, as he feared, his acquaintance with his
cousin. Charles, however, had too humble views of his own position to think
of cultivating her acquaintance, though he would have esteemed a moment in
her society the happiest in his life.
`Blackford, a glass of wine with you,' suddenly spoke Preston, passing him
the decanter. Charles filled his glass not a little surprised at this frankness in
one whom he saw had taken a dislike to him, and as he rightly conceived
wholly
an account of his agency in the rescue of Grace Gordon.
`May the intimacy formed in college, be preserved through life, without any
thing to
mar
its harmony on the part of
either
,' said Preston, unexpectedly
giving a toast. His eye followed his words and met that of Charles who plainly
understood him. From that moment the two young men were
rivals
. That
toast had been a challenge, and our hero took it as such. He drank it in
marked silence, and as they set down their glasses he saw on Preston's face a
smile of haughty defiance. Charles felt too keenly his indebtedness to him to
show his own feelings; and he burned to have the opportunity of releasing
himself from the now painful veight of his obligations.
`You can retire, Preston, with Mr Blackford, if you have done your wine,
and take care of the young ladies, while the Colonel and I sit and chat awhile
upon business matters,' said General Gordon.
The young gentleman who had been leaning back in his chair for sometime
past, making a bell of his hock-glass, with his nut crackers, for a tongue, rose
from the table, and politely enough, yet with an air of superiority, let Charles
precede him to the withdrawing room. The result of the conversation which
followed, so far as it had reference to our hero, will be subsequently made known
in a letter addressed to him by General Gordon, the following morning.
The young ladies were seated, one at the piano, the other at the window,
looking
idly over a portfolio.
Preston walked directly to his cousin, who occupied part of an ottoman in
the window, and seating himself beside her, took her hand in his, as if in the
habit of such terms of intimacy with his fair relation. With a quick and
blushing
glance across the room, to Charles, who was approaching Miss Hare, by the
piano, she hastily withdrew it.
`Why, you are prudish all at once, Grace,' he said, seeing the direction of
the glance, and feeling angry that the poor student had already so much
influence
over her.
`That is fine print, Grayson,' she said, holding to his inspection, an
engraving
of a rural scene.
`Yes. Where were you upset? Can you see the place from the window?'
`Yes, directly opposite the willow, at the foot of the garden, and mid-way the
river. We floated down as far as the Elm, before William Blackford saved us.
Oh, how my heart throbs with gratitude to him.'
`I suppose so,' said Preston, dryly. `Ladies always love young gentlemen
that snatch them out of the water. I suppose you saw this Wm. Blackford on
the shore, and thinking him a very handsome young man, you would apset the
boat for the sake of having a romantic rescue. Well, he is a proper youthpity
he's so poor,' added Preston, glancing where our hero stood listening to an air,
Miss Hare was playing for him.
Grace took her cousin's irony for playful teasing, and did not reply to it; but
his allusion to Mr. Blackford's poverty immediately interested her.
`And is he so poor, Grayson?' she asked with sympathy.
`Yes. He had difficulties in College, and would not have got through but
for my assistance.'
`Yourwere very generous, Grayson,' she said warmly; `you dont know how
much better I think of you.'
Here Preston was foiled, as he deserved to be. He had hoped his allusion to
his indigence and difficulties, and his need and assistance would have
awakened
in her, feelings of reserve towards him; but, on the contrary, he found that
she did not see his poverty, but his own generosity; that it did not lessen her
esteem for him, but her respect for himself. It is ever a woman's nature to
feel so. But Preston was too young in his knowledge to know of that rich and
inexhaustible mine of all that is good and noblethe female heart.
Preston, at length, grew moody, and left the window and then the room.
Grace became silent, and looked out of the window. Miss Hare finished her
song and joined her; and Charles, fearing to trust himself to speak to Miss
Gordon
,
before her, took his leave. In the hall, he met Preston, who passed by him
haughtily, and with a slight bow.
The next morning he was seated in Judge Orne's office, taking his first
lesson
at the law, and where he received from the hands of a servant, in livery, a
note, the contents of which shall be given in the ensuing chapter.
CHAPTER VI.
We
pass over the three years of our hero's law-studies, years of privation,
suffering
,
mortification, and debt. He had earned fifty dollars the first six months
after entering Judge Orne's office, by teaching the village school one winter.
This sum he immediately mailed to Grayson Preston, who had then graduated
and was living, at his father's in Boston, an idle life of pleasure. The letter
which accompanied it, we have not room for; it was manly, appropriate, and
consistent with our hero's noble and generous nature. Preston took no notice
of it, but Charles learned through authentic sources, that he had received the
money. This debt paid, he felt greatly relieved and went forward with his
studies with that ardor and devotion with which a young man might he
supposed
to be inspired, who was ambitious to overtop wealth by worth, to outstrip a
rich rival by talent alone, and to win the respect and regard of a loving woman.
The image of Grace Gordon mingled in all his studies, and her sweet name
floated before his eyes strangely confused with dry law terms.
At length, as we have said, he completed his course of study and was
admitted
with great credit to the bar. During the three years of his noviciate he had
been a guest at the parsonage; his expenses, however, for clothing and other
necessaries, had to be incurred on his own account, which at the end left him
debtor to sundry persons in the village about one hundred dollars. These debts
were incurred, however, with the understanding that he was to pay them out of
his first fees.
Behold Charles Blackford now an attorney at law. There was no opening in
his native town and after a long consultation with his father, he resolved on
going
to try his fortune in Boston. With forty dollars, made by keeeping the
town school a quarter, in his pocket, a slender but well preserved wardrobe, a
head full of law, and all the world before him, our hero, one sunny morning, left
the rectory and took his way to the city, a distance of thirty miles. In his
straitened
life he had learned economy; he therefore preferred sending on his trunk
and a box of law books, presents from Judge Orne and his father, by a waggon
belonging to farmer Gage, who kindly offered to convey them, and to go
himself
on foot.
With a cheerful heart he bade his father and his family farewell, and with a
stoutstaff in his hand, took the road to the bridge in the direction of the Boston
road. As he crossed the bridge, he could not help lingering, to look, for the
last time, at the spot whence he had rescued Grace Gordon three years before
from a watery grave. During all that time he had not seen either her or Miss
Hare. Both young ladies had soon afterwards completed their education under
the excellent and thorough tuition of Miss Hazleton, the accomplished
Principal
of Bradford Academy, with whom they had been four years; and Colonel
Hare having removed to Boston altogether, he had not even heard from them.
Yet his interestwe will use a stronger termhis love for Grace Gordon
continued
deep and strong, and increasing with time and absence. Hope, as he
now leaned over the parapet of the bridge and gazed on the spot endeared to him
by so many associations with which his heart was connected, still whispered
success in
law
; and the subsequent triumph and realization of all his dreams in
love
. Yet he was still a poor studentstill without means, and dependent on a
precarious profession in its outset for his daily subsistence. And his heart
smote him when he thought that he might after all fail, and all his hopes be
destined
to disappointment. At length he roused himself from his gloomy
contemplations
,
and pursued his way towards the city.
He had walked all day at a vigorous pace, and the setting sun was gilding the
dome of the State House and the pinnacles and towers of the tri-mountain
metropolis
when he crossed the Charlestown bridge, and entered the busy,
confused
and thronged streets of the city.
We will pass briefly by the first few months of his residence in Boston. His
forty dollars had been nearly expended in fitting up an office of cheap rent, and
getting a sign, which he added to the scores that grace the fronts of the granite
blocks in Court street. He thought, as he looked at it from the opposite side of
the way, that it was lost among the great number around it, and he felt that he
himself was lost among the host of lawyers that thronged the precincts of the
Court.
The first six months he had but a single client, in his landlordthe host of an
humble tavern in Ann street, where he lodgedwho gave him employment in
part payment for his own long standing bills of board; for
lodging
he had on a
cot in his own office. A year passed away, and he had yet no business, and was
reduced to the greatest extremity. His father in the meanwhile had died,
leaving
his mother and brothers and sisters in a condition that required his
assistance
.
Yet he could not help himself. Fortune seemed to turn her smiles from
him, and an evil fate to frown upon him and upon all his efforts to obtain
employment
.
His rent day came, and fortunately his landlord had tenants to sue,
and gave him the business; but this brought him in no money. His wardrobe
had gone piecemeal to the pawnbrokers, his law books sold, and his landlord had
no more defaulting boarders to sue, and was clamorous for his money. Poor
Blackford's heart became hard through his misery, and he felt that he should
have rejoiced in the commission of any crime that would have brought him
business.
It was the night of the day of extreme suffering and mortification. He had
been menaced with the jail by his landlord and others to whom he had
inevitably
become indebted. But one day of grace and favor was given him. He must
pay more than a hundred dollars on the morrow, or the next night become the
inmate of a prison, disgraced in his profession, and with all his hopes of
respectability
and honor among men forever blasted. He lays restless upon his hard
couch, for his anxiety was too intense for sleep. He rose and paced the floor of
his narrow office. He had fasted all he day, for fear of meeting his landlord's
angry eye and of hearing his landlady's sneering tongue. He was, therefore,
fevered; and his pulse was quick and his brain hot with his mental pain.
`Here I am,' he said bitterly, `after four years of hard, penurious toil and
study, enduring the bitterest privations to gain a profession, at last having
gained it, left to starve in it? Here I am again reduced to debt, to disgrace
and mental anguish, as I was the last day of term in college! And what hope
more than then has four years furnished me? None. I am indeed a victim of
false paternal pride. If I had been a mechanic, I should not now be enduring
this! Yesterday I saw my cousin, James Blackford, the cabinet maker, riding
out of town in his own barouche, and saw the Mayor and General D ,
touch their hats to him. Surely being a mechanic has
not
made him less
respectable
;
and God knows, being a lawyer has not made me more so! I
would go to him for aid, but my pride forbids! I have despised himbeen
taught to do soand now I cannot sleep! No. I must meet my fate,
whatever
it be. At least I have not brought it upon myself by any acts of my own.
How callous and hardened my heart has become to human suffering! How I
should rejoice in an opportunity of defending a murderer! Gracious Heaven!
am I fallen so low asas I fear I do in my heartas to half breathe a wish
that some crime might be committed that I might profit by it professionally!
Ha! what sound is that!
Murder
!'
He sprung to the window of his office, which was in the third story, and
looked out upon Court street. The moon was shining with the clearest light
upon the pavements below. The cries of `murder' help! help!' rung loud
upon the silence of midnight as he threw up his window and looked down.
Near the corner of an alley he perceived two men struggling, and in the hands
of one a knife glittered as it descended again and again into the body of the
other.
`Hold, assassin!' cried Blackford, almost paralyzed by the scene, and unable
to move; and at the same instant were heard footsteps approaching, and shouts
of men crying to the rescue. Charles saw that the assasin lingered to strike a
final and decisive blow, and then throwing away his weapon, started to fly in
the direction of the Old State House. His course was instantly arrested by
two watchmen coming up, when he turned to escape by the Court passage to
School street. But some persons rapidly approaching the scene of the outcries
of murder, turned him back, and for an instant he hesitated, as persons were
advancing from every quarter. At this instant his eyes detected the common
entrance to the tiers of law offices in the granite buildings open, when, as if
trusting for escape to the numerous rooms and passages, he darted in the
direction
of the open door, and disappeared within it beneath the window out of
which Charles was looking. Instantly our hero flew to the door and opened it
into the passage, to intercept and if possible arrest him, should he ascend to the
third story. The stair halls were perfectly dark, and he heard him below,
mounting upward with free and rapid flight from story to story, without seeking
shelter in the rooms below.
In the meanwhile, of those whom the cry of murder had brought to the
neighborhood, some gathered about the dead body, others watched at the
windows
and surrounded the building, lest he should escape by the windows, and
two watchmrn entered the gallery after him. Charles heard their slow and
uncertain steps in the dark below, while the fugitive was on the stairs
terminating
on his own floor.
The man came up at such a fierce and desperate pace, that Charles was
forced to step aside to escape being thrown down; but as he did so, he
forcibly
seized him by the arm as he was passing him after reaching the landing.
The assassin struggled violently, and releasing himself, darted into Blackford's
room, the door of which was open. He was about to close it and bar himself
in, when Charles threw it open, and entering, grappled with him. In the
terrific
contest that ensued, they fell together against the closed door the assassin
underneath. For a few seconds there was a pause, broken only by the heavy
breathing of both. At length the man spoke, in a low deep tone, which Charles
recognized as that of the man Bucklin, who kept the inn where he had boarded
ever since he had been in the city.
`Mr. BlackfordII am in your power. I have killed a manI am
pursued
,
and throw myself upon your generosity. I have money, and you are in
want! Secrete me from those who are in pursuit of me, and I will place five
hundred dollars in your hands to-morrow morning, in told gold. Do not delay!
I hear them searching in the story belowthey will soon be up here. You can
hide me without suspicion, by locking your door. No one would suspect I had
entered your closed door. Save me, and the moneynay, six hundred dollars!'
Charles paused a momentfor the temptation was great. But he paused but
a moment, and the temptation was
only
a temptation.
`Bucklin, you appeal to me in vain,' he answered firmly. `You are a
murderer
by your own confession and by my testimony. I saw you do the deed
from my window.'
`It is because I threatened you with jail to-day! This is poor revenge,
when you will lose sevenyes
eight
hundred dollars by it. I have the money,
and it shall be yours. You are the only one that has recognized me as the
murderer
.
Keep me here till morning, and we will go down to the inn together,
and then I will count you out the money. Hark, they are on the stairs!
Release
my throat and let me get up, and hide me!'
`No. You are secure and shall abide the issue of your crime. I will not
stain my hands, poor as I am, also with the blood.'
The man made a strong effort to rise and throw Blackford off; but was
unsuccessful
.
He made one more appeal to him for life and liberty.
`Who have you murdered?' demanded Charles.
`A seaman who once sailed with me when I committed a crime on the high
seas, I would not care men should know,' replied Bucklin in a hoarse tone.
`I knew him to be the only living witness. I had not seen him for years, when
he came to my house to-night and called me out of bed. He then demanded
money, saying that he was in poverty and that unless I gave it to him he would
'peach. I offered him fifty dollars. He swore he would have two hundred.
At length I gave it to him, and professing friendship went out with him,
resolving
to get him drunk and take it from him again. But he would neither drink
nor enter a tavern. So we walked until we came to the corner of the alley
yonder, down which I tried to prevail upon him to go, saying it was the nearest
way back to my tavern. He refused and boldly accused me of my intention of
robbery. I denied it, and he reiterated the charge. I then made a stroke at
him in the breast with a knife I had taken from my box for the purpose. `It was
not fatal, and he grappled with me and cried murder. I stabbed him several
times, and tore his bag of gold from him and fled. I found escape barred, and
knowing how numerous were the rooms and passages in this building, I thought
of it for shelter and of
you
. I fled to your room expecting you would conceal
me for money, knowing your poverty. I now repeat my offer of eight
hundred
dollars, but here on the spot giving you the the hundred dollars, I took
from the wretch I have killed. They are near your door! For God's sake
bolt it! Save me and the money is yours.'
`Tempt me not.'
`I will give you half I am worth,' cried the man in despair as a hand was laid
upon the bolt to try the door.
`Never! Come in, sir!' he added in a loud tone. `Here is your prisoner!'
The door was thrown open and several men with lanterns entered and beheld
Blackford and the assassin on the floor.
`Secure your prisoner! He fled to my room and I have been so fortunate as
to detain him,' said Charles.
He was speedily relieved from his charge by two officers of police, and the
murderer was dragged off to prison.
The papers of the next day paid Charles Blackford, Esq, many handsome
compliments for his courage and self possession in arresting and detaining the
assassin who had fled into the Law Building; and for a few days he was quite
a lion for a poor lawyer. But this did not put money into his pockets nor pay
his debts. The creditors who had been impressed by his temporary notice by
the public, and ceased for a while to urge him, again became clamorous. At
length the lawyer who held Bucklin's account, received instructions from that
assassin to sue it. Charles was waited upon with a writ. Unable to obtain bail
he was conducted unresisting, and feeling that all his hopes and ambition were
forever dead, to the prison in Leveret street.
Who can pourtray the feelings of this young man as he threw himself upon
his wretched cot when the turnkey closed the massive door upon him! For
hours he lay upon his face without moving, but with his soul tortured by
anguish
inconceivable. He had been thrown into jail by an assassin, and was
now partner in prison with the wretch whose gold he had spurned! `Alas!'
thought he,' what reward has honesty and integrity in the world!' He groaned
deeply; but the consciousness of rectitude sustained him in that dark hour
when life seemed valueless.
Worthy suer of a debt, an assassin in chains! Such men should alone be
base enough to cast a man into prison because he
cannot
pay! Upon an
equality
with him is every heartless and despicable wretch who can coolly give
orders
to deprive a fellow-being of liberty, and then go home to his own fire-side
and smile and chat and be happy, while the home of the victim of his malice is
a scene of anguish and woe! Malice or a spirit of revenge, or, what is worse
still, a naturally cruel and vindictive temper alone actuates the creditor who
visits his helpless debtor, with such a fearful judgment. The power, because
laws, disgraceful to a christian community, give it to him, he exerts to indulge
his own bad nature. For the benefit of
such
men, these laws are suffered to
disgrace the statue books. But thank God this relie of the barbarian and cruel
ages is disappearing before the light of civilization and heavenly charity!
Legislatures
have been moved as one man, by the spirit of benevolenceand
three states of the confederacy have boldly and nobly thrown off the stigma
that still adheres to all New England, the boasted land of intellectual light, the
cradle of civil and religious liberty. Let the shouts which will hail the
elevation
of the last stone upon the summit of Bunker Hill monument, be echoed
from the debtors' cells in Leverett street by the hollow vibrations of
deserted
vaults, and not with the groans of the imprisoned `freemen,' which answered
the loud huzzas of multitudes that witness the laying of its corner stone! Is
there no legislator ambitious for an imperishable name, now in the Legislature
of Massachusetts? Let him then win it, and the blessings of posterity by
stepping forward the pioneer of civil liberty, and striking the first blow that
shall shiver in pieces the chains of the debtor and restore him forever to the
open air of heaven and the free wide earth God has given him to walk upright
upon!
It was the grey dawn of morning when Charles Blackford roused himself
from the mental paroxym of intense agony under which he had labored all that
dreadful night. He rose and paced his narrow cell wretched and indifferent to
life. His pride of character was gone! He felt he could no more hold up his
head among his fellow-men! He felt disgraced and broken spirited. He
wished
for death, for life was now wearisome and a weight to him. Suddenly a key
was thrust into the lock of his door, bolts and bars were removed, and the
jailor
appeared with food; after setting it down upon a stool and casting a
scrutinizing
glance about the cell, he went out again without a word being
interchanged
between them.
`This is to be my way of life for ten weeks, till the court sets, and perhaps
longerfor I have no means of employing counsel or of paying my debts, said
Charles bitterly. `I pray that death may release me ere then! I see nothing
before me but months of imprisonment, for I have no one to go to. The
remembrance
of Colonel Hare's offer occurred to him, but he instantly banished
the idea of soliciting his interference, for he knew Preston was intimate with
him, and had reason to believe he had prejudiced him against himself. His
thoughts then reverted to Grace Gordon with such sweet and touching
memories
that his heart became softened and tears came unbidden and unchecked to
his eyes. He could not help painfully reflecting how much happiness his
poverty
had shut out from him, in losing her whose image had so long been
graven
upon his heart. He pictured her now as the wife of Preston, and the thought
was anguish to him. Hope at this moment whispered that she might yet be
free!
`Free,' he cried with bitter scorn;
free
and for
whom?
Not for
me!
What
have Ithe inmate of a felon's cell, my name blasted by my fellow-men
I
to
do with hope connected with that bright creature! No, no, 'tis madness, and
I do believe I
am
mad! I wish I were, then should I be insensible to my
wretchedness!'
He leaned for some moments in silence against the stone sides of his prison
in passive thought, when he was startled by the door of the cell a second time
unbolted and unopened. The jailer admitted a woman whom he instantly
recognized
as Bucklin's wife.
`Leave me alone wid him, Mr. Jailor, a few minutes, till I talk with him
about the defence of my husband, and make the bargain with him,' she said in
a coarse, coaxing tone.
`I will give you, madam, while I go to two other cells at the end of the
passage
and be back again,' he said, shutting to the heavy door and locking them
in. Charles gazed upon her with surprise and distrust.
`Well, Mr. Blackford, you see my man is locked up as well as yourself,
though your crime isn't quite so bad as his'n; but then the law don't make no
difference 'tween debts and murders, and locks 'em all up alike, just as it should
be, for a man might as well kill a body as keep their honest money away from
'em. But this is nothing to the purpose, and I must be quick as old
Bunch-o'-Keys
won't be long away. You see I've just seen Bucklin, and he says that
you are the only witness that can 'dentify him in that killing business. He
says he shall plead not guilty, and I and another at the tavern will swear to an
alibi
. Now they can't prove that the man that run into the building, and the
man my husband, you had down on the floor in your room was one and the
same man. You and Bucklin, you know, might easily have had a quarrel
about your debt, he havin' come to ask for his pay, and you be scuffling and he
down when the watchman came, and you out o' revenge told 'em he was the
murderer when you knew he wan't.'
`To what does this strange language tend, woman?'
`Why, in plain words, as there is no time to mince the matter, Bucklin will
swing if you are a witness. Now he has sent me to offer you two thousand
dollars in good city bills, if you will keep out of the way. You have not been
subpned yet. Here is the money in $100 billstwenty of 'em she added,
taking a package of bank notes from her bosom and displaying them before him.
`You shall be discharged from Bucklin's suit at once, and then keep out of the
way till he's acquitted. Do this, and you are free, and the money is yours.'
Here was a great temptation to any man under circumstances far different
from Blackford's! He was overpowered be the weight of the temptation, and
was for a moment silent. `Could he positively swear before a Court that the
man he saw in the street slaying another was Bucklin?' This question pressed
itself strongly home upon him as he hesitated under the temptation. `Yes,' he
could!
He knew him then, and knew him to be the assassin when he had him
down in his room. But did the honesty of conscience require that he should
give his testimonywait to be subpned? A moment's reflection decided him
in the affirmative; for at the tribunal of an honorable man's conscience,
questions
of moral action are soon and correctly decided. He felt it to be his duty
as a man of integrity, to be at the service of justice in this case, whatever might
be the forfeiture of worldly considerations.
During the time in which he was arriving to this moral result, the woman
Bucklin was fixing her keen eyes upon him, reading his very thoughts; and
she was not startled when he replied firmly
`Woman, put up your bank notes! I cannot sacrifice my integrity, even for
such a price!'
She knew from his tone and look that this decision was final, and that he was
immoveable. She therefore said vindictively, returning the money to her
bosom
`Be it so, young man. You will repent it. There will be witnesses in behalf
of my husband to impeach your testimony. Men will stand there who will
swear to the fact of your having had a quarrel with the murdered man in my
tavern that dayand that you called late at night and asked for him, and when
I told you he had gone out, you asked after Bucklinand when you were told
he had gone to your office to see you, you went out swearing `he had best not
come to you dunning any more if he knew what was good for himself, and
that if you crossed that sailor's path you would have a reckoning with him for
his blackguarding you in the morning.'
Charles stood petrified, listening to this statement, every word and letter of
which was utterly false, and without even a shadow of foundation in truth;
for he had not been near the tavern that day nor night, seen no sailor, nor
asked
for Bucklin.
`Woman, art thou fiend or human?'
`Ha, ha! I told you you would repent. Bucklin shan't swing if swearing
will get him clear.'
`Demon! begone! Out of my sight. If I perish by thy evil machinations,
be it so! Hence!Jailor!' he cried as the turnkey appeared, `lead this person
forth, and let me no more see her. Begone!' he cried, with a sensation of
mingled
terror and disgust.
`So I am to be charged with this murder! Well, be it thus! God, and not
man is my judge. I feel the consciousness of innocence, which will sustain
me. This blow was only wanting to complete my degredation in the sight of
men; but I am pure and honored in that of Heaven, for which I feel I cannot
be too grateful. God alone gave me strength to resist this great temptation.
I will trust in Him for the issue of this false accusation!'
The day of Bucklin's trial came. Charles was conveyed from prison, where
he had lingered weeks, to the tribunal as a witness. He was sworn, and gave
in his testimony. His clear and connected narrative, his pale and intellectual
features, his emaciated form, interested the Court in him. Bucklin pleaded not
guilty, and the false witnesses appeared in his behalf and against Blackford.
The charges were made with such boldness, and were so plausibly prepared and
worded, that all eyes were fixed upon Charles as the real murderer, and
sympathy
began to be strongly enlisted in favor of Bucklin. An order was already
made out by the Judge to commit him to the felon's cell to await trial for the
murder, when the jailor appeared in Court and desired to be sworn. He had
listened and overheard the interview between Bucklin's wife and Charles, and
now bore witness accordingly. Charles was acquitted by acclamation, and
Bucklin convicted on his previous testimony.
Our hero was removed from the Court again to his cell; for after the
momentary
enthusiasm was over, no one took interest in him; or if any one did,
out of benevolence on account of the false charge against him, this sympathy
flowed directly back to the bosom from whence it sprung, on hearing that he
was a prisoner for debt. When a man's feelings are awakened by benevolence
or any of the sister charities, he is accountable to his own conscience and to
Heaven, whence all charity flows, if he has let any thing step between it and
its object before he has fully and thoroughly investigated, for
himself
, the
condition
of the person or persons who have enlisted his feelings.
In a drawing room of an aristocratic mansion in the vicinity of the Common,
sat a family group around the breakfast table, the morning after the murder and
arrest of Bucklin. It consisted of Colonel Hare, his daughter, Mary Hare, now
become a tall, fine looking belle, and Grace Gordon, whom four years had
changed from girlhood to all the graces of woman. She was now twenty, and
in the richness and bloom of her rare loveliness. Save in form and feature,
she had not changed. Her smile was the same, her heart was the same,
beating
with the same generous impulse that had first led her to defend Charles
Blackford on the evening of the day on which he preserved her life. During
the four years, she had cherished his memory with grateful interest. Nay, the
feeling might have been tenderer and deeper than gratitude with which she
remembered
him, for she had refused numerous offers of marriage, and declined
Preston's urgent suit to her; and a fourth time, and but a few days before we
now meet them, had dismissed him forever with downright displeasure, because
he had thrown up to her, in revenge for his discomfiture, `a low attachment
for that poor parson's son who had sponged on him in college.' Preston left
her, and mounted his dashing phton, asservating with an oath, that he would
never trouble her again with his notice. Mary Hare had a half a score of
lovers
,
whom she kept to flirt with and wait upon herfor to a belle, a retinue of
beaux is a very great convenience She found it so, and knew how to make it
so. Colonel Hare was about the same as when we last saw him, save that his
hair was something whiter. General Gordon, we should have mentioned, had
deceased two years before, and Grace, who was now Colonel Hare's ward was
just coming out of mourning. Thus affairs were at the time we renew our
acquaintance
with them.
The Colonel was reading the Daily Mail, when a paragraph met his eye
which he read aloud. It was the account of our hero's arrest of Bucklin.
`Well, he is as brave and resolute a man as ever,' said the Colonel, looking
over his spectacles to the ladies; `and can arrest assassins as easily as save
girls from drowning. He is an extraordinary young man, and seems to abound
in adventure. I have wondered where he has kept himself, and now find by
the paper that he is a lawyer in this city. It is strange we have never met his
name before. We must invite him to the house. What say, girls, hey?'
`I should have no objection, dear father,' said Miss Hare, with a haughty
movement of her head; `but I think as there has been no acquaintance for some
years, it would be hardly worth while. We should have to introduce him into
society; and we don't know what his character is, and but what he may be very
poor.'
`I will vouch for his character, Mary,' warmly said Grace Gordon, whose
cheek had deepened its tone and whose eyes beamed with secret hope and joy;
`whatever may be his condition, I am confident he is and always will be an
honorable man. He may be poor, but that should be nothing against him.'
`Not where a person with simply repeating the little word `Yes,' can make
him rich, I suppose it is not,' said Miss Hare between irony and playfulness.
`If the whole of my wealthevery dollar of itwere bestowed upon him,
Mary,' answered Grace, with spirit, `my life would be cheaply paid for.'
`And to make up the deficiency, I suppose you would be ready, if he should
be so presumptuous as to ask you, to throw your heart and hand into the scale.'
`Mary, you are unkind,' said Grace, blushing and looking hurt; `I respect
the character of Mr. Blackford, and remember him with gatitude.'
`And if you gave him you heart and hand and fortune, my noble girl,' said
Colonel Hare, taking her hand with kindness in his manner, `you would, I
doubt not, give them to one every way worthy of you, and upon whom, (he
added
,
in a lower tone,) if I read the heart of a certain young lady I wot of, they
are one day destined to be bestowed, or this certain young lady will be
disappointed
in her bright dreams of the future!'
Grace gratefully returned the pressure of his hand, and, rising from the table,
hastily retreated from the breakfast room, to hide her confusion and her joy
from the cold and haughty eyes of Miss Hare.
Circumstances prevented Colonel Hare from calling on our hero for some days, when he found his office shut up, and no one could inform him of his
address
.
He then dropped a line to him through the Post Office; but day after
day passed, and he did not hear from him.
Grace, in the meanwhile, was all anxiety and solicitude, with doubts, fears,
and hopes, alternately in her mind, She no longer hesitated to acknowledge
to herself, now that Colonel Hare had discovered to her the secret of her heart,
her long cherished attachment to her youthful preserver. Miss Hare got
possession
of the secret, and cruelly rallied her, but the Colonel was her fast friend,
and took her part nobly.
Some weeks clapsed, and the party were assembled around the tea-table,
when a servant entered with a package addressed to Miss Gordon in the
handwriting
of Preston. She opened the envelope, and found a note and an evening
paper. The note read briefly as follows:
`Miss Gordon will find, on perusing the
marked
column of the accompanying
print, that a certain gentleman for whom she professes great personal regard,
has been
charged
with a murderthough acquitted, it seems, through the
evidence
of his friend, the turnkey of the city prison, where he at present lodges,
and would no doubt be happy to entertain his
friends
. Mr. P. will do himself
the honor of calling on Miss Gordon to-morrow and renewing his appeal to her
generosity, now that it is certain what he believes to be the
real
obstacle to the
consummation of his wishes, is removed by crime and degradation from all
farther
place in her thoughts.'
`The dastard!' cried Grace, indignantly crushing the note in her hand, while
the tears flowed fast and free.
Colonel Hare and Mary rose from the table with surprise and alarm.
`Read that, sir! Has such a craven kindred blood to the Gordons in his
veins?' and the insulted, grieved and high-spirited girl walked to and fro before
the table, till he had finished the perusal of the note.
`He is a villain, Miss Gordon. Old as I am I will call him out for this insult
to your feelings,' said the Colonel indignantly.
`Noleave him to his own contempt Let me read this paper! What
says it?'
Her eyes rapidly ran over the report of that day's trial, and the account of the
proceedings which are already known to the reader.
`Base conspiracy! I knew he was innocent,' sir,' said she with a glad sound
in her voice and a heaving heart. `But why was he taken back to prison?
This is fearful! Had he been there before? I must know the worst ere I sleep.
I cannot endure this uncertainty. Order the carriage, Colonel Hare, and let
me drive there!'
`Where, my dear child?' asked the Colonel, sympathising in her feelings.
`To the prison,' she answered with energy.
`It will be improper. Youbesides'
`Wellspeak'
`You are not certainI do not wish to damp your hopesbut he may
possibly
not be prepared to
requite
the interest you feel in him.'
Miss Gordon looked him in the face for a few seconds after hearing these
foreboding words, and then sunk in tears of mortification and wretchedness of
heart upon the sofa. She felt an affectionate arm around her and a soft cheek
laid to her's and words of hope and confidence in her ear. It was Mary Hare's
arm and sympathy and affection. She has become interested in our hero from
the account of the trial, and from the contrast his character exhibited to that
of Preston, whose conduct in this affair roused her spirited indignation. She
felt keenly for her friendfor Miss Hare, though haughty and exclusive, was
by no means destitute of feeling, or insensible to the better feelings of nature.
Colonel Hare, kissing them both with pride and affection, told Grace to be
patient
and she should soon hear from him. He immedieatly went out and
getting
into his carriage drove rapidly away.
CHAPTER VII.
Our hero sat in his cell, upon the side of his rude cot, with a sad but
resigned
spirit. He felt that evil and misfortune had done their worst for him, and
that he could fall no lower. But his hardships of this life had led him to a
nearer contemplation of that rest in the life to come. He now experienced the
consolation of that hope which is an anchor to the soul in the hour of adversity.
He was fortified against despair by hope, and elevated above self-contempt by
the consciousness of innocence of life and uprightness and integrity of conduct.
His misfortune he felt had not been his own, but made his by the peculiar
error
in which he had first been thrust upon the ills of life, by his misjudging and
ambitious parents.
While contemplating his present condition, and trying to penetrate the
future
,
the door of his cell was thrown open, and the jailer ushered in, by the
light of a lantern, an elderly gentleman whom, in his surprise and in the
uncertain
light, he did not recognize.
`Mr. Blackford, I am come to repay, in some degree, my long standing debt
to you,' said the familiar voice of Colonel Hare. `You are free. I have not
waited for your consent, fearing your pride would make you prefer a prison to
a pecuniary obligation.'
Charles returned in silence the warm and cordial grasp of Colonel Hare's
hand. His surprise, gratitude, and the conflicting emotions that rushed through
his heart, rendered him for some seconds incapable of articulation. When he
did speak, his voice was so tremulous and broken by his feelings that Colonel
Hare stopped him in the midst, passed his arm through his, and led him to his
carriage. On the way through the streets he learned enough, by delicately
sounding our hero, to know that Grace would not love unrequited. Charles
gave him such outlines of his history as he had not heard from the
communicative
jailer before entering his cell. When, at length, the carriage stopped,
Charles hesitated to get out.
`My dressmy degradationthe ladiesOh, SirI'
`Not a word! We have been seeking you out ever since we heard of your
arrest of that assassin, who would have made you swing in his stead, and we
are glad to find you, and hold on to you under any circumstances.'
Charles found resistance vain, and suffered himself to be led into the house.
We will pass over the interview between our hero and Miss Gordon and the
subsequent growth and maturity of that love which for four years had been
silently at work in each other's hearts, preparing them for an indissoluble union
in one.
Six months after the day on which Grayson Preston maliciously sent the
newspaper and note to his cousin, she was united in the bonds of wedlock with
the very prisoner he had held up to her contempt. But woman's love, he now
learned, cared little for dungeons, bolts and bars, and that persecution and
misfortune
presented only higher and holier claims to her regard. Preston, finding
that the vast wealth of his cousin, with which he had hoped to repair his own
dissipated fortune, had fallen upon his hated rival, our worthy hero, went abroad
in disgust, and now lives in Paris, a bachelor and fashionable roue. Mary Hare
kept up her flirtations so long, that at length, when she would have caught
one of the numerous birds that had pecked about her smiles, and caged him for
life, she found they were too old birds to be caught when she in earnest would
have secured one. So Mary lives in a state of single blessedness, at the age of
thirty-one, but still beautiful in her fading bellehood. Hare Hall has recently
been purchased by the Honorable Charles Blackford, where he resides except
during the session of Congress, when his duties as a Representative call him,
with his accomplished lady, to the Capitol.
Wishing that all errors of education, based upon misguided ambition and a
slavish subserviency to a false system of society, might come to as happy an
issue as those of our hero, (out which we fear in
real life
they seldom do!) we
take leave of our readers with the wise observation of a distinguished member
of the present Cabinet, with which we prefaced our talerecommending its
spirit to all parents who have sons to educate to play their parts on the varying
theatre of life:
`If this Republic shall escape the catastrophe that terminated the career of
every one of its predecessors in ancient and modern days, it must be by the
prevalence of more just and liberal views in regard to the distinctions assigned
to BIRTHS, MONEY and OCCUPATION. The people must be made to see and to feel
that the LAW OF REPUTATION, as now observed, has a false basis; that there can
be no such thing AS PERSONAL MERIT without virtue and usefulnessand that
no branch of industry which contributes to the general compact is intrinsically
degrading
.
THE END.`
The Ox Head Breakfast Inn
,
12
miles from New Haven
, 9, A. M.
Dear Blackford
:I have been thinking of you and your request and
unpleasant
situation, every turn of the coach-wheel to this place. Your case has
undergone my thorough mental survey, and I am convinced I treated your
confidence and trust in me very unhandsomely. I have no wish to excuse
myself
,
though I might do so. The truth is I have been very often applied to by
students to lend money and seldom refusing, I have been sometimes trifled with
and imposed upon, not that I could suspect any such thing of you! Twice
before
your application this morning I had two fellows ask me for money, which
for certain reasons I declined lending; your request was, therefore,
unhappily
timed
and in the hurry of departure I did not give it that
consideration
,
which your own character and my respect for you, should have challenged
for it. Pardon me, if I gave you offence, or by my refusal added to your
mortifying
position. I would now, in some degree, atone for my indifference to
your request, and beg leave to enclose you a bank note for $50, assuring you I
shall not need it; and I pray you will oblige me by never bringing it to my
recollection
again. Wishing you a happy deliverance from all your difficulties, I
beg leave hastily to subscribe myself,
Yours, truly,
GRAYSON PRESTON.'`
My Dear Sir
,I write to lessen the weight of my obligation to you, by
offering
you any service that is in my power. If, in your outset in life, I can do
any thing for you, you will confer upon me an infinite kindness, by naming it
with the same frankness with which I propose to serve you. The ladies join
me, in an invitation for you to dine with us this afternoon, at Hare Hall, where
you will see none but those whom you have already met with.
Very respectfully and gratefully, yours,
Leslie Hare
.'
To Mr. Charles Blackford, Parsonage.'