THE
MYSTERIOUS
STATE-ROOM;
A TALE OF THE MISSISSIPPI.
CHAPTER I.
`Some men, 'tis said, do love rehearsals
O' each day's acts in foregone night dreams:
So nothing happens they ha' not seen the shadow o't.'
Among
the numerous wild and thrilling romances of which the
valley
of the South-west has been so often the scene, and which have,
hitherto, escaped the avidious pen of the tourist and story-writer, is
the one which I have chosen for the subject of the following sketch.
Though not strictly Radcliffean in its tone and aspectfor there are
no castles and dungeons thereaway, in which to lay terrific chapters
yet it may involve sufficient of the romantic to entitle it to
preservation
.
It was one of those autumnal evenings of the South when Heaven
itself seemed to have descended and enthroned herself with banners of
fire and crimson, and curtains of golden light upon the piles of
gorgeous
clouds that lay heaped up in the West, a mass of glory and
splendor too intense for the eye to gaze upon! The majestic flood of
the Mississippi rolled on reflecting from its dark and steely surface a
hue like purple. The centurial trees that lined its shores, were gently
waving their ocean surfacethe red sunlight glancing along their green
and billowy tops as if from wave to wave of a vast and heaving deep!
A small but beautiful city, roof rising above roof, terrace above terrace,
with trees picturesquely mingling with, exposing and half concealing
the white dwellings, slept upon the hill-side facing the west. A rich
roseate tint was suffused over it, and the red fire from the setting sun
illumined its windows, so that it looked like a city in flames; each
dwelling a smouldering furnace within, yet, all burning with smokeless,
unconsuming conflagration. Such it seemed indeed, to be to our eyes,
as we approached it from the south, on board that most imperial steamer
the `Empress.' Every passenger stood on deck enjoying with
unlimited
expressions of admiration the whole magical and gorgeous scene;
not even excepting the ruder portion of the motly and diverse
assemblage
that composed our number, many of whose faces were animated
with the enjoyment which even simple and uncultivated taste is ever
ready to administer to every man who will open his senses to its
influence
.
We had left New Orleans the morning before with a large and and
agreeable party of passengers, and we were to stop at Vicksburg,
the city before us, to take in another, for whom the best, because it was
the largest and sternmost, state-room had been reserved to this time
There existed, therefore, among a bevy of lovely women on board,
married and single, who had been particularly anxious to obtain this
desirable room for some of their own party, probably because it was
not
obtainable, not a little curiosity to learn who the individual was
that had thought him or herself of so much importance as to send to
New Orleans to pre-engage a passage, and the best accommodations.
Among these ladies were two remarkably lovely girls, cousins, on
their passage to Lexington, of which beautiful city one was a resident;
the other being a native of Louisiana, and on her way to make her
cousin a visit. They were under the protection of the charming
Kentuckian's
father, a fine old gentleman, and an admirable specimen of
the high chivalric school, characteristic of his state. They were the
life and joy of our cabin party; and seldom has Heaven given such
charms to please, and fascinations to win. Never were two young
ladies
so different in person, who were so like in spirit. The elder cousin,
Louise Claviere was a Creole of proud French descent. Her hair was
dark as the plumage of the raven, and worn with a simple polished braid
entwined around her fine head. Her complexion is indiscribable. Its
rich tone has no name. It was like the lotus leaf, pure as snow, and
almost
dazzling
but for a soft voluptuous shade, living and glowing over it
like sunlight glowing warm upon marble. The color of her cheek was
not set, but was ever beautifully coming and passing away with every
emotion. With the uplifting of the bending lids of her dark rich eyes,
it would suffuse her cheek, but as delicately as if a rose leaf had been
laid near, and the light had poured through upon it. Her brow
was arched and black, and of exquisite workmanship. Never did I
conceive before the beauty that dwelt in a woman's eye-brow. It was a
study, not for a painter, but for the spirit of beauty herself. Her eyes
I have spoken of Deep as wells that at noonday reflect the heavens
with its stars, they seemed themselves to be a heaven of love and
delight
.
It was impossible to meet their dark dangerous gaze! The eye
dropped suddenly before them worshipingly, while the heart bounded
with emotions strange and powerful. No woman I have seen, ever
possessed like her the wonderful power of beauty. It was a wand which
she had but to wave to command men's homagea talisman which she
had but to lift to enchain their heartsa spell which she only had to
exert, and which lay in every glance, look and motion, to overpower
the soul, and fill the mind with awe and adoration. Beauty in itself ever
irresistibly and instinctively commands adoration. The first man's sin,
says the Buddha theology, was the worship of the woman whom God
presented
to him in all the freshness of glowing beauty instead of her
Creator
.
This principle is still existing in the human mind. Every lover
adores the object of his attachment in degree and it is, perhaps, only
because
no woman exists (can be supposed to exist) so beautiful as Eve,
who, of necessity, united in her person all the perfections of feminine
loveliness, that she is not now made an idol. If any woman could
command the homage of men, and also the admiration of her own
sex, it was Louise Claviere. Her beauty did not consist in the
chaste, yet voluptuous outline of her face; nor the round and
divinely
sculptured cheek and throat; nor in the majestic grace of
her neck and superb bust; nor the sweet majesty of her whole figure; but
rather, these were the glorious fashioning and setting of the shapely
casket which contained the bright and intelligent mind. She seemed
to be created to love, and dispense joy and happiness. Every generous
and lofty feeling dwelt in her bosomtenderness and pity filled her
glorious eyes, ready to yield their sympathy. She was a woman whose
fate promised to be unalloyedly happy or unalloyedly miserablewho
would love when her heart should be interested, either good or evil,
and love with undying devotion. Her cousin Genevieve, was, on the
contrary, a sweet, graceful, laughing
blonde
, with a frank, open face,
a bright blue eye, long, soft brown hair, a mischievous pouting mouth,
and a cheek like the bridal of the lily and the rose. Her figure was
petite, and her motions free and light as the doe in its wild freedom.
Her cousin was twenty, but she was two years younger, and not so tall
by three inches. She was a true child of nature. She knew no evil,
and therefore did not know that it existed. She was as guileless as a
child. She would have been just the same as she was if man had
never
fallen. I could not but sigh as I gazed on her joyous and happy
face, in which one could read her heart with all its emotions, like an
open book, to think how soon care and sorrow would trace their lines
and shadows upon it. Her heart seemed to be full of love and
generous
emotion for all her race. I could conceive an angel, if one came
to dwell on earth awhile, to be like her. There was visible, a shade
of thought in her eyes I perceived, at times, and I observed that her
bright lips would sometimes gently compress when in repose, as if
beneath
all her sweet and gentle grace, she possessed a spirit quick and
sensitive; and one which, if called into exercise by a generous appeal
to her sympathies, would act with decision and prompt determination.
I could see that she posessed no moral fear; that her soul was
courageous
.
It is thus, the gentlest and most delicate women sometimes
present opposites in their composition. In man, firmness and decision
of character are oftener united with physical power; in women it is
usually reversed. Genevieve, the lovely, laughing, enchanting girl of
seventeen, had a bold and fearless spirit. Hitherto, her existence had
flowed from her heart as its source. She scarcely knew that she
possessed
a spirita spirit that, when once called into action, would
unfold
to her a new power and character, of which she knew not she was
the possessor.
CHAPTER II
As
we approached the sun-illumined city, I was standing beside
Genevieve
and Louise on the light columned verandah, called `the Guard,'
which surrounded the boat and formed a commodious and agreeable
place of promenade. She had in her hand a volume of Bryant's Poems,
and had just finished reading aloud his superb address to `The Water
Fowl,' and for the last ten minutes had been speaking in a most
animated
and sprightly manner, giving a just and sensible, yet playful
critique
upon the styles of thought of the different poets of America. If
I was delighted at the sparkling wit and humor she evinced, I was
charmed to discover in her a deep vein of sentiment which, as she
alluded
to some `holy passages of holy thought,' as she expressed it, in
Willis' earlier pieces, softened into that tenderness of feeling which
has ever been to me proof that a true woman is religious by nature.
What is taste in man, is in her elevated religion; ever presenting a
grateful and promising soil for the immortal germ of Christianity to
take root and grow heavenward.
Louise Claviere, however, was absorbed in contemplating the glories
of the sunset, and gave no heed to the eloquent words of her cousin,
which my ears received like a revelation. I could not help mentally
comparing them as they stood together. The beauty of Louise was
intellectual and physical; its effects intoxicating; its power most
dangerous
both to its possessor and its victim. The beauty of Genevieve
was grace and spirituality, a divinity seemed to breathe through her
form; its effect was touching and tender, acting on the finer
sensibilities
of the heart of the observer; its power was to elevate and purify.
But enough of the
poetry
attached to our heroines. I have written
the above descriptions, in the vein they are given, at the suggestion of
a fair creature, scarce less beautiful herself than Louise, scarce less
divine than Genevieve, who insists that the description would be
untrue
if anything was taken from it; and as she was a fellow passenger
and saw them, and well knew them both, her opinion is entitled to
reverence. I shall therefore leave the pictures as they are, and go
into
the action of my story.
We were about a leauge from the town, when the captain, who was
a fine hearted gallant gentleman, came aft to the `guard,' where we
stood, and bowing courteously, said with a smile:
`We are now at Vicksburg, ladies, and the mystery of our
state-room
will be solved.'
`You shall be put down in my journal, Captain Wardham,' said
Genevieve
,
laughing, `as a very obstinate and self-willed captain, and I'll
make the printers be sure and put those words in
italics!
Will you tell
me, now, who is coming on board here?'
`I do not know, fair lady,' answered the polite officer, bowing low,
`it was engaged by a person in New Orleans, who said it was by the
directions of the governor of Virginia. This is the extent of my
knowledge, but you will soon know.'
`I wonder if it be true the governor of Virginia
is
to be the
passenger
with us from this place?' said Louise, suddenly speaking in a voice
the richness of the tone of which thrilled the ear. `I should like it
very much if he werefor he is young and intellectual I am
told.'
`Is he married, cousin?' archly asked Genevieve.
`No.'
`What then can he want of a state-room in the ladies' cabin? I
shall insist on his not occupying it, particularly if he is so elegant and
youthful withal,' answered Genevieve, laughing in a manner that showed
her resistance was not very much to be feared, if he should prove young
and handsome, `all governors,' she added, `should be old and married
too.'
`He belongs to one of the noblest cavalier families,' said Louise
with animation, speaking rather to herself than to her cousin. `I
would like to see one of the blood of the Stanleys, to which it is said
he belongs.'
`I care more for the heart, than the blood that heaves it,' said
Genevieve. But look! we are close by the town! The mystery of
the state-room will soon be cleared up!'
The steamer rapidly approached the city of terraced roofs, and at
length touched the pier as the shades of evening deepened the purple
drapery of the skies. After half an hour's detention, during which,
night, with its `lesser lights,' had taken the place of day, there was
heard the wheels of a carriage rapidly driven to the pier-head. The
ladies were all standing out upon the `
guard
,' anxiously
listening
.
`They are come,' cried the captain in the tones of a man who had
been a long time impatiently waiting to start, get ready to cast off
there, men.'
`Ay, ay, sir,' was the cheerful response of the mate; and a man
with a lantern in his hand sprung to each of the hawsers that confined
the boat.
The carriage steps were now heard rattling, as they were thrown
sharply
down. By the faint and uncertain glimmer of lanterns moving to
and fro, we could discern three persons alight and advance towards the
boat. One of them seemed to be an invalid, as he was wrapped in an
ample cloak, and was supported by two others. They advanced to the
gangway plank forward, and we lost sight of them, hidden by the
intervening
wheel-house.
`Now we will know,' cried Genevieve, retiring from the guard to
the ladies' saloon through which the strangers were to pass.
It was already, in part, occupied by the female passengers whom cu
riosity had drawn thither to get a sight of the personage who had
preengaged
the best state-room in the ladies' cabin, as he passed through
to take possession of it.
[1]
[1]
The ladies' cabin on western boats, is a free drawing-room.
Gentlemen
enter it at any time. Ladies, when they desire to be private, retire to
their state-rooms, large comfortable apartments opening into it.
Louise took an easy and graceful position
quite at the extremity of the saloon, where her eye could command the
approach for its whole length. Genevieve seated herself at her feet on
an ottoman, with as innocent a look as if she had no curiosity in her.
At length they beheld approaching, through the magnificent cabin,
two gentlemen arm in arm, preceded by the captain, whose face wore
a serious expression, which Genevieve could not believe could have
existed there. As they advanced, every eye was turned enquiringly.
A general gloom seemed to be left behind them as they
moved.
`What can be the cause of the silent and earnest gaze with which
all regard him!' asked Genevieve breathlessly, of her cousin.
`Hush,' said the other with extraordinary energy, `I have no sense
but sight!'
The captain entered now the ladies' cabin, bowed silently and
gravely
to the ladies, and the two gentlemen followed him. One leaned
upon
the other. He who supported, or seemed to support his
companion
,
was a large, heavily built man, with a cool, determined look and
an eye of piercing blackness. He was wrapped in a white
dreadnought
over-coat buttoned across his breast, and wore a fur hat with a
broad and flapping brim. He looked like a man of the world, and his
manner was sufficiently gentlemanly; yet, evidently, he was not a
gentleman
.
The other was a tall, elegant young man, not more than
twenty-four years of age. His face was exceedingly handsome, dark,
intelligent, and with an eye blazing with intellect. He was pale, very
pale; yet it was not from illness; his looks were sad to a painful and
touching degree. No eye that fell upon him was turned away without
the observer feeling an indefinable interest in him.
He walked slowly and with great difficulty beside his companion.
As he approached the spot where Louise stood, he lifted his hat with
a melancholy air without scarce raising his eyes, as if conscious of the
presence of beauty. Genevieve shrunk lest her own a
second time
should meet his, and she dropped them to her feet; for she had caught
one full deep glance of his eyes as he entered, and it had penetrated
her soul; it was so full of sorrow, despair, and of voiceless yet
eloquent
grief. From that moment, how intense and exciting was the
interest
awakened in her virgin bosom for the unknown. She felt that
he was unhappy
how
wretched she dared not ask herself. As he was
passing, Louise, whose dark eyes sought his, as she proudly and
gratefully
felt in her inmost heart the homage he had offered her beauty, she
thought she heard beneath his cloak, as he put down his hand which
was closely enveloped in it, a sound, the idea of which made her heart's
blood leap. The man beside him addressed a sharp word at the same
time to him. She cast a suspicious glance at him. Half the truth
flashed upon her mind. The young man bowed his head and walked
forward, for he had insensibly stopped before her, and for a moment it
seemed (his whole form sank so depressingly) as if he would have
knelt at the feet of the cousins. They thought he would do so. Why,
they knew not. They pitied him. The first step he made, Louise
heard again the sound! It grated, too, on Genevieve's ears, it pierced
her very heart! She could have shrieked, but her voice, her life was
paralyzed! It was
the clank of chains!
Louise sprung forward, and
laid her hand upon his arm. He turned and looked in her face with
his large pitiful eyes full of gratitude. He read sympathy in her
intense
gaze of eager inquiry and horror. She held him so that he
could not advance. With one hand she grasped him hard by the arm,
with the other she wildly threw open his collar! the cloak fell to the
ground! The pale and intellectual young stranger stood before her
chained and manacled like a felon!
(See Engraving.)
`What has he done?' she cried, commandingly, fixing her eyes
upon
the other in whose custody he was. `Speak!'
`Committed a forgery,' answered the officer.'
`Oh, God! Oh, God!' she cried with impassioned and bitter
feelings
;
`that the divine form I have seen mingling in my dreams from
childhood, the reality of which I have sought in vain among
mankind
,
should at length appear to me as a chained criminal!
Mysterious
dream of life! Why hast thou cast a spell over my heart, by
presenting ever this face and form for me to worship and love, yet
hiding these chains?'
`Cousin,' cried Genevieve, alarmed at the wild impassioned pathos
of her look and language, `what has come over you? Come with me.
This is no scene for either of us.'
Louise suffered herself to be led to her room by her cousin, and the
manacled young man who had produced upon her mind such an
extraordinary
effect, was led to the state-room prepared for him in the
after cabin, as well for its privacy as for its greater security.
`Dearest cousin, what could you mean by exposing yourself in such
a way?' said Genevieve, kissing her forehead as she reclined her
burning
and throbbing temples on her shoulder. `Poor young man,' and
Genevieve sighed.
`Do you know, Genevieve,' said Louise, lifting her head and
looking
full upon her cousin with a bright and almost unearthly gazeso
brightly beautiful and glorious were her eyes at this moment, `do you
know that I have seen that same face and figure in my dreams since I
was a child! I know not what led me, as he came on board, to
expect
some extraordinary event, but I did so. I have felt ever since I
left New Orleans an indescribable sensation that my happiness was in
some mysterious way connected with the person who was to occupy
that state-room. I see now that my presentiments were not
unfounded
.
Did you see him, how suffering he looked when he first came in?
I felt, as I gazed upon him, that my heart was breaking. I felt the
moment had come when all my dreams were to be realized. I had
seen him in the same cloak, too, and with him the same stern looking
man.'
`In your dreams, cousin?'
`Yesno longer than last night I thus beheld him; but in the dream
he smiled upon me, but I heard no clanking of chains. If I had died
for it, I could not have resisted casting aside his cloak.'
`Why
did
you do it, cousin? My heart bled for him as he stood
exposed
in chains before all eyes through your cruel act.'
`I had seen him in my dreams,' she said hoarsely, and with strong
feeling, `cast aside this cloak and beneath was his bridal garb. I
beheld
,
too, the stern man changed to a priest, and instead of the saloon
of this steamer, I was in a church before an altar which was
enwreathed
as if for a bridal. I flung aside his cloak, for I would know the
worst, and I beheld
chains
instead of bridal wreathsa manacled felon
instead of a happy and glorious bridegroom.'
`And did you
love
him in your dreams, cousin?'
`Yeswith all a woman's love. I do believe, sweet Genevieve,
there were
correspondences
between our spiritual natures. Did you
see, he would have knelt to me as to one his soul held kindred ties
with, but for him who dragged him onwards.'
`And if you loved himI mean, cousin, in your strange dream
you now hate him that you find the reality is unworthy of your love?'
`Cousin Genevieve, you little know me or the strength of woman's
affection! I have learned to love the same pale handsome youth in my
dreams till my heart, waking, has assented to that it gave and pledged
while in sleep. Day by day my mind has dwelt upon his image, till I
had no love but for him, whether it were to be he was ever to remain
visionary or prove real!'
`And did you ever expect the form of your dreams would prove to be
a real person, cousin Louise?' asked Genevieve, whose wonder was
excited
by this narration.
`Yes, oh yes! I have long fed my love with hopes, that it would one
day be rewarded!'
`And this night you have seen him in truth?'
`But oh, in what guise manacled and fettered!' she cried, burying
her face in her hands.
`'Tis strange you have had such a dream! I tremble, there seems
something supernatural about it. You were always a strange girl,
cousin. And this is the secret of your repeated refusals of such
numerous
and desirable offers of marriage!'
`No other reason, Genevieve. I firmly believed I should one day
see the real individual whom I never dreamed without communing
with!' she said with animation.
`Wonderful!' said Genevieve, shuddering.
`It is to
you
wonderful, sweet cousin, but not to me,' she said sadly.
`It is a peculiarity of our race to dream of events personally interesting
to us. My grandfather, Colonel Claviere, foretold the time and
minute
circumstances of his own death, and that of Louis XIV. My
grandfather saved his own life by placing men to arrest an assassin,
whom he had seen in a dream, approaching his chamber to take his
life! The assassin came at the hour named, and was slain at the door
as he was entering. My father was not only a
seer
, but foretold by
dreams the exile of his family to America, and the hour and mode of
his own death, which took place four years afterwards by a
cannon-ball
,
at the battle of New Orleans. Is it wonderful, then, that I should
dream of one whom I was destined one day to see?'
`'Tis strange! I have heard something of all this! I fear for
myself
,
for I share the same blood!' said Genevieve, with a sad
expression
.
`It will do thee no harm.'
`I tremble at the idea,' she replied, shuddering, and turning pale.
`Nay, be not childish; I need your aid!' said Louise with
animation
,
speaking in a low impressive tone.
`How?'
`This young man's fate and mine are united by destiny; and he
must not lie degraded in chains.'
`He is guardeda prisoner.'
`I will free him!'
`He is guilty.'
`Never! but were he guilty, were his hands stained with blood, I
love him, and will share his fate, or make him free! Do you believe
him guilty?'
`I cannot; but'
`Bless you, Genevieve, for that! He is
not
guilty; I will ask him,
and he will say nay! Truth and innocence are written on his
forehead
.
The being my soul has loved, with whose spirit my own has
been in communion for years, guilty? no! I spurn the thought!
Genevieve
,
he must be freed!'
`I would help you, cousin; but he is chained and closely guarded.'
`I care not. I will seek him. I will question him. I will fathom
his soul. I will prove him innocent. I will know from his own lips
wherefore he is manacled and held thus a prisoner. Genevieve, watch
up with me to-night!'
Genevieve pressed her cousin's hand in silent assent, and Louise,
kissing her, remained a few moments buried in deep thought.
Genevieve
also sat thoughtful, her mind awed by the revelation of the
mysterious
dream which had given cast and character to her cousin's whole
life. She looked at her dark and beautiful face, and felt a superstitious
fear at being alone in her presence. This feeling, however, reflection
enabled her to throw off from her spirit, when she remembered that,
save her singular power of dreams, she was in all else like herself. They
remained in their state-room till near midnight together; during which
Louise related to her more in detail the history of her
spiritual
love!
The young stranger was taken to the reserved state-room, and placed
there by the stern officer who held him in custody. A heavy chain was
then passed over the two transverse chains that connected his
manacles
and his fetters, and secured to a strong iron bolt in the deck The
officer then took his station outside without securing the door, knowing
that his escape, thus heavily chained, was impossible; besides the boat
was under way in mid-river.
CHAPTER III.
The
prisoner, when the door was closed on him, sat upon the side
of his berth and buried his face in his hands. Tears trickled through
the fingers and fell upon his chains. He was agitated; his chest heaved,
and his whole form seemed wrung with mental anguish. All at once
he ceased his outward expression of emotion, and removed his hands
from his face. It was deathly pale.
`Yes, yes, I am a felon! The proud and high spirited Preston
Randolph is a chained felon! That I should ever have seen these hands
thus bound! Yes, I am a
forger!
The act of one moment I must
expiate on the gallows! Yet, if ever man had excuse for crime, I
have! And am I the villian these chain would mark me? No, I am
not stained with guilt! My soul is not black! One act of my life is
not to make me all at once a villain! I am innocent in thought and
motive! I had no intention of wrong! It was circumstances that
made the guilt, and not the act! Oh, that I could prove to the world
the integrity of my heart, spite the dishonesty of my hand! I could
then again lift my head up among men. But now, no one pities; all
men scorn. Crime, or the suspicion of it, destroys the link that binds
men to their species. All sympathy dies! No, I err there!
Woman's
heart bleeds for the unfortunateay, for the guiltyfor the
basest, if he be penitent! Heaven forgives and receives the penitent,
so does woman! I could have knelt at the feet of those divine
creatures
,
as I passed through the saloon. I read sympathy in every
lovely
lineament! One of them looked to me like an angel form I once
beheld in my dreams! I was overpowered by the sight of her! Did
I
see
her in reality? Am I not dreaming now? Oh, that I were, that
I were!' and the youth hung his head despondingly upon his breast.
Preston Randolph belonged to one of the best Virginian families.
He was the nephew of a wealthy gentleman who had disinherited his
son for marrying contrary to his wishes. Preston was then a student at
law in Philadelphia. His uncle sent for him to hasten to visit him.
On arriving he found him quite ill in bed. He however dictated a
will which by his direction, his nephew drew up, writing it down word
for word as it came from his lips. The will made him his sole heir.
A magistrate had been sent for to attest it, but had not arrived when
the dying man said he must sign it without delay or it would be too
late. Preston placed it before him and gave him the pen. His uncle
formed the two first letters of his name, `Francis Dayton,' when he was
seized with convulsions, the pen dropped from his hand, and he fell
back and expired.
For a moment Preston was overcome with grief and surprise; the
next instant he recollected that the will had not been signed. The
consequences flashed upon his mind. He yielded to the temptation of the
moment, seized the pen and
completed with his own hand the signature!
Just as he had done so, the magistrate entered. He approached the
bed, and laid his hand upon the still warm temples. He then glanced
at the will and looked enquringly at Preston who held it in his hand.
`Just able to sign it,' said Preston handing it to him without
looking up. It was the first falsehood he had ever spoken.
`Um, um,' he said, `all right I wish I had been here a moment
sooner
.
But as I knew his intention to make you his heir, I will to stop
all objections, just attest it.'
This magistrate of easy conscience then affixed his name and
official
seal to the instrument, and Preston Randolph Dayton became
possessor of the vast property of his uncle. There was, however, a
witness
to this instrument whom they little suspected. It was a shrewd
attorney, whom the son of the deceased had sent to see if he could not
prevail upon his father to make, at least, some bequest in his favor.
He arrived a few moments before Preston commenced writing the
will, and walking across the lawn, came upon the gallery unobserved.
As he passed along towards the main entrance, his inquisitive
curiosity
led him to peep in at the long windows which were trellised with
vines. To his surprise and satisfaction, through one of these he
beheld
the invalid with Preston by his bedside. Unobserved, he heard
and saw all that transpired.
With the possession of this important secret he hastened away. He
let Preston take full management of the property, and then privately
charged him with the forgery, promising to compound with him for a
third of the estate. Preston, after the first alarm and surprise had
passed, refused to do it, and insulted him. The attorney then vowed
to expose him, when the guilty young man overcome with remorse,
shame, and fear of punishment,
fled
. He was, eventually, arrested at
Vicksburg; and on the requisition of the governor of Virginia, who
despatched officers for him, he was taken from prison, and now placed
in chains on board our boat.
It was, indeed, a hard lot for a noble youth like him. How great
and irresistable the temptation! Stronger principles would have
saved him this crime even at the expense of a vast fortune. But
Preston
Dayton was ambitious, proud, and loved wealth for the power and
pleasure it conferred. The temptation offered itselfhe embraced
it, and
fell!
His guilt was, it was true, unpremeditated. He
intended
no fraud the moment before. He had really, only fulfilled his
uncle's
intention. Yet, it would have been better if he had left it as it
was, with this intention so strongly apparent in the first two or three
trembling letters he had signed of his name. How eloquent it would
have spoken in a court of equity. But at all events, truth and
integrity
are safest and best. Yet, to what man living would not the idea
have occurred to
complete
the unfinished signature? Many men,
good Christian men, who fear to do evil, though but the eye of God
is upon them, would have resisted the thought; but many, alas! too
many, would have done like Preston Randolph.
CHAPTER IV.
It was midnight, and all slept in the vast cabins, all on board the
immense steamer, save the watch on deck. But Louise and
Genevieve
were awake, and so was the prisoner. Beside his door heavily
slept the officer, trusting to the chains to bind, and the waters to keep
his charge in safety. Softly Genevieve opened the door of her
state-room
and stole forth into the cabin. The swinging lamp burned
dimly
and cast a pale glare around. She crossed to the state-room of the
prisoner. She looked down and stealthily watched the stern
countenance
of the slumbering guardian. His sleep was not feigned, it was
deep and heavy. She reached her arm across him and slipped a
paper
up between the blinds, and hastily retreated.
Preston was sitting with his hands on his knees and his face buried
in his hands in deep and painful thought. He was calmly
contemplating
suicide. He heard the paper fall at his feet. Hope gleamed
through the darkness of his destiny. He gathered his chains
carefully
together that they should not clank, and picked it up. It read as
follows, in a delicate female hand.
`Guilty or innocent, thou art unhappy! There are friends near
thee who will aid thy escape. Prepare to receive whatever
instruments
may be passed through the blinds, lest they fall, and the noise
wake your guardian.'
He pressed his lips to the note, and hope revived in his heart. In
a few moments afterwards, Louise Claviere was seen traversing with a
light step the silent cabins, wrapped in a cloak and hat she had taken
from one of the tables. She descended to the engine-room and
secretly
obtained two files. With these she returned to her state-room,
having met only the watchman, who took her for one of the gentlemen
passengers who preferred walking on the guards to sleeping.
`Genevieve, I will take these to him,' she said to her cousin, who
felt almost as much interest in his escape as she did. `You will see,
that, if the officer wakes, he listen to you, rather than to us.'
`Yes,' said Genevieve, laughing, `I will try and amuse him if need
bebut let us be cautious and he may not wake. His sleep is that of a
tired man.'
Louise crossed the cabin lightly. Genevieve took a book and sat
on an ottoman close to the head of the officer. Louise softly opened
the door across his body, and entered the state-room of the prisoner.
He started with surprise. She laid her hand impressively upon his
arm, and placed a file in his hand. She closed the door and seated
herself
silently at his feet, and commenced filing his iron fetters. She was
calm, quiet, resolute. Her look was elevated with high purpose. Was
it real? Was it a spirit that had come to aid his escape? He pressed
her hand gratefully to his lips, and took the other file and applied it to
the steel band of his manacles.
In two hours one of his manacles and a fetter released a hand and
foot. In two hours more
he was freed
from his chains! They were
then filed from the bolt. He knelt at the feet of his liberator. There
was an hour yet to day, and she asked him to tell her his crime. Briefly
he related to her what has already been narrated.
`Enough,' said she, `I knew thou hadst been greatly tempted. The
way is open before thee. Escape! If you do not swim, here is a life
preserver I have prepared for you. Let me buckle it about you. Now,
while it is yet dark, spring with your chains in your hands, and with a
loud clanking sound of them into the water, and swim ashore. It will
be thought you are drowned, as no man could swim with such a weight.
There will no pursuit be made for you, and under an other name, and
in another clime, you may live and be happy.'
`And to what glorious being am I indebted for life, liberty, and
happiness
?'
he said, kneeling at her feet.
`It matters not! Fly! If hereafter you should feel an interest
awakened in your breast for her who has liberated you, come on next
St. Mary's eve, and ask at the convent of the Sacred Heart for Louise
Claviere!'
With these words she opened the door, and pointed to the way of
escape ever the body of his sleeping keeper, and through the cabin to
the outer `guard.'
He pressed her hand to his heart, and that of the noble Genevieve
who extended it to himto his lips; and taking up his chains, as he
saw them both vanish into their state-room, he fled through the cabin
to the outer guard. The officer, awakened by the clanking, sprung
up, looked first into the state-room after his prisoner, then beheld him
flying along the cabin. He started in pursuit, giving the alarm, and
only reached the guard to see his prisoner spring with his chains into
the dark flood.
`Stop the boat!' he shouted aloud; but as she was already far
beyond
the spot, he immediately countermanded the order; `no, no, it's
of no use; with twenty pounds of iron on him, he is gone to the bottom
like a stone!'
The boat kept on her way, and ere we reached Louisville, the
prisoner
was forgotten. That some of the females in the cabin had
connived
at his escape, and furnished him with the files, was very
generally
believed, but suspicion was not fastened on the right persons.
CHAPTER V
On the eve of the succeeding St. Mary's, a mounted cavalier rode
up to the gate of the convent
De l' Sacre Cur
in Louisiana. He was
dressed like a Texan county gentleman, with a short horseman's
cloak, a broad Panama hat, a sword at his side, and pistols in his
holsters
.
He was of noble presence, with an exceedingly dark but
handsome
countenance. He asked of the portress of the convent for
permission
to see Louise Claviere, if such a person abode there. The
aged portress retired, and in a few moments Louise Claviere appeared
at the grate. The cavalier dismounted, and kissed the hand she
extended
towards him.
`Lady, I have sought thee, having by deeds of honorable conduct
among men, won a proud and virtuous name, which under heaven, no
temptation will hereafter take from me. I know that thou didst free
me from chains because thou wert interested in me as a woman.'
Louise bent her head, and the changing light of her cheek showed
the pleased yet timid emotion that filled her bosom.
`I have thought only of thee since the hour these delicate fingers
labored for my freedom,' he continued. `That hour of liberty was
the hour of my heart's bondage. The hands that made my body free
bound my heart in stronger chains.'
`Why hast thou sought me?' she asked with mingled hope and fear.
`To ask you to unite your fate with mine.'
`Such is decreed my destiny, fair sir,' she said frankly; `I have here
remained to await thy coming, for in my dreams I have foreseen and
enjoyed this welcome hour. Now I know that thou lovest me, by not
forgetting me, I will freely unite my fate with thine.'
The same day the convent chapel witnessed their bridal; and the
happy pair, a few days after, took their way to Randolph Claviere's (for
that is the name he assumed) fair Texan domain which he had won by
courage, virtue and integritya far nobler and fairer estate than that
which he had criminally sought to enjoy in his native land. No man
hath so far fallen that he may not rise again.
The above story, though not written `i' the Cambyses' vein,' is
written in the exaggerated vein to which some American writers are
very partial; a blending of the false with the true; the supernatural
with the commonplace; the simple with the complex, and the sublime
with its converse. The skeleton or outline of the story is however,
actually true, and the incident of the liberation of a young and
gentlemanly
forger by ladies took place three years since on a steamer upon
the Mississippi. We have adopted in writing it, to suit all tastes and
our own humor, a style which Renaud, speaking of his particolored
ice-creams, would call `a
Harlequinade
.' `But,' as Mr. Samuel Slick
very sensibly observes, `what is the care whether the shell be a smooth
or a shag bark, so there be meat in it after it be cracked!'
[2]
[2]
The same fair lady alluded to in the first part of the tale asks what has
become of sweet Genevieve? We beg her pardon. She was a year since
married to a noble young gentleman in Lexington, who has, as the same
Mr. Slick said of himself very modestly, `sense, soul and sentiment, with
taste, delicacy and feeling to appreciate, a heart to love, and an arm to
defend
and protect her!'
(Note from J. H. Ingraham.)
West Point
,
July
, 1839.
Dear Sir
The accompanying letter and story, with the names of
persons and places alone omitted, are at your service for publication,
if you think they possess sufficient interest to entertain your fair
readers
.
With consideration, I am, &c.
J. H. I.
C Castle, Herefordshire
,
June
, 1839.
My Dear
I.In my last letter from London I informed you that I
was on the eve of quitting town and spending a few weeks in the
country. From the date of my letter you will see that I am at C
Castle, where it is my intention to sojourn for a month or so before
going into Scotland; and a delightful place of sojourn this is too! My
window commands some of the finest sceneryupland, vale, and
mountainin all England. The Malverton Hills in the distance
appear
,
seen through the blue haze, like purple clouds resting on the
green earth. Parks lawns, castles, and gentlemen's seats, arrest and
please the eye, wheresoever it falls. This English scenery! we have
nothing exactly similar to it in America, there is an
old world
look to it
that our young land has not. The rich green of the verdurethe oaks,
(that majestic old monarch of England's woods, which ballad, and
legend, and song have made immortal,) the upland and downland
swellsthe princely castlesthe baronial halls and picturesque villas
that fill the broad land, all give to the landscape a peculiar aspect that
is commonly and best defined as
English
.
I have now been at Castle C a little more than a week; and,
what with riding and driving, hunting and fishing, dining and
waltzing
,
and reading and rambling, with some thirty very respectable
ladies
and gentlemen, (most of whom my republican tongue has taught
itself to address as `my lord' and my lady,') to aid and abet in so
doing
,
passing my time pleasantly enough. At this season all London
is county-mad, as it is at other times town-mad. Noblemen and
gentlemen
now turn their `seats' into free hotels for their frends and such
unfortunate wights as, by hook or crook, (owning no house out of
town, nor perhaps
in
,) can get themselves invited to `pass a week or
two' at some `friend's country-house.' Indeed, living at an English
nobleman's castle in the rusticating season is not very unlike the life
in one of our fashionable hotels at a popular watering placethe
White Sulphur Springs, perhaps, rather than Saratoga. The crowd,
to be sure, is not so great, and the company, of course, is select. But
the mode of killing time is quite similar in both instancesgiving,
however, the balance of comforts and advantages to the side of the
noble entertainer. This is a delightful national custom, (if usages
peculiar to the higher classes alone, may strictly be termed national,)
and its tendency is to keep up the open-handed English hospitality,
though with something more style than was known to the olden
time. The good old fashioned hospitality of
our
fathers, (I say
our
, for are they not
ours
as well as
theirs?
) is, I think,
preserved
in its most delightful simplicity among the gentlemen of the
fox-hunting school, in which class may be found many
`A good old English gentleman,
All of the `olden time.
I have not given you the name or title of my entertainer. His style is
Francis Livingstone Catesby, Esquire, of C Castle;but by
courtesy he is usually called Lord C of C Castle, having
married the only daughter and sole heiress of the ancient title and
vast estates of the Earl of C. There is a romantic story
connected
with this young nobleman and his lovely bride, which got into
the American papers at the time of its occurrence, made a little noise,
then was rejected as incredible, and fell into oblivion. I will relate it
to you, and, as you are given to story writing, will put it in the shape
of a tale, as best likely to enlist your attention; and peradventure, one
of these days, it may serve you for a brace of volumes, should you by
any chance, run short for
material
. You may give it what name you
listI shall call it simply a Story.
A STORY.
CHAPTER I.
Lady Clara Hartly
, at the age of nineteen, was the toast of the
Three Kingdoms. She was incomparably beautifulif a superb
figure
a queenly bust; hands and feet of faultless symmetry; an eye, dark
as night, yet soft and dreamy, now melting in its own fire, now
burning
like stars in the midnight sky; if features perfect in all that makes
loveliness in woman; if a voice of thrilling richness, a smile of light,
and a lip of loveif an enduring sunshine of a happy spirit,
illuminating
all her rare and glorious personif these constitute
beauty
, then
was she most beautiful. Pride of birth and consciousness of her
exceeding
loveliness had given a slight degree of haughtiness to her
manner, that perhaps, still heightened and finished her charms. She
was also wilful, at times, a little capricious, fond of having her own
way, and singularly impatient of restraint. The pet and idol of an
invalid and aged father, she never knew a wish ungratified; while,
humoured
with a thousand indulgences from her doting parent, she
became
not only wilful and independent, but, from being left without
healthful restraint, eccentric habits at length grew upon her, till it got
to be as difficult to decide upon any given line of conduct that Lady
Clara Hartly would pursue, as to calculate the variable course of the
swallow in his swift and uncertain flight.
At the age of nineteen, then, Lady Clara, was left an orphan, an heiress
and her own mistress. For a single winter, she reigned a dazzling
meteor
in London; and, after having a score of cornets cast at her feet,
and broken the hearts of all the young, and many of the old, nobles in
the kingdom, she suddenly disappeared not only from the firmament of
fashion but from England.
`Ha, Lawnshade,' said a gay young Viscount, encountering a noble
friend in the Park, the day after it had been ascertained that Lady
Clara Hartly had certainly left the country; `ha! ha! we have been
chasing a will-o'-wisp this winterflown, eh?'
`To the  for what it concerns me,' said the young Earl of
Lawnshade, who, having lost all his ready cash at Crockford's, and
mortgaged half his estates, was desirous of mending his fortunes by
that of the lady's; `she has proved herself cold as an icicle, and has
a tongue sharpened with the devil's own wit.'
`Witty she isbeautiful you must confess her to be! Heigho, she
has jilted me to my heart's content. I did not love the girlbut I
liked her spirit, and would have married her if I could, she was such
a fine looking woman.'
`You would have held her, you mean, Malvern, as a sort of
property
that administered to your self-love, as you would take pride in being
the possessor of a rare thorough-bred Arabian,' said a third gentleman,
who had just left his carriage and received his horse from his servant
to take a gallop in the Park.
`You have hit it, Chesterton,' replied the Viscount, laughing. `But
you were the hardest served of allfor you loved her. Ah,
Chesterton
,
your dark eyes could not melt her obdurate soul. I pity you,
upon
my honor. Lawnshade and I have only lost a stake that we may
double and win at another daybut you, my dear fellow, have quite
lost your heart. But whither has this Bird of Paradise flown? What
hawk hath watched her flight?' he added quickly observing that the
youthful lover evinced some annoyance at his words.
`Some say to the contiment,' he replied.
`I heard this morning that she had gone to St. Petersburgperhaps
to lay siege to the heart of the Grand Duke,' said Lawnshade,
carelessly
.
`She has full as likely gone to America,' observed Malvern; `our
Countesses of late have taken quite a liking to Brother Jonathan.'
`Ha, my lords,' cried a young baronet riding up, `still the Hartly
question on the floor! So what think ye? 'tis said Lady Clara has
gone to hob and nob with Lady Hester Stanhope, doubtless to honor
with her hand some young Arab Sheik. She is eccentric enough,
i'faith.'
`Deil may care, where she be; all I hope is, that she may yet throw
herself away on some infernal French or Italian Count, who will make
her goldfinches fly,' said Lawnshade, with a laugh of contempt that ill
concealed his chagrin; and putting spurs to his horse, he rode off at
full speed, followed, a moment after, by the remainder of the party.
CHAPTER II.
About
twelve months after the foregoing conversation a handsome
young officer, in the uniform of a captain of artillery, of the United
States Army, was hastening in a coach from his hotel in Broadway,
New York, to one of the North River steamboats, generous wines and
`goodlie companie,' having kept him at the table till the last minute of
delay. Before he reached the foot of Barclay street, the deep toned
bell of the City Hall struck fivethe hour of departurereplied to in
quick succession by all the clocks of the town, in every possible key;
while the lesser tongues from the throats of a dozen rival steamboat
bells, began to ring out their shriller treble, each vying to o'ertop his
noisy neighbor. Carriages rattled up to the pier gate; passengers
leaped recklessly out, their luggage following them helter-skelter;
porters
were swearing, wrangling, and grumbling; noisy, officious, and
impudent hackmen, crowded the way, scratching and fighting for
precedence
;
men with valises in hand, run this way and that way like
mad, sweating and blowing; and, altogether, what with the cries of
the news boys, the yells of orange women, and the deafening ringing
of the ceaseless bells from half a score of contiguous steamersdire
and dreadful was the confusion that reigned. Amid this uproar the
young officer arrived on the scene, the coachman adding his oaths and
execrations, against those who blocked up the way, to increase the
general
flood of noises.
`Clare the road, there, you nager,' he shouted to another hack
driver
,
who had just driven in between his horses and the gate, and
prevented
his farther progress.
`Jis you leff um dare, I ax you,' replied the black, giving his horses
a sharp cut and dashing closer into the curb stone; `I has ladieses to
get out, an' you nuffin but von gen'leman.'
`Won or twinty jintlemen, I'll let no black nager take the inside o'
a white man, an' he an Irishman;' and with these words the ireful
coachman struck the African's horse a blow in the head with the
butt of his whip with such sudden violence that the animals run back,
reared and plunged fearfully in the harness. The young officer, who
witnessed the outrage and its result from the window of his carriage,
at the same instant caught sight of a lovely woman in the coach, who
dropped the glass and was giving, in a cool, energetic tone, two or
three rapid orders to the black, who amid his surprise, rage, and the
confusion, was incompetent to govern his horses.
No sooner did the officer discover the danger of the fair inmate of
the carriage, than undoing his door, he leaped out to her aid. But
before
he reached the ground, the plunging horses, by a short turn,
brought the fore-wheels round at right angles with the coach, and
attempted
to dash off. At this crisis, the lady threw open the coach
door, and sprang out into the arms of the young officer, and the next
instant the carriage was overturned.
`Thank God you have escaped unhurt,' he said, gaizing upon her
bewildered beauty, and losing his hat at the same moment.
`And thank
you
, sir,' she replied gaily, fixing upon him her dark
eyes with a look that made his blood course from his heart to his brow
like lightning. `But my aunt and uncle I fear'
`Are they in the coach?' he eagerly inquired, springing to the door,
the reversed position of which now answered to the scuttle of a roof.
The horses had by this time been cut from the pole by the
bystanders
,
and the door of the carriage being open, were drawn forth, one
after
another a respectable middle-aged man, who complained of a bruise
or two in the back and shoulders, and a nice body of a little woman in
starched cap and ruff, who at first was too frightened to speak, but
at length found voice to lament the derangement of the propriety of her
ruff, and to mourn over a slight rent in her drab silk dress. In a few
seconds the baggage was disengaged from the overturned vehicle, and
tumbled on board the steamer by half a dozen officious individuals,
each of whom demanded a `quarter' for his services; the uncle and
aunt were also hurried on board, closely followed by by the officer and
the young lady who had very frankly accepted the offer of his escort
through the crowd. Scarcely had they touched the deck, when the
bells rung out their final peal, and the usual rapid orders were given
to start.
3
`Haul in the plank. Cast off that bow-line. Let her go.'
Instantly the noble boat, which for the last twenty minutes had been
ceaselessly moving backward and forward to the length of her
fastenings
,
chafing like an impatient racer who is with difficulty held in until
the signal is given for starting, with a swift and stately movement left
the pier, and in company with half a score of other boats from the
docks on either side, shot out into the broad stream. After escorting
his fair charge to a settee in the stern of the boat, the young officer
lingered a few moments near her, and only turned from her to
promenade
the deck, on the approach of the uncle and aunt. It was with
reluctance that he did so. But he thought that farther attention on his
part to a perfect stranger, now that there was no farther call for his
services, might be construed by her into a disposition to take advantage
of an accident to thrust himself upon the acquaintance of a beautiful
woman. She did not know him either; but then, thought he with a
glow of military pride, `My uniform should be my passport, and
endorse
me as a gentleman. Ah, heigho! but is she not a lovely woman!'
he added, as he turned on his heel in his walk, and let his eye rest for
an instant on her beautiful profile. She was watching at the moment
the fleeting city, as with its hundred towers and spires it receded from
the eye. She looked at objects with an observant and speculative
gaze, like one who had travelled, and was in the habit of mentally
instituting
comparsions between what she saw and what she had seen.
Her profile was spirited and beautifulnot exactly regular in its
outline
,
but defined by a soft, yet intellectual, line that undulated without
a fault from the summit of her beauteous forehead to the exquisitely
shaped chin. Her eye was dark, full, and so thickly fringed with long
silken lashes, that while all was sunshine on her cheek and brow, a
dreamy, shadowy twilight seemed to dwell about them, subduing the
lustre of her glorious beauty. She wore a black velvet spencer that
fitted admirably her superb bust, and confined her round waist within
a circle of beauty. Descending from it was a travelling skirt of
coarse material, from beneath which peeped a symmetrical foot, the
perfect shape of which a rather stout laced boot that covered it could not
quite conceal. She wore an open cottage-flat of very coarse straw,
which wonderfully became her style and air, which were indolent, yet
haughty; independent, yet feminine. There was a frank carelessness
about her that was irresistibly captivating. In abundant curls of jet
her raven hair played about her face and snowy throat. In one hand
she carried, apparently for the same purpose that gentlemen wear
canesto have something in the handa lady's riding whip, richly
mounted with gold head and bands; in the other hand, or rather upon
her lap, with the arm gracefully resting upon it, she held a book, that
looked like a sketch book. At a little distance from her on a camp
stool, sat the aunt, putting on her spectacles preparatory to perusing a
penny paper which a ragged urchin had thrust into her hand, while
the uncle was bustling about collecting the `small baggage' into a pile
near the cabin door.
`Who can she be?' thought the young soldier as he gazed. `There is
a certain style about her that looks like a high-bred womanbut then
the uncle and the aunt!
they
, doubtless, are very respectable sort of
people, but'and he took another glance at the man, who, with a hard
Scotch face, shaded by a broad brimmed hat, a Quaker-looking coat,
red waistcoat with flaps, breeches and knee-buckles, was still very
busy in getting together numerous little packings, baskets &c., that
belonged
to his partyhe took a second look at the aunt, who sat poring
over the penny paper, dressed in a neat brown silk bonnet, and gown,
spectacles on nose, and with knit cotton gloves.`Very nice people no
doubt,' he said, shaking his head after this scrutiny`very good sort
of people. She can't be very high in society: but her air, manner, and
superior beauty! these are aristocratic enough. I would give my
commission to know who she is; what farm-house or remote village
could have produced so fair a flower! Well-a-day! I have lost my heart
to her, and Cupid favor me, I will yet know more of her. Ha, there
goes the man up to the office to settle the passage. I will settle mine
at the same time, and so shall at least learn the names of the
party
.'
Thus deciding, he took his station by the captain's window, and
heard the uncle give in his name as `Mr. John Hodge, wife and a
young lady.'
`John Hodge!' repeated the officer, smiling; `their name fits their
appearance. But the nieceif her name be Hodge, I will eat my
sword. But I should not wonder if the barbarians, her father and
mother, who must be chips of the same block with Mr. John Hodge,
have given her some hideous name, Dorcas or Deborah! How could
nature have committed so strange mistake as to produce such a
glorious dahlia in a kitchen garden? Ha, there is intellect theretaste,
poetry, and love for the beautiful. See her eye light up, and the
color
mount to her cheek, as they catch the rocky palisades! Now in
that fair creature is combined everything that constitutes beauty in
woman. What a being to lovewhat bliss to worship herwhat a
bride
what a WIFE she would make me! Ah, this infernal pride of
familyI should be cut by kith and kin if I stooped to mate with one
so low. My proud old father, my dignified mother, my lovely and
aristocratic
sistersah, lovely as yonder fair woman isthey would
never
acknowledge her as a member of one of the oldest and most
stately
famlies in Virginia.'
This young officer belonged, indeed, to one of the best Virginia
families which, though decayed in fortune, had lost none of its pride of
blood. Although he was an only son, yet the possessions he would
inherit were insufficient to afford him an independent income, if he
should continue to keep up the style by which his father and
grandfather
had lessened his patrimony, and therefore he early looked to the
army as a profession. He graduated with distinguished honor at the
United States Military Academy, and at the age of twenty-seven, two
years before his present introduction to the reader, was made a
captain
.
He had recently distinguished himself in several engagements
on the frontier. He was now absent from his post on furlough, and
on his way to pay a visit to West Point, before his return to his
cantonment
beyond the Mississippi. He was a young man of remarkable
personal beauty, to which the southern sun had lent a rich brown;
tall, and well made, with a clear eagle eye, lofty brow shaded with
dark hair, and altogether of noble person and carriage. Few women
could look on him without interest. He was, nevertheless, modest and
retiring, and unconscious of commanding admiration; and in all he
did and said was unaffectedly mingled the courtesy of the finished and
thorough bred gentleman.
The beauty of the fair stranger had the effect for which beauty was
given to womanof captivating his senses, and kindling a flame of
love in his heart, at all times susceptible to such female influences.
This, however was a sincere, deep and all-absorbing passion. Like
Minerva, it sprung into existence in full growth and stature. As the
boat approached the palisades, she left her seat to stand leaning over
the railing, wrapped in the sensations which the sight of such a gigantic
parapet of nature must produce in the soul of every one capable of
receiving
noble impressions from sublime objects. He took a position
near her, and watched the play of her countenance as the varied shades
of thought floated across it, giving it their own changing hues, as a
still lake will paint upon its bosom the clouds that move above it. He
saw not the palisades; he saw not the gilded surface of the water; he
saw not the throng of passengers around himhe saw nothing but her
facewas conscious of nothing but the presence of the lovely object
on which rested his impassioned, worshipping, enraptured gaze.
Suddenly
,
with that singular consciousness of having eyes fixed upon her,
that all have experienced at times, she turned her head involuntarily
round, (as all persons do in such cases, as if the eyes upon you
possessed
a mysterious power that insensibly drew your own to meet them,)
and encountered the full gaze of his impassioned eyes. The start he
gave on being detected in this species of adoration, and the red blush
that leaped to his manly cheek, drew from her a smile that brought the
culprit at once to her side.
`Pardon my rudeness, ladybut'
`Not a wordthis is no time to talk idle nothings, surrounded as
we are by the majesty and beauty of nature; with these rocks on which
the skies seem to be built, towering above our heads, and sending their
black shadows as far down into the water; with this glorious, broad
river on which the western sky has showered its gold till the flood is
not less gorgeous than the firmamentlet not a light thought, an
artificial
word mingle with the feelings of such a time. God has made a
beautiful world for us; oh, how beautiful!'
It would be difficult to describe the manner in which she spoke.
Her first words were addressed to him in a tone of stern reproof, as if
she despised, and knew that he did also, all that was insincere and
artificial
.
Then laying upon his arm her gloved handhe thought he
had never seen one so shapely, and the touch made his blood thrillshe
pointed to the objects around her as she named them with an eye
illuminated
with intelligence, taste and delight, and her countenance
shining with the spirit that animated her; while she spoke with the
loftiest
enthusiasm, slightly touched with scorn that God's glories must
needs be named to draw the admiration of manthat he should not
feel the presence of the spirit of beauty, and yield voluntarily the
homage of his intellect to her power.
`God has made a beautiful world for us! oh, how beautiful!' this
was said in a changed tone, and with a look of mingled gratitude and
wonder, while her beautiful eyes as they wandered over the rich scene,
were tearful with the love and joy that welled from her heart.
`And he has made this glorious being to dwell upon it!' said the
young soldier mentally. He had gazed upon her with bewildered
senses
,
as she spoke, thinking that the world might well be created even
for the pleasure of one such mind. As she ceased speaking, she
leaned pensively over the balustrade, and for many minutes seemed
lost in the contemplation of the scene through which she was borne
along.
He became more and more puzzled. `Such a soul can inhabit no
plebian clay,' were his thoughts. `Wonderful, glorious creature! If
she is to be won, I will strive to win her, for I feel henceforth my
happiness
is in her keeping. Let her be the daughter of the veriest clown,
I will lay my heart at her feet.
While he communed thus with his thoughts, his eye dwelt upon her
intelligent countenanee, and each moment more firmly riveted the
chains that bound his heart to hers. She soon turned and addressed
to him a remark, and insensibl they were led into conversation. The
originality of her mind, the beauty of her thoughts, the richness of
her language, to which were added a highly cultivated sense, a finished
taste, and all the enthusiasm of a poet and painter, filled him with
wonder
and astonishment.
It was twilight when the steamer entered the landlocked part of
the Hudson, called the Highlands. Who that has sailed by night-fall
into this wilderness of dark mountains, will forget his impressions of
the combined majesty and loveliness of the scene. The passengers
hitherto restless,
talkative
and noisy, now, as if under the influence of
a spell, became still. No voice was heardno sound but the regular
dash, like the noise of a waterfall, of their paddles. The boat entered
deeper into the mountains, and the water became black as Tartarus
with the deep shadows flung upon its bosom, and the grey shores rose
skyward higher and higher till they threatened to meet, enclosing
beneath
a vast cavernous lake. As the shadows grew darker, and the
great hills came closer together, showing longer neither inlet or outlet,
the singular girl leaned forward with her hands clasped together, her
lips parted, and her face silently eloquent with the feelings that, in a
mind like hers, such a scene was calculated to awaken. Her
countenance
wore almost a holy character; she seemed to be worshipping
God through his works. Wonder, love, and gratitude were mingled in
her looks. Oh, how beautifulhow lovely she was! But it was
ethereal beauty! the beauty of her face was all forgotton in the beauty
of the soul that shone through it. What, at last, is beauty without
intellect? But when intellect is united with perfect beauty in
woman
,
she assuredly must approach the perfection of angels If lovely
intelligent
girls could be made sensible how the cultivation of the
mind enhances true beauty of feature, and also of formfor the soul
pervades and shines through all the bodyextraordinary female
loveliness
would be more general, and of far higher degree.
Twilight deepened, and the moon soon began to light up the tops
of the mountains, the light of which, to the upturned gaze of those
who sailed in the black shadows of the depths below, appeared like
clouds of silver dust resting there; while the evening star burned like
a beacon fire upon a far off peak, and lesser lights shone down into
the deep water, adding a new and pleasing feature to the ever changing
scene.
Three hours after taking their departure from New York, the
elevated
plain of West Point appeared in sight, overtopped by the hoary
battlements
of `Fort Putnam,' on which poured a flood of moonlight that
had made its way through a cleft in the mountains to the east, as if,
while all around was dark heaven, it would direct the gaze of the
children of America to one of the most sacred altars of their freedom.
The lights from the Military Academy now began to enliven the shores,
and the sound of a bell rung landward to give signal of the approach of
the steamer, floated pleasantly over the water.
`How full of enchantment all! How like fairy land it must be! I am
in a maze of delightrioting in a world of poetry and of the
imagination
.'
The young officer had been standing by the fair girl's side for more
than hour in silence. Not a word until now had been interchanged
between them, yet both felt the sympathies of each other to be active
and in unison. Their spirits conversed together as they bent over the
vessel's side, and in silence drank into their souls the beauty that was
around them.
The soldier started as she spoke and looked up; but the darkness
was too great for him to see her face, and the tones of her rich, sweet
voice, fell like music on his soul. Before he could reply to her
observation
,
the boat rounded the rocky promontory that forms the eastern
most extremity of West Point, and steered directly for a light that
burned, seemingly in the craggy side of the precipice, but which, as
nearer observationx showed, was held in the hand of some one on the
head of a small pier.
`I go on shore here,' said the lady.
`Ah!' and the delighted surprise in which this brief exclamation
was made, could not have escaped the most indifferent hearer.
Hitherto
,
he had been able by no finesse to obtain a clue to her destination.
or of her place of residence; and within the last half hour he had
come to the determination to continue on in the boat as far as she should
go, and leave, only when he had ascertained who she was, and made to
her a declaration of his unconquerable passion.
`Why should not a lady visit West Point?' she said archly; `there
are many gallant gentleman there, if rumor lie not; and beauty too, I
am told, deigns to grace its parades by its presence. How is it
sir?'
`Yes sir.'
`Yes sir.'
`I beg your pardon. No sir.'
`No sir.'
`I would say yesI mean no'
`Really sir, you are amusingly witty,,and the mischevious laugh of
the beautiful creature as she said this, almost set the poor lover beside
himself; his head being already half turned by his passion. `You had
best stop at West Point also, I fear to trust you farther,' she said, with
a gentle fall of the voice that conveyed a wish that he would stay, while
it expressed a confidence in his doing soso conscious is beauty in the
power of its influence!
`I
do
stop here.'
`Indeed! I am glad of it.'
`Passengers for West Point will please walk forward,' cried one of
officers of the boat in a loud voice.
`Will you permit me to see you safely on shore?' asked the young
soldier diffidently; but I fear you will consider my attention as too
great presumption, inasmuch as accident only has thrown me in your
society.'
`By no means. I accept your escort with great pleasure. My good
uncle,' she added in a tone of peculiar humor, that he could not well
define, has, I perceive, got my troublesome baggage forward. I fear
you will find me more troublesome baggage still.'
`I hopenayI feel'
`I beg you will trouble yourself neither to feel nor to hope, till you
get me on shore,' she said, interrupting him, as they reached the
fore-castle
where stood the captain, ready with a lantern.
The boat now came to the pierropes were thrown from the deck,
and skilfully caught and tied by those on shorethe plank was thrown
out, and the passengers, including the party of our story, rapidly
crossed
it. Scarcely had their feet touched the pier, when the cry, `
Go-ahead
!'
was heard, and the majestic steamer moved swiftly away on her
northward course, and soon, save the lights on her stern and bow, was
lost in the dark shadows flung upon the water by the shaggy bulk of
`Old Cro'nest.' Long afterwards the sound of the water as she made her
way through it, was heard roaring among the mountains, till it finally
ceased, and all became still as night and solitude could make it.
At the guard-house on the pier-head, a sentinel met the passengers
with a slate, demanding a register of their names.
`Now I shall learn it!' said the officer to himself, as he took the
slate and entered his own name, which for the present we shall suppose
to be Captain Harry Hunter, U. S. A. `What name?' he added
looking in the face of the lady, who still leaned on his arm.
`Never mind, sir. Uncle John put your name and those of the party
down.'
`I will save him the trouble,' said the officer, `as I see he is busy
with the baggage;' and then with a smile and a glance of humor which
she did not see fit to acknowledge, he wrote:
`Mr. John Hodge, lady, and niece.'
`How do you know this?' she said, as her eye followed the entry as
it was made.
`It is on the boat's record.'
`Humph! Well then, if you will see the niece to the hotel, my
relative
,
Mr. John Hodge and lady will follow at their leisure.'
The path which the officer took to the hotel, which was perched
commandingly on the cliff, and now shone dazzling with lights seen
through the foliage, wound romanticly up the side of the precipice
through a dense wood, and, save to the footsteps of one familiar with
its windings, was difficult to follow by night. Its very gloom and
uncertainty
had for her romantic mind a charm, and she observed that
this wild woodland walk among crags, with the moonlight dappling the
path, the river beneath, and the lights of the illuminated hotel above,
had only been wanting to complete the sum of her enjoyment. At
first their way had been through the deepest gloom, but as they climbed
higher' the moon at intervals found its way through the trees on the
left, and silvered the gravel at their feet; while with occasional glimpses
of the lighted windows, which served not only as a beacon, but held
forth the promise of hospitality, could be heard the strains of music,
or the clear voice of some laughing girl. On the plateau above they
paused an instant to admire the night view of the highlands, with the
steely river sleeping in their bosom like a majestic lake. At length
they entered the mansion, where under the protecting care of Cozzens,
the courteous host thereof, we will leave the fair stranger, with uncle
and aunt, bag and baggage, until morning, assured that in no more
agreeable quarters can travellers take up their temporary abode. Our
hero himself sought the quarters of some of his brother officers, where
although he retired for the night, it was only to think of the beautiful
niece, and lose himself in a labyrinth of conjectures.
CHAPTER III.
The
succceding day the beautiful stranger made her appearance,
for the first time, at the dinner table, and at her entrance, leaning on
the arm of the gallant hostwho had a tolerable eye for female
beauty
a
universal sensation was created by her beauty.
`Who is she?' where is she from? who are her party?' were
questions
that no one could answer.
Captain Harry Hunter, as we shall call him until we get to the
denoument
of our story, dined at the same table, but diffidently took
his seat at the extreme end, but his eyes were scarcely off from her;
but being rallied by his companion he colored, and to give proof of
his indifference to the lady, began very coolly to pepper a glass of
champaigne, instead of his salad.
`Hunter, will you take the mustard?' asked a waggish lieutenant at
his elbow.
`Thank you;' and the champaigne was enlivened by an abundant
spoonful of this pleasant mixture.
`A little salt?' inquired another opposite, handing him the
salt-cellar
.
`Thank youthank you!' and the absent lover added very
seriously
a spoonful of salt to his mustard and pepper.
`Now a little oil, Harry,' said the first wag, `and you will have the
honor of inventing a new disha devilled champaigne.'
A shout of laughter from a dozen gentlemen and ladies, who had
been amused observers, recalled the smitten captain to his senses, and
he fixed his eyes with a look of mingled wonder, shame, and anger on
the heterogeneous mixture before him. Laughing with the others the
affair soon passed; but it gave very positive proof of the state of his
heart in the judgment of more than one person at the table.
For several days afterwards the young lady became an object of
curiosity
,
and so great were her personal attractions, that the most
aristocratic
of the summer sojourners at the Point, would have called
upon
her and sought her acquaintance, but `the homely uncle and aunt'
they could not get over. They were a bar sinister to the otherwise
immaculate shield of her loveliness. Therefore she was courted by
no one, and remained isolated and alone amid a throng of gay and
fashionable people. Yet she seemed to be the happiest there. Her
mornings were past in exploring the wild scenery in the neighborhood,
and in sketching the most striking objects. Curiosity increased.
Who has seen her sketch book?' Nobodyyet the rumor was that,
it was filled with landscapes worthy of Rembrant. She had twice
seated herself at the piano when the drawing-room was nearly empty,
and in three minutes had filled it from terrace, lawn, and garden, by
the ravishing sweetness of her voice, and the magic music her skilful
touch drew from the ivory keys. `Who could she be?'
No one could say. The women avoided her, yet were dying to find
out who she was, and who Mr. and Mrs. Hodge were, and where they
lived, and what they did. They could not even learn the lady's name.
She was registered simply the niece, and as the niece only was she
known. A few ladies had spoken to her civilly to see if they could
get any thing out of her. But they grew no wiser. A gallant
commodore
in the navy who had become a little deaf from the roar of
cannon
in an engagement was her chief beau, for in his eye beauty was
aristocracy, spite of uncles and aunts. A few handsome cadets, also,
had fluttered about her, and she had encouraged their civility, and
and was often to be seen promenading on their arms. To the officers
and other gentlemen she was distant and haughty, and wore an air of
independence which, thought the ladies, would have become a lady
with a different class of relatives, but in the niece of such ordinary
personages was very presumptive and should be put down. So a
party
was formed against her, while another come forward in her defence;
and for a time, she set them all by the ears, and was every where the
subject of conversation. A French Marquis arrived at the Point, and
with native gallantry attached himself to the beauty. They spoke
French together constantly. `She speaks French, too!' was
whispered
about.
`She is a French teacher, perhaps,' said the opposition.
`She is a cultivated woman,' said the others.
There came a German prince, too, to the Point, and the day after
his arrival, he was seen escorting her to the table, and during dinner
they conversed wholly in German. Curiosity increased.
With the Swedish consul she conversed in his own tongue; with
the Spanish minister in Spanish, and even talked Latin with a Roman
priest who was travelling through the country. To sum up her
accomplishments
,
in music she was a mocking bird, warbling melodies
in all languages; in conversation a wonder; in accomplishments
unparalleled
;
in taste perfect; in painting a master; in walking she
moved like a goddess; and in riding she seemed to be the very spirit
of horsemanshipa female Putnam, while she managed her rein with
equal grace and boldness. Truly never were people so mystified
never was curiosity so keennever were ladies so long at fault in
getting
at the bottom of a mystery.
In the meanwhile, what became of Captain Harry Hunter? From
the moment, the first night of his arrival, a spirit of diffidence and
reserve
seemed to have taken possession of him. He avoided her
presence
,
turned from her path, and showed apparent aversion for her
society
.
It appeared dislike. She observed him, and rightly translated it.
It was the timidity of Love.
The inquries she had made about him from time to time, till she had
learned his whole history as we have already given it, led to
conjectures
that Harry knew something of her. But his reserve, and the
fact of never being seen in her presence, took from the supposition all
its force.
One twilight, Captain Harry had been listlessly walking in that
most romantic spot of the Hudson, `Kosciusco's Garden,' when
coming
to the fountain, he seated himself; and while the tinkling fall of
the water into the marble basin soothed his spirit, his thoughts dwelt
no the fair stranger. Long he sat there unintruded upon, occasionally
hearing the strains of music borne to his ears from the encampment.
The shades of night crept over the spot; the glens around grew dark;
the diverging walks became indistinct in the gloom, and solitude, and
silence reigned around him.
`What care I for family? Will parents, sisters, rank, compensate
for her loss? Never. No, I will seek her,' he said half aloud, as if
he had come to a final decision in relation to his passion, `and be she
the lowest of the low by parentage, I will declare my consuming
passion and receive from her own lips the sentence to live or die.'
`Live then!'
He started, and looking up, saw standing near him, the object of
his thoughts and words.
`Ladyangelic creature,' he instantly cried, kneeling before her
and seizing her hand, `forgive the language I have dared to use, I
knew not'
`Nay, Captain Hunter, you are forgivenI know your passion, and
should be cruel not only to myself as well as to a generous heart
which I know you to possess, to deceive you. If the ack
nowledgement
that your interest in me is reciprocated by the unworthy object
of it, will render your being happier, and restore to your cheek the
color, and to your lip and eye the light that have left them for this two
weeks, then receive itand there is my hand in token of the truth of
my heart.'
This was spoken with the extraordinary frankness that characterised
all that she did or said. Its effect upon him was electrical. Her hand
was pressed to his lips and then their lips were pressed together. Ere
they left the spot, they had pledged to each other their undying love.
Still the fair stranger, in whose breast had been kindled a passion
simultaneous
with, and as vivid as his own, did not give him, at his
repeated
solicitations, her name.
`In giving you myself, fair sir, I think I have given you as much as
your merits can well lay claim to,' she said archly. `If, as you have
now promised, after our marriage, you will accompany me to England,
I will then give you my name. Till then, seek not to know more of
me, unless perhaps at the altar.'
`Enough,' he said, `I am the slave of your will, and I obey.'
CHAPTER IV.
The
next day all of the friends of Captain Hunter were
congratulating
him upon his good looks and fine spirits; and when the Captain
was seen to escort the mysterious beauty, (the two apparently on the
best terms together,) into the dining-room, curiosity became once
more alive, and numerous were the surmises this sudden acquaintance
gave rise to.
If this little incident created suspicion, the astonishment of every
body was not lessened, when it was rumored the third day afterwards
the handsome and gallant Captain Harry Hunter was to be married at
twelve o'clock, by Dr. Warren, in the military chapel. The
ceremony
drew crowds of the beauty and chivalry of the spot to the church
at the given hour.
Dr. Warren rose up, and the ceremony commenced. Every eye
was fixed upon the two who were about to be united. A nobler
looking
man, a fairer woman never stood up together before the marriage
altar. There was a universal hum of admiration, yet the intensest
curiosity
was mingled with the approbation. The lady was observed to
place a paper in the hands of the clergyman, who glance at it with a
look of surprise and doubthis eye then fixed upon it with eager
interest
,
and he then, a moment afterwards, proceeded with the
ceremony
.
`He knows her name,' was the mental observation of every lady in
the thronged chapel. `We shall all soon learn it!'
Expectation was on tiptoe. Curiosity was at its height. The
mystery
was about to be solved.
The rites proceeded, and the clergyman solemnly said to the
handsome
soldier,
`Wilt thou have this woman to thy wedded wife, to live together
after God's ordinance, in the holy estate of matrimony? Wilt thou love
her, in sickness and in health; and, forsaking all others keep thee only
unto her, so long as ye both shall live?'
`I will!' swelled through the church in the deep, manly voice of the
gallant soldier; and many a maiden as she heard his fine voice and
rested her gaze on his noble person, confessed in her heart that he was
well worthy to become the protector and cherisher of a lovely woman.
`Wilt thou have this man to thy wedded husband, to live together
after
God's ordinance, in the holy estate of matrimony? Wilt thou obey
him, and serve him, love, honor and keep him in sickness and health;
and, forsaking all others, keep thee only unto him, so long as ye both
shall live?'
`I will,' answered the maiden, in a voice that went to every soul
with the love and confidence and hope with which it was laden. And
many a noble officer envied him by her side who was to be loved and
honored and kept,
both in sickness and in health
, by so fair a being.
There was a moment's expectant silence, when the clergyman said,
looking around `Who giveth this woman to be married to this man?'
When every one looked for the homely uncle to approach and give her
away, to the surprise of all, a gentleman from New York, and the
wealthiest banker in America, who had, unexpectedly to his friends,
arrived at the Point that morning, advanced with dignity, and taking
her ungloved hand, which seemed like ivory into which life had been
breathed, placed it in that of the clergyman. The bridegroom was
evidently unprepared for the presence of this gentleman; and it was
apparent also from the glances that he cast upon the paper in the
clergyman's
hand that he was yet unacquainted with its contents.
Their right hands being joined, he first repeated in an audible voice,
after the minister
`I, Henry, take thee Clara, (here a thousand eyes exchanged
glances
,
for her first name was known, and from the decided tone in which
he repeated it, it was plain that he himself had then heard it for the
first time,) to my wedded wife, to have and to hold, from this day
forward
,
for better, for worse, for richer for poorer, in sickness and health
to love and cherish till death us do part, according to God's holy
ordinance
;
and thereto I plight my troth.'
She also repeated her corresponding part of the ceremony, in a
firm, clear, yet sweetly feminine voice, when Harry receiving it from
the minister, placed upon her finger a plain gold ring, and said, in a
distinct voice that filled the chapel,
`With this ring I thee wed, and with all my worldly goods I thee
endow: In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost.'
After the prayer, the clergyman joined their hands together,
repeated
in a tone of solemn fervor,
`Those that God hath joined together, let no man put asunder.'
Then turning to the assembly he said, while his eye seemed to
anticipate
the effect his words were about to produce,
`Forasmuch as Francis Livingstone Catesby and Clara Huntly,
Countess of Chesterton, have consented together in holy wedlock and
have witnessed the same before God and this company, and thereto
have given and pledged their troth, each to the other, and have declared
the same by giving and receiving a ring, and by joining hands; I
pronounce
that they are man and wife.'
After the announcement of the name and title of the bride, the rest
of the clergyman's words were lost in the general burst of surprise
from every lady present, and a thousand eyes were turned on the bride
with new and stranger interest.
`I knew it,' cried the triumphant
pros
.
`Who would have believed it!' exclaimed the disconcertel
cons
.
The surprise of the bridegroom need not be painted. He loved her,
believing her of low degreehe could love her with no greater ardor
even as Lady Clara Huntly.
So ends my story, my dearand I will conclude the rest in my
letter.
`The gentleman who gave the bride away was Mr. A, her
banker
,
to whom she had written to attend the ceremony. The paper
she gave the priest contained her name and title. Catesby neither knew
nor suspected anything of so singular and fortunate a denouement. In
a few weeks, Frank having resigned his commission in the army, left
America for this country, and on their arrival, drove directly over to
Castle C' where his charming wife at once surrendered to him
her family mansion and vast estates. The change has not spoiled him.
He is one of the most agreeable and gentlemanly men in England, and
highly popular in his country. He is called by courtesy, (his wife's
title having been by her marriage merged in his republican Mister or
Captain,) Lord C, of CCastle, C. His
charming
wife is devoted to him heart and soul. Never was a marriage more
for love than this! He thought her lowly and his love raised her to his
bosomshe knew him only to be a young American, without rank or
title, yet, for love, she gave him all she had to givebeauty, wealth,
and rank among nobles. They have two lovely children, a boy and
girl; and the only subject on which they differ is their education.
Catesby
is for making the little fellow a republican, and sending him to West
Point; while Clara intends him for Parliament, and to inherit her
father's
title and estates, which he will dothe little fellow's title being
through his mother, Lord Viscount C. You will by this time
understand that the `uncle and aunt,' were Lady Clara's steward and his
wife, whom she dragged with her from home, half over the world as
her protectors when she started off on her wild travels. There can be
nogreater instance of the peculiarly independent character of her mind
than the fact of her quitting with disgust, the scenes of London
disappation
and resisting the fascinations of her numerous admirers, to
roam amid the scenery of America, and commune with the works of
nature in a world where nature has exhibited in the most stupendous
manner her power and majesty. They live very retired, and seldom
stay more than a third of the season in town. The remainder of the
year they are in the country combining together in dispensing for the
happiness and comfort of their numerous dependants the wealth with
which they are blest. It was by accident I met Frank in town at the
close of the season, and as he would not let me say nayand something
of his story coming to my mind, I consented to go down with him,
partly from curiosity to learn its truth, I confess, but mainly, as
you
must know, to enjoy once more the society of one who was for four
years my fellow cadet. Do not say after this that my letters are too
short. Adieu, until the next trip of the Liverpool.
Truly yours,
T. H. H.
To J. H. I., Esq., West Point, U. S.
THE END
.`The gentleman who gave the bride away was Mr. A, her
banker
,
to whom she had written to attend the ceremony. The paper
she gave the priest contained her name and title. Catesby neither knew
nor suspected anything of so singular and fortunate a denouement. In
a few weeks, Frank having resigned his commission in the army, left
America for this country, and on their arrival, drove directly over to
Castle C' where his charming wife at once surrendered to him
her family mansion and vast estates. The change has not spoiled him.
He is one of the most agreeable and gentlemanly men in England, and
highly popular in his country. He is called by courtesy, (his wife's
title having been by her marriage merged in his republican Mister or
Captain,) Lord C, of CCastle, C. His
charming
wife is devoted to him heart and soul. Never was a marriage more
for love than this! He thought her lowly and his love raised her to his
bosomshe knew him only to be a young American, without rank or
title, yet, for love, she gave him all she had to givebeauty, wealth,
and rank among nobles. They have two lovely children, a boy and
girl; and the only subject on which they differ is their education.
Catesby
is for making the little fellow a republican, and sending him to West
Point; while Clara intends him for Parliament, and to inherit her
father's
title and estates, which he will dothe little fellow's title being
through his mother, Lord Viscount C. You will by this time
understand that the `uncle and aunt,' were Lady Clara's steward and his
wife, whom she dragged with her from home, half over the world as
her protectors when she started off on her wild travels. There can be
nogreater instance of the peculiarly independent character of her mind
than the fact of her quitting with disgust, the scenes of London
disappation
and resisting the fascinations of her numerous admirers, to
roam amid the scenery of America, and commune with the works of
nature in a world where nature has exhibited in the most stupendous
manner her power and majesty. They live very retired, and seldom
stay more than a third of the season in town. The remainder of the
year they are in the country combining together in dispensing for the
happiness and comfort of their numerous dependants the wealth with
which they are blest. It was by accident I met Frank in town at the
close of the season, and as he would not let me say nayand something
of his story coming to my mind, I consented to go down with him,
partly from curiosity to learn its truth, I confess, but mainly, as
you
must know, to enjoy once more the society of one who was for four
years my fellow cadet. Do not say after this that my letters are too
short. Adieu, until the next trip of the Liverpool.
Truly yours,
T. H. H.
To J. H. I., Esq., West Point, U. S.
THE END
.