Vol. I.2
CHAPTER I.
No more thy glassy brook reflects the day,
But choked with sedges, works its weedy way;
Along thy glades a solitary guest,
The hollow-sounding bittern guards its nest;
Amidst thy desert walks the lapwing flies,
And tires their echoes with unvaried cries.
Sunk are thy bowers in shapeless ruin all,
And the long grass o'ertops the mould'ring wall.
The Deserted Village
.
It
is now more than one hundred and forty-four
years since the ancient capital of Maryland was
shorn of its honours, by the removal of the public
offices, and, along with them, the public functionaries,
to Annapolis. The date of this removal, I think, is
recorded as of the year of grace sixteen hundred
and ninety-four. The port of St. Mary's, up to that
epoch, from the first settlement of the province,
comprehending
rather more than three score years, had
been the seat of the Lord Proprietary's government.
This little city had grown up in hard-favoured times,
which had their due effect in leaving upon it the
visible
tokens of a stunted vegetation: it waxed gnarled
and crooked, as it perked itself upward through the
thorny troubles of its existence, and might be likened
to the black jack, which yet retains a foothold in this
region,a scrubby, tough and hardy mignon of the
forest, whose elder day of crabbed luxuriance affords
a sour comment upon the nurture of its youth.
Geographers are aware that the city of St. Mary's
stood on the left bank of the river which now bears
the same name (though of old it was called St.
George's,) and which flows into the Potomac at the
southern extremity of the state of Maryland, on the
western side of the Chesapeake Bay, at a short distance
westward from Point Lookout: but the very spot where
the old city stood is known only to a few,for the
traces of the early residence of the Proprietary
government
have nearly faded away from the
knowledge
of this generation. An astute antiquarian eye,
however, may define the site of the town by the few
scattered bricks which the ploughshare has mingled
with the ordinary tillage of the fields. It may be
determined, still more visibly, by the mouldering and
shapeless ruin of the ancient State House, whose
venerable remains,I relate it with a blushhave
been pillaged, to furnish building materials for an
unsightly church, which now obtrusively presents its
mottled, mortar-stained and shabby front to the view
of the visiter, immediately beside the wreck of this
early monument of the founders of Maryland. Over
these ruins a storm-shaken and magnificent mulberry,
aboriginal, and cotemporary with the settlement of
the province, yet rears its shattered and topless trunk,
and daily distils upon the sacred relics at its foot, the
dews of heaven,an august and brave old mourner
to the departed companions of its prime. There is
yet another memorial in the family tomb of the
Proprietary
,
whose long-respected and holy repose,
beneath
the scant shade of the mulberry, has, within
twenty years past, been desecrated by a worse than
Vandal outrage, and whose lineaments may now with
difficulty be followed amidst the rubbish produced by
this violation.
These faded memorials tell their story like honest
chroniclers. And a brave story it is of hardy
adventure
,
and manly love of freedom! The scattered
bricks, all moulded in the mother-land, remind us of
the launching of the bark, the struggle with the
unfamiliar
wave, the array of the wonder-stricken savage,
and the rude fellowship of the first meeting. They
recall the hearths whose early fires gleamed upon
the visage of the bold cavalier, while the deep,
unconquerable
faith of religion, and the impassioned
instincts
of the Anglo-Saxon devotion to liberty, were
breathed by household groups, in customary
household
terms. They speak of sudden alarms, and quick
arming for battle;of stout resolve, and still stouter
achievement. They tell of the victory won, and
quiet gradually confirmed,and of the increasing
rapture as, day by day, the settler's hopes were
converted
into realities, when he saw the wilderness put
forth the blossoms of security and comfort.
The river penetrates from the Potomac some twelve
miles inland, where it terminates in little forked bays
which wash the base of the woody hills. St. George's
Island stretches half across its mouth, forming a
screen by which the course of the Potomac is partly
concealed from view. From this island, looking
northward, up St. Mary's river, the eye rests upon a
glittering sheet of water about a league in breadth,
bounded on either shore by low meadow-grounds
and cultivated fields girt with borders of forest;
whilst in the distance, some two leagues upward,
interlocking promontories, with highlands in their
rear, and cedar-crowned cliffs and abrupt acclivities
which shut in the channel, give to the river the
features
of a lake. St. Inigoe's creek, flowing into the
river upon the right hand, along the base of these
cliffs, forms by its southern shore a flat, narrow and
grass-clad point, upon which the ancient Jesuit House
of the patron saint whose name distinguishes the
creek, throws up, in sharp relief, its chateau-like
profile
,
together with its windmill, its old trees, barns and
cottages,the whole suggesting a resemblance to a
strip of pasteboard scenery on a prolonged and
slender
base line of green.
2*
When the voyager from the island has trimmed his
sail and reached the promontories which formed his
first perspective, the river, now reduced to a gun-shot
in width, again opens to his view a succession of little
bays, intercepted by more frequent headlands and
branching off into sinuous creeks that lose
themselves
in the hills. Here and there, amongst these
creeks, a slender beach of white sand separates
from its parent flood a pool, which reposes like a
mirror in the deep forest; and all around, high hills
sweep down upon these placid lakes, and disclose
half-embowered cottages, whose hoary roofs and
antique forms turn the musings of the spectator to
the palmy days of the Lord Proprietary.
A more enchanting landscape than St. Mary's
river,a lovelier assemblage of grassy bank and
hoary grove, upland slope, cliff, cot and strand, of
tangled brake and narrow bay, broad, seaward
road-stead
and air-suspended cape, may not be found
beneath
the yearly travel of the sun!
The ancient city was situated nearly two miles
beyond the confluence of St. Inigoe's creek, upon a
spacious level plain which maintained an elevation
of some fifty feet above the river. The low-browed,
double-roofed and cumbrous habitations of the
towns-people
were scattered at random over this plain,
forming
snug and pleasant groups for a painter's eye, and
deriving an air of competence and comfort from the
gardens and bowers in which they were sheltered.
The State House stood at the upper extremity of the
town, upon a cedar-clad headland which, by an abrupt
descent, terminated in a long, flat, sandy point, that
reached almost half across the river. In regard to
this building, traditionwhich I find to be somewhat
inclined to brag of its gloryaffirms it to have been
constructed in the shape of a cross, looking towards
the river, with walls thick enough to resist cannon,
and perilous steep roofs, from the top of the chief of
which shot up a spire, whereon was impaled a
dolphin
with a crooked, bifurcated tail. A wooden quay
and warehouse on the point showed this to be the
seat of trade, and a crescent-shaped bay or
indentation
between this and a similar headland at the lower
extremity of the town, constituted the anchorage or
harbour for the scant shipping of the port.
The State House looked rearward over the town
common,a large space of open ground, at the
farther
end of which, upon the border of a marshy inlet,
covered with bulrushes and cat-tails, stood a squat,
sturdy and tight little gaol, supported,to use the
military phrase,on one flank by a pillory and stocks,
and on the other by an implement of government
which has gone out of fashion in our day, but which
found favour with our ancestors as an approved
antidote
to the prevalent distemper of an unnecessary or
too clamorous loquacity in their damesa ducking
stool, that hung suspended over a pool of sufficient
depth for the most obstinate case that might occur.
Without wearying my reader with too much
description
,
I shall content myself with referring to but
two or three additional particulars as necessary to
my future purpose: a Catholic chapel devoted to St.
Ignatius, the patron of the province, in humble and
unostentatious guise, occupied, with its appurtenances,
a few acres in the centre of the plain, a short distance
from that confine of the city which lay nearest to St.
Inigoe's; and in the opposite quarter, not far from the
State House, a building of much more pretension,
though by no means so neat, had been erected for
the service of the Church of England, which was
then fast growing into the ascendant. On one of the
streets leading to the beach was the market house,
surrounded by its ordinaries and ale-houses: and
lastly, in the year 1681, to which this description
refers, a little hostelry of famous report, known by
the sign of The Crow and Archer, and kept by
Master Garret Weasel, stood on the water's edge,
at the foot of the bank below the State House, on a
piece of level ground looking out upon the harbour,
where the traveller may still find a luxuriant
wilderness
of pear trees, the scions of a notable ancestor
which, tradition says, the aforesaid Garret planted
with his own hand.
The country around St. Mary's bore, at the period
I have designated, the same broad traces of
settlement
and cultivation which belong to it at the present
day. For many miles the scene was one of varied
field and forest, studded over with dwellings and
farm yards. The settlements had extended across
the neck of land to the Chesapeake, and along both
shores of St. Mary's river to the Potomac. This
open country was diversified by woodland, and
enlivened
every where by the expanse of navigable
water which reflected sun and sky, grove and field
and lowly cottage in a thousand beautiful lights.
Indeed, all the maritime border of the province,
comprehending
Calvert, St. Mary's and Charles, as well
as the counties on the opposite shore of the
Chesapeake
,
might be said, at this date, to be in a
condition
of secure and prosperous habitation. The great
ocean forest had receded some hundred miles
westward
from St. Mary's. The region of country
comprising
the present county of Anne Arundel, as well
as Cecil and the Isle of Kent, was a frontier already
settled with numerous tenants of the Lord
Proprietary
.
All westward from this was the birthright of
the stern Sasquesahannoch, the fierce Shenandoah,
and their kindred men of the woods.
They are gone! Like shadows have these men of
might sunk on the earth. They, their game, their
wigwams, their monuments, their primeval forests,
yea, even their graves, have flitted away in this
spectral
flight. Saxon and Norman, bluff Briton and
heavy Suabian inherit the land. And in its turn,
well-a-day! our pragmatical little city hath departed.
Not all its infant glory, nor its manhood's bustle, its
walls, gardens and bowers,its warm housekeeping,
its gossiping burghers, its politics and its factions,
not even its prolific dames and gamesome urchins
could keep it in the upper air until this our day.
Alas, for the vaulting pride of the village, the vain
glory of the city, and the metropolitan boast! St.
Mary's hath sunk to the level of Tyre and Sidon,
Balbec and Palmyra! She hath become trackless,
tokenless.
I have wandered over the blank field where she
sank down to rest. It was a book whose characters
I could scarce decipher. I asked for relics of the
departed. The winter evening tale told by father to
son, and the written legend, more durable than
monument
of marble, have survived to answer my
question
,
when brick and tile, hearth and tomb have all
vanished from the quest of the traveller.
What I have gathered from these researches will
occupy my reader through the following pages.
CHAPTER II.
A train-band captain eke was he.
John Gilpin
.
At
the extremity of the cape or headland which
formed the lower or more seaward point of the
crescent-shaped
harbour, was erected the Fort of St.
Mary's, where it threatened equal defiance to such
as might meditate disturbance either by sea or land.
A few hundred paces in the rear of the fort, stood
the ample dwelling-house of the Lord Proprietary
with its gables, roofs, chimneys and spires, sharply
defined against the eastern sky. A massive building
of dark brick, two stories in height, and penetrated
by narrow windows, looking forth, beyond the fort,
upon the river, constituted the chief member or main
body of the mansion. This was capped by a wooden,
balustraded parapet, terminating, at each extremity,
in a scroll like the head of a violin, and, in the
middle
,
sustaining an entablature that rose to a summit
on which was mounted a weathercock. From this
central structure, right and left, a series of arcades,
corridors, and vestibules served to bring into line a
range of auxiliary or subordinate buildings of
grotesque
shapes, of which several were bonneted like
haycocksthe array terminating, on one flank, in a
private chapel surmounted by a cross, and, on the
other, in a building of similar size but of different
figure, which was designed and sometimes used for
a banqueting room. The impression produced on
the observer, by this orderly though not uniform
mass of building, with its various offices for
household
comfort, was not displeasing to his sense of rural
beauty, nor, from its ample range and capacious
accommodation
,
did it fail to enhance his opinion of the
stateliness and feudal importance, as well as of the
hospitality of the Lord Proprietary. The armorial
bearings of the Baltimore family, emblazoned on a
shield of free-stone, were built into the pediment
of an arched brick porch which shaded the great
hall door. In the rear of the buildings, a circular
sweep of wall and paling reached as far as a group
of stables, kennels and sheds. Vanward the same
kind of enclosures, more ornate in their fashion, shut
in a grassy court, to which admission was gained
through a heavy iron gate swung between square,
stuccoed pillars, each of which was surmounted by
a couchant lion carved in stone. Ancient trees
shaded the whole mass of dwelling-house, court and
stable, and gave to the place both a lordly and
comfortable
aspect. It was a pleasant group of roof and
bower, of spire and tree to look upon from the city,
towards sunset, when every window-pane flung back
the lustre of a conflagration; and magnificently did
it strike upon the eye of the liegemen as they sat at
their doors, at that hour, gazing upon the glorious
river and its tranquil banks. Nor less pleasant was
it to the inmates of the baronial mansion to look back
upon the fair village-city, studding the level plain
with its scattered dwellings which seemed to sleep
upon the grassy and shaded sward.
A garden occupied the space between the
proprietary
residence and the fort, and through it a
pathway
led to a dry moat which formed one of the
defences
of the stronghold, into which admission was
obtained from this quarter by a narrow bridge and
postern gate. A palisade of sharp pickets fringed
the outer and inner slopes of the ditch,or, to speak
more technically, guarded the scarp and
counterscarp
.
The fort itself sat like a square bonnet on
the brow of the headland. Its ramparts of earth
were faced outwardly by heavy frame-work of hewn
logs, which, on the side looking askant towards the
town, were penetrated by an arched gateway and
secured by heavy doors studded thick with nails.
This portal opened upon a road which lay along the
beach beneath the cliff, all the way to the upper
extremity
of the town. Several low buildings within,
appropriated to barracks and magazines, just peered
above the ramparts. A few pieces of brass cannon
showed like watch-dogs against the horizon, and,
high above all, fluttered the provincial banner
bearing
the cross of England, and holding the relation of
Vol. I.3
a feather to the squat bonnet which the outline of the
work might suggest to one curious to trace
resemblances
.
The province, it may be surmised, was belligerent
at this day. For although the Lords Barons of
Baltimore
,
absolute Proprietaries of Maryland and
Avalon, would fain have encouraged a pacific
temper
,
and desired ever to treat with the Indians upon
terms of friendly bargain and sale, and in all points
of policy manifested an equitable disposition towards
the native men of the forest, the province,
nevertheless
,
had its full share of hard blows. There was
seldom a period, in this early time, when some Indian
quarrel was not coming to a head; and, young as
the province was, it had already tasted of rebellion
at the hands of Clayborne, and Ingle,to say nothing
of that Fendall who was fain to play Cromwell in
the plantation, by turning the burgesses out of their
hall, and whose sedition hath still something to do
with my story.However peaceable, therefore, the
Lord Proprietary might incline to be, he could not
but choose stand by his weapons.
In the view of these and kindred troubles, the
freemen
of the province had no light service in their
obligations of military duty. One of the forms in
which this service was exacted, in addition to the
occasional requisition, on emergency, of the whole
population fit to bear arms, and in addition also to a
force of mounted rangers who were constantly
engaged
in scouring the frontier, was in the
maintenance
of a regularly paid and trained body of
musqueteers who supplied the necessary garrisons
for the principal forts. That of St. Mary's, which
was the oldest and most redoubtable strong-hold in
the province, was furnished with a company of forty
men of this class who were, at the date of this tale,
under the command of a personage of some note,
Captain Jasper Dauntrees, to whom I propose to
introduce
my reader with something more than the
slight commendation of a casual acquaintance.
This worthy had been bred up to the science of
arms from early youth, and had seen many varieties
of service,first, in the civil wars in which he took
the field with the royal army, a staunch cavalier,
and afterwards, with a more doubtful complexion of
loyalty, when he enlisted with Monk in Scotland, and
followed his banner to London in the notable exploit
of the Restoration. Yielding to the bent of that
humour
which the times engendered, and in imitation
of many a hungry and peace-despising gallant of his
day, he repaired to the continent, where, after various
fortunes, he found himself in the train of Turenne
and hard at loggerheads with the Prince of Orange,
in which passage of his life he enjoyed the soldierly
gratification of lending a hand to the famous ravage
of the Palatinate.
Some few years before I have presented him in
these pages he had come over to Maryland, with a
party of Flemings, to gather for his old age that
harvest of wealth and ease which the common report
promised to all who set foot upon the golden shores
of the IndiesMaryland, in vulgar belief, being a
part of this land of wonders. The captain neither
stumbled upon a gold mine, nor picked up an Indian
princess with a dowry of diamonds; but he fared
scarce worse, in his own estimation, when he found
himself, in a pleasant sunny clime, invested with the
rank of captain of musqueteers, with a snug shelter
in the fort, a reasonably fair and punctual allowance
of paymuch better, than had been his lot under
former masters,and a frank welcome at all times
into the mansion of the Lord Proprietary. Add to
these the delights more congenial to the training of
his past life, a few wet companions, namely, to help
him through an evening potation, and no despicable
choice of wines and other comforts at the Crow and
Archer, where the Captain with due alacrity became
a domesticated and privileged guest, and it may still
better be comprehended how little he was likely to
repine at his fortune.
His figure had, in youth, been evidently remarked
for strength and symmetrybut age and varied
service
,
combined with habits of irregular indulgence,
had communicated to it a bluff and corpulent
dimension
.
His port nevertheless was erect, and his step
as firm as in his days of lustihood. His eye still
sparkled with rays but little quenched by time,
although
unseasonable vigils sometimes rendered it
bloodshotten. A thick neck and rosy complexion
betokened a hale constitution; and the ripple of a
deep and constantly welling humour, that played
upon his strongly marked features, expressed in
characters
that could not be misread, that love of
companionship
which had been, perhaps, the most
frequent shoal upon which his hopes in life had been
stranded. His crown was bald and encircled by a
fair supply of crisp, curly and silvery hair, whilst a
thick grey moustache gave a martial and veteran air
to his visnomy.
His dress served to set off his figure to the best
advantage. It consisted of the doublet and ruff,
short cloak and trunk hose, the parti-coloured
stocking
and capacious boot proper to the old English
costume which, about the period of the Restoration,
began to give way to the cumbrous foppery of the
last century. This costume was still retained by
many in the province, and belonged to the military
equipment of the garrison of St. Mary's, where it
was fashioned of light green cloth garnished with
yellow lace.
Arrayed in this guise, Captain Dauntrees had some
excuse for a small share of vanity on the score of
having worn well up to a green old age; and it was
manifest that he sought to improve this impression by
the debonair freedom with which he wore a drab
beaver, with its broad flap looped up on one side,
leaving his ample brow bared to wind and weather.
This combination of the martinet and free
companion
exhibited in the dress of the Captain, was a
pretty intelligible index to his character, which
disclosed
a compound, not unfrequent in the civil wars
of that period, of the precisian and ruffler,the
cavalier
and economist. In the affairs of life,a phrase
which, in regard to him, meant such matters
principally
and before all others, as related to his own
comforthe was worldly-wise, sagaciously
provident
,
as an old soldier, of whatever advantages his
condition might casually supply; in words, he was,
indifferently, according to the occasion, a moralist
or hot-brained revellersometimes affecting the
courtier along with the martialist, and mixing up the
saws of peaceful thrift with the patter of the
campaigns
.
As the occasions of my story may enable me to
illustrate some of these points in the character of the
worthy Captain, I will not forestall the opinion of my
readers, regarding him, by further remark,
preferring
that he should speak for himself, rather than
leave his merits to be certified by so unpractised an
adept, as I confess myself to be, in unriddling the
secret properties of a person so deserving to be
known.
CHAPTER III.
In every creed,
'Tis on all hands agreed,
And plainly confest,
When the weather is hot,
That we stick to the pot
And drink of the best.
Old Song
.
Of
all seasons of the year, autumn is the most
voluptuous, and October the loveliest of months.
Then may a man sit at his doorin the sun if he
choose, for he will not find it too hotor in the shade,
if it liketh him, for neither will he find this too cool,
and there hold converse with his own meditations: or
he may ride or walk, dance or sing, for in this
October
time a man hath heart for any pastime, so rich
is the air, and such pleasant imaginations doth it
engender
.
And if he be poetical, therein will he be
greatly favoured; for surely never nature puts on
such gaudy attire, on earth or sky, as she wears in
our October. The morning haze, which the
hoar-frost
flings up to meet the sun, hangs across the
landscape
as if made on purpose to enchant the painter;
and the evening sunset lights up the heavens with a
glory that shall put that paintereven Claude or
Salvator
to
shame at the inadequacy of his art. And
then the woods!what pallet hath colours for the
forest? Of all the months of the year, commend me
to October!
Some such rhapsody as this was running through
the thoughts, and breaking forth in slight mutterings
from the lips of the Captain of Musqueteers, on an
afternoon in this much lauded month of October, in
the year I have alluded to in a former chapter, as he
sate in front of his quarters in the fort. A small table
was displayed upon the pavement, supplied with a
flagon, pipes, and drinking cups. The Captain's solid
bulk was deposited in a broad arm-chair, close by the
table. His sword and cloak lay upon a bench at the
door, and a light breeze flickered amongst his short
and hoary locks, where they escaped from the cover
of a cloth bonnet which he had now substituted for his
beaver. A sentinel stood on post at the gate, towards
which the Captain, as he slowly quaffed a cup, ever
and anon turned an expectant eye. Once or twice
he rose from his seat and strode backward and
forward
across the parade, then visited the rampart,
which afforded him a view of the road leading from
the town, and finally resumed his seat and renewed
his solitary and slow potation.
When the sun had sunk halfway down the
flag-staff
,
the Captain's wishes were crowned by the
arrival
of a brace of visiters.
The first of these was Garret Weasel, the publican,
a thin, small man, in a suit of gray; of a timid
carriage
and slender voice. He might have been
observed
for a restless, undefinable eye which seemed
to possess the habitual circumspection of a tapster to
see the need of a customer; and this expression was
sustained by a rabbit-like celerity of motion which
raised the opinion of his timidity. There was an air
of assentation and reverence in his demeanour, which,
perhaps, grew out of the domestic discipline of his
spouse, a buxom dame with the heart of a lioness.
She had trained Master Garret to her hand, where he
might have worn out his days in implicit obedience,
had it not luckily fallen out for him, that Captain
Dauntrees had settled himself down in this corner of
the New World. The Captain being a regular
trafficker
in the commodities of the Crow and Archer, and no
whit over-awed by the supremacy of mine hostess,
soon set himself about seducing her worse-half from
his allegiance, so far as was necessary, at least, to
satisfy his own cravings for company at the fort.
He therefore freely made himself the scapegoat
of Garret's delinquencies, confiding in the wheedling
power of his tongue, to pacify the dame. With
all the tapster's humility and meekness, he still
followed
the Captain through his irregularities with the
adhesiveness
and submission of a dogcarousing on
occasion like a man of stouter mould, and imitating
the reveller-tone of his companion with an ambitious
though not always successful zeal. He did not
naturally
lack merriment; but it was not of the
boisterous
stamp: there was, at his worst outbreak, a
glimmering
of deference and respect, rising up to a rickety
laugh, and a song sometimes, yet without violent
clamour; and the salt tears were often wrung from
his eyes by the pent-up laughter which his vocation
and his subordinate temper had taught him it was
unseemly to discharge in a volley.
His companion was a tall, sinewy, and grave
person
,
habited in the guise of a forestera cap, namely,
of undressed deer skin, a buff jerkin, guarded by a
broad belt and buckle at the waist, and leggings of
brown leather. This was a Fleming, named Arnold
de la Grange, who belonged to the corps of wood
rangers in the service of the Lord Proprietary. He
had arrived in the province in the time of Lord
Cecilius
,
many years before, and had shared much of the
toil of the early settlement. His weather-beaten and
gaunt form, tawny cheek, and grizzled hair, bespoke
a man inured to the hard service of a frontier life,
whilst his erect port and firm step, evinced that
natural
gracefulness which belongs to men trained to
the self-dependence necessary to breast the
ever-surrounding
perils of such a service. He was a man
of few words, and these were delivered in a Low
Dutch accent, which his long intercourse with the
English had failed to correct. When his service on
his range was intermitted, Arnold found quarters
amongst the retainers of the Proprietary mansion,
and the Proprietary himself manifested towards the
forester that degree of trust, and even affection,
which resulted from a high sense of his fidelity and
conduct, and which gave him a position of more
privilege
than was enjoyed by the other dependents of
the establishment. Being, at these intervals, an idler,
he was looked upon with favour by the Captain of the
fort, who was not slow to profit by the society of such
a veteran in the long watches of a dull afternoon.
By a customary consequence, Arnold was no less
esteemed
by the publican.
A bluff greeting and short ceremony placed the
visiters at the table, and each, upon a mute signal
from the host, appropriated his cup and pipe.
You are never a true man, Garret Weasel, said
the Captain, to dally so long behind your
appointment
;
and such an appointment, too! state matters
would be trifles to it. The round dozen which you
lost to me on Dame Dorothy's head geara blessing
on it!you did yourself so order it, was to be
broached
at three of the clock; and now, by my troth, it is
something past four. There is culpable laches in it.
Idleness is the canker of the spirit, but occupation is
the lard of the body, as I may affirm in my own
person
.
Mistress Dorothy, I suspect, has this tardy
coming to answer for. I doubt the brow of our
brave dame hath been cloudy this afternoon. How
is it, Arnold? bachelor, and Dutchman to boot, you
will speak without fear.
The woman, replied Arnold, in a broken
English
accent, which I do not attempt to convey in
syllables, had her suspicions.
Hold ye, Captain Dauntrees, eagerly interrupted
the innkeeper, drawing up his chair to the tablefor
he had seated himself a full arms-length off, in
awkward
deference to his host; and hold ye, Master
Arnold! my wife rules not me, as some evil-minded
jesters report: no, in faith! We were much beset to
day. In sooth I could not come sooner. Customers,
you know, Captain, better than most men, customers
must be answered, and will be answered, when we
poor servants go athirst. We were thronged to-day;
was it not so, Arnold?
That is true, replied the forester; the wife had
her hands full as well as Garret himself. There were
traders in the port, to-day, from the Bay Shore and
the Isle of Kent, and some from the country back,
to hear whether the brigantine had arrived. They
had got some story that Cocklescraft should be here.
I see it, said Dauntrees; that fellow,
Cocklescraft
,
hath a trick of warning his friends. He never
comes into port but there be strange rumours of him
ahead; it seems to be told by the pricking of thumbs.
St. Mary's is not the first harbour where he drops his
anchor, nor Anthony Warden the first to docket his
cargo. You understand me.
You have a bold mind, Captain, said the
publican
;
you men of the wars speak your thoughts.
You are none the losers by Master Cocklescraft,
interposed Arnold, drily.
My wife pays honestly for the liquors, said
Weasel, as his eye glanced timorously from one to
the other of his comrades; I take no heed of the
accounts.
But the head gear, Garret, rejoined Dauntrees,
laughing; you pay for that, though the mercer saw
my coin for it. Twelve bottles of Canary were a
good return on that venture. The bauble sits lightly
on the head of the dame, and it is but fair that the
winnings should rise as lightly into ours. But for
Cocklescraft, we should lack these means to be merry.
The customs are at a discount on a dark night. Well,
be it so. What point of duty calls on us to baulk the
skipper in his trade? We are of the land, not of the
water; consumers, on the disbursing side of the
account
,
not of the gathering in. The revenue hath its
proper friends, and we should neither meddle nor
make. Worthy Garret Weasel has good report in
the province for the reasonableness of his wines
and long may he deserve that commendation!
I thank heaven that I strive to merit the good
will of the freemen, interrupted the innkeeper.
And he is something given to brag of his wines.
Faith, and with reason! Spain and Portugal, the
Garonne and the Rhine, are his tributaries. Garret,
we know the meridian of your El Dorado.
Nay, nay, Master Captainyour worship is
merry; I beseech you
Never mind your beseeching, my modest friend.
You scarce do yourself justice. You have his
Lordship's
license paid for in good round ducatoonsand
that's the fee of a clear conscience. So let the trade
thrive! The exchequer is not a baby to be in
swaddling
bands, unable to feed itself. No, it has the
eagle's claw, and wants no help from thee, thou
forlorn
tapster! Make thine honest penny, Garret; all
thirsty fellows will stand by thee.
Vol. I.4
I would be thought orderly, Master Dauntrees.
Thou art so computedto a fault. You would
have been so reckoned in Lord Cecil's time; and
matters are less straitened now-a-days. Lord Charles
gives more play to good living than his father
allowed
of. You remember his Lordship's father set his
face against wines and strong waters.
He did, gentlemen, said Weasel, squaring
himself
in his seat with animation. Heaven forbid I
should speak but as becomes me of the honourable
Lord Cecil's memory, or of his honourable son! but
to my cost, I know that his Lordship's father was no
friend to evil courses, or sottish behaviour, or
drinking
,
unless it was in moderation, mark you. But, with
humility, I protest the law is something hard on us
poor ordinary keepers: for you shall understand,
Arnold Grange, that at a sale by outcry, if there
should lack wherewithal to pay the debts of the
debtor, the publican and vintner are shut out, seeing
that the score for wines and strong waters is the last
to be paid.
And good law it is, let me tell you Garret Weasel!
Good and wholesome: wisely laid down by the
burgesses
,
and wisely maintained by his Lordship. You
rail without cause. Sober habits must be
engendered
:your
health, comrades! Then it behooves you
publicans to be nice in your custom. We will none
of your lurdans that can not pay scot and lotyour
runagates that fall under the statute of outcry. Let
them drink of the clear brook! There is wisdom and
virtue in the law. Is it not so, Arnold?
It preaches well, replied the forester, as he sent
forth a volume of smoke from his lips.
Another flask, and we will drink to his Lordship,
said Dauntrees, who now left the table and returned
with the fourth bottle. Fill up, friends; the evening
wears apace. Here's to his Lordship, and his
Lordship's
ancestors of ever noble and happy memory!
As Dauntrees smacked his lip upon emptying his
cup, he flung himself back in his chair, and in a
thoughtful tone ejaculated: the good Lord Charles
has had a heavy time of it since his return from
England; these church brawlers would lay
gunpowder
under our hearth-stones. And then the death of
young Lord Cecil, whilst his father was abroad, too;
it was a heavy blow. My lady hath never held up
her head since.
A pause succeeded to this grave reflection, during
which the trio smoked their pipes in silence, which
was at length broken by an attenuated sigh from the
publican, as he exclaimed, Well-a-day! the great
have their troubles as well as the rest of us. It is my
opinion that Heaven will have its will, Captain; that's
my poor judgment. And having thus disburdened
himself of this weighty sentimentthe weight of it
being increased, perhaps, by the pressure of his
previous
potationshe drained the heel tap, which stood
in his glass, and half whispered, when he had done,
That's as good a drop of Canary as ever grew
within the horizon of the Peak of Teneriffe.
Through the good will of friend Cocklescraft,
interrupted Dauntrees, suddenly resuming his former
gaiety.
Pray you, Captain Dauntrees, said the publican,
with a hurried concern, think what hurt thy jest
may bring upon me. Arnold knows not your merry
humour, and may believe, from your speech, that I
am not reputable.
Pish, man; bridle thy foolish tongue! Did I not
see the very cask on't at Trencher Rob's? Did I not
mark how your sallow cheek took on an ashen
complexion
,
when his Lordship's Secretary, a fortnight
since, suddenly showed himself amongst the cedars
upon the bank that overlooks your door, when your
ill luck would have you to be rolling the cask in
open day into thy cellar. The secretary was in a
bookish mood, and saw thee notor, peradventure,
was kind, and would not heed.
To this direct testimony, Weasel could only reply
by a faint-hearted and involuntary smile which
surrendered
the point, and left him in a state of silly
confusion.
Never droop in thy courage, worthy Weasel,
exclaimed the Captain; thou art as honest as thy
betters; and, to my mind, the wine hath a better
smack from its overland journey from St. Jerome's
when there was no sun to heat it.
The secretary, said the innkeeper, anxious to
give the conversation another direction, is a
worshipful
youth, and a modest, and grows in favour with
the townspeople.
Ay, and is much beloved by his Lordship,
added the Captain.
And comes, I warrant me, of gentle kind, though
I have not heard aught of his country or friends.
Dorothy, my wife, says that the women almost swear
by him, for his quiet behaviour and pretty wordsand
they have eyes, Captain Dauntrees, for excellence
which we have not.
There is a cloud upon his birth, said Dauntrees,
and a sorrowful tale touching his nurture. I had it
from Burton, the master of the ship who brought
him with my Lord to the province.
Indeed, Captain Dauntrees! you were ever quick
to pick up knowledge. You have a full ear and a
good memory.
Drink, drink, comrades! said the Captain. We
should not go dry because the secretary hath had
mishaps
.
If it please you, I will tell the story, though
I will not vouch for the truth of what I have only at
second hand.
After the listeners had adjusted themselves in their
chairs, Dauntrees proceeded.
There was, in Yorkshire, a Major William
Weatherby, who fought against the ParliamentI
did not know him, for I was but a stripling at the
timewho, when King Charles was beheaded, went
over and took service with the States General, and
at Arnheim married a lady of the name of
Verheyden
.
Getting tired of the wars, he came back to
England with his wife, where they lived together
five or six years without children. The story goes
4*
that he was a man of fierce and crooked temper;
choleric, and unreasonable in his quarrel; and for
jealousy, no devil ever equalled him in that amiable
virtue. It was said, too, that his living was riotous
and unthrifty, which is, in part, the customary sin of
soldiership.I am frank with you, masters.
You are a good judge, Captain; you have had
experience, said the publican.
There was a man of some mark in the country
where this Weatherby lived, a Sir George Alwin,
who, taking pity on the unhappy lady, did her sundry
acts of kindnessharmless acts, people say; such as
you or I, neighbours, would be moved to do for a
distressed
female; but the lady was of rare beauty, and
the husband full of foul fancies.
About this time, it was unlucky that nature
wrought a change, and the lady grew lusty for the
first time in six years marriage. To make the story
short, Weatherby was free with his dagger, and in
the street, at Doncaster, in the midst of a public show,
he stabbed Alwin to the heart.
The wood ranger silently shook his head, and the
publican opened his watery eyes in astonishment.
By the aid of a fleet horse and private enemies
of the murdered man, Weatherby escaped out of the
kingdom, and was never afterwards heard of.
And died like a dog, I s'pose, said Arnold de la
Grange.
Likely enough, replied Dauntrees.
The poor lady was struck down with the horror
of the deed, and had nearly gone to her grave. But
Heaven was kind, and she survived it, and was
relieved
of her burden in the birth of a son. For some
years afterwards, by the bounty of friends, but with
many a strugglefor her means were scantyshe
made shift to dwell in England. At last she returned
to Holland, where she found a resting place in her
native earth, having lived long enough to see her son,
a well grown lad, safely taken in charge by her
brother
,
a merchant of Antwerp. The parents were
both attached to our Church of Rome, and the son
was sent by his uncle to the Jesuit school of his own
city. Misfortune overtook the merchant, and he
died before the nephew had reached his fourteenth
year. But the good priests of Antwerp tended the
lad with the care of parents, and would have reared
him as a servant of the altar. When our Lord
Baltimore
was in the Netherlands, three years ago, he
found Albert Verheyden, (the youth has ever borne
his mother's name,) in the Seminary. His Lordship
took a liking to him and brought him into his own
service. Master Albert was then but eighteen. There
is the whole story. It is as dry as a muscat raisin.
It sticks in the throat, masters,so moisten, moisten!
It is a marvellous touching story, said the
innkeeper
,
as he swallowed at a draught a full goblet.
The hot hand and the cold steel, said Arnold,
thoughtfully, hold too much acquaintance in these
times. Master Albert is an honest youth, and a good
youth, and a brave follower too, of hawk or hound,
Captain Dauntrees.
Then there is good reason for a cup to the
secretary
,
said the Captain, filling again. The world
hath many arguments for a thirsty man. The blight
of the year fall upon this sadness! Let us change our
discourseI would carouse a little, friends: It is
salutary to laugh. Thanks to my patron, I am a
bachelor! So drink, Master Arnold, mein sauff bruder,
as we used to say on the Rhine.
Ich trinck, euch zu, was the reply of the forester,
as he answered the challenge with a sparkling eye,
and a face lit up with smiles; a good lad, an
excellent
lad, though he come of a hot-brained father!
The wine began to show itself upon the revellers;
for by this time they had nearly got through half of
the complement of the wager. The effect of this
potation
upon the Captain was to give him a more
flushed
brow, and a moister eye, and to administer
somewhat
to the volubility of his tongue. It had wrought
no further harm, for Dauntrees was bottle-proof.
Upon the forester it was equally harmless, rather
enhancing than dissipating his saturnine steadfastness
of demeanour. He was, perchance, somewhat more
precise and thoughtful. Garret Weasel, of the three,
was the only weak vessel. With every cup of the
last half hour he grew more supple.
Ads heartlikens! he exclaimed, but this wine
doth tingle, Captain Dauntrees. Here is a fig for my
wife Dorothy! Come and go as you listnone of
your fetch and carry! that's what the world is coming
to, amongst us married cattle!
Thou art a valorous tapster, said the Captain.
I am the man to stand by his friend, Captain
mine; and I am thy friend, CaptainPapist or Roman
though they call thee!
A man for need, Garret! said Dauntrees, patting
him on the head; a dozen flasks or so, when a friend
wants them, come without the asking.
And I pay my wagers, I warrant, Captain, like a
true comrade.
Like a prince, Garret, who does not stop to count
the score, but makes sure of the total by throwing in
a handful over.
I am no puritan, Master Dauntrees, I tell thee.
Thou hast the port of a cavalier, good
Weasel
.
Thou wouldst have done deadly havoc amongst
the round-heads, if they but took thee in the fact
of discharging a wager. Thou wert scarce in
debt, after this fashion, at Worcester, my valiant
drawer. Thy evil destiny kept thee empty on that
day.
Ha, ha, ha! a shrewd memory for a stale jest,
Captain Dauntrees. The world is slanderous, though
I care little for it. You said you would be merry;
shall we not have a song? Come, troll us a catch,
Captain.
I am of thy humour, old madcap; I'll wag it with
thee bravely, replied Dauntrees, as he struck up a
brisk drinking-bout glee of that day, in which he was
followed by the treble voice of the publican, who at
the same time rose from his seat and accompanied
the music with some unsteady gyrations in the
manner
of a dance upon the gravel.
From too much keeping an evil decorum,
From the manifold treason parliamentorum,
From Oliver Cromwell, dux omnium malorum,
Libera nos, Libera nos.
Whilst Dauntrees and his gossips were thus
occupied
in their carouse, they were interrupted by the
unexpected arrival of two well known persons, who
had approached by the path of the postern gate.
The elder of the two was a youth just on the verge
of manhood. His person was slender, well
proportioned
,
and rather over the common height. His
face, distinguished by a decided outline of beauty,
wore a thoughtful expression, which was scarcely
overcome by the flash of a black and brilliant eye.
A complexion pale and even feminine, betokened
studious
habits. His dress, remarkable for its neatness,
denoted a becoming pride of appearance in the
wearer. It told of the Low Countries. A well-fitted
doublet and hose, of a grave colour, were partially
concealed by a short camlet cloak of Vandyke
brown. A black cap and feather, a profusion of
dark hair hanging in curls towards the shoulders,
and a falling band or collar of lace, left it
unquestionable
that the individual I have sketched was of
gentle nurture, and associated with persons of rank.
This was further manifested in the gay and
somewhat
gaudy apparel of his companion,a lad of
fourteen, who walked beside him in the profusely
decorated costume of a young noble of that
ambitious
era, when the thoughtless and merry monarch
of England, instead of giving himself to the cares of
government, was busy to invent extravagancies of
dress. The lad was handsome, though his features
wore the impress of feeble health. He now bore in
his hand a bow and sheaf of arrows.
The visiters had taken our revellers at unawares,
and had advanced within a few feet before they were
observed. The back of the publican was turned to
them, and he was now in mid career of his dance,
throwing up his elbows, tossing his head, and
treading
daintily upon the earth, as he sang the burden,
Libera nos, libera nos.
You give care a holiday, Captain Dauntrees,
said the elder youth, with a slightly perceptible
foreign
accent.
Dauntrees started abruptly from his seat, at this
accost, smiled with a reddened brow, and made a
low obeisance. The cessation of the song left Garret
Weasel what a mariner would term high and dry,
for like a bark floated upon a beach and suddenly
bereft of its element, he remained fixed in the
attitude
at which the music deserted him,one foot
raised, an arm extended, and his face turned
inquiringly
over his shoulder. His amazement upon
discovering
the cause of this interruption, brought about a
sudden and ludicrous affectation of sobriety; in an
instant his port was changed into one of
deference
,
although somewhat awkwardly overcharged
with what was intended to represent gravity and
decorum.
Arnold de la Grange rose from his chair and
stood erect, firm and silent.
Hail, Master Albert Verheyden, and Master
Benedict
Leonard: God save you both! said
Dauntrees
.
I say amen to that, and God save his lordship,
besides! ejaculated the publican with a drunken
formality of utterance.
I would not disturb your merriment, friends,
said the secretary, but his lordship bade me
summon
Captain Dauntrees to the hall. You, Arnold de
la Grange, will be pleased to accompany the
Captain
.
Arnold bowed his head, and the visiters retired by
the great gate of the fort. In a moment young
Benedict
Leonard came running back, and addressed the
forester
Master Arnold, I would have a new bow-string
this is worn; and my bird-bolts want feathering:
shall I leave them with you, good Arnold? And
without waiting an answer, he thrust the bow and
arrows into the smiling wood-ranger's hand, and
bounded away again through the gate.
Dauntrees flung his sword-belt across his shoulder,
put on his cloak, delayed a moment to secure the
remaining flasks of wine, and then beckoned to the
ranger to follow him.
Stop, cried Weasel, with an officious zeal to
make himself useful; your belt is awry: it is not
comely to be seen by his lordship in this slovenly
array.
The belt was set right, and the two directed
their steps towards the postern, and thence to the
mansion. The publican tarried only until his
companions
were out of sight, when, curious to know the
object of the errand, and careful to avoid the
appearance
of intrusion, he followed upon the same path, at
a respectful distance,stepping wisely, as a drunken
man is wont, and full of the opinion that his sobriety
was above all suspicion.
Vol. I.5
CHAPTER IV.
Oft as the peasant wight impelled
To these untrodden paths had been,
As oft he, horror struck, beheld
Things of unearthly shape and mien.
Glengonar's Wassail
.
The
day was drawing near to a close, and the
Proprietary thoughtfully paced the hall. The
wain-scoted
walls around him were hung with costly
paintings, mingled, not untastefully, with Indian war
clubs, shields, bows and arrows, and other trophies
won from the savage. There were also the
ponderous
antlers of the elk and the horns of the buck
sustaining
draperies of the skins of beasts of prey.
Musquets, cutlasses and partisans were bestowed on
brackets ready for use in case of sudden invasion
from that race of wild men whose stealthy incursions
in times past had taught this policy of preparation.
The level rays of the setting sun, striking through
the broad open door, flung a mellow radiance over
the hall, giving a rich picture-like tone to its sylvan
furniture.
Lord Baltimore, at the period when I have
introduced
him, might have been verging upon fifty. He
was of a delicate and slender stature, with a grave
and dignified countenance. His manners were
sedate and graceful, and distinguished by that
gentleness
which is characteristic of an educated mind
when chastened by affliction. He had been schooled
to this gentleness both by domestic and public griefs.
The loss of a favourite son, about two years before,
had thrown a shadow upon his spirit, and a
successsion
of unruly political irritations in the province
served to prevent the return of that buoyancy of
heart which is indifferently slow to come back at
middle age, even when solicited by health, fortune,
friends, and all the other incitements which, in
younger men, are wont to lift up a wounded spirit
out of the depths of a casual sorrow.
Charles Calvert had come to the province in 1662,
and from that date, until the death of his father,
thirteen years afterwards, administered the
government
in the capacity of Lieutenant-General. Upon
his accession to the proprietary rights, he found
himself
compelled by the intrigues of a faction to visit
London, where he was detained nearly four years,
having left Lady Baltimore, with a young family of
children, behind him, under the care of his uncle
Philip Calvert, the chancellor of the province. He
had now, within little more than a twelvemonth,
returned
to his domestic roof, to mingle his sorrows
with those of his wife for the death of his eldest son,
Cecilius, who had sunk into the tomb during his
absence.
The public cares of his government left him scant
leisure to dwell upon his personal afflictions. The
province was surrounded by powerful tribes of
Indians
who watched the white settlers with an eager
hostility, and seized every occasion to molest them
by secret inroad, and often by open assault. A
perpetual
war of petty reprisals, prevailed upon the
frontier, and even sometimes invaded the heart of
the province.
A still more vexatious annoyance existed in the
party divisions of the inhabitantsdivisions
unluckily
resting on religious distinctionsthe most fierce
of all dissensions. Ever since the Restoration, the
jealousy of the Protestant subjects of the crown
against the adherents of the church of Rome had
been growing into a sentiment that finally broke forth
into the most flagrant persecution. In the province,
the Protestants during the last twenty years had
greatly increased in number, and at the date of this
narrative constituted already the larger mass of the
population. They murmured against the dominion
of the Proprietary as one adverse to the welfare of
the English church; and intrigues were set on foot
to obtain the establishment of that church in the
province through the interest of the ministry in
England
.
Letters were written by some of the more
ambitious clergy of Maryland to the Archbishop of
Canterbury to invoke his aid in the enterprise. The
government of Lord Baltimore was traduced in these
representations, and every disorder attributed to the
ascendancy of the Papists. It was even affirmed
that the Proprietary and his uncle the Chancellor,
had instigated the Indians to ravage the plantations
of the Protestant settlers, and to murder their
families
.
Chiefly, to counteract these intrigues, Lord
Baltimore had visited the court at London. Cecilius
Calvert, the founder of the province, with a liberality
as wise as it was unprecedented, had erected his
government upon a basis of perfect religious freedom.
He did this at a time when he might have
incorporated
his own faith with the political character of
the colony, and maintained it, by a course of
legislation
,
which would, perhaps, even up to the present
day, have rendered Maryland the chosen abode of
those who now acknowledge the founder's creed.
His views, however, were more expansive. It was
his design to furnish in Maryland a refuge not only
to the weary and persecuted votaries of his own sect,
but an asylum to all who might wish for shelter in a
land where opinion should be free and conscience
undisturbed. Whilst this plant of toleration was
yet young, it grew with a healthful luxuriance; but
the popular leaders, who are not always as truly and
consistently attached to enlightened freedom as we
might be led to believe from their boasting, and who
incessantly aim to obtain power and make it felt, had
no sooner acquired strength to battle with the
Proprietary
than they rooted up the beautiful exotic and
gave it to the winds.
5*
Amongst the agitators in this cause was a man of
some note in the former history of the province
the famous Josias Fendall, the governor in the time
of the Protectoratenow in a green old age, whose
turbulent temper, and wily propensity to mischief
had lost none of their edge with the approach of
grey hairs. This individual had stimulated some of
the hot spirits of the province into open rebellion
against the life of the Proprietary and his uncle.
His chief associate was John Coode, a coarse but
shrewd leader of a faction, who, with the worst
inclinations
against the Proprietary had the wit to
avoid the penalties of the law, and to maintain
himself
in a popular position as a member of the house
of Burgesses. Fendall, a few months before this
era, had been arrested with several followers, upon
strong proofs of conspiracy, and was now a close
prisoner in the gaol.
Such is a brief but necessary view of the state of
affairs on the date, at which I have presented the
Lord Proprietary to my reader. The matter now in
hand with the captain of the fort had reference to
troubles of inferior note to those which I have just
recounted.
When Lord Baltimore descried Captain Dauntrees
and the ranger approaching the mansion from the
direction of the fort, he advanced beyond the
threshold
to meet them. In a moment they stood
unbonneted
before him.
God save you, good friends! was his salutation
Captain Dauntrees and worthy Arnold, welcome!
Cover,he added in a tone of familiar kindness,
put on your hats; these evening airs sometimes
distill an ague upon a bare head.
A rugged smile played upon the features of the old
forester as he resumed his shaggy cap, and said,
Lord Charles is good; but he does not remember
that the head of an old ranger gets his blossoms like
the dog-wood,in the wind and the rain:the dew
sprinkles upon it the same as upon a stone.
Old friend, replied the Proprietary,that
grizzly head has taken many a sprinkling in the
service
of my father and myself: it is worthy of a better
bonnet, and thou shalt have one, Arnoldthe best
thou canst find in the town. Choose for yourself,
and Master Verheyden shall look to the cost of it.
The Fleming modestly bowed, as he replied with
that peculiar foreign gesture and accent, neither of
which may be described,Lord Charles is good
He is the son of his father, Lord Cecil,Heaven
bless his memory!
Master Verheyden, bade me attend your
lordship
,
said Dauntrees; and to bring Arnold de la
Grange with me.
I have matter for your vigilance, Captain,
replied
the Proprietary. Walk with me in the garden
we will talk over our business in the open air.
When they had strolled some distance, Lord
Baltimore
proceededThere are strange tales afloat
touching certain mysterious doings in a house at St.
Jerome's: the old wives will have it that it is
inhabited
by goblins and mischievous spiritsand, in
truth, wiser people than old women are foolish
enough to hold it in dread. Father Pierre tells me
he can scarcely check this terror.
Your Lordship means the fisherman's house on
the beach at St. Jerome's, said the Captain. The
country is full of stories concerning it, and it has
long had an ill fame. I know the house: the gossips
call it The Wizard's Chapel. It stands hard by the
hut of The Cripple. By my faith,he who wanders
there at nightfall had need of a clear shrift.
You give credence to these idle tales?
No idle tales, an please your Lordship. Some of
these marvels have I witnessed with my own eyes.
There is a curse of blood upon that roof.
I pray you speak on, said the Proprietary,
earnestly; there is more in this than I dreamed
of.
Paul Kelpy the fisherman, continued Dauntrees,
it was before my coming into the provincebut
the story goes
It was in the Lord Cecil's timeI knowed the
fisherman, interrupted Arnold.
He was a man, said the Captain, who, as your
Lordship may have heard, had a name which caused
him to be shunned in his time,and they are alive
now who can tell enough of his wickedness to make
one's hair rise on end. He dwelt in this house at St.
Jerome's in Clayborne's day, and took part with that
freebooter;went with him, as I have heard, to the
Island, and was outlawed.
Ay, and met the death he deservedI
remember
the story, said the Proprietary. He was
foiled in his attempt to get out of the province, and
barred himself up in his own house.
And there he fought like a tiger,or more like a
devil as he was, added the ranger. They were
more than two days, before they could get into his
house.
When his door was forced at last, continued
the Captain; they found him, his wife and child
lying in their own blood upon the hearth stone. They
were all murdered, people say, by his own hand.
And that was true! added Arnold; I
remember
how he was buried at the cross road, below the
Mattapany Fort, with a stake drove through his
body.
Ever since that time, continued Dauntrees,
they say the house has been without lodgersof
flesh and blood, I mean, my Lord,for it has become
a devil's den, and a busy one.
What hast thou seen, Captain? You speak as a
witness.
It is not yet six months gone by, my Lord, when
I was returning with Clayton, the master of the
collector's
pinnace, from the Isle of Kent; we stood
in, after night, towards the headland of St. Jerome's
bay;it was very darkand the four windows of
the Wizard's Chapel, that looked across the beach,
were lighted up with such a light as I have never
seen from candle or fagot. And there were antic
figures passing the blaze that seemed deep in some
hellish carouse. We kept our course, until we got
almost close aboard,when suddenly all grew dark.
There came, at that moment, a gust of wind such
as the master said he never knew to sweep in
daylight
across the Chesapeake. It struck us in our
teeth, and we were glad to get out again upon the
broad water. It would seem to infer that the Evil
One had service rendered there, which it would be
sinful to look upon. In my poor judgment it is matter
for the church, rather than for the hand of the law.
You are not a man, Captain Dauntrees, to be
lightly moved by fantasies, said the Proprietary,
gravely; you have good repute for sense and
courage
.
I would have you weight well what you
report.
Surely, my Lord, Clayton is as stout a man in
heart as any in the province: and yet he could
scarcely hold his helm for fear.
Why was I not told of this?
Your Lordship's favour, replied Dauntrees,
shaking
his head; neither the master, the seamen nor
myself would hazard ill will by moving in the matter.
There is malice in these spirits, my Lord, which will
not brook meddling in their doings: we waited until
we might be questioned by those who had right to
our answer. The blessed martyrs shield me! I am
pledged to fight your Lordship's bodily foes:the
good priests of our holy patron St. Ignatius were
better soldiers for this warfare.
The Proprietary remained for some moments
silent
:
at last, turning to the ranger, he inquired
What dost thou know of this house, Arnold?
Well, Lord Charles, replied the veteran, I
was not born to be much afeard of goblins or
witches.In my rangings I have more than once
come in the way of these wicked spirits; and then I
have found that a clean breast and a stout heart, with
the help of an Ave Mary and a Paternoster was more
than a match for all their howlings. But the
fisherman's
houseoh, my good Lord Charles, he added
with a portentous shrug, has dwellers in it that it
is best not to trouble. When Sergeant Travers and
myself were ranging across by St. Jerome's, at that
time when Tiquassino's men were thought to be a
thieving,last Hallowmass, if I remember,we shot
a doe towards night, and set down in the woods,
waiting to dress our meat for a supper, which kept
us late, before we mounted our horses again. But
we had some aqua vit, and did n't much care for
hours. So it was midnight, with no light but the stars
to show us our way. It happened that we rode not
far from the Wizard's Chapel, which put us to telling
stories to each other about Paul Kelpy and the
ghosts that people said haunted his house.
The aqua vit made you talkative as well as
valiant, Arnold, interrupted the Proprietary.
I will not say that, replied the ranger; but
something put it into our heads to go down the bank
and ride round the chapel. At first all was as quiet
as if it had been our church here of St. Mary's
except that our horses snorted and reared with fright
at something we could not see. The wind was
blowing
,
and the waves were beating on the shore,and
suddenly we began to grow cold; and then, all at
once, there came a rumbling noise inside of the
house like the rolling of a hogshead full of pebbles,
and afterwards little flashes of light through the
windows
,
and the sergeant said he heard clanking chains
and groans:it is n't worth while to hide it from
your lordship, but the serjeant ran away like a
coward, and I followed him like another, Lord
Charles.Since that night I have not been near the
Black house.We have an old saying in my
country
`een
gebrande kat vreest het koude water'
the scalded cat keeps clear of cold waterha, I
mind the proverb.
It is not long ago, said Dauntrees, perhaps
not above two years,when, they say, the old
sundried
timber of the building turned suddenly black.
It was the work of a single nightyour Lordship
shall find it so now.
I can witness the truth of it, said Arnoldthe
house was never black until that night, and now it
looks as if it was scorched with lightning from roof
to ground sill. And yet, lightning could never leave
it so black without burning it to the ground.
There is some trickery in this, said the
Proprietary
.
It may scarce be accounted for on any
pretence of witchcraft, or sorcery, although I know
there are malignant influences at work in the
province
which find motive enough to do all the harm
they can. Has Fendall, or any of his confederates
had commerce with this house, Captain Dauntrees?
Can you suspect such intercourse?
Assuredly not, my Lord, replied the Captain,
for Marshall, who is the most insolent of that
faction
,
hath, to my personal knowledge, the greatest
dread of the chapel of all other men I have seen.
Besides, these terrors have flourished in the
winter-night
tales of the neighbourhood, ever since the
death of Kelpy, and long before the Fendalls grew
so pestilent in the province.
It is the blood of the fisherman, my good Lord,
and of his wife and children that stains the floor,
said Arnold; it is that blood which brings the evil
spirits together about the old hearth. Twice every
day the blood-spots upon the floor freshen and grow
strong, as the tide comes to flood;at the ebb they
may be hardly seen.
You have witnessed this yourself, Arnold?
At the ebb, Lord Charles. I did not stay for the
change of tide. When I saw the spots it was as
much as we could do to make them out.But at the
flood every body says they are plain.
It is a weighty matter, a very weighty matter,
an it like your Lordship's honour, muttered forth the
slim voice of Garret Weasel, who had insinuated
himself, by slow approach, into the rear of the
company
,
near enough to hear a part of this
conversation
,
and who now fancied that his interest in the
subject would ensure him an unrebuked access to the
Proprietaryand your Lordship hath a worthy care
for the fears of the poor people touching the
abominations
of the Wizard's Chapel.
What brought thee here, Garret Weasel?
inquired
Vol. I.6
the Proprietary, as he turned suddenly upon
the publican and looked him steadfastly in the face
What wonder hast thou to tell to excuse thy
lurking
at our heels?
Much and manifold, our most noble Lord,
touching
the rumours, replied the confused innkeeper,
with a thick utterance. And it is the most
notable
thing about it that Robert SwaleRob o' the
Trencher, as he is commonly calledyour Lordship
apprehends I mean the Cripplethat Rob lives so
near the Wizard's Chapel. There's matter of
consideration
in thatif your Lordship will weigh it.
Fie, Master Garret Weasel! Fie on thee! Thou
art in thy cups. I grieve to see thee making a beast
of thyself. You had a name for sobriety. Look
that you lose it not again. Captain Dauntrees if the
publican has been your guest this evening, you are
scarce free of blame for this.
He has a shallow head, my Lord, and it is more
easily sounded than I guessed. Arnold, said
Dauntrees
apartpersuade the innkeeper home.
The ranger took Garret's arm, and expostulating
with him as he led him away, dismissed him at the
gate with an admonition to bear himself discreetly
in the presence of his wife,a hint which seemed to
have a salutary effect, as the landlord was seen
shaping his course with an improved carriage
towards
the town.
Have you reason to believe, Captain Dauntrees,
said the Proprietary, after Weasel had departed;
that the Cripple gives credit to these tales. He
lives near this troubled house?
Not above a gunshot off, my Lord. He cannot
but be witness to these marvels. But he is a man of
harsh words, and lives to himself. There is matter
in his own life, I should guess, which leaves but little
will to censure these doings. To a certainty he has
no fear of what may dwell in the Black building.
I have seldom spoken with him.
Your report and Arnold's, said the Proprietary,
confirm the common rumour. I have heard to-day,
that two nights past some such phantoms as you
speak of have been seen, and deemed it at first a
mere gossip's wonder;but what you tell gives a
graver complexion of truth to these whisperings. Be
there demons or jugglers amongst usand I have
reason to suspect boththis matter must be sifted.
I would have the inquiry made by men who are not
moved by the vulgar love of marvel. This duty
shall be yours, friends. Make suitable preparation,
Captain, to discharge it at your earliest leisure. I
would have you and Arnold, with such discreet
friends as you may select, visit this spot at night and
observe the doings there. Look that you keep your
own counsel:we have enemies of flesh and blood
that may be more dreaded than these phantoms. So,
God speed you friends!
The man who purges the Black House of the
fiend, so please you, my Lord, said Dauntrees,
should possess more odour of sanctity than I doubt
will be found under our soldier's jerkins. I shall
nevertheless execute your Lordship's orders to the
letter.
Hark you, Captain, said the Proprietary, as his
visiters were about to take their leaveif you have
a scruple in this matter and are so inclined, I would
have you confer with Father Pierre. Whether this
adventure require prayer, or weapon of steel, you
shall judge for yourself.
I shall take it, my Lord, as a point of soldiership,
said Dauntrees, to be dealt with, in soldierly
fashion
that
is, with round blows if occasion serves. I
ask no aid from our good priest. He hath a trick
if I may be so bold as to speak it before your
Lord-ship
which
doth not so well sort with my age and
bodily health,a trick, my Lord, of putting one
to a fasting penance by way of purification. Our
purpose of visiting the Black House would be
unseasonably
delayed by such a purgation.
As thou wiltas thou wilt! said the
Proprietary
,
laughing; Father Pierre would have but an
idle sinecure, if he had no other calling but to bring
thee to thy penitentiary.Good even, friends,may
the kind saints be with you!
The Captain and his comrade now turned their
steps toward the fort, and the Proprietary retired
into the mansion. Here he found the secretary and
Benedict Leonard waiting his arrival. They had
just returned from the town, whither they had gone
after doing their errand to the fort. Albert
Verheyden
bore a packet secured with silken strings and
sealed, which he delivered to the Proprietary.
Dick Pagan, the courier, he said, has just
come in from James Town in Virginia, whence he
set forth but four days agohe has had a hard ride
of itand brought this pacquet to the sheriff for my
Lord. The courier reports that a ship had just arrived
from England, and that Sir Henry Chichely the
governor
gave him this for your Lordship to be
delivered
without delay.
The Proprietary took the pacquet: Albert, he
said, as he was about to withdraw, I have
promised
the old ranger, Arnold de la Grane, a new
cap. Look to it:get him the best that you may find
in the townor, perhaps, it would better content him
to have one made express by Cony the leather
dresser. Let it be as it may best please the veteran
himself, good Albert. With this considerate
remembrance
of the ranger, Lord Baltimore withdrew
into his study.
6*
CHAPTER V.
deep on his front engraven,
Deliberation sat, and public care.
Milton
.
Lend me thy lantern quoth a? Marry I'll see thee hanged
first.
Shakspeare
.
A small
fire blazed on the hearth of the study and
mingled its light with that of a silver cresset, which
hung from the ceiling above a table furnished with
writing materials and strewed over with papers.
Here the Proprietary sat intent upon the perusal of
the pacquet. Its contents disquieted him; and with
increasing solicitude he again and again read over
the letters.
At length the secretary was summoned into his
presence. Albert, he said, the council must be
called together to-morrow at noon. The messengers
should be despatched to-night; they have a dark road
and far to ride. Let them be ready with the least
delay.
The secretary bowed and went forth to execute
his order.
The letters brought the Proprietary a fresh
importation
of troubles. That which most disturbed him
was from the Board of Trade and Plantations, and
spoke authoritatively of the growing displeasure of
the ministry at the exclusiveness, as it was termed,
of the Proprietary's favours, in the administration of
his government, to the Catholic inhabitants of the
province; it hinted at the popular and probably
well-founded
discontentto use its own phraseof his
Majesty's Protestant subjects against the too liberal
indulgence shown to the Papists; repeated stale
charges and exploded calumnies against the
Proprietary
,
with an earnestness that showed how
sedulously
his enemies had taken advantage of the disfavour
into which the Church of Rome and its advocates
had fallen since the Restoration; and concluded with
a peremptory intimation of the royal pleasure that all
the offices of the province should be immediately
transferred into the hands of the Church of England
party.
This was a blow at Lord Baltimore which scarcely
took him by surprise. His late visit to England had
convinced him that not all the personal partiality of
the monarch for his familyand this was rendered
conspicuous in more than one act of favour at a time
when the Catholic lords were brought under the ban
of popular odiumwould be able finally to shelter
the province from that religious proscription which
already was rife in the mother land. He was not,
therefore, altogether unprepared to expect this
assault
.
The mandate was specially harsh in
reference
to the Proprietary, first because it was untrue
that he had ever recognised the difference of
religious
opinion in his appointments, but on the contrary
had conferred office indiscriminately in strict and
faithful accordance with the fundamental principle
of toleration upon which his government was
founded
;
and secondly, because it would bear with pointed
injustice upon some of his nearest and most devoted
friendshis uncle the chancellor, the whole of his
council, and, above all others in whose welfare he
took an interest, upon the collector of the port of St.
Mary's, Anthony Warden, an old inhabitant of the
province, endeared to the Proprietaryand indeed
to all his fellow-burgessesby long friendship and
tried fidelity. What rendered it the more grating to
the feelings of the Proprietary in this instance, was
that the collectorship had already been singled out as
a prize to be played for by that faction which had
created the late disturbances in the province. It was
known that Coode had set his eyes upon this lure, and
gloated upon it with the gaze of a serpent. The
emoluments of the post were something considerable,
and its importance was increased by the influence it
was supposed to confer on the incumbent, as a person
of weight and consequence in the town.
The first expression of irritation which the persual
of the pacquet brought to the lips of the Proprietary
had a reference to the collector. They would have
me, he said, as he rose and strode through the
apartment, discard from my service, the very
approved
friends with whom in my severest toils, in this
wilderness, I have for so many years buffeted side
by side, and to whom I am most indebted for
support
and encouragement amidst the thousand
disasters
of my enterprise. They would have me turn
adrift, without a moment's warning, and even with
circumstances of disgrace, that tried pattern of
honesty
,
old Anthony Warden. Virtue, in her best estate,
hath but a step-daughter's portion in the division of
this world's goods, and often goes begging, when
varnished knavery carries a high head and proud
heart, and lords it like a very king. By the blessed
light! old Anthony shall not budge on my motion.
Am I to be schooled in my duty by rapacious
malcontents
,
and to be driven to put away my trustiest
friends, to make room for such thirsty leeches and
coarse rufflers as John Coode? The argument is,
that here, in what my father would have made a
peaceful, contented land, planted by him and the
brothers of his faith,with the kindest, best and most
endeared supporters of that faith by my side
worthy
men, earnest and zealous to do their dutythey
and their children true to every christian precept
men who have won a home by valour and patient,
wise endurancethey must all be disfranchised, as
not trustworthy even for the meanest office, and give
their places to brawlers, vapouring bullies and
factious
stirrers-up of discordand that too in the name
of religion! Oh, this viper of intolerance, how hath
it crept in and defiled the garden! One would have
thought this world were wide enough to give the
baser passions elbow room, without rendering our
little secluded nook a theatre for the struggle. Come
what may, Anthony Warden shall not lack the
collectorship
whilst a shred of my prerogative remains
untorn!
In this strain of feeling the Proprietary continued
to chafe his spirit, until the necessity of preparing the
letters which were to urge the attendance of his
council, drew him from his fretful reverie into a
calmer tone of mind.
In the servants' hall there was an unusual stir
occasioned
by the preparations which were in train for
the outriding of the messengers whom the secretary
had put in requisition for the service of the night.
The first of these was Derrick Brown, a man of
stout mould though somewhat advanced in years.
He held in the establishment what might be termed
the double post of master of the mews and keeper of
the fox hounds, being principal falconer and
huntsman
of the household. The second was a short,
plump little fellow, bearing the name of John Alward,
who was one of the grooms of the stable. These
two, now ready booted, belted and spurred, were
seated on a bench, discussing a luncheon, with the
supplement of a large jack or tankard of brown
bastard
.
Several of the other domestics loitered in the
hall, throwing in occasionally a word of advice to
the riders, or giving them unsolicited aid in the
carnal
occupation of bodily reinforcement to which they
were devoting themselves with the lusty vigour of
practised trenchermen. Leaning against the jamb
of the ample fireplace, immediately below a lamp
which tipped the prominent points of his grave visage
with a sharp light, stood an old Indian, of massive
figure and swarthy hue, named Pamesack, or, as he
was called in the English translation of the Indian
word, The Knife. This personage had been, for
some years past, at intervals, a privileged inmate of
the Proprietary's family, and was now, though
consigned
to a portion of the duties of the evening,
apparently an unconcerned spectator of the scene
around him. He smoked his pipe in silence, or if he
spoke, it was seldom more than in the short
monosyllable
,
characteristic of the incommunicative habits
of his tribe.
When I saw Dick Pagan, the James Town
courier
,
coming into town this evening with his leather
pouch slung across his shoulder, said the elder of
the riders, I guessed as much as that there would
be matter for the council. News from that quarter
now-a-days is apt to bring business for their
worships
.
I warrant you the brother of Master Fendall
hath been contriving an outcome in Virginia. I heard
John Rye, the miller of St. Clements, say last Sunday
afternoon, that Samuel Fendall had forty mounted
men ready in the forest to do his bidding with
broadsword
and carbine. And he would have done it too,
if my Lord had not laid him by the heels at unawares.
He hath a savage spite against my Lord and the
chancellor both.
But knew ye ever the like before, said John
Alward
,
that his lordship should be in such haste to
see their worships, he must needs have us
tramping
over the country at midnight? By the virtue of
my belt, there must be a hot flavour in the news! It
was a post haste letter.
Tush, copperface! What have you to do with
the flavour of the news? The virtue of thy belt,
indeed
!
Precious little virtue is there within its
compass
,
ha, ha! You have little to complain of, John
Alward, for a midnight tramp. It is scant twelve
miles from this to Mattapany, and thine errand is
done. Thou mayst be snoozing on a good truss of
hay in Master Sewall's stable before midnight, if you
make speed. Think of my ride all the way to Notley
Hall,and round about by the head of the river too
for I doubt if I have any chance to get a cast over
the ferry to-night. Simon the boat-keeper is not
often sober at this hour: and if he was, a crustier
churlthe devil warm his pillow!does n't live
'twixt this and the old world. He gets out of his
sleep for no man.
But it is a dark road mine, replied the groom.
A plague upon it! I have no stomach for this bush
and brier work, when a man can see the limb of a
tree no more than a cobweb.
A dark road! exclaimed the master of the
kennels
,
laughing. A dark road, John! It is a long
time, I trow, since there has been a dark road for
thy night rides, with that nose shining like a lighted
link a half score paces around thee. It was
somewhat
deadened last September, I allow, when you
had the marsh ague, and the doctor fed you for a
week on gruelbut it hath waxed lately as bright as
ever. I wish I could buckle it to my head-strap until
to-morrow morning.
A burst of laughter, at this sally, which rang
through the hall, testified the effect of the falconer's
wit and brought the groom to his feet.
'S blood, you grinning fools! he ejaculated,
have n't you heard Derrick's joke a thousand times
before, that you must toss up your scurvy ha-haws
at it, as if it was new! He stole itas the whole
hundred knowsfrom the fat captain, old Dauntrees
in the fort there; who would have got it back upon
hue and cry, if it had been his own;but the truth
is, the Captain filched it from a play-book, as the
surveyor
told him in my hearing at Garret Weasel's,
where the Captain must needs have it for a laughing
matter.
It is a joke that burns fresh every night, replied
Derrick; a thing to make light of. So, up with the
bottom of the pot, boy, and feed it with mother's
milk: it will stand thee in stead to-night. Well done,
John Alward! I can commend thee for taking a jest
as well as another.
Master Derrick, said the other, this is not the
way to do his Lordship's bidding: if we must go, we
should be jogging now. I would I had thy ride to
take, instead of my own,short as you think it.
Ha, say you that! By the rochet, John, you
shall have it, an it please Master Secretary! But
upon one condition.
Upon what condition?
That you tell me honestly why you would choose
Vol I.7
to ride twenty miles to Notley rather than twelve to
Mattapany.
Good Derrick, answered the groom, it is but
as a matter of horsemanship. You have a broader
road, and mine is a path much beset with
brushwood
.
I like not the peril of being unhorsed?
There is a lie in thy face, John Alward;the
Mattapany road is the broadest and best of the two
is it not so, Pamesack?
It is the first that was opened by the white man,
replied the Indian; and more people pass upon it
than the other.
John, said the falconer, you are a coward. I
will not put you to the inventing another lie, but will
wager I can tell you at one guess why you would
change with me.
Out with it, Master Derrick! exclaimed the
bystanders
.
Oh, out with it! repeated John Alward; I heed
not thy gibes.
You fear the cross road, said the falconer; you
will not pass the fisherman's grave.
In troth, mastersI must needs own, replied the
groom, that I have qualms. I never was ashamed
to tell the truth, and confess that I am so much of a
sinner as to feel an honest fear of the devil and
his doings. I have known a horse to start and a
rider to be flung at the cross road before now:
there are times in the night when both horse and
rider may see what it turns one's blood into ice to
look at. Nay, I am in earnest, masters:I jest not.
Thou hast honestly confessed, like a brave man,
that thou art a coward, John Alward; and so it shall
be a bargain between us. I will take your message.
I fear not Paul Kelpyhe has been down with that
stake through his body, ever too fast to walk abroad.
There's my hand to it, said the groom, and
thanks to boot. I am no coward, Derrick,but have
an infirmity which will not endure to look by night
in the lonesome woods, upon a spirit which walks
with a great shaft through it. Willy of the Flats
saw it, in that fashion, as he went home from the
Viewer's feast on the eve of St. Agnes.
Willy had seen too much of the Viewer's hollands
that night, said Derrick; and they are spirits worth
a dozen Paul Kelpys, even if the whole dozen were
trussed upon the same stake, like herrings hung up
to smoke. In spite of the fisherman and his bolt, I
warrant you I pass unchallenged betwixt this and
Mattapany.
The secretary, soon after this, entered the hall and
confirmed the arrangements which had just been
made. He accordingly delivered the letters intended
for Colonel Talbot and Nicholas Sewall to the
falconer
,
and that for Mr. Notley, the late lieutenant
general of the province, to John Alward. To the
Indian was committed the duty of bearing the
missions
to such members of the council as resided either
in the town or within a few miles of it. Holding it
matter of indifference whether he despatched this
duty by night or by day, the Knife took it in hand
at once, and set forth, on foot, with a letter for
Colonel Digges, who lived about five miles off, at
the same time that the other two couriers mounted
their horses for their lonesome journeys through the
forest.
CHAPTER VI.
If we should wait till you, in solemn council
With due deliberation had selected
The smallest out of four and twenty evils,
'I faith we should wait long.
Dash and through with itthat's the better watchword,
Then after, come what may come.
Piccolomini
.
On
the following day, the council, consisting of
some four or five gentlemen, were assembled at the
Proprietary Mansion. About noon their number was
rendered complete, by the arrival of Colonel George
Talbot, who, mounted on a spirited, milk-white steed
that smoked with the hot vigour of his motion, dashed
through the gate and alighted at the door. A pair
of pistols across his saddle-bow, and a poniard,
partially disclosed under his vest, demonstrated the
precautions of the possessor to defend himself against
sudden assault, and no less denoted the quarrelsome
aspect of the times. His frame was tall, athletic, and
graceful; his eye hawk-like, and his features
prominent
and handsome, at the same time indicative of
quick temper and rash resolve. There was in his
dress a manifestation of the consciousness of a good
figureit was the costume of a gallant of the times;
7 *
and his bearing was characteristic of a person
accustomed
to bold action and gay companionship.
Talbot was a near kinsman of the Baltimore
family
,
and besides being a member of the Proprietary's
council, he held the post of Surveyor General, and
commanded, also, the provincial militia on the
northern
frontier, including the settlements on the Elk
River, where he owned a large manor, upon which
he usually resided. At the present time he was in
the temporary occupation of a favourite seat of the
Proprietary, at Mattapany on the Patuxent, whither
the late summons had been despatched to call him to
the council.
This gentleman was a zealous Catholic, and an
ardent personal friend of his kinsman, the
Proprietary
,
whose cause he advocated with that peremptory
and, most usually, impolitic determination which his
imperious nature prompted, and which served to
draw upon him the peculiar hatred of Fendall and
Coode, and their partisans. He was thus, although
a sincere, it may be imagined, an indiscreet adviser
in state affairs, little qualified to subdue or allay that
jealous spirit of proscription which, from the epoch of
the Protectorate down to this date, had been growing
more intractable in the province.
Such was the individual who now with the firm
stride and dauntless carriage of a belted and booted
knight of chivalry, to which his picturesque costume
heightened the resemblance, entered the apartment
where his seniors were already convened.
Well met! he exclaimed, as he flung his hat and
gloves upon a table and extended his hand to those
who were nearest him. How fares it, gentlemen?
What devil of mutiny is abroad now? Has that
pimpled
fellow of fustian, that swiller of the leavings of
a tap room, the worshipful king of the Burgesses,
master Jack Coode, got drunk again and begun to
bully in his cups? The falconer who hammered at
my door last night, as if he would have beaten your
Lordship's house about my ears, could tell me nothing
of the cause of this sudden convocation, save that
Driving Dick had come in hot haste from James
Town with letters that had set the mansion here all
agog, from his Lordship's closet down to the
scullery
.
With proper abatement for the falconer's love of
gossip, said the Proprietary, he told you true.
The letters are there on the table. When you have
read them, you will see that with good reason I
might make some commotion in my house.
Talbot ran his eye over the papers. Well, and
wellan old story! he said, as he threw one letter
aside and took up another. Antichristthe Red
Lady of Babylonthe Jesuitsand the devil: we
have had it so often that the lecture is somewhat
stale. The truculent Papists are the authors of all
evil! We had the Geneva band in fashion for a time;
but that wore out with old Noll. And then comes
another flight of kestrels, and we must have the
thirty-nine articles served up for a daily dish. That
spider, Master Yeo, has grown to be a crony of his
grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, and is busy to
knit his web around every poor catholic fly of the
province.
This must be managed without temper, said
Darnall, the oldest member present, except the
Chancellor
.
Our adversaries will find their advantage
in our resolves, if made in the heat of passion.
You say true, replied Talbot. I am a fool in
my humour; but it doth move me to the last
extremity
of endurance to be ever goaded with this shallow
and hypocritical pretence of sanctity. They prate
of the wickedness of the province, forsooth! our evil
deportment, and loose living, and notorious scandal!
all will be cured, in the opinion of these solemn
Pharisees
,
by turning that good man, Lord Charles and
his friends out of his own province, and by setting
up parson Yeo in a fat benefice under the wing of an
established church.
Read on, said Lord Baltimore, and you shall
see the sum of all, in the argument that it is not fit
Papists should bear rule over the free-born subjects
of the English crown; and, as a conclusion to that, a
summary order to discharge every friend of our holy
church from my employ.
Talbot read the letter to the end.
So be it! he ejaculated, as he threw the letter
from him, and flung himself back into his chair.
You will obey this high behest? With all
humbleness
,
we will thank these knaves for their many
condescensions
,
and their good favours. Your uncle,
the Chancellor here, our old frosted comrade, is the
first that your Lordship will give bare-headed to the
sky. As for myself, I have been voted an incarnate
devil in a half dozen conclavesand so Fendall shall
be the surveyor. I hope your Lordship will
remember
that I have a military commanda sturdy
strong-hold
in the fort of Christinaand some stout fellows
with me on the border. It might be hard to persuade
them to part company with me.
Peace, I pray you, peace! interrupted the
Proprietary
;
you are nettled, Talbot, and that is not
the mood for counsel.
These pious cut-throats here, said Talbot, who
talk of our degeneracy, slander us to the whole
world: and, faith, I am not of the mind to bear it! I
speak plainly what I have thought long sinceand
would rather do than speak. I would arrest the
ring-leaders
upon a smaller scruple of proof than I would
set a vagrant in the stocks. You have Fendall now,
my LordI would have his fellows before long: and
the space between taking and trying should not add
much to the length of their beards:between trying
and hanging, still less.
As to that, said the Proprietary, every day
brings us fresh testimony of the sedition afoot, and
we shall not be slow to do justice on the parties. We
have good information of the extent of the plot against
us, and but wait until an open act shall make their
guilt unquestionable. Master Coode is now upon bail
only because we were somewhat too hasty in his
arrest. There are associates of Fendall's at work
who little dream of our acquaintance with their
designs
.
When does your provincial court hold its
sessions
?
inquired the Surveyor.
In less than a month.
It should make sure work and speedy, said
Talbot
.
Master Fendall should find himself at the end
of his tether at the first sitting.
Ay, and Coode too, said one of the council:
notwithstanding that the burgesses have stepped
forward to protect him. The House guessed well of
the temper against your Lordship in England, when
they stood up so hardily, last month, in favour of
Captain Coode, after your Lordship had commanded
his expulsion. It was an unnatural contumacy.
In truth, we have never had peace in the
province
,
said another, since Fendall was allowed to
return from his banishment. That man hath set on
hotter, but not subtler spirits than his own. He has
a quiet craftiness which never sleeps nor loses sight
of his purpose of disturbance.
Alas! said the Proprietary, he has not lacked
material to work with. The burgesses have been
disaffected ever since my father's death. I know not
in what point of kindness I have erred towards them.
God knows I would cherish affection, not ill-will.
My aim has ever been to do justice to all men.
Justice is not their aim, my Lord, exclaimed
Talbot. Oh, this zeal for church is a pretty weapon!
and honest Captain Coode, a dainty champion to
handle it! I would cut the spurs from that fowl, if I
did it with a cleaver!
He is but the fool in the hands of his betters,
interposed Darnall. This discontent has a broad
base. There are many in the province who, if they
will not take an open part against us, will be slow to
rebuke an outbreakmany who will counsel in
secret
who dare not show their faces to the sun.
These men have power to do us much harm,
said Lord Baltimore; and I would entreat you,
gentlemen, consider, how, by concession to a
moderate
point, which may comport with our honour, we
may allay these irritations. Leaving that question
for your future advisement, I ask your attention to
the letters. The King has commandedfor it is
scarce less than a royal mandate.
Your Lordship, said Talbot, sarcastically, has
fallen under his Majesty's disfavour. You have,
doubtless, failed somewhat in your courtesies to Nell
Gwynn, or the gay Duchess; or have been
wanting
in some observance of respect to old Tom
Killigrew
,
the King's fool. His Majesty is not wont to
look so narrowly into state affairs.
Hold, Talbot! interrupted the Proprietary. I
would not hear you speak slightingly of the King.
He hath been friendly to me, and I will not forget it.
Though this mandate come in his name, King Charles,
I apprehend, knows but little of the matter. He has
an easy conscience for an importunate suitor. Oh,
it grieves me to the heart, after all my father's care
for the provinceand surely mine has been no less
it grieves me to see this wayward fortune coming
over our hopes like a chill winter, when we looked
for springtide, with its happy and cheerful promises.
I am not to be envied for my prerogative. Here, in
this new world, I have made my bed, where I had no
wish but to lie in it quietly: it has become a bed of
thorns, and cannot bring rest to me, until I am
mingled
with its dust. Well, since rebellion is the order
of the times, I must e'en myself turn rebel now against
this order.
Wherein might it be obeyed, my Lord? asked
Darnall. You have already given all the rights of
conscience which the freemen could ask, and the
demand now is that you surrender your own. What
servant would your Lordship displace? Look around
you: is Anthony Warden so incapable, or so hurtful
to your service that you might find plea to dismiss
him?
There is no better man in the province than
Anthony Warden, replied the Proprietary, with
warmth; a just man; a good man in whatever duty
you scan him; an upright, faithful servant to his post.
My Lords of the Ministry would not and could not,
if they knew him, ask me to remove that man. I will
write letters back to remonstrate against this
injustice
.
And say you will not displace a man, my Lord,
come what may! exclaimed Talbot. This battle
must be foughtand the sooner the better! Your
Lordship will find your justification in the unanimous
resolve of your council.
This sentiment was echoed by all present, and
by some of the more discreet an admonition was
added, advising the Proprietary to handle the subject
mildly with the ministry, in a tone of kind
expostulation
,
which, as it accorded with Lord Baltimore's
own feeling, met his ready acquiescence.
After despatching some business of less concern,
the members of the council dispersed.
Vol. I.8
CHAPTER VII.
An old worshipful gentleman who had a great estate,
That kept a brave old house at a bountiful rate.
The Old and Young Courtier
.
But who the countless charms can draw
That grac'd his mistress true?
Such charms the old world seldom saw,
Nor oft, I ween, the new.
Her raven hair plays round her neck
Like tendrils of the vine;
Her cheeks, red, dewy rose-buds deck,
Her eyes like diamonds shine.
Bryan and Pereene
.
Anthony Warden
had resided in Maryland for
forty years before the period of this story. During
the greater portion of this time he performed the
duties of the Collector of the Proprietary's revenues
in the port. By the persuasion of Cecilius Calvert
he had become a settler in the New World, where
he had received from his patron the grant of a large
tract of land, which, in progress of time, under a
careful course of husbandry, rendered him a man of
easy fortune. One portion of this tract lay adjacent
to the town, and stretched along the creek of St.
Inigoe's, constituting an excellent farm of several
hundred acres. Upon this land the Collector had
dwelt from an early period of his settlement.
A certain sturdiness of character that matched the
perils of that adventurous colonial life, and a
vigorous
intellect, gave Mr. Warden great authority over
the inhabitants of the province, which was increased
by the predominant honesty of purpose and plain,
unpretending directness of his nature. A bountiful
purse and jocund temper enabled and prompted him
to indulge, almost without stint, that hospitality which
furnishes the most natural and appropriate enjoyment
of those who dwell remote from the busy marts of
the world. His companionable habits had left their
tokens upon his exterior. His frame was corpulent,
his features strongly defined, his eye dark blue, with
a mastiff kindness in its glance. The flush of
generous
living had slightly overmastered the
wind-and-weather
hue of his complexion, and given it the tints
of a ripe pear. Seventy years had beaten upon his
poll without other badge of conquest than that of a
change of his brown locks to white;their volume
was scarcely diminished, and they still fell in curls
upon his shoulders.
Two marriages had brought him a large family of
children, of whom the eldest (the only offspring of
his first nuptials) was Alice Warden, a maiden lady
who now, well advanced in life, occupied the highest
post of authority in the household, which had, for
several years past, been transferred to her by the
demise of the second wife. His sons had all
abandoned
the paternal roof in the various pursuits of
fortune, leaving behind them, besides Mistress Alice,
a sister, the youngest of the flock, who, at the epoch
at which I am about to present her, was just verging
towards womanhood.
The dwelling of the Collector stood upon the high
bank formed by the union of St. Inigoe's creek and
St. Mary's river. It was, according to the most
approved
fashion of that day, built of imported brick,
with a double roof penetrated by narrow and
triangular-capped
windows. The rooms were large and
embellished with carved wainscots and a profusion of
chiseled woodwork, giving them an elaborate and
expensive aspect. This main building overlooked,
with a magisterial and protecting air, a group of
single-storied offices and out-houses which were
clustered
around, one of which was appropriated by the
Collector as his place of business, and may still be
seen with its decayed book-shelves, a deserted ruin
hard by the mansion which yet survives in tolerable
repair. This spacious domicil, with its broad porch,
cottage-like appendages and latticed sheds, was
embosomed
in the shade of elms and mulberries, whose
brown foliage, fanned by the autumnal breeze,
murmured
in unison with the plashing tide that beat
against the pebbles immediately below. A garden in
the rear, with trellised and vine-clad gateways, and
walks lined with box, which the traveller may
yet behold in venerable luxuriance, furnished good
store of culinary dainties; whilst a lawn, in front,
occupying some two or three acres and bounded by
the cliff which formed the headland on the river, lay
open to the sun, and gave from the water an
unobstructed
view of the mansion. The taste displayed
in these embellishments, the neatness of the grounds,
the low, flower-spangled hedge of thorn that guarded
the cliff, the clumps of rose trees and other
ornamental
shrubs, disposed to gratify the eye in the
shifting seasons of their bloom, the various
accessories
of rustic seats, bowers and parterresall united
to present an agreeable and infallible index of that
purity of mind which brought into assemblage such
simple and attractive elements of beauty.
All around the immediate domain of the
dwelling-house
were orchards, woodlands and cultivated fields,
with the usual barns and other structures necessary
in the process of agriculture;the whole region
presenting
a level plain, some fifty or sixty feet above
the tide, of singular richness as a landscape, and no
less agreeable to be looked upon for its associations
with the idea of comfortable independence in the
proprietor. This homestead had obtained the local
designation of the Rose Croft,a name, in some
degree
,
descriptive of the predominant embellishment
of the spot.
In his attire, Master Anthony Warden, the
worshipful
Collector (to give him his usual style of
address
in the province) exhibited some tendency
towards
the coxcombry of his day. It was marked by
that scrupulous observance of the prerogative of rank
8*
and age which characterised the costume of the olden
time,smacking no little of the flavour of the official
martinet. Authority, amongst our ancestors, was
wont to borrow consequence from show. The broad
line which separated gentle from simple was
recognised
,
in those days, not less strongly in the
habiliments
of the person than in his nurture and manners.
The divisions between the classes of society were not
more authentically distinguished in any outward sign
than in the embroidered velvet or cloth of the man of
wealth, and the plain serge, worsted, or leather of the
craftsman. The Collector of St. Mary's, on festive
occasions, went forth arrayed much after the manner
in which Leslie has represented Sir Roger de
Coverly
,
in his admirable painting of that knight; and
although
he was too vain of his natural locks to adopt
the periwig of that period, yet he had trained his
luxuriant tresses into a studied imitation of this
artificial
adornment. His embroidered coat of drab
velvet
,
with wadded skirts and huge open cuffs, his lace
wristbands, his ample vest, and white lamb's-wool
hose rolled above his knees, his buckled shoe and
three-cornered hatall adjusted with a particularity
that would put our modern foppery to shamegave
to the worthy burgess of St. Mary's a substantial
ascendancy and an unquestioned regard, that
rendered
him, next to the Proprietary, the most worshipful
personage in the province.
This pedantry of costume and the circumspect
carriage which it exacted, were pleasantly
contrasted
with the flowing vivacity of the wearer,
engendering
by their concourse an amusing compound,
which I might call a fettered and pinioned alacrity
of demeanour, the rigid stateliness of exterior
seeming
rather ineffectually to encase, as a half-bursting
chrysalis, the wings of a gay nature.
Mr. Warden was reputed to be stubborn in opinion.
The good people of the town, aware of his
pertinacity
in this particular, had no mind to make points
with him, but, on the contrary, rather corroborated
him in his dogmatism by an amiable assentation; so
that, it is said, he grew daily more peremptory. This
had become so much his prerogative, that the Lord
Proprietary himself gave way to it with as good a
grace as the rest of the inhabitants.
It may be imagined that so general a submission
to this temper would have the tendency to render
him a little passionate. They say it was a rich sight
to see him in one of his flashes, which always took
the bystanders by surprise, like thunder in the midst
of sunshine; but these explosions were always
short-lived
,
and rather left a more wholesome and genial
clearness in the atmosphere of his affections.
The household at the Rose Croft, I have hinted,
was regulated by Mistress Alice, who had, some
time before our acquaintance with her, reached that
period of life at which the female ambition for display
is prone to subside into a love of domestic pursuits.
It was now her chief worldly care and delight to
promote
the comfort of those who congregated around
the family hearth. In the administration of this office,
it may be told to her praise, that she manifested that
unpretending good sense which is a much more rare
and estimable quality than many others of better
acceptation
with the world. As was natural to her
tranquil position and kindly temper, her feelings had
taken a ply towards devotion, which father Pierre
did not omit to encourage and confirm by all the
persuasions
enjoined by the discipline of the Romish
church. The gentle solicitude with which the
ministers
of that ancient faith watch and assist the
growing
zeal of its votaries; the captivation of its
venerable
ceremonies, and the familiar and endearing tone
in which it addresses itself to the regard of its
children
,
sufficiently account for its sway over so large
a portion of mankind, and especially for its hold upon
the affections of the female breast.
Upon the thoughtful character of Alice Warden
this influence shed a mellow and attractive light, and
gave to the performance of her daily duties that
orderly
and uninterrupted cheerfulness which showed
the content of her spirit. She found an engrossing
labour of love in superintending the education of her
sister. Blanche Warden had now arrived within a
span of her eighteenth year. Alice had guarded her
path from infancy with a mother's tenderness,
ministering
to her enjoyments and instilling into her mind
all that her own attainments, circumscribed, it is
true, within a narrow circle, enabled her to teach.
The young favourite had grown up under this
domestic
nurture, aided by the valuable instructions of
father Pierre, who had the guidance of her studies,
a warm-hearted girl, accomplished much beyond
the scant acquisitions ordinarily, at that day, within
the reach of women, and distinguished for that
confiding
gentleness of heart and purity of thought and
word which the caresses of friends, the perception of
the domestic affections, and seclusion from the busy
world are likely to engender in an ardent and artless
nature.
Of the beauty of the Rose of St. Mary's (for so
contemporaries were wont to designate her)
tradition
speaks with a poetical fervour. I have heard it
said that Maryland, far-famed for lovely women, hath
not since had a fairer daughter. The beauty which
lives in expression was eminently her's; that beauty
which is scarcely to be caught by the painter,
which, changeful as the surface of the welling
fountain
where all the fresh images of nature are for ever
shifting and sparkling with the glories of the mirror,
defies the limner's skill. In stature she was neither
short nor tall, but distinguished by a form of
admirable
symmetry both for grace and activity. Her
features
,
it is scarce necessary to say, were regular,
but not absolutely so, for, I know not why, perfect
regularity is a hinderance to expression. Eyes of
dark hazle, with long lashes that gave, by turns, a
pensive and playful light to her face, serving, at will,
to curtain from the world the thoughts which
otherwise
would have been read by friend and foe; hair
of a rich brown, glossy and, in some lights, even like
the raven's wing,ample in volume and turning her
brow and shoulders almost into marble by the
contrast
;
a complexion of spotless, healthful white and
red; a light, elastic step, responding to the gaiety
of her heart; a voice melodious and clear,
gentle
in its tones and various in its modulation,
according
to the feeling it uttered;these constituted no
inconsiderable items in the inventory of her
perfections
.
Her spirit was blithe, affectionate and quick
in its sympathies; her ear credulous to believe what
was good, and slow to take an evil report. The
innocence
of her thoughts kindled an habitual light
upon her countenance, which was only dimmed when
the rough handling by fortune of friend or kinsman
was recounted to her, and brought forth the ready
tearfor that was ever as ready as her smile.
I might tell more of Blanche Warden, but that
my task compels me to hasten to the matter of my
story.
CHAPTER VIII.
The silk well could she twist and twine,
And make the fine march-pine,
And with the needle work:
And she could help the priest to say
His matins on a holiday
And sing a psalm in kirk.
Dowsabel
.
With
such attractions for old and young it will
readily be believed that the Rose Croft was a
favourite
resort of the inhabitants of St. Mary's. The
maidens gathered around Blanche as a May-day
queen; the matrons possessed in Mistress Alice a
discreet and kind friend, and the more sedate part of
the population found an agreeable host in the worthy
official himself.
The family of the Lord Proprietary sustained the
most intimate relations with this household. It is
true that Lady Baltimore, being feeble in health and
stricken with grief at the loss of her son, which yet
hung with scarcely abated poignancy upon her mind,
was seldom seen beyond her own threshold; but his
Lordship's sister, the Lady Mariaas she was
entitled
in the provincewas a frequent and ever most
welcome guest. Whether this good lady had the
advantage
of the Proprietary in years, would be an
impertinent as well as an unprofitable inquiry, since
no chronicler within my reach has thought fit to
instruct
the world on this point; and, if it were
determined
,
the fact could neither heighten nor diminish
the sober lustre of her virtues. Suffice it that she
was a stirring, tidy little woman, who moved about
with indefatigable zeal in the acquittal of the
manifold
duties which her large participation in the affairs
of the town exacted of herthe Lady Bountiful of
the province who visited the sick, fed the hungry,
clothed the naked and chid the idle. She especially
befriended such nursing-mothers as those whose
scanty livelihood withheld from them the necessary
comforts of their condition, and, in an equal degree,
extended her bounty to such of the colonists as had
been disabled in the military service of the province,
holding these two concerns of population and
defence
to be high state matters which her family
connexion
with the government most cogently
recommended
to her care. Though it is reported of her,
that a constitutional tendency towards a too profuse
distribution of nick-nacks and sweet-meats amongst
her invalids, gave great concern and embarrassment
to the physician of the town, and bred up between
him and the lady a somewhat stubborn, but
altogether
good-natured warfare. She was wont to look
in upon the provincial school-house, where, on stated
occasions, she gave the young train-bands rewards
for good conduct, and where she was also
diligent
to rebuke all vicious tendencies. In the early
morning she tripped through the dew, with
scrupulous
regularity, to mass; often superintended the
decorations of the chapel; gossiped with the
neighbours
after service, and, in short, kept her hands full
of business.
Her interest in the comfort and welfare of the
towns-people grew partly out of her temperament,
and partly out of a feudal pride that regarded them
as the liegemen of her brother the chief,a relation
which she considered as creating an obligation to
extend to them her countenance upon all proper
occasions
:
and, sooth to say, that countenance was
not perhaps the most comely in the province, being
somewhat sallow, but it was as full of benevolence
as became so exemplary a spirit. She watched
peculiarly
what might be called the under-growth, and
was very successful in worming herself into the
schemes and plans of the young people. Her
entertainments
at the mansion were frequent, and no less
acceptable to the gayer portion of the inhabitants
than they were to her brother. On these occasions
she held a little court, over which she presided with
an amiable despotism, and fully maintained the state
of the Lord Proprietary. By these means the Lady
Maria had attained to an over-shadowing popularity
in the town.
Blanche Warden had, from infancy, engaged her
deepest solicitude; and as she took to herself no small
share of the merit of that nurture by which her
Vol. I.9
favourite had grown in accomplishment, she felt, in
the maiden's praises which every where rang through
the province, an almost maternal delight. Scarcely
a day passed over without some manifestation of
this concern. New patterns of embroidery, music
brought by the last ship from
home
, some invitation
of friendship or letter of counsel, furnished
occasions
of daily intercourse between the patroness and
the maiden of the Rose Croft; and not unfrequently
the venerable spinster herself,attended by a familiar
in the shape of a little Indian girl, Natta, the daughter
of Pamesack, arrayed in the trinketry of her tribe
alighted from an ambling pony at the Collector's
door, with a face full of the importance of
business
.
Perchance, there might be an occasion of
merry-making in contemplation, and then the lady
Maria united in consultation with sister Alice
concerning
the details of the matter, and it was
debated
,
with the deliberation due to so interesting
a subject, whether Blanche should wear her black
or her crimson velvet boddice, her sarsnet or her
satin, and such other weighty matters as have not
yet lost their claims to thoughtful consideration on
similar emergencies.
In the frequent interchange of the offices of good
neighbourhood between the families of the
Proprietary
and of the Collector, it could scarce fall out
that the Secretary should not be a large participator.
The shyness of the student and the habitual
self-restraint
taught him in the seminary of Antwerp, in
some degree, screened from common observation
the ardent character of Albert Verheyden. The
deferential relation which he held to his patron threw
into his demeanour a reserve expressive of humility
rather than of diffidence; but under this there
breathed a temperament deeply poetical and a longing
for enterprise, that all the discipline of his school and
the constraint of his position could scarce suppress.
He was now at that time of life when the
imagination
is prone to dally with illusions; when youth,
not yet yoked to the harness of the world's business,
turns its spirit forth to seek adventure in the domain
of fancy. He was thus far a dreamer, and dreamed
of gorgeous scenes and bold exploits and rare
fortune
.
He had the poet's instinct to perceive the
beautiful, and his fancy hung it with richer garlands
and charmed him into a worshipper. A mute
worshipper
he was, of the Rose of St. Mary's, from the
first moment that he gazed upon her. That outward
form of Blanche Warden, and the motion and
impulses
of that spirit, might not often haunt the
Secretary's
dream without leaving behind an image that
should live for ever in his heart. To him the thought
was enchantment, that in this remote wild, far away
from the world's knowledge, a flower of such
surpassing
loveliness should drink the glorious light in
solitude,for so he, schooled in populous cities,
deemed of this sequestered province,and with this
thought came breathings of poetry which wrought a
transfiguration of the young votary and lifted him
out of the sphere of this working-day world. Day
after day, week after week, and month after month,
the Secretary watched the footsteps of the beautiful
girl; but still it was silent, unpresuming adoration.
It entered not into his mind to call it love: it was
the very humbleness of devotion.
Meantime the maiden, unconscious of her own
rare perfections and innocent of all thought of this
secret homage, found Master Albert much the most
accomplished and gentle youth she had ever seen.
He had, without her observing how it became so,
grown to be, in some relation or other, part and
parcel of her most familiar meditations. His
occasions
of business with the Collector brought
him so often to the Rose Croft that if they
happened
not every day, they were, at least,
incidents
of such common occurrence as to be noted
by no ceremonyindeed rather to be counted on
in the domestic routine. The Collector was apt
to grow restless if, by any chance, they were
suspended
,
as it was through the Secretary's mission
he received the tidings of the time as well as the
official commands of the Proprietary; whilst Albert's
unobtrusive manners, his soft step and pretensionless
familiarity with the household put no one out of the
way to give him welcome. His early roaming
in summer sometimes brought him, at sunrise,
beneath
the bank of the Rose Croft, where he
looked
,
with the admiration of an artist, upon the
calm waters of St. Inigoe's Creek, and upon the
forest that flung its solemn shades over its farther
shores. Not unfrequently, the fresh and blooming
maiden had left her couch as early as himself, and
tended her plants before the dew had left the leaves,
and thus it chanced that she would find him in his
vocation; and, like him, she took pleasure in gazing
on that bright scene, when it was the delight of both
to tell each other how beautiful it was. And when,
in winter, the rain pattered from the eaves and the
skies were dark, the Secretary, muffled in his cloak,
would find his road to the Collector's mansion and
help the maiden to while away the tedious time.
Even when lay the snow upon a level with the
hedge, the two long miles of unbeaten track did
not stop his visit, for the Secretary loved the
adventure
of such a journey; and Blanche often smiled to
see how manfully he endured it, and how light he
made of the snow-drift which the wind had
sometimes
heaped up into billows, behind which the
feather
of his bonnet might not be discovered while he
sat upon his horse.
In this course of schooling Blanche and Albert grew
into a near intimacy, and the maiden became
dependent
,
for some share of her happiness, upon the
Secretary without being aware. Master Albert had
an exquisite touch of the lute and a rich voice to
grace it, and Blanche found many occasions to tax
his skill: he had a gallant carriage on horseback,
and she needed the service of a cavalier: he was
expert in the provincial sport of hawking, and had
made such acquaintance with Blanche's merlin that
scarce any one else could assist the maiden in
casting
off Ariel to a flight. In short, Blanche followed
the bent of her own ingenuous and truthful nature,
9*
and did full justice to the Secretary's various
capacity
to please her, by putting his talents in requisition
with an unchidden freedom, and without once
pausing
to explore the cause why Master Albert always
came so opportunely to her thoughts. Doubtless, if
she had had the wit to make this inquiry the charm
of her liberty would have been broken, and a
sentinel
would, ever after, have checked the wandering
of her free footstep.
The Collector, in regard to this intercourse, was
sound asleep. His wise head was taken up with
the concerns of the province, his estate, and the
discussion of opinions that had little affinity to the
topics likely to interest the meditations of a young
maiden. He was not apt to see a love-affair, even if
it lay, like a fallen tree, across his path, much less
to hunt it out when it lurked like a bird amongst the
flowers that grew in the shady coverts by the
way-side
.
The astuteness of the lady Maria, however,
was not so much at fault, and she soon discovered,
what neither Blanche nor Albert had sufficiently
studied to make them aware of their own category.
But the Secretary was in favour with the lady Maria,
and so, she kept her own counsel, as well as a
good-natured
watch upon the progress of events.
CHAPTER IX.
Towards
noon of the day on which the council
held their session, a troop of maidens was seen issuing
from the chapel. Their number might have been
eight or ten. The orderly step with which they
departed
from the door was exchanged for a playful
haste in grouping together when they got beyond the
immediate precincts of the place of worship. Their
buoyant carriage and lively gesticulations betokened
the elasticity of health which was still more
unequivocally
shown in their ruddy complexions and well
rounded forms.
Their path lay across the grassy plain towards the
town, and passed immediately within the space
embowered
by an ancient, spreading poplar, scarce a
hundred paces in front of the chapel. When the bevy
reached this spot, they made a halt and gathered
around one of their number, who seemed to be the
object of a mirthful and rather tumultuary
importunity
.
The individual thus beset was Blanche
Warden
.
Together with a few elderly dames, who were
at this moment standing at the door of the chapel in
parley with father Pierre, this troop had constituted
the whole congregation who had that morning
attended
the service of the festival of St. Bridget.
Holy mother, how I am set upon! exclaimed
Blanche, as, half smiling and half earnest, she turned
her back against the trunk of the tree. Have I not
said I could not? Why should my birth-day be
so remembered that all the town must be talking
about it?
You did promise, said one of the party, or at
least, Mistress Alice promised for you, full six months
ago, that when you came to eighteen we should have
a merry-making at the Rose Croft.
It would not be seemlyI should be thought
bold, replied the maiden, to be turning my
birth-day
into a feast. Indeed, I must not and cannot,
playmates.
There is no must not nor cannot in our books,
Blanche Warden, exclaimed another, but simply
we will. There is troth plighted for it, and that's
enough for us. So we hold to that, good Blanche.
Yes, good Blanche! gentle Blanche! sweetheart,
we hold to that! cried the whole party, in a
clamorous
onset.
Truly, Grace Blackiston, you will have father
Pierre checking us for noisy behaviour, said the
maiden. You see that he is now looking towards
us. It is a pretty matter to make such a coil about!
I marvel, has no one ever been eighteen before!
This day se'nnight, replied the arch girl to whom
this reprimand was addressed, will be the first day,
Blanche Warden, the Rose of St. Mary's has ever
seen eighteen; and it will be the last I trow: and
what comes and goes but once in the wide world
should be accounted a rare thing, and rarities should
be noticed, sweetheart.
If I was coming eighteen, said a damsel who
scarce reached as high as Blanche's shoulder, and
had as pretty a house for a dance as the Rose Croft,
there should be no lack of sport amongst the
towns-people
.
It is easy to talk on a two year's venture, little
Madge, replied Blanche; for that is far enough off
to allow space for boasting. But gently, dear
play-mates
!
do not clamour so loud. I would do your
bidding with good heart if I thought it would not be
called something froward in me to be noising my age
abroad, as if it was my lady herself.
We will advise with father Pierre and Lady
Maria, responded Grace Blackiston; they are
coming this way.
At this moment the reverend priest, and the ladies
with whom he had been in conversation, approached.
The sister of the Proprietary was distinguished as
well by her short stature and neat attire, as by her
little Indian attendant, who followed bearing the lady's
missal. The tall figure of father Pierre, arrayed in his
black tunic and belt, towered above his female
companions
.
He bore his square bonnet of black cloth
in his hand, disclosing a small silk cap closely fitted
to his crown, fringed around with the silver locks
which, separating on his brow, gave the grace of
age to a countenance full of benignity.
The presence of the churchman subdued the eager
gaiety of the crowd, and two or three of the maidens
ran up to him with an affectionate familiarity to
make him acquainted with the subject of their
contention
.
Father, said Grace Blackiston, we have a
complaint
to lodge against Mistress Blanche for a
promise-breaker
.
You must counsel her, father, to her
duty.
Ah, my child! pretty Blanche! exclaimed the
priest, with the alacrity of his native French temper,
as he took the assailed damsel by the hand, what
have they to say against you? I will be your friend
as well as your judge.
The maidens, father, replied Blanche, have
taken leave of their wits, and have beset me like
madcaps
to give them a dance at the Rose Croft on my
birth-day. And I have stood on my refusal, father
Pierre, as for a matter that would bring me into
censure
for pertnessas I am sure you will say it would
with worshipful people, that a damsel who should
be modest in her behaviour, should so thrust herself
forward to be observed.
And we do not heed that, father Pierre,
interrupted
Grace Blackiston, who assumed to be the
spokeswoman of the party, holding it a scruple more
nice than wise. Blanche has a trick of standing back
more than a maiden needs. And, besides, we say
that Mistress Alice is bound by pledge of word, and
partly Blanche, toofor she stood by and said never
a syllable against itthat we should have good cheer
and dancing on that day at the Rose Croft. It is the
feast of the blessed virgin, Terese, and we would fain
persuade Blanche that the festival should be kept for
the sake of her birth-day saint.
My children, said the priest, who during this
debate stood in the midst of the blooming troop,
casting
his glances from one to another with the pleased
expression of an interested partaker of their mirth, and
at the same time endeavouring to assume a
countenance
of mock gravity, we will consider this matter
with impartial justice. And, first, we will hear all
that Mistress Blanche has to say. It is a profound
subject. Do you admit the promise, my child?
I do not deny, father Pierre, that last Easter,
when we met and danced at Grace Blackiston's,
my sister Alice did make some promise, and I said
nothing against it. But it was an idle speech of
sister Alice, which I thought no more of till now;
and now should not have remembered it if these wild
mates of mine had not sung it in my ear with such
clamour as must have made you think we had all
gone mad.
It is honestly confessed, said father Pierre;
and though I heard the outcry all the way to the
church door, yet I did not deem the damsels
absolutely
mad, as you supposed. I am an old man, my
child, and I have been taught by my experience, in
what key seven, eight, or nine young girls will make
known their desires when they are together: and,
truly, it is their nature to speak all at the same time.
They speak more than they listenha, ha! But we
shall be mistaken if we conclude they are mad.
Blanche, love, interposed the Lady Maria, you
have scarce given a good reason for gainsaying the
wish of the damsels. Have a care, or you may find
me a mutineer on this question.
That's a rare ladya kind lady! shouted
several
.
Now, Blanche, you have no word of denial
left.
I am at mercy, said the maiden, if my good
mistress, the Lady Maria, is not content. Whatever
my sister Alice and my father shall approve, and
you, dear lady, shall say befits my state, that will I
undertake right cheerfully. I would pleasure the
whole town in the way of merry-making, if I may
do so without seeming to set too much account upon
so small a matter as my birth-day. I but feared it
would not be well taken in one so young as I am.
I will answer it to the town, said the Lady
Maria. It shall be done as upon my motion; and
Mistress Alice shall take order in the matter as a
thing wherein you had no part. Will that content
you, Blanche?
I will be ruled in all things by my dear lady,
replied the maiden. You will speak to my father?
It shall be my special duty to look after it
forthwith
,
responded the lady.
Luckily, said father Pierre, laughing, this
great business is settled without the aid of the
church. Well, I have lost some of my consequence
in the winding up, and the Lady Maria is in the
ascendant. I will have my revenge by being as
merry as any of you at the feast. So, good day, mes
enfans!
With this sally, the priest left the company and
retired to his dwelling hard by the chapel. The
Lady Maria and her elderly companions moved
towards the town, whilst the troop of damsels with
increased volubility pursued their noisy triumph,
and with rapid steps hastened to their several
homes.
Vol. I.10
CHAPTER X.
The
Crow and Archer presented a busy scene on
the evening of the day referred to in the last chapter.
A report had been lately spread through the country
that the brig Olive Branch,an occasional trader
between the province and the coasts of Holland and
Englandhad arrived at St. Mary's. In
consequence
of this report there had been, during the last
two days, a considerable accession to the usual
guests of the inn, consisting of travellers both by
land and water. Several small sloops and other craft
had come into the harbour, and a half score inland
proprietors had journeyed from their farms on
horse-back, and taken up their quarters under the
snug roof of Garret Weasel. The swarthy and
gaunt watermen, arrayed in the close jackets and
wide kilt-like breeches and in the parti-coloured,
woollen caps peculiar to their vocation, were seen
mingling in the tap-room with the more substantial
cultivators of the soil. A few of the burghers of
St. Mary's were found in the same groups, drawn
thither by the love of company, the occasions,
perchance
,
of business, or the mere attraction of an
evening pot and pipe. The greater portion of this
assemblage were loitering between the latticed bar
of the common room, and the quay in front of the
house, which had somewhat of the occupation and
bustle of a little exchange. On a bench, in one
corner
of the tap-room, sat, in a ragged, patched coat
resembling a pea-jacket, a saucy, vagrant-looking
fiddler, conspicuous for a red face and a playful light
blue eye; he wore a dingy, pliant white hat, fretted
at the rim, set daintily on one side of his head, from
beneath which his yellow locks depended over either
cheek, completely covering his ears; and all the
while scraped his begrimed and greasy instrument to
a brisk tune, beating time upon the floor with a
huge hob-nailed shoe. This personage had a
vagabond
popularity in the province under the name of
Will of the Flatsa designation no less suited to his
musical commodity than to the locality of his
ostensible
habitation, which was seated on the flats of
Patuxent, not above fifteen miles from St. Mary's,
where he was tenant of a few acres of barren marsh
and a lodge or cabin not much larger than a good
dog kennel.
Will's chief compeer and brother in taste and
inclination
,
though of more affluent fortune, was Dick
Pagan, or Driving Dick, according to his more
familiar appellation, the courier who had lately
brought the missives from James Town; a
hard-favoured
,
weather-beaten, sturdy, little bow-legged
fellow, in russet boots and long spurs, and wrapt in
a coarse drab doublet secured by a leathern belt,
with an immense brass buckle in front. Old
Pamesack
,
likewise, formed a part of the group, and might
have been observed seated on a settle at the door,
quietly smoking his pipe, as unmoved by the
current
of idlers which ebbed and flowed past him, as
the old barnacled pier of the quay by the daily flux
and reflux of the river.
Such were the guests who now patronised the
thriving establishment of Master Weasel. These
good people were not only under the care, but also
under the command of our hostess the dame
Dorothy
,
who was a woman by no means apt to overlook
her prerogative. The dame having been on a visit
to a neighbour did not show herself in the tap-room
until near the close of the day; in the mean time
leaving her customers to the unchidden enjoyment of
their entertainment which was administered by
Matty
Scamper,a broad-chested, red-haired and
indefatigable
damsel, who in her capacity of adjutant to
the hostess, had attained to great favour with the
patrons of the tavern by her imperturbable good
nature
and ready answer to all calls of business. As
for Master Weasel, never did pleasure-loving
monarch
more cheerfully surrender his kingdom to the
rule of his minister than he to whatever power for
the time was uppermost,whether the dame herself,
or her occasional vicegerent Matty of the
Saucepan
.
Matty's rule, however, was now terminated by the
arrival of Mistress Weasel herself. It is fit I should
give my reader some perception of the exterior of
the hostess, as a woman of undoubted impression
and consideration with the towns-people. Being
now in her best attire which was evidently put on
with a careful eye to effect, I may take occasion
to say that one might suspect her of a
consciousness
of some deficiency of height, as well as of
an undue breadth of figure, both which
imperfections
she had studied to conceal. She wore a
high conical hat of green silk garnished with a
band of pink ribbon which was set on by
indentation
or teethwise, and gathered in front into a
spirited cluster of knots. Her jacket, with long tight
sleeves, was also of green silk, adapted closely to
her shape, now brought into its smallest compass by
the aid of stays, and was trimmed in the same
manner
as the hat. A full scarlet petticoat reached within
a span of her ankles and disclosed a buxom,
well-formed
leg in brown stocking with flashy clocks of
thickly embossed crimson, and a foot, of which the
owner had reason to be proud, neatly pinched into a
green shoe with a tottering high heel. Her black
hair hung in plaits down her back; and her
countenance
,distinguished
by a dark waggish eye, a clear
complexion, and a turned-up nose, to which might
be added a neck both fat and fair, half concealed by
a loose kerchief,radiated with an expression partly
10*
wicked and partly charitable, but in every lineament
denoting determination and constancy of purpose.
This air of careless boldness was not a little
heightened
by the absence of all defence to her brow from
the narrow rim of the hat and the height at which it
was elevated above her features.
The din of the tap-room was hushed into
momentary
silence as soon as this notable figure appeared
on the threshold.
Heaven help these thirsty, roystering men! she
exclaimed, as she paused an instant at the door and
surveyed the group withinOn my conscience,
they are still at it as greedily as if they had just
come out of a dry lent! From sunrise till noon, and
from noon till night it is all the samedrink, drink,
drink. Have ye news of Master Cocklescraft?I
would that the Olive Branch were come and gone,
that I might sit under a quiet roof again!there is
nothing but riot and reeling from the time the skipper
is expected in the port until he leaves it.
True enough, jolly queen! said Ralph Haywood,
a young inland planter, taking the hand of the merry
landlady as she struggled by him on her way to the
barwhat the devil, in good earnest, has become
of Cocklescraft? This is the second day we have
waited for him. I half suspect you, mistress, of a
trick to gather good fellows about you, by setting up
a false report of the Olive Branch.
Thou art a lying varlet, Ralph, quickly
responded
the dame: you yourself came jogging
hither with the story that Cocklescraft was seen two
days ago, beating off the Rappahannock.I play a
trick on you, truly! You must think I have need of
custom, to bring in a troop of swilling bumpkins from
the country who would eat and drink out the
character
of any reputable house in the hundred, without
so much as one doit of profit. You have my free
leave to tramp it back again to Providence, Ralph
Haywood, whenever you have a mind.
Nay, now you quarrel with an old friend,
Mistress
Dorothy.
Take thy hand off my shoulder, Ralph, thou
coaxing villain!Ha, ha, I warrant you get naught
but vinegar from me, for your treacle.But come
thou art a good child, and shalt have of the best in
this house:I would only warn you to call for it
mannerly, Master Ralph.
Our dame is a woman of mettle, said another
of the company, as the landlady escaped from the
planter and took her station behind the bar.
What has become of that man Weasel? she
inquired
somewhat petulantly. The man I am sure
has been abroad ever since I left the house! He is
of no more value than a cracked pot;he would see
me work myself as thin as a broom handle before he
would think of turning himself round.
Garret is now upon the quay, replied one of the
customers;I saw him but a moment since with
Arnold the Ranger.
With some idle stroller,you may be sure of
that! interrupted the hostess:never at his place,
if the whole house should go dry as Cuthbert's spring
at midsummer. Call him to me, if you please,
Master
Shortgrass.Michael Curtis, that wench Matty
Scamper has something to do besides listen to your
claverings! Matty, begone to the kitchen; these
country cattle will want their suppers presently.
Oh, Willy, Willy o'the Flats!for the sake of one's
ears, in mercy, stop that everlasting twangling of
your old crowd!It would disgrace the patience
of any Christian woman in the world to abide in the
midst of all this uproar!Nay then, come forward,
old cronyI would not offend thee, she said in a
milder tone to the fiddler. Here is a cup of ale
for thee, and Matty will give you your supper
to-night
.
I have danced too often to thy music to deny
thee a comfort;so, drink as you will! but pray you
rest your elbow for a while.
And there is a shilling down on the nail, said
Driving Dick, as he and the crowder came
together
to the bar at the summons of the landlady:
when that is drunk out, dame, give me a space
of warning, that I may resolve whether we shall
go another shot.
Master Shortgrass told me you had need of me,
said Garret Weasel, as he now entered the door;
what wouldst with me, wife Dorothy?
Get you gone! replied the wifethou art ever
in the way. I warrant your head is always thrust
in place when it is not wanted! If you had been at
your duty an hour ago, your service might have been
useful.
I can but return to the quay, said Garret, at the
same time beginning to retrace his steps.
Bide thee! exclaimed the dame in a shrill voice
I have occasion for you. Go to the cellar and
bring up another stoop of hollands; these salt water
fish have no relish for alethey must deal in the
strong:nothing but hollands or brandy for them.
The obedient husband took the key of the cellar
and went on the duty assigned him.
At this moment a door communicating with an
adjoining
apartment was thrown ajar and the head of
Captain Dauntrees protruded into the tap-room.
Mistress Dorothy, he saidat your leisure,
pray step this way.
The dame tarried no longer than was necessary to
complete a measure she was filling for a customer,
and then went into the room to which she had been
summoned. This was a little parlour, where the
Captain of musqueteers had been regaling himself
for the last hour over a jorum of ale, in solitary
rumination
.
An open window gave to his view the
full expanse of the river, now glowing with the rich
reflexions of sunset; and a balmy October breeze
played through the apartment and refreshed without
chilling the frame of the comfortable Captain. He
was seated near the window in a large easy chair
when the hostess entered.
Welcome dame, he said, without rising from his
seat, at the same time offering his hand, which was
readily accepted by the landlady.By St. Gregory
and St. Michael both, a more buxom and tidy piece
of flesh and blood hath never sailed between the two
headlands of Potomac, than thou art! You are for
a junketing, Mistress Dorothy; you are tricked out
like a queen this evening! I have never seen thee
in thy new suit before. Thou art as gay as a
marygold
:
and I wear thy colours, thou laughing mother
of mischief! Green is the livery of thy true knight.
Has your goodman, honest Garret, come home yet,
dame?
What would you with my husband, Master
Baldpate
?
There is no good in the wind when you throw
yourself into the big chair of this parlour.
In truth, dame, I only came to make a short
night of it with you and your worthy spouse. Do
not show your white teeth at me, hussy,you are
too old to bite. Tell Matty to spread supper for
me in this parlour. Arnold and Pamesack will
partake
with me; and if the veritable and most authentic
head of this houseI mean yourself, mistresshave
no need of Garret, I would entreat to have him in
company. By the hand of thy soldier, Mistress
Dorothy
!
I am glad to see you thrive so in your calling.
You will spare me Garret, dame? Come, I know
you have not learnt how to refuse me a boon.
You are a saucy Jack, Master Captain, replied
the dame. I know you of old: you would have a
rouse with that thriftless babe my husband. You
sent him reeling home only last night. How can you
look me in the face, knowing him, as you do, for a
most shallow vessel, Captain Dauntrees?
Fie on thee, dame! You disgrace your own
flesh and blood by such speech. Did you not choose
him for his qualities?ay, and with all
circumspection
,
as a woman of experience. You had two
husbands
before Garret, and when you took him for a
third, it was not in ignorance of the sex. Look thee
in the face! I dare,yea, and at thy whole
configuration
.
Faith, you wear most bravely, Mistress
Weasel! Stand apart, and let me survey: turn thy
shoulders round, he added, as by a sleight he twirled
the dame upon her heel so as to bring her back to his
viewthou art a woman of ten thousand, and I
envy Garret such store of womanly wealth.
If Garret were the man I took him for, Master
Captain, said the dame with a saucy smile, you
would have borne a broken head long since. But he
has his virtues, such as they are,though they may
lie in an egg-shell: and Garret has his frailties too,
like other men: alack, there is no denying it!
Frailties, forsooth! Which of us has not, dame?
Garret is an honest man;somewhat olda shade
or so: yet it is but a shade. For my sake, pretty
hostess, you will allow him to sup with us? Speak
it kindly, sweetheartgood, old Garret's jolly, young
wife!
Thou wheedling devil! said the landlady;
Garret
is no older than thou art. But, truly, I may say
he is of little account in the tap-room; so, he shall
come to you, Captain. But, look you, he is weak,
and must not be over-charged.
He shall not, mistressyou have a soldier's word
for that. I could have sworn you would not deny
me. Hark you, dame,bring thine ear to my lips;
a word in seeret.
The hostess bent her head down, as the Captain
desired, when he said in a half whisper, Send me a
flask of the best,you understand? And there's for
thy pains! he added, as he saluted her cheek with a
kiss.
And there's for thy impudence, saucy Captain!
retorted the spirited landlady as she bestowed the
palm of her hand on the side of his head and fled out
of the apartment.
Dauntrees sprang from his chair and chased the
retreating dame into the midst of the crowd of the
tap-room, by whose aid she was enabled to make her
escape. Here he encountered Garret Weasel, with
whom he went forth in quest of Arnold and the
Indian
,
who were to be his guests at supper.
In the course of the next half hour the Captain and
his three comrades were assembled in the little
parlour
around the table, discussing their evening meal.
When this was over, Matty was ordered to clear the
board and to place a bottle of wine and glasses
before
the party, and then to leave the room.
You must know, Garret, said Dauntrees when
the serving-maid had retired, that we go to-night
to visit the Wizard's Chapel by his Lordship's order;
and as I would have stout fellows with me, I have
come down here on purpose to take you along.
Heaven bless us, Master Jasper Dauntrees!
exclaimed
Garret, somewhat confounded with this
sudden
appeal to his valour, which was not of that
prompt complexion to stand so instant a demand,
and yet which the publican was never willing to
have doubtedtruly there be three of you, and it
might mar the matter to have too many on so secret
an outgoing
Tush, man,that has been considered. His
Lordship
especially looks to your going: you cannot
choose but go.
But my wife, Captain Dauntrees
Leave that to me, said the Captain; I will
manage
it as handsomely as the taking of Troy.
Worthy
Garret, say naught against ityou must go, and
take with you a few bottles of Canary and a good
luncheon of provender in the basket. You shall be
our commissary. I came on set purpose to procure
the assistance of your experience, and store of
comfortable
sustenance. Get the bottles, Garret,his
Lordship pays the scot to-night.
I should have my nag, said Garret, and the
dame keeps the key of the stable, and will in no wise
consent to let me have it. She would suspect us for
a rouse if I but asked the key.
I will engage for that, good Weasel, said
Dauntrees
:
I will cozen the dame with some special
invention
which shall put her to giving the key of her
own motion: she shall be coaxed with a device that
shall make all sureonly say you will obey his
Lordship's
earnest desire.
It is a notable piece of service, said the
innkeeper
,
meditating over the subject, and tickled
with the importance which was ascribed to his
cooperation
and
Vol. I.11
will win thanks from the whole
province. His Lordship did wisely to give it in charge
to valiant men.
In faith did he, replied the Captain; and it
will be the finishing stroke of thy fortunes. You will
be a man of mark for ever after.
I am a man to be looked to in a strait, Captain,
said Weasel, growing valorous with the thought. I
saw by his Lordship's eye yesternight that he was
much moved by what I told him. I have had a
wrestle with devils before now.
Arnold smiled and cast his eye towards the Indian,
who, immediately after supper, had quitted the table
and taken a seat in the window.
There be hot devils and cold devils, said he, and
he that wrestles with them must have a hand that
will hold fire as well as ice: that is true,
Pamesack
?
Pamesack has no dealing with the white man's
devil, replied the Indian; he has enough to do with
his own.
Drink some wine, old blade, said Dauntrees as
he presented a cup to Pamesack; the Knife must
be sharp to-nightthis will whet his edge. We shall
have need of your woodcraft.
The Indian merely sipped the wine, as he replied,
Pamesack knows the broad path and the narrow
both. He can lead you to the Black House day or
night.
Brandy is more natural to his throat than this
thin drink, said Weasel, who forthwith left the
room and returned with a measure of the stronger
liquor. When this was presented Pamesack
swallowed
it at a draught, and with something
approaching
a laugh, he said, It is the white man's devil
but the Indian does not fear him.
Now, Garret, said Dauntrees, we have no time
to lose. Make ready your basket and bottles, and lay
them at the foot of the cedar below the bank, near
the Town House steps; then hasten back to the
parlour
.
I will put the dame to sending you on an
errand which may be done only on horseback;you
will mount with the basket and make speedy way to
the Fort. Tell Nicholas Verbrack, the lieutenant,
that I shall be there in reasonable time. We must
set forth by ten; it may take us three hours to reach
St. Jerome's.
My heart is big enough, said Weasel, once more
beginning to waver, for any venture; but, in truth,
I fear the dame. It will be a livelong night carouse,
and she is mortal against that. What will she say in
the morning?
What can she say, when all is come and gone,
but, perchance, that thou wert rash and hot-headed?
That will do you no harm: but an hour ago she
swore to me that you were getting oldand sighed
too, as if she believed her words.
Old, did she say? Ho, mistress, I will show you
my infirmities! A fig for her scruples! the
hey-day
blood yerks yet, Master Captain. I will go
with thee, comrades: I will follow you to any goblin's
chapel twixt St. Mary's and Christina.
Well said, brave vintner! exclaimed the
Captain
;
now stir thee! And when you come back to
the parlour, Master Weasel, you shall find the dame
here. Watch my eye and take my hint, so that you
play into my hand when need shall be. I will get the
nag out of the stable if he were covered with bells.
Away for the provender!
The publican went about his preparations, and had
no sooner left the room than the Captain called the
landlady, who at his invitation showed herself at the
door.
Come in, sweetheart. Good Mistress Daffodil,
he said, I called you that you may lend us your
help to laugh: since your rufflers are dispersed, your
smokers obnubilated in their own clouds, your
tipplers
strewed upon the benches, and nothing more
left for you to do in the tap-room, we would have
your worshipful and witty company here in the
parlour
.
So, come in, my princess of pleasant thoughts,
and make us merry with thy fancies.
There is nothing but clinking of cans and
swaggering
speeches where you are, Captain Dauntrees,
said the hostess. An honest woman had best be
little seen in your company. It is a wonder you
ever got out of the Low Countries, where, what with
drinking with boors and quarrelling with belted
bullies
,
your three years' service was enough to put an
end to a thousand fellows of your humour.
There's destiny in it, dame. I was born to be
the delight of your eyes. It was found in my
horoscope
,
when my nativity was cast, that a certain
jolly mistress of a most-especially-to-be-commended
inn, situate upon a delectable point of land in the New
World, was to be greatly indebted to me, first, for the
good fame of her wines amongst worshipful people;
and, secondly, for the sufficient and decent praise of
her beauty. So was it read to my mother by the
wise astrologer. And then, dame, you slander the
virtue of the Low Countries. Look at Arnold there:
is there a more temperate, orderly, well-behaved
liegeman in the world than the ranger? And did he
not bring his sobriety with him from the very bosom
of the land you rail against?
If Arnold de la Grange is not all that you say of
him, replied the hostess, it is because he has lost
some share of his good quality by consorting with
you, Captain. Besides, Arnold has never been
hackneyed
in the wars.
A Dutch head, said Arnold, laughing, is not
easily made to spin. In the Old World men can
drink more than in the New: a Friesland fog is an
excellent shaving horn, mistress!
Heaven help the men of the Old World, if they
drink more than they do in our province! exclaimed
Mistress Weasel. Look in the tap-room, and you
may see the end of a day's work in at least ten great
loons. One half are sound asleep, and the other of
so dim sight that neither can see his neighbour.
The better reason then, Mistress Dorothy,
replied
Dauntrees, why you, a reputable woman,
should leave such topers, and keep company with
sober, waking, discreet friends. That cap becomes
11*
thee, mistress. I never saw you in so dainty a
head-gear
.
I honour it as a covering altogether worthy
of thy comeliness. Faith, it has been a rich piece of
merchandise to me! Upon an outlay of fourteen
shillings which I paid for it, as a Michaelmas present
to my excellent hostess, I have got in return, by way
of profit, full thirteen bottles of Garret's choicest
Canary, on my wager. Garret was obstinate, and
would face me out with it that you wore it to church
last Sunday, when I knew that you went only in your
hood that day:he has never an eye to look on thee,
dame, as he ought,so he must needs put it to a
wager. Well, as this is the first day thou hast ever
gone abroad in it, here I drink to thee and thy cap,
upon my kneesSuccess to its travels, and joy to the
merry eye that sparkles below it! Come, Arnold,
drink to that, and get Pamesack another glass of
aqua vit:top off to the hostess, comrades!
The toast was drunk, and at this moment Garret
Weasel returned to the room. A sign from him
informed
the Captain that the preparation he had been
despatched to make was accomplished.
How looks the night, Garret? inquired
Dauntrees
;
when have we the moon?
It is a clear starlight and calm, replied the
publican
;
the moon will not show herself till near
morning.
Have you heard the news, mistress? inquired
the Captain, with an expression of some eagerness;
there is pleasant matter current, concerning the
mercer's wife at the Blue Triangle. But you must
have heard it before this?
No, truly, not I, replied the hostess.
Indeed! said Dauntrees, then there's a month's
amusement for you. You owe the sly jade a grudge,
mistress.
In faith I do, said the dame, smiling, and would
gladly pay it.
You may pay it off with usury now, added the
Captain, with no more trouble than telling the
story. It is a rare jest, and will not die quickly.
I pray you tell it to me, good Captaingive me
all of it, exclaimed the dame, eagerly.
Peregrine Cadger, the mercer, you know, said
the Captainbut it is a long story, and will take
time to rehearse it. Garret, how comes it that you
did not tell this matter to your wife, as I charged you
to do? he inquired, with a wink at the publican.
I resolved to tell it to her, said Weasel, but, I
know not how, it ran out of my mindthe day being
a busy one
A busy day to thee! exclaimed the spouse.
Thou, who hast no more to do than a stray in the
pound, what are you fit for, if it be not to do as you
are commanded? But go on, Captain; the story
would only be marred by Garret's tellinggo on
yourselfI am impatient to hear it.
I pray you, what o'clock is it, mistress? asked
the Captain.
It is only near nine. It matters not for the hour
go on.
Nine! exclaimed Dauntress; truly, dame, I
must leave the story for Master Garret. Nine, said
you? By my sword, I have overstaid my time!
I have business with the Lord Proprietary before he
goes to his bed. There are papers at the Fort which
should have been delivered to his Lordship before
this.
Nay, Captain, said the hostess, if it be but the
delivery of a pacquet, it may be done by some other
hand. There is Driving Dick in the tap-room: he
shall do your bidding in the matter. Do not let so
light a business as that take you away.
To-morrow, dame, and I will tell you the tale.
To-night, Captainto-night.
Truly, I must go; the papers should be delivered
by a trusty handI may not leave it to an ordinary
messenger. Now if Garretbut I will ask no such
service from the good man at this time of night; it
is a long way. No, no, I must do my own errand.
There is no reason upon earth, said the
landlady
,
why Garret should not do it: it is but a step
to the Fort and back.
I can take my nag and ride there in twenty
minutes, said Garret. I warrant you his Lordship
will think the message wisely entrusted to me.
Then get you gone, without parley, exclaimed
the dame.
The key of the stable, wife, said Garret.
If you will go, Master Garret, said Dauntrees
and it is very obliging of youdo it
quickly
.
Tell Nicholas Verbrack to look in my
scritoire
;
he will find the pacquet addressed to his
Lordship
.
Take it, and see it safely put into his Lordship's
hands. Say to Nicholas, moreover, that I will be at
the Fort before ten to-night. You comprehend?
I comprehend, replied Garret, as his wife gave
him the key of the stable, and he departed from the
room.
Now, Captain.
Well, mistress: you must know that Peregrine
Cadger, the mercer, who in the main is a discreet
man
Yes.
A discreet manI mean, bating some follies
which you wot of; for this trading and trafficking
naturally begets foresight. A man has so much to
do with the world in that vocation, and the world,
Mistress Dorothy, is inclined by temper to be
somewhat
knavish, so that they who have much to do with
it learn cautions which other folks do not. Now, in
our calling of soldiership, caution is a sneaking
virtue
which we soon send to the devil; and thereby
you may see how it is that we are more honest than
other people. Caution and honesty do not much
consort together.
But of the mercer's wife, Captain.
Ay, the mercer's wifeI shall come to her
presently
.
Well, Peregrine, as you have often seen, is a
shade or so jealous of that fussock, his wife, who
looks, when she is tricked out in her new russet
grogram
cloak, more like a brown haycock in motion
than a living woman.
Yes, interrupted the dame, laughing, and with
a sunburnt top. Her red hair on her shoulders is no
better, I trow.
Her husband, who at best is but a cotquean
one of those fellows who has a dastardly fear of his
wife, which, you know, Mistress Dorothy, truly
makes both man and wife to be laughed at. A
husband
should have his own way, and follow his
humour
,
no matter whether the dame rails or not. You
agree with me in this, Mistress Weasel?
In part, Captain. I am not for stinting a husband
in his lawful walks; but the wife should have an eye
to his ways: she may counsel him.
Oh, in reason, I grant; but she should not chide
him, I mean, nor look too narrowly into his hours,
that's all. Now Peregrine's dame hath a free foot,
and the mercer himself somewhat of a sulky brow.
Well, Halfpenny, the chapman, who is a mad wag
for mischief, and who is withal a sure customer of
the mercer's in small wares, comes yesternight to
Peregrine Cadger's house, bringing with him
worshipful
Master Lawrence Hay, the Viewer.
At this moment the sound of horse's feet from the
court-yard showed that Garret Weasel had set forth
on his ride.
Arnold, I am keeping you waiting, said
Dauntrees
.
Fill up another cup for yourself and
Pamesack
,
and go your ways. Stay not for me, friends;
or if it pleases you, wait for me in the tap-room. I
will be ready in a brief space.
The ranger and the Indian, after swallowing
another
glass, withdrew.
The Viewer, continued Dauntrees, is a
handsome
man,and a merry man on occasion, too. I
had heard it whispered beforebut not liking to
raise a scandal upon a neighbour, I kept my thoughts
to myselfthat the mercer's wife had rather a warm
side for the Viewer. But be that as it may: there
was the most laughable prank played on the mercer
by Halfpenny and the Viewer together, last night,
that ever was heard of. It was thus: they had a
game at Hoodman-blind, and when it fell to
Lawrence
to be the seeker, somehow the fat termagant
was caught in his arms, and so the hood next came
to her. Well, she was blindfolded; and there was
an agreement all round that no one should speak a
word.
Ay, I understandI see it, said the hostess,
eagerly drawing her chair nearer to the Captain.
No, you would never guess, replied Dauntrees,
if you cudgelled your brains from now till
Christmas
.
But I can show you, Mistress Dorothy, better
by the acting of the scene. Here, get down on your
knees, and let me put your kerchief over your eyes.
What can that signify? inquired the dame.
Do it, mistressyou will laugh at the explosion.
Give me the handkerchief. Down, dame, upon your
marrow bones:it is an excellent jest and worth the
learning.
The landlady dropped upon her knees, and the
Captain secured the bandage round her eyes.
How many fingers, dame? he asked, holding
his hand before her face.
Never a finger can I see, Captain.
It is well. Now stand upforth and away! That
was the word given by the Viewer. Turn, Mistress
Dorothy, and grope through the room. Oh, you shall
laugh at this roundly. Grope, grope, dame.
The obedient and marvelling landlady began to
grope through the apartment, and Dauntrees, quietly
opening the door, stole off to the tap-room, where
being joined by his comrades, they hied with all
speed towards the Fort, leaving the credulous dame
floundering after a jest, at least until they got beyond
the hail of her voice.
CHAPTER XI.
Pale lights on Cadez' rocks were seen,
And midnight voices heard to moan,
'Twas even said the blasted oak,
Convulsive heaved a hollow groan.
And to this day the peasant still,
With cautious fear avoids the ground,
In each wild branch a spectre sees
And trembles at each rising ground.
The Spirit's Blasted Tree
.
Dauntrees
, after his unmannerly escape from the
credulous landlady, hastened with his two
companions
,
at a swinging gate, along the beach to the fort,
where they found Garret Weasel waiting for them in
a state of eager expectation.
Is the dame likely to be angry, Captain? were
the publican's first words.Does she suspect us for
a frisk to-night? Adsheartlikens, it is a perilous
adventure
for the morrow! You shall bear the burden
of that reckoning, Master Captain.
I left Mistress Dorothy groping for a secret
at Hoodman-blind, replied the Captain, laughing.
She has found it before now, and by my
computation
is in the prettiest hurricane that ever brought a
Vol. I.12
frown upon a woman's brow. She would bless the
four quarters of thee, Garret, if thou shouldst return
home to-night, with a blessing that would leave a
scorch-mark on thee for the rest of thy days. I
should n't wonder presently to hear her feet pattering
on the gravel of the beach in full pursuit of us
dark as it is: I have left her in a mood to tempt any
unheard of danger for revenge. So, let us be away
upon our errand. You have the eatables safe and
the wine sound, worthy Weasel?Nicholas, he
said, speaking to the Lieutenantare our horses
saddled?
They are at the post on the other side of the
parade, replied the Lieutenant.
Alack! exclaimed WeaselAlack for these
pranks! Here will be a week's repentance. But a
fig for conclusions!in for a penny, in for a pound,
masters. I have the basket well stored and in good
keeping. It will be discreet to mount quicklyI
will not answer against the dame's rapping at the
gate to-night: she is a woman of spirit and valiant
in her anger.
Then let us be up and away, said the Captain,
who was busily bestowing a pair of pistols in his
belt and suspending his sword across his body.
A cutlass and pistols for me, said the publican,
as he selected his weapons from several at hand.
Arnold and Pamesack were each provided with a
carbine, when Dauntrees, throwing his cloak across
his shoulders, led the way to the horses, where the
party having mounted, sallied through the gate of
the fort at a gallop.
Their road lay around the head of St. Inigoe's
creek, and soon became entangled in dark, woody
ravines and steep acclivities which presented, at this
hour, no small interruption to their progress.
Pamesack
,
on a slouching pony, his legs dangling within
a foot of the ground, led the way with an almost
instinctive
knowledge of his intricate path, which
might have defied a darker night. The stars
shining
through a crisp and cloudless atmosphere,
enabled
the party to discern the profile of the tree tops,
and disclosed to them, at intervals, the track of this
solitary road with sufficient distinctness to prevent
their entirely losing it.
They had journeyed for more than two hours in
the depths of the forest before they approached the
inlet of St. Jerome's. Dauntrees had beguiled the
time by tales of former adventures, and now and
then by sallies of humour provoked by the dubious
valour of the innkeeper,for Weasel, although
addicted
to the vanity of exhibiting himself in the light
of a swashing, cut-and-thrust comrade in an emprise
of peril, was nevertheless unable, this night, to
suppress
the involuntary confession of a lurking
faintheartedness
at the result of the present venture.
This inward misgiving showed itself in his increased
garrulity and in the exaggerated tone of his
vauntings
of what he had done in sundry emergencies of
hazard, as well as of what he had made up his mind
to do on the present occasion if they should be so
fortunate as to encounter any peculiarly severe stress
of fortune. Upon such topics the party grew jovial
and Dauntrees laughed at the top of his voice.
The vintner's old roystering courses would make
us lose our road in downright blindness from
laughing
,
he said, as checking himself in one of these
out-breaks, he reined up his horse. Where are we,
Pamesack? I surely hear the stroke of the tide
upon the beach;are we so near St. Jerome's, or
have we missed the track and struck the bay shore
short of our aim?
The she-fox does not run to her den where she
has left her young, by a track more sure than mine
to-night, replied the guide:it is the wave
striking
upon the sand at the head of the inlet: you may
see the stars on the water through yonder wood.
Pamesack says true, added Arnold. He has
found his way better than a hound.
A piece of cleared land, or old field, a few acres
in width, lay between the travellers and the water
which began now to glimmer on their sight through
a fringe of wood that grew upon the margin of
the creek or inlet, and the fresh breeze showed that
the broad expanse of the Chesapeake was at no great
distance.
The Wizard's Chapel, said Dauntrees, by my
reckoning then, should be within a mile of this spot.
It were a good point of soldiership to push forward
a vanguard. That duty, Garret, will best comport
with your mad-cap humourthere may be pith in it:
so, onward, man, until you are challenged by some
out-post of the Foul Onewe will tarry here for
your report. In the mean time, leave us your
hamper
of provender. Come, man of cold iron, be
alertthy stomach is growing restive for a deed of
valour.
You are a man trained to pike and musquetoon,
replied the publican; and have the skill to set a
company, as men commonly fight with men. But I
humbly opine, Captain, that our venture to-night
stands in no need of vanguard, patrol or picquet.
We have unearthly things to wrestle with, and do
not strive according to the usages of the wars. I
would not be slow to do your bidding, but that I
know good may not come of it: in my poor
judgment
we should creep towards the Chapel together,
not parting company. I will stand by thee, Captain,
with a sharp eye and ready hand.
Thy teeth will betray us, Master Vintner, even
at a score rods from the enemy, said Dauntrees:
they chatter so rudely that thy nether jaw is in
danger. If thou art cold, man, button up thy coat.
Of a verity it is a cold night, and my coat is
none of the thickest, replied Weasel with an
increasing
shudder.
I understand you, Garret, responded the
Captain
with a laugh; we must drink. So, friends, to
the green grass, and fasten your horses to the trees
whilst we warm up the liver of our forlorn vintner
with a cup. We can all take that physic.
This command was obeyed by the immediate dis
12*
mounting of the party and their attack upon one of
the flasks in the basket.
"It has a rare smack for a frosty night," said
Dauntrees as he quaffed a third and fourth cup.
"When I was in Tours I visited the abbey of
Marmoustier
,
and there drank a veritable potation from
the huge tun which the blessed St. Martin himself
filled, by squeezing a single cluster of grapes. It
has the repute of being the kindliest wine in all
Christendom for the invigorating of those who are
called to do battle with the devil. The monks of the
abbey have ever found it a most deadly weapon
against Satan. And truly, Master Weasel, if I did
not know that this wine was of the breed of the
islands, I should take it to be a dripping from the
holy tun I spoke of:it hath the like virtue of
defiance
of Beelzebub. So, drink-drink again, worthy
purveyor and valiant adjutant!"
"What is that?" exclaimed Weasel, taking the
cup from his lips before he had finished the contents.
"There is something far off like the howl of a dog
and yet more devilish I should saydid ye not hear
it, masters? I pray heaven there be no evil warning
in this:I am coldstill cold, Captain Dauntrees."
"Tush, it is the ringing of your own ears, Garret,
or it may be, like enough, some devil's cur that
scents our footsteps. Make yourself a fire, and
whilst you grow warm by that grosser element we
will take a range, for a brief space, round the
Chapel
.
You shall guard the forage till we return."
"That is well thought of," replied the innkeeper
quickly. Light and heat will both be useful in our
onslaught:while you three advance towards the
shore I will keep a look out here; for there is no
knowing what devices the enemy may have a-foot to
take us by surprise.
Some little time was spent in kindling a fire, which
had no sooner begun to blaze than Dauntrees, with
the Ranger and the Indian, set forth on their
reconnoissance
of the Chapel, leaving Weasel assured that
he was rendering important service in guarding the
provender and comforting himself by the blazing
fagots.
They walked briskly across the open ground
towards
the water, and as they now approached the
spot which common rumour had invested with so
many terrors, even these bold adventurers
themselves
were not without some misgivings. The
universal
belief in supernatural agencies in the concerns
of mankind, which distinguished the era of this
narrative
,
was sufficient to infuse a certain share of
apprehension into the minds of the stoutest men, and
it was hardly reckoned to derogate from the courage
of a tried soldier that he should quail in spirit before
the dreadful presence of the Powers of Darkness.
Dauntrees had an undoubting faith in the malignant
influences which were said to hover about the
Wizard's Chapel, and nothing but the pride and
subordination
of his profession could have impelled
him to visit this spot at an hour when its mysterious
and mischievous inhabitants were supposed to be
endued with their fullest power to harm. The
Ranger
was not less keenly impressed with the same
feelings, whilst Pamesack, credulous and
superstitious
as all of his tribe, was, like them, endowed
with that deeply-imprinted fatalism, which taught
him to suppress his emotions, and which rendered
him seemingly indifferent to whatever issue awaited
his enterprise.
By my troth, Arnold, said Dauntrees, as they
strode forward, although we jest at yonder
white-livered
vintner, this matter we have in hand might
excuse an ague in a stouter man. I care not to
confess
that the love I bear his Lordship, together with
some punctilio of duty, is the only argument that
might bring me here to night. I would rather stand
a score pikes in an onset with my single hand, where
the business is with flesh and blood, than buffet with
a single imp of the Wizard. I have heard of
over-bold
men being smote by the evil eye of a beldam
hag; and I once knew a man of unquenchable gaiety
suddenly made mute and melancholy by the weight
of a blow dealt by a hand which was not to be seen:
the remainder of his life was spent in sorrowful
penance
.
They say these spirits are quick to punish
rashness.
As Lord Charles commands we must do his
bidding, replied the forester. When the business
in hand must be done, I never stop to think of the
danger of it. If we should not get back, Lord
Charles has as good men to fill our places. I
have been scared more than once by these night
devils, till my hair lifted my cap with the fright, but
I never lost my wits so far as not to strike or to run
at the good season.
Laet lopen die lopen luste
, as we used to say in
Holland, returned the Captain. I am an old rover
and have had my share of goblins, and never
flinched
to sulphur or brimstone, whether projected by the
breath of a devil or a culverin. I am not to be
scared now from my duty by any of Paul Kelpy's
brood, though I say again I like not this strife with
shadows. His Lordship shall not say we failed in
our outlook. I did purpose, before we set out, to
talk with Father Pierre concerning this matter, but
Garret's wine and his wife together put it out of my
head.
The holy father would only have told you,
replied
Arnold, to keep a Latin prayer in your head
and Master Weasel's wine and wife both out of it.
So he would, Arnold, and it would have gone
more against the grain than a hair-shirt penance. I
have scarce a tag of a prayer in my memory, not
even a line of the Fac Salve; and I have moreover a
most special need for a flask of that vintage of
Teneriffe
on a chilly night;and then, as you yourself
was a witness, I had most pressing occasion to
practise
a deceit upon Mistress Dorothy. The Priest's
counsel would have been wasted wordsthat's true:
so we were fain to do our errand to-night without
the aid of the church.Why do you halt,
Pamesack
?
I hear the tread of a foot, replied the Indian.
A deer stalking on the shore of the creek, said
Dauntrees.
More like the foot of a man, returned
Pamesack
,
in a lowered voice; we should talk less to
make our way safe.There is the growl of a dog.
Arnold now called the attention of his companions
to the outlines of a low hut which was barely
discernible
through the wood where an open space
brought the angle of the roof into relief against the
water of the creek, and as they approached near
enough to examine the little structure more minutely,
they were saluted by the surly bark of a deep
throated
dog, fiercely redoubled. At the same time the
sound of receding footsteps was distinctly audible.
Who dwells here? inquired Dauntrees, striking
the door with the hilt of his sword.
There was no answer, and the door gave way to
the thrust and flew wide open. The apartment was
tenantless. A few coals of fire gleaming from the
embers, and a low bench furnished with a blanket,
rendered it obvious that this solitary abode had been
but recently deserted by its possessor. A hasty survey
of the hut, which was at first fiercely disputed by the
doga cross-grained and sturdy mastiffuntil a
sharp blow from a staff which the forester bestowed
sent him growling from the premises, satisfied the
explorers
that so far, at least, they had encountered
nothing
supernatural; and without further delay or
comment
upon this incident they took their course along
the margin of St. Jerome's Creek. After a short
interval
,
the beating of the waves upon the beach
informed
them that they had reached the
neighbourhood
of the shore of the Chesapeake. Here a halt
and an attentive examination of the locality made
them aware that they stoodu pon a bank, which
descended
somewhat abruptly to the level of the beach
that lay some fifty yards or more beyond them. In
the dim starlight they were able to trace the profile
of a low but capacious tenement which stood almost
on the tide mark.
It is the Chapel! said Dauntrees, in an
involuntary
whisper as he touched the Ranger's arm.
It is Paul Kelpy's house, all the same as I have
known it these twenty years:a silent and wicked
house, whispered Arnold, in reply.
And a pretty spot for the Devil to lurk in,
said Dauntrees, resuming his ordinary tone.
Hold, Captain, interrupted the Ranger, no
foul words so near the Haunted House. The good
saints be above us! he added, crossing himself and
muttering a short prayer.
Follow me down the bank, said Dauntrees, in
a low but resolute voice; but first look to your
carbines
that they be charged and primed. I will break
in the door of this ungodly den and ransack its
corners
before I leave it. Holy St. Michael, the
Archfiend
is in the Chapel, and warns us away! he
exclaimed
,
as suddenly a flash of crimson light
illuminated
every window of the building. It is the same
warning given to Burton and myself once before.
Stand your ground, comrades; we shall be beset by
these ministers of sin!
As the flashes of this lurid light were thrice
repeated
,
Pamesack was seen on the edge of the bank
fixed like a statue, with foot and arm extended,
looking
with a stern gaze towards this appalling spectacle.
Arnold recoiled a pace and brought his hand across
his eyes, and was revealed in this posture as he
exclaimed
in his marked Dutch accent, The
fisherman's
blood is turned to fire: we had best go no
further
,
masters. Dauntrees had advanced half-way
down the bank, and the glare disclosed him as
suddenly
arrested in his career; his sword gleamed above
his head whilst his short cloak was drawn by the
motion
of his left arm under his chin; and his broad
beaver, pistolled belt, and wide boots, now tinged
with the preternatural light, gave to his figure that
rich effect which painters are pleased to copy.
I saw Satan's imps within the chamber,
exclaimed
the Captain. As I would the blessed
Martyrs
be with us, I saw the very servitors of the Fiend!
They are many and mischievous, and shall be defied
though we battle with the Prince of the Air. What
ho, bastards of Beelzebub, I defy thee! in the name
of our patron, the holy and blessed St. Ignatius, I
defy thee!
There was a deeper darkness as Dauntrees rushed
almost to the door of the house with his sword in his
hand. Again the same deep flashes of fire illumed the
windows, and two or three figures in grotesque
costume
,
with strange unearthly faces, were seen, for the
instant, within. Dauntrees retreated a few steps nearer
to his companions, and drawing a pistol, held it ready
for instant use. It was discharged at the windows
with the next flash of the light, and the report was
followed by a hoarse and yelling laugh from the
tenants of the house.
Once more I defy thee! shouted the Captain,
with a loud voice; and in the name of our holy
church, and by the order of the Lord Proprietary, I
demand what do you here with these hellish rites?
The answer was returned in a still louder laugh,
and in a shot fired at the challenger, the momentary
light of the explosion revealing, as Dauntrees
imagined
,
a cloaked figure presenting a harquebuss
through the window.
Protect yourselves, friends! he exclaimed, with
such shelter as you may find, at the same time
retreating
to the cover of an oak which stood upon the
bank. These demons show weapons like our own.
I will e'en ply the trade with thee, accursed spirits!
he added, as he discharged a second pistol.
The Ranger and Pamesack had already taken
shelter, and their carbines were also levelled and
fired. Some two or three shots were returned from
the house accompanied with the same rude laugh
which attended the first onset, and the scene, for a
moment, would have been thought rather to
resemble
the assault and defence of mortal foes, than the
strife of men with intangible goblins, but that there
were mixed with it other accompaniments altogether
Vol. I.13
unlike the circumstance of mortal battle; a loud
heavy sound as of rolling thunder, echoed from the
interior of the chapel, and in the glimpses of light
the antic figures within were discerned as dancing
with strange and preposterous motions.
It avails us not to contend against these fiends,
said Dauntrees. They are enough to maintain their
post against us, even if they fought with human
implements
.
Our task is accomplished by gaining sight
of the chapel and its inmates. We may certify what
we have seen to his Lordship; so, masters, move
warily and quickly rearward. Ay, laugh again, you
juggling minions of the devil! he said, as a hoarse
shout of exultation resounded from the house, when
the assailants commenced their retreat. Put on
the shape of men and we may deal with you!
Forward
,
Arnold; if we tarry, our retreat may be vexed
with dangers against which we are not provided.
I hope this is the last time we shall visit this
devil's den, said Arnold, as he obeyed the Captain's
injunction, and moved, as rapidly as his long stride
would enable him to walk, from the scene of their
late assault.
Whilst these events were passing, I turn back to
the publican, who was left a full mile in the rear to
guard the baggage and keep up the fire,a post, as he
described it, of no small danger.
It was with a mistrusting conscience, as to the
propriety
of his separation from his companions, that
Garret, when he had leisure for reflection, set
himself
to scanning his deportment at this juncture. His
chief scruple had reference to the point of view in
which Dauntrees and Arnold de la Grange would
hereafter represent this incident: would they set it
down, as Weasel hoped they might, to the account of
a proper and soldier-like disposition of the forces,
which required a detachment to defend a weak point?
or would they not attribute his hanging back to a
want of courage, which his conscience whispered
was not altogether so wide of the truth, but which
he had hoped to conceal by his martial tone of
bravado? There are many brave men, he reflected,
who have a constitutional objection to fighting in the
dark, and he was rather inclined to rank himself in
that class. In the dark, said he, as he sat down
by the fire, with his hands locked across his knees,
which were drawn up before him in grasshopper
angles, and looked steadily at the blazing brushwood;
in the dark a man cannot seethat stands to reason.
And it makes a great difference, let me tell you,
masters
,
when you can't see your enemy. A brave man,
by nature, requires light. And, besides, what sort of
an enemy do we fight? Hobgoblinsnot mortal men
for I would stand up to any mortal man in
Christendom
;
ay, and with odds against me. I have done
it before now. But these whirring and whizzing
ghosts and their cronies, that fly about one's ears like
cats, and purr and mew like batswhat am I
saying
?
no, fly like bats and mew like catsone may
cut and carve at them with his blade with no more
wound than a boy's wooden truncheon makes
upon a south wind. Besides, the Captain, who is all
in all in his command, hath set me here to watch,
which, as it were, was a forbidding of me to go
onward
.
He must be obeyed: a good soldier disputes
no order, although it go against his stomach. It was
the Captain's wish that I should keep strict watch and
ward here on the skirt of the wood; otherwise, I
should have followed himand with stout heart and
step, I warrant you! But the Captain hath a soldierly
sagacity in his cautions; holding this spot, as he
wisely hath done, to be an open point of danger, an
inlet, as it were, to circumvent his march, and
therefore
straightly to be looked to. Well, let the world
wag, and the upshot be what it may, here are
comforts
at hand, and I will not stint to use them.
Saying this the self-satisfied martialist opened the
basket and solaced his appetite with a slice of pasty
and a draught of wine.
I will now perform a turn of duty, he continued,
after his refreshment; and accordingly drawing his
hanger, he set forth to make a short circuit into the
open field. He proceeded with becoming caution
on this perilous venture, looking slyly at every weed
or bush which lay in his route, shuddering with a
chilly fear at the sound of his own footsteps, and
especially
scanning, with a disturbed glance, the
vibrations
of his long and lean shadow which was sharply
cast by the fire across the level ground. He had
wandered some fifty paces into the field, on this
valorous outlook, when he bethought him that he had
ventured far enough, and might now return, deeming
it more safe to be near the fire and the horses than
out upon a lonesome plain, which he believed to be
infested by witches and their kindred broods. He
had scarcely set his face towards his original post
when an apparition came upon his sight that filled
him with horror, and caused his hair to rise like
bristles. This was the real bodily form and
proportions
of such a spectre as might be supposed to
prefer
such a spotan old woman in a loose and ragged
robe, who was seen gliding up to the burning fagots
with a billet of pine in her hand, which she lighted at
the fire and then waved above her head as she
advanced
into the field towards the innkeeper.
Weasel's
tongue clave to the roof of his mouth, and his
teeth chattered audibly against each other, his knees
smote together, and his eyes glanced steadfastly upon
the phantom. For a moment he lost the power of
utterance or motion, and when these began to return,
as the hag drew nearer, his impulse was to fly; but
his bewildered reflection came to his aid and
suggested
greater perils in advance: he therefore stood
stock-still.
Heaven have mercy upon me!the Lord have
mercy upon me, a sinner! he ejaculated; I am
alone, and the enemy has come upon me.
Watcher of the night, said a voice, in a shrill
note, draw nigh. What do you seek on the wold?
Tetra grammaton, Ahaseelin the name of the
Holy Evangels, spare me! muttered the innkeeper,
fruitlessly ransacking his memory for some charm
against witches, and stammering out an incoherent
jargon. Abracadabraspare me, excellent and
13*
worthy dame! I seek no hurt to thee. I am old,
mother, too old and with too many sins of my own
to account for, to wish harm to any one, much less to
the good woman of this wold. Oh Lord, oh Lord!
why was I seduced upon this fool's errand?
Come nigh, old man, when I speak to you. Why
do you loiter there? shouted the witch, as she stood
erect some twenty paces in front of the publican and
beckoned him with her blazing fagot. What dost
thou mutter?
I but sported with my shadow, mother, replied
Weasel, with a tremulous attempt at a laugh, as he
approached the questioner, in an ill assumed effort
at composure and cheerfulness. I was fain to
divert myself with an antic, till some friends of
mine, who left me but a moment since, returned.
How goes the night with you dame?
Merrily, replied the hag, as she set up a shrill
laugh which more resembled a scream, merrily; I
cannot but laugh to find the henpecked vintner of St.
Mary's at this time of night within the sound of the
tide at the Black Chapel. I know your errand, old
chapman of cheap liquors, and why you have brought
your cronies. You pretend to be a liegeman of his
Lordship, and you travel all night to cheat him of
five shillings. You will lie on the morrow with as
sad a face as there is in the hundred. I know you.
You know all things, worthy dame, and I were
a fool to keep a secret from you. What new
commodity
,
honest mistress, shall I find with Rob? The
port is alive with a rumour of the Olive Branch; I
would be early with the Cripple. Ha, ha! he added,
with a fearful laugh, thou seest I am stirring in my
trade.
Garret Weasel, said the beldam, you may
take it for a favour, past your deservings, that Rob
will see thee alone at his hut even in day time: but
it is as much as your life is worth to bring your
huff-cap
brawlers to St. Jerome's at midnight. It is not
lawful ground for thee, much less for the hot-brained
fools who bear you company. Who showed them
the path to my cabin, that I must be driven out at
this hour?
Worthy mistress, indeed I know not. I am
ignorant
of what you say!
They will call themselves friends to the Chapel:
but we have no friends to the Chapel amongst living
men. The Chapel belongs to the dead and the
tormentors
of the dead. So follow your cronies and
command them back. I warn you to follow, and
bring them back, as you would save them from harm.
Ha! look you, it is come already! she exclaimed,
raising her torch in the air, as the flashes from the
Haunted House illumined the horizon; the seekers
have roused our sentries, and there shall be angry
buffets to the back of it! At this moment the first
shot was heard. Friends, forsooth! she shouted
at the top of her voice: friends, are ye? there is
the token that ye are known to be false liars. Wo
to the fool that plants his foot before the Chapel!
Stand there, Garret Weasel: I must away; follow me
but a stepraise thy head to look after my path, and
I will strike thee blind and turn thee into a drivelling
idiot for the rest of thy days. Remember
In uttering this threat the figure disappeared;
Garret
knew not how, as he strictly obeyed the parting
injunction, and his horrors were greatly increased by
the report of the several shots which now reached
his ear from the direction of the Black House.
He had hardly recovered himself sufficiently to
wander back to the fire, before Dauntrees, Arnold,
and Pamesack arrived, evidently flurried by the
scene through which they had passed, as well as by
the rapidity of their retreat.
Some wine, Garret! some wine, old master of the
tap! was Dauntrees' salutation; and whilst we
regale as briefly as we may, have thou our horses
loose from the trees; we must mount and away. To
the horses, Garret! We will help ourselves.
I pray you, Master Captain, inquired the
publican
,
having now regained his self-possession, what
speed at the Chapel? Oh, an we have all had a night
of it! Sharp encounters all round, masters! I can
tell you a tale, I warrant you.
Stop not to prate now, interrupted Dauntrees,
in a voice choked by the huge mouthful of the pasty
he was devouring; we shall discourse as we ride.
That flask, Arnold, I must have another draught e'er
we mount, and then, friends, to horse as quickly as
you may; we may be followed; we may have ghost,
devil, and man of flesh, all three, at our heels.
I have had store of them, I can tell youghosts
and devils without number, said Weasel, as he
brought the horses forward.
You shall be tried by an inquest of both, for your
life, if you tarry another instant, interposed the
Captain
,
as he sprang into his saddle.
What! are we set upon, comrades? cried out the
vintner, manfully, as he rose to his horse's back, and
pricked forward until he got between Pamesack and
Arnold. Are we set upon? Let us halt and give
them an accolado; we are enough for them, I
warrant
you! Oh, but it had well nigh been a bloody
night, he continued, as the whole party trotted
briskly from the ground. We had work to do,
masters, and may tell of it to-morrow. Good
Pamesack
,
take this basket from me, it impedes my motion
in these bushes. Master Arnold, as we must ride here
in single files, let me get before thee: I would speak
with the Captain. Who should I see, Captain
Dauntrees
,
continued the publican, after these
arrangements
were made, and he had thrust himself into the
middle of the line of march, and all now proceeded at
a slackened pace, but that most notorious and
abominable hag, the woman of WarringtonKate,
who lives, as every body knows, on the Cliffs. She
must needs come trundling down before me, astride
a broomstick, with a black cat upon her shoulder, and
sail up to the fire which I had left, for a space, to make
a round on my watchfor you may be sworn a strict
watch I made of it, going even out of my way to
explore
the more hidden and perilous lurking-places
where one might suspect an enemy to lie. So, whilst
I was gone on this quest, she whips in and seats
herself
by the fire, with a whole score of devils at their
antics around her. Then up I come, naturally
surprised
at this audacity, and question them, partly in
soldier-wise, showing my sword ready to make good
my speech, and partly by adjuration, which soon puts
me the whole bevy to flight, leaving Kate of
Warrington
at mercy: and there I constrained her to divulge
the secrets of the Chapel. She said there had been
devilish work under that roof, and would be again;
when pop, and bang, and slash, and crash, I heard
the outbreak, and saw the devil's lights that were
flashed. I could hold no longer parley with the hag,
but was just moving off at full speed to your relief,
determined in this need to desert my postwhich, in
my impatience to lend you a hand, I could not help
when I heard your footfall coming back, and so I
was fain to bide your coming.
A well conceived sally of soldiership, said
Dauntrees
,
and spoken with a cavalier spirit, Master
Garret. It hath truth upon the face of it: I believe
every word. It shall serve you a good turn with
his Lordship. What does Kate of Warrington in this
neighbourhood? She travels far on her broomstick
unless, indeed, what seems likely, she has taken her
quarters in the cabin we disturbed to-night. These
crows will be near their carrion.
By degrees the party, as they pursued their
homeward
journey, grew drowsy. The publican had lost
all his garrulity, and nodded upon his horse. Arnold
and Pamesack rode in silence, until Dauntrees, as if
waking up from a reverie, said
Well, friends, we return from no barren mission
to-night. His Lordship may have some satisfaction
in our story; particularly in the vintner's. We shall
be ready to report to his Lordship by noon, and after
that we shall hasten to quiet our Dame Dorothy.
The night is far spent: I should take it, Arnold, to
be past three o'clock, by the rising of the moon. At
peep of day we shall be snug upon our pallets, with
no loss of relish for a sleep which will have been
well earned.
As the Captain continued to urge his journey,
which he did with the glee that waits upon a safe
deliverance from an exploit of hazard, he turned his
face upwards to the bright orb which threw a
cheerful
light over the scenery of the road-side, and in the
distance flung a reflection, as of burnished silver, over
the broad surface of St. Mary's river, as seen from
the height which the travellers were now
descending
.
Not more than two miles of their route remained
to be achieved, when the Captain broke forth with an
old song of that day, in a voice which would not have
discredited a professor:
The moon, the moon, the jolly moon,
And a jolly old queen is she!
She hath stroll'd o' nights this thousand year,
With ever the best of company
Sing, Hic and hoc sumus nocturno,
Huzza for the jolly old moon!
Why, Garret, vintner, art asleep, man? inquired
the Captain. Why dost thou not join in the
burden
?
To your hand, Captain, exclaimed Weasel,
rousing
himself and piping forth the chorus
Hic and hoc sumus nocturno,
Huzza for the jolly old moon!
which he did not fail to repeat at the top of his voice
at each return.
Dauntrees proceeded:
She trails a royal following,
And a merry mad court doth keep,
With her chirping boys that walk i' the shade,
And wake when the bailiff's asleep.
Sing, Hic and hoc sumus nocturno,
Huzza for the jolly old moon!
Master Owl he is her chancellor,
And the bat is his serving-man;
They tell no tales of what they see,
But wink when we turn up the can.
Sing, Hic and hoc sumus nocturno,
Huzza for the jolly old moon!
Her chorister is Goodman Frog,
With a glow-worm for his link;
And all who would make court to her,
Are fain, good faith! to drink.
Sing, Hic and hoc sumus nocturno,
Huzza for the jolly old moon!
This ditty was scarcely concludedfor it was
spun out with several noisy repetitions of the chorus
before the troop reined up at the gate of the Fort.
The drowsy sentinel undid the bolt at the Captain's
summons, and, in a very short space, the wearied
adventurers were stretched in the enjoyment of that
most satisfactory of physical comforts, the deep sleep
of tired men.
Vol. I.14
CHAPTER XII.
There remains
A rugged trunk, dismember'd and unsightly,
Waiting the bursting of the final bolt
To splinter it to shivers.
The Doom of Devorgoil
.
The
shore of the Chesapeake between Cape St.
Michaelas the northern headland at the mouth of
Potomac was denominated by the early settlers
and the Patuxent, is generally flat, and distinguished
by a clear pebbly beach or strand. The shore,
comprising
about twenty miles, is intersected by a single
creek, that of St. Jerome, which enters the bay some
five or six miles north of the Potomac. The line of
beach, which I have referred to, is here and there
relieved by small elevations which in any other
region
would scarce deserve the name, but which are
sufficiently prominent in this locality to attract
remark
.
From the general level of the country they
rise high enough to afford a clear prospect over the
wide waters, and no less to distinguish the landward
perspective to the mariner whose eye eagerly seeks
the varieties of landscape as he holds his course up
the bay. At a few points these small hills terminate
immediately upon the tide in the abrupt form of a
cliff, and, at others, take the shape of a knoll
sinking
away by a rapid, but grass-covered, declivity to
the strand. This latter feature is observable in the
vicinity of St. Jerome's, where the slope falls
somewhat
abruptly to the level of the tide, leaving
something
above fifty paces in width of low ground
between
its base and the ordinary water-mark. It was
upon this flat that, in ancient times, stood the
dwelling
house of Paul Kelpy the fishermana long, low
building of deal boards, constructed somewhat in
the shape of a warehouse or magazine. Some
quarter
of a mile along the beach, so sheltered under the
brow of the slope as scarcely to be seen amongst the
natural shrubbery that shaded it, stood a cottage or
hut of very humble pretensions. It was so low that
a man of ordinary height, while standing at the door,
might lay his hand upon the eaves of the roof, and
correspondent to its elevation, it was so scanty in
space as to afford but two apartments, of which the
largest was not above ten feet square. It was
strongly built of hewn logs, and the door,
strengthened
by nails thickly studded over its surface, was
further fortified by a heavy padlock, which rendered
it sufficiently impregnable against a sharper assault
than might be counted on from such as ordinarily
should find motive to molest the proprietor of such a
dwelling.
A small enclosure surrounded the hut and
furnished
ground for some common garden plants which
were not neglected in their culture. A few acres,
on the higher plain above the bank, exhibited signs
of husbandry; and the small nets and other fishing
tackle disposed about the curtilage, together with a
skiff drawn up on the sand, gave evidence of the
ostensible thrift by which the occupant of the hut
obtained a livelihood.
To this spot I propose to introduce my reader, the
day preceding that at which my story has been
opened. It was about an hour before sunset, and a
light drizzling rain, with a steady wind from the
north-east, infused a chilly gloom into the air, and
heightened the tone of solitude which prevailed over
the scene. A thin curl of smoke which rose from
the clumsy chimney of the hut gave a sign of
habitation
to the premises, and this was further confirmed
by the presence of a large and cross-visaged
mastiff-bitch
,
whose heavy head might be discerned thrust
forth from beneath the sill of the gable,a sullen
warder of this sullen place of strength. The waves,
now propelled upon a flood tide, rolled in upon the
shore, and broke almost at the door of the hut, with
a hoarse and harsh and ceaseless plash. Far out
over the bay, the white caps of the wind-driven
surge floated like changing snow drifts upon the
surface of the waters. The water fowl rose in
squadrons above this murky waste and struggled to
windward, in a flight so low as frequently to shield
them from the sight in the spray. An old bald eagle
perched on the loftiest branch of a lightning-riven
tree, immediately upon the bank above the hut, kept
anxious watch upon her nest which, built in the
highest fork, rocked to and fro in the breeze, whilst
her screams of warning to her young seemed to
answer
to the din of the waters.
In the larger apartment of the hut a few fagots
blazed upon the hearth, supplying heat to a pot
that simmered above them, the care of which,
together with other culinary operations, engaged the
attention of a brown, haggard and weather-beaten
woman, who plied this household duty with a silent
and mechanical thrift. She was not the only tenant
of the dwelling. Remote from the hearth, and
immediately
below a small window, sat, apparently
upon the floor, a figure eminently calculated to
challenge
observation. His features were those of a
man of seventy, sharp, shrewd and imprinted with
a deep trace of care. His frame indicated the
possession
,
at an earlier period of his life, of the highest
degree of strength; it was broad in the shoulders,
ample in chest, and still muscular, although deprived
of its roundness by age. His dress, of coarse green
serge, made into a doublet with skirts that fell both
front and rear, secured by a leathern belt, was so
contrived as to conceal, in his present posture, his
lower extremities. A broad ruff received his locks
of iron gray, which fell over his back in crisp wiry
curls: a thick grizzly beard, of the same hue, gave
an elongation to his countenance which imparted to
the observer the unpleasant impression of a head
14*
disproportionably large for the body, at least as seen
in its present aspect. His eyes dark and unusually
clear, were sunk deep in their sockets, whilst a
shaggy and matted brow, overhanging them like a
porch, gave sometimes an almost preternatural
brilliancy
to their quick and changeful glanceslike the
sparkling of water when agitated in a well. It was
observable from the dropping in of the upper jaw
that he had lost his teeth, and this perhaps had given
a tendency of the strong furrowed lines and seams,
with which his features were marked, to converge
towards the mouth.
His girdle sustained a long knife or dagger, which
apparently constituted a part of his daily equipment;
and the oblique flash of his eye, and tremulous
motion
of his thin lip betrayed a temperament, from
which one might infer that this weapon of offence
was not worn merely as an ornament of the person.
The individual described in this summary was
familiar to report, throughout the province, as The
Cripple. His true name was supposed to be Robert
Swale,but this was almost lost in the pervading
popular
designation of Rob of the Bowl, or Trencher
Roban appellative which he had borne ever since
his arrival in the province, now some fifteen years
gone by. Of his history but little was known, and
that little was duly mystified, in the public repute,
by the common tendency in the vulgar mind to make
the most of any circumstance of suspicion. The
story went that he had been shipwrecked, on a
winter
voyage, upon this coast, and, after suffering
incredible
hardships, had saved his life only at the
expense of the loss of both legs by frost. In this
maimed condition he had reached the shore of the
province, and some time afterwards built the hut in
which he now dwelt, near the mouth of St. Jerome's.
Here he had passed many years, without attracting
other notice than such as the stinted charity of the
world affords, when it is exercised upon the fate or
fortunes of an obscure recluse. This observation
began to find a broader scope as soon as it became
obvious that the hermit was not altogether an object
of almsgiving; and the little world of this part of
the province discovering in process of time that he
was not absolutely penniless, were fain to take
offence
at the mystery of his means of earning his
frugal subsistence. Before many years, some few
of the traders and country people round had found
out that Rob was occasionally possessed of good
merchantable commodities much in request by the
inhabitants of the port, and dark whispers were
sometimes circulated touching the manner in which
he came by them. These surmises were not made
topics of public discussion for two reasons;first,
because it was not inconvenient or unprofitable to
the traders in the secret to deal with Rob;and
secondly, Rob was not a man to allow this
indulgence
of idle speculation; he was of an irascible
temper, free to strike when crossed, and, what was
still more to be feared, had friends who were not
unwilling to take up his quarrel. The loss of his
legs was supplied by a wooden bowl or trencher, of
an elliptical shape, to which his thighs were
attached
by a strap, and this rude contrivance was swayed
forward, when the owner chose, by the aid of two
short crutches, which enabled him to lift himself
from the ground and assume a progressive motion.
It was to the exercise which this mode of
locomotion
imposed upon his upper limbs, that the unusual
breadth and squareness of his figure about the
shoulders
,
as well as the visible manifestations of strength
of arm for which he was remarkable, were in part,
perhaps, to be attributed. Use had made him expert
in the management of his bowl, and he could keep
pace pretty fairly with an ordinary walker. The
Cripple was a man of unsocial habits and ascetic
life, although there were times in which his severe
temper relaxed into an approach to companionable
enjoyment, and then his intercourse with the few
who had access to him was marked by a sarcastic
humour and keen ridicule of human action which
showed some grudge against the world, and, at the
same time, denoted conversancy with mankind, and
by no means a deficiency of education. But, in
general, his vein was peevish, and apt to vent itself
in indiscriminate petulance or stern reproof.
A small painting of St. Romuald at his devotions,
by the hand of Salvator himself, hung over a
dressing
table, in the back room of the hut in which the
bed of the Cripple was placed; and this exquisite
gem of art, which the possessor seemed duly to
appreciate
,
was surmounted by a crucifix, indicating
the religious faith in which he worshipped. This
might be gathered also from a curious, antique pix,
of heavy gilded metal, a ponderous missal with silver
clasps, a few old volumes of the lives of the saints,
and other furniture of the like nature, all of which
denoted that the ingredient of a religious devotee
formed an element in his singular compound of
character
.
The superiority of his mind and attainments over
those of the mass of the inhabitants of the province
had contributed to render the Cripple an object of
some interest as well as of distrust amongst them,
and this sentiment was heightened into one
approaching
to vulgar awe, by the reputation of the person
who had always been somewhat in his confidence,
and now attended him as his servitress and only
domestic
.
This person was the ungainly and repulsive
beldam whom I have already noticed as ministering
in the household concerns of the hut. She was a
woman who had long maintained a most unenviable
fame as The Woman of Warrington, in the small
hamlet of that name on the Cliffs of Patuxent, from
whence she had been recently transplanted to
perform
the domestic drudgery in which we have found
her. Her habitation was a rude hovel some few
hundred paces distant from the hut of the Cripple,
on the margin of St. Jerome's creek, and within
gunshot of the rear of the Black Chapel. To this
hovel, after her daily work was done, she retired to
pass the night, leaving her master or patron to that
solitude which he seemed to prefer to any society.
The surly mastiff-bitch, we have noticed, alternately
kept guard at the hut of the master and domestic,
roving between the two in nightly patrol, with a
gruff and unsocial fidelity,no unsuitable go-between
to so strange a pair. It will not be wondered at, that,
in a superstitious age, such an association as that of
the Cripple and the crone, in the vicinity of such a
spot, desecrated, as the Fisherman's lodge had been,
by the acting of a horrible tragedy, should excite,
far and wide amongst the people, a sentiment of
terror sufficiently potent to turn the steps of the
wayfarer, as the shades of evening fell around him,
aside from the path that led to St. Jerome's.
The Cripple, at the time when I have chosen to
present him to my reader, was seated, as I have said,
immediately beneath the window. A pair of
spectacles
assisted his vision as he perused a pacquet of
papers, several of which lay scattered around him.
The dim light for a while perplexed his labour, and
he had directed the door to be thrown wide open
that he might take advantage of the last moment
before
the approaching twilight should arrest his
occupation
.
Whilst thus employed, the deadened sound
of a shot boomed across the bay.
Ha! he exclaimed as he threw aside the paper
in his hand and directed his eyes towards the water;
there is a signalby my body, a signal gun!an
ill bird is flying homeward. Did you not hear that
shot, woman?
I had my dream of the brigantine two nights
ago, replied the servitress; and of the greedy
kite that calls himself her master;the shot must be
his.
Whose can it be else? demanded the Cripple
sharply, as he swung himself forward to the
door-sill
and shook his locks from his brow in the act of
straining his sight across the dim surface of the bay.
Ay, ay; there it is. Harkanother shot!that
is the true pass word between us:Dickon, sure
enough!The brigantine is in the offing.
Cocklescraft
is coming in with the speed of a gull. He
comes full freightedfull freighted, as is his wont,
with the world's plunder. What dole hath he done
this flight?what more wealthy knave than himself
hath he robbed? Mischief, mischief, mischiefgood
store of it, I'll be sworn:and a keener knave than
himself he hath not found in his wide venture. He
will be coming ashore to visit the Cripple, ha!he
shall be welcomeas he ever hath been. We are
comrades,we are cronies, and merry in our
divisions
the
Skipper and the Cripple!there is concord
in itthe Skipper and the Cripplemerry men
both!
These uprisings of the inner thoughts of the man
were uttered in various tonesone moment scarce
audible, the next with an emphatic enunciation, as if
addressed to his companion in the hut,and
sometimes
with the semblance of a laugh, or rather
chuckle, which was wormwood in its accent, and
brought the rheum from his eye down his cheek.
The beldam, accustomed to this habit of
self-communion
in the Cripple, apparently heeded not these
mutterings, until he, at length, accosted her with a
command.Mistress Kate, double the contents of
your pot;the skipper and some of his men will be
here presently, as keen and trenchant as their own
cutlasses. They will be hungry, woman,as these
saltwater monsters always are for earthy
provender
.
Such sharp-set cattle should bring their
provender
with them, replied the domestic, as she went
about increasing her store of provision in compliance
with her master's directions.
Or the good red gold, or the good red gold, old
jade! interrupted the Cripple. The skipper doth
not shrink in the girdle from the disease of a lean
purse, and is therefore worthy of our worshipful
entertainment
.
So goes the world, and we will be in
the fashion! Though the world's malisons drive him
hither as before a tempest, yet, comes he rich in its
gear; he shall have princely reception. I am king of
this castle, and ordain it. Is he taking in sail?is he
seeking an anchorage? Ha, he understands his craft,
and will be with us anon, he continued, as he
marked
the movements of the approaching vessel.
There might be dimly seen, nearly abreast of St.
Jerome's, a close-reefed brig, holding her course
before
a fair wind directly across the bay towards the
hut of the Cripple. She was, at intervals, lost to
view behind the thickening haze, and as often
re-appeared
as she bent under the fresh north-east breeze
and bounded rapidly with the waves towards the lee
shore. It was after the hour of sunset when the
tenants of the hut were just able to discern, in the
murky gloom of the near nightfall, that she had
lowered
sail and swung round with her head seaward, at
an anchorage some two miles out in the bay.
Quick, Mistress Kate, and kindle some
brushwood
on the shore, said the master of the hut. It
grows suddenly dark, and the boat's crew will need
a signal to steer by.
The woman gathered a handful of fagots, and,
kindling them into a blaze, transferred them to the
beach in front of the hut, where, notwithstanding the
rain, they burned with a steady light. This
illumination
had not subsided before the stroke of oars rose
above the din of the waves; and the boat with her
crew, sheeted with the broad glare of the signal-fire,
suddenly appeared mounted on the surf, surrounded
with foam and spray, and in the same instant was
heard grating on the gravel of the beach.
Cocklescraft, with two seamen, entered the hut.
The skipper was now in the prime of youthful
manhood
;
tall, active and strong, with the free step and
erect bearing that no less denoted the fearlessness of
his nature than pride in the consciousness of such a
quality. His face, tinged with a deep brown hue,
was not unhandsome, although an expression of
sensuality
,
to some extent, deprived it of its claim to be
admired. A brilliant eye suffered the same
disparagement
by its over-ready defiance, which told of a
temper obtrusively prone to quarrel. The whole
physiognomy
wanted gentleness, although a fine set of
teeth, a regular profile, and a complexion which, with
Vol. I.15
proper allowance for exposure to the weather, was
uncommonly good, would unquestionably have won
from the majority of observers the repute of a high
degree of masculine beauty.
A scarlet jacket fitted close across the breast, wide
breeches of ash-coloured stuff, hanging in the fashion
of a kirtle or kilt to the knees, tight grey hose,
accurately
displaying the leg in all its fine proportions,
and light shoes, furnished a costume well adapted to
the lithe and sinewy figure of the wearer. A jet
black and glossy moustache, and tuft below the
nether
lip, gave a martial aspect to his face, which had,
nevertheless, the smoothness of skin of a boy. He
wore in his embroidered belt, a pair of pistols richly
mounted with chased silver and costly jewels, and his
person was somewhat gorgeously and, in his present
occupation, inappropriately ornamented with gems
and chains of gold. His hair, in almost feminine
luxuriance, descended in ringlets upon his neck. A
large hat made of the palm leaf, broad enough to
shade his face and shoulders, but ill sorted with the
rest of his apparel, and was still less adapted to the
season and the latitude he was in, though it threw
into the general expression of his figure that trait of
the swaggering companion which was, in fact,
somewhat
prominent in his character.
How dost, friend Rob? was his salutation in
crossing the threshold; how dost, Rob o' the Bowl,
or Rob o' the Trencher?bowl or trencher,either
likes me; I am sworn friend to both, he continued
as he stooped and took the Cripple's hand.
Ay, thy conscience has never stayed thee, was
the Cripple's reply, as he received the skipper's grasp,
when thou wouldst put thy hand in another man's
bowl or trencher,and especially, Dickon, if they
were made of gold. Thou hast an appetite for such
dishes. How now! where do you come from?
That shall be answered variously, friend of the
wooden platter. If you speak to me as Meinherr
Von Cogglescraft, I am from Antwerp, master of the
Olive Branch, with a comfortable cargo of
Hollands
,
and wines French and Rhenish, old greybeard,
and some solid articles of Dutch bulk. But if it be
to the Caballero Don Ricardo,le beso las manos!
I am from Tortuga and the Keys, Senor
Capitan
del Escalfador (there is much virtue in a painted
cloth) with a choice assortment of knicknackeries,
which shall set every wench in the province agog. I
have rare velvets of Genoa, piled and cut in the
choicest fashions: I have grograms, and stuffs, and
sarsnets, with a whole inventory of woman trumpery
the very pick of a Spanish bark, bound from Naples
to the islands, which was so foolish as to read my flag
by its seeming, and just to drop into the Chafing-Dish
when he thought he was getting a convoy to help him
out of the way of the too pressing and inquisitive
courtesies of certain lurking friends of our's in the
Keys. I have, besides, some trinkets, which are none
the worse for having been blessed by the church.
You shall have a choice, Rob, to deck out your
chamber with some saintly gems.
Ha! I guessed thy deviltry, Dickon, said Rob,
with a laugh which, as always happened when much
moved, brought tears down his cheeksI guessed
it when I saw thee step across the door-sill with that
large and suspicious sombrero on thy head. It never
came from Hollandthough you would fain persuade
the province folks that you trade no where else: it
is of the breed of the tropics, and smells of Hispaniola
and Santo Domingo.
It is a tell-tale, replied Cocklescraft, and should
have been thrown overboard before this. Old Kate
of Warrington, thy handand here is a hand for
thee! How does the world use thee? Fairly, I
hope, as you deserve? You shall have the sombrero,
Kate: you can truss it up into a new fashion for a
bonnet, and I have store of ribands to give thee to
set it off.
My share of this world's favour, said the crone,
in acknowledgment of the skipper's bounty, has
never been more than the cast-off bravery of such as
hold a high head over a wicked heart. I have ever
served at the mess of the devil's bantlings. But, as
the custom is, I must be civil and thankful for these
blessings; and so, Master Cocklescraft, I give you
thanks, she added with a courtesy, as she placed
the hat upon her head and strutted fantastically in
the room, for your dainty head-gear that you are
unwilling to wear, and durst not, master, before the
Port Wardens of St. Mary's.
How, Kate! exclaimed the skipper, you have
lost no whit of that railing tongue I left with you at
my last venture? I marvel that the devil hath not
shorn it, out of pure envy. But I know, Kate, you
can do justice to the good will of a friend, after all:
I would have thee to know that thou hast not been
unconsidered, good mother of a thousand devilkins:
I have brought thee stuff for a new gown, rich and
ladylike, Kate, and becoming thy grave and matronly
years, and sundry trickeries for it, by way of
garniture
;
and, reverend dam of night-monsters, I have
in store for thee some most choice distillations of the
West Indies, both plain and spiced. Thou dost not
spurn the strong waters, Kate of Warrington,nor
the giver of them?
This is a make-peace fashion of thine, said the
beldam, relaxing into a smile. You thought not of
the woman of Warringtonno, not so much as a
dog's dream of heruntil it chanced to come into
your head that the foolish crone had a will which it
might not be for your good to set against you. I
knew your incoming, Richard Cocklescraft, before it
was thought of in the province; and I know when
your outgoing will be. You come with a surly sky
and a gay brow;you shall trip it hence with a
bright heaven above you, and deftly, boybut with
a heavy heart and a new crime upon thy soul.
Peace, woman! I will hear none of thy
croakings
it
is an old trick of thine; the device is too
stale, said Cocklescraft, half playfully and half vexed.
You are no conjuror, Kate, as you would make the
world believe by these owl-hootings: if you had but
a needle's-eyeful of the true witch in you, you would
have foretold what bounty my luck has brought you.
15*
Rob, we have packages to land to-night. Is the
Chapel ready for our service?
How should it be other than ready? Doth not
the devil keep his quarters there? said Rob with a
low-toned chuckle that shook his figure for some
moments
,
and almost closed his eyes; hath he not his
court in the Chapel? Go ask the whole country side:
they will swear to it on their bible oaths. Sundries have
seen the hoofs and horns, and heard the howlings,
ay, and smelt the brimstoneha, ha, ha! They'll
swear to it. Is the Chapel ready, in sooth! It is a
precious Chapel! Paul Kelpy, thou wert an honest
cut-throat, to bedevil so good a house: we turn it to
accountha, ha! It needs but to take the key,
Dickon. I warrant you ne'er a man in the province,
burgher or planter, gentle or simple, ventures near
enough to molest you.
The surf runs high, said Cocklescraft, and may
give us trouble in the landing to-night; and as
daylight
must not find me in this latitude, I shall put
what I may ashore before the dawn, and then take a
flight to the opposite side of the bay. To-morrow
night I shall finish my work; and you shall soon
after hear, at St. Mary's, that the good and peaceful
brigantine, the Olive Branch, has arrived from
Holland
.
Meantime, I will leave you a half dozen men
to garrison the Chapel, Rob.
It is so well garrisoned with my merry goblins
already, said Rob, that it requires but a light
watch. The fires alone would frighten his Lordship's
whole array of rangers. That was a pretty device
of mine, Dickonblue, green, and redexcellent
devil-fires all! Then I have masksfaith, most
special
masks! the very noses of them would frighten
the short-winded train-bands of the Port into
catalepsy
.
And the Chapel had an ill name when the
fisherman shed blood on the floor: but since we
blackened it, Richardoh, that was a subtle thought!
it is past all power of exorcism: there is an ague
in the very name of the Black Chapel. And here
the Cripple gave way to a burst of laughter, which
had been struggling for vent during all this reference
to the arts by which he had contrived to maintain the
popular dread of the fisherman's lodge.
Whilst this conference was held, the crone had
prepared their evening meal, which being now ready,
Rob was lifted upon a low platform that brought him
to the proper level with the table, where he was able
to help himself. Cocklescraft partook with him, and
might almost have envied the keen gust and ravenous
appetite with which his host despatched the coarse
but savoury fare of the boardfor the Cripple's
power of stomach seemed to be no whit impaired by
age. He continued to talk, during his meal, in the
same strain which we have described, now indulging
a peevish self-communion, now bursting forth with
some sarcastic objurgation of the world, and again
breaking a jest with his visiter.
When the seamen, under the ministration of the
aged domestic, had got their supper, Cocklescraft
took his departure.
All night long lights were gleaming in the
Chapel
;
the rain continued in a steady misty drizzle,
and not a star was seen to tempt a wanderer abroad.
The morning, which broke upon an atmosphere
purged of its vapours, showed no trace of the brig
in the vicinity of St. Jerome's. Far down the bay,
hugging the eastern shore, might have been
discerned
what a practised mariner would affirm to be a
sail; but whether ship or brigwhether outward or
homeward bound, might not be told without the aid
of a glass.
CHAPTER XIII.
Up she rose, and forth she goes,
I'll mote she speed therefor.
Adam Bell
.
Bell, my wife, she loves not strife,
Yet she will lead me if she can;
And oft, to live a quiet life,
I'm forced to yield, though I'm goodman.
It's not for a man a woman to threape,
Unless he first give o'er his plea:
As we began we now will leave
And I'll take my old cloak about me.
Old Song
.
It
was nine o'clock of the morning before
Dauntrees
and his companions, Garret and Arnold, rose
from their beds. Pamesack, whose taciturnity was
not greater than his indifference to fatigue, had, at
an earlier hour, gone his way. A breakfast was
provided in the Captain's quarters, and the three
heroes of the past night sat down to it with a relish
which showed that, however unfit they might be to
contend against spiritual foes, their talents for this
encounter of material existences were highly
respectable
.
You have had a busy time of it in dreams, Master
Weasel, said Dauntrees, since you laid yourself
down on your truckle bed this morning. You have
been re-acting your exploits at the Chapel. I heard
you at daylight crying aloud for sword and dagger.
I warrant you, Captain Dauntrees, replied the
publican, my head has been full of fantasies since I
laid me down to restfor I was exceeding weary
and weariness doth set the brain to ramble in sleep.
There was good argument, too, in our deeds at St.
Jerome's for a world of dreaming.
Ah, the night has made a man of you, my
gallant
vintner. You should bless your stars that you
fell into such worthy company. You knew not
heretofore
even
with your experience at Worcester
what elements of valour it pleased Heaven to mix up
in the mould whereof thou wert made. A man never
sufficiently values himself until he has had some such
passage as this.
Ay, and look you, Captain Dauntrees, said
Garret, his eye flashing with self-gratulation, you
will reflect that I had the brunt of it
alone
, whilst
you three were banded together for common defence
and support. There I was, by my single self, in the
very centre of them. A man needs more comfort
and companionship in a matter with witches and
devils, than he does against your sword and buckler
fellows. Tut! I wouldn't have cared a fig for a foe
that could be struck at; but these pestilent things of
the darkhags on besoms, and flying bats as big as
a man, great sword-fishes walking on legs, with their
screechings, and mopings, and mewingsLord, Lord,
how it tries the reins of a solitary man! But you had
flashing and firing, and charging, Captain, which is
more in the way of what one expects in a fight, and
one is prepared for: it has life in it.
That is most true, doughty Garret. A culverin
is but the whiff of an oaten pipe, compared with a
hag upon her broomstick. Thou wert ever the man
to encounter these women. It needs thy mettle to
face them. Now there is thy wife, Master Weasel
oh, but that is a perilous venture in store for thee!
You shall go to her and have it over, whilst I make
my report to his Lordship; when that is done I will
straight for the Crow and Archer, to help you in the
battle, which by that time will doubtless find you sore
at need.
I must go to his Lordship with you, replied
Garret, in a lowered key; I must have my hand in
the report; after that we will set out together for
the inn.
Why, man! exclaimed Dauntrees, with affected
astonishment, would you tarry to do your duty to
Mistress Dorothy? Do you not know that she hath
suffered agony of mind the live-long night in your
behalf, and that she is now in the very tempest of her
affection waiting for you?
I know it, I know it, worthy Captain; but it doth
not become my respect for Lord Charles's service to
defer his business for mine own.
Thou shalt not budge an inch, said Dauntrees,
on any other path than that which takes thee quickly
to thy loving wife.
Truly, Captain, replied Weasel, in a dolorous
tone, I would have thee to go with me; I beseech
you heartily, allow me to bear you company to his
Lordship. His Lordship will think it strange I did
not come: and it will take more than me to pacify
the dame.
Well, friend Weasel, in consideration that you
contended single handed last night with a whole score
of devils, and bore thee gallantly; and, moreover, as
it is such heavy odds against thee in this matter of
Dame Dorothyfor, of a verity, I know she is in a
devil of a passion at thy contumacy, and not less at
mine, I'll be swornwhy we will make a muster of it
and breathe our defence in solid column. Arnold
will go with us. And mark me, Vintner, at the
fitting
time, we shall regale.
On the best in cellar or larder at the Crow and
Archer, replied Garret. You have the word of a
man and a soldier for it.
I wot of a woman and no soldier, whose word
would go further to that bargain, Garret, than yours.
Make ready, friends, we must move.
Dauntrees now set his beaver jauntily over his
brow, and throwing his short cloak across his arm,
marched through the postern of the fort, followed by
his trusty allies, to the mansion of the Lord Proprietor.
Lord Baltimore received them in his library, and
there heard from the Captain a circumstantial
narrative
of the events of the preceding night.
It is a strange tale, he said, and may well
perplex
the faith of the simple rustics of the province.
That evil spirits preside over that blood-stained house,
from your testimony, Captain Dauntrees, may no
longer be denied. Friends, you all saw these things?
All, said Garret Weasel, with emphatic
solemnity
as he straitened his body even beyond the
perpendicular
line. Pamesack and Arnold stood by
the Captain and can vouch for him. I maintained
a post of danger, an please your Lordship, alone;
what I saw neither the Captain, Arnold, nor
Pamesack
,
sawit was a fearful sight.
What was it? inquired the Proprietary, with
some earnestness.
A woman, replied Garret,
seemingly
a woman,
an your Lordship comprehends: but in truth a witch,
as we all do know:Kate of Warrington, of whom
your Lordship has heard. She it was who came
suddenly
down upon the wold. How she came, here
Garret shook his head, and what came with her,
it was a sight to look upon!
The vintner affirms to sundry fantastic shapes of
imps and spectres in company with the woman of
Warrington, said Dauntrees. We saw nothing of
the hag, having left Master Weasel, some distance in
our rear when we visited the Chapel. He was cold,
and required comfort. What he recounts, my Lord,
you have his own avouch for.
And what say you, Arnold? inquired his
Lordship
,
smiling.
Vol. I.16
These ghosts and goblins keep a hot house, and
the less we have to do with them the better, replied
the forester, gravely.
They fired upon you, Captain? said the
Proprietary
;
with what weapons?
They had the sharp crack of the musket and
pistol, replied Dauntrees, or what seemed to be such:
yet I would not swear I saw carnal weapons in the
strife, though in the flash I thought I noted fire arms.
This may tell better than guess of mine, my Lord,
he added, as he held up his cloak and pointed to a
rent in one of its folds; this hole was made by some
missive from the house: whether it be a bullet mark
or an elf-shot, I will not say.
Body o' me! exclaimed Garret Weasel, as the
Captain pointed to the damage he had sustained, I
knew not this before. There was hot work, I
warrant
.
There is knavery in alliance with this sorcery,
said the Proprietary, as he examined the cloak.
These wicked spirits ever find kindred amongst
men. They have profligate companions of flesh to
profit by their devilish arts. I thank you, friends,
kindly, for this venture, and will turn it to wholesome
account hereafter. Fare you well.
The party left the room, and now shaping their
course towards the Crow and Archer, soon
descended
below the bank and took the road along the beach.
Whilst they trudged through the sand and gravel,
midway between the fort and the town, Dauntrees,
looking behind, saw a figure descending on
horseback
from the main gate of the fort down to the road
upon which they now travelled. It was that of a
woman, whose gestures, at the distance of half a mile,
were sufficiently observable to show that she urged
her horse forward with impatient earnestness. As
soon as she arrived at the level of the beach, her
speed was increased nearly to the utmost of the
faculty
of the animal which bore her, and she now
came flying over the sand, with her garments and
loose tresses floating in the wind.
In the devil's name, what have we here?
exclaimed
Dauntrees. As I live, it is our queen of the
hostel! Oh, Garret, Garret, here is a volcano! Here
is an out-come with a conclusion at hand! Stand,
masters, firmly on your legs, and brace up for the
onset!
Alack, alack! groaned the publican; the
woman
is bereft. She hath my nag from the fort.
Ay, and rides upon your saddle, as if it were
made for her, ejaculated the Captain. Take post
behind me, Garret: I will answer her speech.
It were no more than the luck she deserves,
said Garret, pettishly, if she should fall from the
nag and break her little finger, or at the least sprain
an ancle-joint.
Hold, runagates! varlets! out upon you for a
filthy Captain! shouted the dame, in a shrill voice,
as she came within call of the party, and now
galloped
up to the spot at which they had halted. Give
me that idiot from your beastly company. Garret
Weasel, Garret Weasel! you have been the death of
me!
Good lack, Mistress Dorothy, wife, why dost thou
bear thyself in such a sort as this?
I will bare thee to the buff, driveller, for this.
Are you not steeped in wickedness and abomination
by evil-consorting with this copper Captain, and this
most horrid wood ranger? Hast no eye for thy
family; no regard for good name, that you must be
strolling o' nights with every pot-guzzler and
foul-breathed
and cankered cast-off of the wars? I am
ashamed of thee. You have been in your cups, I
warrant, the live-long night.
Dame, I must speak, now, said Dauntrees.
Thou, thou! interrupted the hostess, with her
face scarlet from anger. Never in a Christian
land should such as thou be permitted to lift thy head
before honest people. His Lordship would do but
justice to the province to chain thee up in a dark
stable, as a bull which may not be trusted at large.
Did you not beguile me last night with a base lie?
Did you not practice upon me, you faithless,
false-hearted
coward? here tears fell from the flashing
eyes of the voluble landlady. Did you not steal
that lob, my husband, from me, thief?
Appearances, dame, replied the Captain, with a
grave composure, if they might be trusted, were
certainly to my disfavour last night. But then, I
knew that when this matter was all over, I had a most
sufficient and excellent reason, which a considerate,
virtuous, and tender-hearted woman like yourself
would fully approve, when she came to hear it.
There was matter in hand of great import and
urgency; no revelling, dameno riotbut brave
service
,
enjoined by his Lordship, and which it was his
Lordship's most earnest desire should be committed
in part to thy husband. It was an action of pith and
bravery he had on hand; and his Lordship being well
aware, dame, that Garret's wife was a woman of a
loving heart, and gentle withal in her nature, and not
fitted to endure the wringing of her affection by such
a trial as the adventure imposed upon Garret, he
charged me to make some light pretext for
withdrawing
thy husband from thine eye, which, by fraud, I
confess, I did, and am nowsince Garret hath
worthily achieved his most perilous dutyhere to
avow my own treachery. There is promotion and
great advantage at hand for this which will set up
thy head, dame, the highest amongst them that wear
hoods.
We have barely escaped with our lives, Mistress
Dorothy, said Weasel, in a whining accent of
deprecation
;
we should be made much of and praised for
our duty, not be set upon with taunts and foul
rebukes
;
and when you know all, wife, you will be
sorry for this wounding of our good name.
This is but another trick, said the landlady.
Nay, good mistress, interrupted the Captain, I
will agree to be gibbeted by thine own fair hand, if
I do not satisfy thee that in this adventure we are
deserving
of all applause. The Lieutenant at the fort,
16*
doubtless, told thee that we were absent last night on
special duty at his Lordship's command?
The varlet did feign such a story, when I thought
to catch this fool in thy company. And he would
deny me, too, the nag; but I brought such coil about
his ears that he was glad to give me the beast and set
all gates open. Where do you say you have spent
the night?
At the Black Chapel, mistress, said Weasel, with
a most portentous solemnity of speech: at the Black
Chapel, by his Lordship's order; and, oh, the sights
we have seen! and the time we have had of it, wife!
it would make thy blood freeze to hear it.
On the honour of a soldier, dame! by the faith
of this right hand! said Dauntrees, as he offered it
to the hostess and took her's, I swear this is true.
We have had a night of wonders, which you shall
hear in full when the time suits. We are on our way
now to the Crow and Archer, for thine especial
gratification
.
Can this be true, Arnold? inquired the mollified
and bewildered landlady. I will believe what you
say.
You may trust in every word of it, as I am a
Christian man. There be marvellous doings at the
Black Chapel. We have seen spirits and devils in
company.
It is graver matter, wife, than you wot of, said
Weasel.
Ride forward, dame, added Dauntrees; you
shall see us soon at the hostel. And I promise you
shall have the story, too, of the Mercer's Wife from
beginning to end: you shall dame.
You are a wheedling, cogging cheat, Captain;
thy roguery will have a melancholy end yet, replied
the dame, as she now rode forward with a sunshiny
smile playing upon features which but a few moments
before were dark with storm.
When they reached the Crow and Archer they
found a group of traders assembled on the quay,
gazing
with a busy speculation towards the mouth of
the river. By degrees the crowd increased, and
the rumour soon spread abroad that the Olive
Branch was in sight. A vessel was, indeed,
discernible
across the long flat of St. Inigoe's, just
entering
the river, and those who professed a knowledge
of nautical affairs had no scruple in announcing her
as the brigantine of Cocklescraft. She was
apparently
an active craft, belonging to the smaller class
of sea-vessels, and manifestly a faster sailer than was
ordinarily to be seen at that period. A fair and
fresh breeze impelled her steadily towards her haven,
and as she bounded over the glittering waters, the
good folks of the little city were seen clustering in
knots on every prominent cliff along the high bank,
and counting the minutes which brought this
messenger
from the old world nearer to their salutation.
Meantime the Olive Branch began to show the
sparkling foam which broke upon her bow; then to
give forth voices from her deck, audible to the crowd;
presently to lower sail; and at last, being stripped to
her bare poles and naked rigging, she glided with
lessening speed, slower and slower, until her
extended
cable showed that her anchor was dropt and her
voyage at an end.
It was past noon when the brig came to her
mooring
,
opposite the Town House wharf, and after a
brief interval, Cocklescraft, arrayed as we have
before
seen him, except that he had changed his
sombrero
for a tasseled cap of cloth, landed on the quay,
and soon became the lion of the Crow and Archer.
CHAPTER XIV.
Every white will have its black,
And every sweet its sour.
Old Ballad
.
The
birth-day festival at the Rose Croft might be
said appropriately to belong to the eminent dominion
of the Lady Maria. It therefore lacked nothing of
her zealous supervision. With the aid of father
Pierre and some female auxiliaries she had persuaded
the Collectora task of no great difficultyto
sanction
the proceeding, and she was now intent upon
the due ordering and setting out of the preparations.
The day was still a week off when, early after
breakfast
,
on a pleasant morning the business-fraught lady
was seen in the hall, arrayed in riding hood and
mantle, ready to mount a quiet black-and-white pony
that, in the charge of a groom, awaited her pleasure
at the door. Natta, the little Indian girl, stood by
entrusted with the care of a work-bag or wallet
apparently
well stuffed with the materials for future
occupation,the parcel-fragments which thrifty
housewives and idleness-hating dames, down to this
day, are accustomed to carry with them, for the
sake of the appearance, at least, of industry. Just
at this moment the Proprietary came into the hall,
and seeing that his worthy sister was bound on some
enterprise of more than usual earnestness, he added
to his customary morning salutation a playful inquiry
into the purport of her excursion.
Ah, Charles, she replied, there are doings in
the province which are above the rule of your
burgesses
and councils. I hold a convocation at the
Rose Croft to-day, touching matters more earnest
than your state affairs. We have a merry-making
in the wind, and I am looked to both for countenance
and advice. It is my prerogative, brother, to be
mistress of all revels.
God bless thine age, Maria! was the
affectionate
reply of the Proprietaryit wears a pleasant
verdure and betokens a life of innocent thoughts and
kind actions. May the saints bear thee gently
onward
to thy rest! Come, I will serve as your
cavalier
,
and help you to your horse, sister.See now,
my arm has pith in it. Hither, Nattathere is the
wench on the pillionwho could serve thee with a
better grace than that?
Thanksthanks, good brother! ejaculated the
lady as the Proprietary lifted her to her seat, and
then swung the Indian girl upon the pillion behind
her. Your arm is a valiant arm, and is blessed by
more than one in this province. It has ever been
stretched forth in acts of charity and protection.
Nay, Maria, you are too old to flatter. Fie! I
have no advancement to offer thee. In truth thou
art sovereign herethough you go through your
realm with but scant attendance for one so
magnified
.
Why is not Albert in your train? I may well
spare himas he has a liking for such service.
Brother, I would not tax the Secretary. He
hath a free foot for his own pleasure; and, methinks,
he finds his way to the Rose Croft easily enough
without my teaching. It is an ancient caution of
mine, in such affairs, neither to mar nor make.
Heaven help thee for a considerate spinster!
said the Proprietary with a benignant smile as he
raised his hands and shook them sportively towards
his sister. Go thy ways, with thy whimsies and
thy scruples;and a blessing on them! I wish
yours were our only cares:but go thy ways, girl!
he added, as the lady set forth on her journey, and
he withdrew from the door.
At the Rose Croft, the approaching merry-making
had superseded all other family topics, both in parlour
and kitchen. The larder was already beginning to
exhibit the plentiful accumulations which, in a place
of strength, might portend a siege: the stable boys
were ever on the alert, with their cavalry, to do
rapid errands to the town, and Michael Mossbank,
the gardener, was seen in frequent and earnest
consultation
with John Pouch, a river-side cotter,
touching
supplies of fish and wild fowl.
Whilst the elder sister Alice despatched the graver
duties of the housekeeping, she had consigned to
Blanche the not less important care of summoning
the guests, and the maiden was now seated at the
table with pen in hand registering the names of those
who had been, or were to be invited to the feast,
or in other words making a census of pretty nearly
the whole titheable population of St. Mary's and its
dependencies.
A plague upon it for a weary labour! she
exclaimed
as she threw down the pen and rested her
chin upon the palm of her hand. I know I shall
forget somebody I ought not to forgetand shall be
well rated for it. And then again I shall be chid for
being too free with my fellowship.What a world of
names is here! I did not think the whole province
had so many. There is Winnefred Hay, the
Viewer's
sister,they have tales about her which, if they
be true, it is not fit she should be a crony of mine
and yet I don't believe them, though many do.
Truly the Viewer will be in a grand passion if I
slight her! Sister Alice, give me your advice.
Bid her to the feast, Blanche. We should be
slow to believe these rumours to the injury of a
neighbour. Winnefred Hay, is not over discreet
and gives more semblance to an evil opinion than, in
truth, her faults deserve: but the townspeople are
scarce better in this quickness to censureespecially
such as look to the tobacco viewing. Lawrence
Hay's place has something to do with that scandal.
I am glad, sister Alice, you give me an
argument
to indulge my own secret wish, replied
Blanche; for I like not to believe harsh reports
against any of our province. And so, that is at an
end. Alack!here is another matter for counsel:
Grace Blackiston says Helen Clements is too young
to be at my gathering:she has two years before
her yet at school, and has only begun embroidering.
Oh, but I would as soon do a barefoot penance for a
month as disappoint her!she is the wildest of all
for a dance, and looks for it, I know,though she
says never a word, and has her eyes on the ground
when we talk about it.Ha, let Grace Blackiston
prate as she will, Helen shall be here! Fairly, my
gossip,I will be mistress in my own house, I
promise
you!
There is room for all thy friends, young and old,
said Alice; and you should not stint to ask them
for the difference of a span or so in height. You are
not quite a woman yourself, Blanche,no, nor Grace
neitheralthough you perk yourselves up so
daintily
.
Would you have the gauger's wife, sister?
inquired
Blanche, with a face of renewed perplexity.
I think my dear Lady Maria would be pleased if I
bid the damefor the gauger is a good friend of his
Lordshiphot-headed, they say, but that does not
make him the worseand his dame takes it kindly
to be noticed.
Even as you will, Blanche,it is a mark of
gentle
nurture not to be too scrupulous with thy
questions
of qualitya kind neighbour will never disgrace
your courtesy. But one thing, child, your father will
look to:see that you avoid these Coodes and
Fendalls
and even the Chiseldines. There is a feud
between
them and the Proprietary,and my Lord's
Vol. I.17
friends are warm in the matter,your father amongst
the rest.
I warrant you they get no bid from me, said
Blanche, as the colour mantled in her cheek. I
hate them stock and branchyes, as my good lady
hates them.
Blanche had scarcely uttered these words before
the good lady herself rode past the window. The
maiden bounded forth to receive her, and Alice with
less precipitation followed.
I come with pony and pillion, said the visiter
as she was assisted to the ground, and bustled into
the parlour. I could not rest until I saw Blanche,
to know if all her biddings were abroad. My pretty
bird, pray look you to your taskyou have no time
to lose: there are the families beyond Patuxentand
our friends across the bay,besides many at home
that I know have not heard from you yet. And here,
sweet, I have brought you some trinketry which you
shall wear at the feast: a part is for Grace
Blackiston
,
and a part for you. Thou shalt have the choice,
Blanche:but whisht!not a word of it to Grace,
because I think she hath a conceit to be jealous of
thy favour.
Whilst the two sisters welcomed the lady and
responded
to her voluble communications in a tone of
affectionate intimacy, the contents of the work-bag
were thrown open to view, and successively gave
rise to sundry discussions relating not only to the
objects presented, but also collaterally to the
thousand
matters of detail connected with the festival,
thus engrossing the first hour of their interview, until
the subject was changed by an exclamation from
Blanche, as she looked through the window upon the
river
Oh, but here is a gallant sight!see yonder
hawk following a heron. He will strike presently
the heron cannot get away. Poor bird! how he
doubles and drops in his flight to escape the swift
hawk;but it is of no avail. I should almost say it
was sinful,if it was not approved and followed by
those I love bestI should hold it sinful to frighten
and torture a harmless heron by such pursuit. There,
the hawk has struck, and down comes hawk and
quarry to the water.
It is his Lordship's hawk, said the Lady Maria,
as she looked out upon the river. Derrick the
falconer
must be abroad to-day with his birds:and
now whilst I speak, there is walking along the
beach. And he is not alone neither:by that short
mantle and that feather, Blanche, you may know a
friend.
The colour rose on the maiden's cheek as she said,
it is Albert, his Lordship's secretary.
His eyes are turned this way, said the sister of
the Proprietary. A wager he comes to the house
in the next ten minutes!He would fain find some
business with the CollectorI know Master Albert's
occasions: nay, do not flurry thyself, my sweet
Blanche.
I wish the Secretary
would
come, returned the
maiden; we have need of him; he promised to
show me how I were best to arrange my flower
vases.
Then thou shouldst do well to despatch a
messenger
to him, interrupted the Lady Maria,
playfully
;
dost thou not think he might forget?
Oh no, my dear lady, replied Blanche,
Master
Albert never forgets a promise to me.
Indeed! Well, I should have thought that
having
occasion to make you so many promisesfor he
is here at the Rose Croft thrice a week at leastand
every visit has its promise, or I mistakehe would
forget full one half.
I deal but scantily in promises with the
Secretary
,
replied Blanche. Master Albert's errands
here are for pastime mostly.
Ah, he doth not forget, exclaimed the Lady
Maria; for there I see the feather of his bonnet as
he climbs up the bank,and now we have his head
and shoulders; we shall get the whole man anon,
and Master Benedict Leonard in the bargain, for I
see
him
trudging in the Secretary's footsteps, as he
is wont to do; his young Lordship hath become the
Secretary's shadow. And there is Derrick behind.
They are all bound for this haven.
As the lady spoke, the Secretary was seen from
the window with the heir apparent and the falconer
on the verge of the bank which they had just
ascended
.
Benedict Leonard had a hooded hawk upon
his fist; and Derrick, waving a light rod to which
a small streamer or flag was attached, was busy in
luring down the bird that had just flown at the
heron. Whilst the falconer continued his
occupation
the Secretary and his young companion entered
the mansion.
Albert Verheyden's accost to the ladies was
characterized by a familiarity not unmixed with
diffidence, and a momentary flush passed across
his cheek as, after saluting Mistress Alice, and
turning
to Blanche, his eye fell upon the sister of the
Proprietary
.
I did not expect to find my honoured
lady so early at the Rose Croft, he said with a
profound reverence. It should have been my duty,
madam, to attend you, but I knew not of your
purpose
;
and the falconer being bent to fly the cast of
lancrets which Colonel Talbot lately sent to my Lord,
would have me witness the trial, and so I came with
Master Benedict to see this sport.
Nay, Albert, replied the lady, you should not
have been of my company even if you had sought
permission. I come to-day on no idle errand which
might allow your loitering paces and customary
delays
to gaze on headlands and meadows, whereby
you are wont to interrupt the course of your
journey
.
The matter of our present meeting has need of
stirring feet, which go direct to their work,yours
are not such. Still, Master Albert, you shall not be
useless to-day:here is occupation to thy hand;
Blanche is in much want of a penman, and as you
are of the writing craft, she would gladly enlist thee
in her servicethat is, if thou hast not been already
marshaled and sworn under her colours.
Master Albert, our dear lady does but jest, said
17*
Blanche. She knows I had at first no need of
better penman than myself, and now have need of
none,for, in truth, my work was finished ere she
came. But your service I may command in a better
task. You did promise to bring me some device for
my flower-stands.
The joiner will have them here to-day, replied
the Secretary. I have not failed to spur his
industry
as well as my own poor invention to that
endeavour
.
Then all is done but the rendering of thanks,
said Blanche, which yet I am not in the humour to
do, having matter of quarrel with you for that
following
of the poor heron which, but now, we saw the
hawk strike down, whilst you were a looker-on, and,
as we suspect, an encourager of the trespass. It was
a cruel thing to assail the innocent fowl, which, being
native here, has ever found friends in our house;
yes, and has daily fed upon the flat below the garden.
These herons scarce fly when I walk by them on the
beach. I wish the falconer had sought his quarry
elsewhere than amongst my harmless birds. You
should have controlled him.
I am deeply grieved, replied the Secretary.
Indeed
,
I knew not of the bird nor whence he came:
nor thought of it, in truth. A feather of his wing
should not have come to harm had I been aware that
he had ever pleased your eye. I am all unskilled in
these out-door sports, and have scarce worn out the
complexion of my school at Antwerp, where worldly
pastimes were a forbidden thought. A poor scholar
of the cloister might go free of blame if, in this sunny
and gallant world, the transport of a noble game
should rob him of his circumspection. I thought of
naught but the glorious circling of the hawk and his
swift and imperious assault. I crave your pardon for
my inconsiderate error.
You speak more like a practised cavalier than a
scholar of the cloister, said the sister of the
Proprietary
;
thou hast a cavalier's love of the sport,
Albert.
It doth not beseem me, madam, was the
Secretary's
reply, to affect a pastime which belongs
neither
to my rank nor humble means; but, in sadness,
dear lady, I do love hawk, and hound, and steed.
And when in my sequestered studywhere, being, as
I thought, destined to the service of the altar, I read
mostly of holy men and holy things, little dreaming
that I should ever see the worldit sometimes
chanced, in my stray reading, I fell upon a lay
wherein deeds of chivalry were told; and then I was
conscious of a wish, I am now almost ashamed to
confess, that fortune might some day bring me better
acquainted with that world to which such deeds
belonged
.
Oh, blessed chance! it hath befallen now:
that is,I mean to say, continued the
Secretary
,
checking himself, as his flashing eye fell to the
floor and a blush flitted across his browit hath
pleased Heaven to give me a kind master in my good
Lord, who doth not deny me to look on when these
sports are afield.
And if we did strike down the heron, Blanche
Warden, said Benedict Leonard, saucily accosting
the maiden, and showing the hawk that was bound
to his wristwhat is a heron good for, but to be
brought down? Herons were made for hawksyes,
and for the hawks of the Proprietary above all
others; for I have heard say that every heron on the
Chesapeake, within my father's boundary, is his own
bird: so Derrick has said a hundred times. And
there 's my uncle Talbot, who flies a hawk better
than any other in the provinceI do n't care if
Derrick
hears meand has the best mews,he says that
these fire-arms have broken up hawking in the old
country; and he told me I must not let it fall through
when I come to the province; for my father, he
thinks, does n't care much for it. I promise you in
my time we shall have hawking enoughchide as
you like, Mistress Blanche. It was partly for me
that my uncle Talbot sent us this cast of birds. Look
at that laneret, Blanche,look at her! Is n't that a
bird? Talk to me of a goshawk after that!
Benedictnephew, interposed the Lady Maria,
why dost thou fling thy bird so rudely? She brushes
Blanche's cheek with her wing. Pray, not so bold:
Blanche will not like thee for it.
Blanche will never quarrel with me for loving
my hawk, aunt, replied the boy playfully. Will you,
mistress? A laneret's wing and Blanche Warden's
cheek are both accounted beautiful in this province,
and will not grow angry with each other upon
acquaintance
.
I know not that, Benedict, replied the maiden;
my cheek may grow jealous of your praise of the
wing, and mischief might follow. She is but a savage
bird, and hath a vicious appetite.
I will away to the falconer, said the boy. It
is but wasting good things to talk with women about
hawks. You will find me, Master Albert, along the
bank with Derrick, if you have need of me.
That boy hath more of the Talbot in him than
the Calvert, said the Lady Maria, after he had left
the room. His father was ever grave from youth
upwards, and cared but little for these exercises.
Benedict Leonard lives in the open air, and has a
light heart.Thou hast a book under thy mantle,
Master Albert, continued the lady. Is your
breviary
needful when you go forth to practise a
laneret
?
It is a volume I have brought for Mistress
Blanche, replied the Secretary, as, with some
evident
confusion, he produced a gilded quarto with
clasps, from beneath his dress. It is a delightful
history of a brave cavalier, that I thought would
please her.
Ah! exclaimed the sister of the Proprietary,
taking the book and reading the title-page `
La
trs joyeuse et plaisante Histoire, compose par le
Loyal Serviteur, des faits, gestes et prouesses du
bon Chevalier sans peur et sans reproch
.' Ay, and a
right pleasant history it is, this of the good Knight
Bayard, without fear and without reproach. But,
Albert, thou knowest Blanche doth not read French.
I designed to render it myself to Mistress Blanche,
in her native tongue, replied the Secretary.
Blanche, said the lady, shanking her head, this
comes of not taking my counsel to learn this
language
of chivalry long ago. See what peril you will
suffer now in journeying through this huge book alone
with Master Albert.
I see no peril, replied the maiden, unconscious
of the raillery. Master Albert will teach me, ere
he be done, to read French for myself.
When thou hast such a master, and the Secretary
such a pupil, said the lady, smiling, Heaven speed
us! I will eat all the French thou learnest in a month.
But, Master Albert, if Blanche cannot understand
your legend, in the tongue in which it is writ, she can
fully comprehend your musicand so can we. It is
parcel of your duty at the Rose Croft to do minstrel's
service. You have so many songsand I saw thee
stealing a glance at you lute, as if thou wouldst greet
an old acquaintance.
If it were not for Master Albert, said Alice,
Blanche's lute would be unstrung. She scarce keeps
it, one would think, but for the Secretary's
occupation
.
Ah, sister Alice, and my dear lady, said Blanche,
the Secretary hath such a touch of the lute, that I
but shame my own ears to play upon it, after hearing
his ditties. Sing, Master Albert, I pray you, she
added, as she presented him the instrument.
I will sing to the best of my skill, replied Albert,
which has been magnified beyond my deservings.
With your leave, I will try a canzonet I learned in
London. It was much liked by the gallants there,
and I confess a favour for it because it hath a stirring
relish. It runs thus:
`Tell me not, sweet, I am unkind,
That from the nunnery
Of thy chaste breast and quiet mind
To war and arms I fly.
`True, a new mistress, now I chase,
The first foe in the field;
And with a stronger faith embrace
A sword, a horse, a shield.
`Yet this inconstancy is such
As you too shall adore:
I could not love thee, dear, so much,
Lov'd I not honour more.'
Well done! Well touched lutewell trolled
ditty
!
Brave song for a bird of thy feather, Master
Verheyden! exclaimed the Collector, who, when the
song was finished, entered the room with
Cocklescraft
.
That's as good a song, Master
Cocklesscraft
the
Skipper, ladiesmy friend of the Olive
Branch, who has been with me this hour past
docketing
his cargo: I may call him especially your friend
he is no enemy to the vanities of this world. Ha,
Master Cocklescraft, thou hast wherewith to win a
world of grace with the petticoats!thou hast an
eye for the trickery of the sex! Sit down, sirI
pray you, without further reverence, sit down.
The Skipper, during this introduction, stood near
the door, bowing to the company, and then advanced
into the room with a careless and somewhat
over-bold
step, such as denotes a man who, in the
endeavour
to appear at his ease in society, carries his
acting
to the point of familiarity. Still his freedom was
not without grace, and his demeanour, very soon
after the slight perturbation of his first accost,
became
natural and appropriate to his character.
Save you, madam, he said, addressing the sister
of the Proprietary, and bowing low, and you,
Mistress
Alice, and you, my young lady of the Rose
Croft. It is a twelvemonth since I left the Port, and
I am right glad to meet the worshipful ladies of the
province once again, and to see that good friends
thrive. The salt water whets a sailor's eye for
friendly
faces. Mistress Blanche, I would take upon me
to say, without being thought too free, that you have
grown some trifle taller than before I sailed. I did
not then think you could be bettered in figure.
The maiden bowed without answering the
Skipper's
compliment.
Richard Cocklescraft, said the Collector, I
know not if you ever saw Albert Verheyden. Had
he come hither before you sailed? His Lordship's
secretary.
I was not so lucky as to fall into his company,
replied Cocklescraft, turning towards the Secretary,
and eyeing him from head to foot. I think I heard
that his Lordship brought new comers with him.
We shall not lack acquaintance. Your hand, Master
VerdunI think so you said? he added, as he
looked
inquiringly at the Collector.
The Collector again pronounced the name of the
Secretary with more precision.
Nearly the same thing, continued the Skipper.
Master Verheyden, your hand: mine is something
rougher, but it shall be the hand of a comrade, if
thine be in the service of worshipful Master Anthony
Warden, the good Collector of St. Mary's. I know
how to value a friend, Master Secretary, and a
friend's friend. You have a rare voice for a ballad
I pretend to have an opinion in such mattersan
excellent voice and a free finger for the lute.
I am flattered by your liking sir, returned Albert
Verheyden coldly, as he retired towards a window,
somewhat repelled by the too freely proffered
acquaintance
of the Skipper, and the rather loud voice
and obtrusive manner with which he addressed those
around him.
Oh, this craft of singing is the touchstone of
gentility
now-a-days, said Cocklescraft, twirling his
velvet
bonnet by the gold tassel appended to the crown.
A man is accounted unfurnished who has no skill
in that joyous art. Sea-bred as I am, Collector
worshipful Master Wardenyou would scarce
believe
me, but I have touched lute and guitar myself,
and passably well. I learned this trick in Milan,
whither I have twice gone in my voyages, and dwelt
there with these Italians, some good summer months.
That is your climate for dark eyes and bright nights
balconies, and damsels behind the lattice, listening
Vol. I.18
to thrummers and singers upon the pavements below.
And upon occasion, we wear the short cloak and
dagger. I have worn cloak and stiletto in my travels,
Master Collector, and trolled a catch in the true
tongue of Tuscany, when tuck and rapier rung in the
burden. The hot blood there is a commodity which
the breeze from the Alps hath no virtue to cool, as it
doth in Switzerland.
We will try your singing craft ere it be long,
replied the Collector. We will put you to catch
and glee, with a jig to the heel of it, Richard
Cocklescraft
.
You must know, Blanche is eighteen on the
festival of St. Therese, and we have a junketing
forward
which has set the whole province astir. You
shall take part in the sport with the town's-people,
Master Skipper; and I warrant you find no rest of
limb until you show us some new antics of the fashion
which you have picked up abroad. You shall dance
and sing with witnessesor a good leg and a topping
voice shall have no virtue! I pray you do not forget
to make one of our company on the festival of St.
Therese. Your gewgaws, Richard, and woman's
gear, could not be more in season: every wench in
the port is like to be your debtor.
Thanks, Master Collector, I have a foot and
voice, ay, and hand, ever at the service of your good
company. I will be first to come and last to depart.
I have been mindful of the Rose of St. Mary's in
my voyaging, he said in a respectful and
lowered
tone, as he approached the maiden. Mistress
Blanche is never so far out of my thoughts that I
might come back to the Port without some token
for her. I would crave your acceptance of a
pretty mantle of crimson silk lined with minever. I
found it in Dort, and being taken with its beauty,
and thinking how well it would become the gay
figure of my pretty mistress of the Rose Croft, I
brought it away, and now make bold to askthat is,
if it be agreeable to Mistress Blanche, and if I do
not venture too farthat I may be allowed to bring
it hither.
You may find a worthier hand for such a
favour
,
said Blanche, with a tone and look that
somewhat
eagerly repelled the proffered gift, and
manifested
dislike of the liberty which the Skipper had
takena liberty which was in no degree lessened to
her apprehension by the unaccustomed gentleness of
his voice, and the humble and faltering manner in
which he had asked her consent to the present. I
am unused to such gaudy trappings, and should not
be content to wear the cloak; then perceiving some
reproof, as she fancied, in the countenance of her
sister Alice and the Lady Maria, she added, in a
kindlier voice, I dare not accept it at your hand,
Master Skipper.
Nay, replied Cocklescraft, presuming upon the
mildness of the maiden's last speech, and pressing
the matter with that obtrusiveness which marked his
character and nurture, I shall not take it kindly
if thou dost not; and as a flush overspread his cheek,
he added, I counted to a certainty that you would
do me this courtesy.
Men sometimes count rashly, Master
Cocklescraft
,
interposed the Lady Maria, who presume
upon a maiden's willingness to incur such debts.
Save you, madam, replied the Skipper; I should
be sorry Mistress Blanche should deem it to be
incurring
a debt.
I have not been trained, said Blanche, with
perfect
self-possession and firmness of manner, which
she intended should put an end to the Skipper's
importunity
,
to receive such favours from the hand of
a stranger; when I have need of a mantle, the mercer
shall be my friend.
You will, perchance, think better of it when you
see the mantle, said the Skipper, carelessly, and then
added with a saucy smile, women are changeful,
Master Collector; I will bring the gewgaw for
Mistress
Blanche's inspectiona chapman may have
that privilege.
You may spare yourself the trouble, said the
maiden.
Nay, mistress, think it not a trouble, I beseech
you; I count nothing a trouble which shall allow me
to please thy fancy. As the Skipper uttered this he
came still nearer to the chair on which Blanche was
seated, and, almost in a whisper, said, I pray you,
mistress, think not so lightly of my wish to serve you.
I have set my heart upon your taking the mantle.
Master Skipper, a word with you, interrupted
the Secretary, who had watched the whole scene;
and aware of the annoyance which Cocklescraft's
rudeness inflicted upon the maiden, had quietly
approached
him and now beckoned him to a recess of
the window, where they might converse without
being heard by the company. It is not civil to
importune
the lady in this fashion. You must be
satisfied
with her answer as she has given it to you. It
vexes the daughter of Master Warden to be thus
besought
.
I pray you, sir, no more of it.
Cocklescraft eyed the Secretary for a moment with
a glance of scornful resentment, and then replied in a
voice inaudible to all but the person to whom it was
addressed. Right! perhaps you are right, sir; but
when I would be tutored for my behaviour, he shall
be a man, by my troth, who takes that duty on him,
and shall wear a beard and sword both. I needed not
thy schooling, master crotchet-monger! Then
leavingt
he Secretary, he strode towards the maiden, and
assuming a laughing face, which but awkwardly
concealed
his vexation, he said, well, Mistress Blanche,
since you are resolved that you will not take my
poor bauble off my hands, I must give it over as a
venture lost, and so an end of it. I were a fool to
be vexed because I could not read the riddle of a
maiden's fancy: how should such fish of the sea be
learned in so gentle a study? So, viaggio, it shall
break no leg of mine! I will dance none the less
merrily for it at the feast: and as for the mantle,
why it may find other shoulders in the Port, though
it shall never find them so fit to wear it withal, as the
pretty shoulders of Mistress Blanche. Master
Warden
I must fain take my leave; my people wait me
at the quay. Fair weather for the feast, and a
18*
merry time of it, ladies! A Dios, Master
Collector
!
The gaiety of this leaving-taking was dashed with
a sternness of manner which all the Skipper's acting
could not conceal, and as he walked towards the door,
he paused a moment to touch Albert Verheyden's
cloak and whispered in his ear, We shall be better
acquinted, sir; then leaving the house he rapidly
shaped his course towards the town.
He had scarcely got out of sight before Blanche
sprang from her chair and ran towards her father,
pouring out upon him a volley of reproof for his
unadvised
and especially unauthorized invitation of the
Skipper to the festival. The maiden was joined in
this assault by her auxiliaries, the Proprietary's sister
and Mistress Alice, who concurred in reading the
simple-minded and unconsciously offending old
gentleman
a lecture upon his improvident interference
in this delicate matter. They insisted that
Cocklescraft's
associations in the port gave him no claim to
such a favour, and that, at all events, it was Blanche's
prerogative to be consulted in regard to the
admission
of the younger and gayer portions of her
company
.
Have you not had your will, my dear father,
was the summing up of Blanche's playful attack, to
your full content, in summoning all the old humdrum
folks of the province, even to the Dominie and his
wife, who have never been known to go to a
merry-making
any where, and who are both so deaf that
they have not heard each other speak this many a
day? and now you must needs be bringing the Skipper
hither.
Lackaday, wench! what have I done to redden
thy brow? interrupted Mr. Warden, with a face of
perplexed good humour, unable longer to bear the
storm of rebuke, or to parry the arguments which
were so eagerly thrust at him; I warrant now I
have made mischief without knowing how! The
Skipper is a free blade, of good metal, and of a figure,
too, which, methinks, might please a damsel in a
dance, and spare us all this coil; his leg has not its
fellow in the province. You take me to task roundly,
when all the while I was so foolish as to believe I was
doing you regardful service.
He hath a wicked look, father, was Blanche's
reply; and a saucy freedom which I like not. He
is ever too bold in his greeting, and lacks gentle
breeding
.
He must come to me, forsooth, with his mantle,
as an especial token, and set upon me with so much
constancy to take it! Take a mantle from him! I
have never even seen him but twice before, and then
it was in church, where he must needs claim to speak
to me as if he were an old acquaintance! I will none
of him nor his mantle, if he were fifty times a
properer
man than he is!
Be it so, my daughter, replied the Collector.
But we must bear this mishap cheerily. I will not
offend again. You women, he said, as he walked
to and fro through the parlour, with his hands behind
his back, and a good natured smile playing over his
features, you women are more shrewd to read the
qualities of men, especially in matters touching
behaviour
,
than such old pock-puddings as I am. I
will be better counselled before I trespass in this sort
again. But remember, Blanche, the Skipper has his
summons, and our hospitality must not suffer
reproach
;
so we will e'en make the best we can of this
blundering misadventure of mine. For our own
honour, we must be courteous, Blanche, to the Skipper;
and, therefore, do thou take heed that he have no
cause to say we slight him. As I get old I shall
grow wise.
Blanche threw her arms around her father's neck
and imprinting a kiss upon his brow, said in a tone
of affectionate playfulness, for your sake, dear
father, I will not chide: the Skipper shall not want
due observance from me. I did but speak to give you
a caution, by which you shall learn that the maidens
of this province are so foolish as to stand to it, and I
amongst the rest, that they are better able to choose
their gallants than their fathers,though their fathers
be amongst his Lordship's most trusty advisers.
Now a thousand benisons upon thy head, my
child! said the Collector, as he laid his hand upon
Blanche's glossy locks, and then left the apartment.
CHAPTER XV.
Friend to the sea, and foeman sworn
To all that on her waves are borne,
When falls a mate in battle broil
His comrade heirs his portioned spoil
Chalice and plate from churches borne,
And gems from shrieking beauty torn,
Each string of pearl, each silver bar,
And all the wealth of western war.
Rokeby
.
As
the Skipper strode towards the town, his dogged
air and lowering brow evinced the disquiet of his spirit
at what had just occurred. He was nettled by the
maiden's rejection of his proffered gift, and a still
deeper feeling of resentment agitated his mind against
the Secretary. Far other man was he than he was
deemed by the burghers of St. Mary's. In truth,
they knew but little more of him than might be gained
from his few occasional visits to the port in a calling
which, as it brought him a fair harvest of profit, laid
him under a necessity to cultivate, for the nonce, the
good opinion of his customers by such address as he
was master of.
Cocklescraft belonged to that tribe of desperate
men, until near this period in the full career of their
bloody successes, known as The Brethren of the
Coast. His first breath was drawn upon the billows
of the ocean, and his infancy was nursed in the haunts
of the buccaneers, amongst the Keys of the Bahamas.
When but a lad, attending upon these wild hordes in
their expeditions against the commerce of the Gulf, he
chanced to attract the notice of the famous Captain
Morgan, whilst that most rapacious of all the pirate
leaders was preparing, at Jamaica, for his incursion
against Maracaibo. The freebooter was charmed
with the precocious relish for rapine conspicuous in
the character of the boy; and, with an affectionate
interest
,
took him under his tutelage, assigning to him a
post near his person, rather of pageantry than service
that of a page or armour-bearer, according to the yet
lingering forms of chivalry. The incredible bravery
of the buccaneers in this exploit, and their detestable
cruelties were witnessed by this callow imp of the
sea, with a delight and a shrewdness of apprehension
which gave to his youthful nature the full benefit of
the lesson. He was scarce two years older when,
in the due succession of his hopeful experience, he
again attended his patron upon that unmatched
adventure
of plunder and outrage, the leaguer of
Panama
;
and it was remarked that amidst the perils of
the cruise upon the Costa Rica, the toils of the inland
march over moor and mountain, and the desperate
hazards of the storming of the city, the page,
graceful
and active as the minion of a lady's bower, and
fierce as a young sea-wolf, was seen every where,
like an elvish sprite, tracking the footsteps of his
ruthless master. The history of human wickedness
has not a more appalling chapter than that which
records
the fate of the wretched inhabitants of Panama
in this assault; and yet, in the midst of its shocking
enormities, the gay and tasseled familiar of the ruffian
pirate chief tripped daintily through the carnage, with
the light step of a reveller, and pursued the flying
virgins and affrighted matrons, from house to house,
as the flames enveloped their roof trees, with the
mockery and prankishness of an actor in a
masquerade
.
This expedition terminated not without
adding
another item to the experience of the young
free-booter
the
only one, perhaps, yet wanting to his
perfect accomplishment. The Welsh Captain, laden
with spoils of untold value, played false to his
comrades
,
by stealing off with the lion's share of the
booty; thus, by a gainful act of perfidy, inculcating
upon the eager susceptibility of the page an imposing
moral, of which it may be supposed he would not be
slow to profit.
Such was the school in which Cocklescraft
received
the rudiments of his education. These harsher
traits of his character, however, it is but justice to
say, were, in some degree, mitigated by a tolerably
fair amount of scholastic accomplishment, picked up
in the intervals of his busy life amongst the scant
teaching afforded by the islands, of which the
protection
and care of his patron enabled him to profit.
To this was added no mean skill in music, dancing,
and the use of his weapon; whilst a certain
enthusiasm
of temperament stimulated his courage and
even whetted the fierceness of his nature.
Morgan, having run his career, returned to
England
,
a man of wealth, and was knighted by the
monarch, in one of those profligate revels by which
Charles disgraced his kingly state; the page was, in
consequence, turned adrift upon the world, as it is
usual to say of heroes, with no fortune but his
talents, and no friend but his sword. Riot soon
exhausted
his stock of plunder, and the prodigal
licentiousness
of The Brethren of the Coast, forbade
the gathering of a future hoard. About this date the
European powers began to deal more resolutely with
the banditti of the islands, and their trade
consequently
became more precarious. They were
compelled
,
in pursuit of new fields for robbery, to cross
the isthmus and try their fortunes on the coast of
the Pacificwhither Cocklescraft followed and
reaped
his harvest in the ravage of Peru: but in turn, the
Brethren found themselves tracked into these remoter
seas, and our adventurer was fain, with many of
his comrades, to find his way back to the coves and
secret harbours of Tortuga and the Keys, whence
he contrived to eke out a scant subsistence, by an
occasional
stoop upon such defenceless wanderers of
the ocean as chance threw within his grasp. The
Olive Branch was a beautiful light vessel, which, in
one of his sea-forays, he had wrested from a luckless
merchant; and this acquisition suggested to him the
thought that, with such necessary alterations as
should disguise her figure and equipment, he might
drive a more secure, and, perchance, more profitable
trade between the Atlantic colonies and the old
countries; so, with a mongrel crew of trusty
cut-throats
,
carefully selected from the companions of
his former fortunes, and a secret armament well
bestowed for sudden emergency, he set himself up
for an occasional trader between the Chesapeake and
the coast of Holland. A lucky acquaintance with
the Cripple of St. Jerome's gave him a useful ally in
his vocation as a smuggler; the fisherman's hut, long
believed to be the haunt of evil spirits, admirably
favoured
his design, and under the management of Rob,
soon became a spot of peculiar desecration in popular
report; and thus, in no long space of time, the gay,
swashing cavalier, master of the Olive Branch, began
to find good account in his change of character from
the Flibustier of the Keys into that of smuggler and
trader of the Chesapeake. He had now made several
voyages from St. Mary's to the various marts of
Holland and England, taking out cargoes of tobacco
and bringing back such merchandise as was likely
to find a ready sale in the colonies. His absence
from port was often mysteriously prolonged, and on
his return it not unfrequently happened that there
were found amongst his cargo commodities such as
might scarce be conjectured to have been brought
from the ports of Europe,consisting some times of
tropical fruits, ingots of gold and silver, and sundry
rich furniture of Indian aspect, better fitted for the
cabinet of the virtuoso than the trade of a new
province
.
Then, also, there were occasionally costly
Vol. I.19
stuffs, and tissues of exceeding richness, such as cloth
of gold, velvets of Genoa, arras tapestry, and even
pictures which might have hung in churches. These
commodities were invariably landed at St. Jerome's
Bay before the Olive Branch cast her anchor in
the harbour of St. Mary's, and were reshipped on
the outward voyage. The Cripple of St. Jerome's
had a few customers who were privileged at certain
periods to traffic with him in a species of
merchandise
of which he was seldom without a supply at his
commandchiefly wines and strong waters, and
coarser household goods, which were charily
exhibited
in small parcels at the hut, and when the
bargain
was made, supplied in greater bulk by unseen
hands from secret magazines, concerning which the
customer was not so rash as even to inquirefor Rob
was a man who, the country people most devoutly
believed, had immediate commerce with the Evil
One, and who, it was known, would use his dagger
before he gave warning by words.
The open and lawful dealing of the Skipper, in the
port of St. Mary's, had brought him into an
acquaintance
with most of the inhabitants, and as his arrival
was always a subject of agreeable expectation, he
was, by a natural consequence, looked upon with a
friendly regard. His address, gaiety of demeanour,
and fine figurewhich last was studiously set off to
great advantage by a rich and graceful costume
heightened this sentiment of personal favour, and
gave him privileges in the society of the town which,
in that age of scrupulous regard to rank, would have
been denied him if he had been a constant sojourner.
Emboldened by this reception he had essayed to
offer some gallant civilities to the maiden of the Rose
Croft, which were instantly repelled, however, by
the most formal coldness. The Skipper was not so
practised an observer as to perceive in this
repugnance
,
the actual aversion which the maiden felt
against his advances to acquaintance; and he was
content to account it a merely girlish reserve which
importunity and assiduous devotion might overcome.
His vanity suggested the resolve to conquer the
damsel's
indifference; and as that thought grew upon his
fancy, it, by degrees, ripened into a settled purpose,
which in the end completely engrossed his mind. As
he brooded over the subject, and permitted his
imagination
to linger around that form of beauty and
loveliness,cherished as it was, during the long
weeks of his lonely tracking of the sea, and in the
solitary musings and silent night-watches of his deck,
a romantic ardour was kindled in his breast, and
he hastened back to the Port of St. Mary's, strangely
wrought upon by new impulses, which seemed to
have humanized and mellowed even his rude nature:
the shrewder observers were aware of more
gentleness
in his bearing, though they found him more
wayward in his temper;he was prouder of heart,
yet with humbler speech, and often more stern than
before. The awakening of a new passion had
overmastered
both the ferocity and the levity of his
character
.
He was, in truth, the undivulged, anxious,
and almost worshipping lover of Blanche Warden.
When such a nature as I have described chances
to fall into the loving vein, it will be admitted to be
a somewhat fearful category both for the lady and
the lover's rival. Such men are not apt to mince
matters in the course of their wooing.
This was the person who now plied his way
towards
the port, in solitary rumination over two
distinct
topics of private grief, each of a nature to rouse
the angry devil of his bosom. He could not but see
that his first approach towards the favour of his
mistress
had been promptly repelled. That alone would
have filled his mind with bitterness, and given a
harsh complexion to his thoughts;but this cause of
complaint was almost stifled by the more engrossing
sentiment of hostility against the Secretary. That
he should have been rebuked for his behaviour, by a
man,and a man, too, who evidently stood well
with the lady of his love; taken to task and chid in
the very presence of his mistress,was an offence
that called immediately to his manhood and
demanded
redress. Such redress was more to his hand than
the nicer subtleties of weighing the maiden's
displeasure
,
and he turned to it with a natural alacrity, as
to a comfort in his perplexity. It is the instinct of a
rude nature to refer all cases of wounded sensibility
to the relief of battle. A rejected lover, like a child
who has lost a toy, finds consolation in his distress
by fighting any one that he can persuade himself has
stood in his way, and he is made happy when there
chances to be some plausible ground for such a
proceeding
.
The Skipper thought the subject over in
every aspect which his offended pride could fancy.
At one moment the idea of quarrel with the
Secretary
pleased him, and almost reconciled him to the
maiden's coldness; at the next he doubted whether,
after all, she had in fact designed to repel his
friendship
.
He vibrated between these considerations for
a space in silence: his pride quelled the expression
of his anger. But by degrees his quickened pace
and sturdier step, and, now and then, that slight
shake of the head by which men sometimes express
determination, made it plain that the fiery element in
his bosom was rising in tumult. At length, unable to
suppress his feeling, the inward commotion found
utterance
in words.
Who and what is this Master Secretary that hath
set the maiden of the Rose Croft to look upon me
with an evil spirit? I would fain know if he think
himself a properer man than I. Doth he stand upon
his fingering of a lute, and his skill to dance?Why
even in this chamber-craft I will put it to a wager he
is no master of mine. Is he more personable in
shape or figure?goes he in better apparel? or is
that broken English of his more natural to the
province
than my plain speech, that he should claim the
right to chide me for my behaviour? Is it that he
hath a place in the train of his Lordship? Have not
I served as near to a belted knightlord of a
thousand
stout hearts and master of a fleet of thirty sail?
ay, and in straits where you should as soon expect
to meet a hare as that crotchet-monger. A bookish
clerk with no manly calling that should soil his ruff
19*
in the space of a moon! By Saint Iago, but I will
put him to his books to learn how he shall heal the
stroke of a choleric hand, when the time shall serve
to give him the taste of it!Mistress Blanche would
not be importunedindeed! And he must be my
tutor to teach me what pleaseth Mistress Blanche.
He liedthe maiden did not mislike my question;
she but hung her head to have it so openly spoken.
I know she doth not set at naught my favours, but
as damsels from custom do a too public tender of a
token. Old Anthony Warden counts his friends by
their manhood, and he hath shown me grace:his
daughter in the end will follow his likingsand as
the father's choice approves, so will her's incline.
Am I less worthy in old Master Warden's eyes, than
yonder parchment bearerthat pen-and-ink slave of
his Lordship's occasions?he that durst not raise
his eye above his Lord's shoe, nor speak out of a
whisper when his betters are in presence? What is
he, to put me from the following of my own will
when it pleases me to speak to any maiden of this
province?I am of the seathe broad, deep sea!
she hath nursed me in her bosom,and hath given
me my birth-right to be as proudly borne as the
honours
of any lord of the land. I have a brave deck
for my foot, a good blade for my belt, the bountiful
ocean before me and a score of merry men at my
back. Are these conditions so mean that I must
brook the Secretary's displeasure or fashion my
speech to suit his liking?We shall understand each
other better, in good time, or I shall lack opportunity
to speak my mind:I shall, good Master
Verheyden
,you
have the word of a `Brother of the Bloody
Coast' for that!
Before the Skipper had ceased this petulant and
resentful self-communion, he found himself in the
neighbourhood of the Catholic Chapel, nearly in front
of the dwelling of father Pierre, when the good
priest, who was at this moment returning from
noon-day
service, took him at unawares with the
salutation
,
Peace be with you, son!you reckon up the
sum of your ventures with a careful brow, and speak
loud enough to make the town acquainted with thy
gains, if perchance some of the chapmen with whom
thou hast dealing should be in thy path. How fares
it with thee, Master Skipper?
Ha, Mi Padre! exclaimed Cocklescraft,
instantly
throwing aside his graver thoughts and
assuming
a jocular tone. Well met;I was on my
way to visit you: that would I have done yesterday
upon my arrival, but that the press of my business
would not allow it. You grow old, father, so evenly
that, although I seey ou but after long partings, I can
count no fresh touch of time upon your head.
Men of your calling should not flatter, said the
priest smiling. What news do you bring us from
the old world?
Oh, much and merry, father Pierre. The old
world plies her old trade and thrives by it. Knavery
hath got somewhat of the upper hand since they
have quit crossing swords in this new piece of
Nimeguen
.
The Hogan Mogans are looking a little surly
at the Frenchman for cocking his beaver so bravely;
and our jobbernowl English, now that they can find
no more reason to throttle each other, have gone
back to their old sport of pricking the side of our
poor church. You shall find as many plots in
London
,
made out of hand and ready for use in one
month, as would serve all the stage plays of the
kingdom for the next hundred yearsand every plot
shall have a vile Papist at the bottom of it,if you
may believe Oates and Bedloe. I was there when
my Lord Stafford was made a head shorter on Tower
Hill. You heard of this,father?
Alack! in sorrow we heard of this violence,
replied
the priest,; and deeply did it grieve my Lord
to lose so good a friend. Even as you have found it
in England, so is it here. The discontents against
the holy church are nursed by many who seek
thereby
to command the province. We have plotters
here who do not scruple to contrive against the life
of his Lordship and his Lordship's brother the
Chancellor
.
Besides, the government at home is unfriendly
to us.
You have late news from England? inquired the
Skipper.
We have,and which, but that you are true in
your creed, I might scarce mention to your ear
the royal order has come to my Lord to dismiss his
Catholic servants from officeevery one. His
Lordship
scruples to obey. This, Master Skipper, I
confide
to you in private, as not to be told again.
To remove all! said Cocklescraft. Why it
will sweep off his nearest friendsAnthony
Warden
and all.
Even so.
There is fighting matter in that, upon the spot,
exclaimed the Skipper. By St. Sebastian, I hope it
may come up while I am in port! The Collector,
old as he is, will buckle on his toledo in that quarrel.
He has mettle for it; and I could wish no better play
than to stand by his side. Who is this Secretary of
my Lord's private chamber? I met him at the
Collector's
to-day.
Master Albert Verheyden, replied the priest.
I know his namethey told it to me therebut
his quality and condition, father?
You may be proud of his fellowship, said father
Pierre; he was once a scholar of the Jesuit school
at Antwerp, of the class inscribed `Princeps
Diligenti
,'
and brought thence by my Lord. A youth,
Master Cocklescraft, of promise and discretiona
model to such as would learn good manners and
cherish virtuous inclinations. You may scarcely
fail to see him at the Collector's: the townspeople do
say he has an eye somewhat dazzled there.
Craving pardon for my freedom, I say, father
Pierre, a fig's end for such a model! exclaimed the
Skipper, pettishly: you may have such by the
score, wherever lazy, bookish men eat their bread.
I like him not, with his laced band and feather, his
book and lute: harquebuss and whinyard are the
tools for these days. I hear the Fendalls have been
at mischief again. We shall come to bilbo and buff
before long. Your Secretary will do marvellous
service
in these straits, father.
Son, you are somewhat sinful in your scorn,
said the priest, mildly; the Secretary doth not
deserve
this taunt
By the holy hermits, father, I speak of the
Secretary but as I think. He does not awe me with
his greatness. I vail no topsail to him, I give you
my word for it.
The saints preserve us from harm! said the
churchman. We know not what may befall us from
the might of our enemies, when this hot blood shall
sunder our friends. In sober counsel, son, and not
in rash divisions shall we find our safety. It doth
not become thee, Master Cocklescraft, to let thy
tetchy humour rouse thee against the Secretary. It
might warrant my displeasure.
Mea culpa, holy fatherI do confess my fault,
said the seaman, in a tone of assumed self-constraint
I will not again offend; and for my present
atonement
will offer a censer of pure silver, which in my
travels I picked up, and in truth did then design
to give, to the Chapel of St. Mary's. I will bring
it to the chapel, father Pierre, as soon as my vessel
is unladen.
You should offer up your anger too, to make this
gift acceptable, returned the priest. Let thy
dedication
be with a cleansed heart.
Ha, father Pierre, said the Skipper, jocularly;
my conscience does easily cast off a burden: so it
shall be as you command. I did not tell you that
whilst my brigantine lay in the Helder, I made a
land flight to Louvaine, where a certain Abbot of
Andoyne,a pious, somewhat aged, and, thanks to a
wholesome refectory! a good jolly priest,hearing I
came from the province, must needs send for me
to ask if I knew father Pierre de la Maise, and
upon my answer, that I did right well, he begs me
to bring his remembrance back to you.
I knew father Gervase, replied the priest with a
countenance full of benignitysome forty years
ago, when he was a reader in the Chair of St. Isidore
at Rome. He remembers me?a blessing on his
head!and he wears well, Master Skipper?
Quite as well as yourself, replied Cocklescraft.
Father, a cup of your cool water, and I will
depart
,
he said, as he helped himself to the draught.
I will take heed to what you have said touching the
royal orderand by St. Iago, I will be a friend in
need to the Collector. Master Verheyden shall not
be a better one. Now fare thee well, father.
Peregrine
Cadger shall have order to cut you off a
cassock
from the best cloth I have brought him, and
little Abbot the tailor shall put it in fashion for you.
You are lavish of your bounties, son, replied
the priest, taking Cocklescraft by both hands as he
was now about to withdraw. You have a poor
churchman's thanks. It gives me comfort to be so
considered, and I prize your kindness more than the
cassock. A blessing on thy ways, Master
Cocklescraft
!
The Skipper once more set forth on his way
towards
the port; and with a temper somewhat allayed
by the acting of the scene I have just described,
though with no abatement of the resentment which
rankled at the bottom of his heart, even under the
smiling face and gay outside which he could assume
with the skill of a consummate dissembler, he soon
reached the Crow and Archer. From thence he
meditated, as soon as his occasions would permit, a
visit to the Cripple of St. Jerome's.
CHAPTER XVI.
Who be these, sir?
Fellows to mount a bank. Did your instructer
In the dear tongues never discourse to you
Of the Italian mountebanks?
Yes, sir.
Why here you shall see one.
They are quacksalvers,
Fellows that live by venting oils and drugs.
Volpone
.
The
council had been summoned to meet on the
morning following that of the incidents related in the
last chapter, and the members were now
accordingly
assembling, soon after breakfast, at the
Proprietary
mansion. The arrival of one or two
gentlemen on horseback with their servants, added
somewhat to the bustle of the stable yard, which was
already the scene of that kind of busy idleness and
lounging occupation so agreeable to the menials of a
large establishment. Here, in one quarter, a few
noisy grooms were collected around the watering
troughs, administering the discipline of the
currycomb
or the wash bucket to some half score of
Vol. I.20
horses. In a corner of the yard Dick Pagan the
courier and Willy o' the Flats, with the zeal of
amateur
vagrants, were striving to cozen each other
out of their coppers at the old game of Cross and
Pile; whilst, in an opposite direction, Derrick was
exhibiting to a group of spectators, amongst whom
the young heir apparent was a prominent personage,
a new set of hawk bells just brought by the Olive
Branch from Dort, and lecturing, with a learned
gravity, upon their qualities, to the infinite
edification
and delight of his youthful pupil. Slouching fox
hounds, thick-lipped mastiffs and wire-haired terriers
mingled indiscriminately amongst these groups, as if
confident of that favouritism which is the universal
privilege of the canine race amongst good tempered
persons and contented idlers all the world over.
Whilst the inhabitants of the yard were engrossed
with these occupations, a trumpet was heard at a
distance in the direction of the town. The blast
came so feebly upon the ear as, at first, to pass
unregarded
,
but being repeated at short intervals, and
at every repetition growing louder, it soon arrested
the general attention, and caused an inquiry from
all quarters into the meaning of so unusual an
incident
.
Fore God, I think that there be an alarm of
Indians
in the town! exclaimed the falconer as he
spread his hand behind his ear and listened for some
moments, with a solemn and portentous visage.
Look to it, ladsthere may be harm afoot. Put
up thy halfpence, Dick Pagan, and run forward to
seek out the cause of this trumpeting. I will wager
it means mischief, masters.
Indians! said Willy; Derrick's five wits have
gone on a fool's errand ever since the murder of that
family at the Zachaiah fort by the salvages. If the
Indians were coming you should hear three guns
from Master Randolph Brandt's look-out on the
Notley road. It is more likely there may be trouble
at the gaol with the townspeople, for there was a
whisper afloat yesterday concerning a rescue of the
prisoners. Troth, the fellow has a lusty breath who
blows that trumpet!
Ay, and the trumpet, said Derrick, is not
made to dance with, masters: there is war and
throat-cutting in it, or I am no true man.
During this short exchange of conjectures, Dick
Pagan had hastened to the gate which opened
towards
the town, and mounting the post, for the sake
of a more extensive view, soon discerned the
object
of alarm, when, turning towards his companions,
he shouted,
Wounds,but here's a sight! Pike and musket,
belt and saddle, boys! To it quickly;you shall
have rare work anon. Wake up the ban dogs of the
fort and get into your harness. Here comes the
Dutch Doctor with his trumpeter as fierce as the
Dragon of Wantley. Buckle to and stand your
ground!
Ho, ho! roared the fiddler with an impudent,
swaggering laugh. Here's a pretty upshot to your
valours! Much cry and little wool, like the Devil's
hog-shearing at Christmas. You dullards, couldn't
I have told you it was the Dutch Doctor,if your
fright had left you but a handful of sense to ask a
question? Didn't I see both him and his trumpeter
last night at the Crow and Archer, with all their
jingumbobs
in a pair of panniers? Oh, but he is a rare
Doctor, and makes such cures, I warrant you, as
have never been seen, known or heard of since the
days of St. Byno, who built up his own serving man
again, sound as a pipkin, after the wild beasts had
him for supper.
The trumpet now sent forth a blast which
terminated
in a long flourish, indicating the approach of
the party to the verge within which it might not be
allowable to continue such a clamour; and in a few
moments afterwards the Doctor with his attendant
entered the stable yard. He was a little,
sharp-featured
,
portly man, of a brown, dry complexion, in
white periwig, cream-coloured coat, and scarlet
small clothes: of a brisk gait, and consequential air,
which was heightened by the pompous gesture with
which he swayed a gold-mounted cane full as tall as
himself. His attendant, a bluff, burly, red-eyed man,
with a singularly stolid countenance, tricked out in a
grotesque costume, of which a short cloak,
steeple-crowned
hat and feather, and enormous nether
garments
,
all of striking colours, were the most notable
components, bore a brass trumpet suspended on one
side, and a box of no inconsiderable dimensions in
front of his person; and thus furnished, followed close
at the heels of the important individual whose coming
had been so authentically announced.
No sooner had the Doctor got fairly within the gate
than he was met by Derrick Brown, who, being the
most authoritative personage in the yard, took upon
himself the office of giving the stranger welcome.
Frents, how do you do? was the Doctor's accost
in a strong, Low Dutch method of pronouncing
English
.
I pelieve dis is not de gate I should have
entered
to see his Lordship de Lord Proprietary, he
added, looking about him with some surprise to find
where he was.
If it was my Lord you came to see, said the
falconer, you should have turned to your right, and
gone by the road which leads to the front of the
house. But the way you have come is no whit the
longer: we can take you through, Master Doctor,
by the back door.
Vell, vell, dere is noding lost by peing acquainted
at once wid de people of de house, replied the man
of medicine; dere is luck to make your first
entrance
by de pack door, as de old saying is. I vas
summoned dis morning to appear before de council,
py my Lord's order; and so, I thought I might trive
a little pusiness, at de same time, wid de family.
I told you all, said Willy, with an air of
self-importance
at his own penetration, that this was a
rare doctor. The council hath sent for him! my
Lord hath made it a state matter to see him. It
is n't every doctor that comes before the worshipful
20*
council, I trow. Give him welcome, boys, doff your
beavers.
At this command several of the domestics touched
their hats, with a gesture partly in earnest and partly
in sport, as if expecting some diversion to follow.
No capping to me, my frents! exclaimed the
Doctor, with a bow, greatly pleased at these tokens
of respect; no capping to me! Pusiness is
pusiness
,
and ven I come to sell you tings dat shall do
you goot, I tank you for your custom and your
money, widout asking you to touch your cap.
There is sense in that, said John Alward; and
since you come to trade in the yard, Doctor, you can
show us your wares. There is a penny to be picked
up here.
Open your box, Doctor; bring out your
penny-worths
;
show us the inside! demanded several
voices at once.
Ha, ha! exclaimed the vender of drugs, you
are wise, goot frents; you know somewhat! You
would have a peep at my aurum potabiles in dat little
casketmy multum in parvo? Yes, you shall see,
and you shall hear what you have never seen pefore,
and shall not in your long lives again.
Have you e'er a good cleansing purge for a
moulting hawk? inquired Derrick Brown, whilst the
doctor was unlocking the box.
Or a nostrum that shall be sure work on a horse
with a farcy? asked one of the grooms.
Hast thou an elixir that shall expel a lumbago?
demanded John Alward: all three speaking at the
same instant.
Tib, the cook, said a fourth, has been so sore
beset with cramps, that only this morning she was
saying, in her heart she believed she would not stop
to give the paste buckle that Tom Oxcart gave her
for a token at Whitsuntide, for a cordial that would
touch a cold stomach. I will persuade her into a
trade with the Doctor.
Oh, as for the women, replied a fifth, there
is n't a wench in my Lord's service that has n't a
bad tooth, or a cold stomach, or a tingling in the
ears, or some such ailing: it is their naturethey
would swallow the Doctor's pack in a week, if they
had license.
The man of nostrums was too much employed in
opening out his commodities to heed the volley of
questions which were poured upon him all round, but
having now put himself in position for action, he
addressed
himself to his auditors:
I vill answer all your questions in goot time; but
I must crave your leave, frents, to pegin in de order
of my pusiness. Dobel, he said, turning to his
attendant
,
who stood some paces in the rear, come
forward and pegin.
The adjutant at this command stepped into the
middle of the ring, and after making several strange
grimaces, of which at first view his countenance
would have been deemed altogether incapable, and
bowing in three distinct quarters to the company,
commenced the following speech:
Goot beoplish!this was accompanied with a
comic leer that set the whole yard in a roardish
ish de drice renowned und ingomprbl Doctor Closh
Teboranother grimace, and another volley of
laughterwhat ish de grand pheseeshan of de
greate gofernor of New York, Antony Prockolls,
und lives in Alpany in de gofernor's own pallash,
wid doo tousand guilders allowed him py de
gofernor
everich yeere, und a goach to rite, und a
podycart
to go perfore him in de sthreets ven he valks to
take de air. All tish to keepe de gofernor und his
vrouw de Laty Katerina Prockholls in goot healf
noding elseon mein onor. This was said with
great emphasis, the speaker laying his hand on his
heart and making a bow, accompanied with a still
more ludicrous grimace than any he had yet
exhibited
,
which brought forth a still louder peal from
his auditory.
He was about to proceed with his commendatory
harangue, when he was interrupted by Benedict
Leonard. It seems that upon the first announcement
by the Doctor of the purport of his visit, the youth,
fearful lest his mother, who was constitutionally
subject
to alarm, might have been disturbed by the
trumpet
,
ran off to apprise her of what he had just
witnessed
;
and giving her the full advantage of Willy's
exaggerated estimate of the travelling healer of
disease
,
returned, by the lady's command, to conduct
this worthy into her presence. He accordingly now
delivered his message, and forthwith master and man
moved towards the mansion, with the whole troop of
the stable yard at their heels.
The itinerant was introduced into Lady Baltimore's
presence in a small parlour, where she was attended
by two little girls, her only children beside the boy
we have noticed, and the sister of the Proprietary.
Her pale and emaciated frame and care-worn visage
disclosed to the practised glance of the visiter a facile
subject for his delusive art,a ready votary of that
credulous experimentalism which has filled the world
with victims to medical imposture. In the professor
of medicine's reverence to the persons before him
there was an overstrained obsequiousness, but, at the
same time, an expression of imperturbable confidence
fully according with the ostentatious pretension which
marked his demeanour amongst the menials of the
household. Notwithstanding his broad accent, he
spoke with a ready fluency that showed him well
skilled in that voluble art by which, at that day, the
workers of wonderful cures and the possessors of
infallible
elixirs advertised the astonishing virtues of
their compoundsan art which has in our time only
changed its manner of utterance, and now announces
its ridiculous pretensions in every newspaper of every
part of our land, in whole columns of mountebank
lies and quack puffery.
This is the great Doctor, said Benedict Leonard,
who now acted as gentleman usher, and he has
come I can't tell how far, to see who was ailing in
our parts. I just whispered to him, dear mother,
what a famous good friend you were to all sorts of
new cures. And oh, it would do you good to see
what a box of crankums he has in the hall! Yes,
and a man to carry it, with a trumpet! Blowing and
physicking a plenty now, to them that like it! How
the man bears such a load, I can't guess.
Dobel has a strong back and a steady mule for
his occasions, my pretty poy, said the Doctor,
patting
the heir apparent on the head, with a fondness
of manner that sensibly flattered the mother. When
we would do goot, master, we must not heed de
trouble
to seek dem dat stand in need of our ministrations
over de world.
The lady's feeble countenance lit up with a sickly
smile as she remonstrated with the boy. Bridle thy
tongue, Benedict, nor suffer it to run so nimbly. We
have heard, Doctor, something of your fame, and
gladly give you welcome.
Noble lady, replied the pharmacopolist, I am
but a simple and poor Doctor, wid such little fame as
it has pleased Got to pestow for mine enteavours to
miticate de distemperatures and maladies and
infirmities
which de fall of man, in de days of Adam, de
august progenitor of de human races, has prought
upon all his children. And de great happiness I have
had to make many most wonderful cures in de
provinces
of America, made me more pold to hope I
might pring some assuagement and relief to your
ladyship, who, I have peen told, has peen grievously
tormented wid perturbations and melancholies; a
very common affection wid honourable ladies.
Alack, Doctor, my affections come from causes
which are beyond the reach of your art, said the
lady with a sigh. Still, it would please me to hear
the cures you speak of. You have, doubtless, had
great experience?
You shall hear, my lady. I am not one of dat
rabble of pretenders what travel apout de world to
cry up and magnify dere own praises. De Hemel is
mij getuige,Heaven is my chudge, and your
ladyship's
far renowned excellent wisdom forbids dat you
should be imposed upon by dese cheats and impostors
denominatedand most justly, on my wort!
charlatans
and empirical scaramouches. De veritable
merit in dis world is humble, my lady. I creep rader
in de dust, dan soar in de clouts:it is in my nature.
Oders shall speak for menot myself.
But you have seen the world, Doctor, and
studied
,
and served in good families?
Your ladyship has great penetration. I have
always
lived in friendship wid worshipful peoples. De
honourable Captain General Anthony Brockholls, de
governor of de great province of New York,hah!
dere was nopody could please him but Doctor Debor.
Night and day, my lady, for two years, have I peen
physicking his excellency and all his family:de
governor is subject to de malady of a pad digestion
and crudities which gives him troublesome dreams.
I have studied in de school of Leydendree courses,
until I could find no more to learn; and den I have
travelled in France, Germany, and Italy, where I
took a seat in de great University of Padua, for de
penefit of de lectures of dat very famous doctor,
Veslingius, de prefect, your ladyship shall
understand
,
and professor of botany, a most rare herbalist.
And dere also I much increased and enriched my
learning under de wing of dat astonishing man, de
grave and profound Doctor Athelsteinus Leonenas,
de expounder of de great secrets of de veins and
nerves. You shall chudge, honourable ladies, what
was my merit, when I tell you de University would
make me Syndicus Artistarum, only dat I refused so
great honour, pecause I would not make de envy of
my compeers. Did I not say true when I tell you it
is not my nature to soar in de clouts?
Truly the Doctor hath greatly slighted his fame,
said the Lady Maria apart to her kinswoman. I
would fain know what you have in your pack.
Worshipful madam, you shall soon see, replied
the Doctor, who now ordered Dobel, his man, into
the room. Here, he said, as he pointed to the
different
parcels, are balsamums, panaceas, and elixirs.
Dis is a most noted alexipharmacum against quartan
agues, composed of many roots, herps and spices;
dis I call de lampas vit, an astonishing exhilirator
and promoter of de goot humours of de mind, and
most valuable for de rare gift of clear sight to de old,
wid many oder virtues I will not stop to mention.
Dese are confections, electuaries, sirups, conserves,
ointments, odoraments, cerates, and gargarisms, for
de skin, for de stomach, for de pruises and wounds,
for de troat, and every ting pesides. Ah! here, my
lady, is de great lapour of my life, de felicity and
royal rewardas I may sayof all my studies: it is
de most renowned and admired and
never-to-be-estimated
Medicamentum Promethei, which has done
more penefactions dan all de oder simples and
compounds
in de whole pharmacopeia of medicine. Your
ladyship shall take but one half of dis little phial, when
you will say more for its praise dan I could speak
widout peing accounted a most windy, hyperbolical
and monstrous poasterha, waarachtig! I will speak
noting. Dat wise and sagacious and sapient man,
de great governor and captain, Antony Brockholls,
has given me in my hand so much as five ducatoons,
yes, my lady, five ducatoons for dat little glass,
two hours after a dinner of cold endivesIk spreek
a waarachtiglikI speak you truly, my lady: and
now I give it away for de goot of de world and mine
own glory, at no more dan one rix dollar,five
shillings
.
I do not soar in de clouts?
Can you describe its virtues, Doctor? inquired
the lady.
Mine honoured madam, dey are apundant, and I
shall not lie if I say countless and widout number.
First, it is a great enemy to plack choler, and to all
de affections of de spleen, giving sweet sleep to de
eyelids dat have peen kept open py de cares and
sufferings
and anxieties of de world. It will dispel de
charms of witchcraft, magic and sorcery, and turn
away de stroke of de evil eye. It corroborates de
stomach py driving off de sour humours of de
pylorus
,
and cleansing de diaphram from de oppilations
which fill up and torpefy de pipes of de nerves. And
your ladyship shall observe dat, as nature has supplied
Vol. I.21
and adapted particular plants and herps to de
maladies
of de several parts of de animal pody, as,not
to be tedious,aniseeds and calamint for de head,
hysop and liquorice for de lungs, borage for de heart,
betony for de spleen, and so on wid de whole pody
dis wonderful medicament contains and possesses
in itself someting of all, being de great remedy,
antidote
and expeller of all diseases, such as vertigine,
falling
sickness, cramps, catalepsies, lumbagos, rheums,
inspissations, agitations, hypocondrics, and
tremorcordies
,
whedder dey come of de head, de heart, de
liver, de vena cava, de mesentery or de pericardium,
making no difference if dey be hot or cold, dry or
moist, or proceeding from terrestrial or genethliacal
influences, evil genitures, or vicious aspects of de
starsit is no matterdey all vanish pefore de great
medicamentum. You must know, my lady, dis
precious
mixture was de great secretde arcanum
mirificabile
of
dat wonderful Arabian physician
Hamech
,
which Paracelsus went mad wid cudgelling
his prains to find out; and Avicenna and Galen and
Trismegistus and Moderatus Columella all proke
down in deir search to discover de meaning of de
learned worts in which Hamech wrote de
signification
.
De great Swammerdam, hoch! what would he
not give Doctor Debor for dat secret! I got it, my
lady, from a learned Egyptian doctor, who took it
from an eremite of Arabia Felix. It was not my
merit, so much as my goot fortune. I am humble,
my lady, and do not poast, but speak op 't woord van
een eerlyk man.
He discourses beyond our depth, said Lady
Baltimore
,
greatly puzzled to keep pace with the learned
pretensions of the quack; and yet I dare say there
is virtue in these medicines. What call you your great
compound, Doctor? I have forgotten its name.
De Medicamentum Promethei, replied the owner
of this wonderful treasure, pleased with the interest
taken in his discourse. Your ladyship will
comprehend
from your reading learned pooks, dat
Prometheus
was a great headen god, what stole de fire
from Heaven, whereby he was able to vivicate and
reluminate de decayed and worn-out podies of de
human families, and in a manner even to give life to
de images of clay; which is all, as your good
ladyship
discerns, a fabulous narration, or pregnant fable,
as de scholars insinuate. And moreover, de poets
and philosophers say dat same headen god was very
learned in de knowledge of de virtues of plants and
herps, which your ladyship will remark is de very
consistence and identification of de noble art of
pharmacy
.
Well den, dis Prometheus, my ladyha, ha!
was some little bit of a juggler, and was very fond
of playing his legerdemains wid de gods, till one day
de great Jupiter, peing angry wid his jocularities and
his tricks, caused him to be chained to a rock, wid a
hungry vulture always gnawing his liver; and dere
he was in dis great misery, till his pody pined away
so small dat his chain would not hold him, and den,
aha! he showed Jupiter a goot pair of heels, like an
honest fellow, and set apout to find de medicines
what should renovate and patch up his liver, which
you may be sure he did, my lady, in a very little
while. Dis again is anoder fable, to signify dat he
was troubled wid a great sickness in dat part of his
pody. Now, my lady, see how well de name
significates
de great virtues of my medicament, which, in
de first place, is a miraculous restorer of health and
vigour and life to de feeble spirits of de pody: dere's
de fire. Second, it is composed of more dan one
hundred plants, roots, and seeds, most delicately
distilled
,
sublimed and suffumigated in a limbeck of pure
virgin silver, and according to de most subtle
projections
of alchemy: and dere your ladyship shall
see de knowledge of de virtues of plants and de
most consummate art of de concoctions. And now
for de last significance of de fable: dis medicament
is a specific of de highest exaltation for de cure,
which never fails, of all distemperatures of de liver;
not to say dat it is less potent to overcome and
destroy
all de oder diseases I have mentioned, and many
more. Dere you see de whole Medicamentum
Promethei
,
which I sell to worshipful peoples for one rix
dollar de phial. Is it not well named, my lady, and
superlative cheap? I give it away: de projection
alone costs me more dan I ask for de compound.
The name is curiously made out, said the lady,
and worthily, if the virtue of the compound answer
the description. But your cures, you have not yet
touched upon them. I long to hear what notable
feats you have accomplished in that sort.
My man Dobel shall speak, replied the
professor
.
De great Heaven forpid I should pe a poaster
to de ears of such honourable ladies! Dobel,
rehearse
de great penefaction of de medicament upon
de excellent and discreet and virtuous vrouw of
Governor
BrockhollsSpreek op eene verstaanbare
wijze!
Hier ben ik, answered Dobel to this summons,
stepping at the same time into the middle of the
room and erecting his person as stiffly as a grenadier
on parade: Goot beoplish! dish ish de drice
renowned
und ingomprbl Doctor Closh Tebor
Stop, stop, hou stil! haltvolslagen gek!
exclaimed
the Doctor, horrified at the nature of the
harangue his stupied servitor had commenced, and
which for a moment threatened to continue, in spite
of the violent remonstrance of the master, Dobel
persevering
like a thing spoken from rather than a thing
that speaksFool, jack-pudding! you pelieve
yourself
on a bank, up on a stage, before de rabble rout?
You would disgrace me before honourable and noble
ladies, wid your tavern howlings, and your parkings
and your pellowings! Out of de door, pegone!
The imperturbable and stolid trumpeter, having
thus unfortunately incurred his patron's ire, slunk
from the parlour, utterly at a loss to comprehend
wherein he had offended. The Doctor in the mean
while, overwhelmed with confusion and mortified
vanity, bustled towards the door and there continued
to vent imprecations upon the unconscious Dobel,
which, as they were uttered in Low Dutch, were
altogether
incomprehensible to the company, but at the
same time were sufficiently ludicrous to produce a
21*
hearty laugh from the Lady Maria, and even to
excite
a partial show of merriment in her companion.
Fortunately for the Doctor, in the midst of his
embarrassment
,
a messenger arrived to inform him that
his presence was required before the council, in
another
part of the house, which order, although it
deprived
the ladies of the present opportunity of
learning
the great efficacy of the Medicamentum
Promethei
in the case of the wife of Governor Brockholls,
gave the Doctor a chance of recovering his
self-possession
by a retreat from the apartment. So, after
an earnest entreaty to be forgiven for the inexpert
address of his man, and a promise to resume his
discourse on a future occasion, he betook himself,
under the guidance of the messenger, to the chamber
in which the council were convened.
Here sat the Proprietary, and Philip Calvert, the
Chancellor, who were now, with five or six other
gentlemen, engaged in the transaction of business
of grave import.
Some depredations had been recently committed
upon the English by the Indians inhabiting the upper
regions of the Susquehanna,especially by the
Sinniquoes
,
who, in an incursion against the
Piscattaways
,
a friendly tribe in the vicinity of St. Mary's,
had advanced into the low country, where they had
plundered the dwellings of the settlers and even
murdered
two or three families. The victims of these
outrages happened to be Protestants, and Fendall's
party availed themselves of the circumstance, to
excite the popular jealousy against Lord Baltimore
by circulating the report that these murders were
committed by Papists in disguise.
What was therefore but an ordinary though
frightful
incident of Indian hostility, was thus exaggerated
into a crime of deep malignity, peculiarly calculated
still more to embitter the party exasperations of the
day. This consideration rendered it a subject of
eager anxiety, on the part of the Council, to procure
the fullest evidence of the hostile designs of the
Indians
,
and thus not only to enable the province to
adopt the proper measure for its own safety, but also
confute the false report which had imputed to the
Catholics so absurd and atrocious a design. A
traveller
by the name of Launcelot Sakel happened, but
two or three days before the present meeting of the
Council, to arrive at the port, where he put afloat the
story of an intended invasion of the province by
certain
Indians of New York, belonging to the tribes of
the Five Nations, and gave as his authority for this
piece of news a Dutch doctor, whom he had fallen
in with on the Delaware, where he left him selling
nostrums, and who, he affirmed, was in a short space
to appear at St. Mary's. This story, with many
particulars
,
was communicated to the Proprietary, which
induced the order to summon the Doctor to attend the
council as soon after his arrival as possible. In
obedience
to this summons, our worthy was now in the
presence of the high powers of the province, not a
little elated with the personal consequence attached
to his coming, as well as the very favourable
reception
he had obtained from the ladies of the household.
This consequence was even enhanced by the suite of
inquisitive domestics, who followed, at a respectful
distance, his movement towards the council chamber,
and who, even there, though not venturing to enter,
were gathered into a group which from the outside
of the door commanded a view of the party within:
in the midst of these Willy of the Flats was by no
means an unconspicuous personage.
Lord Baltimore received the itinerant physician
with that bland and benignant accost which was
habitual
to him, and proceeded with brief ceremony to
interrogate him as to the purport of his visit. The
answers were given with a solemn self-complacency,
not unmixed with that shrewdness which was an
essential attribute to the success of the ancient
quacksalver
.
He described himself as Doctor Claus Debor,
a native of Holland, a man of travel, enjoying no
mean renown in New York, and, for two years past,
a resident of Albany. His chief design in his
present
journey, he represented to be to disseminate the
blessings of his great medicament; whereupon he
was about to launch forth into an exuberant tone of
panegyric, and had, in fact, already produced a smile
at the council board by some high wrought phrases
expressive of his incredible labour in the quest of his
great secret, when the Proprietary checked his career
by a timely admonition.
Ay, we do not seek to know thy merits as a
physician, nor doubt the great virtue of thy drugs,
worthy Doctor; but in regard thereto, give thee free
permission to make what profit of them you
reasonably
may in the province. Still, touching this license,
I must entreat you, in consideration that my Lady
Baltimore has weak nerves, and cannot endure rude
noises, to refrain from blowing thy trumpet within
hearing of this mansion: besides, our people, he
added, looking archly towards the group of
domestics
,
some of whom had now edged into the
apartment
,
are somewhat faint-hearted at such martial
sounds.
By my troth! said Willy, in a half whisper to
his companions in the entry; my Lord hath put it
to him for want of manners!I thought as much
would come from his tantararas. Listen, you shall
hear more anon. Whist!the Doctor puts on a face
and will have his say, in turn.
Your very goot and admirable Lordship,
mistranslates
de significance of my visit, said the
Doctor
,
in his ambitious phrase; for although I most
heartily tank your Lordship's bounty for de
permission
to sell my inestimable medicament, and which
Got geve hetI do hope shall much advantage my
lady wid her weak nerfs and her ailments,still, I
come to opey your most honourable Lordship's
summons
,
which I make pold to pelieve is concerned wid
state matters pefore de high and noble council.
Well, and bravely spoken, said Willy; and
with a good face!the Doctor holds his own,
masters
.
We would hear what you can tell touching a
rumour brought to us by one Master Launcelot
Sakel, whom you saw at Christina Fort, said the
Proprietary.
There is the point of the matter, whispered
Willy, all in an egg shell.
Dere is weighty news, my Lord, replied the
Doctor. I have goot reason to pelieve dat de
Nordern
Indians of New York are meditating and
concocting
mischief against your Lordship's province.
Have a care to the truth of your report, said
Colonel Talbot, rising from his seat: it may be
worse for you if you be found to trifle with us by
passing current a counterfeit story, churned into
consistence in your own brain, out of the froth of
idle, way-side gossipings. We have a statute
against the spreaders of false news.
Heigh, heigh!listen to that, said Willy,
nudging
one of the crowd over whose shoulders he was
peering into the room. There's an outcome with
a witness!there's a flanconade that shall make the
Doctor flutter!
If I am mendacious, replied the Doctor, dat
is, if I am forgetful of mine respect for trute, dese
honourable gentlemens shall teal wid me as a lying
pusy pody and pragmatical tale-bearer. Your
Lordship
shall hear. It is put a fortnight ago, when I
was making ready for dis journey, in Alpany, I
chanced to see in de town so many as two score,
perhaps fifty Indians, who were dere trading skins
for powder and shot. Dey reported demselves to be
Sinniquoes, and said dey came to talk wid de tribes
furder back, to get deir help to fight against de
Piscattaways
.
Indeed!there is probability in that report,
said the Proprietary: well, and how had they sped?
what was their success?
Some of de Five Nations,I forget de name of
de tribe, my Lordit might pe de Oneidasdey told
us, promised to march early de next season;in
dere own worts, when de sap pegin to rise.
In what force, did they say?
In large force, my Lord. De Piscattaways, dey
said, were frents to my Lord and de English,and
so dey should make clean work wid red and white.
What more?
Dey signified dat dey should have great help from
de Delawares and Susquehannocks, who, as I could
make it out, wanted to go to war wid your Lordship's
peoples at once.
True; and they have done so. The insolencies
of these tribes are already as much as we can endure.
Did they find it easy to purchase their powder and
lead in Albany? I should hope that traffic would not
be allowed.
My Lord, de traders do not much stop, when
dey would turn a penny, to reckon who shall get de
loss, so dey get de profit. Dese same Indians I saw
afterwards in de town of New York, trading in de
same way wid Master Grimes, a merchant.
Mischief will come of this, said the
Proprietary
,
unless it be speedily taken in hand. What
reason was given by the Northern Indians for joining
in this scheme?
I tink it was said, replied the Doctor, dat
your Lordship had not made your treaties wid dem,
nor sent dem presents, dese two years past.
True, interposed the Chancellor; we have
failed in that cautionalthough I have more than
once reminded your Lordship of its necessity.
It shall not be longer delayed, replied the
Proprietary
.
You are sure, Doctor Debor, these were
Sinniquoes you saw?
I only know dem by dere own reportI never
heard de name pefore. My man Dobel heard dem
as well as me; wid your Lordship's permission I
shall ask him, said the Doctor, as he went to the
door and directed some of the domestics to call the
man Dobel.
It happened that Dobel, after his disgrace, had
kept apart from the servants of the household, and
was now lamenting his misfortune in a voluntary
exile on the green at the front door, where Willy of
the Flats having hastened to seek him, gave him the
order to appear before the council.
Dobel, you are a made man, he said by way
of encouragement; your master wants you to
speak to their honours: and the honourable council
want to hear you, Dobel; and so does his Lordship.
Hold up thy head, Dobel, and speak for thy
manhood
boldly
and out, like a buckler man.
Ya, ya, replied Dobel, whose acquirements in
the English tongue were limited to his professional
advertisement of Doctor Debor's fame, and a few
slender fragments of phrases in common use. Thus
admonished by Willy, he proceeded doggedly to the
Council Chamber, where as soon as he entered, the
Proprietary made a motion to him with his hand to
approach the table,which Dobel interpreting into
an order to deliver his sentiments, he forthwith
began
in a loud voice
Goot beoplish! dish is de drice renowned und
ingomprbl Doctor
Before he had uttered the name, the Doctor's hand
was thrust across Dobel's mouth and a volley of
Dutch oaths rapped into his ears, at a rate which
utterly
confounded the poor trumpeter, who was
forcibly
expelled from the room, almost by a general
order. When quiet was restored,for it may be
imagined the scene was not barren of laughter,the
Doctor made a thousand apologies for the stupidity
of his servant, and in due time received permission
to retire, having delivered all that he was able to
say touching the matter in agitation before the
Proprietary
.
The Council were for some time after this
incident
engaged in the consideration of the conspiracy
against the Proprietary, of which new evidences
were every day coming to light; and it was now
resolved
that the matter should be brought into the
notice of the judicial authority at an early day.
The only circumstance which I have further
occasion
to notice, related to a diversion which was not
unusual at that day amongst the inhabitants of the
Vol. I.22
province, and which required the permission of the
Council. It was brought into debate by Colonel
Talbot.
Stark Whittle, the swordsman, he said, has
challenged Sergeant Travers to play a prize at such
weapons as they may selectand the Sergeant
accepts
the challenge, provided it meet the pleasure of
his Lordship and the Council. I promised to be a
patron to the play.
It shall be as you choose, said the Proprietary.
This martial sport has won favour with our people.
Let it be so ordered that it tend not to the breach of
the peace. We commit it to your hands, Colonel
Talbot. The Council, assented and the necessary
order was recorded on the journal.
CHAPTER XVII.
Some do call me Jack, sweetheart,
And some do call me Jille:
But when I come to the king's faire courte,
They call me Wilfulle Wille.
The Knight and Shepherd's Daughter
.
The
Skipper's necessary affairs in the port
engaged
him all the day succeeding that of his interview
with father Pierre, and therefore prevented him from
making his intended visit to the Cripple of St.
Jerome's
.
When the next morning broke upon him,
the early bell of St. Mary's Chapel informed him of
the Sabbath,a day seldom distinguished in his
calendar
from the rest of the week. It was, however,
not unheeded now, as it suggested the thought that
an opportunity might be afforded him to gain a sight
of Blanche Wardenand even, perchance an
interview
at
the service of the Chapel. In this hope he
at once relinquished his design of going to St.
Jerome's
,
at least until after the morning offices of the
church were performed. Accordingly, at an hour
somewhat in advance of the general attendance of
the congregation, the Skipper was seen loitering in
the purlieus of the Chapel, where he marked with an
inquisitive but cautious watchfulness the various
groups that were coming to their devotions. When
at length his strained vision was able to descry a
cavalcade approaching from the direction of St.
Inigoe's
,
and he discerned the figures of Albert
Verheyden
and Blanche Warden dallying far in the rear
of the Collector and his daughter Alice, their horses
almost at a walk, and themselves manifestly
engrossed
in an earnest conference, he turned hastily
towards
the church and with a compressed lip and
knitted brow, ascended the stair and threw himself
into an obscure corner of the little gallery which
looked upon the altar. Here he remained a sullen
and concealed observer of the rites of the temple,
his bosom rankling with uncharitable thoughts, and
his countenance clouded with feelings the most
ungenial
to the lowly self-abasement and contrition of
heart which breathed in every word of the solemn
ritual that addressed his ear.
The Collector's family entered the place of
worship
.
The Secretary still accompanied Blanche,
knelt beside her in prayer, opened her missal to the
various services of the day, and tendered the
customary
offices of familiar gallantry common to such
an occasion, with an unrebuked freedom: all this in
the view of the Skipper, whose eye flashed with a
vengeful fire, as he gazed upon the man to whom he
attributed the wrong he deemed himself to have
suffered
in his recent interview with the maiden. The
service ended and the throng was retiring, when
Cocklescraft planted himself on the outside of the
door. His purpose was to exchange even but a word
with the daughter of the Collectorat least to win a
recognition of his presence by a smile, a nod, the
smallest courtesy,so dear to the heart of a lover.
She came at last, loiteringly with father Pierre and
Albert Verheyden. Perhaps she did not see
Cocklescraft
in the shade of the big elm, even although her
father's weaker sight had recognised him, and the old
man had stepped aside to shake his hand. She passed
on to her horse without once turning her head towards
him. The Skipper abruptly sprang from the
Collector
to help her into her saddle, but Blanche had
already Albert's hand, and in a moment was in her
seat. Cocklescraft's proffered service was
acknowledged
by a bow and only a casual word. The
Secretary
in an instant mounted his steed, and, with
the maiden, set forth on their ride at a brisk gallop.
The Brother of the Coast forgetful of his usual
circumspection
,
stood with folded arms and moody
visage, looking darkly upon them as they disappeared,
and muttering half-audible ejaculations of wrath.
He was, after an interval, roused from his abstraction
by the hand of father Pierre gently laid upon his
shoulder:
You have forgotten the censer of virgin silver,
you promised to offer at this shrine, said the priest
in a grave voice. It was to be an offering for the
sin of a wayward spirit of anger. Beware, son, that
thou dost no wrong to a brother.
22*
I have not forgotten the censer, holy father,
returned the Skipper, with an ineffectual effort to
assume his usual equanimity. I have only deferred
the offeringuntil I may give it, he added in a
stern voicewith an honest conscience. Thou
shalt have it anon. I have business now that stands
in the way:good morning to you, father. And
with these words he walked rapidly away.
In the afternoon Cocklescraft was seen plying his
way from the quay in a small boat, attended by two
seamen who rowed him to a point some five or six
miles below the town, where he landed, and set out
on foot for St. Jerome's.
On the following morning, whilst the dawn yet
cast its grey hue over the face of the land, two men,
in shaggy frize dresses, arrived at the hut of the
Cripple. They rode on rough, little beach-ponies,
each provided with a sack. The mastiff bitch
eyed the visiters with a malign aspect from her
station
beneath the door sill, and by her low
mutterings
warned them against a too near approach.
They accordingly stood at bay.
Curse on the slut! said one; she has the eye
of a very devil;it might not be safe to defy her.
Not a mouse is stirring:the old Trencherman is as
still as his bowl. Were it safe, think you, to wake
him?
Why not? demanded the other. He will be
in a passion, and threaten, at first, with his weapon;
but when he knows we come to trade with him, I
will warrant he butters his wrinkles as smoothly with
a smile as you could desire. Strike your staff,
Nichol, against the door.
The fiend fetch me, if I venture so near as to
strike, with that bitch at the step. Try it thyself,
Perry Cadger.
Nay, and it comes to that, I will rouse him in
another fashion, said the other.
Master SwaleMaster Robert SwaleHalloo
halloo!
Rob, man, awake,turn out for thy friends!
exclaimed the first. The growl of the mastiff bitch
was now changed into a hoarse bark. Some stir
was heard from the inside of the hut, and, in a
moment
afterwards, the door was unbolted and brought
sufficiently open to allow the uncouth head and half
dressed figure of the Cripple to be seen. A short
blunderbuss was levelled directly in the face of the
visiters, whilst an ungracious repulse was screamed
out in a voice husky with rage.
Begone, you misbegotten thieves! What makes
you here? Do you think I am an ale draper to take
in every strolling runagate of the night. Begone, or
by my body, I will baptize you with a sprinkling of
lead!
In God's name, Robert Swale, exclaimed the
first speaker, turn thy weapon aslant! Thou mayst
do a deed of mischief upon thy friends. We are
Nichol Upstake, and Peregrine Cadgerfriends,
Rob,friends, who have come to drive bargains to
thy profit. Open your eyes, Masterput on your
glasseswe have gold in pocket, man.
Ha, ha, ha! chuckled the tenant of the hut;
thou art astir, cronies! Ha, ha! I took ye for
land louperssharks. By the Five Wounds, I knew
ye not! Have patience a space and I will open.
When the Cripple had dressed himself he came
swinging forth in his bowl, and passing beyond the
curtilage of his dwelling went to the beach, whither
he was followed by his two visiters who had now
dismounted from their ponies. Here he halted, and
taking off his cap, exposed his bare head and loose
white tresses to the morning breeze which came
somewhat sharply from the water.
Soh! he exclaimed, there is refreshment in
that! It is my custom to expel these night-cap vapours
with the good salt water breeze: that is a
commodity
that may reach the province without paying
duty to his Lordship! a cheap physic, a cheap physic,
masters. Now what scent art thou upon, Nichol
Upstake? Perry Cadger, man of sarsnet and
grogram
,
I guess thy errand.
In truth, Robert Swale, said Upstake
No Robert Swale, nor Master Robert Swale,
testily interrupted the owner of the cabin: none of
your worshipful phrase for me! Thou art but a
shallow hypocrite to affect this reverence. Rob of
the Bowl is the best I get from you when your
longings
are satisfied; ay, and it is said with a curl of
your lip; and you make merry over my unworthiness
with your pot-fellows. So, be honest, and give me
plain Rob; I seek no flattery.
You do us wrong, good Master Rob, interposed
Peregrine Cadger
To your needs, said Rob, sternly: Speak in
the way of your trade! You have no voice, nor I
ear for aught else.
Then, in brief, said Nichol Upstake, I would
fain know if you could supply me with Antigua to
day, or aqua vit, I care not which?
If such a thing might be, where wouldst thou
take it, Nichol? inquired Rob.
To Warrington on the Cliffs.
Ay, to Warrington on the Cliffs; good!and
warily to be borne? no hawk's eye upon thy path?
It shall be by night, if you like it, said the dealer.
Well, well! replied the Cripple; I can give
you a little of both, master: a flagon or so; some
three or four. My hut is small, and hath a scant
cellar. But the money in hand, Nichol Upstake!
Good goldfull weightand a fair price, too, mark
you! I must have a trifle above my last marketten
shillings the gallon on the brandy, and two more for
the Antigua. Leave thy kegs, and see me again at
sunset. The money in hand! the money in hand!
there is no trust in my commonwealth.
It shall be so, said Nichol.
And now, Master Cadger, what wilt? You have
a scheme to cozen dame and wench with gewgaws;
I see it in thine eye: and you will swear upon book
and cross, if need be, they have stood you a wondrous
hard purchase, even at the full three hundred per
cent, excess you purpose to exact above the cost;
and all the while it has come out of Rob's warehouse
as cheap as beggars' alms: Ha, ha, ha! This world
thrives on honesty! it grows fat on virtue! knavery
only starves! Your rogue in rags, what hath he but
his deserts! Let him repent and turn virtuous, like
you and me, Perry, and his torn cloak and threadbare
doublet shall be fenced and lined to defy all weathers.
Hark ye, master, I have camblets, satins, and velvets,
cambric, and lawn for theechoice commodities all.
Thou shalt see them in the hut.
How came you by so rich an inventory, Rob?
The Cripple turned a fierce eye upon the mercer,
and with one glance conveyed his meaning, as he
touched the handle of his dagger and said in a low
tone,
Dost forget the covenant between us? Peregrine
Cadger you know I brook no such question.
The mercer stood for a moment abashed, and then
replied: An idle word, Master Rob, which meant
no harm: as you say, honesty will only thrive.
You shall find never a knave that is not some part
fool. I will into the hut to look at the wares.
Do so, said the Cripple. You will find them
in the box behind the door. There is need that you
leave me, so follow him, Nichol. I have sudden
business, masters, which it does not concern you to
witness. When you have seen what you desire,
depart
quickly; leave your sacks and come back at
sunset
.
I charge you, have a care that your eyes do
not wander towards my motions. You know me, and
know that I have sentinels upon your steps who have
power to sear your eye-balls if you but steal one
forbidden
glance: away!
The dealers withdrew into the hut, wondering at
the abrupt termination of their interview, and
implicitly
confiding in the power of the Cripple to make
good his threat.
The Lord have mercy upon us! said the mercer,
in a smothered voice, after they had entered the
door; the Cripple hath matters on hand which it
were not for our good to pry into. Pray you, Nichol,
let us make our survey and do his bidding, by setting
forth at once. I am not the man to give him
offence
.
The cause of this unexpected dismissal of the
visiters was the apparition of Cocklescraft, whose
figure, in the doubtful light of the morning, was seen
by Rob at a distance, on the profile of the bank in
the neighbourhood of the Wizard's Chapel. He had
halted upon observing the Cripple in company with
strangers, and had made a signal which was
sufficiently
intelligible to the person to whom it was
addressed
,
to explain his wish to meet him.
Rob, having thus promptly rid himself of his
company
,
now swung on his short crutches, almost as
rapidly as a good walker could have got over the
ground, towards the spot where the Buccaneer had
halted.
Steer your cockleshell there to the right, old
worm! said the Freebooter, as Rob came opposite
to the bank on which he stood. You shall find it
easier to come up by the hollow.
The plagues of a foul conscience light on thee!
replied the Cripple, desisting from farther motion,
and wiping the perspiration from his brow. Is it
more seemly I should waste my strength on the
fruitless
labour to clamber up that rough slope, or thou
come down to me? You mock me, sirrah! he added,
with an expression of sudden anger; Thou know'st
I cannot mount the bank.
Thou know'st I can drag thee up, reverend
fragment
of a sinful man! returned Cocklescraft,
jocularly
;
yes, and with all thy pack of evil passions at
thy back, besides. Would you hold our meeting in
sight from the window of the hut, where you have
just lodged a pair of your busy meddlersyour
bumpkin
cronies in the way of trade? It was such as these
that, but a few nights ago, set his Lordship's hounds
upon our tracks. Come up, man, without farther
parley.
The Cripple's fleeting anger changed, as usual, to
that bitter smile and chuckle with which he was wont
to return into a tractable mood, as he said,
A provident rogue! a shrewd imp! He has his
instinct of mischief so keen that his forecast never
sleepeth. The devil hath made him a perfect scholar.
There, Dickon, give me thy hand, he added, when
he came to the steep ascent which his machine of
locomotion was utterly inadequate to surmount.
Give me thy hand, good cut-throat. Help me to
the top.
The muscular seaman, instead of extending his
hand to his companion, descended the bank, and
taking the bowl and its occupant upon his shoulder,
strode upward to the even ground, and deposited his
load with as little apparent effort as if he had been
dealing with a truss of hay.
Bravely! ejaculated Rob, when he was set down.
I scarce could have done better in my best day.
Now, what set thee to jogging so early, Dickon?
Where dost thou come from?
From the Chapel, replied the other. I came
there from the Port last night, express to see you;
and having no special favour for the bed I slept on,
I left it at the first streak of light to go and rouse you
from your dreams, and lo! there you are at one of
your dog and wolf bargains with the country side
clowns.
Discreet knaves, Dickon, who have come to ease
us of somewhat of our charge of contraband: stout
jerkinsstout and well lined; rogues of substance
Nichol Upstake, the ordinary keeper of Warrington,
and Perry Cadger, the mercer of St. Mary's. Seeing
thee here, I dismissed them until sunset. That
Peregrine
Cadger is somewhat leaky as a gossip, and
might tell tales if he were aware that I consorted
with you.
I see them taking the road on their ponies, said
Cocklescraft; we may venture to the hut. I am
sharp set for breakfast, and when I have a contented
stomach, I will hold discourse with you, Rob,
touching
matters of some concern to us both.
The Cripple and his guest, upon this hint, repaired
to the hut, and in due time the morning meal was
Vol. I.23
supplied and despatched. Cocklescraft then opened
the purport of his visit.
Has it ever come into your wise brain, Master
Rob, he asked, that you are getting somewhat old;
and that it might behoove you to make a shrift at
the confessional, by way of settling your account?
I take it, it will not be a very clean reckoning
without
a good swashing penance.
How now, thou malignant kite! exclaimed the
Cripple; what's in the wind?
Simply, Rob, that the time has come when,
peradventure
,
we must part. I am tired of this wicked
life. I shall amend; and I come to counsel you to
the like virtuous resolution. I will be married,
Robert Swale, Man of the Bowl!
Grammercy! thou wilt be married! thou! I spit
upon thee for a fool. What crotchet is this?
I will be married, as I say, neither more nor less.
Now to what wench, ask you? Why to the very
fairest and primest flower of this provincethe Rose
of St. Mary'sthe Collector's own daughter. I
mark that devil's sneer of unbelief of your's, old
buckler man; truer word was never spoke by son of
the sea or land, than I speak now.
To the Collector's daughter! ejaculated the
Cripple, in a tone of derision. Thy carriage is bold
in the Port, but no measure of audacity will ever
bring thee to that favour. Would'st thou play at thine
old game, and sack the town, and take the daintiest
in it for ransom? You know no other trick of wooing,
Dickon.
By my hand, Rob, I am specially besought by the
Collector to make one at a choice merry-making
which his daughter has on foot for next Thursday.
Ay, and I am going, on his set command, to dance a
gailliard with Mistress Blanche. Oh, she shall be
the very bird of the seathe girl of the billow, Rob!
She shall be empress of the green wave that nursed
me, and the blue sky, and the wide waste. Her
throne shall be on the deck of my gay bark: and my
merry men shall spring at her beck as deftly as at
the boatswain's pipe!
You shall sooner meet your deservings, said
Rob, on the foal of the acorn, with a hempen string,
than find grace with the Collector's child. Thy whole
life has been adversary to the good will of the
father.
I know it, replied Cocklescraft. I was born
in natural warfare with the customs and all who
gather them; the more praise for my exploit! I shall
change my ways and forsake evil company. I shall
be a man of worship. We shall shut up the Chapel,
Rob; expel our devils; pack off our witches to
Norway
,
and establish an honest vocation. Therefore,
Rob, go to father Pierre; repent of your misdeeds,
and live upon your past gains. You are rich and
may afford to entertain henceforth a reputable
conscience
.
Do not palter with me, sirrah! but tell me what
this imports.
Then truly, Rob, I am much disturbed in my
fancies. I love the wench, and mean to have her
fairly if I canbut after the fashion of the Coast if I
must. She doth not consent as yetmainly because
she hath a toy of delight in that silken Secretary of
my Lorda bookish pale-cheeked, sickly strummer
of stringed instrumentsone Master Verheyden, I
think they call him.
Ha! exclaimed the Cripple, as a frown
gathered on his brow; what is he? Whence comes
he?
His Lordship's chamber secretary, replied
Cocklescraft
;
brought hither I know not when nor
whence. A silent-paced, priestly pattern of modesty,
who feeds on the favour of his betters, as a lady's
dog, that being allowed to lick the hand of his
mistress
,
takes the privilege to snarl on all who approach
her. I shall make light work with him by whipping
him out of my way. Why are you angry, that you
scowl so, Master Rob?
I needs must be angry to see thee make a fool of
thyself, replied the master of the hut. Verheyden
his Lordship's secretary! he muttered to himself.
No, no! it would be a folly to think it.
Mutter as you will, Rob, said Cocklescraft; by
St. Iago, I will try conclusions with the Secretary
folly or no folly! He hath taught the maiden, he
added, with a bitter emphasis, to affect a scorn for
me, and he shall smart for it.
Ha! thy spirit is ever for undoing! exclaimed
Rob, suddenly changing his mood, and forcing a harsh
laugh of derision. Mischief is your proper element
your food, your repose, your luxury. Well, if
thou needst must take on a new life, and strive to be
worshipful, I would counsel thee to begin it with some
deed of charity, not strife. I had as well make my
lecture to a young wolf! Ha, Dickon, thou wilt be a
prospering pupil to the master that teaches thee the
virtue of charity! Such rede will be welcome to thee
as water to thy shoes! I have scanned thee in all
thy humours!
I spurn upon your advice, and will not be scorned,
old man! said Cocklescraft, angrily. The maiden
shall be mine, though I pluck her from beneath her
father's blazing roof-tree; and then farewell to the
province, and to thee! Mark you that! I come not
to be taunted with thy ill-favoured speech! My men
shall be withdrawn from the Chapel. I will put them
on worthier service than to minister to thy
greediness
.
Hot-brained, silly idiotthou drivelling fool!
shouted Rob. Dost thou not know that I can put
thee in the dust and trample on thee as a caitiff?
that I can drive thee from the province as a vile
out-law
?
Art thou such a dizzard as to tempt my anger?
If you would thrive even in your villanous wooing,
have a care not to provoke my displeasure! One
word from me, and not a man paces thy deck:
thou goest abroad unattended, stiverlessa fugitive,
with hue and cry at thy heels. How dar'st thou
reprove
me, boy?
Thy hand, Rob, said Cocklescraft, relenting.
You say no more than my folly warrants; I am a
wanton fool: your pardonlet there be peace
between
us.
Art reasonable again? Bravely confessed, Dickon!
I forgive thy rash speech. Now go thy ways, and
the Foul One speed thee! I have naught to counsel,
either for strife or peace, since thou hast neither
wit, wisdom, nor patience for sober advice against
the current of thy will. It will not be long before
this maimed trunk shall sink into its natural resting
placeand it matters not to me how my remnant
of time be spentwhether in hoarding or keeping.
The world will find me an heir to squander what
little store it hath pleased my fortune to gather. So
go thy ways!
I will see you again, friend Rob, said the
Buccaneer
.
I have matter to look after at the Chapel,
and then shall get back to the Port, to drive my
suit to a speedy issue. I came here but in honest
dealing with you, to give you friendly notice of
my design, and, perchance, to get your aid. You
have no counsel for me? It is well; my own head
and arm shall befriend me; they have stood me in
stead in straits more doubtful than this; farewell
farewell!
As the Skipper stepped along the beach, Rob
planted himself in the door of the hut and looked
after him for some moments, nodding his head
significantly
towards him, and muttering in a cynical
undertone, Go thy ways, snake of the sea, spawn
of a water devil! Thou married! ha, ha! Thy
lady gay shall have a sweetened cup in thee: and thy
wooing shall be tender and gentleyea, as the
appetite of the sword-fish. It shall be festival
wooingall in the lightin the lightof the bride's
own blazing roof: a dainty wolf! a most tractable
shark! Oh, I cannot choose but laugh!
END OF VOLUME I.