1*
ABBOTSFORD.
I SIT down to perform my promise of giving
you an account of a visit made many years since
to Abbotsford. I hope, however, that you do
not expect much from me, for the travelling
notes taken at the time are so scanty and vague,
and my memory so extremely fallacious, that I
fear I shall disappoint you with the meagreness
and crudeness of my details.
Late in the evening of the 29th August, 1816,
I arrived at the ancient little border town of
Selkirk, where I put up for the night. I had
come down from Edinburgh, partly to visit
Melrose
Abbey and its vicinity, but chiefly to get a
sight of the mighty minstrel of the north. I
had a letter of introduction to him from Thomas
Campbell the poet, and had reason to think, from
the interest he had taken in some of my earlier
scribblings, that a visit from me would not be
deemed an intrusion.
On the following morning, after an early
breakfast, I set off in a postchaise for the Abbey.
On the way thither I stopped at the gate of
Abbotsford
,
and sent the postillion to the house with
the letter of introduction and my card, on which
I had written that I was on my way to the ruins
of Melrose Abbey, and wished to know whether
it would be agreeable to Mr. Scott (he had not
yet been made a Baronet) to receive a visit from
me in the course of the morning.
While the postillion was on his errand, I had
time to survey the mansion. It stood some short
distance below the road, on the side of a hill
sweeping down to the Tweed; and was as yet
but a snug gentleman's cottage, with something
rural and picturesque in its appearance. The
whole front was overrun with evergreens, and
immediately above the portal was a great pair of
elk horns, branching out from beneath the
foliage
,
and giving the cottage the look of a hunting
lodge. The huge baronial pile, to which this
modest mansion in a manner gave birth, was just
emerging into existence: part of the walls,
surrounded
by scaffolding, already had risen to the
height of the cottage, and the court yard in front
was encumbered by masses of hewn stone.
The noise of the chaise had disturbed the
quiet of the establishment. Out sallied the
warder
of the castle, a black greyhound, and, leaping
on one of the blocks of stone, began a furious
barking. His alarum brought out the whole
garrison
of dogs:
Both mongrel, puppy, whelp, and hound,
And curs of low degree;
all open mouthed and vociferous.I should
correct my quotation;not a cur was to be
seen on the premises: Scott was too true a
sportsman, and had too high a veneration for
pure blood, to tolerate a mongrel.
In a little while the lord of the castle
himself
made his appearance. I knew him at once
by the descriptions I had read and heard, and
the likenesses that had been published of him
He was tall, and of a large and powerful frame.
His dress was simple, and almost rustic. An
old green shooting coat, with a dog whistle at
the button hole, brown linen pantaloons, stout
shoes that tied at the ankles, and a white hat
that had evidently seen service. He came
limping
up the gravel walk, aiding himself by a stout
walking staff, but moving rapidly and with vigour.
By his side jogged along a large iron-grey stag
hound of a most grave demeanour, who took no
part in the clamour of the canine rabble, but
seemed to consider himself bound, for the
dignity
of the house, to give me a courteous
reception
.
Before Scott had reached the gate he called
out in a hearty tone, welcoming me to Abbotsford,
and asking news of Campbell. Arrived at the
door of the chaise, he grasped me warmly by
the hand: Come, drive down, drive down to the
house, said he, ye're just in time for breakfast,
and afterwards ye shall see all the wonders of
the Abbey.
I would have excused myself, on the plea of
having already made my breakfast. Hout
man, cried he, a ride in the morning in the
keen air of the Scotch hills is warrant enough
for a second breakfast.
I was accordingly whirled to the portal of the
cottage, and in a few moments found myself
seated at the breakfast table. There was no
one present but the family, which consisted of
Mrs. Scott, her eldest daughter Sophia, then a
fine girl about seventeen, Miss Ann Scott, two
or three years younger, Walter, a well grown
stripling, and Charles a lively boy, eleven or
twelve years of age. I soon felt myself quite at
home, and my heart in a glow with the cordial
welcome I experienced. I had thought to make
a mere morning visit, but found I was not to be
let off so lightly. You must not think our
neighbourhood is to be read in a morning, like a
newspaper, said Scott. It takes several days
of study for an observant traveller that has a
relish for auld world trumpery. After
breakfast
you shall make your visit to Melrose Abbey;
I shall not be able to accompany you, as I have
some household affairs to attend to, but I will
put you in charge of my son Charles, who is very
learned in all things touching the old ruin and
the neighbourhood it stands in, and he and my
friend Johnny Bower will tell you the whole
truth about it, with a good deal more that you
are not called upon to believeunless you be a
true and nothing-doubting antiquary. When you
come back, I'll take you out on a ramble about
the neighbourhood. To-morrow we will take a
look at the Yarrow, and the next day we will
drive over to Dryburgh Abbey, which is a fine
old ruin well worth your seeingin a word,
before
Scott had got through with his plan, I found
myself committed for a visit of several days,
and it seemed as if a little realm of romance was
suddenly opened before me.
After
breakfast I accordingly set off for the
Abbey with my little friend Charles, whom I
found a most sprightly and entertaining
companion
.
He had an ample stock of anecdote
about the neighbourhood, which he had learned
from his father, and many quaint remarks and
sly jokes, evidently derived from the same source,
all which were uttered with a Scottish accent
and a mixture of Scottish phraseology, that gave
them additional flavour.
On our way to the Abbey he gave me some
anecdotes of Johnny Bower to whom his father
had alluded; he was sexton of the parish and
custodian of the ruin, employed to keep it in
order and show it to strangers;a worthy
little man, not without ambition in his
humble
sphere. The death of his predecessor had
been mentioned in the newspapers, so that his
name had appeared in print throughout the land.
When Johnny succeeded to the guardianship of
the ruin, he stipulated that, on his death, his
name should receive like honourable blazon;
with this addition, that it should be from the
pen of Scott. The latter gravely pledged
himself
to pay this tribute to his memory, and
Johnny now lived in the proud anticipation of a
poetic immortality.
I found Johnny Bower a decent looking
little
old man, in blue coat and red waistcoat. He
received us with much greeting, and seemed
delighted
to see my young companion, who was
full of merriment and waggery, drawing out his
peculiarities for my amusement. The old man
was one of the most authentic and particular of
cicerones; he pointed out every thing in the
Abbey
that had been described by Scott in his Lay
of the Last Minstrel: and would repeat, with
broad Scottish accent, the passage which
celebrated
it.
Thus, in passing through the cloisters, he made
me remark the beautiful carvings of leaves and
flowers wrought in stone with the most exquisite
delicacy, and, notwithstanding the lapse of
centuries
,
retaining their sharpness as if fresh from
the chisel; rivalling, as Scott has said, the real
objects of which they were imitations:
Nor herb nor flowret glistened there
But was carved in the cloister arches as fair.
He pointed out also among the carved work
a nun's head of much beauty, which he said Scott
always stopped to admirefor the shirra' had
a wonderful eye for all sic matters.
I would observe, that Scott seemed to derive
more consequence in the neighbourhood from
being sheriff of the county, than from being
poet.
In the interior of the Abbey, Johnny Bower
conducted me to the identical stone on which
Stout William of Deloraine and the Monk took
their seat on that memorable night when the
wizard's book was to be rescued from the grave.
Nay, Johnny had even gone beyond Scott in
the minuteness of his antiquarian research, for
he had discovered the very tomb of the wizard,
the position of which had been left in doubt by
the poet. This he boasted to have ascertained
by the position of the Oriel window, and the
direction
in which the moon beams fell at night,
through the stained glass, casting the shadow
to the red cross on the spot; as had all been
specified in the poem. I pointed out the whole
to the shirra, said he, and he could na'
gainsay
but it was varra clear. I found
afterwards
,
that Scott used to amuse himself with the
simplicity of the old man, and his zeal in
verifying
every passage of the poem, as though it
had been authentic history, and that he always
acquiesced in his deductions. I subjoin the
description of the wizard's grave, which called
forth the antiquarian research of Johnny Bower.
Lo warrior! now the cross of red,
Points to the grave of the mighty dead;
Slow moved the monk to the broad flag-stone,
Which the bloody cross was traced upon:
He pointed to a secret nook:
An iron bar the warrior took;
And the monk made a sign with his withered hand,
The grave's huge portal to expand.
It was by dint of passing strength,
That he moved the massy stone at length.
I would you had been there, to see
How the light broke forth so gloriously,
Streamed upward to the chancel roof,
And through the galleries far aloof!
And, issuing from the tomb,
Showed the monk's cowl and visage pale,
Danced on the dark brown warrior's mail,
And kissed his waving plume.
2
Before their eyes the wizard lay,
As if he had not been dead a day.
His hoary beard in silver rolled,
He seemed some seventy winters old;
A palmer's amice wrapped him round;
With a wrought Spanish baldric bound,
Like a pilgrim from beyond the sea:
His left hand held his book of might;
A silver cross was in his right:
The lamp was placed beside his knee.
The fictions of Scott had become facts with
honest Johnny Bower. From constantly living
among the ruins of Melrose Abbey, and pointing
out the scenes of the poem, the Lay of the Last
Minstrel had, in a manner, become interwoven
with his whole existence, and I doubt whether
he did not now and then mix up his own
identity
with the personages of some of its cantos.
He could not bear that any other production
of the poet should be preferred to the Lay of
the Last Minstrel. Faith, said he to me,
it's just e'en as gude a thing as Mr. Scott has
writtenan if he were stannin there I'd tell him
soan' then he'd lauf.
He was loud in his praises of the affability
of Scott. He'll come here sometimes, said
he, with great folks in his company, an the first
I know of it is his voice, calling out Johnny!
Johnny Bower!and when I go out, I am sure
to be greeted with a joke or a pleasant word.
He'll stand and crack and lauff wi' me, just like
an auld wifeand to think that of a man that
has such an awfu' knowledge o' history!
One of the ingenious devices on which the
worthy little man prided himself, was to place a
visiter opposite to the Abbey, with his back to
it, and bid him bend down and look at it between
his legs. This, he said, gave an entire different
aspect to the ruin. Folks admired the plan
amazingly, but as to the leddies, they were
dainty on the matter, and contented themselves
with looking from under their arms.
As Johnny Bower piqued himself upon
showing
every thing laid down in the poem, there
was one passage that perplexed him sadly. It
was the opening of one of the cantos:
If thou would'st view fair Melrose aright,
Go visit it by the pale moonlight;
For the gay beams of lightsome day,
Gild but to flout the ruins gray, &c.
In consequence of this admonition, many of
the most devout pilgrims to the ruin could not
be contented with a daylight inspection, and
insisted
it could be nothing, unless seen by the
light of the moon. Now, unfortunately, the moon
shines but for a part of the month; and what is
still more unfortunate, is very apt in Scotland to
be obscured by clouds and mists. Johnny was
sorely puzzled, therefore, how to accommodate
his poetry-struck visiters with this indispensable
moonshine. At length, in a lucky moment, he
devised a substitute. This was a great double
tallow candle stuck upon the end of a pole, with
which he would conduct his visiters about the
ruins on dark nights, so much to their
satisfaction
that, at length, he began to think it even
preferable to the moon itself. It does na light
up a' the Abbey at aince, to be sure, he would
say, but then you can shift it about and show
the auld ruin bit by bit, whiles the moon only
shines on one side.
Honest Johnny Bower! so many years have
elapsed since the time I treat of, that it is more
than probable his simple head lies beneath the
walls of his favourite Abbey. It is to be hoped
his humble ambition has been gratified, and his
name recorded by the pen of the man he so loved
and honoured.
After
my return from Melrose Abbey, Scott
proposed a ramble to show me something of the
surrounding country. As we sallied forth, every
dog in the establishment turned out to attend us.
There was the old stag hound Maida, that I
have already mentioned, a noble animal, and a
great favourite of Scott's, and Hamlet, the black
greyhound, a wild thoughtless youngster, not yet
arrived to the years of discretion; and Finette, a
beautiful setter, with soft silken hair, long
pendant
ears, and a mild eye, the parlour favourite.
When in front of the house, we were joined by a
superannuated greyhound, who came from the
kitchen wagging his tail, and was cheered by
Scott as an old friend and comrade.
In our walks, Scott would frequently pause in
conversation to notice his dogs and speak to
them, as if rational companions; and indeed
there appears to be a vast deal of rationality in
these faithful attendants on man, derived from
their close intimacy with him. Maida deported
himself with a gravity becoming his age and size,
and seemed to consider himself called upon to
preserve a great degree of dignity and decorum
in our society. As he jogged along a little
distance
ahead of us, the young dogs would gambol
about him, leap on his neck, worry at his ears,
and endeavour to teaze him into a frolic. The
old dog would keep on for a long time with
imperturbable
solemnity, now and then seeming to
rebuke the wantonness of his young companions.
At length he would make a sudden turn, seize
one of them, and tumble him in the dust; then
giving a glance at us, as much as to say, You
see, gentlemen, I can't help giving way to this
nonsense, would resume his gravity and jog on
as before.
Scott amused himself with these peculiarities.
2*
I make no doubt, said he, when Maida is
alone with these young dogs, he throws gravity
aside, and plays the boy as much as any of
them; but he is ashamed to do so in our
company
,
and seems to say, `Ha' done with your
nonsense
,
youngsters; what will the laird and that
other gentleman think of me if I give way to
such foolery?'
Maida reminded him, he said, of a scene on
board an armed yacht in which he made an
excursion
with his friend Adam Ferguson. They
had taken much notice of the boatswain, who was
a fine sturdy seaman, and evidently felt flattered
by their attention. On one occasion the crew
were piped to fun, and the sailors were
dancing and cutting all kinds of capers to the
music of the ship's band. The boatswain
looked
on with a wistful eye, as if he would like to
join in; but a glance at Scott and Ferguson
showed that there was a struggle with his
dignity
,
fearing to lessen himself in their eyes. At
length one of his messmates came up, and
seizing
him by the arm, challenged him to a jig.
The boatswain, continued Scott, after a little
hesitation complied, made an awkward gambol
or two, like our friend Maida, but soon gave it
up. It's of no use, said he, jerking up his
waistband and giving a side glance at us, one
can't dance always nouther.
Scott amused himself with the peculiarities
of another of his dogs, a little shamefaced
terrier
,
with large glassy eyes, one of the most
sensitive little bodies to insult and indignity in
the world. If ever he whipped him, he said,
the little fellow would sneak off and hide
himself
from the light of day, in a lumber garret,
from whence there was no drawing him forth
but by the sound of the chopping-knife, as if
chopping up his victuals, when he would steal
forth with humbled and downcast look, but
would skulk away again if any one regarded
him.
While we were discussing the humours and
peculiarities of our canine companions, some
object provoked their spleen, and produced a
sharp and petulant barking from the smaller fry,
but it was some time before Maida was
sufficiently
aroused to ramp forward two or three
bounds and join in the chorus, with a
deep-mouthed
bow-wough!
It was but a transient outbreak, and he
returned
instantly, wagging his tail, and looking up
dubiously in his master's face; uncertain
whether
he would censure or applaud.
Aye aye, old boy! cried Scott, you have
done wonders. You have shaken the Eildon
hills with your roaring, you may now lay by
your artillery for the rest of the day. Maida
is like the great gun at Constantinople,
continued
he; it takes so long to get it ready, that
the small guns can fire off a dozen times first,
but when it does go off it plays the very dl.
These simple anecdotes may serve to show
the delightful play of Scott's humours and
feelings
in private life. His domestic animals were
his friends; every thing about him seemed to
rejoice in the light of his countenance: the face
of the humblest dependant brightened at his
approach, as if he anticipated a cordial and
cheering word. I had occasion to observe this
particularly in a visit which we paid to a
quarry
,
whence several men were cutting stone for
the new edifice; who all paused from their
labour
to have a pleasant crack wi' the laird.
One of them was a burgess of Selkirk, with
whom Scott had some joke about the old song:
Up with the Souters o' Selkirk,
And down with the Earl of Home.
Another was precentor at the Kirk, and, beside
leading the psalmody on Sunday, taught the lads
and lasses of the neighbourhood dancing on
week days, in the winter time, when out-of-door
labour was scarce.
Among the rest was a tall, straight old fellow,
with a healthful complexion and silver hair, and
a small round-crowned white hat. He had been
about to shoulder a hod, but paused, and stood
looking at Scott, with a slight sparkling of his
blue eye, as if waiting his turn; for the old
fellow
knew himself to be a favourite.
Scott accosted him in an affable tone, and
asked for a pinch of snuff. The old man drew
forth a horn snuff-box. Hoot, man, said Scott,
not that old mull: where's the bonnie French
one that I brought you from Paris? Troth,
your honour, replied the old fellow, sic a mull
as that is nae for week days.
On leaving the quarry, Scott informed me
that when absent at Paris, he had purchased
several trifling articles as presents for his
dependants
,
and among others the gay snuff-box
in question, which was so carefully reserved for
Sundays, by the veteran. It was not so much
the value of the gifts, said he, that pleased
them, as the idea that the laird should think of
them when so far away.
The old man in question, I found, was a great
favourite with Scott. If I recollect right, he
had been a soldier in early life, and his straight
erect person, his ruddy yet rugged countenance,
his gray hair, and an arch gleam in his blue eye,
reminded me of the description of Edie
Ochiltree
.
I find that the old fellow has since been
introduced by Wilkie, in his picture of the Scott
family.
We
rambled on among scenes which had
been familiar in Scottish song, and rendered
classic by the pastoral muse, long before Scott
had thrown the rich mantle of his poetry over
them. What a thrill of pleasure did I feel when
first I saw the broom covered tops of the
Cowden
Knowes, peeping above the gray hills of the
Tweed: and what touching associations were
called up by the sight of Ettrick Vale, Galla
Water
,
and the Braes of Yarrow! Every turn
brought to mind some household airsome
almost
forgotten song of the nursery, by which I
had been lulled to sleep in my childhood; and
with them the looks and voices of those who
had sung them, and who were now no more.
It is these melodies, chanted in our ears in the
days of infancy, and connected with the memory
of those we have loved, and who have passed
away, that clothe Scottish landscape with such
tender associations. The Scottish songs, in
general
,
have something intrinsically melancholy in
them; owing, in all probability, to the pastoral
and lonely life of those who composed them;
who were often mere shepherds, tending their
flocks in the solitary glens, or folding them among
the naked hills. Many of these rustic bards
have passed away, without leaving a name
behind
them; nothing remains of them but their
sweet and touching songs, which live, like echoes,
about the places they once inhabited. Most of
these simple effusions of pastoral poets are
linked
with some favourite haunt of the poet; and
in this way, not a mountain or valley, a town or
tower, green shaw or running stream, in
Scotland
,
but has some popular air connected with
it, that makes its very name a key note to a
whole train of delicious fancies and feelings.
Let me step forward in time, and mention
how sensible I was to the power of these simple
airs, in a visit which I made to Ayr, the
birthplace
of Robert Burns. I passed a whole
morning
about the banks and braes of bonnie Doon,
with his tender little love verses running in my
head. I found a poor Scotch carpenter at work
among the ruins of Kirk Alloway, which was
to be converted into a school-house. Finding
the purpose of my visit, he left his work, sat
down with me on a grassy grave, close by
where Burns' father was buried, and talked of
the poet, whom he had known personally. He
said his songs were familiar to the poorest and
most illiterate of the country folk,
and it
seemed
to him as if the country had grown more
beautiful
,
since Burns had written his bonnie little
songs about it
.
I found Scott was quite an enthusiast on the
subject of the popular songs of his country, and
he seemed gratified to find me so alive to them.
Their effect in calling up in my mind the
recollections
of early times and scenes in which I
had first heard them, reminded him, he said, of
the lines of his poor friend Leyden, to the
Scottish
muse:
In youth's first morn, alert and gay,
Ere rolling years had passed away,
Remembered like a morning dream,
I heard the dulcet measures float,
In many a liquid winding note,
Along the bank of Teviot's stream.
Sweet sounds! that oft have soothed to rest
The sorrows of my guileless breast,
And charmed away mine infant tears;
Fond memory shall your strains repeat,
Like distant echoes, doubly sweet,
That on the wild the traveller hears.
Scott went on to expatiate on the popular
songs of Scotland. They are a part of our
national inheritance, said he, and something
that we may truly call our own. They have no
foreign taint; they have the pure breath of the
heather and the mountain breeze. All the
genuine
legitimate races that have descended from
the ancient Britons; such as the Scotch, the
Welsh, and the Irish, have national airs. The
English have none, because they are not natives
of the soil, or, at least, are mongrels. Their
music is all made up of foreign scraps, like a
harlequin jacket, or a piece of mosaic. Even
in Scotland, we have comparatively few
national
songs in the eastern part, where we have had
most influx of strangers. A real old Scottish
song is a cairn gorma gem of our own
mountains
:
or rather, it is a precious relic of old
times, that bears the national character stamped
upon it:like a cameo, that shows what the
national
visage was in former days, before the
breed was crossed.
While
Scott was thus discoursing, we were
passing up a narrow glen, with the dogs beating
about, to right and left, when suddenly a black
cock burst upon the wing.
Aha! cried Scott, there will be a good
shot for master Walter; we must send him this
way with his gun, when we go home. Walter's
the family sportsman now, and keeps us in game.
I have pretty nigh resigned my gun to him; for
I find I cannot trudge about as briskly as
formerly
.
Our ramble took us on the hills commanding
an extensive prospect. Now, said Scott,
I have brought you, like the pilgrim in the
Pilgrim's
Progress, to the top of the Delectable
Mountains, that I may show you all the goodly
regions hereabouts. Yonder is Lammermuir,
3
and Smalholme; and there you have
Gallashiels
,
and Torwoodlie, and Gallawater: and
in that direction you see Teviotdale, and the
Braes of Yarrow; and Ettrick stream, winding
along, like a silver thread, to throw itself into
the Tweed.
He went on thus to call over names
celebrated
in Scottish song, and most of which had
recently received a romantic interest from his
own pen. In fact, I saw a great part of the
border country spread out before me, and could
trace the scenes of those poems and romances
which had, in a manner, bewitched the world.
I gazed about me for a time with mute surprise,
I may almost say with disappointment. I
beheld
a mere succession of gray waving hills,
line beyond line, as far as my eye could reach;
monotonous in their aspect, and so destitute of
trees, that one could almost see a stout fly
walking
along their profile: and the far famed Tweed
appeared a naked stream, flowing between bare
hills, without a tree or a thicket on its banks;
and yet, such had been the magic web of poetry
and romance thrown over the whole, that it had
a greater charm for me than the richest scenery
I beheld in England.
I could not help giving utterance to my
thoughts. Scott hummed for a moment to himself,
and looked grave: he had no idea of having his
muse complimented at the expense of his native
hills. It may be partiality, said he, at length;
but to my eye, these gray hills and all this wild
border country have beauties peculiar to
themselves
.
I like the very nakedness of the land;
it has something bold, and stern, and solitary
about it. When I have been for some time in
the rich scenery about Edinburgh, which is like
ornamented garden land, I begin to wish myself
back again among my own honest gray hills;
and if I did not see the heather at least once a
year,
I think I should die!
The last words were said with an honest
warmth, accompanied with a thump on the
ground with his staff, by way of emphasis, that
showed his heart was in his speech. He
vindicated
the Tweed, too, as a beautiful stream in
itself, and observed that he did not dislike it for
being bare of trees, probably from having been
much of an angler in his time, and an angler
does not like to have a stream overhung by
trees, which embarrass him in the exercise of his
rod and line.
I took occasion to plead, in like manner, the
associations of early life, for my
disappointment
,
in respect to the surrounding scenery. I
had been so accustomed to hills crowned with
forests, and streams breaking their way through
a wilderness of trees, that all my ideas of
romantic
landscape were apt to be well wooded.
Aye, and that's the great charm of your
country, cried Scott. You love the forest as
I do the heatherbut I would not have you
think I do not feel the glory of a great woodland
prospect. There is nothing I should like more
than to be in the midst of one of your grand,
wild, original forests; with the idea of hundreds
of miles of untrodden forest around me. I once
saw, at Leith, an immense stick of timber, just
landed from America. It must have been an
enormous tree when it stood on its native soil,
at its full height, and with all its branches. I
gazed at it with admiration; it seemed like one
of the gigantic obelisks which are now and then
brought from Egypt, to shame the pigmy
monuments
of Europe; and, in fact, these vast
aboriginal
trees, that have sheltered the Indians
before the intrusion of the white men, are the
monuments and antiquities of your country.
The conversation here turned upon
Campbell's
poem of Gertrude of Wyoming, as
illustrative
of the poetic materials furnished by
American scenery. Scott spoke of it in that
liberal style in which I always found him to
speak of the writings of his cotemporaries. He
cited several passages of it with great delight.
What a pity it is, said he, that Campbell
does not write more and oftener, and give full
sweep to his genius. He has wings that would
bear him to the skies; and he does now and then
spread them grandly, but folds them up again
and resumes his perch, as if he was afraid to
launch away. He don't know or won't trust his
own strength. Even when he has done a thing
well, he has often misgivings about it. He left
out several fine passages of his Lochiel, but I got
him to restore some of them. Here Scott
repeated
several passages in a magnificent style.
What a grand idea is that, said he, about
prophetic boding, or, in common parlance,
second
sight
`Coming events cast their shadows before.'
It is a noble thought, and nobly expressed. And
there's that glorious little poem, too, of
Hohenlinden
;
after he had written it, he did not seem
to think much of it, but considered some of it
`dd drum and trumpet lines.' I got him to
recite it to me, and I believe that the delight I
felt and expressed had an effect in inducing him
to print it. The fact is, added he,
Campbell
is, in a manner, a bugbear to himself. The
brightness of his early success is a detriment to
all his further efforts.
He is afraid of the
shadow
that his own fame casts before him
.
While we were thus chatting, we heard the
report of a gun among the hills. That's
Walter
,
I think, said Scott, he has finished his
3*
morning's studies, and is out with his gun. I
should not be surprised if he had met with
the black cock; if so, we shall have an
addition
to our larder, for Walter is a pretty sure
shot.
I inquired into the nature of Walter's studies.
Faith, said Scott, I can't say much on that
head. I am not over bent upon making
prodigies
of any of my children. As to Walter, I
taught him, while a boy, to ride, and shoot, and
speak the truth; as to the other parts of his
education, I leave them to a very worthy young
man, the son of one of our clergymen, who
instructs
all my children.
I afterwards became acquainted with the
young man in question, who acted as private
tutor in the family, and whom I found possessed
of much intelligence and modest worth. I
believe he often acted as Scott's amanuensis,
when composing his novels. With him the
young people were occupied, in general, during
the early part of the day, after which they took
all kinds of healthful recreations in the open air;
for Scott was as solicitous to strengthen their
bodies as their minds.
We had not walked much further before we
saw the two Miss Scotts advancing along the
hill side to meet us. The morning's studies
being over, they had set off to take a ramble on
the hills, and gather heather blossoms with
which to decorate their hair for dinner. As they
came bounding lightly like young fawns, and
their dresses fluttering in the pure summer
breeze, I was reminded of Scott's own
description
of his children in his introduction to one of
the cantos of Marmion
My imps, though hardy, bold, and wild,
As best befits the mountain child,
Their summer gambols tell and mourn,
And anxious ask will spring return,
And birds and lambs again be gay,
And blossoms clothe the hawthorn spray?
Yes, prattlers, yes, the daisy's flower
Again shall paint your summer bower;
Again the hawthorn shall supply
The garlands you delight to tie;
The lambs upon the lea shall bound,
The wild birds carol to the round,
And while you frolic light as they,
Too short shall seem the summer day.
As they approached, the dogs all sprang forward
and gambolled around them. They played with
them, for a time, and then joined us with
countenances
full of health and glee. Sophia, the
eldest, was the most lively and joyous,
having
much of her father's varied spirit in
conversation
,
and seeming to catch excitement from his
words and looks. Ann was of quieter mood,
rather silent, owing, in some measure, no doubt,
to her being some years younger.
At
dinner Scott had laid by his half rustic
dress, and appeared clad in black. The girls,
too, in completing their toilet, had twisted in
their hair the sprigs of purple heather which
they had gathered on the hill side, and looked all
fresh and blooming from their breezy walk.
There was no guest at dinner but myself.
Around the table were two or three dogs in
attendance. Maida, the old stag hound, took
his seat at Scott's elbow, looking up wistfully in
his master's eye, while Finette, the pet spaniel,
placed herself near Mrs. Scott, by whom, I
soon perceived, she was completely spoiled.
The conversation happening to turn on the
merits of his dogs, Scott spoke with great
feeling
and affection of his favourite, Camp, who
is depicted by his side in the earlier
engravings
of him. He talked of him as of a real
friend whom he had lost, and Sophia Scott,
looking up archly in his face, observed that
Papa shed a few tears when poor Camp died.
I may here mention another testimonial of
Scott's fondness for his dogs, and his humorous
mode of showing it, which I subsequently met
with. Rambling with him one morning about the
grounds adjacent to the house, I observed a small
antique monument, on which was inscribed, in
Gothic characters
Cy git le preux Percy.
(Here lies the brave Percy.)
I paused, supposing it to be the tomb of some
stark warrior of the olden time, but Scott drew
me on, Pooh! cried he, it's nothing but one
of the monuments of my nonsense, of which
you'll find enough hereabouts. I learnt
afterwards
that it was the grave of a favourite
greyhound
.
Among the other important and privileged
members of the household who figured in
attendance
at the dinner, was a large gray cat, who,
I observed, was regaled from time to time with
tit bits from the table. This sage grimalkin
was a favourite of both master and mistress, and
slept at night in their room; and Scott
laughingly
observed, that one of the least wise parts
of their establishment was, that the window
was left open at night for puss to go in and out.
The cat assumed a kind of ascendency among
the quadrupedssitting in state in Scott's
armchair
,
and occasionally stationing himself on a
chair beside the door, as if to review his
subjects
as they passed, giving each dog a cuff
beside the ears as he went by. This
clapper-clawing
was always taken in good part; it
appeared to be, in fact, a mere act of sovereignty
on the part of grimalkin, to remind the others of
their vassalage; which they acknowledged by
the most perfect acquiescence. A general
harmony
prevailed between sovereign and subjects,
and they would all sleep together in the
sunshine
.
Scott was full of anecdote and
conversation
during dinner. He made some admirable
remarks upon the Scottish character, and spoke
strongly in praise of the quiet, orderly, honest
conduct of his neighbours, which one would
hardly expect, said he, from the descendants of
moss troopers, and borderers, in a
neighbourhood
famed in old times for brawl and feud,
and violence of all kinds. He said he had, in
his official capacity of sheriff, administered the
laws for a number of years, during which there
had been very few trials. The old feuds and
local interests, and rivalries, and animosities of
the Scotch, however, still slept, he said, in their
ashes, and might easily be roused. Their
hereditary
feeling for names was still great. It was
not always safe to have even the game of
football
between villages, the old clannish spirit was
too apt to break out. The Scotch, he said, were
more revengeful than the English; they carried
their resentments longer, and would sometimes
lay them by for years, but would be sure to
gratify them in the end.
The ancient jealousy between the
Highlanders
and the Lowlanders still continued to a
certain
degree, the former looking upon the latter
as an inferior race, less brave and hardy, but at
the same time, suspecting them of a disposition
to take airs upon themselves under the idea of
superior refinement. This made them techy and
ticklish company for a stranger on his first
coming
among them; ruffling up and putting
themselves
upon their mettle on the slightest
occasion
,
so that he had in a manner to quarrel and
fight his way into their good graces.
He instanced a case in point in a brother of
Mungo Park, who went to take up his residence
in a wild neighbourhood of the Highlands. He
soon found himself considered as an intruder,
and that there was a disposition among these
cocks of the hills, to fix a quarrel on him,
trusting
that, being a Lowlander, he would show the
white feather.
For a time he bore their flings and taunts with
great coolness, until one, presuming on his
forbearance
,
drew forth a dirk, and, holding it
before him, asked him if he had ever seen a
weapon like that in his part of the country.
Park, who was a Hercules in frame, seized the
dirk, and, with one blow, drove it through an
oaken table:Yes, replied he, and tell your
friends that a man from the Lowlands drove it
where the devil himself cannot draw it out
again. All persons were delighted with the
feat, and the words that accompanied it. They
drank with Park to a better acquaintance, and
were staunch friends ever afterwards.
After
dinner we adjourned to the drawing
room, which served also for study and library.
Against the wall on one side was a long writing
table, with drawers; surmounted by a small
cabinet of polished wood, with folding doors
richly studded with brass ornaments, within
which Scott kept his most valuable papers.
Above the cabinet, in a kind of niche, was a
complete corslet of glittering steel, with a closed
helmet, and flanked by gauntlets and battle axes.
Around were hung trophies and relics of various
kinds: a cimeter of Tippoo Saib; a Highland
broadsword from Floddenfield; a pair of
Rippon
spurs from Bannockburn; and above all, a
gun which had belonged to Rob Roy, and bore
his initials, R. M. G., an object of peculiar
interest
to me at the time, as it was understood
Scott was actually engaged in printing a novel
founded on the story of that famous outlaw.
On each side of the cabinet were book cases,
well stored with works of romantic fiction in
various
languages, many of them rare and
antiquated
.
This, however, was merely his cottage
library, the principal part of his books being at
Edinburgh.
From this little cabinet of curiosities Scott
drew forth a manuscript picked up on the field
of Waterloo, containing copies of several songs
popular at the time in France. The paper was
dabbled with bloodThe life blood, very
possibly
,
said Scott, of some gay young officer,
who had cherished these songs as a keepsake
from some lady love in Paris.
He adverted in a mellow and delightful
manner
to the little half gay, half melancholy
campaigning
song, said to have been composed by
General Wolfe, and sung by him at the mess
table
,
in the air of the Storming of Quebec, in
which he fell so gloriously.
Why soldiers, why,
Should we be melancholy, boys?
Why soldiers, why,
Whose business 'tis to die!
For should next campaign,
Send us to him who made us, boys,
We're free from pain:
But should we remain,
A bottle and kind landlady
Makes all well again.
4
So, added he, the poor lad who fell at
Waterloo, in all probability had been singing
these songs in his tent the night before the
battle
,
and thinking of the fair dame that had taught
him them, and promising himself, should he
outlive
the campaign, to return to her all glorious
from the wars.
I find since that Scott published translations
of these songs among some of his smaller poems.
The evening passed away delightfully in this
quaint looking apartment, half study, half
drawing
room. Scott read several passages from
the old romance of Arthur, with a fine deep
sonorous
voice, and a gravity of tone that seemed
to suit the antiquated, black letter volume. It
was a rich treat, to hear such a work, read by
such a person, and in such a place; and his
appearance
as he sat reading, in a large armed
chair, with his favourite hound Maida at his feet,
and surrounded by books, and relics, and border
trophies, would have formed an admirable and
most characteristic picture.
While Scott was reading, the sage grimalkin
already mentioned, had taken his seat in a chair
beside the fire, and remained with fixed eye
and grave demeanour, as if listening to the
reader. I observed to Scott that his cat seemed
to have a black letter taste in literature.
Ah, said he, these cats are a very
mysterious
kind of folk. There is always more
passing
in their minds than we are aware of. It
comes no doubt from their being so familiar
with witches and warlocks. He went on to
tell a little story about a gude man who was
returning
to his cottage one night, when in a lonely
out of the way place, he met with a funeral
procession
of cats all in mourning, bearing one of
their race to the grave in a coffin covered with
a black velvet pall. The worthy man,
astonished
and half frightened at so strange a pageant,
hastened home and told what he had seen to his
wife and children. Scarce had he finished, when
a great black cat that sat beside the fire, raised
himself up, exclaimed Then am I King of the
cats, and vanished up the chimney. The
funeral
seen by the gude man, was of one of the
cat dynasty.
Our grimalkin, here, added Scott,
sometimes
reminds me of the story, by the airs of
sovereignty which he assumes; and I am apt
to treat him with respect from the idea that he
may be a great prince incog., and may
sometime
or other come to the throne.
In this way Scott would make the habits and
peculiarities of even the dumb animals about
him, subjects for humorous remark or whimsical
story.
Our evening was enlivened also by an
occasional
song from Sophia Scott, at the request of
her father. She never wanted to be asked
twice, but complied frankly and cheerfully. Her
songs were all Scotch, sung without any
accompaniment
,
in a simple manner, but with great
spirit and expression, and in their native
dialects
,
which gave them an additional charm.
It was delightful to hear her carol off in sprightly
style, and with an animated air, some of those
generous spirited old Jacobite songs, once
current
among the adherents of the Pretender in
Scotland, in which he is designated bythe
appellation
of "the Young Chevalier."
These songs were much relished by Scott,
notwithstanding his loyalty; for the unfortunate
"Chevalier" has always been a hero of romance
with him, as he has with many other staunch
adherents to the House of Hanover, now that
the Stuart line has lost all its terrors. In
speaking
on the subject, Scott mentioned as a curious
fact, that, among the papers of the "Chevalier,"
which had been submitted by government to his
inspection, he had found a memorial to Charles,
from some adherents in America, dated 1778
proposing to set up his standard in the back
settlements
.
I regret that, at the time, I did not
make more particular inquiries of Scott on the
subject; the document in question, however, in
all probability, still exist among the Pretender's
papers, which are in the possession of the British
Government.
In the course of the evening, Scott related the
story of a whimsical picture hanging in the
room, which had been drawn for him by a lady
of his acquaintance. It represented the doleful
perplexity of a wealthy and handsome young
English knight of the olden time, who in the
course of a border foray, had been captured and
carried off to the castle of a hard-headed and
high-handed old baron. The unfortunate youth
was thrown into a dungeon, and a tall gallows
erected before the castle gate for his execution.
When all was ready, he was brought into the
castle hall where the grim baron was seated in
state, with his warriors armed to the teeth
around him, and was given his choice, either to
swing on the gibbet or to marry the baron's
daughter. The last may be thought an easy
alternative, but unfortunately, the baron's young
lady was hideously ugly, with a mouth from ear
to ear, so that not a suitor was to be had for
her, either for love or money, and she was
known throughout the border country by the
name of Muckle-mouthed Mag!
The picture in question represented the
unhappy
dilemma of the handsome youth. Before
him sat the grim baron, with a face worthy of
the father of such a daughter, and looking
daggers
4 *
and rat's bane. On one side of him was
Muckle-mouthed Mag, with an amorous smile
across the whole breadth of her countenance,
and a leer enough to turn a man to stone; on the
other side was the father confessor, a sleek friar,
jogging the youth's elbow, and pointing to the
gallows, seen in perspective through the open
portal.
The story goes, that after long labouring in
mind, between the altar and the halter, the love of
life prevailed, and the youth resigned himself to
the charms of Muckle-mouthed Mag. Contrary
to all the probabilities of romance, the match
proved a happy one. The baron's daughter, if
not beautiful, was a most exemplary wife; her
husband was never troubled with any of those
doubts and jealousies which sometimes mar the
happiness of connubial life, and was made the
father of a fair and undoubtedly legitimate line,
that still flourishes on the border.
I give but a faint outline of the story from
vague recollection; it may, perchance, be more
richly related elsewhere, by some one who may
retain something of the delightful humour with
which Scott recounted it.
When I retired for the night, I found it
almost
impossible to sleep; the idea of being under
the roof of Scott; of being on the borders of the
Tweed, in the very centre of that region which
had for some time past been the favourite scene
of romantic fiction; and above all, the
recollections
of the ramble I had taken, the company
in which I had taken it, and the conversation
which had passed, all fermented in my mind, and
nearly drove sleep from my pillow.
On
the following morning, the sun darted his
beams from over the hills through the low lattice
window. I rose at an early hour, and looked
out between the branches of eglantine which
overhung the casement. To my surprise Scott
was already up and forth, seated on a fragment
of stone, and chatting with the workmen
employed
on the new building. I had supposed,
after the time he had wasted upon me yesterday,
he would be closely occupied this morning: but
he appeared like a man of leisure, who had
nothing
to do but bask in the sunshine and amuse
himself.
I soon dressed myself and joined him. He
talked about his proposed plans of Abbotsford:
happy would it have been for him could he have
contented himself with his delightful little vine
covered cottage, and the simple, yet hearty and
hospitable style, in which he lived at the time of
my visit. The great pile of Abbotsford, with
the huge expense it entailed upon him, of
servants
,
retainers, guests, and baronial style, was a
drain upon his purse, a task upon his exertions,
and a weight upon his mind, that finally crushed
him.
As yet, however, all was in embryo and
perspective
,
and Scott pleased himself with
picturing
out his future residence, as he would one of
the fanciful creations of his own romances. It
was one of his air castles, he said, which he
was reducing to solid stone and mortar. About
the place were strewed various morsels from the
ruins of Melrose Abbey, which were to be
incorporated
in his mansion. He had already
constructed out of similar materials a kind of
Gothic shrine over a spring, and had surmounted
it by a small stone cross.
Among the relics from the Abbey which
lay scattered before us, was a most quaint and
antique little lion, either of red stone, or painted
red, which hit my fancy. I forget whose
cognizance
it was; but I shall never forget the
delightful
observations concerning old Melrose to
which it accidentally gave rise.
The Abbey was evidently a pile that called
up all Scott's poetic and romantic feelings; and
one to which he was enthusiastically attached
by the most fanciful and delightful of his early
associations. He spoke of it, I may say, with
affection. There is no telling, said he, what
treasures are hid in that glorious old pile. It is
a famous place for antiquarian plunder; there
are such rich bits of old time sculpture for the
architect, and old time story for the poet. There
is as rare picking in it as in a Stilton cheese,
and in the same tastethe mouldier the better.
He went on to mention circumstances of
mighty import connected with the Abbey,
which had never been touched, and which had
even escaped the researches of Johnny Bower.
The heart of Robert Bruce, the hero of
Scotland
,
had been buried in it. He dwelt on the
beautiful story of Bruce's pious and chivalrous
request in his dying hour, that his heart might
be carried to the Holy Land and placed in the
Holy Sepulchre, in fulfilment of a vow of
pilgrimage
;
and of the loyal expedition of Sir
James Douglas to convey the glorious relic.
Much might be made, he said, out of the
adventures
of Sir James in that adventurous age; of
his fortunes in Spain, and his death in a crusade
against the Moors; with the subsequent fortunes
of the heart of Robert Bruce, until it was brought
back to its native land, and enshrined within the
holy walls of old Melrose.
As Scott sat on a stone talking in this way,
and knocking with his staff against the little red
lion which lay prostrate before him, his gray
eyes kindled beneath his shagged eyebrows;
scenes, images, incidents, kept breaking upon
his mind as he proceeded, mingled with touches
of the mysterious and supernatural as connected
with the heart of Bruce. It seemed as if a poem
or romance were breaking vaguely on his
imagination
.
That he subsequently contemplated
something of the kind, as connected with this
subject, and with his favourite ruin of Melrose,
is evident from his introduction to `The
Monastery
;'
and it is a pity that he never succeeded
in following out these shadowy but enthusiastic
conceptions.
A summons to breakfast broke off our
conversation
,
when I begged to recommend to
Scott's attention my friend the little red lion,
who had led to such an interesting topic, and
hoped he might receive some niche or station in
the future castle, worthy of his evident antiquity
and apparent dignity. Scott assured me, with
comic gravity, that the valiant little lion should
be most honourably entertained; I hope,
therefore
,
that he still flourishes at Abbotsford.
Before dismissing the theme of the relics from
the Abbey, I will mention another, illustrative of
Scott's varied humours. This was a human
scull, which had probably belonged of yore to
one of those jovial friars, so honourably
mentioned
in the old border ballad:
O the monks of Melrose made gude kale
On Fridays, when they fasted;
They wanted neither beef nor ale,
As long as their neighbours lasted.
This scull Scott had caused to be cleaned and
varnished, and placed it on a chest of drawers
in his chamber, immediately opposite his bed;
where I have seen it, grinning most dismally. It
was an object of great awe and horror to the
superstitious housemaids; and Scott used to
amuse himself with their apprehensions.
Sometimes
in changing his dress, he would leave his
neckcloth coiled round it like a turban, and none
of the lasses dared to remove it. It was a
matter of great wonder and speculation among
them that the laird should have such an
awsome
fancy for an auld girning scull.
At
breakfast that morning, Scott gave an
amusing account of a little Highlander called
Campbell of the North, who had a lawsuit of
many years' standing with a nobleman in his
neighbourhood about the boundaries of their
estates
.
It was the leading object of the little
man's life; the running theme of all his
conversations
;
he used to detail all the circumstances
at full length to every body he met, and, to aid
him in his description of the premises, and make
his story mair preceese, he had a great map
made of his estate, a huge roll several feet long,
which he used to carry about on his shoulder.
Campbell was a long bodied, but short and
bandy-legged
little man, always clad in the highland
garb; and as he went about with this great roll
on his shoulder, and his little legs curving like a
pair of parentheses below his kilt, he was an
odd figure to behold. He was like little David
shouldering the spear of Goliath, which was
like unto a weaver's beam.
Whenever sheep shearing was over, Campbell
used to set out for Edinburgh to attend to his
lawsuit. At the inns he paid double for all his
meals and his nights' lodgings; telling the
landlords
to keep it in mind until his return, so that
he might come back that way at free cost; for he
knew, he said, that he would spend all his money
among the lawyers at Edinburgh, so he thought
it best to secure a retreat home again.
On one of his visits he called upon his
lawyer
,
but was told he was not at home, but his
lady was. It is just the same thing, said little
Campbell. On being shown into the parlour,
he unrolled his map, stated his case at full length,
and, having gone through with his story, gave
her the customary fee. She would have declined
it, but he insisted on her taking it. I ha' had
just as much pleasure, said he, in telling the
whole tale to you, as I should have had in telling
it to your husband, and I believe full as much
profit.
The last time he saw Scott, he told him he
believed he and the laird were near a settlement,
as they agreed to within a few miles of the
boundary. If I recollect right, Scott added that
he advised the little man to consign his cause
and his map to the care of Slow Willie
Mowbray
,
of tedious memory; an Edinburgh
worthy
,
much employed by the country people, for
he tired out every body in office by repeated
visits and drawling, endless prolixity, and gained
every suit by dint of boring.
These little stories and anecdotes which
abounded in Scott's conversation, rose naturally
out of the subject, and were perfectly unforced;
though in thus relating them in a detached way,
without the observations or circumstances which
led to them, and which have passed from my
recollection, they want their setting to give them
proper relief. They will serve, however, to show
the natural play of his mind, in its familiar moods,
and its fecundity in graphic and characteristic
detail.
His daughter Sophia and his son Charles
5
were those of his family who seemed most to
feel and understand his humours, and to take
delight in his conversation. Mrs. Scott did not
always pay the same attention, and would now
and then make a casual remark which would
operate a little like a damper. Thus, Scott was
going on with great glee to relate an anecdote
of the laird of Macnab, who, poor fellow! said
he, is dead and gone Why, Mr. Scott,
exclaimed the good lady, Macnab's not dead,
is he? Faith, my dear, replied Scott with
humorous
gravity, if he's not dead they've done
him great injustice,for they've buried him!
After
breakfast, Scott was occupied for some
time correcting proof sheets, which he had
received
by the mail. The novel of Rob Roy, as
I have already observed, was at that time in the
press, and I supposed them to be the proof
sheets of that work. The authorship of the
Waverly novels was still a matter of conjecture
and uncertainty; though few doubted their
being
principally written by Scott. One proof to
me of his being the author, was that he never
adverted to them. A man so fond of any
thing Scottish, and any thing relating to national
history or local legend, could not have been
mute respecting such productions, had they been
written by another. He was fond of quoting
the works of his cotemporaries; he was
continually
reciting scraps of border songs, or relating
anecdotes of border story. With respect to his
own poems, and their merits, however, he was
mute, and while with him I observed a
scrupulous
silence on the subject.
I may here mention a singular fact, of which
I was not aware at the time, that Scott was
very reserved with his children respecting his
own writings, and was even disinclined to their
reading his romantic poems. I learnt this, some
time after, from a passage in one of his letters to
me, adverting to a set of the American
miniature
edition of his poems, which, on my return
to England, I forwarded to one of the young
ladies
.
In my hurry, writes he, I have not
thanked you, in Sophia's name, for the kind
attention
which furnished her with the American
volumes. I am not quite sure I can add my
own, since you have made her acquainted with
much more of papa's folly, than she would
otherwise
have learned; for I have taken special
care they should never see any of these things
during their earlier years.
To return to the thread of my narrative.
When Scott had got through his brief literary
occupation, we set out on a ramble. The young
ladies started to accompany us, but had not gone
far, when they met a poor old labourer and
his distressed family, and turned back to take
them to the house, and relieve them.
On passing the bounds of Abbotsford, we
came upon a bleak looking farm, with a forlorn
crazy old manse, or farm house, standing in
naked
desolation. This, however, Scott told me
was an ancient hereditary property called
Lauckend
,
about as valuable as the patrimonial estate
of Don Quixote, and which, in like manner,
conferred
a hereditary dignity upon its proprietor,
who was a laird, and though poor as a rat,
prided himself upon his ancient blood, and the
standing of his house. He was accordingly
called Lauckend, according to the Scottish
custom
of naming a man after his family estate, but
he was more generally known through the
country
round, by the name of Lauckie Long Legs,
from the length of his limbs. While Scott was
giving this account of him, we saw him at a
distance
striding along one of his fields, with his
plaid fluttering about him, and he seemed well
to deserve his appellation, for he looked all legs
and tartan.
Lauckie knew nothing of the world beyond
his neighborhood. Scott told me that on
returning
to Abbotsford from his visit to France,
immediately
after the war, he was called on by
his neighbours generally, to inquire after foreign
parts. Among the number, came Lauckie Long
Legs and an old brother as ignorant as himself.
They had many inquiries to make about the
French, who they seemed to consider some
remote
and semi-barbarous hordeAnd what
like are thae barbarians in their own country?
said Lauckie, can they write?can they
cypher
?
He was quite astonished to learn that
they were nearly as much advanced in
civilization
as the gude folks of Abbotsford.
After living for a long time in single
blessedness
,
Lauckie all at once, and not long before my
visit to the neighbourhood, took in into his head
to get married. The neighbours were all
surprised
;
but the family connexion, who were as
proud as they were poor, were grievously
scandalized
,
for they thought the young woman on
which he had set his mind quite beneath him.
It was in vain, however, that they remonstrated
on the misalliance he was about to make: he
was not to be swayed from his determination.
Arraying himself in his best, and saddling a
gaunt steed that might have rivalled Rosinante,
and placing a pillion behind his saddle, he
departed
to wed and bring home the humble lassie
who was to be made mistress of the venerable
hovel of Lauckend, and who lived in a village
on the opposite side of the Tweed.
5*
A small event of the kind makes a great stir
in a little quiet country neighbourhood. The
word soon circulated through the village of
Melrose
,
and the cottages in its vicinity, that Lauckie
Long Legs had gone over the Tweed to fetch
home his bride. All the good folks assembled
at the bridge to await his return. Lauckie,
however, disappointed them; for he crossed the
river at a distant ford, and conveyed his bride
safe to his mansion, without being perceived.
Let me step forward in the course of events,
and relate the fate of poor Lauckie, as it was
communicated to me a year or two afterwards
in letter by Scott. From the time of his
marriage
he had no longer any peace, owing to the
constant intermeddlings of his relations, who
would not permit him to be happy in his own
way, but endeavoured to set him at variance
with his wife. Lauckie refused to credit any
of their stories to her disadvantage; but the
incessant
warfare he had to wage, in defence of
her good name, wore out both flesh and spirit.
His last conflict was with his own brothers, in
front of his paternal mansion. A furious
scolding
match took place between them; Lauckie
made a vehement profession of faith in her
immaculate
honesty, and then fell dead at the
threshold of his own door. His person, his
character, his name, his story, and his fate,
entitled
him to be immortalized in one of Scott's
novels, and I looked to recognise him in some of
the succeeding works from his pen; but I looked
in vain.
After
passing by the domains of honest
Lauckie, Scott pointed out, at a distance, the
Eildon
stone. There in ancient days stood the Eildon
tree, beneath which Thomas the Rhymer,
according
to popular tradition, dealt forth his
prophecies
,
some of which still exist in antiquated
ballads.
Here we turned up a little glen with a small
burn or brook whimpering and dashing along it,
making an occasional waterfall, and overhung,
in some places, with mountain ash and weeping
birch. We are now, said Scott, treading classic,
or rather fairy ground. This is the haunted glen
of Thomas the Rhymer, where he met with the
queen of fairy land, and this the bogle burn, or
goblin brook, along which she rode on her dapple
gray palfrey, with silver bells ringing at the
bridle.
Here, said he, pausing, is Huntley Bank,
on which Thomas the Rhymer lay musing and
sleeping when he saw, or dreamt he saw, the
queen of Elfland:
True Thomas lay on Huntlie bank;
A ferlie he spied wi' his e'e;
And there he saw a ladye bright,
Come riding down by the Eildon tree.
Her skirt was o' the grass green silk,
Her mantle o' the velvet fyne;
At ilka tett of her horse's mane
Hung fifty siller bells and nine.
Here Scott repeated several of the stanzas and
recounted the circumstance of Thomas the
Rhymer's
interview with the fairy, and his being
transported by her to fairy land
And til seven years were gone and past,
True Thomas on earth was never seen.
It is a fine old story, said he, and might be
wrought up into a capital tale.
Scott continued on, leading the way as usual,
and limping up the wizard glen, talking as he
went, but as his back was toward me, I could
only hear the deep growling tones of his voice,
like the low breathing of an organ, without
distinguishing
the words, until pausing, and
turning
his face towards me, I found he was reciting
some scrap of border minstrelsy about Thomas
the Rhymer. This was continually the case in
my ramblings with him about this storied
neighbourhood
.
His mind was fraught with the
traditionary
fictions connected with every object
around him, and he would breathe it forth as he
went, apparently as much for his own
gratification
as for that of his companion.
Nor hill, nor brook, we paced along,
But had its legend or its song.
His voice was deep and sonorous, he spoke with
a Scottish accent, and with somewhat of the
Northumbrian burr, which, to my mind, gave
a doric strength and simplicity to his
elocution
.
His recitation of poetry was, at times,
magnificent.
I think it was in the course of this ramble that
my friend Hamlet, the black greyhound, got into
a sad scrape. The dogs were beating about the
glens and fields as usual, and had been for some
time out of sight, when we heard a barking at
some distance to the left. Shortly after we saw
some sheep scampering on the hills, with the dogs
after them. Scott applied to his lips the ivory
whistle, always hanging at his button-hole, and
soon called in the culprits, excepting Hamlet.
Hastening up a bank which commanded a view
along a fold or hollow of the hills, we beheld
the sable prince of Denmark standing by the
bleeding body of a sheep. The carcass was
still warm, the throat bore marks of the fatal
grip, and Hamlet's muzzle was stained with
blood. Never was culprit more completely
caught in
flagrante delictu
. I supposed the
doom of poor Hamlet to be sealed; for no higher
offence can be committed by a dog in a country
abounding with sheep walks. Scott, however,
had a greater value for his dogs than for his
sheep. They were his companions and friends.
Hamlet, too, though an irregular impertinent
kind of youngster, was evidently a favourite.
He would not for some time believe it could be
he who had killed the sheep. It must have been
some cur of the neighbourhood, that had made
off on our approach, and left poor Hamlet in the
lurch. Proofs, however, were too strong, and
Hamlet was generally condemned. Well,
well, said Scott, it's partly my own fault. I
have given up coursing for some time past, and
the poor dog has had no chance after game to
take the fire edge off of him. If he was put
after a hare occasionally he never would meddle
with sheep.
I understood, afterwards, that Scott actually
got a pony, and went out now and then coursing
with Hamlet, who, in consequence, showed no
further inclination for mutton.
A FURTHER stroll among the hills brought us
to what Scott pronounced the remains of a
Roman camp, and as we sat upon a hillock
which had once formed a part of the ramparts,
he pointed out the traces of the lines and
bulwarks, and the prtorium, and showed a
knowledge of castramatation that would not have
disgraced the antiquarian Oldbuck himself.
Indeed
,
various circumstances that I observed
about Scott during my visit, concurred to
persuade
me that many of the antiquarian humours
of Monkbarns were taken from his own richly
compounded character, and that some of the
scenes and personages of that admirable novel
were furnished by his immediate neighbourhood.
He gave me several anecdotes of a noted
pauper named Andrew Gemmells, or Gammel,
as it was pronounced, who had once flourished
on the banks of Galla Water, immediately
opposite
Abbotsford, and whom he had seen and
talked and joked with when a boy; and I
instantly
recognised the likeness of that mirror of
philosophic vagabonds and Nestor of beggars,
Edie Ochiltree. I was on the point of
pronouncing
the name and recognising the portrait, when
I recollected the incognito observed by Scott
with respect to the novels, and checked myself;
but it was one among many things that tended
to convince me of his authorship.
His picture of Andrew Gemmells exactly
accorded
with that of Edie as to his height,
carriage
,
and soldier-like air, as well as his arch and
sarcastic humour. His home, if home he had,
was at Gallashiels; but he went daundering
about the country, along the green shaws and
beside the burns, and was a kind of walking
chronicle throughout the valleys of the Tweed,
the Ettrick, and the Yarrow; carrying the
gossip
from house to house, commenting on the
inhabitants
and their concerns, and never
hesitating
to give them a dry rub as to any of their
faults or follies.
A shrewd beggar like Andrew Gemmells, Scott
added, who could sing the old Scotch airs, tell
stories and traditions, and gossip away the long
winter evenings, was by no means an unwelcome
visiter at a lonely manse or cottage. The
children
would run to welcome him, and place his
stool in a warm corner of the ingle nook, and
the old folks would receive him as a privileged
guest.
As to Andrew, he looked upon them all as a
parson does upon his parishioners, and
considered
the alms he received as much his due as the
other does his tythes. I rather think, added
Scott, Andrew considered himself more of a
gentleman than those who toiled for a living, and
that he secretly looked down upon the
painstaking
peasants that fed and sheltered him.
He had derived his aristocratical notions in
some degree from being admitted occasionally
to a precarious sociability with some of the small
country gentry, who were sometimes in want
of company to help while away the time. With
these Andrew would now and then play at cards
and dice, and he never lacked siller in pouch
to stake on a game, which he did with a perfect
air of a man to whom money was a matter of
little moment, and no one could lose his money
with more gentlemanlike coolness.
Among those who occasionally admitted him
to this familiarity, was old John Scott of Galla,
a man of family, who inhabited his paternal
mansion
of Torwoodlee. Some distinction of rank,
however, was still kept up. The laird sat on
the inside of the window and the beggar on the
outside, and they played cards on the sill.
Andrew now and then told the laird a piece
of his mind very freely; especially on one
occasion
,
when he had sold some of his paternal
lands to build himself a larger house with the
proceeds. The speech of honest Andrew smacks
of the shrewdness of Edie Ochiltree.
It's a' varra weelit's a' varra weel,
Torwoodlee
,
said he; but who would ha' thought
that your father's son would ha' sold two gude
estates to build a shaw's (cuckoo's) nest on the
side of a hill?
6
That
day there was an arrival at Abbotsford
of two English tourists; one a gentleman of
fortune
and landed estate, the other a young
clergyman
whom he appeared to have under his
patronage, and to have brought with him as a
travelling companion.
The patron was one of those well bred,
commonplace
gentlemen with which England is
overrun. He had great deference for Scott,
and endeavoured to acquit himself learnedly in
his company, aiming continually at abstract
disquisitions
,
for which Scott had little relish. The
conversation of the latter, as usual, was studded
with anecdotes and stories, some of them of
great pith and humour: the well bred gentleman
was either too dull to feel their point, or too
decorous
to indulge in hearty merriment; the
honest parson, on the contrary, who was not too
refined to be happy, laughed loud and long at
every joke, and enjoyed them with the zest of a
man who has more merriment in his heart than
coin in his pocket.
After they were gone, some comments were
made upon their different deportments. Scott
spoke very respectfully of the good breeding and
measured manners of the man of wealth, but
with a kindlier feeling of the honest parson, and
the homely but hearty enjoyment with which he
relished every pleasantry. I doubt, said he,
whether the parson's lot in life is not the best;
if he cannot command as many of the good things
of this world by his own purse as his patron can,
he beats him all hollow in his enjoyment of them
when set before him by others. Upon the whole,
added he, I rather think I prefer the honest
parson's good humour to his patron's good
breeding
;
I have a great regard for a hearty laugher.
He went on to speak of the great influx of
English travellers, which of late years had
inundated
Scotland; and doubted whether they had
not injured the old fashioned Scottish character.
Formerly, they came here occasionally as
sportsmen, said he, to shoot moor game,
without
any idea of looking at scenery; and they
moved about the country in hardy simple style,
coping with the country people in their own
way; but now they come rolling about in their
equipages, to see ruins, and spend money, and
their lavish extravagance has played the
vengeance
with the common people. It has made
them rapacious in their dealings with strangers,
greedy after money, and extortionate in their
demands for the most trivial services.
Formerly
,
continued he, the poorer classes of our
people, were, comparatively, disinterested; they
offered their services gratuitously, in promoting
the amusement, or aiding the curiosity of
strangers
,
and were gratified by the smallest
compensation
;
but now they make a trade of
showing
rocks and ruins, and are as greedy as Italian
cicerones. They look upon the English as so
many walking money bags, the more they are
shaken and poked, the more they will leave
behind
them.
I told him that he had a great deal to answer
for on that head, since it was the romantic
associations
he had thrown by his writings, over so
many out of the way places in Scotland, that
had brought in the influx of curious travellers.
Scott laughed, and said he believed I might
be in some measure in the right, as he
recollected
a circumstance in point. Being one time
at Glenross, an old woman who kept a small inn,
which had but little custom, was uncommonly
officious in her attendance upon him, and
absolutely
incommoded him with her civilities. The
secret at length came out. As he was about
to depart, she addressed him with many
curtsies
,
and said she understood he was the
gentleman
that had written a bonnie book about
Loch Katrine. She begged him to write a
little
about their lake also, for she understood his
book had done the inn at Loch Katrine a muckle
deal of good.
On
the following day, I made an excursion
with Scott and the young ladies, to Dryburgh
Abbey. We went in an open carriage, drawn
by two sleek old black horses, for which Scott
seemed to have an affection, as he had for every
dumb animal that belonged to him. Our road
lay through a variety of scenes, rich in poetical
and historical associations, about most of which
Scott had something to relate. In one part of
the drive, he pointed to an old border keep, or
fortress, on the summit of a naked hill, several
miles off, which he called Smallholm Tower, and
a rocky knoll on which it stood, the Sandy
Knowe crags. It was a place, he said,
peculiarly
dear to him, from the recollections of
childhood. His grandfather had lived there in
the old Smallholm Grange, or farm house: and
he had been sent there, when but two years old,
on account of his lameness, that he might have
the benefit of the pure air of the hills, and be
under
the care of his grandmother and aunts.
In the introduction of one of the cantos of
Marmion
,
he has depicted his grandfather, and the
fireside of the farm house; and has given an
amusing picture of himself in his boyish years.
Still with vain fondness could I trace,
Anew each kind familiar face,
That brightened at our evening fire;
From the thatched mansion's gray-haired sire,
6 *
Wise without learning, plain and good,
And sprung of Scotland's gentler blood;
Whose eye in age, quick, clear and keen,
Showed what in youth its glance had been;
Whose doom discording neighbours sought,
Content with equity unbought;
To him the venerable priest,
Our frequent and familiar guest,
Whose life and manners well could paint
Alike the student and the saint;
Alas! whose speech too oft I broke
With gambol rude and timeless joke;
For I was wayward, bold, and wild,
A self-willed imp, a grandame's child;
But half a plague, and half a jest,
Was still endured, beloved, carest.
It was, he said, during his residence at
Smallholm
crags, that he first imbibed his passion for
legendary tales, border traditions, and old national
songs and ballads. His grandmother and aunts,
were well versed in that kind of lore, so current
in Scottish country life. They used to recount
them in long, gloomy, winter days, and about the
ingle nook at night, in conclave with their gossip
visiters; and little Walter would sit and listen
with greedy ear; thus, taking into his infant
mind, the seeds of many a splendid fiction.
There was an old shepherd, he said, in the
service of the family, who used to sit under the
sunny wall, and tell marvellous stories, and
recite
old time ballads, as he knitted stockings.
Scott used to be wheeled out in his chair, in
fine weather, and would sit beside the old man,
and listen to him for hours.
The situation of Sandy Knowe was favourable
both for story teller and listener. It commanded
a wide view over all the border country, with
its feudal towers, its haunted glens, and wizard
streams. As the old shepherd told his tales, he
could point out the very scene of action. Thus,
before Scott could walk, he was made familiar
with the scenes of his future stories; they were
all seen as through a magic medium, and took
that tinge of romance, which they ever after
retained
in his imagination. From the height of
Sandy Knowe, he may be said to have had the
first look out upon the promised land of his
future
glory.
On referring to Scott's works, I find many
of the circumstances related in this conversation,
about the old tower, and the boyish scenes
connected
with it, recorded in the introduction to
Marmion, already cited. This was frequently
the case with Scott; incidents and feelings that
had appeared in his writings, were apt to be
mingled up in his conversation, for they had
been taken from what he had witnessed and felt
in real life, and were connected with those
scenes among which he lived, and moved, and
had his being. I make no scruple at quoting the
passage relative to the tower, though it repeats
much of the foregone imagery, and with vastly
superior effect.
Thus, while I ape the measure wild
Of tales that charmed me yet a child,
Rude though they be, still with the chime
Return the thoughts of early time;
And feelings roused in life's first day,
Glow in the line, and prompt the lay.
Then rise those crags, that mountain tower,
Which charmed my fancy's wakening hour,
Though no broad river swept along
To claim perchance heroic song;
Though sighed no groves in summer gale
To prompt of love a softer tale;
Though scarce a puny streamlet's speed
Claimed homage from a shepherd's reed;
Yet was poetic impulse given,
By the green hill and clear blue heaven.
It was a barren scene, and wild,
Where naked cliffs were rudely piled;
But ever and anon between
Lay velvet turfs of loveliest green;
And well the lonely infant knew
Recesses where the wall-flower grew
And honey-suckle loved to crawl
Up the low crag and ruined wall.
I deemed such nooks the sweetest shade
The sun in all his round surveyed;
And still I thought that shattered tower
The mightiest work of human power:
And marvelled as the aged hind
With some strange tale bewitched my mind,
Of forayers, who, with headlong force,
Down from that strength had spurred their horse,
Their southern rapine to renew,
Far in the distant Cheviot's blue,
And, home returning, filled the hall
With revel, wassell-rout, and brawl
Methought that still with tramp and clang
The gate-way's broken arches rang;
Methought grim features, seamed with scars,
Glared through the window's rusty bars.
And ever by the winter hearth,
Old tales I heard of wo or mirth,
Of lovers' sleights, of ladies' charms,
Of witches' spells, of warriors' arms;
Of patriot battles, won of old
By Wallace wight and Bruce the bold;
Of later fields of feud and fight,
When pouring from the highland height,
The Scottish clans, in headlong sway,
Had swept the scarlet ranks away.
While stretched at length upon the floor,
Again I fought each combat o'er,
Pebbles and shells, in order laid,
The mimic ranks of war displayed;
And onward still the Scottish Lion bore,
And still the scattered Southron fled before.
Scott eyed the distant height of Sandy Knowe
with an earnest gaze as we rode along, and said
he had often thought of buying the place,
repairing
the old tower, and making it his residence.
He has in some measure, however, paid off his
early debt of gratitude, in clothing it with poetic
and romantic associations, by his tale of The
Eve of St. John. It is to be hoped that those
who actually possess so interesting a monument
of Scott's early days, will preserve it from
further
dilapidation.
Not far from Sandy Knowe, Scott pointed out
another old border hold, standing on the summit
of a hill, which had been a kind of enchanted
castle to him in his boyhood. It was the tower of
Bemerside, the baronial residence of the Haigs',
or De Haga's, one of the oldest families of the
border. There had seemed to him, he said,
almost a wizard spell hanging over it, in
consequence
of a prophecy of Thomas the Rhymer, in
which, in his young days, he most potently
believed
:
Betide, betide, whate'er betide,
Haig shall be Haig of Bemerside.
Scott added some particulars which showed
that, in the present instance, the venerable
Thomas had not proved a false prophet, for it
was a noted fact, that, amid all the changes and
chances of the border; through all the feuds,
and forays, and sackings, and burnings, which
had reduced most of the castles to ruins, and
the proud families that once possessed them to
poverty, the tower of Bemerside still remained
unscathed, and was still the strong hold of the
ancient family of Haig.
Prophecies, however, often ensure their own
fulfilment. It is very probable that the
prediction
of Thomas the Rhymer has linked the
Haigs to their tower, as their rock of safety, and
has induced them to cling to it, almost
superstitiously
,
through hardship and inconveniences that
would, otherwise, have caused its abandonment.
I afterwards saw, at Dryburgh Abbey, the
burying place of this predestinated and
tenacious
family, the inscription of which showed the
value they set upon their antiquity:
Locus Sepultur,
Antiquessim Famili
De Haga
De Bemerside
In reverting to the days of his childhood, Scott
observed that the lameness that had disabled
him in infancy gradually decreased; he soon
acquired strength in his limbs, and though he
always limped, he became, even in boyhood, a
great walker. He used frequently to stroll from
home and wander about the country for days
together, picking up all kinds of local gossip,
and observing popular scenes and characters.
His father used to be vexed with him for this
wandering propensity, and shaking his head,
would say he fancied the boy would make
nothing
but a pedler. As he grew older, he became
a keen sportsman, and passed much of his time
hunting and shooting. His field sports led him
into the most wild and unfrequented parts of the
country, and in this way he picked up much of
that local knowledge which he has since evinced
in his writings.
His first visit to Loch Katrine, he said, was
in his boyish days, on a shooting excursion. The
island, which he has made the romantic
residence
of the Lady of the Lake, was then
garrisoned
by an old man and his wife. Their
house was vacant: they had put the key under
the door, and were absent fishing. It was at that
time a peaceful residence, but became
afterwards
a resort of smugglers, until they were
ferreted out.
In after years, when Scott began to turn this
local knowledge to literary account, he revisited
many of those scenes of his early ramblings, and
endeavoured to secure the fugitive remains of the
traditions and songs that had charmed his
boyhood
.
When collecting materials for his Border
Minstrelsy, he used, he said, to go from cottage
to cottage and make the old wives repeat all
they knew, if but two lines; and by putting these
scraps together, he retrieved many a fine
characteristic
old ballad or tradition from oblivion.
I regret to say that I can recollect scarce any
thing of our visit to Dryburgh Abbey. It is on
the estate of the Earl of Buchan. The religious
edifice is a mere ruin, rich in Gothic antiquities,
but especially interesting to Scott, from
containing
the family vault, and the tombs and
monuments
of his ancestors. He appeared to feel
much chagrin at their being in the possession,
and subject to the intermeddlings of the Earl,
who was represented as a nobleman of an
eccentric character. The latter, however, set
great value on these sepulchral relics, and had
expressed a lively anticipation of one day or
other having the honour of burying Scott, and
adding his monument to the collection, which he
intended should be worthy of the mighty
minstrel
of the north,a prospective compliment
which was by no means relished by the object
of it.
One
of my pleasantest rambles with Scott,
about the neighbourhood of Abbotsford, was
taken in company with Mr. William Laidlaw, the
steward of his estate. This was a gentleman
for whom Scott entertained a particular value.
He had been born to a competency, had been
well educated, his mind was richly stored with
varied information, and he was a man of sterling
moral worth. Having been reduced by
misfortune
,
Scott had got him to take charge of his
estate. He lived at a small farm on the hill
side above Abbotsford, and was treated by Scott
as a cherished and confidential friend, rather
than a dependant.
As the day was showery, Scott was attended
by one of his retainers, who carried his plaid.
7
This man, whose name, I think, was George,
deserves especial mention. Sophia Scott used
to call him her father's grand vizier, and she
gave a playful account one evening, as she was
hanging on her father's arm, of the consultations
which he and George used to have about
matters
relative to farming. George was tenacious
of his opinions, and he and Scott would have
long disputes in front of the house, as to
something
that was to be done on the estate, until the
latter, fairly tired out, would abandon the ground
and the argument, exclaiming, Well, well,
George, have it your own way.
After a time, however, George would present
himself at the door of the parlour, and observe,
I ha' been thinking over the matter, and
upon the whole, I think I'll take your honour's
advice.
Scott laughed heartily when this anecdote was
told of him. It was with him and George,
he said, as it was with an old laird and a pet
servant, whom he had indulged until he was
positive beyond all endurance. `This won't
do!' cried the old laird, in a passion, `we can't
live together any longerwe must part;' `An'
where the deel does your honour mean to go?'
replied the other.
I would, moreover, observe of George, that he
was a firm believer in ghosts, and warlocks, and
all kinds of old wives' fable. He was a religious
man, too, mingling a little degree of Scottish
pride in his devotion; for though his salary was
but twenty pounds a year, he had managed to
afford seven pounds for a family bible. It is
true, he had one hundred pounds clear of the
world, and was looked up to by his comrades as
a man of property.
In the course of our morning's walk, we
stopped
at a small house belonging to one of the
labourers on the estate. The object of Scott's
visit was to inspect a relic which had been
digged up in the Roman camp, and which, if I
recollect right, he pronounced to have been a
tongs. It was produced by the cottager's wife,
a ruddy, healthy looking dame, whom Scott
addressed
by the name of Ailie. As he stood
regarding the relic, turning it round and round,
and making comments upon it, half grave, half
comic, with the cottage group around him, all
joining occasionally in the colloquy, the
inimitable
character of Monkbarns was again brought
to mind, and I seemed to see before me that
prince of antiquarians and humourists holding
forth to his unlearned and unbelieving
neighbours
.
Whenever Scott touched, in this way, upon
local antiquities, and in all his familiar
conversations
about local traditions and superstitions,
there was always a sly and quiet humour
running
at the bottom of his discourse, and playing
about his countenance, as if he sported with the
subject. It seemed to me as if he distrusted his
own enthusiasm, and was disposed to droll upon
his own humours and peculiarities, yet, at the
same time, a poetic gleam in his eye would
show that he really took a strong relish and
interest
in them. It was a pity, he said, that
antiquarians were generally so dry, for the
subjects
they handled were rich in historical and
poetic recollections, in picturesque details, in
quaint and heroic characteristics, and in all
kinds of curious and obsolete ceremonials. They
are always groping among the rarest materials
for poetry, but they have no idea of turning
them to poetic use. Now every fragment from
old times has, in some degree, its story with it,
or gives an inkling of something characteristic
of the circumstances and manners of its day, and
so sets the imagination at work.
For my own part I never met with antiquarian
so delightful, either in his writings or his
conversation
,
and the quiet subacid humour that was
prone to mingle in his disquisitions, gave them,
to me, a peculiar and an exquisite flavour. But he
seemed, in fact, to undervalue every thing that
concerned himself. The play of his genius was
so easy that he was unconscious of its mighty
power, and made light of those sports of
intellect
that shamed the efforts and labours of other
minds.
Our ramble this morning took us again up the
Rhymer's glen, and by Huntley bank, and
Huntley
wood, and the silver waterfall overhung with
weeping birches and mountain ashes, those
delicate
and beautiful trees which grace the green
shaws and burn sides of Scotland. The heather,
too, that closely woven robe of Scottish
landscape
which covers the nakedness of its hills
and mountains, tinted the neighbourhood with
soft and rich colours. As we ascended the glen,
the prospects opened upon us; Melrose, with its
towers and pinnacles, lay below; beyond was
the Eildon hills, the Cowden Knowes, the Tweed,
the Galla water, and all the storied vicinity;
the whole landscape varied by gleams of
sunshine
and driving showers.
Scott, as usual, took the lead, limping along
with great activity, and in joyous mood, giving
scraps of border rhymes and border stories;
two or three times in the course of our walk
there were drizzling showers, which I supposed
would put an end to our ramble, but my
companions
trudged on as unconcernedly as if it had
been fine weather.
At length, I asked whether we had not better
seek some shelter. True, said Scott, I did
7*
not recollect that you were not accustomed to
our Scottish mists. This is a lachrymose climate,
evermore showering. We, however, are
children
of the mist, and must not mind a little
whimpering of the clouds any more than a man
must the weeping of an hysterical wife. As
you are not accustomed to be wet through, as a
matter of course, in a morning's walk, we will
bide a bit under the lee of this bank until the
shower is over. Taking his seat under shelter
of a thicket, he called to his man George for his
tartan, then turning to me, come, said he,
come under my plaidy, as the old song goes;
so, making me nestle down beside him, he
wrapped a part of the plaid round me, and took
me, as he said, under his wing.
While we were thus nestled together, he
pointed
to a hole in the opposite bank of the glen.
That, he said, was the hole of an old gray
badger, who was, doubtless, snugly housed in
this bad weather. Sometimes he saw him at
the entrance of his hole, like a hermit at the
door of his cell, telling his beads, or reading a
homily. He had a great respect for the
venerable
anchorite, and would not suffer him to be
disturbed. He was a kind of successor to
Thomas
the Rhymer, and perhaps might be Thomas
himself returned from fairy land, but still under
fairy spell.
Some accident turned the conversation upon
Hogg, the poet, in which Laidlaw, who was
seated beside us, took a part. Hogg had once
been a shepherd in the service of his father, and
Laidlaw gave many interesting anecdotes of
him, of which I now retain no recollection.
They used to tend the sheep together when
Laidlaw was a boy, and Hogg would recite the
first struggling conceptions of his muse. At
night when Laidlaw was quartered comfortably
in bed, in the farm house, poor Hogg would take
to the shepherd's hut, in the field on the hill side,
and there lie awake for hours together, and look
at the stars and make poetry, which he would
repeat the next day to his companion.
Scott spoke in warm terms of Hogg, and
repeated
passages from his beautiful poem of
Kelmeny, to which he gave great and well
merited
praise. He gave, also, some amusing
anecdotes of Hogg and his publisher, Blackwood,
who was at that time just rising into the
bibliographical
importance which he has since enjoyed.
Hogg in one of his poems, I believe the
Pilgrims of the Sun, had dabbled a little in
metaphysics, and like his heroes, had got into
the clouds. Blackwood, who began to affect
criticism, argued stoutly with him as to the
necessity of omitting or elucidating some obscure
passage. Hogg was immoveable.
But, man, said Blackwood, I dinna ken
what ye mean in this passage. Hout tout,
man, replied Hogg, impatiently, I dinna ken
always what I mean mysel. There is many a
metaphysical poet in the same predicament with
honest Hogg.
Scott promised to invite the Shepherd to
Abbotsford
during my visit, and I anticipated much
gratification in meeting with him, from the
account
I had received of his character and
manners
,
and the great pleasure I had derived from
his works. Circumstances, however, prevented
Scott from performing his promise; and to my
great regret I left Scotland without seeing one
of its most original and national characters.
When the weather held up, we continued our
walk until we came to a beautiful sheet of water,
in the bosom of the mountain, called, if I
recollect
right, the lake of Cauldshiel. Scott prided
himself much upon this little Mediterranean sea
in his dominions, and hoped I was not too much
spoiled by our great lakes in America to relish it.
He proposed to take me out to the centre of it,
to a fine point of view; for which purpose we
embarked in a small boat, which had been put
on the lake by his neighbour Lord Somerville.
As I was about to step on board, I observed in
large letters on one of the benches, Search No.
2. I paused for a moment and repeated the
inscription aloud, trying to recollect something I
had heard or read to which it alluded. Pshaw,
cried Scott, it is only some of Lord
Somerville's
nonsenseget in! In an instant scenes
in the Antiquary connected with Search No. 1
flashed upon my mind. Ah! I remember now,
said I, and with a laugh took my seat, but
adverted
no more to the circumstance.
We had a pleasant row about the lake, which
commanded some pretty scenery. The most
interesting circumstance connected with it,
however
,
according to Scott, was, that it was
haunted
by a bogle in the shape of a water bull, which
lived in the deep parts, and now and then came
forth upon dry land and made a tremendous
roaring, that shook the very hills. This story
had been current in the vicinity from time
immemorial
;there
was a man living who declared
he had seen the bull,and he was believed by
many of his simple neighbours. I don't choose
to contradict the tale, said Scott, for I am
willing to have my lake stocked with any fish,
flesh, or fowl that my neighbours think proper
to put into it; and these old wives' fables are a
kind of property in Scotland that belong to the
estates and go with the soil. Our streams and
lochs are like the rivers and pools in Germany,
that have all their Wasser Nixe, or water witches,
and I have a fancy for these kind of amphibious
bogles and hobgoblins.
Scott
went on after we had landed to make
many remarks, mingled with picturesque
anecdotes
,
concerning the fabulous beings with which
the Scotch were apt to people the wild streams
and lochs that occur in the solemn and lonely
scenes of their mountains; and to compare them
with similar superstitions among the northern
nations of Europe; but Scotland, he said, was
above all other countries for this wild and vivid
progeny of the fancy, from the nature of the
scenery, the misty magnificence and vagueness
of the climate, the wild and gloomy events of its
history; the clanish divisions of its people; their
local feelings, notions, and prejudices; the
individuality
of their dialect, in which all kinds of
odd and peculiar notions were incorporated; by
the secluded life of their mountaineers; the
lonely habits of their pastoral people, much of
whose time was passed on the solitary hill sides;
their traditional songs, which clothed every rock
and stream with old world stories, handed down
from age to age and generation to generation.
The Scottish mind, he said, was made up of
poetry and strong common sense; and the very
strength of the latter gave perpetuity and
luxuriance
to the former. It was a strong tenacious
soil, into which, when once a seed of poetry fell,
it struck deep root and brought forth
abundantly
.
You will never weed these popular stories
and songs and superstitions out of Scotland,
said he. It is not so much that the people
believe
in them, as that they delight in them. They
belong to the native hills and streams of which
they are fond, and to the history of their
forefathers
of which they are proud.
It would do your heart good, continued he,
to see a number of our poor country people
seated round the ingle nook, which is generally
capacious enough, and passing the long dark
dreary winter nights listening to some old wife,
or strolling gaberlunzie, dealing out auld
world stories, about bogles and warlocks, or
about raids and forays, and border skirmishes;
or reciting some ballad stuck full of those
fighting
names that stir up a true Scotchman's blood
like the sound of a trumpet. These traditional
tales and ballads have lived for ages in mere
oral circulation, being passed from father to son,
or rather from grandam to grandchild, and are a
kind of hereditary property of the poor
peasantry
,
of which it would be hard to deprive them,
as they have not circulating libraries to supply
them with works of fiction in their place.
I do not pretend to give the precise words,
but, as nearly as I can from scanty
memorandums
and vague recollections, the leading ideas
of Scott. I am constantly sensible, however,
how far I fall short of his copiousness and
richness
.
He went on to speak of the elves and sprites,
so frequent in Scottish legend. Our fairies,
however, said he, though they dress in green,
and gambol by moonlight about the banks, and
shaws, and burn sides, are not such pleasant little
folks as the English fairies, but are apt to bear
more of the warlock in their natures, and to
play spiteful tricks. When I was a boy, I used
to look wistfully at the green hillocks that were
said to be haunted by fairies, and felt sometimes
as if I should like to lie down by them and
sleep, and be carried off to Fairy land, only that
I did not like some of the cantrips which used
now and then to be played off upon visiters.
Here Scott recounted, in graphic style, and
with much humour, a little story which used to
be current in the neighbourhood, of an honest
burgess of Selkirk, who, being at work upon
the hill of Peatlaw, fell asleep upon one of these
`fairy knowes,' or hillocks. When he awoke, he
rubbed his eyes and gazed about him with
astonishment
,
for he was in the market place of a
great city, with a crowd of people bustling
about him, not one of whom he knew. At length
he accosted a bystander, and asked him the
name of the place. Hout man, replied the
other, are ye in the heart o' Glasgow, and
speer the name of it. The poor man was
astonished
,
and would not believe either ears or
eyes; he insisted that he had laid down to sleep
but half an hour before on the Peatlaw, near
Selkirk. He came well nigh being taken up for
a mad man, when, fortunately a Selkirk man
came by, who knew him, and took charge of
him, and conducted him back to his native place.
Here, however, he was likely to fare no better,
when he spoke of having been whisked in his
sleep from the Peatlaw to Glasgow. The truth
of the matter at length came out; his coat, which
he had taken off when at work on the Peatlaw,
was found lying near a fairy knowe, and his
bonnet, which was missing, was discovered on
the weathercock of Lanark steeple. So it was
as clear as day that he had been carried through
the air by the fairies while he was sleeping, and
his bonnet had been blown off by the way.
I give this little story but meagerly from a
scanty memorandum; Scott has related it in
somewhat different style in a note to one of his
poems; but in narration these anecdotes derived
their chief zest, from the quiet but delightful
humour, the bonhommie with which he seasoned
8
them, and the sly glance of the eye from under
his bushy eyebrows, with which they were
accompanied
.
That
day at dinner, we had Mr. Laidlaw and
his wife, and a female friend who accompanied
them. The latter was a very intelligent,
respectable
person, about the middle age, and was
treated with particular attention and courtesy
by Scott. Our dinner was a most agreeable
one; for the guests were evidently cherished
visiters to the house, and felt that they were
appreciated
.
When they were gone, Scott spoke of them
in the most cordial manner. I wished to show
you, said he, some of our really excellent,
plain Scotch people: not fine gentlemen and
ladies, for such you can meet every where, and
they are every where the same. The character
of a nation is not to be learnt from its fine folks.
He then went on with a particular eulogium
on the lady who had accompanied the Laidlaws.
She was the daughter, he said, of a poor country
clergyman, who had died in debt, and left her
an orphan and destitute. Having had a good
plain education, she immediately set up a child's
school, and had soon a numerous flock under her
care, by which she earned a decent
maintenance
.
That, however, was not her main
object
.
Her first care was to pay off her father's
debts, that no ill word or ill will might rest upon
his memory. This, by dint of Scottish
economy
,
backed by filial reverence and pride, she
accomplished, though in the effort, she subjected
herself to every privation. Not content with
this, she in certain instances refused to take pay
for the tuition of the children of some of her
neighbours, who had befriended her father in his
need, and had since fallen into poverty. In a
word, added Scott, she is a fine old Scotch
girl; and I delight in her, more than in many a
fine lady I have known, and I have known many
of the finest.
It
is time, however, to draw this rambling
narrative to a close. Several days were passed
by me, in the way I have attempted to describe,
in almost constant, familiar, and joyous
conversation
with Scott; it was, as if I were admitted
to a social communion with Shakspeare, for it
was with one of a kindred, if not equal genius.
Every night I retired with my mind filled with
delightful recollections of the day, and every
morning I rose with the certainty of new
enjoyment
.
The days thus spent, I shall ever look
back to, as among the very happiest of my life;
for I was conscious at the time of being happy.
The only sad moment that I experienced at
Abbotsford, was that of my departure; but it
was cheered with the prospect of soon returning;
for I had promised, after making a tour in the
Highlands, to come and pass a few more days on
the banks of the Tweed, when Scott intended
to invite Hogg the poet to meet me. I took a
kind farewell of the family, with each of whom
I had been highly pleased; if I have refrained
from dwelling particularly on their several
characters
,
and giving anecdotes of them
individually
,
it is because I consider them shielded by
the sanctity of domestic life: Scott, on the
contrary
,
belongs to history. As he accompanied
me on foot, however, to a small gate on the
confines
of his premises, I could not refrain from
expressing the enjoyment I had experienced in
his domestic circle, and passing some warm
eulogiums on the young folks, from whom I had
just parted. I shall never forget his reply. They
have kind hearts, said he, and that is the
main point as to human happiness. They love
one another, poor things, which is every thing in
domestic life. The best wish I can make you,
my friend, added he, laying his hand upon my
shoulder, is, that when you return to your own
country, you may get married, and have a family
of young bairns about you. If you are happy,
there they are to share your happinessand if
you are otherwisethere they are to comfort
you.
By this time we had reached the gate, when
he halted and took my hand. I will not say
farewell, said he, for it is always a painful
word, but I will say, come again. When you
have made your tour to the Highlands, come
here and give me a few more daysbut come
when you please, you will always find
Abbotsford
open to you, and a hearty welcome.
I have
thus given, in a rude style, my main
recollections of what occurred during my sojourn
at Abbotsford, and I feel mortified that I can
give but such meager, scattered, and colourless
details of what was so copious, rich, and varied.
During several days that I passed there Scott
was in admirable vein. From early morn until
dinner time, he was rambling about showing me
the neighbourhood, and during dinner, and until
late at night, engaged in social conversation. No
time was reserved for himself; he seemed as if
his only occupation was to entertain me; and
yet I was almost an entire stranger to him, one
8*
of whom he knew nothing, but an idle book I had
written, and which, some years before, had
amused him. But such was Scotthe appeared
to have nothing to do but lavish his time,
attention
,
and conversation on those around. It was
difficult to imagine what time he found to write
those volumes that were incessantly issuing
from the press; all of which, too, were of a
nature
to require reading and research. I could
not find that his life was ever otherwise than a
life of leisure and hap-hazard recreation, such as
it was during my visit. He scarce ever balked
a party of pleasure, or a sporting excursion, and
rarely pleaded his own concerns as an excuse
for rejecting those of others. During my visit I
heard of other visiters who had preceded me,
and who must have kept him occupied for many
days, and I have had an opportunity of knowing
the course of his daily life for some time
subsequently
.
Not long after my departure from
Abbotsford, my friend Wilkie arrived there, to
paint a picture of the Scott family. He found
the house full of guests. Scott's whole time was
taken up in riding and driving about the country,
or in social conversation at home. All this
time, said Wilkie to me, I did not presume to
ask Mr. Scott to sit for his portrait, for I saw he
had not a moment to spare; I waited for the
guests to go away, but as fast as one set went
another arrived, and so it continued for several
days, and with each set he was completely
occupied
.
At length all went off, and we were quiet.
I thought, however, Mr. Scott will now shut
himself up among his books and papers, for he
has to make up for lost time; it won't do for me
to ask him now to sit for his picture. Laidlaw,
who managed his estate, came in, and Scott
turned to him, as I supposed, to consult about
business. `Laidlaw,' said he, `to-morrow
morning
we'll go across the water and take the dogs
with usthre's a place where I think we shall
be able to find a hare.'
In short, added Wilkie, I found that
instead
of business, he was thinking only of
amusement
,
as if he had nothing in the world to occupy
him; so I no longer feared to intrude upon
him.
The conversation of Scott was frank, hearty,
picturesque, and dramatic. During the time of
my visit he inclined to the comic rather than
the grave, in his anecdotes and stories, and such,
I was told, was his general inclination. He
relished a joke, or a trait of humour in social
intercourse, and laughed with right good will.
He talked not for effect or display, but from the
flow of his spirits, the stores of his memory, and
the vigour of his imagination. He had a natural
turn for narration, and his narratives and
descriptions
were without effort, yet wonderfully
graphic. He placed the scene before you like a
picture; he gave the dialogue with the
appropriate
dialect or peculiarities, and described the
appearance and characters of his personages
with that spirit and felicity evinced in his
writings
.
Indeed, his conversation reminded me
continually of his novels; and it seemed to me,
that during the whole time I was with him, he
talked enough to fill volumes, and that they
could not have been filled more delightfully.
He was as good a listener as talker,
appreciated
every thing that others said, however
humble
might be their rank or pretensions, and was
quick to testify his perception of any point in
their discourse. He arrogated nothing to himself,
but was perfectly unassuming and unpretending,
entering with heart and soul into the business, or
pleasure, or, I had almost said folly, of the hour
and the company. No one's concerns, no one's
thoughts, no one's opinions, no one's tastes and
pleasures seemed beneath him. He made
himself
so thoroughly the companion of those with
whom he happened to be, that they forgot for a
time his vast superiority, and only recollected
and wondered, when all was over, that it was
Scott with whom they had been on such familiar
terms, and in whose society they had felt so
perfectly
at their ease.
It was delightful to observe the generous mode
in which he spoke of all his literary
cotemporaries
,
quoting the beauties of their works, and
this, too, with respect to persons with whom he
might have been supposed to be at variance in
literature or politics. Jeffrey, it was thought,
had ruffled his plumes in one of his reviews, yet
Scott spoke of him in terms of high and warm
eulogy, both as an author and as a man.
His humour in conversation, as in his works,
was genial and free from all causticity. He had
a quick perception of faults and foibles, but he
looked upon poor human nature with an
indulgent
eye, relishing what was good and pleasant,
tolerating what was frail, and pitying what was
evil. It is this beneficent spirit which gives such
an air of bonhommie to Scott's humour
throughout
all his works. He played with the foibles
and errors of his fellow beings, and presented
them in a thousand whimsical and characteristic
lights, but the kindness and generosity of his
nature would not allow him to be a satirist. I
do not recollect a sneer throughout his
conversation
any more than there is throughout his
works.
Such is a rough sketch of Scott, as I saw him
in private life, not merely at the time of the visit
here narrated, but in the casual intercourse of
subsequent years. Of his public character and
merits, all the world can judge. His works have
incorporated themselves with the thoughts and
concerns of the whole civilized world, for a
quarter of a century, and have had a controlling
influence over the age in which he lived. But
when did a human being ever exercise
an influence more salutary and benignant? Who
is there that, on looking back over a great
portion
of his life, does not find the genius of Scott
administering to his pleasures, beguiling his
cares, and soothing his lonely sorrows? Who
does not still guard his works as a treasury of
pure enjoyment, an armoury to which to resort
in time of need, to find weapons with which to
fight off the evils and the griefs of life? For my
own part, in periods of dejection, I have hailed
the announcement of a new work from his pen
as an earnest of certain pleasure in store for me,
and have looked forward to it as a traveller in a
waste looks to a given spot at a distance, where
he feels assured of solace and refreshment.
When I consider how much he has thus
contributed
to the better hours of my past existence,
and how independent his works still make me,
at times, of all the world for my enjoyment, I
bless my stars that cast my lot in his days, to be
thus cheered and gladdened by the outpourings
of his genius. I consider it one of the greatest
advantages that I have derived from my literary
career, that it has elevated me into genial
communion
with such a spirit; and as a tribute of
gratitude for his friendship, and veneration for
his memory, I cast this humble stone upon his
cairn, which will soon, I trust, be piled aloft with
the contributions of abler hands.
NEWSTEAD ABBEY.
9
NEWSTEAD ABBEY
HISTORICAL NOTICE.
Being
about to give a few sketches taken
during a three weeks' sojourn in the ancestral
mansion of the late Lord Byron, I think it proper
to premise some brief particulars concerning its
history.
Newstead Abbey is one of the finest
specimens
in existence of those quaint and romantic
piles, half castle half convent, which remain as
monuments of the olden times of England. It
stands, too, in the midst of a legendary
neighbourhood
;
being in the heart of Sherwood
Forest
,
and surrounded by the haunts of Robin
Hood and his band of outlaws, so famous in
ancient
ballad and nursery tale. It is true, the
forest scarcely exists but in name, and the tract
of country over which it once extended its broad
solitudes and shades, is now an open and smiling
region, cultivated with parks and farms, and
enlivened
with villages.
Newstead, which probably once exerted a
monastic sway over this region, and controlled
the consciences of the rude foresters, was
originally
a priory, founded in the latter part of the
twelfth century, by Henry II., at the time when
he sought, by building of shrines and convents,
and by other acts of external piety, to expiate
the murder of Thomas a Becket. The priory
was dedicated to God and the Virgin, and was
inhabited by a fraternity of canons regular of
St. Augustine. This order was originally
simple
and abstemious in its mode of living, and
exemplary in its conduct; but it would seem
that it gradually lapsed into those abuses which
disgraced too many of the wealthy monastic
establishments
;
for there are documents among
its archives which intimate the prevalence of
gross misrule and dissolute sensuality among its
members.
At the time of the dissolution of the convents
during the reign of Henry VIII., Newstead
underwent
a sudden reverse, being given, with the
neighbouring manor and rectory of Papelwick,
to Sir John Byron, Steward of Manchester and
Rochdale, and Lieutenant of Sherwood Forest.
This ancient family worthy figures in the
traditions
of the Abbey, and in the ghost stories with
which it abounds, under the quaint and graphic
appellation of Sir John Byron the Little, with
the great Beard. He converted the saintly
edifice
into a castellated dwelling, making it his
favourite residence and the seat of his forest
jurisdiction
.
The Byron family being subsequently
ennobled
by a baronial title, and enriched by various
possessions, maintained great style and retinue
at Newstead. The proud edifice partook,
however
,
of the vicissitudes of the times, and Lord
Byron, in one of his poems, represents it as
alternately
the scene of lordly wassailing and of civil
war.
Hark, how the hall resounding to the strain,
Shakes with the martial music's novel din!
The heralds of a warrior's haughty reign,
High crested banners wave thy walls within.
Of changing sentinels the distant hum,
The mirth of feasts, the clang of burnish'd arms,
The braying trumpet, and the hoarser drum,
Unite in concert with increased alarms.
About the middle of the last century, the
Abbey
came into the possession of another noted
character, who makes no less figure in its
shadowy
traditions than Sir John the Little with
the great Beard. This was the grand uncle of
the poet, familiarly known among the gossiping
chroniclers of the Abbey as the Wicked Lord
Byron. He is represented as a man of irritable
passions and vindictive temper, in the indulgence
of which an incident occurred which gave a turn
to his whole character and life, and in some
measure affected the fortunes of the Abbey. In
his neighbourhood lived his kinsman and friend,
Mr. Chaworth, proprietor of Annesley Hall.
Being together in London in 1765, in a chamber
of the Star and Garter tavern in Pall Mall, a
quarrel arose between them. Byron insisted
upon settling it upon the spot by single combat.
They fought without seconds, by the dim light
of a candle, and Mr. Chaworth, although the
most expert swordsman, received a mortal
wound. With his dying breath he related such
particulars of the contest as induced the
coroner's
jury to return a verdict of wilful murder.
Lord Byron was sent to the tower, and
subsequently
tried before the House of Peers, where
an ultimate verdict was given of manslaughter.
He retired after this to the Abbey, where he
shut himself up to brood over his disgraces; grew
gloomy, morose, and fantastical, and indulged in
fits of passion and caprice, that made him the
theme of rural wonder and scandal. No tale
was too wild or too monstrous for vulgar belief.
Like his successor the poet, he was accused of
all kinds of vagaries and wickedness. It was
said that he always went armed, as if prepared
to commit murder on the least provocation.
At one time when a gentleman of his
neighbourhood
was to dine
tete a tete
with him, it is said a
9 *
brace of pistols were gravely laid with the
knives and forks upon the table, as part of the
regular table furniture, and implements that
might be needed in the course of the repast.
Another rumour states that being exasperated
at his coachman for disobedience to orders, he
shot him on the spot, threw his body into the
coach where lady Byron was seated, and,
mounting the box, officiated in his stead. At
another time, according to the same vulgar
rumours
,
he threw her ladyship into the lake in
front of the Abbey, where she would have been
drowned, but for the timely aid of the gardener.
These stories are doubtless exaggerations of
trivial incidents which may have occurred; but
it is certain that the wayward passions of this
unhappy man caused a separation from his wife,
and finally spread a solitude around him. Being
displeased at the marriage of his son, and heir,
he displayed an inveterate malignancy towards
him. Not being able to cut off his succession
to the Abbey estate, which descended to him by
entail, he endeavoured to injure it as much as
possible, so that it might come a mere wreck
into his hands. For this purpose he suffered the
Abbey to fall out of repair, and every thing to
go to waste about it, and cut down all the
timber
on the estate, laying low many a tract of old
Sherwood Forest, so that the Abbey lands lay
stripped and bare of all their ancient honours.
He was baffled in his unnatural revenge by the
premature death of his son, and passed the
remainder
of his days in his deserted and
dilapidated
halls, a gloomy misanthrope, brooding
amidst the scenes he had laid desolate.
His wayward humours drove from him all
neighbourly society, and for a part of the time
he was almost without domestics. In his
misanthropic
mood, when at variance with all
human
kind, he took to feeding crickets, so that in
process of time the Abbey was overrun with
them, and its lonely halls made more lonely at
night, by their monotonous music. Tradition adds
that, at his death, the crickets seemed aware
that they had lost their patron and protector, for
they one and all packed up bag and baggage,
and left the Abbey, trooping across its courts
and corridors in all directions.
The death of the Old Lord, or The Wicked
Lord Byron, for he is known by both
appellations
,
occurred in 1798; and the Abbey then
passed into the possession of the poet. The
latter was but eleven years of age, and living
in humble style with his mother in Scotland.
They came soon after to England, to take
possession
.
Moore gives a simple but striking
anecdote
of the first arrival of the poet at the
domains of his ancestors.
They had arrived at the Newstead toll bar,
and saw the woods of the Abbey stretching out
to receive them, when Mrs. Byron, affecting to
be ignorant of the place, asked the woman of
the toll house to whom that seat belonged?
She was told that the owner of it, Lord Byron,
had been some months dead. And who is the
next heir? asked the proud and happy mother.
They say, answered the old woman, it is a
little boy who lives at Aberdeen. And this
is he, bless him! exclaimed the nurse, no
longer able to contain herself, and turning to kiss
with delight the young lord who was seated on
her lap.
[1]
[1]
Moore's Life of Lord Byron.
During Lord Byron's minority, the Abbey
was let to Lord Grey de Ruthen, but the poet
visited it occasionally during the Harrow
vacations
,
when he resided with his mother at
lodgings
in Nottingham. It was treated little better
by its present tenant, than by the old lord who
preceded him, so that, when, in the autumn of
1808, Lord Byron took up his abode there, it
was in a ruinous condition. The following lines
from his own pen, may give some idea of its
condition.
Through thy battlements, Newstead, the hollow winds
whistle,
Thou, the hall of my fathers, art gone to decay
In thy once smiling garden, the hemlock and thistle
Have choked up the rose which once bloomed in the
way.
Of the mail-covered barons who, proudly, to battle
Led thy vassals from Europe to Palestine's plain,
The escutcheon and shield, which with every wind rattle,
Are the only sad vestiges now that remain.
[2]
[2]
Lines on leaving Newstead Abbey.
In another poem he expresses the melancholy
feeling with which he took possession of his
ancestral
mansion.
Newstead! what saddening scene of change is thine,
Thy yawning arch betokens sure decay:
The last and youngest of a noble line,
Now holds thy mouldering turrets in his sway.
Deserted now, he scans thy gray worn towers,
Thy vaults, where dead of feudal ages sleep,
Thy cloisters, pervious to the wintry showers,
Thesethese he views, and views them but to weep.
Yet he prefers thee to the gilded domes,
Or gewgaw grottoes of the vainly great;
Yet lingers mid thy damp and mossy tombs,
Nor breathes a murmur 'gainst the will of fate.
Elegy on Newstead Abbey.
Lord Byron had not fortune sufficient to put
the pile in extensive repair, or to maintain any
thing like the state of his ancestors. He restored
some of the apartments, so as to furnish his
mother
with a comfortable habitation, and fitted up
a quaint study for himself, in which, among
books, and busts, and other library furniture,
were two sculls of the ancient friars, grinning
on each side of an antique cross. One of his gay
companions gives a picture of Newstead when
thus repaired, and the picture is sufficiently
desolate.
There are two tiers of cloisters, with a variety
of cells and rooms about them, which, though
not inhabited, nor in an inhabitable state, might
easily be made so; and many of the original
rooms, among which is a fine stone hall, are still
in use. Of the Abbey church, one end only
remains; and the old kitchen with a long range
of apartments, is reduced to a heap of rubbish.
Leading from the Abbey to the modern part of
the habitation is a noble room, seventy feet in
length and twenty-three in breadth; but every
part of the house displays neglect and decay,
save those which the present lord has lately
fitted up.
[3]
[3]
Letter of the late Charles Skinner Mathews, Esq.
Even the repairs thus made were but of
transient
benefit, for the roof being left in its
dilapidated
state, the rain soon penetrated into the
apartments which Lord Byron had restored and
decorated, and in a few years rendered them
almost as desolate as the rest of the Abbey.
Still he felt a pride in the ruinous old edifice;
its very dreary and dismantled state, addressed
itself to his poetical imagination, and to that love
of the melancholy and the grand which is evinced
in all his writings. Come what may, said
he in one of his letters, Newstead and I stand
or fall together. I have now lived on the spot.
I have fixed my heart upon it, and no pressure,
present or future, shall induce me to barter the
last vestige of our inheritance. I have that
pride within me which will enable me to support
difficulties: could I obtain in exchange for
Newstead
Abbey, the first fortune in the country,
I would reject the proposition.
His residence at the Abbey, however, was
fitful and uncertain. He passed occasional
portions
of time there, sometimes studiously and
alone, oftener idly and recklessly, and
occasionally
with young and gay companions, in riot and
revelry, and the indulgence of all kinds of mad
caprice. The Abbey was by no means benefited
by these roystering inmates, who sometimes
played off monkish mummeries about the
cloisters
,
at other times turned the state chambers
into schools for boxing and single-stick, and shot
pistols in the great hall. The country people of
the neighbourhood were as much puzzled by
these madcap vagaries of the new incumbent,
as by the gloomier habits of the old lord, and
began to think that madness was inherent in the
Byron race, or that some wayward star ruled
over the Abbey.
It is needless to enter into a detail of the
circumstances
which led his Lordship to sell his
ancestral estate, notwithstanding the partial
predilections
and hereditary feeling which he had
so eloquently expressed. Fortunately, it fell into
the hands of a man who possessed something of
a poetical temperament, and who cherished an
enthusiastic admiration for Lord Byron.
Colonel
(at that time Major) Wildman had been a
schoolmate of the poet, and sat with him on the
same form at Harrow. He had subsequently
distinguished himself in the war of the Peninsula,
and at the battle of Waterloo, and it was a great
consolation to Lord Byron, in parting with his
family estate, to know that it would be held by
one capable of restoring its faded glories, and
who would respect and preserve all the
monuments
and memorials of his line.
[4]
[4]
The following letter, written in the course of the transfer
of the estate, has never been published:
Venice, Nov.
18, 1818.
My Dear Wildman
,
Mr. Hanson is on the eve of his return, so that I have only
time to return a few inadequate thanks for your very kind
letter. I should regret to trouble you with any requests of
mine, in regard to the preservation of any signs of my
family, which may still exist at Newstead, and leave every
thing of that kind to your own feelings, present or future,
upon the subject. The portrait which you flatter me by
desiring, would not be worth to you your trouble and expense
of such an expedition, but you may rely upon having the
very first that may be painted, and which may seem worth
your acceptance.
I trust that Newstead will, being yours, remain so, and
that it may see you as happy, as I am very sure that you will
make your dependants. With regard to myself, you may be
sure that whether in the fourth, or fifth, or sixth form at
Harrow, or in the fluctuations of after life, I shall always
remember with regard my old school-fellowfellow monitor,
and friend, and recognise with respect the gallant soldier,
who, with all the advantages of fortune and allurements of
youth to a life of pleasure, devoted himself to duties of a
nobler order, and will receive his reward in the esteem and
admiration of his country.
Ever yours most truly and affectionately,
BYRON.
The confidence of Lord Byron in the good
feeling and good taste of Colonel Wildman has
been justified by the event. Under his judicious
eye and munificent hand the venerable and
romantic pile has risen from its ruins in all its
old monastic and baronial splendour, and
additions
have been made to it in perfect conformity
of style. The groves and forests have been
replanted; the lakes and fish-ponds cleaned out,
and the gardens rescued from the hemlock and
thistle, and restored to their pristine and
dignified
formality.
The farms on the estate have been put in
10
complete order, new farm houses built of stone,
in the picturesque and comfortable style of the
old English granges; the hereditary tenants
secured in their paternal homes, and treated
with the most considerate indulgence; every
thing, in a word, gives happy indications of a
liberal and beneficent landlord.
What most, however, will interest the visiters
to the Abbey in favour of its present occupant,
is the reverential care with which he has
preserved
and renovated every monument and relic
of the Byron family, and every object in anywise
connected with the memory of the poet. Eighty
thousand pounds have already been expended
upon the venerable pile, yet the work is still
going on, and Newstead promises to realize the
hope faintly breathed by the poet when bidding
it a melancholy farewell
Haply thy sun emerging, yet may shine,
Thee to irradiate with meridian ray;
Hours splendid as the past may still be thine,
And bless thy future, as thy former day.
ARRIVAL AT THE ABBEY.
I HAD been passing a merry christmas in the
good old style at a venerable family hall in
Derbyshire
,
and set off to finish the holydays with
the hospitable proprietor of Newstead Abbey.
A drive of seventeen miles through a pleasant
country, part of it the storied region of Sherwood
Forest, brought me to the gate of Newstead park.
The aspect of the park was by no means
imposing
,
the fine old trees that once adorned it
having
been laid low by Lord Byron's wayward
predecessor.
Entering the gate, the postchaise rolled heavily
along a sandy road, between naked declivities,
gradually descending into one of those gentle
and sheltered valleys, in which the sleek monks
of old loved to nestle themselves. Here a sweep
of the road round an angle of a garden wall
brought us full in front of the venerable edifice,
embosomed in the valley, with a beautiful sheet
of water spreading out before it.
The irregular gray pile, of motley
architecture
,
answered to the description given by Lord
Byron:
An old, old monastery once, and now
Still older mansion, of a rich and rare
Mixed Gothic
One end was fortified by a castellated tower,
bespeaking the baronial and warlike days of the
edifice; the other end maintained its primitive
monastic character. A ruined chapel flanked
by a solemn grove, still reared its front entire.
It is true, the threshold of the once frequented
portal was grass grown, and the great lancet
window, once glorious with painted glass, was
now entwined and overhung with ivy; but the
old convent cross still braved both time and
tempest
on the pinnacle of the chapel, and below,
the blessed effigies of the Virgin and child,
sculptured
in gray stone, remained uninjured in their
niche, giving a sanctified aspect to the pile.
[5]
[5]
in a higher niche, alone, but crowned,
The Virgin Mother of the God-born child
With her son in her blessed arms, looked round,
Spar'd by some chance, when all beside was spoiled:
She made the earth below seem holy ground.
Don Juan
,
Canto III.
A flight of rooks, tenants of the adjacent grove,
were hovering about the ruin, and balancing
themselves upon every airy projection, and
looked
down with curious eye and cawed as the
postchaise rattled along below.
The chamberlain of the Abbey, a most
decorous
personage, dressed in black, received us at
the portal. Here, too, we encountered a
memento
of Lord Byron, a great black and white
Newfoundland dog, that had accompanied his
remains from Greece. He was descended from
the famous Boatswain, and inherited his
generous
qualities. He was a cherished inmate of
the Abbey, and honoured and caressed by every
visiter. Conducted by the chamberlain, and
followed by the dog, who assisted in doing the
honours of the house, we passed through a long
low vaulted hall, supported by massive gothic
arches, and not a little resembling the crypt of a
cathedral, being the basement story of the Abbey.
From this we ascended a stone staircase, at
the head of which a pair of folding doors
admitted
us into a broad corridor that ran round the
interior of the Abbey. The windows of the
corridor looked into a quadrangular grass grown
court, forming the hollow centre of the pile. In
the midst of it rose a lofty and fantastic fountain,
wrought of the same gray stone as the main
edifice
,
and which has been well described by Lord
Byron.
Amidst the court a gothic fountain play'd,
Symmetrical, but decked with carvings quaint,
Strange faces, like to men in masquerade,
And here perhaps a monster, there a saint:
The spring rush'd through grim mouths of granite made,
And sparkled into basins, where it spent
Its little torrent in a thousand bubbles,
Like man's vain glory, and his vainer troubles.
[6]
[6]
Don Juan, Canto III.
10*
Around this quadrangle were low vaulted
cloisters, with gothic arches, once the secluded
walks of the monks: the corridor along which
we were passing was built above these cloisters,
and their hollow arches seemed to reverberate
every footfall. Every thing thus far had a
solemn
monastic air; but, on arriving at an angle
of the corridor, the eye, glancing along a
shadowy
gallery, caught a sight of two dark figures
in plate armour, with closed visors, bucklers
braced, and swords drawn, standing motionless
against the wall. They seemed two phantoms
of the chivalrous era of the Abbey.
Here the chamberlain, throwing open a
folding
door, ushered us at once into a spacious and
lofty saloon, which offered a brilliant contrast to
the quaint and sombre apartments we had
traversed
.
It was elegantly furnished, and the
walls hung with paintings, yet something of its
original architecture had been preserved and
blended with modern embellishments. There
were the stone-shafted casements and the deep
bow window of former times. The carved and
panelled wood work of the lofty ceiling had
likewise been carefully restored, and its gothic
and grotesque devices, painted and gilded in
their ancient style.
Here, too, were emblems of the former and
latter
days of the Abbey, in the effigies of the first
and last of the Byron line that held sway over its
destinies. At the upper end of the saloon, above
the door, the dark Gothic portrait of Sir John
Byron the Little with the great Beard looked
grimly down from his canvass, while, at the
opposite
end, a white marble bust of the
genius
loci
, the noble poet, shone conspicuously from
its pedestal.
The whole air and style of the apartment
partook more of the palace than the monastery,
and its windows looked forth on a suitable
prospect
,
composed of beautiful groves, smooth
verdant
lawns, and silver sheets of water. Below
the windows was a small flower garden, enclosed
by stone balustrades, on which were stately
peacocks, sunning themselves and displaying
their plumage. About the grass plots in front,
were gay cock pheasants, and plump partridges,
and nimble footed water hens, feeding almost in
perfect security.
Such was the medley of objects presented to
the eye on first visiting the Abbey, and I found
the interior fully to answer the description of
the poet
The mansion's self was vast and venerable,
With more of the monastic than has been
Elsewhere preserved; the cloisters still were stable,
The cells, too, and refectory I ween;
An exquisite small chapel had been able,
Still unimpaired, to decorate the scene;
The rest had been reformed, replaced, or sunk,
And spoke more of the friar than the monk.
Huge halls, long galleries, spacious chambers, joined
By no quite lawful marriage of the arts,
Might shock a connoisseur; but when combined
Formed a whole, which, irregular in parts,
Yet left a grand impression on the mind,
At least of those whose eyes were in their hearts.
It is not my intention to lay open the scenes
of domestic life at the Abbey, or to describe the
festivities of which I was a partaker during my
sojourn within its hospitable walls. I wish merely
to present a picture of the edifice itself, and of
those personages and circumstances about it,
connected with the memory of Byron.
I forbear, therefore, to dwell on my reception
by my excellent and amiable host and hostess,
or to make my reader acquainted with the
elegant
inmates of the mansion that I met in the
saloon; and I shall pass on at once with him to
the chamber allotted me, and to which I was
most respectfully conducted by the
chamberlain
.
It was one of a magnificent suite of rooms,
extending between the court of the cloisters and
the Abbey garden, the windows looking into the
latter. The whole suite formed the ancient state
apartment, and had fallen into decay during the
neglected days of the Abbey, so as to be in a
ruinous condition in the time of Lord Byron. It
had since been restored to its ancient splendour,
of which my chamber may be cited as a
specimen
.
It was lofty and well proportioned; the
lower part of the walls was panelled with
ancient oak, the upper part hung with goblin
tapestry, representing oriental hunting scenes,
wherein the figures were of the size of life, and
of great vivacity of attitude and colour.
The furniture was antique, dignified, and
cumbrous
.
High backed chairs curiously carved,
and wrought in needle-work; a massive
clothes-press
of dark oak, well polished, and inlaid with
landscapes of various tinted woods; a bed of
state, ample and lofty, so as only to be ascended
by a moveable flight of steps, the huge posts
supporting a high tester with a tuft of crimson
plumes at each corner, and rich curtains of
crimson damask hanging in broad and heavy
folds.
A venerable mirror of plate glass stood on
the toilet, in which belles of former centuries
may have contemplated and decorated their
charms. The floor of the chamber was of
tessellated
oak, shining with wax, and partly
covered
by a Turkey carpet. In the centre stood a
massy oaken table, waxed and polished as
smooth as glass, and furnished with a writing
desk of perfumed rose wood.
A sober light was admitted into the room
through gothic stone shafted casements, partly
shaded by crimson curtains, and partly
overshadowed
by the trees of the garden. This
solemnly tempered light added to the effect of
the stately and antiquated interior.
Two portraits, suspended over the doors, were
in keeping with the scene. They were in
ancient
Vandyke dresses; one was a cavalier,
who may have occupied this apartment in days
of yore, the other was a lady with a black velvet
mask in her hand, who may once have arrayed
herself for conquest at the very mirror I have
described.
The most curious relic of old times, however,
in this quaint but richly dight apartment, was a
great chimney-piece of panel work, carved in
high relief, with niches or compartments, each
containing a human bust, that protruded almost
entirely from the wall. Some of the figures
were in ancient gothic garb; the most striking
among them was a female, who was earnestly
regarded by a fierce Saracen from an adjoining
niche.
This panel work is among the mysteries of the
Abbey, and causes as much wide speculation as
the Egyptian hieroglyphics. Some suppose it
to illustrate an adventure in the Holy Land, and
that the lady in effigy has been rescued by some
crusader of the family from the turbaned Turk
who watches her so earnestly. What tends to
give weight to these suppositions is, that similar
pieces of panel work exist in other parts of
the Abbey, in all of which are to be seen the
Christian lady and her Saracen guardian or lover.
At the bottom of these sculptures are
emblazoned
the armorial bearings of the Byrons.
I shall not detain the reader, however, with
any further description of my apartment, or of the
mysteries connected with it. As he is to pass
some days with me at the Abbey, we shall have
time to examine the old edifice at our leisure,
and to make ourselves acquainted, not merely
with its interior, but likewise with its environs.
THE ABBEY GARDEN.
The
morning after my arrival, I rose at an
early hour. The daylight was peering brightly
between the window curtains, and drawing them
apart, I gazed through the gothic casement upon
a scene that accorded in character with the
interior
of the ancient mansion. It was the old
Abbey garden, but altered to suit the tastes of
different times and occupants. In one direction
were shady walks and alleys, broad terraces
and lofty groves; in another, beneath a gray
monastic looking angle of the edifice, overrun
with ivy and surmounted by a cross, lay a small
French garden, with formal flower pots,
gravelled
walks, and stately stone balustrades.
The beauty of the morning, and the quiet of
the hour, tempted me to an early stroll; for it
is pleasant to enjoy such old time places alone,
when one may indulge poetical reveries, and
spin cobweb fancies, without interruption.
Dressing
myself, therefore, with all speed, I descended
a small flight of steps from the state apartment
into the long corridor over the cloisters, along
which I passed to a door at the farther end.
Here I emerged into the open air, and,
descending
another flight of stone steps, found myself in
the centre of what had once been the Abbey
chapel.
Nothing of the sacred edifice remained,
however
,
but the gothic front, with its deep portal
and grand lancet window, already described.
The nave, the side walls, the choir, the sacristy,
all had disappeared. The open sky was over
my head, a smooth shaven grass plot beneath
my feet. Gravel walks and shrubberies had
succeeded to the shadowy aisles, and stately
trees to the clustering columns.
Where now the grass exhales a murky dew,
The humid pall of life extinguished clay,
In sainted fame the sacred fathers grew,
Nor raised their pious voices but to pray.
Where now the bats their wavering wings extend,
Soon as the gloaming spreads her warning shade,
The choir did oft their mingling vespers blend,
Or matin orisons to Mary paid.
Instead of the matin orisons of the monks,
however, the ruined walls of the chapel now
resounded
to the cawing of innumerable rooks
that were fluttering and hovering about the dark
grove which they inhabited, and preparing for
their morning flight.
My ramble led me along quiet alleys,
bordered
by shrubbery, where the solitary water hen
11
would now and then scud across my path, and
take refuge among the bushes. From hence I
entered upon a broad terraced walk, once a
favourite
resort of the friars, which extended the
whole length of the old Abbey garden, passing
along the ancient stone wall which bounded it.
In the centre of the garden lay one of the
monkish fish pools, an oblong sheet of water,
deep set like a mirror, in green sloping banks of
turf. In its glassy bosom was reflected the
dark mass of a neighbouring grove, one of the
most important features of the garden.
This grove goes by the sinister name of the
Devil's Wood, and enjoys but an equivocal
character in the neighbourhood. It was planted
by The Wicked Lord Byron, during the early
part of his residence at the Abbey, before his
fatal
duel with Mr. Chaworth. Having something
of a foreign and classical taste, he set up leaden
statues of satyrs or fawns at each end of the
grove. These statues, like every thing else
about the old Lord, fell under the suspicion and
obloquy that overshadowed him in the latter part
of his life. The country people, who knew
nothing of heathen mythology and its sylvan
deities, looked with horror at idols invested with
the diabolical attributes of horns and cloven
feet. They probably supposed them some
object
of secret worship of the gloomy and
secluded
misanthrope, and reputed murderer, and
gave them the name of The old Lord's Devils.
I penetrated the recesses of the mystic grove.
There stood the ancient and much slandered
statues, overshadowed by tall larches, and
stained
by dank green mould. It is not a matter of
surprise, that strange figures thus behoofed and
behorned, and set up in a gloomy grove, should
perplex the minds of the simple and superstitious
yeomanry. There are many of the tastes and
caprices of the rich, that in the eyes of the
uneducated
must savour of insanity.
I was attracted to this grove, however, by
memorials of a more touching character. It
had been one of the favourite haunts of the late
Lord Byron. In his farewell visit to the Abbey,
after he had parted with the possession of it, he
passed some time in this grove, in company
with his sister; and as a last memento, engraved
their names on the bark of a tree.
The feelings that agitated his bosom during
this farewell visit, when he beheld round him
objects dear to his pride, and dear to his
juvenile
recollections, but of which the narrowness
of his fortune would not permit him to retain
possession, may be gathered from a passage in
a poetical epistle, written to his sister in after
years.
I did remind you of our own dear lake
By the old hall,
which may be mine no more;
Leman's is fair; but think not I forsake
The sweet remembrance of a dearer shore:
Sad havoc Time must with my memory make
Ere
that
or
thou
can fade these eyes before;
Though, like all things which I have loved, they are
Resigned for ever, or divided far.
I feel almost at times as I have felt
In happy childhood; trees, and flowers, and brooks,
Which do remember me of where I dwelt
Ere my young mind was sacrificed to books,
Come as of yore upon me, and can melt
My heart with recognition of their looks;
And even at moments I would think I see
Some living things I lovebut none like thee.
I searched the grove for some time, before I
found the tree on which Lord Byron had left
his frail memorial. It was an elm of peculiar
form, having two trunks, which sprang from the
same root, and, after growing side by side,
mingled
their branches together. He had selected
it, doubtless, as emblematical of his sister and
himself. The names of
Byron
and
Augusta
were still visible. They had been deeply cut in
the bark, but the natural growth of the tree was
gradually rendering them illegible, and a few
years hence, strangers will seek in vain for this
record of fraternal affection.
Leaving the grove, I continued my ramble
along a spacious terrace, overlooking what had
once been the kitchen garden of the Abbey.
Below me lay the monks' stew, or fish pond, a
dark pool, overhung by gloomy cypresses, with
a solitary water hen swimming about in it.
A little further on, and the terrace looked
down upon the stately scene on the south side
of the Abbey; the flower garden, with its stone
balustrades and stately peacocks, the lawn, with
its pheasants and partridges, and the soft valley
of Newstead beyond.
At a distance, on the border of the lawn, stood
another memento of Lord Byron; an oak planted
by him in his boyhood, on his first visit to the
Abbey. With a superstitious feeling inherent in
him, he linked his own destiny with that of the
tree. As it fares, said he, so will fare my
fortunes. Several years elapsed, many of them
passed in idleness and dissipation. He returned
to the Abbey a youth scarce grown to manhood,
but as he thought with vices and follies beyond
his years. He found his emblem oak almost
choked by weeds and brambles, and took the
lesson to himself.
Young oak, when I planted thee deep in the ground,
I hoped that thy days would be longer than mine,
That thy dark waving branches would flourish around,
And ivy thy trunk with its mantle entwine.
Such, such was my hopewhen in infancy's years
On the land of my fathers I reared thee with pride;
11 *
They are past, and I water thy stem with my tears
Thy decay not the weeds that surround thee can hide.
I leaned over the stone balustrade of the
terrace
,
and gazed upon the valley of Newstead,
with its silver sheets of water gleaming in the
morning sun. It was a Sabbath morning,
which always seems to have a hallowed
influence
over the landscape, probably from the
quiet of the day, and the cessation of all kinds
of week day labour. As I mused upon the
mild and beautiful scene, and the wayward
destinies
of the man, whose stormy temperament
forced him from this tranquil paradise to battle
with the passions and perils of the world, the
sweet chime of bells from a village a few miles
distant, came stealing up the valley. Every
sight and sound this morning seemed
calculated
to summon up touching recollections of poor
Byron. The chime was from the village spire
of Hucknall Torkard, beneath which his remains
lie buried!
I have since visited his tomb. It is
in an old gray country church, venerable with
the lapse of centuries. He lies buried beneath
the pavement, at one end of the principal aisle.
A light falls on the spot through the stained
glass of a gothic window, and a tablet on the
adjacent wall announces the family vault of the
Byrons. It had been the wayward intention or
the poet to be entombed, with his faithful dog,
in the monument erected by him in the garden of
Newstead Abbey. His executors showed better
judgment and feeling, in consigning his ashes to
the family sepulchre, to mingle with those of his
mother and his kindred. Here,
After life's fitful fever, he sleeps well.
Malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing
Can touch him further!
How nearly did his dying hour realize the
wish made by him, but a few years previously in
one of his fitful moods of melancholy, and
misanthropy
:
When time, or soon or late, shall bring
The dreamless sleep that lulls the dead,
Oblivion! may thy languid wing
Wave gently o'er my dying bed!
No band of friends or heirs be there,
To weep or wish the coming blow:
No maiden with dishevelled hair,
To feel, or feign decorous wo.
But silent let me sink to earth,
With no officious mourners near:
I would not mar one hour of mirth,
Nor startle friendship with a tear.
He died among strangers; in a foreign land,
without a kindred hand to close his eyes, yet he
did not die unwept. With all his faults and
errors
,
and passions, and caprices, he had the gift
of attaching his humble dependents warmly to
him. One of them, a poor Greek, accompanied
his remains to England, and followed them to
the grave. I am told that, during the ceremony,
he stood holding on by a pew in an agony of
grief, and when all was over, seemed as if he
would have gone down into the tomb with the
body of his master.A nature that could inspire
such attachments, must have been generous and
beneficent.
PLOUGH MONDAY.
Sherwood
Forest is a region that still retains
much of the quaint customs and holyday games
of the olden time. A day or two after my
arrival
at the Abbey, as I was walking in the
cloisters
,
I heard the sound of rustic music, and now
and then a burst of merriment, proceeding from
the interior of the mansion. Presently the
chamberlain
came to me and informed me that a
party of country lads were in the servants' hall,
performing Plough Monday antics, and invited
me to witness their mummery. I gladly
assented
,
for I am somewhat curious about these relics
of popular usages. The servants' hall was a fit
place for the exhibition of an old gothic game.
It was a chamber of great extent, which, in
monkish times had been the refectory of the
Abbey. A row of massive columns extended
lengthwise through the centre, from whence
sprung gothic arches, supporting the low vaulted
ceiling. Here was a set of rustics dressed up
in something of the style represented in the
books, concerning popular antiquities. One was
in a rough garb of frieze, with his head muffled
in bearskin, and a bell dangling behind him, that
jingled at every movement. He was the clown,
or fool of the party, probably a traditional
representative
of the ancient satyr. The rest were
decorated with ribands and armed with wooden
swords. The leader of the troop recited the
old ballad of St. George and the Dragon, which
has been current among the country people for
ages; his companions accompanied the
recitation
with some rude attempt at acting, while the
clown cut all kinds of antics.
To these succeeded a set of morrice dancers,
gaily dressed up with ribands and hawks' bells.
In this troop we had Robin Hood and Maid
Marian
,
the latter represented by a smooth faced
boy: also, Belzebub, equipped with a broom,
and accompanied by his wife Bessy, a
termagant
old beldame. These rude pageants are the
lingering remains of the old customs of Plough
Monday, when bands of rustics, fantastically
dressed, and furnished with pipe and tabor,
dragged
what was called the fool plough from
house to house, singing ballads and performing
antics, for which they were rewarded with
money
and good cheer.
But it is not in merry Sherwood Forest
alone that these remnants of old times prevail.
They are to be met with in most of the counties
north of the Trent, which classic stream seems
to be the boundary line of primitive customs.
During my recent christmas sojourn at Barlboro'
Hall, on the skirts of Derbyshire and Yorkshire,
I had witnessed many of the rustic festivities
peculiar to that joyous season, which have rashly
been pronounced obsolete, by those who draw
their experience merely from city life. I had
seen the great Yule clog put on the fire on
Christmas Eve, and the wassail bowl sent round,
brimming with its spicy beverage. I had heard
carols beneath my window by the choristers of
the neighbouring village, who went their rounds
about the ancient Hall at midnight, according to
immemorial christmas custom. We had
mummers
and mimers too, with the story of St.
George and the Dragon, and other ballads and
traditional dialogues, together with the famous
old interlude of the Hobby Horse, all
represented
in the antichamber and servants' hall by
rustics
,
who inherited the custom and the poetry
from preceding generations.
The boar's head, crowned with rosemary, had
taken its honoured station among the christmas
cheer; the festal board had been attended by
glee singers and minstrels from the village to
entertain the company with hereditary songs
and catches during their repast; and the old
Pyrrhic game of the sword dance, handed down
since the time of the Romans, was admirably
performed in the court yard of the mansion by
a band of young men, lithe and supple in their
forms and graceful in their movements, who I
was told went the rounds of the villages and
country seats during the christmas holydays.
I specify these rural pageants and
ceremonials
,
which I saw during my sojourn in this
neighbourhood
,
because it has been deemed that some
of the anecdotes of holyday customs given in
my preceding writings, related to usages which
have entirely passed away. Critics who reside
in cities have little idea of the primitive manners
and observances, which still prevail in remote
and rural neighbourhoods.
In fact, in crossing the Trent one seems to
step back into old times: and in the villages of
Sherwood Forest we are in a black letter
region
.
The moss green cottages, the lowly
mansions
of gray stone, the gothic crosses at each
end of the villages, and the tall May pole in the
centre, transport us in imagination to foregone
centuries: every thing has a quaint and
antiquated
air.
The tenantry on the Abbey estate partake of
this primitive character. Some of the families
have rented farms there for nearly three hundred
years; and, notwithstanding that their
mansions
fell to decay, and every thing about them
partook of the general waste and misrule of the
Byron dynasty, yet nothing could uproot them
from their native soil. I am happy to say, that
Colonel Wildman has taken these staunch loyal
families under his peculiar care. He has
favoured
them in their rents, repaired, or rather rebuilt
their farm houses, and has enabled families that
had almost sunk into the class of mere rustic
labourers
,
once more to hold up their heads among
the yeomanry of the land.
I visited one of these renovated establishments
that had but lately been a mere ruin, and now
was a substantial grange. It was inhabited by
a young couple. The good woman showed
every part of the establishment with decent
pride, exulting in its comfort and respectability.
Her husband, I understood, had risen in
consequence
with the improvement of his mansion,
and now began to be known among his rustic
neighbours by the appellation of the young
Squire.
12
OLD SERVANTS.
In
an old, time-worn, and mysterious looking
mansion like Newtead Abbey, and one so
haunted
by monkish, and feudal, and poetical
associations
,
it is a prize to meet with some ancient
crone, who has passed a long life about the
place, so as to have become a living chronicle
of its fortunes and vicissitudes. Such a one is
Nanny Smith, a worthy dame, near seventy
years of age, who for a long time served as
housekeeper to the Byrons. The Abbey and
its domains comprise her world, beyond which
she knows nothing, but within which she has
ever conducted herself with native shrewdness
and old fashioned honesty. When Lord Byron
sold the Abbey her vocation was at an end, yet
still she lingered about the place, having for it
the local attachment of a cat. Abandoning her
comfortable housekeeper's apartment, she took
shelter in one of the rock houses, which are
nothing more than a little neighbourhood of
cabins, excavated in the perpendicular walls of
a stone quarry, at no great distance from the
Abbey. Three cells, cut in the living rock,
formed her dwelling; these she fitted up humbly
but comfortably; her son William laboured in
the neighbourhood, and aided to support her,
and Nanny Smith maintained a cheerful aspect
and an independent spirit. One of her gossips
suggested to her that William should marry and
bring home a young wife to help her and take
care of her. Nay! nay, replied Nanny, tartly,
I want no young mistress in
my house
. So
much for the love of rulepoor Nanny's house
was a hole in a rock!
Colonel Wildman, on taking possession of the
Abbey, found Nanny Smith thus humbly nestled.
With that active benevolence which
characterizes
him, he immediately set William up in a
small farm on the estate, where Nanny Smith
has a comfortable mansion in her old days. Her
pride is roused by her son's advancement. She
remarks with exultation that people treat
William
with much more respect now that he is a
farmer, than they did when he was a labourer.
A farmer of the neighbourhood has even
endeavoured
to make a match between him and his
sister, but Nanny Smith has grown fastidious,
and interfered. The girl, she said, was too old
for her son, besides, she did not see that he was
in any need of a wife.
No, said William, I ha' no great mind to
marry the wench; but if the Colonel and his lady
wish it, I am willing. They have been so kind
to me that I should think it my duty to please
them. The Colonel and his lady, however, have
not thought proper to put honest William's
gratitude
to so severe a test.
Another worthy whom Colonel Wildman found
vegetating upon the place, and who had lived
there for at least sixty years, was old Joe
Murray
.
He had come there when a mere boy in
the train of the old lord, about the middle of
the last century, and had continued with him
until his death. Having been a cabin boy when
very young, Joe always fancied himself a bit of
a sailor, and had charge of all the pleasure boats
on the lake, though he afterwards rose to the
dignity of butler. In the latter days of the
old Lord Byron, when he shut himself up from
all the world, Joe Murray was the only servant
retained by him, excepting his housekeeper
Betty Hardstaff, who was reputed to have an
undue sway over him, and was derisively called
Lady Betty among the country folk.
When the Abbey came into the possession of
the late Lord Byron, Joe Murray accompanied
it as a fixture. He was reinstated as butler in
the Abbey, and high admiral on the lake, and
his sturdy honest mastiff qualities won so upon
Lord Byron as even to rival his Newfoundland
dog in his affections. Often when dining, he
would pour out a bumper of choice Madeira,
and hand it to Joe as he stood behind his chair.
In fact, when he built the monumental tomb
which stands in the Abbey garden, he intended
it for himself, Joe Murray, and the dog. The
two latter were to lie on each side of him.
Boatswain died not long afterwards, and was
regularly interred, and the well known epitaph
inscribed on one side of the monument. Lord
Byron departed for Greece; during his absence,
a gentleman to whom Joe Murray was showing
the tomb, observed, Well, old boy, you will
take your place here some twenty years hence.
I don't know that, sir, growled Joe, in
reply, if I was sure his Lordship would come
here, I should like it well enough, but I should
not like to lie alone with the dog.
Joe Murray was always extremely neat in
his dress, and attentive to his person, and made
a most respectable appearance. A portrait of
him still hangs in the Abbey, representing him
a hale fresh looking fellow, in a flaxen wig, a
blue coat and buff waistcoat, with a pipe in his
hand. He discharged all the duties of his station
with great fidelity, unquestionable honesty, and
much outward decorum, but, if we may believe
his contemporary, Nanny Smith, who, as
housekeeper
,
shared the sway of the household with
him, he was very lax in his minor morals, and
used to sing loose and profane songs as he
presided
12*
at the table in the servants' hall, or sat
taking his ale and smoking his pipe by the
evening fire. Joe had evidently derived his
convivial notions from the race of English
country
squires who flourished in the days of his
juvenility. Nanny Smith was scandalized at his
ribald songs, but being above harm herself,
endured them in silence. At length, on his
singing them before a young girl of sixteen, she
could contain herself no longer, but read him
a lecture that made his ears ring, and then
flounced off to bed. The lecture seems, by her
account, to have staggered honest Joe, for he
told her the next morning that he had had
a terrible dream in the night. An Evangelist
stood at the foot of his bed with a great Dutch
bible, which he held with the printed part
towards
him, and after a while pushed it in his
face. Nanny Smith undertook to interpret the
vision, and read from it such a homily, and
deduced such awful warnings, that Joe became
quite serious, left off singing, and took to reading
good books for a month; but after that,
continued
Nanny, he relapsed and became as bad as
ever, and continued to sing loose and profane
songs to his dying day.
When Colonel Wildman became proprietor of
the Abbey he found Joe Murray flourishing in a
green old age, though upwards of fourscore, and
continued him in his station as butler. The old
man was rejoiced at the extensive repairs that
were immediately commenced, and anticipated
with pride the day when the Abbey should rise
out of its ruins with renovated splendour, its
gates be thronged with trains and equipages,
and its halls once more echo to the sound of
joyous hospitality.
What chiefly, however, concerned Joe's pride
and ambition, was a plan of the Colonel's to
have the ancient refectory of the convent, a great
vaulted room, supported by gothic columns,
converted
into a servants' hall. Here Joe looked
forward to rule the roast at the head of the
servants'
table, and to make the gothic arches ring
with those hunting and hard drinking ditties
which were the horror of the discreet Nanny
Smith. Time, however, was fast wearing away
with him, and his great fear was that the hall
would not be completed in his day. In his
eagerness to hasten the repairs, he used to get
up early in the morning, and ring up the
workmen
.
Notwithstanding his great age, also, he
would turn out half dressed in cold weather to
cut sticks for the fire. Colonel Wildman kindly
remonstrated with him for thus risking his health,
as others would do the work for him.
Lord, sir, exclaimed the hale old fellow,
it's my air bath, I'm all the better for it.
Unluckily as he was thus employed one
morning
,
a splinter flew up and wounded one of his
eyes. An inflammation took place; he lost the
sight of that eye, and subsequently of the other.
Poor Joe gradually pined away, and grew
melancholy
.
Colonel Wildman kindly tried to
cheer him upCome, come, old boy, cried he,
be of good heart, you will yet take your place
in the servants' hall.
Nay, nay, sir, replied he, I did hope once
that I should live to see itI looked forward to
it with pride, I confess, but it is all over with me
nowI shall soon go home!
He died shortly afterwards, at the advanced
age of eighty-six, seventy of which had been
passed as an honest and faithful servant at the
Abbey. Colonel Wildman had him decently
interred in the church of Hucknall Torkard, near
the vault of Lord Byron.
SUPERSTITIONS OF THE ABBEY.
The
anecdotes I had heard of the quondam
housekeeper of Lord Byron, rendered me
desirous
of paying her a visit. I rode in company
with Colonel Wildman, therefore, to the cottage
of her son William, where she resides, and found
her seated by her fireside, with a favourite cat
perched upon her shoulder and purring in her
ear. Nanny Smith is a large good looking
woman
,
a specimen of the old fashioned country
housewife, combining antiquated notions and
prejudices, and very limited information, with
natural good sense. She loves to gossip about
the Abbey and Lord Byron, and was soon drawn
into a course of anecdotes, though mostly of an
humble kind, such as suited the meridian of the
housekeeper's room and servants' hall. She
seemed to entertain a kind recollection of Lord
Byron, though she had evidently been much
perplexed
by some of his vagaries; and especially
by the means he adopted to counteract his
tendency
to corpulency. He used various modes
to sweat himself down; sometimes he would lie
for a long time in a warm bath, sometimes he
would walk up the hills in the park, wrapped up
and loaded with great coats; a sad toil for the
poor youth, added Nanny, he being so lame.
His meals were scanty and irregular,
consisting
of dishes which Nanny seemed to hold in
great contempt, such as pilaw, maccaroni, and
light puddings.
She contradicted the report of the licentious
life which he was reported to lead at the Abbey,
and of the paramours said to have been brought
with him from London. A great part of his
time used to be passed lying on a sopha reading.
Sometimes he had young gentlemen of his
acquaintance
with him, and they played some mad
pranks; but nothing but what young gentlemen
may do, and no harm done.
Once, it is true, she added, he had with
him a beautiful boy as a page, which the house
maids said was a girl. For my part, I know
nothing about it. Poor soul, he was so lame he
could not go out much with the men; all the
comfort he had was to be a little with the lasses.
The housemaids, however, were very jealous;
one of them, in particular, took the matter in
great dudgeon. Her name was Lucy; she was
a great favourite with Lord Byron, and had been
much noticed by him, and began to have high
notions. She had her fortune told by a man
who squinted, to whom she gave two and
sixpence
.
He told her to hold up her head and
look high, for she would come to great things.
Upon this, added Nanny, the poor thing dreamt
of nothing less than becoming a lady, and
mistress
of the Abbey; and promised me, if such
luck should happen to her, she would be a good
friend to me. Ah well-a-day! Lucy never had
the fine fortune she dreamt of; but she had
better
than I thought for; she is now married, and
keeps a public house at Warwick.
Finding that we listened to her with great
attention
,
Nanny Smith went on with her
gossiping
.
One time, said she, Lord Byron took
a notion that there was a deal of money buried
about the Abbey by the monks in old times,
and nothing would serve him but he must have
the flagging taken up in the cloisters; and they
digged and digged, but found nothing but stone
coffins full of bones. Then he must needs have
one of the coffins put in one end of the great
hall, so that the servants were afraid to go there
of nights. Several of the sculls were cleaned
and put in frames in his room. I used to have
to go into the room at night to shut the windows,
and if I glanced an eye at them, they all seemed
to grin; which I believe sculls always do. I
can't say but I was glad to get out of the room.
There was at one time (and for that matter
there is still) a good deal said about ghosts
haunting
about the Abbey. The keeper's wife said
she saw two standing in a dark part of the
cloisters
just opposite the chapel, and one in the
garden
,
by the lord's well. Then there was a young
lady, a cousin of Lord Byron, who was staying
in the Abbey and slept in the room next the
clock; and she told me that one night when she
was lying in bed, she saw a lady in white come
out of the wall on one side of the room, and go
into the wall on the opposite side.
Lord Byron one day said to me, `Nanny,
what nonsense they tell about ghosts, as if there
ever were any such things. I have never seen
any thing of the kind about the Abbey, and I
warrant you have not.' This was all done, do
you see, to draw me out; but I said nothing, but
shook my head. However, they say his lordship
did once see something. It was in the great
hallsomething all black and hairy: he said it
was the devil.
For my part, continued Nanny Smith, I
never saw any thing of the kindbut I heard
something once. I was one evening scrubbing
the floor of the little dining room at the end of
the long gallery; it was after dark; I expected
every moment to be called to tea, but wished to
finish what I was about. All at once I heard
heavy footsteps in the great hall. They sounded
like the tramp of a horse. I took the light and
went to see what it was. I heard the steps
come from the lower end of the hall to the
fireplace
in the centre, where they stopped: but I
could see nothing. I returned to my work, and
in a little time heard the same noise again. I
went again with the light; the footsteps stopped
by the fireplace as before; still I could see
nothing
.
I returned to my work, when I heard
the steps for a third time. I then went into the
hall without a light, but they stopped just the
same, by the fireplace half way up the hall. I
thought this rather odd, but returned to my work.
When it was finished, I took the light and went
through the hall, as that was my way to the
kitchen. I heard no more footsteps, and thought
no more of the matter, when, on coming to the
lower end of the hall, I found the door locked,
and then on one side of the door, I saw the
stone coffin with the scull and bones that had
been digged up in the cloisters.
Here Nanny paused: I asked her if she
believed
that the mysterious footsteps had any
connexion
with the skeleton in the coffin; but she
shook her head, and would not commit herself.
We took our leave of the good old dame shortly
after, and the story she had related gave subject
for conversation on our ride homeward. It was
evident she had spoken the truth as to what she
had heard, but had been deceived by some
peculiar
13
effect of sound. Noises are propagated
about a huge irregular edifice of the kind in a
very deceptive manner; footsteps are prolonged
and reverberated by the vaulted cloisters and
echoing halls; the creaking and slamming of
distant gates, the rushing of the blast through
the groves and among the ruined arches of the
chapel, have all a strangely delusive effect at
night.
Colonel Wildman gave an instance of the kind
from his own experience. Not long after he
had taken up his residence at the Abbey, he
heard one moonlight night a noise as if a
carriage
was passing at a distance. He opened the
window and leaned out. It then seemed as if
the great iron roller was dragged along the
gravel
walks and terrace, but there was nothing to
be seen. When he saw the gardener on the
following morning, he questioned him about
working so late at night. The gardener declared
that no one had been at work, and the roller was
chained up. He was sent to examine it, and
came back with a countenance full of surprise.
The roller had been moved in the night, but he
declared no mortal hand could have moved it.
Well, replied the Colonel good humouredly,
I am glad to find I have a brownie to work
for me.
Lord Byron did much to foster and give
currency
to the superstitious tales connected with
the Abbey, by believing, or pretending to believe
in them. Many have supposed that his mind
was really tinged with superstition, and that this
innate infirmity was increased by passing much
of his time in a lonely way, about the empty
halls and cloisters of the Abbey, then in a
ruinous
melancholy state, and brooding over the
sculls and effigies of its former inmates. I should
rather think that he found poetical enjoyment in
these supernatural themes, and that his
imagination
delighted to people this gloomy and
romantic
pile with all kinds of shadowy inhabitants.
Certain it is, the aspect of the mansion under
the varying influence of twilight and moonlight,
and cloud and sunshine operating upon its halls,
and galleries, and monkish cloisters, is enough
to breed all kinds of fancies in the minds of its
inmates, especially if poetically or stuperstitiously
inclined.
I have already mentioned some of the fabled
visitants of the Abbey. The goblin friar,
however
,
is the one to whom Lord Byron has given
the greatest importance. It walked the cloisters
by night, and sometimes glimpses of it were
seen in other parts of the Abbey. Its
appearance
was said to portend some impending evil
to the master of the mansion. Lord Byron
pretended
to have seen it about a month before he
contracted his ill-starred marriage with Miss
Milbanke
.
He has embodied this tradition in the
following
ballad, in which he represents the friar as
one of the ancient inmates of the Abbey,
maintaining
by night a kind of spectral possession of
it, in right of the fraternity. Other traditions,
however, represent him as one of the friars
doomed to wander about the place in atonement
for his crimes. But to the ballad
Beware! beware! of the Black Friar,
Who sitteth by Norman stone,
For he mutters his prayer in the midnight air,
And his mass of the days that are gone.
When the Lord of the Hill, Amundeville,
Made Norman Church his prey,
And expell'd the friars, one friar still
Would not be driven away.
Though he came in his might, with King Henry's right,
To turn church lands to lay,
With sword in hand, and torch to light
Their walls, if they said nay,
A monk remain'd, unchased, unchain'd,
And he did not seem form'd of clay,
For he's seen in the porch, and he's seen in the church,
Though he is not seen by day.
And whether for good, or whether for ill,
It is not mine to say;
But still to the house of Amundeville
He abideth night and day.
By the marriage bed of their lords, 'tis said,
He flits on the bridal eve;
And 'tis held as faith, to their bed of death,
He comesbut not to grieve.
When an heir is born, he is heard to mourn,
And when aught is to befall
That ancient line, in the pale moonshine
He walks, from hall to hall.
His form you may trace, but not his face,
'Tis shadow'd by his cowl;
But his eyes may be seen from the folds between,
And they seem of a parted soul.
But beware! beware of the Black Friar,
He still retains his away,
For he is yet the church's heir,
Whoever may be the lay.
Amundeville is lord by day,
But the monk is lord by night,
Nor wine nor wassail could raise a vassal
To question that friar's right.
Say nought to him as he walks the hall,
And he'll say nought to you;
He sweeps along in his dusky pall,
As o'er the grass the dew.
Then gramercy! for the Black Friar;
Heaven sain him! fair or foul,
And whatsoe'er may be his prayer
Let ours be for his soul.
Such is the story of the goblin friar, which,
partly through old tradition, and partly through
the influence of Lord Byron's rhymes, has
become
completely established in the Abbey, and
13*
threatens to hold possession as long as the old
edifice shall endure. Various visiters have
either fancied, or pretended to have seen him,
and a cousin of Lord Byron, Miss Sally Parkins,
is even said to have made a sketch of him from
memory. As to the servants at the Abbey, they
have become possessed with all kinds of
superstitious
fancies. The long corridors and gothic
halls, with their ancient portraits and dark figures
in armour, are all haunted regions to them; they
even fear to sleep alone, and will scarce venture
at night on any distant errand about the Abbey
unless they go in couples.
Even the magnificent chamber in which I
was lodged was subject to the supernatural
influences
which reigned over the Abbey, and
was said to be haunted by Sir John Byron the
Little with the great Beard. The ancient black
looking portrait of this family worthy, which
hangs over the door of the great saloon, was
said to descend occasionally at midnight from
the frame, and walk the rounds of the state
apartments. Nay, his visitations were not
confined
to the night, for a young lady, on a visit to
the Abbey some years since, declared that, on
passing in broad day by the door of the
identical
chamber I have described, which stood partly
open, she saw Sir John Byron the Little
seated
by the fireplace, reading out of a great
black letter book. From this circumstance
some have been led to suppose that the story of
Sir John Byron may be in some measure
connected
with the mysterious sculptures of the
chimney piece already mentioned; but this has
no countenance from the most authentic
antiquarians
of the Abbey.
For my own part, the moment I learned the
wonderful stories and strange suppositions
connected
with my apartment, it became an
imaginary
realm to me. As I lay in bed at night and
gazed at the mysterious panel work, where gothic
knight, and Christian dame, and Paynim lover
gazed upon me in effigy, I used to weave a
thousand
fancies concerning them. The great figures
in the tapestry, also, were almost animated by
the workings of my imagination, and the
Vandyke
portraits of the cavalier and lady that
looked down with pale aspects from the wall,
had almost a spectral effect, from their
immoveable
gaze and silent companionship
For by dim lights the portraits of the dead
Have something ghastly, desolate, and dread.
Their buried looks still wave
Along the canvass; their eyes glance like dreams
On ours, as spars within some dusky cave,
But death is mingled in their shadowy beams.
In this way I used to conjure up fictions of the
brain, and clothe the objects around me with
ideal interest and import, until, as the Abbey
clock tolled midnight, I almost looked to see Sir
John Byron the Little with the long Beard stalk
into the room with his book under his arm, and
take his seat beside the mysterious chimney
piece.
ANNESLEY HALL.
At
about three miles distance from Newstead
Abbey, and contiguous to its lands, is situated
Annesley Hall, the old family mansion of the
Chaworths
.
The families, like the estates, of the
Byrons and Chaworths, were connected in
former
times, until the fatal duel between their two
representatives. The feud, however, which
prevailed
for a time, promised to be cancelled by
the attachment of two youthful hearts. While
Lord Byron was yet a boy, he beheld Mary Ann
Chaworth, a beautiful girl, and the sole heiress
of Annesley. With that susceptibility to female
charms, which he evinced almost from
childhood
,
he became almost immediately enamoured
of her. According to one of his biographers it
would appear that at first their attachment was
mutual, yet clandestine. The father of Miss
Chaworth was then living, and may have
retained
somewhat of the family hostility, for we are
told that the interviews of Lord Byron and the
young lady were private, at a gate which opened
from her father's grounds to those of Newstead.
However, they were so young at the time that
these meetings could not have been regarded as
of any importance: they were little more than
children in years; but as Lord Byron says of
himself, his feelings were beyond his age.
The passion thus early conceived was blown
into a flame, during a six weeks' vacation which
he passed with his mother at Nottingham. The
father of Miss Chaworth was dead, and she
resided
with her mother at the old Hall of Annesley.
During Byron's minority, the estate of Newstead
was let to Lord Grey de Ruthen, but its
youthful
Lord was always a welcome guest at the
Abbey. He would pass days at a time there,
and from thence make frequent visits to
Annesley
Hall. His visits were encouraged by Miss
Chaworth's mother; she partook none of the
family feud, and probably looked with
complacency
upon an attachment that might heal old
differences and unite two neighbouring estates.
The six weeks' vacation passed as a dream
amongst the beautiful bowers of Annesley. Byron
was scarce fifteen years of age, Mary Chaworth
was two years older; but his heart, as I have
said, was beyond his age, and his tenderness for
her was deep and passionate. These early loves,
like the first run of the uncrushed grape, are the
sweetest and strongest gushings of the heart, and
however they may be superseded by other
attachments
in after years, the memory will
continually
recur to them, and fondly dwell upon
their recollections.
His love for Miss Chaworth, to use Lord
Byron's own expression, was the romance of
the most romantic period of his life, and I think
we can trace the effect of it throughout the
whole course of his writings, coming up every
now and then, like some lurking theme that runs
through a complicated piece of music, and links
it all in a pervading chain of melody.
How tenderly and mournfully does he recall
in after years, the feelings awakened in his
youthful
and inexperienced bosom, by this impassioned,
yet innocent attachment; feelings, he says, lost
or hardened in the intercourse of life:
The love of better things and better days;
The unbounded hope, and heavenly ignorance
Of what is called the world, and the world's ways;
The moments when we gather from a glance
More joy than from all future pride or praise,
Which kindle manhood, but can ne'er entrance
The heart in an existence of its own,
Of which another's bosom is the zone.
Whether this love was really responded to by
the object, is uncertain. Byron sometimes speaks
as if he had met with kindness in return, at other
times he acknowledges that she never gave him
reason to believe she loved him. It is probable,
however, that at first she experienced some
flutterings of the heart. She was at a
susceptible
age; had as yet formed no other
attachments
;
her lover, though boyish in years, was a
man in intellect, a poet in imagination, and had
a countenance of remarkable beauty.
With the six weeks' vacation ended this brief
romance. Byron returned to school deeply
enamoured, but if he had really made any
impression
on Miss Chaworth's heart, it was too
slight to stand the test of absence. She was at
that age when a female soon changes from the
girl to the woman, and leaves her boyish lovers
far behind her. While Byron was pursuing his
school-boy studies, she was mingling with
society
,
and met with a gentleman of the name of
Musters, remarkable, it is said, for manly beauty.
A story is told of her having first seen him from
the top of Annesley Hall, as he dashed through
the park, with hound and horn, taking the lead
of the whole field in a fox chase, and that she
was struck by the spirit of his appearance, and
his admirable horsemanship. Under such
favourable
auspices, he wooed and won her, and when
Lord Byron next met her, he learned to his
dismay
that she was the affianced bride of another.
With that pride of spirit which always
distinguished
him, he controlled his feelings and
maintained
a serene countenance. He even affected
to speak calmly on the subject of her
approaching
nuptials. The next time I see you, said
he, I suppose you will be Mrs. Chaworth, (for
she was to retain her family name.) Her reply
was, I hope so.
I have given these brief details preparatory
to a sketch of a visit which I made to the scene
of this youthful romance. Annesley Hall I
understood
was shut up, neglected, and almost in
a state of desolation; for Mr. Musters rarely
visited it, residing with his family in the
neighbourhood
of Nottingham. I set out for the Hall
on horseback, in company with Colonel
Wildman
,
and followed by the great Newfoundland
dog Boatswain. In the course of our ride we
visited a spot memorable in the love story I have
cited. It was the scene of this parting interview
between Byron and Miss Chaworth, prior to her
marriage. A long ridge of upland advances into
the valley of Newstead, like a promontory into
a lake, and was formerly crowned by a beautiful
grove, a landmark to the neighbouring country.
The grove and promontory are graphically
described
by Lord Byron in his Dream, and an
exquisite picture given of himself, and the lovely
object of his boyish idolatry
I saw two beings in the hues of youth
Standing upon a hill, a gentle hill,
Green, and of mild declivity, the last
As 'twere the cape of a long ridge of such,
14
Save that there was no sea to lave its base,
But a most living landscape, and the wave
Of woods and corn fields, and the abodes of men,
Scatter'd at intervals, and wreathing smoke
Arising from such rustic roofs;the hill
Was crown'd with a peculiar diadem
Of trees, in circular array, so fixed,
Not by the sport of nature, but of man:
These two, a maiden and a youth, were there
Gazingthe one on all that was beneath
Fair as herselfbut the boy gazed on her;
And both were fair, and one was beautiful:
And both were youngyet not alike in youth.
As the sweet moon in the horizon's verge,
The maid was on the verge of womanhood;
The boy had fewer summers, but his heart
Had far outgrown his years, and to his eye
There was but one beloved face on earth,
And that was shining on him.
I stood upon the spot consecrated by this
memorable
interview. Below me extended the
living landscape, once contemplated by the
loving pair; the gentle valley of Newstead,
diversified
by woods and corn fields, and village
spires, and gleams of water, and the distant
towns and pinnacles of the venerable Abbey.
The diadem of trees, however, was gone. The
attention drawn to it by the poet, and the
romantic
manner in which he had associated it with
his early passion for Mary Chaworth, had
nettled
the irritable feelings of her husband, who
but ill brooked the poetic celebrity conferred on
his wife by the enamoured verses of another.
The celebrated grove stood on his estate, and in
a fit of spleen he ordered it to be levelled with
the dust. At the time of my visit the mere roots
of the trees were visible; but the hand that laid
them low is execrated by every poetical
pilgrim
.
Descending the hill, we soon entered a part
of what once was Annesley Park, and rode
among time-worn and tempest-riven oaks and
elms, with ivy clambering about their trunks,
and rooks' nests among their branches. The
park had been cut up by a post road, crossing
which, we came to the gate house of Annesley
Hall. It was an old brick building that might
have served as an outpost or barbacan to the
hall during the civil wars, when every
gentleman's
house was liable to become a fortress.
Loopholes were still visible in its walls, but the
peaceful ivy had mantled the sides, overrun the
roof, and almost buried the ancient clock in
front, that still marked the waning hours of its
decay.
An arched way led through the centre of the
gate house, secured by grated doors of open
iron work, wrought into flowers and flourishes.
These being thrown open, we entered a paved
court yard, decorated with shrubs and antique
flower pots, with a ruined stone fountain in
the centre. The whole approach resembled
that of an old French chateau.
On one side of the court yard was a range of
stables, now tenantless, but which bore traces
of the fox hunting squire; for there were stalls
boxed up, into which the hunters might be
turned loose when they came home from the
chase.
At the lower end of the court, and
immediately
opposite the gate house, extended the hall
itself; a rambling, irregular pile, patched and
pieced at various times, and in various tastes,
with gable ends, stone balustrades, and enormous
chimneys, that strutted out like buttresses from
the walls. The whole front of the edifice was
overrun with evergreens.
We applied for admission at the front door,
which was under a heavy porch. The portal
was strongly barricadoed, and our knocking was
echoed by waste and empty halls. Every thing
bore an appearance of abandonment. After a
time, however, our knocking summoned a
solitary
tenant from some remote corner of the pile.
It was a decent looking little dame, who emerged
from a side door at a distance, and seemed a
worthy inmate of the antiquated mansion. She
had, in fact, grown old with it. Her name, she
said, was Nanny Marsden; if she lived until next
August, she would be seventy-one: a great part
of her life had been passed in the Hall, and when
the family had removed to Nottingham, she had
been left in charge of it. The front of the house
had been thus warily barricadoed in consequence
of the late riots at Nottingham; in the course of
which, the dwelling of her master had been
sacked by the mob. To guard against any
attempt of the kind upon the Hall, she had put
it in this state of defence; though I rather think
she, and a superannuated gardener comprised
the whole garrison. You must be attached to
the old building, said I, after having lived so
long in it. Ah, sir! replied she, I am
getting in years
, and have a furnished cottage
of my own in Annesley Wood, and begin to feel
as if I should like to go and live in my own
home.
Guided by the worthy little custodian of the
fortress, we entered through the sally port by
which she had issued forth, and soon found
ourselves
in a spacious, but somewhat gloomy hall,
where the light was partially admitted through
square stone-shafted windows, overhung with
ivy. Every thing around us had the air of an
old fashioned country squire's establishment. In
the centre of the hall was a billiard table, and
about the walls were hung portraits of race
horses, hunters, and favourite dogs, mingled
indiscriminately with family pictures.
14*
Staircases led up from the Hall to various
apartments. In one of the rooms we were shown
a couple of buff jerkens, and a pair of ancient
jack boots, of the time of the cavaliers; relics
which are often to be met with in the old English
family mansions. These, however, had peculiar
value, for the good little dame assured us they
had belonged to Robin Hood. As we were in the
midst of the region over which that famous
outlaw
once bore ruffian sway, it was not for us to
gainsay his claim to any of these venerable
relics, though we might have demurred that the
articles of dress here shown were of a date
much later than his time. Every antiquity,
however, about Sherwood Forest is apt to be
linked with the memory of Robin Hood and his
gang.
As we were strolling about the mansion, our
four-footed attendant, Boatswain, followed
leisurely
,
as if taking a survey of the premises. I
turned to rebuke him for his intrusion, but the
moment the old housekeeper understood he had
belonged to Lord Byron, her heart seemed to
yearn towards him.
Nay, nay, exclaimed she, let him alone,
let him go where he pleases. He's welcome.
Ah, dear me! If he lived here I should take great
care of himhe should want for nothing.
Well! continued she, fondling him, who would
have thought that I should see a dog of Lord
Byron in Annesley Hall?
I suppose, then, said I, you recollect
something
of Lord Byron, when he used to visit
here? Ah, bless him! cried she, that I do!
He used to ride over here and stay three days at
a time, and sleep in the blue room. Ah! poor
fellow! He was very much taken with my young
mistress; he used to walk about the garden and
the terraces with her, and seemed to love the
very ground she trod on. He used to call her
his bright morning star of Annesley
.
I felt the beautiful poetic phrase thrill through
me.
You appear to like the memory of Lord
Byron, said I.
Ah sir! why should not I? He was always
main good to me when he came here. Well!
well! they say it is a pity he and my young
lady did not make a match. Her mother would
have liked it. He was always a welcome guest,
and some think it would have been well for him
to have had her; but it was not to be! He
went away to school, and then Mr. Musters
saw her, and so things took their course.
The simple soul now showed us into the
favourite sitting room of Miss Chaworth, with a
small flower garden under the windows, in which
she had delighted. In this room Byron used to
sit and listen to her as she played and sang,
gazing upon her with the passionate, and almost
painful devotion of a love-sick stripling. He
himself gives us a glowing picture of his mute
idolatry:
He had no breath, no being, but in hers;
She was his voice; he did not speak to her,
But trembled on her words; she was his sight,
For his eye followed hers, and saw with hers,
Which coloured all his objects;he had ceased
To live within himself; she was his life,
The ocean to the river of his thoughts,
Which terminated all; upon a tone,
A touch of hers, his blood would ebb and flow,
And his cheek change tempestuouslyhis heart
Unknowing of its cause of agony.
There was a little Welsh air, called Mary
Ann, which, from bearing her own name, he
associated with herself, and often persuaded her
to sing it over and over for him.
The chamber, like all the other parts of the
house, had a look of sadness and neglect; the
flower plots beneath the window, which once
bloomed beneath the hand of Mary Chaworth,
were overrun with weeds; and the piano, which
had once vibrated to her touch, and thrilled the
heart of her stripling lover, was now unstrung
and out of tune.
We continued our stroll about the waste
apartments
,
of all shapes and sizes, and without much
elegance of decoration. Some of them were
hung with family portraits, among which was
pointed out that of the Mr. Chaworth who was
killed by the wicked Lord Byron.
These dismal looking portraits had a powerful
effect upon the imagination of the stripling poet,
on his first visit to the Hall. As they gazed
down from the wall he thought they scowled
upon him, as if they had taken a grudge against
him on account of the duel of his ancestor. He
even gave this as a reason, though probably in
jest, for not sleeping at the Hall, declaring that
he feared they would come down from their
frames at night to haunt him.
A feeling of the kind he has embodied in one
of his stanzas of Don Juan:
The forms of the grim knights and pictured saints
Look living in the moon; and as you turn
Backward and forward to the echoes faint
Of your own footstepsvoices from the urn
Appear to wake, and shadows wild and quaint
Start from the frames which fence their aspects stern,
As if to ask you how you dare to keep
A vigil there, where all but death should sleep.
Nor was the youthful poet singular in these
fancies; the Hall, like most old English
mansions
that have ancient family portraits hanging
about their dusky galleries and waste
apartments
,
had its ghost story connected with these
pale memorials of the dead. Our simple hearted
conductor stopped before the portrait of a lady,
who had been a beauty in her time, and
inhabited
the Hall in the heyday of her charms.
Something mysterious or melancholy was
connected
with her story; she died young, but
continued for a long time to haunt the ancient
mansion, to the great dismay of the servants,
and the occasional disquiet of the visiters, and
it was with much difficulty her troubled spirit
was conjured down and put to rest.
From the rear of the Hall we walked out into
the garden, about which Byron used to stroll and
loiter in company with Miss Chaworth. It was
laid out in the old French style. There was a
long terraced walk, with heavy stone balustrades
and sculptured urns, overrun with ivy and
evergreens
.
A neglected shrubbery bordered one
side of the terrace, with a lofty grove inhabited
by a venerable community of rooks. Great
flights of steps led down from the terrace to a
flower garden, laid out in formal plots. The rear
of the Hall, which overlooked the garden, had
the weather stains of centuries, and its
stone-shafted
casements, and an ancient sun dial
against its walls, carried back the mind to days
of yore.
The retired and quiet garden, once a little
sequestered world of love and romance, was
now all matted and wild, yet was beautiful even
in its decay. Its air of neglect and desolation
was in unison with the fortune of the two beings
who had once walked here in the freshness of
youth, and life, and beauty. The garden, like
their young hearts, had gone to waste and ruin.
Returning to the Hall we now visited a
chamber built over the porch, or grand entrance:
it was in a ruinous condition; the ceiling having
fallen in, and the floor given way. This,
however
,
is a chamber rendered interesting by
poetical associations. It is supposed to be the
oratory alluded to by Lord Byron in his Dream,
wherein he pictures his departure from
Annesley
,
after learning that Mary Chaworth was
engaged to be married
There was an ancient mansion, and before
Its walls there was a steed caparison'd:
Within an antique Oratory stood
The Boy of whom I spake;he was alone,
And pale and pacing to and fro: anon
He sate him down, and seized a pen, and traced
Words which I could not guess of; then he lean'd
His bow'd head on his hands, and shook as 'twere
With a convulsionthen arose again,
And with his teeth and quivering hands did tear
What he had written, but he shed no tears.
And he did calm himself, and fix his brow
Into a kind of quiet: as he paused,
The lady of his love re-entered there;
She was serene and smiling then, and yet
She knew she was by him beloved,she knew,
For quickly comes such knowledge, that his heart
Was darken'd with her shadow, and she saw
That he was wretched, but she saw not all.
He rose, and with a cold and gentle grasp
He took her hand; a moment o'er his face
A tablet of unutterable thoughts
Was traced, and then it faded as it came;
He dropp'd the hand he held, and with slow steps
Return'd, but not as bidding her adieu,
For they did part with mutual smiles:he pass'd
From out the massy gate of that old Hall,
And mounting on his steed he went his way,
And ne'er repass'd that hoary threshold more.
In one of his journals, Lord Byron describes
his feelings after thus leaving the oratory.
Arriving
on the summit of a hill, which commanded
the last view of Annesley, he checked his horse,
and gazed back with mingled pain and fondness
upon the groves which embowered the Hall, and
thought upon the lovely being that dwelt there,
until his feelings were quite dissolved in
tenderness
.
The conviction at length recurred
that she never could be his, when, rousing
himself
from his reverie, he stuck his spurs into his
steed and dashed forward, as if by rapid motion
to leave reflection behind him.
Yet, notwithstanding what he asserts in the
verses last quoted, he did pass the hoary
threshold
of Annesley again. It was, however, after
the lapse of several years, during which he had
grown up to manhood, had passed through the
ordeal of pleasures and tumultuous passions, and
had felt the influence of other charms. Miss
Chaworth, too, had become a wife and a mother,
and he dined at Annesley Hall at the invitation
of her husband. He thus met the object of his
early idolatry in the very scene of his tender
devotions, which, as he says, her smiles had
once made a heaven to him. The scene was
but little changed. He was in the very chamber
where he had so often listened entranced to the
witchery of her voice; there were the same
instruments
and music; there lay her flower garden
beneath the window, and the walks through which
he had wandered with her in the intoxication of
youthful love. Can we wonder that amidst the
tender recollections which every object around
him was calculated to awaken, the fond passion
of his boyhood should rush back in full current
to his heart. He was himself surprised at this
sudden revulsion of his feelings, but he had
acquired self possession and could command
them. His firmness however was doomed to
undergo a further trial. While seated by the
object of his secret devotion, with all these
recollections
throbbing in his bosom, her infant
daughter was brought into the room. At sight
of the child he started; it dispelled the last
lingerings
of his Dream, and he afterwards
confessed
,
that to repress his emotion at the moment
was the severest part of his task.
15
The conflict of feelings that raged within his
bosom throughout this fond and tender, yet
painful
and embarrassing visit, are touchingly depicted
in lines which he wrote immediately afterwards,
and which, though not addressed to her by
name, are evidently intended for the eye and
the heart of the fair lady of Annesley
Well! thou art happy, and I feel
That I should thus be happy too;
For still my heart regards thy weal
Warmly, as it was wont to do.
Thy husband's blestand 'twill impart
Some pangs to view his happier lot:
But let them passOh! how my heart
Would hate him, if he loved thee not!
When late I saw thy favourite child
I thought my jealous heart would break;
But when the unconscious infant smiled,
I kiss'd it for its mother's sake.
I kiss'd it, and repress'd my sighs
Its father in its face to see;
But then it had its mother's eyes,
And they were all to love and me.
Mary, adieu! I must away:
While thou art blest I'll not repine;
But near thee I can never stay;
My heart would soon again be thine.
I deem'd that time, I deem'd that pride
Had quench'd at length my boyish flame;
Nor knew, till seated by thy side,
My heart in all, save love, the same.
Yet I was calm: I knew the time
My breast would thrill before thy look;
But now to tremble were a crime
We met, and not a nerve was shook.
I saw thee gaze upon my face,
Yet meet with no confusion there:
One only feeling could'st thou trace;
The sullen calmness of despair.
Away! away! my early dream
Remembrance never must awake:
Oh! where is Lethe's fabled stream?
My foolish heart, be still, or break.
The revival of this early passion, and the
melancholy associations which it spread over
those scenes in the neighbourhood of Newstead,
which would necessarily be the places of his
frequent resort while in England, are alluded to
by him as a principal cause of his first departure
for the Continent
When man expell'd from Eden's bowers
A moment lingered near the gate,
Each scene recalled the vanish'd hours,
And bade him curse his future fate.
But wandering on through distant climes,
He learnt to bear his load of grief;
Just gave a sigh to other times,
And found in busier scenes relief.
Thus Mary must it be with me,
And I must view thy charms no more;
For, while I linger near to thee,
I sigh for all I knew before.
It was in the subsequent June that he set off
on his pilgrimage by sea and land, which was to
become the theme of his immortal poem. That
the image of Mary Chaworth, as he saw and
loved her in the days of his boyhood, followed
him to the very shore, is shown in the glowing
stanzas addressed to her on the eve of
embarcation
'Tis doneand shivering in the gale
The bark unfurls her snowy sail;
And whistling o'er the bending mast,
Loud sings on high the fresh'ning blast;
And I must from this land be gone,
Because I cannot love but one.
And I will cross the whitening foam,
And I will seek a foreign home;
Till I forget a false fair face,
I ne'er shall find a resting place;
My own dark thoughts I cannot shun,
But ever love, and love but one.
To think of every early scene,
Of what we are, and what we've been,
Would whelm some softer hearts with wo
But mine, alas! has stood the blow;
Yet still beats on as it begun,
And never truly loves but one.
And who that dear loved one may be
Is not for vulgar eyes to see,
And why that early love was cross'd,
Thou know'st the best, I feel the most,
But few that dwell beneath the sun
Have loved so long, and loved but one.
I've tried another's fetters too,
With charms, perchance, as fair to view;
And I would fain have loved as well,
But some unconquerable spell
Forbade my bleeding breast to own
A kindred care for aught but one.
'Twould soothe to take one lingering view,
And bless thee in my last adieu;
Yet wish I not those eyes to weep
For him that wanders o'er the deep;
His home, his hope, his youth are gone,
Yet still he loves, and loves but one.
The painful interview at Annesley Hall which
revived with such intenseness his early passion,
remained stamped upon his memory with singular
force, and seems to have survived all his
wandering
through distant climes, to which he trusted
as an oblivious antidote. Upwards of two years
after the event, when, having made his famous
pilgrimage, he was once more an inmate of
Newstead Abbey; his vicinity to Annesley Hall
brought the whole scene vividly before him, and
he thus recalls it in a poetic epistle to a friend
I've seen my bride another's bride,
Have seen her seated by his side,
Have seen the infant which she bore,
Wear the sweet smile the mother wore,
When she and I in youth have smiled
As fond and faultless as her child:
Have seen her eyes, in cold disdain,
Ask if I felt no secret pain,
15*
And I have acted well my part,
And made my cheek belie my heart,
Return'd the freezing glance she gave,
Yet felt the while
that
woman's slave;
Have kiss'd, as if without design,
The babe which ought to have been mine,
And show'd, alas! in each caress,
Time had not made me love the less.
It was about the time, says Moore in his
life of Lord Byron, when he was thus bitterly
feeling and expressing the blight which his heart
had suffered from a
real
object of affection, that
his poems on an imaginary one, Thyrza,' were
written. He was at the same time grieving
over the loss of several of his earliest and
dearest
friends, the companions of his joyous
school-boy
hours. To recur to the beautiful language of
Moore, who writes with the kindred and kindling
sympathies of a true poet: All these
recollections
of the young and the dead mingled
themselves
in his mind with the image of her, who,
though living, was, for him, as much lost as they,
and diffused that general feeling of sadness and
fondness through his soul, which found a vent in
these poems. * * * It was the blending of
the two affections, in his memory and
imagination
,
that gave birth to an ideal object combining
the best features of both, and drew from him
those saddest and tenderest of love poems, in
which we find all the depth and intensity of real
feeling touched over with such a light as no
reality ever wore.
An early, innocent, and unfortunate passion,
however fruitful of pain it may be to the man,
is a lasting advantage to the poet. It is a well
of sweet and bitter fancies; of refined and
gentle sentiments; of elevated and ennobling
thoughts; shut up in the deep recesses of the
heart, keeping it green amidst the withering
blights of the world, and, by its casual gushes and
overflowings, recalling at times all the freshness,
and innocence, and enthusiasm of youthful days.
Lord Byron was conscious of this effect, and
purposely cherished and brooded over the
remembrance
of his early passion, and of all the scenes
of Annesley Hall connected with it. It was this
remembrance that attuned his mind to some of
its most elevated and virtuous strains, and shed
an inexpressible grace and pathos over his best
productions.
Being thus put upon the traces of this little
love story, I cannot refrain from threading them
out, as they appear from time to time in various
passages of Lord Byron's works. During his
subsequent rambles in the East, when time and
distance had softened away his early romance
almost into the remembrance of a pleasing and
tender dream, he received accounts of the object
of it, which represented her, still in her paternal
Hall, among her native bowers of Annesley,
surrounded by a blooming and beautiful family,
yet a prey to secret and withering melancholy
In her home,
A thousand leagues from his, her native home,
She dwelt, begirt with growing infancy,
Daughters and sons of beauty, butbehold!
Upon her face there was the tint of grief,
The settled shadow of an inward strife,
And an unquiet drooping of the eye,
As if its lids were charged with unshed tears
.
For an instant the buried tenderness of early
youth and the fluttering hopes which
accompanied
it, seem to have revived in his bosom, and
the idea to have flashed upon his mind that his
image might be connected with her secret
woesbut he rejected the thought almost as
soon as formed.
What could her grief be?she had all she loved,
And he who had so loved her was not there
To trouble with bad hopes, or evil wish,
Or ill repress'd affection, her pure thoughts.
What could her grief be?she had loved him not,
Nor given him cause to deem himself beloved,
Nor could he be a part of that which prey'd
Upon her minda spectre of the past.
The cause of her grief was a matter of rural
comment in the neighbourhood of Newstead and
Annesley. It was disconnected from all idea
of Lord Byron, but attributed to the harsh and
capricious conduct of one to whose kindness and
affection she had a sacred claim. The domestic
sorrows which had long preyed in secret on her
heart, at length affected her intellect, and the
bright morning star of Annesley was eclipsed
for ever.
The lady of his love,oh! she was changed
As by the sickness of the soul; her mind
Had wandered from its dwelling, and her eyes,
They had not their own lustre, but the look
Which is not of the earth; she was become
The queen of a fantastic realm: but her thoughts
Were combinations of disjointed things;
And forms impalpable and unperceived
Of others' sight, familiar were to hers.
And this the world calls frenzy
Notwithstanding lapse of time, change of place,
and a succession of splendid and spirit-stirring
scenes in various countries, the quiet and gentle
scene of his boyish love seems to have held a
magic sway over the recollections of Lord
Byron
,
and the image of Mary Chaworth to have
unexpectedly obtruded itself upon his mind like
some supernatural visitation. Such was the fact
on the occasion of his marraige with Miss
Milbanke
;
Annesley Hall and all its fond
associations
floated like a vision before his thoughts,
even when at the altar, and on the point of
pronouncing
the nuptial vows. The circumstance
is related by him with a force and feeling that
persuade us of its truth.
A change came o'er the spirit of my dream.
The wanderer was return'd.I saw him stand
Before an altarwith a gentle bride;
Her face was fair, but was not that which made
The star-light of his boyhood;as he stood
Even at the altar, o'er his brow there came
The self same aspect, and the quivering shock
That in the antique oratory shook
His bosom in its solitude; and then
As in that houra moment o'er his face
The tablet of unutterable thoughts
Was traced,and then it faded as it came,
And he stood calm and quiet, and he spoke
The fitting vows, but heard not his own words,
And all things reel'd around him: he could see
Not that which was, nor that which should have been
But the old mansion, and the accustomed hall,
And the remember'd chambers, and the place,
The day, the hour, the sunshine, and the shade,
All things pertaining to that place and hour,
And her who was his destiny, came back,
And thrust themselves between him and the light:
What business had they there at such a time?
The history of Lord Byron's union is too well
known to need narration. The errors, and
humiliations
,
and heart-burnings that followed upon
it, gave additional effect to the remembrance of
his early passion, and tormented him with the
idea, that had he been successful in his suit to
the lovely heiress of Annesley, they might both
have shared a happier destiny. In one of his
manuscripts, written long after his marriage,
having accidentally mentioned Miss Chaworth
as my M. A. C. Alas! exclaims he, with
a sudden burst of feeling, why do I say
my?
Our union would have healed feuds in which
blood had been shed by our fathers; it would
have joined lands broad and rich; it would have
joined at least
one
heart, and two persons not ill
matched in yearsandandandwhat has
been the result!
But enough of Annesley Hall and the poetical
themes connected with it. I felt as if I could
linger for hours about its ruined oratory, and
silent hall, and neglected garden, and spin
reveries
and dream dreams, until all became an ideal
world around me. The day, however, was fast
declining, and the shadows of evening throwing
deeper shades of melancholy about the place.
Taking our leave of the worthy old housekeeper,
therefore, with a small compensation and many
thanks for her civilities, we mounted our horses
and pursued our way back to Newstead Abbey.
THE LAKE.
Before
the mansion lay a lucid lake,
Broad as transparent, deep, and freshly fed
By a river, which its softened way did take
In currents through the calmer water spread
Around: the wild fowl nestled in the brake
And sedges, brooding in their liquid bed:
The woods sloped downward to its brink, and stood
With their green faces fixed upon the flood.
Such is Lord Byron's description of one of a
series of beautiful sheets of water, formed in old
times by the monks by damming up the course
of a small river. Here he used daily to enjoy
his favourite recreations of swimming and
sailing
.
The wicked old Lord, in his scheme of
rural devastation, had cut down all the woods
that once fringed the lake; Lord Byron, on
coming of age, endeavoured to restore them, and
a beautiful young wood, planted by him, now
sweeps up from the water's edge, and clothes
the hill side opposite to the Abbey. To this
woody nook Colonel Wildman has given the
appropriate
title of the Poet's Corner.
The lake has inherited its share of the
traditions
and fables connected with every thing in
and about the Abbey. It was a petty
Mediterranean
sea on which the wicked old Lord
used to gratify his nautical tastes and humours.
He had his mimic castles and fortresses along
its shores, and his mimic fleets upon its waters,
and used to get up mimic seafights. The
remains
of his petty fortifications still awaken the
curious inquiries of visiters. In one of his
vagaries
,
he caused a large vessel to be brought on
wheels from the sea coast and launched in the
lake. The country people were surprised to see
a ship thus sailing over dry land. They called
to mind a saying of Mother Shipton, the famous
prophet of the vulgar, that whenever a ship
freighted with ling should cross Sherwood
Forest
,
Newstead would pass out of the Byron
family. The country people, who detested the
old Lord, were anxious to verify the prophecy.
Ling, in the dialect of Nottingham, is the name
for heather; with this plant they heaped the
fated bark as it passed, so that it arrived full
freighted at Newstead.
The most important stories about the lake,
however, relate to the treasures that are
supposed
to lie buried in its bosom. These may have
taken their origin in a fact which actually
occurred
.
There was one time fished up from the
deep part of the lake a great eagle of molten
brass, with expanded wings, standing on a
pedestal
16
or perch of the same metal. It had
doubtless
served as a stand or reading desk, in the
Abbey chapel, to hold a folio bible or missal.
The sacred relic was sent to a brasier to be
cleaned. As he was at work upon it, he
discovered
that the pedestal was hollow and
composed
of several pieces. Unscrewing these, he
drew forth a number of parchment deeds and
grants appertaining to the Abbey, and bearing
the seals of Edward III. and Henry VIII., which
had thus been concealed, and ultimately sunk in
the lake by the friars, to substantiate their right
and title to these domains at some future day.
One of the parchment scrolls thus discovered,
throws rather an awkward light upon the kind
of life led by the friars of Newstead. It is an
indulgence granted to them for a certain number
of months, in which plenary pardon is assured
in advance for all kinds of crimes, among which,
several of the most gross and sensual are
specifically
mentioned.
After inspecting these testimonials of
monkish
life, in the regions of Sherwood Forest, we
cease to wonder at the virtuous indignation of
Robin Hood and his outlaw crew, at the sleek
sensualists of the cloister:
I never hurt the husbandman,
That use to till the ground,
Nor spill their blood that range the wood
To follow hawk and hound.
My chiefest spite to clergy is,
Who in these days bear sway;
With friars and monks with their fine spunks,
I make my chiefest prey.
Old Ballad of Robin Hood
.
The brazen eagle has been transferred to the
parochial and collegiate church of Southall, about
twenty miles from Newstead, where it may still
be seen in the centre of the chancel, supporting,
as of yore, a ponderous bible. As to the
documents
it contained, they are carefully treasured
up by Colonel Wildman among his other deeds
and papers, in an iron chest secured by a patent
lock of nine bolts, almost equal to a magic spell.
The fishing up of this brazen relic, as I have
already hinted, has given rise to tales of treasure
lying at the bottom of the lake, thrown in there
by the monks when they abandoned the Abbey.
The favourite story is, that there is a great iron
chest there filled with gold and jewels, and
chalices
and crucifixes. Nay, that it has been seen,
when the water of the lake was unusually low.
There were large iron rings at each end, but all
attempts to move it were ineffectual; either the
gold it contained was too ponderous, or, what is
more probable, it was secured by one of those
magic spells usually laid upon hidden treasure.
It remains, therefore, at the bottom of the lake
to this day; and it is to be hoped, may one day
or other be discovered by the present worthy
proprietor.
ROBIN HOOD AND SHERWOOD FOREST.
While
at Newstead Abbey I took great
delight
in riding and rambling about the
neighbourhood
,
studying out the traces of merry
Sherwood Forest, and visiting the haunts of
Robin Hood. The relics of the old forest are
few and scattered, but as to the bold outlaw that
once held a kind of freebooting sway over it,
there is scarce a hill or dale, a cliff or cavern,
a well or fountain, in this part of the country,
that is not connected with his memory. The
very names of some of the tenants on the
Newstead
estate, such as Beardall and Hardstaff,
sound as if they may have been borne in old times
by some of the stalwart fellows of the outlaw
gang.
One of the earliest books that captivated my
fancy when a child, was a collection of Robin
Hood ballads, adorned with cuts, which I
bought of an old Scotch pedler, at the cost of
all my holyday money. How I devoured its
pages, and gazed upon its uncouth wood cuts!
For a time my mind was filled with picturings
of merry Sherwood, and the exploits and
revelling of the bold foresters; and Robin Hood,
Little John, Friar Tuck, and their doughty
compeers
,
were my heroes of romance.
These early feelings were in some degree
revived when I found myself in the very heart
of the far-famed forest, and, as I said before, I
took a kind of schoolboy delight in hunting up
all traces of old Sherwood and its sylvan
chivalry
.
One of the first of my antiquarian
rambles
was on horseback, in company with Colonel
Wildman and his lady, who undertook to guide
me to some of the mouldering monuments of the
forest. One of these stands in front of the very
gate of Newstead Park, and is known
throughout
the country by the name of the Pilgrim
Oak. It is a venerable tree, of great size,
over-shadowing
a wide area of the road. Under its
shade the rustics of the neighbourhood have
been accustomed to assemble on certain
holydays
,
and celebrate their rural festivals. This
custom had been handed down from father to
son for several generations, until the oak had
acquired a kind of sacred character.
The old Lord Byron, however, in whose
eyes nothing was sacred, when he laid his
desolating
hand on the groves and forests of
Newstead
,
doomed likewise this traditional tree to
the axe. Fortunately the good people of
Nottingham
16*
heard of the danger of their favourite
oak, and hastened to ransom it from destruction.
They afterwards made a present of it to the
poet, when he came to the estate, and the
Pilgrim Oak is likely to continue a rural
gathering
place for many coming generations.
From this magnificent and time-honoured tree
we continued on our sylvan research, in quest
of another oak, of more ancient date and less
flourishing condition. A ride of two or three
miles, the latter part across open wastes, once
clothed with forest, now bare and cheerless,
brought us to the tree in question. It was the
Oak of Ravenshead, one of the last survivers of
old Sherwood, and which had evidently once
held a high head in the forest; it was now a
mere wreck, crazed by time, and blasted by
lightning, and standing alone on a naked waste,
like a ruined column in a desert.
The scenes are desert now, and bare,
Where flourished once a forest fair,
When these waste glens with copse were lined,
And peopled with the hart and hind.
Yon lonely oak, would he could tell
The changes of his parent dell,
Since he, so gray and stubborn now,
Waved in each breeze a sapling bough.
Would he could tell how deep the shade
A thousand mingled branches made.
Here in my shade methinks he'd say
The mighty stag at noontide lay.
While doe, and roe, and red-deer good,
Have bounded by through gay green-wood.
At no great distance from the Ravenshead
Oak is a small cave which goes by the name of
Robin Hood's stable. It is in the breast of a
hill, scooped out of brown freestone, with rude
attempts at columns and arches. Within are
two niches, which served, it is said, as stalls for
the bold outlaw's horses. To this retreat he
retired when hotly pursued by the law, for the
place was a secret even from his band. The
cave is overshadowed by an oak and alder, and
is hardly discoverable, even at the present day;
but when the country was overrun with forest
it must have been completely concealed.
There was an agreeable wildness and
loneliness
in a great part of our ride. Our devious
road wound down, at one time, among rocky
dells, by wandering streams, and lonely pools,
haunted by shy water fowl. We passed through
a skirt of woodland, of more modern planting,
but considered a legitimate offspring of the
ancient forest, and commonly called Jock of
Sherwood. In riding through these quiet,
solitary
scenes, the partridge and pheasant would
now and then burst upon the wing, and the hare
scud away before us.
Another of these rambling rides in quest of
popular antiquities, was to a chain of rocky
cliffs, called the Kirkby Crags, which skirt the
Robin Hood hills. Here, leaving my horse at
the foot of the crags, I scaled their rugged
sides, and seated myself in a niche of the rocks,
called Robin Hood's chair. It commands a
wide prospect over the valley of Newstead, and
here the bold outlaw is said to have taken his
seat, and kept a look out upon the roads below,
watching for merchants, and bishops, and other
wealthy travellers, upon whom to pounce down,
like an eagle from his eyrie.
Descending from the cliffs and remounting
my horse, a ride of a mile or two further along
a narrow robber path, as it was called, which
wound up into the hills between perpendicular
rocks, led to an artificial cavern cut in the face
of a cliff, with a door and window wrought
through the living stone. This bears the name
of Friar Tuck's cell, or hermitage, where,
according
to tradition, that jovial anchorite used
to make good cheer and boisterous revel with
his freebooting comrades.
Such were some of the vestiges of old
Sherwood
and its renowned yeomandrie, which I
visited in the neighbourhood of Newstead. The
worthy clergyman who officiated as chaplain at
the Abbey, seeing my zeal in the cause, informed
me of a considerable tract of the ancient forest,
still in existence about ten miles distant. There
were many fine old oaks in it, he said, that had
stood for centuries, but were now shattered and
stag headed, that is to say, their upper branches
were bare, and blasted, and straggling out like
the antlers of a deer. Their trunks, too, were
hollow, and full of crows and jackdaws, who
made them their nestling places. He occasionally
rode over to the forest in the long summer
evenings
,
and pleased himself with loitering in the
twilight about the green alleys and under the
venerable trees.
The description given by the chaplain made
me anxious to visit this remnant of old
Sherwood
,
and he kindly offered to be my guide and
companion. We accordingly sallied forth one
morning on horseback on this sylvan expedition.
Our ride took us through a part of the country
where King John had once held a hunting seat;
the ruins of which are still to be seen. At that
time the whole neighbourhood was an open
royal forest, or Frank chase, as it was termed; for
King John was an enemy to parks and warrens,
and other enclosures, by which game was fenced
in for the private benefit and recreation of the
nobles and the clergy.
Here, on the brow of a gentle hill,
commanding
an extensive prospect of what had once been
forest, stood another of those monumental trees,
which, to my mind, gave a peculiar interest to
this neighbourhood. It was the Parliament Oak,
so called in memory of an assemblage of the
kind held by King John beneath its shade. The
lapse of upwards of six centuries had reduced
this once mighty tree to a mere crumbling
fragment
,
yet, like a gigantic torso in ancient
statuary
,
the grandeur of the mutilated trunk gave
evidence of what it had been in the days of its
glory. In contemplating its mouldering remains,
the fancy busied itself in calling up the scene
that must have been presented beneath its shade,
when this sunny hill swarmed with the pageantry
of a warlike and hunting court. When silken
pavilions and warrior tents decked its crest,
and royal standards, and baronial banners, and
knightly pennons rolled out to the breeze. When
prelates and courtiers, and steel-clad chivalry
thronged round the person of the monarch, while
at a distance loitered the foresters in green, and
all the rural and hunting train that waited upon
his sylvan sports.
A thousand vassals mustered round
With horse, and hawk, and horn, and hound;
And through the brake the rangers stalk,
And falc'ners hold the ready hawk;
And foresters in green wood trim
Lead in the leash the greyhound grim.
Such was the phantasmagoria that presented
itself for a moment to my imagination, peopling
the silent place before me with empty shadows
of the past. The reverie however was transient;
king, courtier, and steel-clad warrior, and
forester
in green, with horn, and hawk, and hound, all
faded again into oblivion, and I awoke to all that
remained of this once stirring scene of human
pomp and powera mouldering, oak and a
tradition
.
We are such stuff as dreams are made of!
A ride of a few miles further brought us at length
among the venerable and classic shades of
Sherwood
.
Here I was delighted to find myself in
a genuine wild wood, of primitive and natural
growth, so rarely to be met with in this thickly
peopled and highly cultivated country. It
reminded
me of the aboriginal forests of my native
land. I rode through natural alleys and green
wood groves, carpeted with grass and shaded by
lofty and beautiful birches. What most interested
me, however, was to behold around the mighty
trunks of veteran oaks, old monumental trees,
the patriarchs of Sherwood Forest. They were
shattered, hollow, and moss-grown, it is true, and
their leafy honours were nearly departed; but
like mouldering towers they were noble and
picturesque
in their decay, and gave evidence, even
in their ruins, of their ancient grandeur.
As I gazed about me upon these vestiges of
once Merrie Sherwood, the picturings of my
boyish fancy began to rise in my mind, and
Robin Hood and his men to stand before me.
He clothed himself in scarlet then,
His men were all in green;
A finer show throughout the world
In no place could be seen.
Good lord! it was a gallant sight
To see them all in a row;
With every man a good broad sword
And eke a good yew bow.
The horn of Robin Hood again seemed to
sound through the forest. I saw his sylvan
chivalry
,
half huntsmen, half freebooters, trooping
across the distant glades, or feasting and
revelling
beneath the trees; I was going on to
embody
in this way all the ballad scenes that had
delighted me when a boy, when the distant
sound of a wood cutter's axe roused me from
my day dream.
The boding apprehensions which it awakened
were too soon verified. I had not ridden much
further, when I came to an open space where the
work of destruction was going on. Around me
lay the prostrate trunks of venerable oaks, once
the towering and magnificent lords of the forest,
and a number of wood cutters were hacking and
hewing at another gigantic tree, just tottering to
its fall.
Alas! for old Sherwood Forest: it had fallen
into the possession of a noble agriculturist.
a modern utilitarian, who had no feeling for
poetry
or forest scenery. In a little while and this
glorious woodland will be laid low; its green
glades turned into sheep walks; its legendary
bowers supplanted by turnip fields; and Merrie
Sherwood will exist but in ballad and tradition.
O for the poetical superstitions, thought I,
of the olden time! that shed a sanctity over
every grove; that gave to each tree its tutelar
genius or nymph, and threatened disaster to all
who should molest the hamadryads in their leafy
abodes. Alas! for the sordid propensities of
modern days, when every thing is coined into
gold, and this once holyday planet of ours is
turned into a mere `working day world.'
My cobweb fancies put to flight, and my
feelings
out of tune, I left the forest in a far
different
mood from that in which I had entered it,
and rode silently along until, on reaching the
summit of a gentle eminence, the chime of
evening
bells came on the breeze across a heath from
a distant village.
I paused to listen.
They are merely the evening bells of
Mansfield
,
said my companion.
Of Mansfield! Here was another of the
legendary names of this storied neighbourhood,
17
that called up early and pleasant associations.
The famous old ballad of the King and the
Miller
of Mansfield came at once to mind, and the
chime of the bells put me again in good humour.
A little further on, and we were again on the
traces of Robin Hood. Here was Fountain dale
where he had his encounter with that stalworth
shaveling Friar Tuck, who was a kind of saint
militant, alternately wearing the casque and the
cowl:
The curtal fryar kept Fountain dale
Seven long years and more,
There was neither lord, knight or earl
Could make him yield before.
The moat is still shown which is said to have
surrounded the strong hold of this jovial and
fighting friar; and the place where he and Robin
Hood had their sturdy trial of strength and
prowess, in the memorable conflict which lasted
From ten o'clock that very day
Until four in the afternoon,
and ended in the treaty of fellowship. As to
the hardy feats, both of sword and trencher,
performed
by this curtal fryar, behold are they
not recorded at length in the ancient ballads, and
in the magic pages of Ivanhoe?
The evening was fast coming on, and the
twilight
thickening, as we rode through these haunts
famous in outlaw story. A melancholy seemed
to gather over the landscape as we proceeded,
for our course lay by shadowy woods, and
across naked heaths, and along lonely roads,
marked by some of those sinister names by
which the country people in England are apt
to make dreary places still more dreary. The
horrors of Thieves' Wood, and the
Murderers'
Stone, and the Hag Nook, had all to
be encountered in the gathering gloom of
evening
,
and threatened to beset our path with more
than mortal peril. Happily, however, we passed
these ominous places unharmed, and arrived in
safety at the portal of Newstead Abbey, highly
satisfied with our greenwood foray.
THE ROOK CELL.
In
the course of my sojourn at the Abbey, I
changed my quarters from the magnificent old
state apartment haunted by Sir John Byron the
Little, to another in a remote corner of the
ancient
edifice, immediately adjoining the ruined
chapel. It possessed still more interest in my
eyes, from having been the sleeping apartment
of Lord Byron during his residence at the Abbey.
The furniture remained the same. Here was the
bed in which he slept, and which he had brought
with him from college; its gilded posts
surmounted
by coronets, giving evidence of his
aristocratical
feelings. Here was likewise his college
sofa; and about the walls were the portraits of
his favourite butler, old Joe Murray, of his fancy
acquaintance, Jackson the pugilist, together with
pictures of Harrow School and the college at
Cambridge, at which he was educated.
The bedchamber goes by the name of the
Rook Cell, from its vicinity to the Rookery which,
since time immemorial, has maintained
possession
of a solemn grove adjacent to the chapel.
This venerable community afforded me much
food for speculation during my residence in this
apartment. In the morning I used to hear them
gradually waking and seeming to call each other
up. After a time, the whole fraternity would be
in a flutter; some balancing and swinging on the
tree tops, others perched on the pinnacles of the
Abbey church, or wheeling and hovering about
in the air, and the ruined walls would
reverberate
with their incessant cawings. In this way
they would linger about the rookery and its
vicinity
for the early part of the morning, when,
having apparently mustered all their forces,
called
over the roll, and determined upon their line
of march, they one and all would sail off in a
long straggling flight to maraud the distant fields.
They would forage the country for miles, and
remain absent all day, excepting now and then
a scout would come home, as if to see that all
was well. Towards night the whole host might
be seen, like a dark cloud in the distance,
winging
their way homeward. They came, as it
were, with whoop and halloo, wheeling high in
the air above the Abbey, making various
evolutions
before they alighted, and then keeping up
an incessant cawing in the tree tops, until they
gradually fell asleep.
It is remarked at the Abbey, that the rooks,
though they daily sally forth on forays
throughout
the week, yet keep about the venerable
edifice
17*
on Sundays, as if they had inherited a
reverence for the day, from their ancient
confreres
,
the monks. Indeed, a believer in the
metemsychosis might easily imagine these gothic
looking birds to be the embodied souls of the
ancient friars still hovering about their sanctified
abode.
I dislike to disturb any point of popular and
poetic faith, and was loath, therefore, to question
the authenticity of this mysterious reverence for
the Sabbath, on the part of the Newstead rooks;
but certainly in the course of my sojourn in the
rook cell, I detected them in a flagrant outbreak
and foray on a bright Sunday morning.
Beside the occasional clamour of the rookery,
this remote apartment was often greeted with
sounds of a different kind, from the
neighbouring
ruins. The great lancet window in front of
the chapel, adjoins the very wall of the chamber;
and the mysterious sounds from it at night, have
been well described by Lord Byron:
Now loud, now frantic,
The gale sweeps through its fretwork, and oft sings
The owl his anthem, when the silent quire
Lie with their hallelujahs quenched like fire.
But on the noontide of the moon, and when
The wind is winged from one point of heaven,
There moans a strange unearthly sound, which then
Is musicala dying accent driven
Through the huge arch, which soars and sinks again.
Some deem it but the distant echo given
Back to the night wind by the waterfall,
And harmonized by the old choral wall.
Others, that some original shape or form,
Shaped by decay perchance, hath given the power
To this gray ruin, with a voice to charm,
Sad, but serene, it sweeps o'er tree or tower;
The cause I know not, nor can solve; but such
The fact:I've heard it,once perhaps too much.
Never was a traveller in quest of the
romantic
in greater luck. I had, in sooth, got lodged
in another haunted apartment of the Abbey; for
in this chamber Lord Byron declared he had
more than once been harassed at midnight by
a mysterious visiter. A black shapeless form
would sit cowering upon his bed, and after gazing
at him for a time with glaring eyes, would roll
off and disappear. The same uncouth
apparition
is said to have disturbed the slumbers of a
newly married couple that once passed their
honey-moon in this apartment.
I would observe, that the access to the Rook
Cell is by a spiral stone staircase leading up into
it, as into a turret, from the long shadowy
corridor
over the cloisters, one of the midnight
walks of the goblin friar. Indeed, to the
fancies
engendered in his brain in this remote and
lonely apartment, incorporated with the floating
superstitions of the Abbey, we are no doubt
indebted
for the spectral scene in Don Juan.
Then as the night was clear, though cold, he threw
His chamber door wide openand went forth
Into a gallery, of sombre hue,
Long furnish'd with old pictures of great worth,
Of knights and dames, heroic and chaste too,
As doubtless should be people of high birth.
No sound except the echo of his sigh
Or step ran sadly through that antique house,
When suddenly he heard, or thought so, nigh,
A supernatural agentor a mouse,
Whose little nibbling rustle will embarrass
Most people, as it plays along the arras.
It was no mouse, but lo! a monk, arrayed
In cowl, and beads, and dusky garb, appeared,
Now in the moonlight, and now lapsed in shade;
With steps that trod as heavy, yet unheard;
His garments only a slight murmur made;
He moved as shadowy as the sisters weird,
But slowly; and as he passed Juan by
Glared, without pausing, on him a bright eye.
Juan was petrified; he had heard a hint
Of such a spirit in these halls of old,
But thought, like most men, there was nothing in't
Beyond the rumour which such spots unfold,
Coin'd from surviving superstition's mint,
Which passes ghosts in currency like gold,
But rarely seen, like gold compared with paper.
And
did
he see this? or was it a vapour?
Once, twice, thrice pass'd, repass'dthe thing of air,
Or earth beneath, or heaven, or t'other place;
And Juan gazed upon it with a stare,
Yet could not speak or move; but, on its base
As stands a statue, stood: he felt his hair
Twine like a knot of snakes around his face;
He tax'd his tongue for words, which were not granted,
To ask the reverend person what he wanted.
The third time, after a still longer pause,
The shadow pass'd awaybut where? the hall
Was long, and thus far there was no great cause
To think his vanishing unnatural:
Doors there were many, through which, by the laws
Of physics, bodies, whether short or tall,
Might come or go; but Juan could not state
Through which the spectre seem'd to evaporate.
He stood, how long he knew not, but it seem'd
An ageexpectant, powerless, with his eyes
Strain'd on the spot where first the figure gleam'd;
Then by degrees recall'd his energies,
And would have pass'd the whole off as a dream,
But could not wake; he was, he did surmise,
Waking already, and returned at length
Back to his chamber, shorn of half his strength.
As I have already observed, it is difficult to
determine whether Lord Byron was really
subject
to the superstitious fancies which have been
imputed to him, or whether he merely amused
himself by giving currency to them among his
domestics and dependants. He certainly never
scrupled to express a belief in supernatural
visitations
,
both verbally and in his correspondence.
If such were his foible, the Rook Cell was an
admirable place to engender these delusions.
As I have lain awake at night, I have heard all
kinds of mysterious and sighing sounds from the
neighbouring ruin. Distant footsteps, too, and
the closing of doors in remote parts of the
Abbey
,
would send hollow reverberations and
echoes along the corridor and up the spiral
staircase
.
Once, in fact, I was roused by a strange
sound at the very door of my chamber. I threw
it open, and a form black and shapeless with
glaring eyes stood before me. It proved,
however
,
neither ghost nor goblin, but my friend
Boatswain, the great Newfoundland dog, who
had conceived a companionable liking for me,
and occasionally sought me in my apartment.
To the hauntings of even such a visitant as
honest
Boatswain may we attribute some of the
marvellous stories about the Goblin Friar.
THE LITTLE WHITE LADY.
In
the course of a morning's ride with Colonel
Wildman, about the Abbey lands, we found
ourselves
in one of the prettiest little wild woods
imaginable. The road to it had led us among
rocky ravines overhung with thickets, and now
wound through birchen dingles and among
beautiful
groves and clumps of elms and beeches.
A limpid rill of sparkling water, winding and
doubling in perplexed mazes, crossed our path
repeatedly, so as to give the wood the
appearance
of being watered by numerous rivulets.
The solitary and romantic look of this piece of
woodland, and the frequent recurrence of its
mazy stream, put him in mind, Colonel Wildman
said, of the little German fairy tale of Undine,
in which is recorded the adventures of a knight
who had married a water nymph. As he rode
with his bride through her native woods, every
stream claimed her as a relative; one was a
brother, another an uncle, another a cousin.
We rode on amusing ourselves with applying
this fanciful tale to the charming scenery around
us, until we came to a lowly gray-stone farm
house, of ancient date, situated in a solitary glen,
on the margin of the brook, and overshadowed
by venerable trees. It went by the name, as I
was told, of the Weir Mill farm house. With
this rustic mansion was connected a little tale
of real life, some circumstances of which were
related to me on the spot, and others I collected
in the course of my sojourn at the Abbey.
Not long after Colonel Wildman had
purchased
the estate of Newstead, he made it a visit for
the purpose of planning repairs and alterations.
As he was rambling one evening, about dusk,
in company with his architect, through this little
piece of woodland, he was struck with its
peculiar
characteristics, and then, for the first time,
compared it to the haunted wood of Undine.
While he was making the remark, a small female
figure, in white, flitted by without speaking a
word, or indeed appearing to notice them. Her
step was scarcely heard as she passed, and her
form was indistinct in the twilight.
What a figure, exclaimed Colonel
Wildman
,
for a fairy or sprite! How much a poet or
a romance writer would make of such an
apparition
,
at such a time and in such a place.
He began to congratulate himself upon having
some elfin inhabitant for his haunted wood,
when, on proceeding a few paces, he found a
white frill lying in the path, which had evidently
fallen from the figure that had just passed.
Well, said he, after all, this is neither
sprite nor fairy, but a being of flesh, and blood,
and muslin.
Continuing on, he came to where the road
passed by an old mill in front of the Abbey.
The people of the mill were at the door. He
paused and inquired whether any visiter had
been at the Abbey, but was answered in the
negative.
Has nobody passed by here?
No one, sir.
That's strange! Surely I met a female in
white, who must have passed along this path.
Oh, sir, you mean the Little White
Lady
oh,
yes, she passed by here not long
since.
The Little White Lady! And pray who is
the Little White Lady?
Why, sir, that nobody knows, she lives in
the Weir Mill farm house, down in the skirts of
the wood. She comes to the Abbey every
morning, keeps about it all day, and goes away
at night. She speaks to nobody, and we are
rather shy of her, for we don't know what to
make of her.
Colonel Wildman now concluded that it was
some artist or amateur employed in making
sketches of the Abbey, and thought no more
about the matter. He went to London, and was
18
absent for some time. In the interim, his sister,
who was newly married, came with her husband
to pass the honey-moon at the abbey. The Little
White Lady still resided in the Weir Mill farm
house, on the border of the haunted wood, and
continued her visits daily to the Abbey. Her
dress was always the same, a white gown with
a little black spencer or bodice, and a white hat
with a short veil that screened the upper part of
her countenance. Her habits were shy, lonely,
and silent; she spoke to no one, and sought no
companionship, excepting with the
Newfoundland
dog, that had belonged to Lord Byron.
His friendship she secured by caressing him and
occasionally bringing him food, and he became
the companion of her solitary walks. She
avoided all strangers, and wandered about the
retired parts of the garden; sometimes
sitting
for hours, by the tree on which Lord Byron
had carved his name, or at the foot of the
monument, which he had erected among the
ruins of the chapel. Sometimes she read,
sometimes
she wrote with a pencil on a small slate
which she carried with her, but much of her time
was passed in a kind of reverie.
The people about the place gradually became
accustomed to her, and suffered her to wander
about unmolested: their distrust of her subsided
on discovering that most of her peculiar and
lonely habits arose from the misfortune of being
deaf and dumb. Still she was regarded with
some degree of shyness, for it was the common
opinion that she was not exactly in her right
mind.
Colonel Wildman's sister was informed of all
these circumstances by the servants of the
Abbey
,
among whom the Little White Lady was a
theme of frequent discussion. The Abbey and
its monastic environs being haunted ground, it
was natural that a mysterious visitant of the kind,
and one supposed to be under the influence of
mental hallucination, should inspire awe in a
person
unaccustomed to the place. As Colonel
Wildman's sister was one day walking along a
broad terrace of the garden, she suddenly beheld
the Little White Lady coming towards her, and,
in the surprise and agitation of the moment,
turned and ran into the house.
Day after day now elapsed, and nothing more
was seen of this singular personage. Colonel
Wildman at length arrived at the Abbey, and
his sister mentioned to him her rencounter and
fright in the garden. It brought to mind his own
adventure with the Little White Lady in the
wood of Undine, and he was surprised to find
that she still continued her mysterious
wanderings
about the Abbey. The mystery was soon
explained. Immediately after his arrival he
received
a letter written in the most minute and
delicate female hand, and in elegant and even
eloquent language. It was from the Little White
Lady. She had noticed and been shocked by
the abrupt retreat of Colonel Wildman's sister on
seeing her in the garden walk, and expressed
her unhappiness at being an object of alarm to
any of his family. She explained the motives
of her frequent and long visits to the Abbey,
which proved to be a singularly enthusiastic
idolatry
of the genius of Lord Byron, and a solitary
and passionate delight in haunting the scenes he
had once inhabited. She hinted at the
infirmities
which cut her off from all social communion
with her fellow beings, and at her situation in
life as desolate and bereaved; and concluded by
hoping that he would not deprive her of her only
comfort, the permission of visiting the Abbey
occasionally, and lingering about its walks and
gardens.
Colonel Wildman now made further inquiries
concerning her, and found that she was a great
favourite with the people of the farm house
where she boarded, from the gentleness,
quietude
,
and innocence of her manners. When at
home, she passed the greater part of her time in
a small sitting room, reading and writing.
Colonel Wildman immediately called on her
at the farm house. She received him with some
agitation and embarrassment, but his frankness
and urbanity soon put her at her ease. She
was past the bloom of youth, a pale nervous little
being, and apparently deficient in most of her
physical organs, for in addition to being deaf and
dumb, she saw but imperfectly. They carried
on a communication by means of a small slate,
which she drew out of her reticule, and on which
they wrote their questions and replies. In
writing
or reading she always approached her eyes
close to the written characters.
This defective organization was accompanied
by a morbid sensibility almost amounting to
disease
.
She had not been born deaf and dumb;
but had lost her hearing in a fit of sickness, and
with it the power of distinct articulation. Her
life had evidently been chequered and unhappy;
she was apparently without family or friend, a
lonely desolate being, cut off from society by
her infirmities.
I am always amongst strangers, said she,
as much so in my native country, as I could be
in the remotest parts of the world. By all I am
considered as a stranger and an alien; no one
will acknowledge any connexion with me. I
seem not to belong to the human species.
Such were the circumstances that Colonel
Wildman was able to draw forth in the course
of his conversation, and they strongly interested
18*
him in favour of this poor enthusiast. He was
too devout an admirer of Lord Byron himself,
not to sympathize in this extraordinary zeal of
one of his votaries, and he entreated her to
renew
her visits to the Abbey, assuring her that
the edifice and its grounds should always be
open to her.
The Little White Lady now resumed her
daily walks in the Monk's Garden, and her
occasional
seat at the foot of the monument; she was
shy and diffident, however, and evidently fearful
of intruding. If any persons were walking in
the garden she would avoid them, and seek the
most remote parts; and was seen like a sprite, only
by gleams and glimpses, as she glided among the
groves and thickets. Many of her feelings and
fancies, during these lonely rambles, were
embodied
in verse, noted down on her tablet, and
transferred to paper in the evening on her
return
to the farm house. Some of these verses
now lie before me, written with considerable
harmony of versification, but chiefly curious as
being illustrative of that singular and
enthusiastic
idolatry with which she almost worshipped
the genius of Byron, or rather, the romantic
image of him formed by her imagination.
Two or three extracts may not be
unacceptable
.
The following are from a long rhapsody
addressed to Lord Byron:
By what dread charm thou rulest the mind
It is not given for us to know;
We glow with feelings undefined,
Nor can explain from whence they flow.
Not that fond love which passion breathes
And youthful hearts inflame;
The soul a nobler homage gives,
And bows to thy great name.
Oft have we own'd the muses' skill,
And proved the power of song,
But sweetest notes ne'er woke the thrill
That solely to thy verse belong.
Thisbut far more, for thee we prove,
Something that bears a holier name,
Than the pure dream of early love,
Or friendship's nobler flame.
Something divineOh! what it is
Thy muse alone can tell,
So sweet, but so profound the bliss
We dread to break the spell.
This singular and romantic infatuation, for
such it might truly be called, was entirely
spiritual
and ideal, for, as she herself declares in
another
of her rhapsodies, she had never beheld
Lord Byron; he was, to her, a mere phantom of
the brain.
I ne'er have drunk thy glanceThy form
My earthly eye has never seen,
Though oft when fancy's visions warm,
It greets me in some blissful dream.
Greets me, as greets the sainted seer
Some radiant visitant from high,
When heaven's own strains break on his ear,
And wrap his soul in ecstasy.
Her poetical wanderings and musings were
not confined to the Abbey grounds, but
extended
to all parts of the neighbourhood
connected
with the memory of Lord Byron, and
among the rest to the groves and gardens of
Annesley Hall, the seat of his early passion for
Miss Chaworth. One of her poetical effusions
mentions her having seen from Howet's Hill in
Annesley Park, a sylph like form, in a car
drawn by milk-white horses, passing by the foot
of the hill, who proved to be the favourite child,
seen by Lord Byron, in his memorable interview
with Miss Chaworth after her marriage. That
favourite
child was now a blooming girl
approaching
to womanhood, and seems to have
understood
something of the character and story of
this singular visitant, and to have treated her
with gentle sympathy. The Little White Lady
expresses in touching terms, in a note to her
verses, her sense of this gentle courtesy. The
benevolent condescension, says she, of that
amiable and interesting young lady, to the
unfortunate
writer of these simple lines, will
remain
engraved upon a grateful memory, till the
vital spark that now animates a heart that too
sensibly feels, and too seldom experiences such
kindness, is for ever extinct.
In the meantime, Colonel Wildman, in
occasional
interviews, had obtained further
particulars
of the story of the stranger, and found that
poverty was added to the other evils of her
forlorn
and isolated state. Her name was Sophia
Hyatt. She was the daughter of a country
bookseller, but both her parents had died several
years before. At their death, her sole
dependance
was upon her brother, who allowed her a
small annuity on her share of the property left
by their father, and which remained in his hands.
Her brother, who was a captain of a merchant
vessel, removed with his family to America,
leaving her almost alone in the world, for she
had no other relative in England but a cousin, of
whom she knew almost nothing. She received
her annuity regularly for a time, but unfortunately
her brother died in the West Indies, leaving his
affairs in confusion, and his estate overhung by
several commercial claims, which threatened to
swallow up the whole. Under these disastrous
circumstances, her annuity suddenly ceased; she
had in vain tried to obtain a renewal of it from
the widow, or even an account of the state of
her brother's affairs. Her letters for three years
past had remained unanswered, and she would
have been exposed to the horrors of the most
abject want, but for a pittance quarterly doled
out to her by her cousin in England.
Colonel Wildman entered with characterestic
benevolence into the story of her troubles. He
saw that she was a helpless, unprotected being,
unable from her infirmities and her ignorance
of the world, to prosecute her just claims. He
obtained from her the address of her relations in
America, and of the commercial connexion of
her brother; promised through the medium of
his own agents in Liverpool, to institute an
inquiry
into the situation of her brother's affairs,
and to forward any letters she might write, so as
to insure their reaching their place of
destination
.
Inspired with some faint hopes, the Little
White Lady continued her wanderings about the
Abbey and its neighbourhood. The delicacy and
timidity of her deportment increased the
interest
already felt for her by Mrs. Wildman. That
lady, with her wonted kindness, sought to make
acquaintance with her, and inspire her with
confidence
.
She invited her into the Abbey; treated
her with the most delicate attention, and, seeing
that she had a great turn for reading, offered her
the loan of any books in her possession. She
borrowed a few, particularly the works of Sir
Walter Scott, but soon returned them; the
writings of Lord Byron seemed to form the only
study in which she delighted, and when not
occupied
in reading those, her time was passed in
passionate meditations on his genius. Her
enthusiasm
spread an ideal world around her in
which she moved and existed as in a dream,
forgetful
at times of the real miseries that beset her
in her mortal state.
One of her rhapsodies is, however, of a very
melancholy cast; anticipating her own death,
which her fragile frame and growing infirmities
rendered but too probable. It is headed by the
following paragraph:
Written beneath the tree on Crowholt Hill,
where it is my wish to be interred, (if I should
die in Newstead).
I subjoin a few of the stanzas: they are
addressed
to Lord Byron:
Thou, while thou stand'st beneath this tree,
While by thy foot this earth is press'd,
Think, here the wanderer's ashes be
And wilt thou say, sweet be thy rest!
'Twould add even to a seraph's bliss,
Whose sacred charge thou then may be,
To guideto guardyes, Byron! yes,
That glory is reserved for me.
If woes below may plead above
A frail heart's errors, mine forgiven,
To that high world I soar, where love
Surviving forms the bliss of Heaven.
O wheresoe'er, in realms above,
Assign'd my spirit's new abode,
'Twill watch thee with a seraph's love,
'Till thou too soar'st to meet thy God.
And here, beneath this lonely tree
Beneath the earth thy feet have press'd,
My dust shall sleeponce dear to thee
These sceneshere may the wanderer rest!
In the midst of her reveries and rhapsodies,
tidings reached Newstead of the untimely death
of Lord Byron. How they were received by
this humble but passionate devotee I could not
ascertain; her life was too obscure and lonely to
furnish much personal anecdote, but among her
poetical effusions are several written in a broken
and irregular manner, and evidently under great
agitation.
The following sonnet is the most coherent and
most descriptive of her peculiar state of mind.
Well, thou art gonebut what wert thou to me?
I never saw theenever heard thy voice,
Yet my soul seemed to claim affiance with thee.
The Roman bard has sung of fields Elysian,
Where the soul sojourns ere she visits earth;
Sure it was there my spirit knew thee, Byron!
Thine image haunteth me like a past vision;
It hath enshrined itself in my heart's core:
'Tis my soul's soulit fills the whole creation.
For I do live but in that world ideal
Which the muse peopleth with her bright fancies,
And of that world thou art a monarch real,
Nor ever earthly sceptre ruled a kingdom,
With sway so potent as thy lyre, the mind's
dominion
.
Taking all the circumstances here adduced
into consideration, it is evident that this strong
excitement and exclusive occupation of the mind
upon one subject, operating upon a system in a
high state of morbid irritability, was in danger
of producing that species of mental derangement
called monomania. The poor little being was
aware, herself, of the dangers of her case, and
alluded to it in the following passage of a letter
to Colonel Wildman, which presents one of the
most lamentable pictures of anticipated evil ever
conjured up by the human mind.
I have long, writes she, too sensibly felt
the decay of my mental faculties, which I
consider
as the certain indication of that dreaded
calamity which I anticipate with such terror.
A strange idea has long haunted my mind, that
Swift's dreadful fate will be mine. It is not
ordinary
insanity I so much apprehend, but
something
worseabsolute idiotism!
O sir! think what I must suffer from such
an idea, without an earthly friend to look up to
for protection in such a wretched stateexposed
to the indecent insults which such spectacles
always
excite. But I dare not dwell upon the
thought; it would facilitate the event I so much
dread, and contemplate with horror. Yet I
cannot
help thinking from people's behaviour to me
at times, and from after reflections upon my
19
conduct, that symptoms of the disease are
already
apparent.
Five months passed away, but the letters
written by her, and forwarded by Colonel
Wildman
to America relative to her brother's affairs,
remained unanswered; the inquiries instituted
by the Colonel had as yet proved equally
fruitless
.
A deeper gloom and despondency now
seemed to gather upon her mind. She began
to talk of leaving Newstead, and repairing to
London, in the vague hope of obtaining relief or
redress by instituting some legal process to
ascertain
and enforce the will of her deceased
brother. Weeks elapsed, however, before she
could summon up sufficient resolution to tear
herself away from the scene of poetical
fascination
.
The following simple stanzas, selected
from a number written about the time, express
in humble rhymes the melancholy that preyed
upon her spirits:
Farewell to thee, Newstead, thy time-riven towers
Shall meet the fond gaze of the pilgrim no more;
No more may she roam through thy walks and thy bowers,
Nor muse in thy cloisters at eve's pensive hour.
Oh how shall I leave you, ye hills and ye dales,
When lost in sad musing, though sad not unblest,
A lone pilgrim I strayAh! in these lonely vales.
I hoped, vainly hoped, that the pilgrim might rest.
Yet rest is far distantin the dark vale of death,
Alone shall I find it, an outcast forlorn
But hence vain complaints, though by fortune bereft
Of all that could solace in life's early morn.
Is not man from his birth doomed a pilgrim to roam
O'er the world's dreary wilds, whence by fortune's rude
gust,
In his path, if some flowret of joy chanced to bloom,
It is torn and its foliage laid low in the dust.
At length she fixed upon a day for her
departure
.
On the day previous, she paid a farewell
visit to the Abbey; wandering over every part
of the grounds and garden; pausing and
lingering
at every place particularly associated with
the recollection of Lord Byron; and passing a
long time seated at the foot of the monument,
which she used to call her altar. Seeking
Mrs. Wildman, she placed in her hands a sealed
packet, with an earnest request that she would
not open it until after her departure from the
neighbourhood. This done, she took an
affecting
leave of her, and with many bitter tears bade
farewell to the Abbey.
On retiring to her room that evening, Mrs.
Wildman could not refrain from inspecting the
legacy of this singular being. On opening the
packet, she found a number of fugitive poems,
written in a most delicate and minute hand, and
evidently the fruits of her reveries and
meditations
during her lonely rambles: from these the
foregoing extracts have been made. These were
accompanied by a voluminous letter, written
with the pathos and eloquence of genuine
feeling
,
and depicting her peculiar situation and
singular
state of mind in dark but painful colours.
The last time, says she, that I had the
pleasure of seeing you in the garden, you asked
me why I leave Newstead; when I told you my
circumstances obliged me, the expression of
concern
which I fancied I observed in your look
and manner would have encouraged me to have
been explicit at the time, but from my inability
of expressing myself verbally.
She then goes on to detail precisely her
pecuniary
circumstances, by which it appears that
her whole dependance for subsistence was on an
allowance of thirteen pounds a year from her
cousin, who bestowed it through a feeling of
pride, lest his relative should come upon the
parish
.
During two years this pittance had been
augmented from other sources, to twenty three
pounds, but the last year it had shrunk within
its original bounds, and was yielded so
grudgingly
,
that she could not feel sure of its
continuance
from one quarter to another. More than
once it had been withheld on slight pretences,
and she was in constant dread lest it should be
entirely withdrawn.
It is with extreme reluctance, observes she,
that I have so far exposed my unfortunate
situation
;
but I thought you expected to know
something
more of it, and I feared that Colonel
Wildman
,
deceived by appearances, might think that
I am in no immediate want, and that the delay
of a few weeks, or months, respecting the
inquiry
,
can be of no material consequence. It is
absolutely necessary to the success of the
business
that Colonel Wildman should know the
exact
state of my circumstances without reserve,
that he may be enabled to make a correct
representation
of them to any gentlemen whom he
intends to interest, who, I presume, if they are
not of America themselves, have some
connexions
there, through whom my friends may be
convinced of the reality of my distress, if they
pretend to doubt it, as I suppose they do: but
to be more explicit is impossible; it would be too
humiliating to particularize the circumstances of
the embarrassment in which I am unhappily
involved
my
utter destitution. To disclose all
might, too, be liable to an inference which I hope I
am not so void of delicacy, of natural pride, as to
endure the thought of. Pardon me, madam, for
thus giving trouble where I have no right to do
compelled to throw myself upon Colonel
Wildman's
humanity, to entreat his earnest exertions
in my behalf, for it is now my only resource.
Yet do not too much despise me for thus
submitting
to imperious necessityit is not love of life,
19*
believe me it is not, nor anxiety for its
preservation
.
I cannot say, There are things that make
the world dear to me,for in the world there
is not an object to make
me
wish to linger here
another hour, could I find that rest and peace in
the grave which I have never found on earth,
and I fear will be denied me there.
Another part of her letter developes more
completely
the dark despondency hinted at in the
conclusion of the foregoing extractand
presents
a lamentable instance of a mind diseased,
which sought in vain, amidst sorrow and
calamity
,
the sweet consolations of religious faith.
That my existence has hitherto been
prolonged
,
says she, often beyond what I have
thought to have been its destined period, is
astonishing
to myself. Often when my situation
has been as desperate, as hopeless, or more so,
if possible, than it is at present, some unexpected
interposition of Providence has rescued me
from a fate that has appeared inevitable. I do
not particularly allude to recent circumstances
or latter years, for from my earlier years I have
been the child of Providencethen why should
I distrust its care now? I do not
dis
trust it
neither do I trust it. I feel perfectly unanxious,
unconcerned, and indifferent to the future; but
this is not trust in Providencenot that trust
which alone claims its protection. I know this
is a blameable indifferenceit is morefor it
reaches to the interminable future. It turns
almost
with disgust from the bright prospects
which religion offers for the consolation and
support
of the wretched, and to which I was early
taught, by an almost adored mother, to look for
ward with hope and joy; but to me they can
afford no consolation. Not that I doubt the
sacred truths that religion inculcates. I
cannot
doubtthough I confess I have
sometimes
tried to do so, because I no longer wish
for that immortality of which it assures us.
My only wish now is for rest and peace
endless
rest. `For restbut not to feel 'tis rest,'
but I cannot delude myself with the hope that
such rest will be my lot. I feel an internal
evidence
,
stronger than any arguments that reason
or religion can enforce, that I have that within
me which is imperishable; that drew not its
origin from the `clod of the valley.' With this
conviction, but without a hope to brighten the
prospect of that dread future:
I dare not look beyond the tomb
Yet cannot hope for peace before.
Such an unhappy frame of mind, I am sure,
madam, must excite your commiseration. It is
perhaps owing, in part at least, to the solitude
in which I have lived, I may say, even in the
midst of society; when I have mixed in it; as my
infirmities entirely exclude me from that sweet
intercourse of kindred spiritsthat sweet solace
of refined conversation; the little intercourse I
have at any time with those around me cannot
be termed conversationthey are not kindred
spiritsand even where circumstances have
associated
me (but rarely indeed) with superior
and cultivated minds, who have not disdained
to admit me to their society, they could not by
all their generous efforts, even in early youth,
lure from my dark soul the thoughts that loved
to lie buried there, nor inspire me with the
courage
to attempt their disclosure; and yet of all
the pleasures of polished life which fancy has
often pictured to me in such vivid colours, there
is not one that I have so ardently coveted as
that sweet reciprocation of ideas, the supreme
bliss of enlightened minds in the hour of social
converse. But this I knew was not decreed for
me
Yet this was in my nature
but since the loss of my hearing, I have always
been incapable of verbal conversation. I need
not, however, inform you, madam, of this. At
the first interview with which you favoured me,
you quickly discovered my peculiar unhappiness
in this respect: you perceived from my manner,
that any attempt to draw me into conversation
would be in vainhad it been otherwise perhaps
you would not have disdained now and then, to
have soothed the lonely wanderer with yours.
I have sometimes fancied, when I have seen you
in the walk, that you seemed to wish to
encourage
me to throw myself in your way. Pardon
me if my imagination, too apt to beguile me with
such dear illusions, has deceived me into too
presumptuous an idea here. You must have
observed
that I generally endeavoured to avoid
both you and Colonel Wildman. It was to spare
your geneorus hearts the pain of witnessing
distress
you could not alleviate. Thus cut off, as it
were, from all human society, I have been
compelled
to live in a world of my own, and
certainly
with the beings with which my world is
peopled, I am at no loss to converse. But though
I love solitude and am never in want of subjects
to amuse my fancy, yet solitude too much
indulged
in must necessarily have an unhappy effect
upon the mind, which, when left to seek for
resources
solely within itself, will unavoidably, in
hours of gloom and despondency, brood over
corroding
thoughts that prey upon the spirits, and
sometimes terminate in confirmed misanthropy
especially with those who, from constitution, or
early misfortunes, are inclined to melancholy,
and to view human nature in its dark shades.
And have I not cause for gloomy reflections?
The utter loneliness of my lot would alone have
rendered existence a curse to one whose heart
nature has formed glowing with all the warmth
of social affection, yet without an object on which
to place itwithout one natural connexion, one
earthly friend to appeal to, to shield me from the
contempt, indignities, and insults, to which my
deserted situation continually exposed me.
I am giving long extracts from this letter, yet I
cannot refrain from subjoining another, which
depicts her feelings with respect to Newstead.
Permit me, madam, again to request your
and Colonel Wildman's acceptance of those
acknowledgements
which I cannot too often repeat,
for your unexampled goodness to a rude stranger.
I know I ought not to have taken advantage of
your extreme good nature so frequently as I
have. I should have absented myself from
your garden during the stay of the company at
the Abbey, but, as I knew I must be gone long
before they would leave it, I could not deny
myself
the indulgence, as you so freely gave me
your permission to continue my walks; but now
they are at an end. I have taken my last
farewell
of every dear and interesting spot, which I
now never hope to see again, unless my
disembodied
spirit may be permitted to revisit
them.Yet O! if Providence should enable me
again to support myself with any degree of
respectability
,
and you should grant me some little
humble shed, with what joy shall I return and
renew my delightful rambles. But dear as
Newstead is to me, I will never again come under
the same unhappy circumstances as I have this
last timenever without the means of at least
securing myself from contempt. How dear, how
very dear Newstead is to me, how unconquerable
the infatuation that possesses me, I am now
going to give a too convincing proof. In
offering
to your acceptance the worthless trifles that
will accompany this, I hope you will believe that
I have no view to your amusement. I dare not
hope that the consideration of their being the
products of your own garden and most of them
written there, in my little tablet, while sitting at
the foot of
my Altar
I could not, I cannot
resist
the earnest desire of leaving this memorial
of the many happy hours I have there enjoyed.
Oh! do not reject them, madam; suffer them
to remain with you, and if you should deign to
honour them with a perusal, when you read them
repress, if you can, the smile that I know will
too naturally arise, when you recollect the
appearance
of the wretched being who has dared
to devote her whole soul to the contemplation of
such more than human excellence. Yet
ridiculous
as such devotion may appear to some, I
must take leave to say, that if the sentiments
which I have entertained for that exalted being
could be duly appreciated, I trust they would
be found to be of such a nature as is no
dishonour
even for him to have inspired. * * *
I am now coming to take a last, last view
of scenes too deeply impressed upon my
memory
ever to be effaced even by madness itself.
O madam! may you never know, nor be able to
conceive the agony I endure in tearing myself
from all that the world contains of dear and
sacred
to me: the only spot on earth where I can
ever hope for peace or comfortMay every
blessing the world has to bestow attend you, or
rather, may you long, long live in the enjoyment
of the delights of your own paradise, in secret
seclusion from a world that has no real blessings
to bestow. Now I gobut O might I dare to
hope that when you are enjoying these blissful
scenes, a thought of the unhappy wanderer might
sometimes cross your mind, how soothing would
such an idea be, if I dared to indulge itcould
you see my heart at this moment, how needless
would it be to assure you of the respectful
gratitude
,
the affectionate esteem, this heart must ever
bear you both.
The effect of this letter upon the sensitive
heart of Mrs. Wildman may be more readily
conceived than expressed. Her first impulse
was to give a home to this poor homeless being,
and to fix her in the midst of those scenes which
formed her earthly paradise. She communicated
her wishes to Colonel Wildman, and they met
with an immediate response in his generous
bosom. It was settled on the spot, that an
apartment should be fitted up for the Little
White Lady in one of the new farm houses, and
every arrangement made for her comfortable
and permanent maintenance on the estate.
With a woman's prompt benevolence, Mrs.
Wildman
,
before she laid her head upon her pillow,
wrote the following letter to the destitute
stranger
:
Newstead Abbey,
Tuesday night, Sept. 20th, 1825.
On retiring to my bed chamber this evening
I have opened your letter, and cannot lose a
moment in expressing to you the strong interest
which it has excited both in Colonel Wildman
and myself, from the details of your peculiar
situation, and the delicate, and, let me add,
elegant
language in which they are conveyed. I
am anxious that my note should reach you
previous
to your departure from this neighbourhood,
and should be truly happy if, by any arrangement
for your accommodation, I could prevent the
necessity
of your undertaking the journey.
Colonel
Wildman begs me to assure you that he will
20
use his best exertion in the investigation of those
matters which you have confided to him, and
should you remain here at present, or return
again after a short absence, I trust we shall
find means to become better acquainted, and to
convince you of the interest I feel, and the real
satisfaction it would afford me to contribute in
any way to your comfort and happiness. I will
only now add my thanks for the little packet which
I received with your letter, and I must confess
that the letter has so entirely engaged my
attention
,
that I have not as yet had time for the
attentive perusal of its companion.
Believe me, dear madam,
with sincere good wishes,
Yours truly,
Louisa Wildman
.
Early the next morning a servant was
despatched
with the letter to the Weir Mill farm,
but returned with the information that the Little
White Lady had set off, before his arrival, in
company with the farmer's wife, in a cart for
Nottingham, to take her place in the coach for
London. Mrs. Wildman ordered him to mount
horse instantly, follow with all speed, and deliver
the letter into her hand before the departure of
the coach.
The bearer of good tidings spared neither
whip nor spur, and arrived at Nottingham on a
gallop. On entering the town a crowd
obstructed
him in the principal street. He checked
his horse to make his way through it quietly.
As the crowd opened to the right and left, he
beheld a human body lying on the pavement.
It was the corpse of the Little White Lady!
It seems that on arriving in town and
dismounting
from the cart, the farmer's wife had
parted with her to go on an errand, and the
White Lady continued on toward the
coach-office
.
In crossing a street a cart came along
driven at a rapid rate. The driver called out to
her, but she was too deaf to hear his voice or
the rattling of his cart. In an instant she was
knocked down by the horse, the wheels passed
over her body, and she died without a groan.
THE END.Newstead Abbey,
Tuesday night, Sept. 20th, 1825.
On retiring to my bed chamber this evening
I have opened your letter, and cannot lose a
moment in expressing to you the strong interest
which it has excited both in Colonel Wildman
and myself, from the details of your peculiar
situation, and the delicate, and, let me add,
elegant
language in which they are conveyed. I
am anxious that my note should reach you
previous
to your departure from this neighbourhood,
and should be truly happy if, by any arrangement
for your accommodation, I could prevent the
necessity
of your undertaking the journey.
Colonel
Wildman begs me to assure you that he will
20
use his best exertion in the investigation of those
matters which you have confided to him, and
should you remain here at present, or return
again after a short absence, I trust we shall
find means to become better acquainted, and to
convince you of the interest I feel, and the real
satisfaction it would afford me to contribute in
any way to your comfort and happiness. I will
only now add my thanks for the little packet which
I received with your letter, and I must confess
that the letter has so entirely engaged my
attention
,
that I have not as yet had time for the
attentive perusal of its companion.
Believe me, dear madam,
with sincere good wishes,
Yours truly,
Louisa Wildman
.