THE LADYE ANNABEL;
OR,
THE DOOM OF THE POISONER.
A
It was in the far-gone times of mystery and darkness, when Religion shrouded her form of lofty and solemn
beauty within the shadow of the Gothic altar; when Superstition, companioned by her weird and mystic sisters,
Legend and Romance, sat enthroned on every castle-tower, and dwelt in every palace-hall; when the voice of
the ancient Death, shuddering with horror at the sight of unnatural crime, was heard in the court of the Unknown,
and the ocean of man's wickedness came surging to the very battlements of Heaven: it was in this time that the
world was awe-stricken, by a history of woe so dread, crime so fearful, and mystery so dark, that even the denizens
of the convent, where all was fraud and wrong, grew pale with affright; and the tyrants in their castles, where
every stone was crimsoned with human blood, shrieked in tones of terror and dismay, It is not so!it is not so!
Messer. Graccini's Italian Chronicle
.
BOOK THE FIRST.
The Death.
The Sunlight is broken by the Cloud.
CHAPTER THE FIRST.
THE SIGNET RING OF ALBARONE.
HIGH-NOON AMID THE OLD CASTLE WALLS.
From the clear azure of the summer sky, the
mid-day sun shone over the lofty battlements and
massive towers of an ancient castle, which, rising
amid the heights of a precipitous rock, lay
basking
in the warm sunlight; while along the
spacious
court-yard, and among the nooks and
crevices
of the dark grey walls, the mellow beams fell
lazily, gilding each point they touched, and
turning
the blackened rocks to brightened gold, with
the voluptuous light of a summer noon.
The massive cliff, from whose stern foundations
the castle arose, sank suddenly down, with a
preoipitous
descent, into the bed of the valley, while
around, in all the solemn grandeur of ages, swept
the magnificent forest, with its mass of verdure
mellowing in the sunlight; and, winding on its
way of silver, a broad and rapid stream, gleaming
from the deep green foliage of the encircling
forest
trees, now gave each wave and ripple to the
kiss of day, and now sweeping in its shadowy
nooks, sheltered its beauty from the dazzling
light.
Far along the plain, verdant forest towered over
forest, and sloping meadows, dotted with cottages,
succeeded shelving fields, golden with wheat, or
gay with vines; while many a pleasant hill-side
arose from amid the embowering woods, with the
peaceful summit sleeping in the sunlight, and the
straight shadows of the still noon resting along
the depths of the valley, from which it greenly
ascended.
Along the edge of the horizon, amid the tall
peaks of the far-off mountains, summer clouds,
vast and gorgeous, lay basking in the sunlight,
with their fantastic forms, of every hue and shape
now dark, now bright, now golden, now grey,
and again white as the unsunned snowall
clearly
and delicately relieved by the back-ground of
azure, transparent and glassy with its own
unspotted
clearness.
The hour was still and solemn, with the
peculiar
silence and solemnity of the high noon; the
broad banner floated heavily from the loftiest tower
of the castle, unruffled by a whisper of the wind;
and along the court-yard, and throughout the
castle
,
a death-like silence reigned, which betokened
aught else than the presence of numerous bodies
of armed men within the castle walls.
The sentinels who waited at the castle gate,
rested indolently upon their pikes, and glancing
over the spacious court-yard, marked, with a look
of discontent, the absence of all signs of
animation
from those walls which had so often rung
with sounds of gay carousal and shouts of
merriment
.
All was still and solemn where, in days
bygone, not a sound had awoke the echoes of the
time-darkened walls save the loud laugh of the
careless reveller, the merry carol of the minstrel,
or the glee-song of the banquet hall.
A footstepa mailed and booted footstepbroke
the silence of the air, and presently appearing from
the shadow of the lofty hall door of the castle, a
stout and strong-limbed soldier emerged into the
light of the sun. As he descended the steps of
stone, he paused for a moment, and glanced around
the court-yard. Stout, without being bulky in
figure, the person of the yeoman was marked by
broad shoulders, a chest massive and prominent,
arms that were all bone and muscle, and legs that
discovered the bold and rugged outline of strong
physical power and ability, hardened by fatigue
and toil.
He raised his cap of buff, surmounted by a dark
plume, and plated with steel, from his brow, and
the sunbeams fell upon a rugged countenance,
darkened by the sun, and seamed by innumerable
wrinkles, with a low, yet massive forehead, a nose
short, straight, yet prominent, a wide mouth, with
thin lips, cheek bones high and bold in outline,
while his clear blue eyes, with their quick and
varying glance, afforded a strange contrast to his
toil-hardened and sunburnt features. Around his
throat, and over his prominent chin, grew a thick
and rugged beard, dark as his eyebrows in hue,
while his hair, slightly touched by age, and worn
short and close, gave a marked outline to his head,
that completed the expression of dogged courage
and blunt frankness visible in every lineament of
his countenance.
Attired in doublet and hose of buff, defended by
a plate of massive steel in the breast, with smaller
plates on each arm and leg, the yeoman wore
boots of slouching buckskin, while a broad belt of
darkened leather, thrown over his manly chest,
supported the short, straight sword, which
depended
from his left side.
Having glanced along the court-yard, and
marked the sentinels waiting lazily beside the
castle gate, the yeoman's eye wandered to the
banner which clung heavily around the towering
staff, and then depositing his cap on his head
with an air of discontent, he exclaimed, as he
again surveyed the castle yard
St. Withold! he cried, in a voice as rugged
as his faceSt. Withold! but some foul spell
of the fiend's own making has fallen upon these
old walls! All dullall deadall stupid! Even
yon flag, which kissed the breeze of the Holy Land
not three months agone, looks dull and drowsy.
'Slife! a man might as well be dead as live in this
manner. No feastingno songsno carousing!
Ugh! A pest take it all, I say! No joustsno
tournamentsno mellays! The foul fiend take
it, I say; and Sathanas wither the heathen hand
that winged the poisoned javelin at my knightly
LordJulian, Count of this gallant castle Di
Albarone
!
The foul fiend wither the hand of the
paynim dog, I say!
Ha, ha, ha! my good Robin, laughed a clear
and youthful voice, by my troth, thou'rt sadly
out of temper! What has ruffled thee, my
buffand-buckskin
?
Sancta Maria
what
a face!
Robin turned, and beheld the slender form of a
daintily apparelled youth, whose full cheeks were
wrinkled with laughter, while his merry hazel
eyes seemed dancing in the light of their own
glee.
Out of temper! exclaimed rough Robin, as
he glanced at the laughing youth; out of
temper
?
By St. Withold! there's good reason for't,
too. Look ye, my bird of a page, never since I
left the service of mine own native prince, the
brave Richard, of the Lion Heartnever since
the day when the gallant Sir Geoffrey, o' th'
Long-sword
,
drew his sword in the wars of Palestine,
under the banner of Count Julian Di Albarone,
have I felt so sick, so wearied in heart, as I do
this daymark ye, my page! `Out of temper,'
forsooth! Answer me, then, popinjaydoes not
our gallant Lord Julian lie wasting away in yon
sick chamber, with the poison of an incurable
wound eating his very heart? Answer me that,
Guiseppo.
Aye, marry does he, my good Robin, the page
answered, as he played with a jewelled chain that
hung depending from his neck; but then thou
knowest he will recover. He will again mount
his war-horse! Aye, my good Lord Julian will
again lead armies to battle in the wilds of
Palestine
!
He will, by my troth, Rough Robin!
I fear me, never, never, the yeoman replied,
in a solemn tone. Look ye, Guiseppo, what
dost think of this thin-faced half brother of the
Count, the scholar Aldarin? There's a mystery
about the manI like him not. Thy master, the
Duke of Florence, hath now been three days at
this good castle of Albaronewhy is he so much
in the company of this keen-eyed Aldarin? By
St. Withold! I like it not. Marry, boy, but the
devil's a brewing a pretty pot of yeast for
somebody's
bread! Guiseppo, canst tell me naught
concerning the object of the visit of thy master'
the Duke, to this castlehey, boy?
Why, Robin, replied the page, as, placing
one small hand on either side of his slender waist,
he glanced at the yeoman with a sidelong look;
why, Robin, didst ever hear ofofthe fair
Ladye Annabel? Eh, Robin?
The fair Ladye Annabel! Tut! boy, thou
triflest
with me. The fair Ladye Annabelshe is
the lovely daughter of this crusty old scholar.
Her mother was an Eastern woman; and the fair
girl first saw the light in the wilds of Palestine
when the scholar Aldarin accompanied his brother
thither. Marry, tis more than sixteenseventeen
years since. 'Tis long agovery long. By St.
Withold! those were merry days. But come, sir
page, why name the Ladye Annabel and the Duke
in the same breath?
The restless Guiseppo sprang aside with a
nimble
movement, and then folding his arms, stood at
the distance of a few paces, regarding the stout
yeoman with a look of mock gravity and solemn
humor.
What wouldst give to know, Robin? he
exclaimed
,
with a peculiar contortion of his mirthful
face. Hark ye, my stout yeoman, `My Lord
Duke of Florence and the Ladye Annabel, Duchess
of Florence.' Dost like the sound? What says
my rough soldier, now?
I see a light, slowly responded Robin; I
see a light! and he slowly drew his sword
halfway
from the scabbard. But as yet 'tis but a
pestilent Jack o' lanthorn light, dancing about a
tangled marsh of pits and bogs, with plenty o'
hidden traps to catch honest men by the heels, i'
faith. Annabel and the Duke! Hoho! Then
the game's up with the son o' th' Countmy
Lord Adrian?
Wag that clumsy tongue o' thine with a spice
o' caution, Robin, whispered the merry page.
See, the sharp-faced steward o' th' castle draws
nigh, and with him a group of sworn grumblers.
The four old esquires who followed our lord to
battle in the wilds o' Palestinea soldier, with a
carbuncled visage, and a lounging servitor, the
huntsman o' th' castle. Hark! didst ever hear
such eloquent growling?
And as Robin turned to listen, he beheld the
strangely contrasted party lounging slowly along
the castle yard, with the indolent gait of men
having little to do save to eat, to drink, to sleep,
and to gossip, while around them the lazy hours
of the silent castle walls dragged onward with
wings of lead.
Talk not to me of thrift, sir steward, cried
the bluff-faced and thick-headed huntsman. My
Lord, Count Julian, was wellnot a day passed
but a lusty buck was steaming on the castle
hearth
Wine flowed like water, chimed in the soldier
with the fiery nose. Your true soldier swore by
his beaker alone
Now!
interrupted the sharp-faced steward,
waving his thin hands, and with an expressive
shrug of the shoulders;
now
, my lord, the Count,
is
sick
. The scholar Aldarin hath the rule. Tell
me, sir huntsman, and you, sir, of the fiery nose,
is there any waste o' flesh or liquor in the castle?
Is not the signor careful of the beeves of my lord.
No longer are we quiet folks disturbed by your
carousings; no silly dances, no rude catches o'
vile camp-follower songs! By the Virgin, no!
By the true wood o' th' cross, sir steward
thou'rt a rare one! growled a white-haired esquire,
as his scarred and sunburnt visage was turned
angrily toward the sharp-faced steward. Dost
think men o' mettle are made o' such broomstick
bones and mud-puddle blood as thou? Body o'
Bacchus, no! `No carousing!' I'd e'en like to
see thee on a jolly carouse!
Say rather, sir esquire, Robin the Rough,
exclaimed, as the party reached his side, say
rather, you'd e'en wish to see a death's head
making mirth at a feast, or a funeral procession
strike up a jolly fandago! Sir steward at a feast!
the owl at a gathering o' nightingales!
The sharp-faced steward was about to make an
angry reply, when a sudden thrill ran through the
party. Each tongue was stilled, and each man
stood motionless in the full glare of the noonday
beams.
THE STRANGE FEAR OF THE SIGNIOR ALDARIN.
Hist! The Signor Aldarin approaches,
whispered
the page Guiseppo. He comes from the
castle gate along to the castle hall.
And as each head was stealthily turned over the
shoulder toward the castle gate, there came
gliding
along, with cat-like steps and down cast look,
a man of severe aspect, whose grey eyecold,
flashing, and clear, in its unchangeable glance
seemed as though it could read the very heart.
A tunic of dark velvet, disclosing the spare
outlines
of his slim figure, reached to his ancles, and
over this garment, depending from his right
shoulder
,
he wore a robe of similar color, passed under
his left arm, joined in front by a chain of gold,
and then falling in sweeping folds to his sandalled
feet.
A cap of dark fur, bright with a single gem of
strange lustre, gave a striking relief to his high,
pale forehead, seamed by a single deep wrinkle
shooting upward from between the eyebrows,
while his grey hair fell in slight masses down
along the hollow cheeks and over his neck and
shoulders.
This is thescholar! growled one of the
white-haired esquires. His days have been
passed
in the labaratory, while his brother's sword
hath flashed at the head of armies.
The saints preserve me from the wizard-tribe,
say I! muttered Robin the Rough; and as he
spoke, with an involuntary movement of fear, the
party separated on either side of the castle hall,
leaving room for the passage of the Signor Aldarin.
He came slowly onward, with his head
downcast
,
neither looking to the one side or to the other.
He ascended the steps of stone, and in a moment
was lost to the view of the loiterers in the castle
yard.
The hall of the castle passed, a passage
traversed
,
and another stairway ascended, the
stooping
scholar stood in a small ante-chamber, with
the light of the noonday sun subdued to a
twilight
obscurity by the absence of windows from
the place, while an evening gloom hung around
the narrow walls, the arching ceiling of darkened
stone, and the floor of tesselated marble. A
single
casement, long and narrow, reaching from
floor to arch, gave entrance to a straggling beam
of daylight, disclosing the stout and muscular form
of a man-at-arms, with armor and helmet of steel,
who, pike in hand, waited beside a massive door,
opening into one of the principal apartments of
the castle.
With a soft, gliding footstep, the Signor
Aldarin
glided along the tesselated floor, and stood
beside the man-at-arms, ere he was aware of his
approach.
Ha! Balvardo, thou keepest strict watch beside
the sick chamber of my lord. The words broke
from the Signor Aldarin. Hast obeyed my
behest
?
E'en so, my lord, the sentinel began, in a
rough, surly tone.
How, schelm! Dost name me with the title
of my brother? Have a care, good Balvardo,
have a care!
He chides me in a rough voice, murmured
the sentinel, as though speaking to his own ear;
and yet a wild light flashes over his features at
the word. Signor, I but mistook the worda
slip o' th' tongue, he exclaimed aloud. Thy
behests have been obeyed. No one has been
suffered
to pass into the chamber of my Lord Di
Albarone
since morning dawn, save the fair Ladye
Annabel, who waits beside the couch of the
wounded knight.
Come hither, Balvardo. Look from this narrow
window: mark you well the dial-plate in the
castle
yard. In a few moments the shadow will
sweep across the path of high noon. When high
noon and the shadow meet, thy charge is over.
The soothing potion which I gave my brother at
daybreak, will have taken its proper effect. Until
that moment, keep strict watch: let not a soul
enter the Red Chamber on the peril of thy life!
And with the command, the Signior swept from
the ante-chamber, gliding along a corridor
opposite
the one from which he had just emerged, and
his low footsteps in a moment had ceased to echo
along the dark grey arches.
He is gone, the sentinel murmured, slowly
pacing the tesselated floor. He comes like a cat
he glides hence like a ghost. Hark! footsteps
from opposite corridors meeting in this
ante-chamber
.
By'r our Lady! here comes Adrian, the
son of this sick lord, and from the opposite gallery
emerges the monk Albertine, the tool and
counsellor
of my Lord of Florence. 'Tis a moody
monk and a shrewd boy. I'faith, there's a pain
o' 'em.
And as he spoke, sweeping from the shadow of
the northern gallery, came a dark-robed monk,
walking with hastened step, his arms folded on
his breast, and his head drooped low, as if in
thought, while the outlines of his face were
enveloped
in the folds of his priestly cowl. And as he
swept onward toward the centre of the
ante-chamber
,
from the southern gallery, with slow and
solemn
steps, advanced a youth of some twenty
summers
,
attired in the gay dress of a cavalier, with
a frank, open visage, marked by the lines of
premature
thought, and relieved by rich and
luxuriant
locks of golden hair sweeping along each
cheek down to the shoulders.
Whither speed ye, Lord Adrian? exclaimed
the deep, sonorous voice of the monk, as the twain
met breast to breast in the centre of the rich mosaic
floor. Whither speed ye, heir of Albarone, at
this hour?
Whither do I speed? cried the cavalier
starting with sudden surprise. Sir monk, I
wend to the sick chamber of my father.
The monk grasped the cavalier suddenly by
the right hand, and raised it as suddenly in the
light of the sunbeams streaming through the
solitary
window.
An hour since, this hand was graced by a
signet
ring: the signet ring which has been an heir
loom in thy house for centuries. Dost remember
the prophecy spoken of that strange ring? Dost
remember the rude lines of the vandal seer:
`While treasured and holily worn,
An omen of glory and good:
When from the hand the ruby is torn,
An omen of doom and of blood.'
Sir monk, the lines are rude; yet I mind me
well the words of the prophecy are an household
sound to an heir of Albarone. Yet why this
sudden
grasp of my hand? Why thus urgent? The
fire in thine eye seems not of earth.
Lord Adrian, by the Virgin tell me how long
since parted this finger from the ruby signet ring
of thy house? Never parted that ring from the
hand of heir of Albarone, without sudden evil,
fearful doom, or unheard of death, gathering thick
and dark around thy house!
I missed not the signet ring till this moment.
An instant ago, I was in my chamber. Thy air
is strange and solemn for the confessor of this
jovial
Duke, yet I will turn me, and seek the signet
without delay. Thy warning may be
well-timed
.
Boy, a word in thine ear. My life has been
strange and dark. I have loved the shadow
rather
than the light. I have courted the glare of
corruption in the midnight charnel house, rather
than the blaze of the noonday sun. I have made
me a home amid strange mysteries, and from the
tomes of darksome lore I have wrung the secrets
of the hidden world.
To what tends all this, sir monk? By'r our
Ladye, thou'rt strangely moved!
And from my hidden lore have I learned this
mystery of mysteries. When the stillness of mid
night hangs like lead over the noonday hour
when at mid-noon, a strange, solemn, and
voiceless
silence pervades the air, spreads through the
universe, and impresses the heart of each living
thing with a feeling of unutterable AWE, then wick
ed men are doing, in the sight of heaven, with the
laughter of fiends in their ears, some deed of
horror
,
that the fiends tremble 'mid their laughter to
behold. Some deed of nameless horror which
thrills the universe with AWE, making the hour
of noon more terrible than midnight in the charnel
house. Look abroad, Adrian'tis high noon.
Dost hear a sound, a whisper of the wind? All
silent as deathall still as the grave! The
silence
of this nameless AWE is upon the noonday
hour. Adrian, to thy chamber, to thy chamber,
and rest not till the signet ring again encircles thy
finger! There is a doom upon this hour!
And with these words, uttered in a low, yet
deep and piercing tone, the monk glided from the
ante-chamber; and the cavalier, without a word,
as hastily retraced his steps, and in an instant had
disappeared in the shadow of the southern gallery.
Whispered words! muttered the bull-headed
man-at-arms. A ring! What about a ring?
Haha! The Monk and the Springald commune
togetherwell! I could not make out their
secret
,
butbut, the ring!
And raising his sturdy form to its full height,
with a grim smile on his bearded face, Balvardo
glanced around the ante-chamber, and then, with
a low chuckle, he let his pike fall heavily upon
the pavement of stone.
CHAPTER THE SECOND.
THE WHITE DUST IN THE GOBLET
OF GOLD.
THE WARRIOR AND THE MAIDEN.
In a lofty apartment of the castle, hung with
rich folds of crimson tapestry, and designated from
time past memory as the Red-Chamber, on a
couch of gorgeous hangings, lay the once
muscular
,
but now disease-stricken, Julian, Count of
Albarone, shorn of his warrior strength, divested
of the glory of his manhood's prime.
The warm sunlight which filled the place, fell
with a golden glow, over the outlines of his lofty
brow indented with wrinkles, the long grey hair
parted on either side, the eye brows, snow-white,
over-arching the clear, bold eyes, that sent
forth their glance with all the fire and intensity
of youth, rendered more vivid and flame-like by
the contrast of sunken eyelid and hollow cheek.
And by the bedside of the warrior, bending like
an angel of good, as she ministered to his slightest
wants, the form of a fair and lovely maiden, was
disclosed in the noonday-light, while her flaxen
curls, fell lightly, and with a waving motion, over
the rich bloom of her cheek, glowing with the
warmth of fifteen summers, and her full, large
eyes of liquid blue, gleamed with the expression
of a soul, whose fruits were pure and happy
thoughts, the blossoms and the buds of youth and
innocence.
Annabel,said the warrior, in a voice faint
with diseaseMethinks I feel the strength of
youth again returning, the sleeping potion of my
good brother, Aldarin, has done me wondrous
service
.
Assist me to the casement, niece of mine
heart, that I may gaze once more upon the broad
lands and green woods of my own native domain
of Albarone .
As he spoke, the Count rose on his feet, with
a tottering movement, and had fallen to the floor,
but for the fair arm of the maiden wound around
his waist, while his muscular hand rested upon
her shoulder.
Lean upon my arm, my uncle,tread with a
careful footstep. In a moment we will reach the
casement.
They stood, within the recess of the
emblazoned
window, the warrior and the maiden, while
around them floated and shimmered the golden
sunshine, falling over the tesselated stone of the
pavement, throwing a glaring light around the
hangings of the bed, and streaming in flashes of
brightness along the distant corners and nooks
of the Red-Chamber.
'Tis a fair land, niece of mine,a fair and
lovely land
A land of dreams, a land of magnificent
visions
,
overshadowed by yon blue mountains of
romance. Look, my uncle, how the noonday sun
is showering his light over the deep woods that
encircle the rock of Albaroneyonder, beyond the
verdure of the trees, winds the silvery Arno,
yonder
are hills and rugged steeps, and far away
tower
the blue heights of the Appenines!
And here, niece of mine, in my youthful
prime I stood, when my aged father's hand had
dubbed meknight. 'Twas such a quiet noonday
hour, on a calm and dreamlike day, as this, that
from the recess of this window, I gazed upon yon
gorgeous land. How the blood swelled in my
youthful veins, how dreams of ambition fired my
boyish fancy, as the words broke from my lips,
Here they ruled, my fathers, in days bygone
with the iron-sword of the Goth, here they
reigned
as sovereign princesas Dukes of
Florence
.'
Since that noonday hour thy sword has
flashed in the van of a thousand battles!
It hasit has! And yet what am I now?
Old before my time, swept away from the path
of glory, as I neared the goal! A warrior should
never utter a word of complaintand yetby
the Sacrament of Heaven, I had much rather
died with sword in hand, at the head of my hosts,
than to wither away with this festering wound on
yonder couch! I like not to count the pulsations
of my dying heart.
Nay, my uncle,chide not so bitterly. Thou
wilt recoverthy sword will again flash at the
head of armies!
My sword, Annabel, my sword,cried the
warrior, as his eye lit up with a strange
brilliancy
,
and his wan features were crimsoned by a
ruddy flush.
In a moment, the fair hands of the maiden bore
the sword from its resting place, in a nook of the
Red-Chamber, with a slow and weary movement,
as though the massive piece of iron she trailed
along the marble floor, exceeded her maidenly
strength to lift on high.
It is my sword, it is my swordshrieked the
warrior, as he flung the robes of purple back
from his muscular, though attenuated shoulder
and raised his proud form to its full height
Look, Annabel, how it gleams in the light! So
it gleamed on the walls of Jerusalem, so it shone
aloft over the desert-sands of the Syrian
wilderness
!
It will gleam over the battle field again!
Age, again will the snow-white plume of Julian
Di Albarone, wave over the ranks of the fray,
while ten thousand warriors, hail that plume as
their beacon-light!
He swung the sword aloft in the air, his whole
form was moved by excitement, every vein filled
and every pulse throbbed, his eye flashed like a
thing of flame, and his whitened lip trembled
with the glorious expression of battle-scorn.
Thrice he waved the sword around his head,
when the wild impulse of his sudden excitement
died away, his eyes lost their flashing brightness,
his limbs their vigor, and Julian of Alberone,
tottered
as he stood upon the marble-floor, and
stepping
hurriedly backward, fell heavily upon the
couch of the Red-Chamber.
The goblet, fair niecethe goblet on the
beaufet.Haste theeI am faint.
As the words broke gaspingly from the sick
man's lips, the Ladye Annabel turned hastily to
bring the goblet, and as she turned, she beheld
the head of Lord Julian resting uneasily on his
pillow
,
while his left arm hung heavily over the side
of the couch.
She turned again with trembling footsteps, and
hastened to arrange the pillow of the sick warrior.
Her fair hands smoothed the pillow of down, and
she gently raised his head from the couch.
At the very instant, the tapestry in a dark
corner
of the Red-Chamber rustled quickly to and
fro, as a figure muffled in a sweeping cloak of
crimson, emerged into view, and treading across
the tesselated pavement, with a footstep like a
spirit of the unreal air, it approached the beaufet of
ebony, and a white hand, glittering with a single
ring was extended for a moment over the goblet
of gold.
The Ladye Annabel placed the head of Lord
Julian, gently upon the pillow of down.
The glittering ring shone in the sun, as it fell
in the goblet of gold, and the hand of the figure,
white as alabaster, was again concealed in the
thick folds of the crimson robe
.
The Ladye Annabel, with her delicate hands,
parted the grey hairs from the sick man's face,
and swept them back from his brow.
The figure in robes of crimson, strode with a
noiseless footstep across the apartment, and
sought the shelter of the hangings of tapestry,
with as strange a silence as it had emerged from
their folds
.
Without taking notice of the white dust that
covered the bottom of the empty goblet, Annabel
filled it with generous wine, and approached the
bedside of her uncle. The Count raised himself
from the pillow, and lifted the goblet to his lips.
As his wan face was reflected in the ruddy
wavelets
of the wine, he fixed his full large eyes upon
the lovely face of Annabel, with a look of
affection
,
mingled with an expression, so strange, so
solemn and dread, that it dwelt in the soul of the
maiden for years.
He drank, and drained the goblet to the dregs.
Thank theefair niecethank thee.
He paused suddenly, his arms he flung wildly
from him, a thin, glassy film gathered over his
eyes, a gurgling noise sounded in his throat, and
he fell heavily upon the couch.
His features were knit in a fearful expression of
pain and suffering, his mouth opened with a
ghastly
grimace, leaving the teeth visible, the lips
were writhen with a quick convulsive pang, and
his eyes sternly fixed, glanced wildly from beneath
the eyebrows woven in a frown.
My unclemy father,shrieked the Ladye
Annabel, rushing to the bedsideLook not so
wildly, gaze not so sternly upon me. Speak my
uncle, oh, speak!
Her utterance failed, and an indistinct murmur
broke from her lips. Her hands ran hurriedly over
the brow of the warriorit was cold with beaded
drops of moisture. She bent hastily over the form
of Lord Julian, she imprinted a kiss on his parted
lips. She kissed the lips of the dead!
Then the tapestry, the hangings of the
Red-Chamber
,
the couch, with its ghastly corse, all
swam round her in a fearful dance, and the Ladye
Annabel fell insensible on the floor.
The great bell of the Castle of Albarone tolled
forth the hour of noon. The shadow of death
had been flung across the dial-plate in the
castle-yard
.
While the thunder-like tones of the bell, went
swinging, and quivering, and echoing among the
old castle halls, a footstep was heard without the
Red-Chamber, and the door was flung suddenly
open.
A young Cavalier, with a face marked by frank
open features, locks of rich gold, and an eye of
blue, while his handsome form was clad in a gay
dress of velvet, entered the apartment, and strode
with hurried steps to the couch.
He cast one look at the face of the corse,
marked
by the ghastly grimace of death, he cast one
quick and hasty glance at the form of the Ladye
Annabel, thrown insensible along the floor of
stone, and then he covered his face with his
trembling
hands, and his manly form was convulsed by
a shuddering tremor, that shook the folds of his
blue doublet, as though every sinew writhed in
agony beneath the gay apparel.
The heavy sob, which unutterable anguish
alone can bring from the heart of a proud man,
broke on the deep silence of the room, and the
big, heavy tear-drops of man's despair, came
trickling between the clasped fingers, pressed over
his countenance.
He is deadmy fatherhe is dead!
He mastered the first terrible impulse of grief,
and raised the swooning maiden from the floor.
THE ACCUSATION.
He is deadmy fatheragain sounded the
husky voice of the Cavalier. Thou, Annabel,
art all that is left to meI am
A murderera parricide!
cried a sharp and
piercing voice, that thrilled to the very heart of
the cavalier.
He turned hurriedly as he grasped the maiden
with his good right arm, he turned and beheld,
the Scholar Aldarin
.
His glance was fixed and stern, while with one
hand half-upraised, with his thick eyebrows
woven
in a frown, he stood regarding the Cavalier
with a look that was meant to rend his very heart
of hearts.
What means this outcry in the presence of the
dead! exclaimed Adrian in a determined tone
Let our past disputes be forgotten, old man, in
this terrible hour. See you not, my father lies
stark and dead?
Murdered by
thee
, vile parricide!rang out
the voice of the Signior Aldarin, as with a
determined
step he advanced to the bedsideHo!
Guards, I sayhe shouted, raising his voice
Vassals of Albarone, to the rescue!
The eye of the young Cavalier flashed, his brow
was knit, and his form crected to its full height
as he spoke in a quiet, determined tone.
Look ye, old man, thou mayst taunt and gibe
with thy magpie tongue, as long as the humor
pleases thee. My father's brother need fear no
wrong from methis maiden's father can fear no
harm from Adrian Di Albarone. Heap taunt on
taunt, good Signior, but see that this spirit of
insuit
is not carried into action. I am lord in the
Castle of my fathers!
Father, what mean those wild words, these
looks of anger? shrieked the Ladye Annabel, as
she awoke from her swoon of terror, and supported
by the arm of Adrian, glanced round the scene
Surely my father, you speak not aught against
Lord Adrian?
And as she spoke, the chamber was filled with
men-at-arms, in their glittering armour, and
servitors
of Albarone, all attired in the livery of the
house, who came thronging into the apartment,
and circled round the scene, while their mouths
were agape, and their eyes protruding with
astonishment
.
Aldarin glanced around the throng, he
marked each stalwart man-at-arms, each
strong-limbed
yeoman of the guard, and then his chest
heaved and his eye flashed as he shouted
Seize him, men of Albarone,
seize the
murderer
of your lord!
He pointed to Adrian Di Albarone as he spoke.
There was one wild thrill of terror and
amazement
,
spreading thro' the group, a confused
murmur, bursting involuntarily from every lip,
and then all was still as death.
Not a man stirred, not a servitor moved, but
all remained like statues, clustering round the
group in their centre, where Aldarin stood with
his slender form raised to its full stature, his arm
outstretched and his eye flashing like a
flame-coal
,
while Adrian gathered the Ladye Annabel
in his good right arm, and gazed upon the Signor
with a look of concentrated scorn.
Seize him guardsagain shouted Aldarin
see the Parricide!
There was the sound of a heavy footstep, and
the form of the stout yeoman emerged from the
group.
Not quite so fastmarry, my good Signior,
not quite so fasthe cried as he advanced. By
St. Withold, I have followed my old lord to many
a hard fought fight, I have served him by night
and by day, with hand and heart, for a score of
long years. Shall I stand by, and see his brave
son suffer wrong?
What means this wild uproar? exclaimed a
calm yet half-indignant voice, as the stately dame
of the Lord Di Albarone, yet unaware of her
bereavement
,
crossed the threshold with a lofty
step and an extended arm, advancing with the
port of a queen, to the centre of the group.
Vassals
what
means this wild uproar? Know ye
not that your lord lies deadly sick? Brother
Aldarin
,
I take it ill of you to suffer the clamor!
What can our liege of Florence think of ye,
vassals
,
when he beholds ye thus assail the sick
chamber of your lord with noise and outcry!
The stately dame, pointed to a richly attired
cavalier, who had followed her into the apartment.
He was a well formed nan with a face marked
by no definite expression. His dark hair,
gathered
in short, stiff curls around a low and
unmeaning
forehead, his small dark eyes protruding from
his head, seemed to be trying their utmost to
outstrip
his faintly delineated eyebrows, the nose
neither aquiline, classic, or Judaic, seemed
composed
of all the varieties of nasal organ, his
upper
lip was garnished with a portion of the wiry
beard that flourished on his prominent chin, his
lips were thick, and sensual, while his entire
face was as inexpressive as might be. The
throng bowed low, as they became aware of the
presence of the guest of their late lord. They
bowed to the Duke of Florence.
Adrian, my son, cred the Lady of Albarone
turning to her son in utter amazement, what
means this scene of confusion and alarm!
Adrian took his mother by the hand, and led
her to the couch. He spoke not a word, but waved
his hand toward the couch. Her form was
concealed
for a moment amid the hangings of the
bed, and then a shrick of wild emphasis startled
the ears of the bystanders.
He is dead, exclaimed the Lady of Albarone,
in a voice of unatural calmness, as she again
appeared
from amid the hangings of the bed, with a
face ghastly and livid as the face of death,
Vassals
of Albarone, your lord is dead!
There was one wild thrill of horror ran around
the group, and the Lady of Albarone, sank
leaning
for support upon the arm of her son, while
Annabel in the intervals of her own sobs and
sighs, whispered hurried words of consolation in
her car.
Aldarin stood regarding the group with a glance
of deep and searching meaning. He gazed upon
the vacant features of the Duke distended by
surprise
,
the countenance of Adrian marked by a
settled
frown of indignation, the visage of the
Countess
livid as death, and then the fair face of his
daughter Annabel, her eyes swimming in tears,
the parted lips and the cheek pale and flushed by
turns, met the glance of Aldarin, and a strange
expression trembled on his compressed lip, and
darkened over his high forehcad.
Lady of Albarone, exclaimed the Scholar,
advancing
.
Lady of Albarone, my brother died not
thro' the course of nature, he died not by the hand
of disease, he was murdered!
Murdered! repeated the Countess with a
hollow
echo.
And the Duke took up the word, echoing with
a trembling voice, that word of fear, murdered,
while the Servitors of Albarone sent the cry
shrieking
around the nooks and corners of the
Red-Chamber
.
Adrian of Albarone looked around the scene
and smiled as if in scorn, but said not a word.
Aldarin made one stride to the couch of death.
Behold the corse, he shrieked, behold the
blackened face, the sunken eyelid and the livid lips,
behold the ghastly remains of the Lord of
Albarone
!
Another stride and he reached the beaufet. He
seized the goblet of gold, and held it aloft.
Behold, he cried, behold the instrument of
his murder!
God save me now, shrieked the Countess.
There has been foul work hereAdrianoh,
Adrian, thy sire hath been poisoned!
This is some new mysterie, Sir Scholar,
exclaimed
Adrian with a look of scorn.
The Lady fell insensible, and the goblet rung
with a clanging sound upon the marble floor,
while from its depths there rolled a small compact
substance, encrusted in some chemical compound
white as snow in hue.
The Duke of Florence stooped hurriedly to the
very floor and seized both the goblet and the
encrusted
substance, with an eager grasp.
Ha! There is a white sediment deposited at
the bottom of this goblet. Albertine advance;
thou art skilled in such mysteries. Tell me, Sir
Monk, the nature of this white powder.
THE BLOODHOUND SALADIN.
The monk Albertine, whose dark eyes had for
a moment been gleaming over the shoulders of the
bystanders, now advanced with a slow and
measured
footstep, and confronted the Signior Aldarin,
with a look full of meaning and thought. Aldarin
returned the look, with a keen and searching
glance, and their eyes then mingled in one long
and ardent gaze, as though each man wished to
read the heart of his fellow.
With a look of calmness and perfect
self-posession
Albertine turned to the Duke and took the
goblet from his hand.
He gazed at its depths for a moment, he was
about to speak, when the heart of every man in
the Red-Chamber was thrilled by a wild and
terrific
howl, more fearful even than the yell of the
dying
,
that proceeded from among the curtains of the
death-couch, and echoed around the apartment.
That sound, exclaimed Aldarin, with a
nervous
start; That sound is from the couch of death!
It means, it means
A ruddy glow passed over his pale countenance,
and suddenly pausing he gazed round the group
in silence.
It is the poor hound of our good Lord;
muttered
Robin the Rough, advancing. The hound,
with skin black as death, which Lord Julian
brought from Palestinehe is howling over the
dead corse of his master. So have I heard him
howl for three days past, as the castle-bell tolled
the hour of high noon, beside the panels of yonder
door. Come hither brute; come hither Saladin.
The hound, black as night, with an eye like
fire, came leaping through the throng and
crouched
whining at the feet of the stout yeoman.
It was, in sooth, a noble hound, with full chest,
slender limbs, long neck, and tapering body,
marked by all that delicacy of proportion, that
beauty of shape, and grace of motion, which
tradition
ascribes to the bloodhounds of the Eastern
lands. The head was like the head of a snake,
while the eye seemed almost instinct with a human
soul.
Sir monk, cried the Duke, in an imperious
tone, were it not better for thee to tell us at once
whether the white powder in the goblet is poison?
or shall we wait thy pleasure while thou dost
weary thine eyes with gazing at yonder hound?
The monk Albertine made a solemn inclination
of his head, and kneeling on the marble floor in
the centre of the group, he struck the edge of the
goblet upon the tesselated stone with a quick and
sudden motion of his hand.
The diamond-shaped stone of black marble was
strewn with the white sediment deposited in the
bottom of the goblet.
The hound sprang forward, and while his wild
eyes flashed and blazed, his nostrils dilated and
the sable animal snuffed the atmosphere of the
Red-Chamber, as he leaped quickly around the
group.
He snuffs the smell of human blood!
muttered
the stout yeoman.
And while all was intense interest and suspense,
while a mingled feeling of surprise and terror and
nameless fear ran around the group, while every
eye was fixed upon the kneeling form of Albertine,
with the goblet upraised in his hand, the hound
Saladin passed from man to man, scenting the
garments of the bystanders, and glancing wildly
from face to face, from eye to eye.
He paused for a moment in front of the Signior
Aldarin, and uttered a low whining sound as he
gazed in the scholar's face.
How long is this mummery to last?
exclaimed
Aldarin, advancing with a sudden stepTell
me, sir monk, is thy study over?
The hound Saladin sprang suddenly aside from
the robes of the Signior and eagerly snuffing the
marble floor approached the monk Albertine, and
with a wild howling sound licked the white
substance
from the diamond-shape stone.
Is it poison? asked the Duke, and the interest
of the group clustered around became absorbing
and intense.
Some new mysteric of thine, learned scholar
exclaimed Adrian Di Alberone, with a smile of
incredulity. The man does not live, so false in
heart as to place a death-bowl to the lips of a
warrior
like Julian of Albarone!
Is it poison! exclaimed Albertine, gazing
round upon the groupBehold!
And as he spoke, the hound Saladin fell
stiffened
and dead, upon the marble pavement, with a
single fearful struggle, a single terrible howl.
His limbs were fearfully distorted, and his eyes
were starting from their sockets, while a thin white
foam hung round his serpent-like jaw.
There was one quick yell of horror thundering
around the apartment, and then you might have
heard the footsteps of the Invisible Death, all was
so fearfully silent and still.
As God lives, my father has been murdered!
shouted Adrian Di Albarone, as the expression of
incredulity lately visible in his manly face changed
to a look of pallid horrorNow by the Sacrament
of God, he shall be avenged as never was
murdered
man avenged before! Who, he shricked in
a husky voice, turning to the throngWho hath
done this murder?
Sir Duke, exclaimed Aldarin, as though he
had not heard Adrian, the encrusted substance
which fell from the death-bowl may be
poisonous
THE SIGNET-RINGTHE ROBETHE SECRET
DOOR
The small white ball, which the Duke had
absently
clenched in his fingers, fell to the floor, and
every ear heard a ringing sound as it fell, and
every eye beheld the fragments splintering as it
touched the floor. The whole substance had
vanished, and along the floor there rolled a massive
signet ring, glittering with a single ruby.
The Duke of Florence stooped hastily and again
grasped the ring; he held it aloft, and shouted with
a tone of amazement and horror
It is the ring of the murderer, dropped by
accident
into the death-bowl! It bears a crest and
an inscriptionlook Signior Aldarincan'st make
out crest or inscription?
Aldarin replied with a look of horror
The crest, 'tis a Winged Leopardthe motto
`
Grasp boldly, and bravely strike!
' Both crest
and motto are those of Albaronehis voice sank
to a deathlike whisperLord Adrianbehold
it is, it is the signet ring of Albarone!
Aldarin turned with a voice of fierce emphasis
Thy question has its answerlet the
signet-ring
tell the tale. Adrian, oh, Adrian, he con
tinued as his voice changed with mingled
compassion
and anguishwhat moved thee to this
fearful deed? Oh, that I, a weak old man, should
live to see my brother's son accused of that brother's
murder!
This is some damning plot! calmly responded
Adrian, though his chest heaved and swelled with
the tempest aroused in his soulTell me, Sig
nior Aldarin, what were the contents of the `
soothing'
potion administered by thee to the late Lord
Julian at day break?
Tell me, good Albertine, thou didst aid in its
composition, and thou can'st witness when I gave
it to my murdered brother.
I aided in its compositionit was harmless.
I saw thee minister the potion to Lord Julian.
Thou alone, Aldarin, thou alone has had access
to this chamber since daybreakspoke Adrian,
with his calm eye fixed full on the Signior's visage
Now tell me who it was that drugged you bowl
with death?
Balvardo, thou didst stand sentinel at yon door
from daybreak until high noondid a soul enter
the Red-Chamber from the first moment to the
last second of thy watch?
Not a living manmuttered the hoarse voice
of Balvardo from the crowdnot a soul save the
Ladye Annabel.
Search the apartments! shouted the Duke
the assassin may be yet lurking in some dark
nook or corner!
The doors were closed, the search commenced.
Every nook was ransacked, every corner thrown
open to the light, not even the bed of death and
its pillows of down and its hangings of purple was
spared.
While the search was in progress, the Countess
of Albarone awoke from her swoon, and striding
from the recess of an emblazoned window, where
the Ladye Annabel remained glancing with a
vacant
look over the strange and terrible scene
progressing
in the Red-Chamber, she was soon made
aware of the fearful crime charged upon her son,
the signet-ring and the terrible mystery.
There is mystery, she cried with a proud
voice, there is mystery, butno dishonour!
Who can believe Adrian Di Albarone guilty of so
accursed an act!
For one, I do not! bluntly cried the stout
yeoman.
Nor I! cried one of the servitors, and the cry
went round the apartment.
Nor Inor IHe is guiltless.
A wild and prolonged shriek from a nook of the
Red-Chamber near the death-couch sent a sudden
thrill through the group assembled in this terrible
mystery.
Every form wheeled suddenly round, every eye
was fixed in the direction from whence issued the
shriek, and the aged Steward of the Castle was
seen upholding with one trembling hand the folds
of the gorgeous crimson tapestry, while as his aged
face grew livid as death, he pointed with the other
hand to a recess beyond.
A secret passagethe door, cut into the solid
wall is flung wide opena robe laid across the
thresholda robe of crimson faced with gold.
And as he spoke he flung the hangings yet
farther
aside, and the bright sunshine gleamed over
the panel of the secret door, flung wide open, the
crimson robe thrown over the threshold, but no
beam lighted up the gloom of the passage beyond.
The Lady of Albarone rushed hurriedly
forward
,
she seized the robe, she held it aloft in the
sunbeams, and
every eye beheld the robe of
Adrian Di Albarone!
Adrian! shrieked the Countess, Adrian of
Albaroneyonder secret passage leads to thy
sleeping chamberthy departed sire, myself and
thou, alone were aware of its existence. It has
ever been a secret of our house. Tell me, by yon
murdered corse, I implore thee, tell me who flung
this door open, who laid thy robe across the
threshhold
?
Adrian passed his hand wildly over his forehead
and with a cry of horror fell lifeless upon the
floor.
CHAPTER THE THIRD.
THE EMBRACE OF A BROTHER.
The sun was setting, calmly and solemnly
setting
,
behind a gorgeous pile of rainbow-hued
clouds, magnificent with airy castle and pinnacle,
while the full warmth of his beams shone through
the arching window of the Red Chamber, its
casement panels thrown wide open, filling that
place of death with light and splendor.
In the recess of the lofty casement, with the
sunshine falling all around, and the shadow of her
slender figure thrown like a belt of gloom over the
mosaic floor, stood the Ladye Annabel, silent and
motionless; her rounded arms half raised, with
the slonder hands crossed over her bosom, her
robe of pale blue velvet, with the inner vest of
undimmed
white made radiant by the sunbeams;
while, swept aside from her features, the golden
hair fell with a floating motion down over her
shoulders, and along the breast of snow.
And as she stood thus still and immovable,
gazing
with one unvarying glance along the
court-yard
,
the sunshine revealed her face of beauty,
every lineament and feature disclosed in the
golden
light, seeming more like the face of a
dream-spirit
,
than the countenance of a mortal maiden.
The soul shone from her face. The eyes full,
large, and lustrous with their undimmed blue,
dilating
and enlarging with one wild glance; the
cheek white as alabaster, yet tinted by the bloom,
and swelled with the fullness of the budding rose;
the lips small, and curvingly shaped, slightly
parted
,
revealing a glimpse of the ivory teeth; the
chin, with its dimple; the brow, with its clear
surface, marked by the parted hair, waving aside
like clustered sunbeamssuch was the face of the
Ladye Annabel, all vision, all loveliness, and soul.
He is bound; yes, bound with the cord and
thong! They gather around him, with looks of
insult; they place him on the steed; they move
oh, mother of Heaven!they move toward the
castle gate! And shall I never see him again
never, never? It is a dream; it is no reality.
It is a dream! Was it a dream, yesterday, when
he stood in this recess, his hand clasped in mine,
his eyes calm and eloquent, gazing in mine, while
his voice spoke of the sunset glories of the summer
sky?
One long, wild glance at the scene in the
court-yard
,
and then veiling her eyes from the sight,
she started wildly from the window.
It is a dream, murmured the Ladye
Annabel
,
as she hurriedly glided from the room, and
the echoes returned her whisper. It is, it is a
dream!
Her footsteps had scarce ceased to echo along
the ante-chamber, when another footstep was
heard, and ere a moment passed, Aldarin stood
in the recess of the lofty window of the Red
Chamber
.
His face was agitated by strange and va
rying expressions, as with a keen and anxious
eye he glanced over the spears and pennons of a
long line of men-at-arms, passing under the raised
portcullis of the castle gate.
The portcullis was lowered with a thundering
clang, the spears and pennons, the gallant steeds
and their stalwart riders, were lost to sight, but
presently came bursting into view again, beyond
the castle gate, where the highway to Florence,
appearing from amid surrounding woods, led up
a steep and precipitous hill. And there, flashing
with gold and glowing with embroidery, the broad
banner of the Duke of Florence was borne in the
van of the calvacade. Then came four
men-at-arms
,
in armor of blazing gold; and then,
distinguished
by his rich array, rode the Duke,
mounted
upon a snow-white charger, and behind him,
environed by guards, his arms lashed behind his
back, came Lord Adrian Di Albarone, accused of
the most foul and atrocious murder of his sire.
Beside her son, her face closely veiled, and her
form bowed low, the Countess rode; and in the
rear, their steeds gaily prancing, their spears
flashing, and their pennons glancing in the sun,
came the men-at-arms in long and gallant array.
With parted lips and strained eyes did Signior
Aldarin watch the movements of this company.
As the steed of the last man-at-arms was lost
in the shades of the forest, Aldarin smiled grimly,
and, extending his shrivelled hand, shouted in
tones of exultation:
One hour ago I was the stooping scholar,
The
Signior
Aldarin.
Now!
full boldly did he
swell that little word; Now, I am the
Count
Aldarin
Di Albarone
, lord of the wide domains of
Albarone!
He laughed the short, husky laugh which was
peculiar to him.
Adrian swept from my pathand is he not
already swept from my path?that brainless
idiot,
my liege
of Florence, swallowed the charge
against that forward boy as greedily as the fish
swallows the tempting bait; the signet and the
robe will bring the changeling to the block, and
thus, my only obstacle swept away, I, as next
heir, succeed to the titles and estates of Albarone!
And Annabel, my fair daughter! thy brow shall
be decked with a coronet; thou shall reign
Duchess
of Florence! Haha!
And here, as the wide prospect of ambition
opened to his mind's eye, he became silent, and,
hurriedly pacing the floor, resigned his soul to
the dreams of his excited fancy.
Suddenly his visions were interrupted by a
deep sigh, that seemed to proceed from the corse
upon the couch
.
Aldarin started, and for a moment stood still
as a statue, his ear inclined toward the couch, as
if intently listening; his lips apart, and his
quivering
hands stretched forth as though he would
defend himself from some unreal foe.
At last, gaining courage, he approached the bed.
There, without the slightest signs of animation,
lay the faded form of the gallant warrior; the
eyes closed, the stern expression of the features
vanished, and the whole attitude that of
unconscious
repose.
Turning away, Aldarin was chiding himself for
his childish terror, when a deep, sonorous groan
met his ear. With a beating heart he once more
turned, and beheld a sight that caused the cold
sweat of intense terror to ooze from his person,
and every nerve to quake with alarm.
The eyes of the Count were wide open; a slight
flush pervaded his cheeks, and his entire attitude
was changed. A voice came from his pallid lips:
Annabel, dearest Annabel! a fearful dream
but now possessed my fancy! Methought I lay
deaddead, Annabel, dead; and that I died ere
thy nuptials were solemnizedthy nuptials,
Annabel
,
and thine Adrian!
A fearful expression came over the scholar
Aldarin's
features, as though he was stringing his
mind to one great effort. In an instant his
countenance
became calm again, and approaching the
bedside, he enquired, in a soft voice, if his dear
brother wanted anything?
The Count answered hurriedly, as if a sudden
light burst upon him:
Ah! the Virgin save us! good Aldarin, art
thou here? Surely, I saw Adrian and Annabel
but a moment since? Surely
Nay, my brother; answered Aldarin, 'twas
but mere phantasy. Annabel is not with us, nor
is my Lord Adrian here; but I, dear brother, I
am by your side.
Speaking these words in a voice tremulous with
affection, Signior Aldarin passed his left arm
around the body of the Count, while the other
enclosed
his neck. He clasped him in an ardent
embrace, as he continued:
I am with you, dear brother; I will minister
to your slightest wish; I, Aldarin, your own
devoted
friend.
Here he inserted his right hand beneath the
long gray locks of the Count, and clasping his
neck, pressed him yet closer to his bosom.
Kind Aldarin, the Count began, but the
sentence
was cut short by a piercing cry, and the
right hand of Aldarin clutched tighter and tighter
around his brother's throat.
Nay, brother, thou shalt have rest, an' thou
wishest it, cried Signor Aldarin. There, sleep
softly, and pleasant dreams attend you!
The Count fell heavily upon the bed; his
bloodshot
eyes protruded from his blackened face, a
livid circle was around his throat, and a thin
line of blood trickled from his mouth. A heavy,
deep, prolonged sigh came from his chest, and
the murdered man ceased to live.
The fiend be thanked!it is
done!
Having thus spoken, in a voice that came from
his clenched teeth, the murderer looked up and
sawthe dogged, rough, yet honest visage of the
stout yeoman peeping from among the curtains,
on the opposite side of the bed, his eyes steadily
fixed on the corse, and a curious look of inquiry
visible in every feature of his face.
ALDARIN, THE SCHOLAR, AND ROBIN, THE
SOLDIER.
The Signior drew back, trembling in every
limb, and pale as death. It was a moment ere he
recovered his speech, when, assuming a haughty
air, he exclaimed:
Slave, what do you here? Is it thus you
intrude
upon my privacy? Speak, siryour
excuse
!
The stout yeoman replied in his usual manner,
speaking in the Italian, but with a sharp English
accent:
Why, most worshipful Signior, you will please
to bear in mind that for twenty long years have I
followed my lord, he who now lies cold and
senseless
,
to the wars. That withered arm have I
seen bearing down upon the foe in the thickest of
the fight; that sunken eye have I beheld glance
with the stern look of command. By his side
have I fought and bled; for him did I leave my
own native landmerrie, merrie England,and
I will say, a more generous, true-hearted, and
valiant
knight, never wore spurs, or broke a lance,
than my lord, the noble Count Julian Di
Albarone
.
The yeoman passed the sleeve of his blue
doublet
across his eyes.
Well, sirrah, cried the Signior, to what
tends all this?
Marry, to this does it tend: that wishing to
behold that noble face yet once more, I stole
silently
to this chamber, thinking to be a little
while alone with my brave lord. I did not
discover
your presence, till I looked through the
curtains
and saw
The stout Englishman suddenly stopped; there
was a curious twitch in his left eye, and a grim
smile upon his lip.
Saw what, sirrah? hurriedly asked the
scholar
Aldarin.
Marry, I saw thee, worshipful Signior, in the
act of embracing the Count; and such a warm,
kind, brotherly embrace as it was! By St.
Withold
!
it did me more good than a hundred of
Father
Antonio's homiliesby my faith, it did!
The thin visage of Aldarin became white as
snow and red as crimson by turns. Making an
effort to conceal his agitation, he replied;
Well, well, Robin, thou art a good fellow,
after
all, though, to be sure, thy manners are
somewhat
rough. I tell thee, brave yeoman, I have
long had it in my mind to advance thy condition.
Follow me to the Round Room, good Robin, where
I will speak further to thee of this matter.
The Round Room!
murmured Robin, as he
followed the scholar Aldarin from the Red
Chamber
.
Ha! 'tis the secret chamber o' th' scholar;
many, many have been seen entering its confines
never a single man has been seen emerging
from its narrow door, save the scholar Aldarin!
I'll beware the serpent's pangs! I'll drink no
goblets o' wine, touch no food or dainty viands
while in this Round Room; or else, by St.
Withold
,
Rough Robin's place may be vacant in the
hall, forever and a day!
With these thoughts traversing his mind, the
yeoman followed the scholar over the floor of the
ante-chamber, and as they entered the confines of
a gloomy corridor, a spectacle was visible, which,
to say the least, was marked by curious and
singular
features.
Imagine the solemn scholar striding slowly
along the corridor with measured and gliding
foot-steps
,
while behind him walks Robin the Rough,
describing various eccentric figures in the air
with his clenched hands; now brandishing them
above the Signior's head, now exhibiting a
remarkable
display of muscular vigor at the very
back of Aldarin; and again, making a pass with
all his strength apparently at the body of the
alchymist
,
but in reality at the intangible
atmosphere
.
These demonstrations did not appear to
give the stout yeoman much pain, for his cheeks
were very much agitated, and from his eyes were
rolling thick, large tears of laughter.
The corridor terminated in a long, dark gallery
hung with pictures colored by age, and framed in
massive oak. Traversing this gallery, they
ascended
a staircase of stone, and passed along another
corridor, terminated by a winding staircase. This
the scholar and the yeoman descended, and then
came another gallery, another ascending stairway,
and then various labyrinthine passages traversed,
Rough Robin at last found himself standing side
by side with Aldarin, in front of the dark panels
of the narrow door leading into the Round Room.
This room was scarce ever visited by any living
being in the castle save Aldarin, and strange
legends
concerning its mysterious secrets were
current
among the servitors of Albarone.
Many had been seen entering its confines with
the Signior, but never was any one, save Aldarin,
seen to emerge from its gloomy door.
CHAPTER THE FOURTH.
THE DEATH-TRAP.
ROBIN THE ROUGH IS ADVANCED TO HONOR,
WHILE THE SKELETON-GOD LAUGHS
OVER HIS SHOULDER.
The door flew suddenly open, and Robin, gazing
around, found himself standing in a small room,
circular in form, with arching ceiling, and floor
of stone. The walls were lined with shelves,
piled with massive books, clasped by fastenings of
silver and of gold, thrown among scrolls of
parchment
,
richly illuminated, and emblazoned with
strange figures, relieving pictures of dark and
hidden meaning.
The apartment having no casement, light was
supplied by a small lamp of curious workmanship,
depending from the arched ceiling, and diffusing
its intense and radiant beams all around the place,
making the lonely room as bright as though the
noonday sun shone over its shelves and walls.
Around the chamber were scattered strange
instruments
pertaining to the science of astrology
or mysteries of alchemy; here richly emblazoned
parchments, inscribed with curious characters,
glittered in the light; and yonder, the ghastly
skull, with its hideous grin of mockery, was strown
along the floor, mingled with the bones of the
human
skeleton, the last fragments of the tenement
of the living soul.
While Robin's eyes distended in wonder, as he
hastily
glanced around the room, he stumbled and fell
against an object reared in the centre of the floor.
The foul fiend take thee, slave! shouted
Aldarin
,
as, with his extended arms, he stayed the
soldier in his fall. Wouldst thou destroy the
labor of thrice seven long years? Wouldst thou
destroy a Mighty Thought? Stand aside from the
altar, and come not near it again, or by the body
of * * *, I will brain thee with this dagger! Thou
slave! he shrieked, in tones of wild indignation,
as his blazing eye was fixed upon the face of the
yeoman, who stood confused and silent, for what
dost thou suppose I have watched yon beechen
flame, by day and night, for twenty-one long years?
For what have I wasted the youth and the vigor
of my days before yon altar? Was it to have my
labor, the mighty thought, for which I have dared
what mortal never dared before, destroyed by thy
clumsy carcase? Dost think so, slave?
Rough Robin murmured an excuse for his
awkwardness
,
and, while the Signior's features
subsided
into their usual deep and solemn expression,
he again gazed around the room.
From the centre of the oaken floor arose a small
altar, built of snow-white marble, with a light blue
flame arising from a vessel of gold on its surface:
the fire sweeping along the sides of an alembic,
suspended over the altar by four chains, attached
to as many rods of gold placed at each corner of
the structure.
There was something so strange and solemn in
the entire aspect of the placethe light blue flame
arising in tongues of fire from the vessel of gold
on the snow-white altar, burning for ever beneath
the hanging alembic, the chains and rods of gold,
the pure and undimmed white of the marble,
varied
by no sculpturing or ornament, combined with
the utter stillness and solitude of the roomthat
Robin felt awed, he scarce knew why; and dark
forebodings crept like shadows over his brain.
The scholar seated himself upon a small stool
placed near the other, and pointing to another, in
a mild voice, desired Robin to follow his example.
The yeoman hesitated.
It is not meet for a poor yeoman o' th' Guard
to rest himself in the presence of so great a
scholar
.
Nay, nay, good Robin, rest thyself. I was
angered with thee a moment hence, but now it is
all past. Seat thyself, brave yeoman.
The soldier complied, and rested his stout
person
upon a stool of oak, placed some six feet
from the spot where sat the Signior Aldarin.
Robin
had but time to note a singular circumstance,
ere the scholar spoke.
The stool upon which the
stout yeoman sat, was firmly jointed in a large
slab of red stone, which, spreading before him for
the space of some six feet, was curiously fixed in
the planks of the oaken floor
.
With a mild and smiling look, the scholar
spoke:
Robin, thou hast been a true and faithful
vassal
to my late brother. Thou didst right carefully
attend Lord Julian, when forced by the incurable
wound of a poisoned arrow, some three months
since, he returned from Palestine, leaving Sir
Geoffrey o' th' Long-sword, at the head of his
men-at-arms. Robin, I have long designed to
testify
the good opinion in which I hold thee by
some substantial giftthou shalt be Seneschal of
this mighty castle of Albarone!
Marry, good Signior
How, sir!dost thou address
me
as Signior?
Vassal, I am the Lord of Albarone!
But Adrian
What sayest thou of Adrian? A murderer
a parricidehis death is certain. The Duke of
Florence hath sworn it.
Well, my Lord Count, then, an' it pleases you
better, I was about to say that if I had my choice
I would sooner be made an esquire.
This thou shalt be:first promise to serve
me faithfully in all that I shall command.
Well, as far as an honest man may, so far do
I promise.
The scholar Aldarin mused a moment, and then
said carelessly:
Was it not an exceeding wicked deedthis
murder of my good brother?
Aye, marry was it, replied Robin, looking
fixedly at Aldarin, and the fiend of hell, himself,
could not have done a more damned, or a more
accursed thing.
True, good Robin, 'twas a horrid murder.
What could have prompted Adrain to raise his
hand against his father, eh? good Robin?
The yeoman did not reply. He cast his eyes
to the floor, and confusedly fingered his cap.
The Count Aldarinso must I style him
reached a folded parchment from a writing-desk,
and then asked:
Why dost thou not speak, good Robin? What
art thinking of?
Why, heaven save your
lordship
, said Robin,
speaking in a whisper, and gazing full in
Aldarin's
face,
I was just wondering whether the
murderer embraced the Count ere he strangled
him?
Aldarin started asidehis features were
writhen
into a fearful contortion, and his whole frame
shook like a leaf of the aspen tree. Again he
turned his visage: it was calm as the face of
innocence
,
and a smile was on his pinched lip.
Receive thy warrant as seneschal of the
Castle
Di Albarone, said Aldarin, as he held forth
the parchment. Nay, kneel not, good Robin;
keep thy seat.
Robin held forth his hand to reach the
parchment
;
his fingers touched it, when Aldarin
stamped
his foot upon the floor, and the slab of red
stone fell quick as lightning beneath the yeoman.
A deep and dark well was discovered. In an
instant
the stool affixed to the stone was empty, and
far below, in the depths of the pit, the echo of the
falling slab sank with a sound like the rushing of
the winter wind through the corridors of a deserted
mansion.
A face, with eyes rolling ghastlily, with the
lower jaw sunken, and the tongue protruding
from the mouth, appeared above the side of the
cavity, at the very feet of Aldarin, and a muscular
hand convulsively clutched the oaken planks;
while the body of the stout yeoman was seen
through the darkness of the pit, as he clung, with
the grasp of despair, to the floor of the room.
Devil! shouted the desperate soldier, as he
made a convulsive effort to tighten the grasp of
his hand on the smooth plank, I'll foil thee yet.
'Tis not the fate of an honest man to die thus!
My doom
Is death
! shrieked the scholar, and drawing
the glittering dagger from his robe, he smote the
fingers of the yeoman with its unerring steel.
The joints of the hand were severed, the grasp of
the soldier failed, he gave one dying look, and
then far, far down in the pit a whizzing noise like
the sound of a falling body was heard, and as it
grew fainter and fainter did Aldarin stand in
attitude
of listening, gazing down into the shadowy
void, his arms outstretched, his eyes wildly
glaring
,
his lips apart, and every lineament of his
face expressive of triumph, mingled with hate and
scorn.
A wild, maniac laugh came from the
murderer's
lips:
Hahaha! caitiff and slave! Thou hast
met thy fate. The scholar hath enemies, but
haha!they all
disappear!
Again he cast his eyes into the well. All was
still as death. A single look into the dark cavity,
and, with his bitter smile, Aldarin pictured the
mangled corse of the yeoman, lying in bloody
fragments, strewn over the vaults of the castle,
amid the corses of the ghastly dead. He stamped
his foot on the floor, and the red slab, bearing the
empty stool, slowly arose on its hinges, and was
again fixed in the oaken planks.
Silent forever, prying fool! My secret is
safe. Thou shalt no more prate of a certain
warm
embrace. Nay, nay; now for my schemes. I
must send on to Florence fresh proofs of Adrian's
guilt: witnesses, and so on, and so on. That
matter arranged, then comes the marriage of
Annabel
and the Duke. Haha! Let me think.
Here he fell into a musing fit, and having
newly
fed the beechen flame upon the altar of marble,
he approached a point of the Round Room, where
a small knob of iron projected from the oaken
floor. Stamping upon the knob, a division of the
shelving receded, and a portion of the wall,
leaving
an open space, while a passage was disclosed
into a secret chamber, beyond the Round Room.
A door of dark and solid wood, painted in
imitation
of the walls of the Round Room, had been
made in an aperture of the wall, with shelving
placed on its panels, and every sign or mark of
the existence of such a door, carefully and
effectually
erased. It bore a complete resemblance to
the other parts of the walls, and no one, save
Aldarin, could have dreamed of its existence.
The small knob in the oaken floor, communicated
with a spring, and the secret door rolled into the
adjoining room on grooves fixed in the floor.
Aldarin stepped through the secret passage,
the door rolled back, and the Round Room was
left to the silent flame and the grinning skull.
CHAPTER THE FIFTH.
THE CHAMBER OF MYSTERIES.
FEAR * * * AND GIVE GLORY TO HIM, FOR THE
HOUR OF HIS JUDGMENT IS COMETHE
SMOKE OF THEIR TORMENT
ASCENDETH
UP FOR EVER AND
EVER.
The Book
.
A chamber with a low, dark ceiling, supported
by massive rafters of oak, floor and wall of dark
stone, unrelieved by wainscot or plaster, bare,
rugged and destitute, in form, an oblong square,
B
narrow in width, and extensive in length, with
the impression of a coffin-like gloom and
confinement
,
resting upon each dark stone and rugged
rafter, while the air was insupportable with the
scent of decaying mortality.
In the centre of the room arose a rough table
of massive oak, with a smoking light, burning in
a vessel of iron, placed at each corner, flinging
a dreary brilliancy around the darkness of the
chamber.
The ruddy light threw its red and murky
beams over the fearful burden of the table. It
was piled with ghastly carcasses of the dead!
There were lifeless trunks, all hewn and hacked,
there were discolored faces, green with decay,
with the eyes scooped from the sockets, the livid
skin dropping from the forehead, the jaw torn
from its socket, and the brain, once the resting
place of the mighty soul, protruding in all its
discoloration
and corruption over the bared brow;
there were arms and limbs torn from the body,
some yet wearing the hue of life, others rendered
hideous and disgusting by the revel of the worm;
there, in that lone room were piled up all these
ghastly remains of humanity, these fearful
mockeries
of life, there rotting relics of what had once
enthroned the GIANT SOUL.
The form of a muscular man, with chest of
iron, and arms of brass, lay on the centre of the
table, side by side with the figure of a fragile
woman
,
the short, stiff locks of the one surmounting
the half peeled forehead of the warrior, while the
sweeping tresses of the other, drooped over the
white cheek, the alabaster neck, and fell twining
over the bosom, yet untainted by decay.
Here, cried Aldarin, with a wild and dilating
eyeHere for twenty-one long years have I
toiled. The sun shone over the beauty of spring,
the luxury of summer, and yet I beheld him not.
Autumn came with its decay, and winter with
its cold, and yet Aldarin went not forth. Toil,
tiol, toil, while youth died in my veins, and age
came wrinkling over my brow; toil, toil, toil,
unceasing
and eternal toil. Julian went to war, his
plume waved over the ranks of battle. Aldarin
toiled on, over the carcasses of the dead. Others
have made friends among the living, and won
honour from the greatit was mine to build a
home amid the carcasses of the rotting dead, and to
wring knowledge, wild and terrible, it is true, yet
mighty knowledge, from the grasp of death. Toil,
toil, toil, but not forever. It will come at last
the glorious secret. A few more weary days, a
few more dreary nights, and the corse will speak,
the alembic will give forth the secret. The future
speaks two words that fill my heart with fire
unbounded wealth
Immortal life
!
He looked around with a blazing eye and
extended
armThey rise before me, the host of
victimsghastly with the death-hue, gory with
blood they rise, they raise their hands, and shriek
my name! And yet, it was to be, it was to be,
and
it was!
And
he
, the last, the most dread and
fearful sacrificeoh,
Fiend
, wring not my heart
with throes of fire, nor point to yon wan and pallid
form! I tell thee when the last secret shall have
been wrung from the lips of Death, then, then,
he
,
aye,
he
may, may
He paused, he drooped his head low on his
breast, a scarcely audible murmur broke from his
lips. Two phrases of doubtful purport might
alone be heard
Live againand then the murmurmighty
secretfrom
his
body
Aldarin turned from his dread and mystic
reveries
,
he seized the scalpel, he commenced the
work of knowledge, among the carcasses of the
dead. Long he labored, and eagerly he toiled,
but at last, as the solemn hours of the night wore
on, he slept and dreamed a dream. Prostrate
among the bodies of the dead, his arms flung
carelessly on either side over the torn and
mangled
faces, Aldarin slept and dreamed.
And this was the
Dream of Aldarin the
Fratricide
.
THE DREAM OF THE DAMNED.
He stood upon a lonely isle. His feet were
tortured by the sensation of burning, he looked
beneath in wonder, he found he stood upon a rock
of fire. He looked aroundhe beheld an ocean
of fire; as far as eye could see, nothing met his
vision
but the waves of crimson flame, undulating
to and fro, with a gentle, yet solemn motion. Had
the waves arisen around him, in giant billows, or
swept above in mountains of liquid flame, the
dreamer would have rejoiced, his spirit would
have joined in the tumult, his soul become the
incarnation of the storm. But that strange
calmness
of the waves, that quiet undulation, awed
him, chilled him to the heart. He looked again
over the shoreless sea, and saw with straining
eyes a sight of woeunutterable woe.
From the surface of every wave, from the waves
breaking in spiral flames at his feet, afar and near,
on every side, from the surface of every wave was
thrust a discolored face, with burning eyes, that
gleamed with a strange life, while the lips were
colorless, the cheeks livid, and the brow green
with decay. As the Dreamer looked, low, faint
murmurs, unutterable sighs and sobs, broke on
the air, and a hollow whisper, more like the echo
of a thought than a sound, came to his ear
THESE ARE THE FACES OF THE DAMNEDevery
face you see, is the face of a
Lost-soul
THESE
ARE THE FACES OF THE DAMNED.
Aldarin turned from side to side with a horror
he had never felt before. All around seemed
turning
to fire, fire in every shape and form, fire
intangible
and fire incarnate. Above, no sky with
Sun of Glory gave light to the ocean of flame,
with the faces of the damned, thrust from every
billow. A roof of brass, vast and awful, and
magnificent
,
arched over the waves of fire; it was
heated to a burning heat, and the eye of Aldarin
seemed turning to flame, as he looked upon the
brazen sky. The horizon of this fearful sky, was
concealed by great clouds, rolling slowly on, and
on, and on, over the waves of fire, far, far, from
the isle where stood Aldarin.
And while the hollow murmur broke over the
scene, and the wispering of suppressed voices, and
the sobs of soft voiced women, shrieking that
unutterable
wail, Aldarin felt the very air burn into
his flesh, hotter, and more torturing than the air
of the simoom, he felt the rock beneath him
turning
to red-hot fire, his feet were crumbling into
fragments, while agony and intense pain, quivered
along his veins, and the flame lapped up his blood.
He burned, and yethe burned not. The air
penetrated
into his flesh, entering the pores, burning
along his veins; he felt the fire at his very heart,
he drank in the flame with every breath, and yet
he burned not. No sooner did his feet crumble
with the agonizing influence of the fire, than
another
portion of his frame, seemed renewing its life,
his heart became young, and his brain flowed with
healthy blood. Again his feet renewed their flesh,
and then, with a hollow voice, he shrieked,
mingling
in that unutterable wail of the damned, I
burn, I burn, my heart is on fire, my brain is
turned to flame, and yet I am not consumed!
A sudden change in the shape of the islet on
which he stood, attracted his attention. At first
wide and extensive in form, it was now narrow
and contracted. Every moment it grew smaller,
and yet smaller, and the waves of fire came rolling
wave after wave over its surface. Aldarin started
with a new and strange horror. Terrible it was
to stand on the rock of fire, his feet consuming, his
brain on fire, his heart aflame; air, sky and ocean,
all burning into his very soul, terrible, most
terrible
,
but those hollow murmurs, those fearful
whispers
of the damned came breaking on his ear,
speaking of mysteries, yet more terrible, in the
Vast Beyond
.
The wretched man clung to the rock. Oh!
God, how fearful was the first touch of the waves
of molten flame; how the liquid fire ate into his
flesh and corrupted his blood, as the spiral flames
cresting each wave came hissing and curling
round his limbs!
The waves rose higher and higher; the bodies of
the lost, offensive with decay, the loathsome, and
worm-eaten came floating around Aldarin. He
raised his hands, he pushed the ghastly carcasses
aside, but still they came floating on, and on,
throwing their crumbling arms around his neck
and fixing their livid lips upon his burning
cheek, in the kiss of the damned.
They hailed himbrotherwith a hollow
welcome
,
and as innumerable voices whispered forth
the sound of awe, Aldarin missed his footing on
the rock, he felt his form changing with decay, he
raised his hands in the effort to keep on the
surface
of the waves, and found the fingers with the
flesh dropping from the bones; he floated on the
surface of the boundless sea, he became one of the
damned. Forever and forever lost.
They were floating on and on, the boundless
legion of the lost, and with them floated Aldarin.
A strange distant sound burst on the ear, he heard
it grow louder and louder, now it was like the
roaring of a mighty ocean, now it was like the
hissing of a thousand furnaces.
Floating on the waves the of fire, crowded by
legion of the lost, Aldarin turned with a feeling of
intense awe, and murmured the questionWhat
means yon sound of terroryon murmur of fear?
We are floating on and on, toward the
Cataract
of Hellwas the hoarse murmur of the
living corse floating by his side, and a million
tongues, speaking from livid lips returned the
echoOn and on toward the Cataract of Hell!
Aldarin was carried on without the power of
resistance, with no object to stay his career, on
and on, every moment nearing the fearful
Cataract
,
whose roar, and hissing and surging, now
deafened his ears, and seemed to fall upon his
very brain, with the weight of a mighty burden.
Then came a pause of strange unconsciousness,
from which Aldarin presently awoke; and opening
his eyes, gazed around.
He hung on the verge of a rock, a rock of
melting
bitumen, that burned his hands to masses of
crisped and blackened flesh as he hung. The rock
flung its projecting form over a gulf, to which the
cataracts of earth might compare, as the rivulet
to the mighty ocean. It seemed to Aldarin as
though the universe, with all the boundless fields
of space, was comprised in the sweep of the awful
rocks of bitumen and red-hot ore of lead, extending
for miles and miles innumerable, on either side,
with the waves of fireeach wave bearing its
awful
burden of a damned soulsurging and
foaming
over the edge of the precipice, while a hissing
and crackling sound, like the noise of ten thousand
forests, ravaged by flame, startled the very air of
hell, and mingled with the shrieks of the ******.
Aldarin looked below. God of Heaven, what a
sight! A gulf, like the space occupied by a
thousand
worldsdeep, vast, immense, and yet
perceptible
to the eyesunk beneath him, with its
surface of fiery waves, all convulsed and foaming
with innumerable whirlpools, all crimsoned by
bubbles of flame, each whirlpool swallowing the
millions of the lost, each bubble hearing on its
surface
the face of a soul, damned and damned forever.
Forever and forever. And as the lost were borne
on by the waves and swallowed by the whirlpools,
they raised their hands and cast their burning
eyes to the brazen sky, and shrieked, with low
and muttering voices, the eternal death-wail of the
lost.
Over the cataract, shrieking and wailing, were
pitched the millions and ten thousand millions or
living-dead; each one swelling that unutterable
murmur as he fell, each soul yelling with a more
intense horror as they sank below, and all around,
innumerable echoes bursting from the rocks or
bitumen and melting lead, breaking from the
heated air, gave back the shriek, the wail and
murmur
of the lost. Forever and forever lost.
And over this scene, awful and vast, towered a
figure of ebony darkness; his blackened brow
concealed
in the clouds, his extended arms seemed
grasping the infinitude of the cataract, while his
feet rested upon islands of bitumen far in the gulf
below.
The eyes of the figure were fixed upon Aldarin,
as he clung with the nervous grasp of despair, to
the rock of melting bitumen, and their gaze
curdled
his heated blood.
Every moment he was losing his grasp, sliding
and sliding from the rock, now his feet were
loosened and hung dangling over the gulf. There
was no hope for him, he must fallfall, and fall
forever
.
At this moment, when his burning hands
clung to the rock, when his feet were dangling in
the air, when his blood-shot eyes, protruding from
their sockets, glared ghastlily above, a new and
sudden wonder attracted the gaze of Aldarin.
A stairway, built of white marble, wide, roomy,
and secure, seemed to spring from the very rock
to which he clung, and winding up from the
cataract
,
encircled by white and rainbow-hued clouds,
was lost in the distance, far, far above.
Aldarin beheld two figures slowly descending
the stairway from the distancethe figure of a
warrior and the form of a dark-eyed woman. As
they drew near and nearer, he felt a strange
feeling
of awe gathering round his heart. He knew
the figures, he knew them well. Her face of
beauty wore a smile, her dark eyes were brilliant
as ever, brilliant as when first he wooed and won
her in the wilds of Palestine. Yet there was blood
upon her vestments near the heart; and
his
lip was
spotted with one drop of thick red blood.
It was most fearful to see them thus calmly
approach
;
it was most terrible to recognize every
line of their features, every part of their vestments.
This, muttered Aldarin, this indeed, is Hell.
And yet he must call for aid, and call to the
warrior
and the woman. How the thought worked
like a serpent round his very heart!
He was sliding from the rock, slowly, yet
certainly
sliding. Another moment and he would
plunge below. There was but one hope. He
might, by a desperate effort, drag his carcass
along the pointed rock; by a single extension
of his arm, his hand would grasp the lowest
step of the stairway. He prepared himself for the
effort, his feet hung dangling below, it is true, and
his body was gradually slipping, but he gathered
all the strength of his living corse for that single
effort. Slowly he passed his hand along the rock
of bitumen, clutching the red-hot masses of lead
in the action, and with his heart all aflame, he
supported his trembling carcass with the other
hand, and passed the extended hand yet further
along the rock.
It wanted but a single inch, a little inch, and
his hand would grasp the marble of the stairway.
And yet that inch he could not compass with the
hand so nervously outstretched, all his strength
had been expended in the effort, and there he
hung trembling on the verge of the abyss, when
had he but the additional vigor of a mere child,
he might grasp the stairwayhe might be saved.
Another and a desperate effort! His fingers
touched the carved marble-work of the stair-way,
but had not freedom of action to hold in their
grasp. With an eye of horrible intensity he
looked
above him, ere he made the last effort. The
figures stood before him on the second step of the
stairway. The woman, beautiful and bright-eyed,
smiled, and the stern warrior shared her smile.
Thou, thou wilt save me Ilmerinemy wife,
my love, thou wiltdragdragmy hand to thee,
and I can reach the staircase.
She stooped, the beautiful woman, she reached
forth a fair and lily hand, she grasped the
blackened
fingers of Aldarin.
Thanks, beautiful Ilmerine. I have wronged
thee, butthe
Secret
a little nearerdrag
drag my handa momentand I will grasp the
staircaseI will be saved.
She placed his fingers round a projecting
ornament
of the staircase, his grasp was tight and
desperate
.
Ascend! she cried in a sweet and soft toned
voice.
Julianoh, Juliangrasp this handaid me,
oh Julian my brother!
The figure of the Warrior slowly stooped and
seized the other hand, and drawing it towards the
staircase wound the fingers round another piece
of the carved work of the staircase.
Ascend, Aldarin, brother of mine, ascend!
cried his deep toned and awful voice.
Ascend, brother of mine, I would, but my
strength failsseize me, by the body, and drag
me from this rock of terroroh, seize me.
The Warrior seized Aldarin by the shoulder,
and dragged him slowly along the rock, but the
flesh he clenched, crumbled in his grasp. Alda
rin again trembled over the verge of the abyss
the blow of a single straw, might suffice to hurl
him into the world below.
Julian my brother. Ilmerine my wife, save
meoh, save me!
The woman, dark-haired and beautiful, stooped,
she slowly unwound the fingers of Aldarin from
the ornament of the staircase. And as she
unwound
finger after finger, she looked upon his
horror-stricken face and smiled, and pointed to
the red-wound near her heart. He returned her
smile with a ghastly grimace, he looked to
the Warrior, and tightened the grasp of his other
hand.
Thou Julian, wilt save methou wilt not
unwind
my fingers, thou wilt hurl this beautiful
demon
aside.
Aldarin my brother! said the Figure in a
voice of awe, as kneeling on the lowest step of the
staircase, he cast the glance of his full and
burning eyes upon the livid visage of Aldarin,
while for a moment he wound the folds of his
robe yet closer around his warrior-form.
Aldarin
,
my brother, I will save thee.
He smiledAldarin returned his smile.
Reach me thy hand, Julian, thy hand, or I
perish.
The Warrior slowly reached forth his hand,
from beneath the folds of his cloak, he held it
before
the face of Aldarin, and the eyes of the
doomed
man saw that the fingers clenched a Goblet of
Gold, that shone and glimmered thro' the air, like
a beacon-fire of hell.
Oh
Fiendthe Death-bowl
!
As these words shrieked from Aldarin's livid
lips, he drew back from the maddening sight,
with horror, he missed his hold, he slid from the
rockHE FELL.
A thousand fires burned before his eyes, ten
thousand horrid sounds fell on his very brain,
serpents loathsome and noxious crawled thro' his
hair, all around, above and beneath was fire,
waves of flame eating into his soul, sky of
brass, burning his eyes from their sockets, all was
fire and horror and death, andstill he fell.
And a hoarse hollow voice, rising above the
murmurs of the damned, spoke forth the words
Forever and Forever
and all hell gave
back the echo
Ever, Ever, Ever
! Still he
fell! The whirlpool sucked him within its circles
of flame, around and around he dashed, with
the bodies of the livingdead floating over him,
with ghastly faces, upturned to his vision, with
foul arms, clenching him in a loathsome embrace,
around and around he dashed, joining in the low
deep murmur of the damned, and his heart gave
back the murmur. This, This, is hell!
Suddenly all was dark. Aldarin heard no sound,
no murmur of the lost. All was dark, all was
still. He touched his brow, and was amazed to
find it untortured by flame. Yet big beaded drops
of sweat stood from his forehead, his frame was
chilled, a feeling of unutterable AWE was upon
him, he feared to stir. He had been dreaming.
His dream was past, his consciousness gradually
returned, he found himself reclining among the
foul remnants of decay, amid the carcasses of the
dead.
He drooped his head low on his bosom, his face
rested on his knees, his arms were folded across
his eyes, and there in that lone chamber, while
the silent hours of the night wore on, with his
own weird soul, communed
Aldarin the
Fratricide
.
CHAPTER THE SIXTH.
THE CELL OF THE DOOMED.
THE DOOMSMAN.
He dies at daybreakha, ha, hahe dies by
the wheel.
And as he laughed, the man-at-arms, Hugo, let
fall the end of his pike upon the dark pavement,
and the sound echoed along the gloom of the
gallery
,
like thunder, every arch repeating the echo,
and every nook and corner of the obscure passage
taking up the sound, until, an indistinct murmur
swelled from all sides, and the voices of the
Invisible
seemed whispering from the old and
blood-stained
walls.
He dies at day-break! Right, Hugothe
Goblet
and the Ring, sent him to the doomsman!
And IIthe Doomsman will have his
blood! How looked he, good Balvardo, when the
sentence of the Duke rang thro' the hallDeath,
Death to the Parricide? Quailed he or begged
for mercy?
Quail? 'Slife I've seen the eye of the dying
war-horse, when the poisoned arrow was in his
heart, and the death-cry of his master in his ears,
but the mad glare of his eye never thrilled me,
like the deep glance of thismurderer! Blood o'
th' Turk, his eye burned like a coal!
Tell me, tell me, how was the murder fixed
upon him? Who laid it to his hands?
Blood o' th' Turk! Must thou know everything!
Then go ask the gossips, at the corners of the
streets, and hear them tell in frightened murmurs,
how the Poisoned Bowl was found on the beaufet,
how the Signet-Ring was found in the bowl, how
the Robe was thrown over the secret threshold,
and ha, ha, how
one
Balvardo swore to
certain
words uttered by theParricide, wishes for
the old lord's death, hopes of hot-brained youth,
and mysterious whispers about that Ring, and
How one Hugoha, ha,swore to his guilt
in like manner. Faith did Ihow I met the
young Lord, in the southern corridor about high
noon, how he turned pale when I told him, with
every mark of respect, be sure, that he had
forgotten
his crimson robe, and
So ye gave him to the
Doomsman
? shrieked
the executioner, as his thick-set hump-backed
figure was disclosed in the solitary light, hanging
from the ceiling of the gallerySo ye gave him
Lord Adrianto me, to the pincers and the knife,
to the hot lead, and the wheel of torture! You are
brave fellowsha, ha, he dies at day-breakand
the Doomsman thanks ye!
The two sentinels watching in the Gaol of
Florence
,
besides the gloomy door of the Doomed Cell,
started with a sudden thrill of fear, as they looked
upon the distorted form, and hideous face, of the
wretch who stood laughing and chattering before
their eyes.
Balvardo drew his stout form to its full height,
and bent the darkness of his beetle-brows, upon
the deformed Doomsman, and Hugo, clad in
armour
of shining steel, like his comrade, started
nervously aside, as his squinting eyes were fixed
upon the distorted face, the wide mouth, opening
with a hideous grin, the retreating brow and the
large, vacant, yet flashing eyes, that marked the
visage of the Executioner of Florence. A dress
made of coarsest serge, hung rather than fitted
around his deformed figure, while a long-bladed
knife, with handle of unshapen bone, glittered in
the belt of dark leather that girdled his body.
Sir Doomsman, thou art merrygrowled
Balvardo
Choose
other scenes for thy merry
humor
this
dark corridor, with shadows of gloom
in the distance, and the flickering light of yon
smoking cresset, making the old walls yet more
gloomy, around us, is no place for thy magpie
laugh. No more such sounds of grave yard
merriment
orwe quarrel, mark ye.
We quarrel, mark ye! echoed the
sinister-eyed
Hugo, gravely dropping the end of his pike
on the pavement.
St. Judas! My brave men of mettle are
wondrous
fiery, this quiet night! Hahapardon
Sir Balvardo, I meant not to anger ye! Yet dost
thou know that
it
makes my veins fill with new
blood! and my heart warm with a strange fire.
Thy veins fill with new blood! Hahaha!
Did'st ever hear of a withered vine, blackened
by flame, bearing ripe grapes, or was ever a dead
toad perfumed by the south wind? Hugo, his
heart warms with a strange fire? Odor o' pitch
and brimstone, what a fancy! Haha
Nay, nay Balvardo. There is some life in the
Doomsman's veins. Don't doubt it? Just fancy
those taloons, which he calls fingers, clutched
round thy throatW-h-e-w!
I say it makes my veins fill with new blood,
my heart warm with a strange firethis
matchless
picture! A gallant Lord, with the warm flush
of youth on his cheek, strength in his limbs and
fire in his heart, stretched out upon the wheel
here a hand is corded to the wheel, and there
another
,
here a foot is bound to the spokes and there
another. He looks like the cross of Saint Andrew
by St. Judas. A merry fancyeh! Balvardo?
Stretched out upon the wheel, he looks with his
bloodshot eyes to the heavens. See's he any hope
there? Laid on his back, he casts his last long
glance aside over the multitudethe vile mob,
See's he a face of pity there! Hears he a voice of
mercy? Nonenone! Earth curses, heaven
forsakes
,
hell yawns! And he is of noble blood,
and on his brow there sits the frown of a lofty
line. While the mob hoot, the victim holds
his breath, and II the Doomsman approach!
God's deathhe makes my blood chill!
muttered
Hugo, glancing askance at his comrade, who
stood silent biting his compressed lip.
He writhes, for the hissing of the cauldron of
hot lead falls on his ear, he feels his flesh creep, for
the red hot glare of the blazing iron with its
jagged
point blinds his eyes as he gazes! He
utters
no moanbut he hears the beating of his
heart. He hears a stepa low and cat-like step
tis mine, the Doomsman's step. The red hot
iron in one hand, the ladle filled with melted lead.
hot and seething lead in the other, nay start not
nor wince, good Balvardo'tis no fancy picture.
The Fiend take thy wordsthey burn my
heart! Hold or by thy master, the devil, I'll strike
ye to the floor!
Harkhear you that hissing sound? His
muscular
chest is bared to the light, these talon-hands
guide the red hot iron over the warm flesh, with
the blood blackening as it oozes from the veins.
He writhesbut utters no groan. Now lay down
the iron and the lead; seize the knotted club, aloft
it whirls, it descends! D'ye see the broken arm
bone, protruding from the flesh? Hurl it aloft
again, nor heed the sudden struggle and the quick
convulsive agony, never heed themall writhe
and struggle so. It grows exciting, Balvardo, it
warms me, Hugo.
Hugo muttered a half-forced syllable, but his
parted lips and absent manner, attested his
unwilling
interest in the words of the Doomsman,
while Balvardo, clutching his pike, strode
hurriedly
to and fro along the floor of stone.
Again the Doomsman sweeps the club aloft!
Crashcrashcrash, and then a sound, not a
groan, not a groan, but a howl, a howl of agony!
Look, Balvardo, look Hugo, you can count the
bones as they stick out from each leg, from
each arm, from the wrist and from the
shoulder
,
from the ancle and the thigh, never mind the
bloodit streams in a torrent from each limb, be
sure, but the hot iron dries it up. Your melted
lead is good for cauteryit healsha, ha, ha, let
me laughit heals the wound, each blow the club
had made. The picture growsit deepens.
Now by the Heaven above, I see it all
muttered
Balvardo with a dilating eye, as his manner
suddenly changed, and he leaned forward with
unwilling
yet absorbing interest. This is no man,
but a devil's body with a devil's soul!
His face is yet unscarredunmoved save by
the wrinkling contortions of pain. The mob
hoot, and hiss, and yellthe play must deepen.
Hand me the ironred hotand hissinggive me
the bowl of melted lead, dipped from the boiling
cauldron. The Doomsman's step again! The
victim's
body creeps, and writhes in every sinew, his
veins seem crawling thro' his carcass, his nerves,
turned to thongs of incarnate pain, are drawn
and stretched to the utmost. Look well upon the
blue heavens, Parricide, for the red hot iron is
pointed, andha ha, how he howlsit nears your
eyes, it glares before them in their last glance.
It must be done, why howl you so? Does it burn
your eyes, tho' it touches them not? Ha, haI
meant it thus.
Balvardo, strike him down. He is not
human
see
his flashing eyes, his arms thrown
wildly
aside, with the taloon-fingers, grasping the
air!
H-i-s-sit touches the eyeball, the eye is dark
forever! H-i-s-s it licks up the blood, it turns
round and round in the socket. Now fill the
hollow
socket with the lead, the hissing leadand,
ha, ha, now bring me another iron pointed like
this, and heated to a white heat. Quick, quick,
the victim groans, howls, writhes, and yells! Quick!
Ah, ha, let the iron touch the skin of the eyeball,
it shrivels like a burnt leaf, deeper sink the
hissing
point, turn it round and round, let it lap up
the gushing blood? now the lead, the thick and
boiling lead, pour it from the ladle, fill the socket,
it hardens, it grows coldha, ha, ha, behold the
eyes of lead!
I see them! shrieked Hugo, trembling in his
iron armor.
And I, echoed BalvardoI see them, oh,
horrible, and ghastly, IIsee the eyes of lead!
Quick, quickwhy lag ye man? Quick
quick, I say! The knife, the glittering knife. The
Parricide howls not nor groans, but his soul is
trampling on the fragments of clay. Quick, while
his carcase is all palpitation, all alive with
torture
,
all throe, all agony and pulsation, hand
me the knife. I would cut his beating
heart from the body. There, therethe flesh,
severed to the bone, parts on either side
the ribs are bareda blow with the jagged
club, and they are broken. This hand is thrust
within the aperture, I feel the hot blood, I feel his
heart. It beats, it throbs, it palpitates! Quick
the knife againI hold the heart, cut it from
the carcass, sever each nerve, snap each artery.
A deep, low trembling heave of the chest; a rattle
in the throat. I raise the heart, the beating heart
on high, it gleams in the light of day, and its
warm blood-drops fall pattering on the face of the
felon. The mob shout their curses and hoot their
oaths of scorn. Quick, the pincers, the red hot
pincers, but holdthat shaking of the chest, that
heave of the trunk, that quivering in every
splintered
limb, with that quick tremor of the lip, ha,
ha, that blanching of the cheek, with the blood
oozing from every pore, that thick gurgling sound
in the throat, he dies, the Felon dies, the
Doomsman
laughs, and from the shattered clod, creeps
the Spirit of the Parricide!
Hugo turned his face to the wall, and covered
his eyes with his upraised hands. Balvardo stood
still as death, gazing on the vacant air, with a
wild glance, as tho' he saw the Spirit of the dead.
Neither spoke, nor said a word. The maniac
wildness of the Doomsman awed and chilled them
to the heart.
This is the fate, to which ye have given him;
this proud Lord now sleeping in the Chamber of
the Doomedto me, the Doomsman, to the wheel,
to the knotted club, to the knife, the hot iron and
the melted lead, to the dishonor ye have given him!
Hahahathese hands itch for his blood.
To-morrow's
rising sun will gleam on the scene, this
merry scene
The Doom of the Poisoner
.
The Sentinels heard a hurried footstep, followed
by a closing door, the Doomsman had disappeared.
They turned with looks of horror, of remorse,
mingled with all the fear and torture that the
human
soul can feel, stamped in their faces, while
from one to the other broke the whisper
He sleeps within you cellthe Doomsman's
cell, till the first glimpse of the morrow morn
shall rouse him to this workthis work of horror
and ofDoom.
THE DOOMED.
The wierd and mystic spirit that rules this
chronicle, throws open to your view the cell of the
Doomed.
It is a sad and gloomy place, where every dark
stone has its tale of blood, every name, rudely
scratched on the damp wall, its legend of despair.
All is silent, not a whisper, not a sob, not a sound.
The silence is so utter that you fear the spirits of
the condemned, who passed from this chamber to
the Wheel and the Block, might start into life
at the sound of a whisperfrom the dark corners
of the room, and appal your eye with their shapes
of horror.
The cresset of iron fixed to the rough wall threw
a dim light over the form of the Doomed, as
seated
upon a rough bench, with his head drooped
between his clenched hands, his elbows resting on
his knees, his golden hair faded to a dingy brown,
falling over his shoulders and hiding his
countenance
,
he mused with the secrets of his heart, and
called up before his soul the mighty panorama of
despairthe wheel, the block, the doomsman, and
the multitude.
Adrian the Doomed raised his form from the
oaken bench, and paced the dungeon floor. He
was not shackled by manacles or clogged by chains
It was the last night of his existence; escape came
not within his thoughts, the walls were built of
rack, hundreds of armed sentinels paced the long
galleries of the prison, and a guard of two
men-at-arms
watched without the triple-locked and
triple-bolted
door of the Doomed chamber.
Suffering and pain, anxiety of mind and torture
of soul, had wrought fearful changes in the late
well knit and muscular form of the Lord of
Albarone
.
His countenance was pale and thin; his
lips whitened, his cheeks hollow and his eyes
sunken, while his faded locks of gold fell in
tangled masses over his face and shoulders. His
blue eye was sunken, yet it gleamed brighter than
ever, and there was meaning in its quick, fiery
glance.
To die on the gibbet, with the taunt and the
sneer of the idiot crowd ringing in my ears, my
last look met with the vulgar grimaces and
unmeaning
laughter of ten thousand clownish faces;
to die on the rack, each bone splintered by the
instruments
of ignominious torture, my scarred and
mangled carcase mocking the face of day,oh,
Godis this the fate of Adrian, heir to the fame,
the glory, and the fortunes of the house of
Albarone
?
Pausing in his hurried walk, he stood for a
moment
still and motionless as the sculptured
marble
,
and then eagerly stretching forth his hands,
cried
Fatherfather! noble father! I believe thy
holy shade is now hovering unseen over the form
of thy doomed sonby all the hopes men hold of
bliss in an unknown state of being; by the faith
which teaches the belief of a future world, I
implore
thee, appear and speak to me. Tell me of
that eternity which I am about to face! Tell me
of that awful world which is beyond the present!
Father, I implore thee, speak!
His imagination, almost excited to phrenzy by
long and solitary thought, with glaring eyes, arms
outstretched, and trembling hands, the agitated
boy gazed at a dark corner of the cell, every
instant
expecting to behold the dim and ghostly
form of his murdered sire slowly arise and become
visible through the misty darkness. No answer
cameno form arose. Adrian drew a dagger
from his vest.
Father, by the mysterious tie that binds the
parent to the son, which neither time nor space
can severdeath or eternity annihilateI implore
thee
appear!
The tone in which he spoke was dread and
solemn. Again he waited for a response to his
adjuration, but no response came.
This, then, cried Adrian, raising the dagger;
this, then, is the only resource left to me. Thus
do I cheat the mob of their show; thus do I rescue
the name of Albarone from foul dishonor!
Tighter he clutched the dagger; his arm was
thrown back and his breast was bared; and, as he
thus nerved himself for the final blow, all the
scenes of his lifethe hopes of his boyhoodthe
dreams of his love, rose up before him like a
picture
.
And, like a vast unbounded ocean,
overhung
with mists, and dark with clouds, was the
idea of the
Dread Unknown
to his mind
.
Amid all the memories of the past; the agonies of
the present, or the anticipations of the future, did
the calm, lovely face of the Ladye Annabel appear,
and the smile upon her lip was like the smile of
a guardian spirit, beaming with hope and love.
Oh, Godreceive my soul!Annabel,
fare-thee-well
!
The dagger descended, driven home with all
the strength of his arm.
Hold!
exclaimed a hollow voice, and a strange
hand thrown before the breast of the doomed felon
struck his wrist, the instant the dagger's point had
touched the flesh. The weapon flew from the
hand of Adrian and fell on the other side of the
cell.
He turned and beheld the muffled form of a
monk, who had entered through the massive door,
which had been unbolted without Adrian's
heeding
the noise of locks and chains, so deep was his
abstraction. The ruddy glare of torches streamed
into the cell, and the sentinels who held them,
in their endeavours to shake off their late terror
and remorse, gave utterance to unfeeling and
ribald
jests.
I say, Balvardo, cried the sinister-eyed
soldier
,
does not the springald bear himself right
boldly? And yet at break o' day he dies!
Marry, Hugo, returned the other, he had
better thought of making all these fine speeches
ere he gave thehahaha!the physic to the
old man.
Reproving the sentinels for their insolence, the
muffled monk closed the door, and approaching
Adrian, exclaimed
My son, prepare thee for thy fate! The shades
of night behold thee erect in the pride of
manhood
;
the light of morn shall see thee prostrate,
bleeding, dead! Thy soul shall stand before the
bar of eternity. Art thou prepared for death, my
son?
Father, Adrian answered; I have been ever
a faithful son of the Holy Church, but its offices
will avail me naught at this hour. Once, for all,
I tell thee I will die without human prayers or
human consolation. On the solemn thought of
Him
who gave me being, I alone rely for support
in the hour of a fearful death. Thy errand is a
vain one, Sir Priest, if thou dost hope to gain
shrift or confession from me. I would be alone!
Thou art but young to die, said the monk, in
a quiet tone.
Adrian made no reply.
Tell me, young sir, cried the monk, seizing
Adrian by the wrist, wouldst thou accept life,
though it were passed within the walls of a
convent
?
The cowl of the monk was never worn by a
descendant of Albarone. I would pass my days
as my fathers have done before meat the head
of armies and in the din of battle!
The monk threw back his cowl and discovered
a striking and impressive face; bearing marks of
premature age, induced by blighted hopes and
fearful wrongs. His hair, as black as jet,
gathered
in short curls around a high and pallid
forehead
;
his eyebrows arched over dark, sparkling
eyes; his nose was short and Grecian; his lips
thin and expressive, and his chin well rounded
and prominent. And as the cowl fell back,
Adrian
with a start beheld the
monk of the
ante-chamber
!
Count Adrian Di Albarone, this morning thou
wert tried before the Duke of Florence, and his
peers, for the murder of thy sire. Thou, a
descendant
of Albarone, connected with the royal blood of
Florence, wert condemned on the testimony of two
of thy father's vassals, for this most accursed act.
I ask thee, canst thou tell who it is that hath
spirited
up these perjured witnesses; and why it is that
the Duke of Florence countenances the
accusations
?
In the name of God, kind priest, I thank thee
for thy belief in my innocence. The stirrer up of
this foul wrong, is, I shame to say it, my uncle,
Aldaren, the Scholar. The reason why it is
countenanced
by the duke, is  Adrian paused as if
the words stuck in his throat; is because he would
wed my own fair cousin, the Ladye Annabel.
Ha! shouted the monk, my suspicions were
not false. Let Aldarin look to his fate; and, as for
the duke thrusting his hand into his bosom, he
drew from his gown a miniatureit was the
miniature
of a fair and lovely maiden.
Behold! cried the monk, Adrian Di Albarone,
behold this fair and lovely countenance, where
youth, and health, and love, beaming from every
feature, mingle with the deep expression of a mind
rich in the treasure of thoughts, pure and virginal
in their beauty. Mark well the forehead, calm and
thoughtful; the ruby lips, parting with a smile; the
full cheek blooming with the rose-buds of youth
mark the tracery of the arching neck; the
half-revealed
beauty of the virgin bosom. Adrian, this
was the maiden of my heart, the
one
beloved of my
very soul. I was the private secretary of the duke,
he won my confidencehe betrayed it. Guilietta
was the victim, and I sought peace and oblivion
within the walls of a convent. I am now in his
favorhe loads me with honors; I accept his gifts
aye, aye, Albertine, the Monk, takes the gold of the
proud duke, that he may effect the great object of
his existence
And that cried Adrianthat is
The monk spoke not; a smile wreathed his
compressed
lips, and a glance sparkled in his eye.
Adrian was answered
.
In the breast of the man to whom God has given
a soul, there also dwells at times a demon; and
that demon arises from the ruins of betrayed
confidence
.
The monk whispered something in the
ear of the condemned noble, and then, waving his
hand, retired.
CHAPTER THE SEVENTH.
THE FELON AND THE DUKE.
In a few minutes the door again opened, and
the stately form of the Countess of Albarone
entered
the traitor's cell.
Why need I tell of the warm embrace with
which she enclosed her son? Why tell of her
tears that came from her very soulher deep
expressions
of detestation when the name of
Aldarin
,
the scholar, was mentioned? Need I say
that she was firmly assured of her son's innocence;
that she saw through the mummery of his trial,
and the trickery of his foes? Leaving all this to
the fancy of the reader of this chronicle, I pass
on with my history.
The kind discourse of mother and son was
broken
off by the clanging of chains and the drawing
of locks. The light of many torches streamed
through the opened door into the cell, and the
gaily-bedizened form of the Duke was discovered.
With a last farewell, the Countess of Albarone
retired; the door was closed, and Adrian was left
alone with the Duke.
Well, sir, exclaimed he, I have
condescended
to visit you. Albertine, my confessor, told me
it was due to a branch of the royal blood of
Florence
.
It were best that you make a short story
of what you have to say. My train wait without,
and I am somewhat hurried. Here he opened
his sleepy eyes, and, curling his bearded lip, tried
to assume a look of dignity.
Adrian bowed down to the earth.
The son of Count Di Albarone, said he,
feels highly honoured by your condescension.
Well, now, sir, what have you to say?
exclaimed
the Duke. Speak, ignoble son of an
honored sireinglorious descendant of a noble
line. Speak! What would you say?
Merely this, most gracious Duke, answered
Adrian, as he gazed sternly into the very eyes of
the haughty prince, merely this, that I have been
doomed to death by thee and thy minions, in a
manner that never was noble doomed before.
Without form; on the proof of perjured caitiffs;
without defence, have I been condemned for a
crime, at the name of which hell itself would
shudder!
The Duke sneered, as he spoke:
Surely, I cannot help it, an' a brainless boy
takes it into his head to poison his sire.
Pardon me, gracious Duke, said Adrian, as
by a sudden movement he grasped him by the
throat, and at the same time seizing his cloak of
scarlet and gold, he thrust it into his gaping
mouth. Closer and yet more close he would his
grasp, and, scarce able to breathe, much less to
speak, the Duke of Florence stood without power
or motion. Adrian coolly tripped up his heels,
and then placing his knee upon his breast by a
dexterous movement, he tore away the scarlet
cloak, and then cautiously placing one hand over
the mouth of the prince, he gathered some straw
with the other, and forced it down his throat.
Then unbuckling his own belt of rough doe skin,
he wound it around the neck and over the mouth
of the Duke, and having fastened it as tightly as
might be, he proceeded to tie his hands behind his
back; the cord he used being nothing less than
the chain of knighthood suspended from the neck
of his grace.
You may be sure this was not accomplished
without a struggle. The Duke writhed and
shifted
,
but to no purpose. He could not speak, and
the knee of Adrian placed on his breast, laid him
silent and motionless.
And now behold Adrian, arrayed in the blazing
cloak of the Duke, which descending to his knees,
sweeps the tops of the fine boots of doe-skin,
ornamented
with spurs of gold. On his head is placed
the slouching hat of the prince, surmounted by a
group of nodding plumes, and beneath the folds
of the cloak shines the richly embossed sheath of
his sword.
Adrian surveyed his figure with a smilethat
smile which arises from the recklessness of
desperation
and
then, without heeding the
malignant
glances of the Duke, he fixed him against
the rough bench upon his knees, with his face to
the wall, in an attitude of prayer and devotion.
He threw his own sombre cloak over the back
of his captive; and then, having slouched the hat
over his face, after the manner of the Duke, he
gathered up the cloak of crimson along his chin,
and stood ready to depart.
He opened the door of the traitor's cell with a
beating heart, and in an instant, found himself
standing in the gallery where the muffled priest
waited for the Duke. The soldiers bowed low to
the wearer of the scarlet cloak, and the word was
passed along the galleries
make way for the
Dukemake way for his grace of Florence
.
The monk now advanced, and locking the door
of the doomed cell, he affixed to its panel a
parchment
signed by the Duke of Florence, and sealed
with the seal of state. It declared that the
prisoner
,
Adrian Di Albarone, was to be seen by no
one until the morrow, when he was to suffer the
doom of the law, by the terrors of the wheel.
This done, the monk fell meekly in the rear of
Albarone, who paced along the gallery, saluted at
the door of every cell by the lowered spears of the
sentinels.
The gallery terminated in a staircase. This
Adrian and the monk ascended, and at the top
they found a company of gay cavaliers, who
waited
for his grace of Florence. The wearer of the
scarlet cloak and slouching hat was greeted with
a low bow. Adrian then traversed another
gallery
,
and yet another; being all the while followed
by the band of gallant courtiers.
Urban, whispered one of these gallants to
another, methinks our lord is wondrous silent
to-night.
Why, Cesarini, replied his companion, it
may be that he is weeping for this young
springald
,
Adrian. Marry, 'tis enough to make an
older
man than I am weep.
Hist! whispered the monk, our lord would
have you observe strict silence.
They had arrived at the lofty arching door of
the castle leading into the court-yard, when Adrian
was alarmed by a noise and shouting in the
galleries
which he had just traversed.
All is lost! thought Adrian, as his hand
caught the hilt of his sword.
Fear not, whispered the monk, but push
boldly onward.
They now descended into the court-yard, where
a richly-attired page held a steed ready for his
grace. Springing with one bound into the saddle,
Aldarin passed under the raised portcullis, with
the monk riding at his side, and the bridle reins
of the courtiers ringing in the rear.
Thus far all was well. The monk leaned from
his saddle, and whispered to Adrian:
One effort more, brave boy. Nerve thyself
for the trial at the palace gate.
Traversing one of the most spacious streets of
the city of Florence, they soon arrived before the
lofty gate of the palace of the Duke.
Here a crowd of men-at-arms, blazing in armor
of gold, saluted the supposed Duke with every
mark of respect.
And finally, innumerable dangers past, behold
Adrian enter the palace, traverse innumerable
chambers, hung with gorgeous tapestry, lighted
by lamps of silver and of gold, and thronged with
nobles and courtiers, who much wondered to
behold
their lord pass them by, without one mark of
recognition or sign of respect.
At last Adrian arrived before folding doors
ornamented
with exquisite carving, and having the
arms of the Duke emblazoned in glowing colours
upon the panels.
Push open the doors, and boldly enter,
whispered
the monk to Adrian, who immediately
obeyed his directions.
The monk then turned to the gallant throng of
courtiers, and said:
My lords, his grace is unwell. He would
dispense
with your further attendance. The monk
retired.
Never arose such a mingled crowd of
exclamations
of wonder as then burst from the lips of the
cavaliers. One whispered their lord must
certainly
be woad; another that he must have been
repulsed
in some illicit amour; and a third
seriously
gave it as his opinion, that some devil or other
had taken possession of the Duke of Florence.
However, being well aware of the high regard in
which the Duke held the monk Albertine, they all
slowly trooped out of the ante-chamber, leaving it
to the guards of the palace, who watched within
its confines, as was their wont.
CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.
THE SECRET PASSAGE.
In a lofty chamber, hung with tapestry of
purple
,
embroidered with rare and pleasant designs,
and lighted by lamps of gold, depending from the
ceiling, Adrian and the Monk rested themselves
after their arduous exploit.
In one corner of the apartment stood a gorgeous
bed, with a canopy of silver and gold hangings,
surmounted
by a Ducal coronet. Around were strewn
couches of the most inviting softness, and every
thing in the chamber wore an appearance of luxury
and ease.
Adrian reposed on a couch of velvet, and by his
side was seated the monk. Before them was placed
a small table, on which stood several flasks of rich
wine, together with more substantial refreshments.
Truly, sir monk, said Adrian, filling a goblet
of wine, I have heard of many unmannerly acts,
but this deed of mine does seem to me to be the
most nnmannerly of all. I not only tied the brave
duke, lashed him in the Cell of the Doomed, used
his gallant steed, and worshipful name, but,
forsooth
!
I must also repose me upon his couches,
and refresh me with his wine! And Adrian
laughed.
Thou art merry, young sir. But an hour
since
The monk was interrupted by a slight knocking
under the tapestry. Adrian started up, and drew
his sword, taking the precaution, however, to
resume
the scarlet cloak, and slouching hat. The
knocking grew louder. The monk removed the
tapestry in the part from whence the sound
proceeded
,
and having pressed a spring, a secret door
in the wainscotting flew open, and a woman of
beautiful countenance, and rich attire, was
discovered
.
Thou here, stern priest! said the damsel, in a
sweet voice, I would speak with my lord.
Marianne, thou canst not see him to-night; he
hath no time to trifle with such as thou.
The monk closed the door, and, turning to
Adrian, said,
Another of this miscreant's victims, Adrian. It
was fortunate she did not see thee closely, for her
eye would have detected where hundreds might
look without suspicion. And now let us away;
every moment increases thy danger; the duke may
even now have freed himself, and set his minions
in chase.
To fly, I am willing, sir monk; but whither?
Follow me
, said the monk, as he lighted a
small lamp of silver. He then removed the
tapestry
,
and discovered a secret door opposite the one
afore-mentioned. This the monk entered, followed
by Adrian, and a stairway of stone, some two feet
in width, was revealed; it was cut into the wall
and over-arched, and the distance between the steps,
and the arch not more than four feet.
With great care the monk led the way down the
steps of stone, until they numbered thirty, when
they terminated in a narrow platform, which,
indeed
,
was nothing more than a step somewhat
longer than the others. Here our adventurers
descended
another stairway, likewise ending in a
platform, and then yet another stairway was
terminated
by another platform; and thus they
descended
stairway after stairway, and crossed
platform
after platform, until the increasing coldness
and dampness of the atmosphere, warned them that
they had penetrated far below the surface of the
earth.
Suddenly the stairway ended in a large and
gloomy vault, with walls and floor of the unhewn
rock. On the side nearest the stairway, a gate of
iron was erected between the points of two large
and irregular rocks. Through a large crevice which
time had worn into this gate, the monk and Adrain
passed into a vault like the former, except that the
dim light of the taper discovered the rough floor
strewn with grinning skulls, and whitened bones.
Along this dreary place strode the monk, lighting
the way, while, at his back followed Adrain Di
Albarone. In about a quarter of an hour the vault
narrowed into a confined passage, along which
they crawled on hands and knees. This
terminated
in another vault, sloping upwards with a
gradual ascent, which having traversed, our
adventurers
found themselves again between two
narrowing walls, and finally, all further progress
was stopped by a large stone thrown directly across
the path. Adrian spoke for the first time in half
n hour
And are we to be baulked after all the
adventures
of this night?
The monk answered by pointing to the stone, to
which he and his companion presently laid their
shoulders, but their united strength was insufficient
to remove it. Again they tried, and again were
they unsuccessful; they made a third attempt, and
the stone was precipitated before them. Seizing
the light, Adrian threw himself into the breach,
and discovered an extensive vault, hedged in by
walls built of hewn stone, while the floor was
covered
by rows of coffins, with here and there a
monument of marble. Throwing themselves into
this place, they picked their way through the
dreary line of coffins, when they came to a wide
sraircase, which they ascended, until they found it
suddenly terminated by the archway above.
The monk raised his hand, and drawing a bolt
which Adrian had not perceived, he pushed with
all his strength against the archway, and a
trapdoor
rose above the heads of our adventurers.
Through this passage the monk ascended, followed
by Adrian, who looked around with a gaze of
wonder
,
and found himself standing in the aisle of the
Grand Cathedral of Florence.
The moonbeams streaming through the lofty
arched windows of stained glass, threw a dim light
upon the high altar with its cross of gold, and
faintly revealed the line of towering pillars which
arose to the dome of the cathedral, as vast and
magnificent it extended far above.
My son, cried the monk, give thanks to God
for thy deliverance.
And there, in that lone aisle, as the deep toned
bell of the cathedral tolled the third hour of the
morning, did Adrian and the monk fall lowly on
the marble pavement, and, prostrating themselves
before the sublime symbol of our most holy faith,
give thanks to God, the Virgin, and the Saints, for
their most wonderful escape.
BOOK THE SECOND.
The Demon Form.
The Cloud Gathers and Blackens.
CHAPTER THE FIRST.
THE PIT OF DARKNESS.
One moment in light, and the next in darkness
down thro' the gloom of the pit, plumb as a
hurled
rock, and swift as an arrow, the betrayed soldier
fell, precipitated by the treachery of the scholar
Aldarin.
The swiftness of his descent took from him all
thought or sensation. His flight was suddenly
terminated by his body splashing into a
subterranean
pool of water, into the depths of which he
sunk for a moment, and then arose to the surface.
The coldness of the flood, together with an
unconquerable
stench that assailed his nostrils on
all sides, restored the stout yeoman to sensation
and feeling.
Spreading his arms instinctively outward, in an
attitude of swimming, Rough Robin could neither
guess where he was now, or with whom he had
been conversing a moment since. His thoughts
were wandering and confused, as are the thoughts
of a man who dreams when half asleep and half
awake.
Still swimming onward through the stagnant
waters, Robin cast his eyes overhead, and
discerned
far, above, a faintly twinkling light,
somewhat
of the size of a dim and distant star. He
looked again, and it was gone. Around, above,
and beneath was darkness: darkness which no
eye could pierce, where all was shadow and
vacuum
darkness
that was almost tangible with its
density. The cheek of the brave soldier was
chilled by air that, heavy with dampness and
mist, seemed as dead and stagnant as the waters
in which he swam.
The light glimmering for an instant far above,
brought dimly to his mind the person of Aldarin,
and the incidents of a moment hence.
And then Robin thought that his fall of terror
was only a dream, and, splashing and plunging in
the dark waters, he sought to shake off the fearful
night-mare that stiffened his sinews and froze his
blood.
His extended hand touched a cold and slimy
substance, and a small, bright speck shone like a
coal of fire through the darkness. Robin grasped
the slimy substance: it moved, and a noisome
reptile wriggled in his hand. Now it was that
he became aware that the subterranean waters
were filled by crawling serpents, who writhed
around his legs, twined around his body, and
struck his arms and hands at every movement.
Their bright eyes sparkled in the waters, and their
hissing broke upon the air, as they were thus
disturbed
by the presence of a strange visitor.
Robin was no coward, neither was he much
given to strange fancies; but a feeling of awful
and intense terror chilled the very blood around
his heart, as the thought came over him that he
lay in that fearful place, of which so many legends
were told by the vassals of Albarone. The
peasantry
had many stories of a vast, unearthly pit
sunk far in the depths of the castle, where the
fiends of darkness were wont to hold their revel,
and shake the bosom of the earth with the sounds
of hellish wassail. Into this dark pit so ran the
legendhad many a shivering wretch been
precipitated
by the lords of Albarone; and here,
unpitied
and unknown, had the carcasses of the
murdered lain rotting and festering in darkness
and oblivion.
As the memory of these strange legends crept
over the confused mind of Robin the Rough, he
gave utterance to a faint shriek.
It was returned back to him in a thousand
echoes, swelling one after the other; now like the
sound of repeated claps of thunder, and again
dying
away fainter and yet fainter, as though many
voices were engaged in a hushed and whispering
conversation.
Avaunt thee, fiend! avaunt thee! cried the
stout yeoman, as he still strove to keep himself
upon the surface of the water. Holy Mary,
holy Paul, holy Peter! continued he, between
his struggles, an' ye save me from these
pestilent
devils, I will
Here the yeoman plunged under the waters,
and the sentence was unfinished.
I will, by St. Withold, I will! cried he, as
he rose to the surface, place at the altar of the
first chapel at which I may arrive after my
deliverance
,
a wax taper, in honour of all three o'
you.
The yeoman struck his arms boldly through the
flood, as he continued:
And, an' ye work out my deliverance, I'll
never ask a boon of ye again.
Here he gave another bold push.
I'll never ask a boon of ye more, but stick
like a good christian to my own native saint
even the good St. Withold!
Here, satisfied that his duty to heaven was
done, the yeoman strove to gain some rock, or
other object, upon which he might rest his body,
much disjointed as it was by his fall of terror.
A murmuring sound now met his ears; it was
the sound of running waters. Onward and
onward
the bold yeoman dashed, and louder and yet
louder grew the sweet sound of waters in motion.
In a moment he felt a sudden change, from the
dull leaden stillness of a stagnated pool, to the
quick flow and wild careering of waves in motion.
And now he was carried onward with arrowy
fleetness, while high above, the roaring of the
subterranean
stream was returned in a thousand
echoes. Now tossed against the sharp, rough
points of rocks; now plunged in whirling gullies;
now borne on the crests of swelling waves, in
darkness and in terror, bold Robin swept on in his
career.
CHAPTER THE SECOND.
ROBIN ALONE IN THE EARTH-HIDDEN
CAVERN.
Thus was he carried onward for the space of
a quarter of an hour, when, bruised, shattered and
bleeding, he was thrown by the swell of a wave,
high out of the water upon a mass of rocks.
Here he lay for a long while, without sense or
feeling. When he recovered from this swoon, it
was with difficulty that he made the attempt to
collect his thoughts; all was vague, indistinct, and
like a dream.
St. Withold! at last he whispered, as if
communing
with himself; St Withold! but this Al
darin is, in good sooth, a most pestilent knave!
He paused a moment, and then, as if to
redouble
his private assurance of Aldarin's villany, he
resumed:
Ayea pestilent knaveugh!
This last interjection was a suppressed growl,
which he forced through his fixed teeth, as,
extending
his arms, with the hands clenched, he
made every demonstration of being engaged in
shaking some imaginary Aldarin, with great
danger
to his victim's comfort and life.
Ugh! Well, here am I, in this pitthis
back-staircase to the devil's dining roomalone,
wet, hungry, and in darkness. St. Withold save
me from all fiends, and I'll take care of aught
beside
.
Let me see. Mayhap I shall find some
passage from this place. I am on solid rock
that's well. Now for't.
Cautiously creeping along in the darkness,
he followed the winding of the subterranean flood
by its roaring, until he was suddenly stopped by
an upright stone, which, to his astonishment, he
found to be square in shape, and, feeling it
carefully
,
he doubted not that it had been shapen by
the chisel of the mason.
Over this stone Robin clambered, and lighted
upon a large chisseled stone laid in a horizontal
position, and over this was placed another stone
of like form; and thus proceeding in his
discoveries
our stout yeoman found that a stairway
arose in front of him.
With a shout of joy, bold Robin rushed up the
steps of stone, which, wide and roomy, afforded
his feet firm and substantial footing. Some forty
steps, or more, now lay below him, when raising
his foot to ascend yet higher, the yeoman found it
fall beneath him, and in a moment he stood upon
a floor, which to all likelihood was laid with slabs
of chisseled stone.
Through this place he wandered, now
stumbling
against regularly-built walls, now falling over
hidden objects, now passing through doorway
after
doorway, and again returning to the head of
the stairway from which he started.
Hours passed. Sometimes Rough Robin would
hear a faint booming sound far above, which he
supposed was the bell of the castle, tolling for
the death of the noble Count Di Albarone, known
throughout Christendom, in a thousand lays, as
the bravest of crusaders, and the gentlest of knights.
The sound of this bell swung upon the breeze for
miles around, whenever it was struckso Robin
remembered well; yet now, far down in the depths
of the earth, a low moaning noise was all that
reached the ears of the stout yeoman.
With every sinew stiffened, and with every
vein chilled by the damp of subterranean vaults,
scarce able to breathe in the putrid air which had
never known light or sunbeam, his whole frame
weakened by hunger, and his brain confused by
his dream-like adventures, Robin, the stout
yeoman
,
at last sank down upon a block of rough
stone, where he remained for hours in a state of
half unconsciousness, which finally deepened into
a sound and wholesome slumber.
CHAPTER THE THIRD.
THE CHAPEL OF THE ROCKS.
THE MONKS OF THE ORDER OF THE HOLY
STEEL HOLD SOLEMN COUNCIL IN
THE WILD WOOD.
The scene was a wild and solitary dell, buried
in the depths of the forests, far away among the
mountains; the time was high noon, and the
characters
of the scene were the members of a dark
and mysterious Order, whose history is involved
in shadow; whose names, embracing the highest
titles and the wealthiest nobles in the Dukedom
of Florence, are wrapt in mystery; whose deeds,
performed in secret, and executed with the most
appalling severity, are to this day known and
celebrated as household words, in the legends of
the valley of the Arno.
A level piece of sward, some twenty yards in
length, and as many in width, extended greenly
along within the depths of the forest; its bounds
described, and its verdure shadowed, by huge
masses of perpendicular rock, which seemed to
spring upward from the very sod, towering in wild
and rugged grandeur above, thrice the height of a
man; with the deep, rich foliage of forest oaks
arising beyond, and the clear summer sky seen
far, far above, as from the depths of a well,
forming
the roof of this hidden temple of nature.
The rugged masses of perpendicular rock, piled
upon each other in rude magnificence, surrounded
the glade in the form of a square. Viewed from
the forest side, these rocks looked like one vast
mound of massive stone, placed in the wild-wood
valley by some freak of nature; while a narrow,
though deep and rapid stream, its waters
shadowed
to ebony blackness, laved one side of the steeps
of granite, and sweeping beneath an arching
crevice
,
some three feet high, and as many thick, the
rivulet washed the sod of the hidden glade and
rolled along its edge, foaming against the rugged
walls; the waves plashing on high in showery
drops, until it suddenly disappeared under the
opposite
wall, and was lost in the subterranean
recesses
of the earth.
The mid-day sun, shining over the rich foliage
of the surrounding forests, where silence, vast
and immense, seemed to live and feel; over the
rough walls of the Temple of Rocks, scarce ever
visited by human feet,for strange legends scared
the peasantry from the place,flung his full and
glaring beams down from the very zenith along the
quiet of the level sward, with its encircling rocks,
now alive with a scene of wild and peculiar
interest
.
Around a square table, draped with folds of
solemn
black, arising from the centre of the sward,
sat a band of twenty-four mysterious men, each
figure robed in the thick folds of a monkish robe
and cowl, each face veiled, and each arm folded
within the circles of the sable garment. These
were the priests of the Order of the Monks of the
Steel.
At the head of the table, seated on a chair of
rough and knotted oak, placed on an uprising
rock, sate a tall and imposing figure, clad as the
others, in the robe and cowl of velvet, with his
face veiled from sight and sunbeam, while an
extended
hand grasped a slender rod of iron, with a
sculpturing of clearest ivory, fashioned into a
strange shape, fixed on the endthe solemn and
revered Abacus of the Order. This was the High
Priest of the Order of the Monks of the Steel.
At the other end of the table was seated a figure,
veiled and robed like the rest, yet with a taller and
more muscular form, while his extended hand,
flung over the velvet covering of the table, grasped
an axe of glittering steel. He was the Doomsman
of the Order. His voice denounced, his voice
consigned
to death, his voice was like the echo of the
grave, for it never spoke other words than the
sentence of doom.
Grouped around the table, a circle of solemn
figures
,
robed and veiled like the others, stood
shoulder to shoulder, each form holding a torch
on high with the left hand, while the right hand
grasped a keen and slender-bladed dagger. Silent
and motionless they stood, the blue flame of the
torch, held by the upraised arm, burning over
each head, every right hand steadily grasping the
dagger, while the robes of each figure, scarce
stirred into motion by the heaving of the breast,
looked like the drapery of some monkish effigy,
rather than the attire of moving and acting men
These were the Initiates, or Neophytes of the
Order
;
their dagger it was that protruded from the
breast of the victim, found by the affrighted
peasantry
in the lonely woods, or seen by the careless
crowd thrown down, in all the ghastliness of
murder
,
along the very streets of Florence, on the
steps of her palaces, in the halls of her castles, or
even in the cloisters of her cathedral. Whom the
Order condemned, or the Doomsman doomed, they
the neophytes of the Order, gave to the sudden
death of the invisible steel.
Never had the sun looked down upon a scene
as solemn and dread as this. The chronicles of
the olden time are rife with legends of secret
orders
,
linked together in some foul work of crime,
or joined in the holy task of vengeance on the
wronger, or doom to the slayer; but these bands
of men were wont to assemble in dark caverns,
lighted by the glare of smoking torches, speaking
their words of terror to the air of midnight, and
celebrating their solemn ceremonies amid the
corses of the dead. The band assembled in the
Chapel of Rocks were unlike all these, unlike any
band that ever assembled on the face of the earth.
They met at noonday, raising their torches in the
broad light of the sun, whispering their words of
doom in the wild solitudes of the woods, with
their faces and forms veiled from view, preserving
the sloemn unity of the Order, by a uniformity of
costume, while the rugged rocks, golden with the
mid-day beams, gave back, in sullen murmurs,
the voice of the accuser, or the sentence of the
doomsman, coupled with the low-muttered name
of the doomed. From their solemn noonday
meeting
in the Chapel of Rocks, they issued forth on
their errands of death, leaving the reeking dagger
in the heart of the tyrant, as he slept in the
recesses
of his castle; flinging their victims along
the roadside of the mountain, or the streets of the
city, while the faint murmurs of the multitude,
gazing at the work of the invisible, gave forth their
name and mission: Behold, behold the
vengeance
of the Monks of the Steel!
As the sun towered in the very zenith, waving
his solemn abacus, the high priest spoke from his
oaken throne. His words were few and concise.
Hail, brothers; met once again in the Chapel
of Rocks. Hail brothers, from the convent, from
the castle, and the cottage, hail! Prince and
peasant, lord and monk, met together in these
solemn
wilds, joined in the work of vengeance on
the wronger, death to the slayer, I bid ye welcome.
Herald arise; proclaim to the rising of the sun
the meeting of our solemn Order.
And the veiled figure seated on the right of the
high priest arose, and extending his hands on high
looked to the east, chaunting with a low,
deep-toned
voice:
Lo, people! lo, kings! lo, angels of heaven,
and men of earth! The solemn Order of the
Monks of the Steel, hold high council in the
Chapel
of the Rocks, beneath the light of the noonday
sun. Vengeance on the wronger, death to the
slayer!
And rising with hands outspread and, solemn
voices, three heralds successively made
proclamation
to the north, to the south, and to the setting
sun, that the solemn Order of the Monks of the
Steel, held high council in the Chapel of Rocks,
beneath the light of the noonday sun, while thrice
arose the wild denunciation
Vengeance to the
wronger, death to the slayer!
Priests of our solemn Order, ye have been
abroad on your errands of secrecy. Speak; what
have ye seen, whom do ye accuse, whom do ye
give to the steel?
I come from the people, said a veiled figure,
as he arose and spoke from the folds of his robe
Yesternight, like a shadow, I glided along the
streets of Florence, listening to the low-whispered
murmurs of the scattered groups of people. Every
tongue had some foul wrong to tell; every voice
spoke of midnight murder, at the bidding of a
tyrant; every voice whispered a story of woman's
innocence outraged, the grey hairs of age dabbled
in blood, the poor robbed, the weak crushed; while
the mighty raised their red hands to heaven,
laughing with scorn, as they shook the blood-drops
in the very face of God. Ask ye the name of the
tyrant? Find it in the whispers of the people;
the wronger and the slayer was the Dukethe
Duke of Florence!
I come from the palace! cried another robed
priest, rising solemnly, and speaking from the
folds of his robe. Mingling with the nobles of
Florence and the courtiers of the Duke, I heard
low whispers of discontent, murmurs of rebellion,
C
and dark threats of assassination. The Duke
the tyrant Dukewas on every lip, on every
tongue. Florence is slumbering over the depths
of a mighty volcanoa moment, and lo! the
scathing fires ascend to the sky, the dark smoke
blackens the face of day!
I come from the scaffold!
cried another dark
robed figure, as he arose and spoke through his
muffled garment. Last night, a mighty crowd
gathered around the gaol of Florence; every voice
was fraught with a tale of horror, every check
was pale, and every eye fixed upon a dark object,
that rose in the centre of the multitude. Breasting
my way through the throng, I rushed forward, I
gained the place of execution, I beheld a dark
scaffold rising like a thing of evil omen on the air.
I beheld the wheel of torture, the cauldron, and
the axe! `For whom are these?' I cried. `For
a lord of the royal blood of Florence,' shricked a
bystander: `for Adrian Di Albarone. To-morrow,
at daybreak, he dies; condemned by the Duke and
his minions, on the foul accusation of the murder
of his father!' I know the accusation to be false.
At this hour, brothers of the Holy Steel, the ghost
of the murdered shrieks for vengeance, before the
throne of God!
Accusers of the Duke of Florence, do ye
invoke
upon your own souls the punishment
accorded
to the tyrant, should your words prove false?
We do!
Priests of the solemn Order of the Holy Steel
what shall be the doom of the tyrant, the betrayer,
the assassin?
Death!
Initiates of the Order, do ye accord this
judgment
?
Death, death, death!
Doomsman, arise and proclaim the judgment
of the Order of the Monks of the Holy Steel!
Hear, oh heaven,oh earth,oh hell, arose
the harsh tones of the doomsman, Urbano, Duke
of Florence, tyrant, assassin, and betrayer, is
doomed! I give his body to the gibbet, to the
axe, to the steel! Though he sleeps within the
bridal chamber, there will the vengeance of the
Order
grasp him; though he wields the sceptre on his
ducal throne, there will the death blow strike the
sceptre from his hand, his carcase from the throne,
though he kneels at the altar, there will the
dagger
seek his heart. Doomed, doomed, doomed!'
And then, in a voice of fierce denunciation, he
gave forth to the noonday air, the dark and fearful
curse of the Order, whose sentences of woe may
not be written down on this page; a curse so dark,
so dread, and terrible, that the very priests of the
Order drooped their heads down low on each
bosom
,
as the sounds of the doomsman startled their
ears.
Let his name be written down in the book of
judgment, as the Doomed!
Lo, it is written!
And as the doomsman spoke, a level slab of
grey stone, which varied the appearance of the
green sward, some yards behind the chair of the
High Priest, slowly arose from the sod, and,
unperceived
by the monks of the Order, two figures,
robed in the cowl and monkish gown of the secret
band, emerged silently from the bosom of the
earth, and took their stations at the very backs of
the torch bearers.
Who will be the minister of this doom? Who
will receive the consecrated stceel, and strike it to
the tyrant's heart?
There was a low, deep murmur, a pause of
hesitation
,
and then the priests communed with each
other in muttered whispers.
Who will minister this doom? again echoed
the High Priest, while the sound of footsteps
startled the silence of the place. Who will
receive
the consecrated steel, and strike it to the
tyrant's
heart?
Behold the minister! cried a deep-toned
voice, as the strange figures strode toward the
table.
Give me the steel!
It is Albertine! echoed the members of the
Order, and the wan face and flashing eyes of the
monk were disclosed by the falling cowl.
Behold the minister of this doom! he
shouted
,
advancing to the doomsman. Death to the
tyrant! Give me the steel!
And as he spoke, the cowl fell from the face of
the figure who stood beside the monk, and the
torch bearers, the monks, and the High Priest,
looked from their muffled robes in wonder and in
awe, and beheld the face of
Adrian Di
Albarone
.
CHAPTER THE FOURTH.
THE CHAPEL OF ST. GEORGE OF
ALBARONE.
THE SOLEMN FUNERAL RITES OF THE MIGHTY
DEAD, CONVEYED TO THE TOMB, NOT
AS THE VICTIM, BUT THE
CONQUEROR.
The beams of the midnight moon, streaming
through the emblazoned panes of the lofty arching
windows, mingled with the blaze of long lines of
funeral torches, making the chapel of St. George
of Albarone as light as day, when illumined by
the glare of the thunder storm, and revealing a
strange and solemn scenethe last rites of
religion
celebrated over the corse of the mighty dead.
The mingled light of moonbeam and glaring
torch, revealed the roof of the chapel arching
above, all intricately carved and fretted, the lines
of towering columns, arabesque in outline and
effect
,
the high altar of the church, with its cross of
gold and diamonds, won by the lords of Albarone
from the lands of Heathenesse, its rare painting of
the dying God, its rich sculpturings and quaint
ornaments; while along the mosaic floor, among
the pillars, and around the altar, grouped the
funeral
crowd, marking their numbers by the
upraised
torch and spear.
An aged abbot, attired in the gorgeous robes of
his holy office, with long locks of snow-white hair
falling over his shoulders, stood at the foot of the
altar, celebrating the midnight mass for the dead;
while around the venerable man were grouped
the brothers of his convent, their mingled robes of
white and black giving a strange solemnity to the
scene.
Beside the foot of the altar, resting in the ruddy
glare of the funeral torches, robed in full armor,
partly concealed by a pall of snow-white velvet,
on a bier of green beechen wood, covered by skins
of the wild leopard, in simple majesty, lay the
corse of the gallant lord of Albarone. The raised
vizor revealed his stern features set grimly in
death, while his mail-clad arms were crossed on his
muscular chest, robed in battle armour. No coffin
panels held his manly form; no death-shroud, with
ghastly folds of white, enveloped those sinewy
limbs; neither did things of glitter and show
glisten
along his couch, heaping mockery on the still
solemnity of the grave. It was the custom of
Albarone
,
that the knight who once reigned lord of
its wide domains, should even in death meet the
stern enemy of man, not as victim, but as
conqueror
.
Borne to the vaults of death, not with
songs of wail and woe, but compassed by
men-at-arms
;
environed by upraised swords, the silent
corse seemed to smile in the face of the
skeleton-god
,
and enter even the domains of the grave in
triumph, while the battle shout of Albarone rose
pealing above, and over the visage of the dead
waved the broad banner of the warlike race.
Near the head of the corse, while along the
aisles of the chapel gathered the men-at-arms and
servitors of Albarone, were grouped two figures
an aged man and a youthful maiden.
With his head depressed, his arms folded
meekly
over his breast, his slender form clad in solemn
folds of sable velvet, faced with costly furs, and
relieved by ornaments of scattered gold, the Count
Aldarin Di Albarone seemed absorbed in listening
to the chaunt of the holy mass, when, in sooth, his
keen eye flashed with impatience, and his lip
curved with scorn, as he was forced to witness the
ceremonies of a religion whose mandates he
defied
,
whose awful God his very soul blasphemed.
The maiden, fair, and young, and gentle, her
robes of white flowing loosely around her form of
grace, her hands half clasped and half upraised,
stood near the couch of the dead, her calm blue
eyes fixed upon the visage of the corse, while the
memory of the fearful scene in the Red Chamber
swept over her soul, mingling with the thoughts
of the felon now festering on the wheel of Florence.
The bosom of the Ladye Annabel rose and fell
with a wild pulsation, and her rounded cheeks
grew like the face of death, as thus waiting beside
the dead, the thoughts of the past awoke such
terrible
memories in her soul.
Around, circling along the pavement, with stern
visages and iron-clad forms gleaming in the light,
were grouped the men-at-arms of Albarone,
extending
along the chapel aisles, in one rugged
array
of battle, while each warrior held aloft a
blazing
torch with his left arm, as his good
right hand grasped the battle sword. Here and
there were scattered servitors of Albarone, clad
in the rich livery of the ancient house, darkened
by folds of crape, mingled with the humble
peasant
vassals, whose faces of sorrow mingled with
the general grief. Every voice was hushed, and
every foot-tramp stilled, as the last strains of the
holy chaunt of the mass floated solemnly along
the chapel aisles, while high overhead, above
armed
warrior and white-robed monk, floated the
broad banner of Albarone, waving to and fro with
the motion of the night air, its gorgeous folds
bearing the emblazoning of the winged leopard,
with the motto, in letters of gold:
Grasp boldly, and bravely strike
.
As the last echoes of the holy ceremony of the
mass died away along the chapel aisles, Count
Aldarin glanced over the group of white-robed
monks, with the venerable abbot of St. Peters of
Florence in their midst, and along the files of the
iron-robed soldiers, for a single moment, and then
gazing upon the broad banner waving overhead,
he spoke in a bold and deep-toned voice:
Let the corse of Lord Julian Di Albarone be
raised upon the shoulders of the ancient men who
served as esquires of his body.
Four men-at-arms, whose heads were whitened
by the frosts of seventy winters, advanced; and,
raising the death-couch upon their shoulders,
with the right leg thrown forward, stood ready
to march.
At the same moment, the united strength of
ten of the servitors threw open the huge oaken
panels of a trap-door, which, cut into the floor of
the middle aisle of the chapel, revealed a wide and
spacious stairway, descending into the bosom of
the earth.
The Count Aldarin seized the staff which bore
the broad banner of Albarone, he flung the azure
folds to the night wind, and his voice rung
echoing
along the chapel walls:
Vassals of Albarone, form around the corse of
your lord. Draw your swords, and raise the
shout: `Albarone, to the rescue! Strike for the
Winged Leopardstrike for Albarone!'
With the battle cry pealing, their swords
flashing in the light, and their torches waving on
high, the men-at-arms formed in files of four
behind
the bier, which now began to move slowly
toward the subterranean stairway.
In the rear of the men-at-arms came the Ladye
Annabel, followed by the venerable abbot, bearing
aloft a crucifix of gold; while on either side
walked
rosy-cheeked children, clad in robes of white,
and holding censers in their hands, which ever
and anon they swung to and fro, filling the air
with perfume of frankincense and myrrh. Then
came the monks, in their mingled robes of white
and black, walking with slow and solemn tread,
and holding in one hand a torch, while the other
grasped a cross.
As the ancient esquires who bore the bier of
beechen wood, arrived at the trap-door which
discovered
the subterranean stairway, the funeral
train halted for an instant. The sight was full of
grandeur. The light of a thousand torches threw
a ruddy glow upon the folds of the broad banner
upon the glistening armor and bright swords of
the men-at-armsover the snow-white attire of
the long array of monks, and along the cold face
of the dead. The carvings that decorated the
walls of the churchthe altar, rich a
thousand
offeringsthe cross of gold, and the rare
paintingsthe arched and fretted roof, and the
lofty pillars, were all shown in bold and strong
relief.
Ye ancient men who bear the corse of the
Lord Di Albarone, ye who served your lord with
a faithful service while living, prepare to descend
into the vault of the dead, there to lay your sacred
burden beside his fathers. Vassals of Albarone,
grasp your swords yet tighter, and join, every
man, in the battle song of our race. The house
of Albarone enter the tomb, not with wail and
lamentation, but with song and joy, as though
they went to battle; with swords flashing, with
armor clanking, and with the broad banner of the
Winged Leopard waving above their heads.
Right full and loud sounded the voice of Count
Aldarin, while his bent form straightened proudly
erect, as though he were suddenly fired with the
warlike spirit of his ancestors. His small dark
eye flashed as he shouted, waving the banner over
the bier:
Men of Albarone, to the rescue!
Strike for the Winged Leopard!strike for
Albarone! responded, with one deep-toned voice
the aged bearers of the bier, as they began to
descend
the stairway.
Ha! an Albarone! an Albarone! Strike for
the Winged Leopard: strike for Albarone!
shouted
the men-at-arms, as, waving their torches on
high, and brandishing their swords, they advanced
with a hurried, yet measured tread, after the
manner
they were wont to advance to the storming of
a besieged fortress.
The aged abbot of St. Peters suddenly forgot
his sacred character, aud stirred by the memory
of the days when he had mingled in the din of
battle, side by side with the noble Lord Julian, he
caught up the wary cry: Albarone, to the
rescue
!a
blow for the Winged Leopard! and along
the line of white-robed monks ran the shout: An
Albarone! Ha! for the Winged Leopard! Strike
for Albarone! and thus spreading from the
men-at-arms
to the abbot, from the abbot to the monks,
the cry of battle resounded along the aisles of the
chapel, and was echoed again and again from the
fretted roof.
As the corse disappeared down the stairway,
followed by the funeral train, the war song of
Albarone
was raised by the men-at-armswild and
thrilling arose the notes of the chaunt, that had
swelled in the van of a thousand battles.
The subterranean stairway seemed to be
without
end. At last, when some five score steps had
been passed, the bearers of the corse found
themselves
in a long and narrow passage, which
having
slowly traversed, they stood at the head of a
winding stairway. This they descended, while
louder and yet more loud arose the chaunt of the
battle song, mingling with the clash of swords and
the clank of armor. At the foot of this stairway
lay another passage, narrower than the last, from
which it differed in that it was hewn out of the
solid rock, while the walls of the other were built
of chisseled stone. Along this passage the
procession
slowly proceeded, the walls approaching
closer together at every step, until at last there
was barely room for the bier to pass; when
suddenly
,
as if by the wand of a magician, the scene
was changed, and the funeral train found
themselves
in the vault of the dead.
CHAPTER THE FIFTH.
THE CAVERN OF THE DEAD.
THE FUNERAL TRAIN, BEARING THE CORSE
ALONG THROUGH THE GROUPS OF
SPECTRAL-FORMS ARE
AWE-STRICKEN
BY THE
APPEARANCE
OF A STRANGE
KNIGHT.
Above, the cavern roof spread vast and
magnificent
,
like an earth-hidden sky; around, on every
side, in rugged grandeur, extended the rocky
walls; and far in the distance, the solid pavement
seemed to grow larger and wider, as the gazer
looked upon its surface of substantial stone. The
light of the funeral torches flashing over the
abrupt
rocks, revealed the level floor, and gave a
faint glimpse of the vast arch extending far above.
The ruddy beams flasning on every side, disclosed
a strange and ghastly spectacle. Around the
walls of the cavern, and over the floor, were
scattered
figures of gigantic stone, rising from the
pavement, at irregular intervals, in various and
strangely contrasted attitudes, bearing the most
singular resemblance to the gestures of living
men, yet with every face stamped with an
expression
that chilled the heart of the gazer, as though
he beheld a spirit of the unreal world.
A wild legend was written in the archives of
Albarone, concerning these strange figures. In
the olden time, while eternal midnight brooded
through these cavern halls, a demon band shook
the rugged arches with their sounds of hellish
wassail, startling the gloom of night and the
brightness of noonday above, with the echo of
their shrieks and yells; while their foul
blasphemies
of the
Awful Unknown
infected the very
air with a curse, and sent disease and death abroad
from the cavern over the land, until every lip grew
pale, and every heart was chilled, at the mention
of the demon vault of Albarone. It was when the
impious revel swelled loudest; when the infernal
goblet was raised to every lip; when the glances
of glaring eyes, burning with the curse of Lucifer,
were exchanged between the supernatural revellers;
when the sounds of mockery and yells of
blasphomy
,
echoing and thundering around the vault,
realized
a hell on earth, that the words of the
Invisible
broke over the scene, and the figures of the
demon band were suddenly transformed to lifeless
stone. This wild tradition gained credence from
the positions and attitudes of these strange statues.
The smallest of the figures was three times as
large as the tallest and most robust of men; there
were others whose heads of dark rock well nigh
touched the cavern's roof, while their outstretched
arms and writhing attitude filled the gazer with
indefinable dread. Some were springing in the
festal dance, the smile, grim and ghastly,
wreathing
their lips of stone; some were circling in
groups of wild, revelry, their faces agitated by
laughter; while others, with upturned
countenances
,
bearing the impress of every dark and hellish
passion, and arms thrown wildly aloft, seemed
daring the vengeance of heaven, and mocking the
power of God. Among all these various and
contrasted
figures, there was not one form of beauty,
not one shape of grace; but all were expressive of
low, bestial revelry, servile terror, or else of
sublime
hatred and defiance. Some were formed of
the darkest, and some of the lightest stone. Here
arose a form of dark rock, side by side with a
shape of snow-white stone; yonder towered a
figure of dusky red, and farther on, a form of dark
blue, veined by streaks of crimson and purple,
broke through the darkened air.
The ancient esquires who bore the corse, had
faced the brunt of an hundred battles, and fought
in the van of a thousand frays, yet it was not
without a shiver of terror that they looked around
upon this wild and unearthly scene, thronged with
those dark and fiend-like figures.
As they advanced, a new wonder attracted the
attention of the funeral train. Far in the cavern,
to all appearance near the centre, a vast mound,
of a square form, arising from the level pavement,
was hung with burning lamps, and overlooked by
a figure of stone, which seemed to those of the
funeral train to exceed all the others, both in the
magnitude of its height, and the wildness of its
attitude. The lamps burning above this mound,
threw s strong light over the dark figure, and along
the pavement, for some few yards around; while
the space between the mound and the procession
was left in entire darkness.
The bearers of the corse, advancing towards
the mound, led on the funeral train, who all, save
the Count Aldarin, seemed seized with a sudden
and indefinable dread. The battle song was still
continued, the swords were still brandished, and
the torches were still waved on high; but there
was a tremor in the notes of the song, the swords
were grasped with the nervous sensation that men
ever feel when expecting to meet antagonists of
the unknown world, and the waving of the torches
was accompanied by the muttered exorcisms of
the monks. As for the Ladye Annabel, she
leaned
halt swooning upon the arm of the venerable
abbot, who, in good sooth, was as much
frightened
as the maiden.
The esquires who bore the remains of their
gallant
lord, had now gained near half the way over
the pavement of stone, toward the mound; the last
of the servitors had emerged from the narrow
passage
into the cavern, and the whole train
extending
in one unbroken line, marked by the long
array
of torches flashing over the armor of the
warriors, and the white robes of the monks,
presented
a striking and imposing spectacle.
Aldarin turned suddenly round, and exclaimed,
with a wild gesture:
How now, vassals? Why this tremor?
Whence this alarm? Do I not lead you? Raise
the battle song of our race yet higher, and advance
yet more boldly! The banner of the Winged
Leopard waves above ye! Shout the war cry, and
let your noble lord be borne to his rest as were
his fathers before him. Shout the war cry
shout
Wheeling suddenly around in the warmth of
his excitement, he turned from the men-at-arms,
to the corse-bearers, and at the very instant,
started
a step backward with involuntary horror. The
corse sate erect in the death-couch, the while pall
falling back from the iron clad shoulders, while
the light of the torches fell vividly upon its
unclosed
eyes as their cold, stony glare rested upon the
face of Aldarin.
Aldarin felt his very heart leaping within his
bosom, while big beaded drops of moisture,
clammy
as the death-sweat, stood out from his
forehead
.
The Corse hath arisen in the death-couch
he hurriedly whispered,The eyes of the dead
are unclosed, they are gazing around the vault of
death.
It is the custom of Albarone, exclaimed a
white haired Esquire,We have raised the corse
erect, we have unclosed its eyes. The mighty
dead of Albarone enter the vault of death,
proudly
and erect, with their unclosed eyes gazing
fearlessly
on the tombsuch is the custom of
Albarone
!
Thanksbrave EsquireThanksslowly
and gaspingly exclaimed Aldarin, as he
recovered
his powers of mind. Men of Albarone, he
exclaimed in a loud and commanding tone, Gaze
ye upon the face of the unconquered Dead, gaze
upon the erect form, the unclosed eyes
daring
the terror of the tomband as ye gaze, let
the battle-song of our race peal to the very
cavern's
roof! Shout the war cry, shout
A figure clad from head to foot in azure armour
of shining steel, leaped from behind a form of
stone, arising from the cavern floor, at the head
of the bier, and seizing the banner-staff from the
hands of Aldarin, finished his sentence
Shoutexclaimed the Figure armed in azure
steelShout Albarone to the rescue! Death to
the Murderer!
The thunder-tones of that voice were known,
along the line of men-at-arms, through the columns
of the Monks. One wild shout arose from the
warriors
Ha! For Albarone! Adrian, our Lord, comes
from the dead to lead us! Onon! Strike for
the Winged Leopardstrike for Albarone!
Strange it was that the very men, who a
moment
before had trembled with undefined terror,
now hailed with joy the presence of one whom
they supposed to have risen from the dead.
In an instant all was confusion and uproar.
The Esquires set down the corse, and together
with the men-at-arms, clustered around the figure
in azure armour, shouting and making the very
cavern's roof re-echo with their exclamations of
joy.
The tumult and outcry, coupled with the name
of Adrian, reached the ears of the fair Ladye
Annabel
,
who already half swooning with terror,
now felt her brain whirling in wild confusion, as
she fell fainting in the arms of the Abbot of St.
Peters.
Brethren,cried the Abbot, addressing the
MonksHaste ye away to the upper air for aid,
while I stay here with the maiden, and exorcise
yon devil, if devil it may be, with solemn prayers
and ceremonies. Awayaway, the fair Ladye
may die, ere ye can return with aid.
It needed no second word from the Abbot; the
Monks gazed in each other's faces with affrighted
looks, and then trooping hurriedly together,
hastened
across the floor of the cavern, followed by
the Servitors, who but a moment past formed part
of the procession. It was but an instant when
the white robes of the monks, and the gay livery
of the servitors, were lost to view within the
confines
of the narrow passage.
The Abbot holding the fainting maiden in his
arms, her white attire mingling with his
sacerdotal
robes, gazed around the cavern, and found to
his astonishment that all around him was wrapt
in darkness, while far ahead, he could discern the
lights of the death mound, breaking through the
gloom, with the glare of torches, held aloft by the
men-at-arms, creating a brilliant space between
his position and the mound of the dead.
All is darkmurmured the AbbotAll is
dark around meyet far ahead, I behold the
men-at-arms
clustering round the Strange Figure
their swords rise aloft, and their distant shouts
break on my ear! She lays in my arms, cold,
cold and senseless. Save me, mother of Heaven,
but I cannot feel the beating of her heartI hear
no sound of aid, no voice of assistance! The
Cavern is damp, and she may die ere they come
with succor,I will away and seek for aid
myself
.
Lay there, gentle Ladye, at the foot of this
strange Statuethus I enfold thee in my robes of
whitethus I defend thee from the cold and damp
in a moment I will be with thee again! God
aid my steps!
At the foot of a figure of stone, wrapping her
form in his glittering robe of white and gold,
which he doffed from his own trembling frame,
the Abbot rested the Ladye Annabel, all cold and
insensible, and then hastened from the Cavern in
search of aid.
There was a long, long pause around the spo
where lay the maiden, while fearful mysteries
were enacting far beyond, on the summit of the
Death-Mound.
When the Abbot again returned he was
companioned by armed men, with glittering
attire
and flashing swords. He sought the resting
place of the maiden; he beheld nothing but the
rough floor of the cavern. The Ladye Annabel
had disappeared, and the grotesque figure rising
from the pavement seemed to grin in mockery as
the horror-stricken Abbot gazed upon the vacant
stone, where he had laid the maiden down to rest,
her form of beauty, sheltered by his sacred robes.
CHAPTER THE SIXTH.
THE ORDEAL.
With a mind of might and a brain of power,
the Count Aldarin possessed a soul, vigorous with
the noblest efforts of moral courage, yet now while
the men-at-arms gathered with shouts and
exclamations
of joy, around the Azure Figure, he stood
trembling like a reed shaken by the winter wind,
his face at all times destitute of color, became
lividly
pale, and with quivering lips and
chattering
teeth, he remained for a moment silent and
motionless
.
Superstitious terror, he was wont to contemn,
fear of the supernatural, he was known to despise,
yet now when the voice of the dead rang in his
ears, and the form, which he believed lay
extended
on the Wheel of the Doomsman, moved before
his eyes, he thought the voice and form had sprung
from the unknown recesses of the grave.
It was after the lapse of a few moments, that he
summoned courage to advance through the crowd
of men-at-arms, and fixing his keen eye on the
form of the unknown knight, he spoke
Who, Sir, art thou? What is thine errand
in this lonely vault of the dead? Why disturb
the funeral rites of the Lord Di Albarone?
I come to avenge his murder!
Ha! shouted AldarinHis murderer is
already
doomedeven now he festers upon the
wheel!
His murderer livesshouted the Figure,
through the bars of his closed helmet,His
murderer
breathes, while the Corse asks in the
speechless
tongue of deathasks and prays to God, to
man for vengeance! The Murderer walks the earth,
walks in the calm sunshine, while the Murdered
rots and crumbles in gloom and darkness. His
murderer is hereaye among the brave soldiers,
who followed Julian of Albarone to battle, stands
the foul miscreant.
Thou
ART THE MURDERER!
A wild thrill of surprise and horror ran through
the group. From heart to heart, like lightning
leaping from cloud to cloud, darted the wild words
of the accuser; from eye to eye flew the quick
glance of vengeance, and from lip to lip, swelled
the shout of the avengers.
Hew him down! cried oneFor days have
we all thought him guilty. Our suspicions are
now confirmedthe corse pleads for his blood!
Down with the brother-murderer!
Lo! I whet my knife for his blood!
Our Lordexclaimed a tall and slalwart
man-at-armsOur Lord Adrian doth rise from
the dead to convict thee of the murder of thy
brother! Miscreant, canst thou deny it?
The four ancient Esquires said not a word,
but each of them raised his dagger, they seized
the Scholar Aldarin, with one firm grasp, their
eyes were fixed upon his visage in one stern glare,
their instruments of vengeance gleamed over his
head, and with silent determination, they
awaited
the command to strike and kill.
The Azure Knight stayed their hands.
Onward, brave soldiershe criedonward
to the tomb of the race of Albarone. There will
we administer the Ordeal to the old man, there,
beneath the shadow of the Demon of our Race,
shall he swear that he is guiltless. Onward
bearers
of the corsein the name of the Winged
Leopard
,
onward!
Raising the bier upon their shoulders, with the
corse still sitting grimly erect, the ancient
Esquires
advanced toward the Mound, led onward
by the Unknown Knight, while in the rear,
surrounded
by men-at-arms, walked the Scholar
Aldarin
,
his head drooped low, and his arms folded
across his breast.
He said no word, he uttered no sound of
entreaty
,
but his keen grey eyes, half-buried by his
contracting brows, seemed all aflame with the
intensity
of his thoughts.
The Mound, with all its ponderous outline,
ighted by the lamps burning on the summit, now
begun to appear more clearly through the gloom.
At first it seemed like some vast pile of rocks,
heaped on high by a giant-hand, and then, as the
men-at-arms drew near and nearer, it gradually
assumed a definite form, rising like a pyramid, its
three sides fashioned into steps of living rock,
while from the fourth, arose the dark figure of
stone, towering far, far above, its arms wildly
out-spread
,
its face looking down upon the tomb, as
its vacant eyes seemed fixing their weird and
terrible
glance upon the faces of the dead.
The strange procession reached the mound, they
ascended twenty steps of stone, and the bearers of
the corse found themselves standing upon the
summit
,
from the centre of which arose a solid block
of stone, some thirty feet in length and seven in
width, while it was but four feet in height.
On the top of this rock, within the hollow of a
cavity, hewn out of the living stone, lay the
remains
of the Lords of Albarone, placed there from
age to age, from generation to generation, through
the long lapse of six hundred years. It was a
strange scene. The lamps of iron, curious in
fashion and ponderous in weight, placed at
intervals
around the rock, cast their glaring light over
the crumbling remains, each grisly skeleton
attired
in the warlike costume of the age that
beheld
his glory and owned his rule.
Here the thin and blackened arm-bones of a
Gothic warrior were crossed upon his breast-plate
of gold, which long years ago had covered the
plain tunic, worn by these iron-men, who swept
like an avalanche from the Alps of the North,
over the fair plains of Italy. The lamp-beams
glimmering over the skeleton, revealed the bones
below the breastplate, mouldering into dust, while
the fragments of the feet were encircled in the
simple yet warlike sandals of iron once worn by
the warriors from the land of the Goth. Side by
side with this relic, the bones of another skeleton
gleamed grimly through the bars and
armour-plates
of a later age, wrapping the remains of the
mighty dead, from the helmeted skull to the
iron-booted
feet.
And thus extending along the cavity in the
surface
of the rock, skull after skull and skeleton
succeeding skeleton, reposed the Lords of the
House of Albarone, clad in strange and various
costumes, types of contrasted ages, or enwrapped
in the stern iron armour, which had defended their
living forms in the terror of battle. The boast of
the proud Housethat the earth of the grave-yard
should never soil a Lord of the race of Albarone
was fulfilled.
Over this singular tomb towered the dark figure
of gigantic rock, its rude arms thrown wildly
aloft, while its downcast eyes of stone were fixed
upon the corses of the dead. Many a legend,
whispered beside the hearths of the peasantry, or
told by the minstrel in the hall of the castle,
inspiring
its hearers with terror and awe, spoke in
words of fear of the demon-form arising in the
cavernous recesses of Albarone, its mighty power,
and the strange sympathy it possessed for the race
of the Winged Leopard. Some traditions, dim
and indistinct, yet fraught with wild mysteries,
named the figure as the representation of the
Northern-God
Odin
, stating that in ages long
gone by, it had been worshipped with infant
sacrifice
and midnight bloodshed, while the Lords of
Albarone flung themselves in awe beneath its
gloomy shadow.
Other legends named the rude creation of rocks
as the Demon of the race of Albarone, brooding
silently over the tomb of the Lords, while its
heart of stone was sentient with a strange soul, and
its eyes looked forth with an expression that froze
the blood of the gazer to behold.
Such were the legends, differing in their style
and story, yet all uniting in throwing the veil of
mystery and shadow over the dark dread form of
stone.
It was seen but once in the life-time of a Lord
of Albarone, when he celebrated the funeral rites
of his predecessor, and the demon-form once seen,
the cavern of the dead was never traversed by his
living form again.
Thrice the funeral train passed round the tomb,
the Esquires bearing the upright corse, thrice
they raised the wild chaunt of the battle-song of
Albarone, while far and wide the depths of the
cavern gave back the sound, swelling in a
thousand
echoes, like successive claps of August
thunder
.
The death-couch was then rested upon the
platform
of stone.
The ancient Esquires slowly raised the corse,
again the battle-cry swelled through the cavern,
the men-at-arms wildly clashed their swords
together
,
while the banner streamed proudly in the
torchlight.
Men of Albarone! spoke the solemn tones of
the Azure-Knight; The Count Julian of
Albarone
is laid beside his fathers!
Louder clashed the swords, more proudly waved
the banner, and higher and yet higher swelled the
song as the mailed corse was placed in the cavity,
side by side with its ancestors.
The figure in azure armour glanced round upon
the group of men-at-arms, and exclaimed in a
deep-toned
voice, that thrilled to every heart
Fall back, vassals of Albarone. Let Aldarin
brother of the late Lord advance!
Aldarin advanced with a sneer upon his pale
countenance.
Haha! he muttered to himself, they think
to frighten
me
with their senseless mummery
their childish mockery! Frighten Aldarin with
superstition, that believes not in their God! Ha
ha! I am here, he continued aloudwhat
would ye with me?
Old man! exclaimed the stranger-knight,
look upon the corse of thy murdered brother.
Behold the features pale with death; the clammy
brow, the sunken cheek, the livid liplook upon
that corse and say you did not do the murder!
The men-at-arms looked on with intense
interest
,
their forms clad in iron armour were
crowded
together, and every eye was fixed upon the
Scholar.
The face of Aldarin was calm as innocence, as
he replied
I did not do the murder!
Give me thy handplace thy fingers upon the
livid lips of the corse.
Boldly did Aldarin reach forth his hand and
touch the compressed mouth of the mailed corse.
The lips slowly parted, and a thin stream of
blood emerged from the mouth, and trickled over
the lower lip and down the chin, staining the grey
beard of the deccased warrior with its dark red
hue.
The men-at-arms shrunk back aghast, with
sudden
horror, and each soldier could hear the
gasping
of his comrade's breath. A tremor passed
over the frame of Aldarin, and his face became
pale as that of the corse beside which he stood.
Wilt thou now say thou art innocent?
exclaimed
the stranger-knight. The corsethe
lifeless form of thy murdered brother, shrinks at
thy accursed touch!
I am innocent!
cried Aldarin, recovering his
determined tone of voice.
By the God of
heaven
and earth I swear it!
What say ye, vassals of Albarone? Is this
man innocent?
Then arose one firm, determined cry from the
men-at-arms
He is guiltyheaven and earth proclaim it!
The dead witness it!
And the depths of the cavern returned the
hollow
echoGuiltyguilty!
They all advanced a step toward the accused.
Each eye fired with one expression; the sinews of
each hand were strained to bursting, as they
grasped
their well-tried swords.
One trial more, exclaimed the figure in
armour
of azure steel. Aldarin of Albarone, look
upon that awful form which towers above us.
Behold
the arms outstretched, as if to hurl the red
levin bolt down upon thy guilty head. Mark well
those eyes of stonethe fearful look of that dark
countenancethe eyes are fixed upon thee; and
the brow lowers at thee. Look, Aldarin of
Albarone
,
look upon the Demon of our race. Call to
mind the fearful legends of that demon's vengeance
upon all who ever wronged the House of
Albarone
.
Think of the time when those lips of stone
have sent forth a voice to convict the guilty; when
those arms of rock have been filled with life to
crush the wretch whom the voice convicted. Old
man art thou ready for the ordeal?
Aldarin cast one glance around. A dead silence
reigned throughout the cavern. The torches cast
a strong light upon the long line of robed skeletons,
and upon the stern visage of the murdered Lord.
The faces of the men-at-arms glared fiercely upon
the accused: their eyes sparkled from under their
woven brows, their lips were compressed, and
their half raised swords glowed in the ruddy light.
Aldarin looked above. The massive brow, the
stone eye-balls, the sneering lip, of that dread
dark face of stone, were all turned to glaring
red by the strong light of many torches. Each
sinew of the muscular arms; the clenched hands;
the bold prominence of the gigantic chest; the
strong outline of the towering figure, were all
shown in bold and sublime relief.
Aldarin raised his hands on high.
Dark formDemon of our raceBefore thee I
swearI am guiltless.
Murderer!
a hollow voice exclaimed. The
sound rung thro' the arches of the cavern like the
voice of the dead.
Ha! shouted the men-at-arms, beholdbe
hold the Demon speaks; the lips of stone move;
the eyes firebehold!
The voice again rung thro' the cavern
Murderer
!
Aldarin started. The sneer upon his lip had
fled. In a moment he lay prostrate upon the
platform of stone, and a score of swords flashed
over him.
I confessI confess! shouted he in hurried
tones; I ask but one moment to prepare me for
death. Grant me this boon an' ye are christians.
Dog! shouted one of the pall-bearers, thy
victim died without shrift
So shalt thou die! cried another.
Lo! my knife is whetted for thy blood!
Hold! exclaimed the strange knight, let him
have his request.
Aldarin arose and drew from his vest a small
missal, with clasps of gold, and covers that blazed
with jewels.
I would pray, he exclaimed meekly, as
pressing
the clasps of the missal, it flew open,
discovering
not the leaves of a book of prayer but a
hollow casket. Taking a small phial of silver
from the bottom of this casket, he held it
hurriedly
to the flame of a torch, and then with as much
haste, he applied the mouth of the phial to a bright
stone that was fixed under the lid of the casket.
The stone emitted quick flashing sparks of fire,
and a light misty smoke emerging from the
mouth of the phial, spread like a cloud around
Aldarin
,
and rolled thro' the vault in waving
columns
.
It was accompanied by a pungent odour, which,
far sweeter than perfume of frankincense and
myrrh, stole over the senses of the astonished
spectators, gradually benumbing their limbs, and
depriving them both of motion and consciousness.
The figure in azure armour rushed forward to
seize the murderer, but his limbs refused their
office, and he fell upon the platform of stone, his
armour ringing as he fell. At the same moment
while the smoke grew thicker and the odor more
pungent, the men-at-armsboth those who stood
upon the platform and those who thronged the
steps of stonefell to the earth as one man. The
ancient Esquires drew their daggers and
advanced
.
The Count Aldarin gave a derisive laugh.
Dogs! shouted he, ye knew not of my last
resort! I hold a power above your grasp
receive
the reward of your insolence. Down, ye
slaves!
Flashes of fire played like lightning in the
wreaths of misty smoke. The Esquires tottered
and fell prostrate among their fellows.
CHAPTER THE SEVENTH.
THE BLOW FOR THE WINGED
LEOPARD.
The light of the lamps, burning along the tomb
fell over the steps of stone, and cast its crimson
glow over the dread face of the Demon-Form,
while the sands of the fourth part of an hour,
sank in the glass of timesilent and solitary time.
The kinght in armor of azure steel, was the first
to rise from the strange slumber which the
chymical
spell of the Scholar had flung around the
sensos of the avengers. He arose, he looked
wildly
over the steps of stone and along the cavern
Aldarin was gone
.
The azure knight gazed around the gloom and
darkness of the vault of death, for some moments,
while the utter silence of the place impressed his
heart with a strange awe.
A sound struck his ear. It was the sound of
men marching in order of battle. It grew louder
and was mingled with the clanking of armour and
the clashing of swords. Listening intently for a
few moments the knight of the azure armour at
last beheld a body of men-at-arms emerge from the
narrow passage that led into the cavern, with long
ines of torches shining upon a brilliant array of
upraised swords, armour of gold, mingled with
shining spears and waving pennons. They
advanced
in regular order, being formed in two
distinct columns, between which, at the head of
the party, walked one distinguished from the
others by the richness of his armour, while his
voice of command showed him to be the leader of
the company.
While they poured across the floor of the cavern
the knight of the azure armour scanned them
with great attention, as he exclaimed with a shout
of joy.
They comethe shallow-pated Duke and his
minions. One blowone good straight-forward
blow, and I am Lord of the halls of my
ancestors
.
With his right hand he seized his sword, and
with his left he waved the banner of the
Winged
Leopard
.
Upup!Ye men Albarone. On with your
swords, and strike for the Winged Leopard, for
our Lord and his rights!
The men-at-arms awoke like men awaking from
troubled sleep and hideous dreams. They groped
hastily for their swords over the steps of stone
and along the platform, and in a few moments
they stood erect and prepared for fight.
Range yourselves, my brave men, on either
side of the tomb, in the darkness. Ye number
fifty in all; our enemies appear to count ten times
our force. Behold!they continue to pour into
the cavern. But hist!The watchword is`
Ha!
for the Winged Leopard
.'
The men-at-arms of his Grace of Florence were
now within one hundred yards of the mound.
Well, by St. Paul, exclaimed the Duke, this
is certainly a very dreary looking place. Really
one could imagine this cavern to be a very fit
habitation
for witches, devils, or any other
unnecessary
things. Where be these caitiff knaves of
which my Lord the Count Aldarin told us?
Advance
my brave men; find these villians. They
have stolen the Ladye Annabel awaydespatch
them, and then we will all have time to share the
banquet of our lordly host!
The broad banner of the Duke, of glaring red,
having a lion rampant emblazoned on its folds,
was now unfurled, and the company advanced
in the same careless order, in which they had
proceeded over the floor of the cavern.
By the tomb of my ancestors will I flesh my
maiden sword. By the corse of my father will I
fight for my right.
The knight of the Azure armour grasped his
sword more firmly. In another moment the
torches of the Duke's followers would flash upon
the armour of his ambushed men, in another
moment he would stand disclosed before the eyes
of the Duke. With a flashing eye he measured
the clear level space that lay between the mound
and the advancing men at arms.
A whisper to his mena firmer grasp of his
sword, and a firmer grasp of the banner staff, and
the knight in three good leaps sprang down the
twenty steps of stone, shouting as he sprang
Ha! for the Winged Leopard! Ha! for Albarone!
At his back, with swords drawn, and springing
with all the litheness of youth, came the four
ancient
Esquires, and behind them, leaping from the
opposite side of the mound, with swords likewise
drawn, and with the war-cry pealing to the
cavern's roof, came the two bodies of
men-at-arms
,
numbering twenty-five in each company.
Another leap and another spring and the
Azure knight stands within striking distance of
the astonished Duke. Quick as thought he
planted
his banner in the cavern floor, and grasping his
sword with both hands, he whirled it once round
his head, and throwing all his strength in the
blow, he brought it down full upon the golden
crest of the tyrant, who was driven to the very
earth by the vigor of the stroke.
In an instant the foot of the azure knight was
upon the breast of the prostrate prince, and while
the men-at-arms, on right and left, and the
esquires
at his back, were carrying on the strife
right merrily, he prepared for another stroke. He
shortened his grasp of the sword, and gazing
sternly through the bars of his helmet, down into
his fallen enemy's uncovered face, with all the
strength of his stalwart arm, he essayed to send
his weapon into his very throat.
The blow descended whizzing thro' the air, but
its aim was foiled. One of the ancient esquires,
with a stout stroke of his sword, sent a vassal
reeling
before the person of the Duke, and thus drove
aside the blow of the azure knight, which sank
deep into the lifeless corse thrown so suddenly
before him.
And now the followers of the Duke gathered
around the champions of the Winged Leopard, in
vast numbers, hurrying forward without order,
and dropping their torches in their haste.
The azure knight was driven back, and as he
receded, the blood of the oldest of the gallant
esquires
stained his armour.
On, my brave men! shouted he. A blow for
Albarone! At every exclamation a foe took the
measure of his grave upon the cavern floor.
Ha! for the Winged Leopard! he shouted, as
perceiving the head of the Duke among the throng
he essayed to greet him with one gallant blow.
At the same moment his men-at-arms sunk on
one knee and thus received the disorderly charge
of their foes. It was in vain. On all sides thronged
the followers of the Duke, and one after the other
the brave champions of the Winged Leopard fell
bleeding and dead upon the pavement of stone.
Onward and onward pressed the azure knight
gallantly breasting the flood before him, throwing
his foes to the right and left until he again fronted
the Duke.
And at the very instant, with soft and noiseless
foosteps, there glided along the steps of the mound
of stone, a fair and lovely form, clad in a strange
robe, of white and gold, soiled by the cavern earth
and floating abroad in the night air, in waving
folds like spirit-wings. She gained the platform
of the mound, and fixed one half-conscious glance
upon the corse of the dead, while her large blue
eyes warmed with a glance of holy affection.
He sleeps, my uncleshe murmuredanon,
I will give him the potionand thenah, then
he will arise and smile upon me!
She turned her wild glance to the scene passing
in the cavern floor far below, she heard the
distant
shouts, she caught a vision of one well-known
form, which her half-crazed brain deemed a
visitant
from the spirit world.
It was a picture of loveliness, rising amid gloom
and death, the beautiful maiden raised to her full
stature, one fair hand resting upon the dark mound,
while with the other thrown wildly across her
brow she essayed to pierce the gloom of the cavern
beyond. Her robes hung floating round her form,
revealing the delicate symmetry of her shape, the
rising of the snow-white bosom as it heaved in the
light, the arching bend of the neck, while the
blooming loveliness of her countenance,
half-shaded
by the upraised hand, was varied by sudden
and changing, yet dreamlike expressions.
I see his formshe murmedand yet 'tis a
dreamthey seize him, theyO, heaven help me
they raise their swords above his head
Maiden fling thy robe!fling the death-pall
over the funeral lamps!a solemn voice broke on
the air directly overhead.
She looked above, she shrieked with horror, for
the cold strange eyes of the Demon-Figure met
her gaze.
Meanwhile breasting his way thro' the opposing
crowd of foemen, the azure knight neared the
person of the Duke, he stood before the tyrant face
to face.
Die, tyrant! he shouted, as springing back to
give effect to his blow, he threw his sword on
high. It decended full upon the shoulder of the
Duke, and severing his armour, snapped
suddenly
short, and the azure knight was left
defenceless
in the hands of his enemies.
Up with the caitiff's vizor, shouted the duke.
Let us see the bravo's face. Up with his
vizor
.
The captive knight cast a glance around, and
beheld his followersthe dying and the dead
strewn ever the floor of the cavern. The brave old
Esquires lay side by side, their sinewy hands still
grasping their broken swords, and their grey hair
dabbled in blood.
Sir Duke, exclaimed the captive, behold the
bravo! He raised his vizor, and the features of
Adrian Di Albarone, pale and sunken, were
revealed
.
Behold the bravo!
Now by the body of God! shouted the Duke
boiling with passion, thou shalt not escape me
this time.Dog
These hands itch for thy bloodshrieked a
shrill and ringing voice, and Adrian beheld the
distorted form and mishapen features of the
Doomsman, pressing forward from the throng of
men-at-arms, with his talon-like fingers grasping
the air, while his face wore the expression of a
demon in human guise,These hands itch for
thy blood! Ha!ha! Once escapedthe second
time, the hot iron, the melted lend and the wheel
of torture wait not for thee in vain! Ha, ha,
hark how the cavern roof joins in my laugh.
Great Duke, the Doom man claims his victim!
Duketyrant, I am in thy power! shouted
Adrian, gazing upon the circle of men-at-arms
who surrounded him. These thongs, they are
for my wrists! Yon chainsthey soon will
fasten
this body to the dungeon floor! Thou art
sure of thy victimLo! I defy thee!
And as he spoke, there came gliding from the
darkness of the cavern, two forms, clad in robes
of sable velvet, who advanced hastily along the
floor, and stood between the victim and the
Duke.
Lo! I defy thee! Tremble for thine own head,
tyrant and coward! Tremble and turn pale, for
o! even now the axe glimmers high above thy
head, whetted for the Wronger's bloodin a
moment
it descendsbeware the blow!
And as he spoke, while the Duke recoiled with a
sudden start, and even the Doomsman trembled as
he beheld the sable figures standing before his
victim, silent and motionless, yet with the long
curved dagger in their girdles, and the parchment
scroll in their hands, all suddenly became dim
and indistinct, and the cavern was wrapt in
darkness
.
The lights burning on the mound were
extinguished
by an unknown hand, while every eye
beheld a waving robe of white, fluttering in the
air, the moment ere darkness came down upon
the scene.
Torches there! shouted the DukeLook
to the prisoner, vassals! Torches there I say!
Torches were presently seen hurrying from the
farther end of the cavern, borne in the firm grasp
of men-at-arms, and in a few moments a ruddy
light was thrown around the spot, where stood
the Duke.
Dog, exclaimed the Duke, gazing hurriedly
around, Thou shalt bitterly rue this foul
treason
.
He looked around in vain. His prisoner was
gone, and with him had disappeared the banner
of the Winged Leopard.
The light of torches again gleamed around the
Mound of the Dead. The figure of a maiden lay
extended along the steps of stone, her white robes
waving round her insensible formit was the
Ladye Annabel.
Mighty Duke, behold the scroll! shrieked
the Doomsman, as he held aloft the parchment,
which he had taken from the cavern floorBehold the scroll, it bears an inscriptionread,
read.
Tyrant thrice-warned, yet unrelenting,
the Invisible now bids thee prepare for the
steel! Lo! Thy Death now walks abroad
seeking thee with the upraised axe,
beware
his path:
CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.
THE PAGE AND THE DAMSEL.
In a richly furnished ante-room, adjoining the
bower of the Ladye Annabel, on a couch of the
most inviting softness, lay Guiseppo, well known
to all the castle as the favorite page of his grace
of Florence.
A lamp of the most elaborate moulding,
suspended
from the ceiling, threw a brilliant light
over the rose colored tapestry that adorned the
walls and relieved the eye, gaily embroidered with
the history of the temptations of the blessed St.
Anthony. Here forms of terror appalled, and
there shapes of beauty cheered the venerable saint,
who was distinguished by a nose of a very
blooming
hue, marking a face redolent with the kiss of
the wine-god. The floor of the apartment was
carefully
strewn with rushes, and here and there were
placed couches rivalling, in downy softness, the
one on which Guiseppo lay, while everything
wore the appearance of ease and luxury.
The small, yet well-proportioned figure of the
youth was arrayed in a doublet of fine blue velvet
embroidered with gold, and brilliant with jewelled
chains, that hung depending from his neck. His
well formed legs were shown to the best
advantage
by hose of doe-skin, fitting close to the
person
,
and he wore boots of the same material,
ornamented
with spurs of gold. His doublet was
gathered
about his waist by a belt that shone with gold
and jewels, and at his left side he wore a rare
dagger, with handle of ivory and sheath of gold.
The features of Guiseppo were not formed after
the regular line of manly beauty, yet every
lineament
was redolent of light-hearted mirth and
gleesome
mischief. His forehead was rather low, his
eyebrows arching, and his hazel eyes somewhat
protruding; his nose was a thought too large, his
lips curving with a merry smile, his cheeks full
and glowing, and his rich brown hair fell in
clustering
locks down upon his collar of rarest lace.
He laid upon the couch in an easy position, his
hazel eyes sparkling yet more brightly, and his lip
curving yet more merrily, as he gazed upon a
billet
which he held in his right hand over his head.
To the fair Ladye Annabel, thus he
murmured
to himself; to be delivered as soon as she
recovers from her swoonhum!
Here the page sprang suddenly up into a
sitting
posture. It seemed as if some new thought
had taken possession of his fancy. His eyes
sparkled, his lip curved, his cheeks rounded, and
his whole frame shook with suppressed laughter.
Oh! he exclaimed, as the tears came into
his eyes; Oh! 'twas exquisite! He gave
his right leg an emphatic slap. 'Twas
exquisite
exquisiteexquisite!
And laughing
louder
than ever, the page walked up and down the
apartment, well nigh bursting with repeated fits of
merriment.
Oh! St. Guiseppo! he cried, an' I live to
he an old man, I shall never recover it! Ha
haha!
Mayhap it was very fortunate for Guiseppo
that the door leading into Ladye Annabel's
apartment
was opened, just at the moment when he
seemed about dissolving in his merriment.
A lovely black-eyed, dark-haired maiden
entered
the chamber, with an angry look, as if to
reprove
the author of this boisterous laughter; but
no sooner did she behold Guiseppo than she
rushed
into his arms, pronouncing his name at the
same time, to which he very quietly responded
Rosalind! accompanying the expression with a
kiss.
Having seated themselves upon a couch,
Rosalind
began to recall the times of old, naming many
a familiar scene, many a well-known spot, where
they had rambled together, ere Guiseppo left the
castlewithin whose walls he had been reared
to be a page to his grace of Florence.
As Rosalind rattled on, Guiseppo sat in mute
admiration, much wondering to behold the lively
little child whom he had left some two years since,
grown up into a handsome and budding damsel.
He gazed with peculiar admiration upon the
boddice
of green velvet which fitted so nicely,
revealing
the shape of one of the finest busts in the
worldso Guiseppo thought, at least. He also
had some indefinite idea of the prettiness of the
cross of ebony, which, strung round her arching
neck by a chain of gold, rose and fell with the
heavings of the maiden's bosom.
The dimple of the chinthought Guiseppo
is very pretty; those lips are very tempting, but
those beautiful, dancing, beaming black eyes
Guiseppo rounded the sentence with a sigh.
I'faith, Guiseppo, continued Rosalind, your
merriment, but a moment gone, startled me with
affright. You might have awaked my cousin, the
Ladye Annabel. She is sleeping after her fright in
that dreadful vault. Tell me, Guiseppo, what
made you so merry?
The mirthful ideawhatever it wasagain
danced before the fancy of the page, and he fell
into a fit of laughter, interspersed with numerous
exclamations of delight.
At last Rosalind wrung from him the cause of
his mirth, which he told somewhat after the
following
fashion.
CHAPTER THE NINTH.
THE STORY OF GUISEPPO.
On the day'my young Lordso I must still call
himwas doomed to die by the Duke and Lords
of Florence, I felt very dull, and the brighest piece
of gold in the wide world would not have hired me
to smile. And as for laughingSt Guiseppo, that
came not with my thoughts!
(Rosalind very quietly asked if nothing could
have made him smile? He pressed his lips to
hers and did not dispute the matter any further.)
Being in this melancholy mood, I requested
permission
of my gracious master the Duke, to visit
Lord Adrian that night. My request was granted.
It was but half an hour after midnight, that I
stood at the door of the Doomed Cell, where I
learned, to my great regret, that the Duke had just
departed, leaving his commands that no one should
see the prisoner until the morrow. There was an
order of state affixed to the door to that effect,
having the private seal of the Duke impressed
upon
it.
No sooner had I persued this paper of state
thou knowest, Rosalind, that I can both read and
writethanks to Count Aldarin, who taught me,
with much care and not a little painsno sooner
had I perused this paper of state, than unslinging
my cloak of blue velvet and silver embroidery, I
assumed all the pertness of a page at court, as I
criedStand aside, Sir Beetle-brow, and make
room for my couchand you, gallant sir, of the
squinting orb, be pleased to shift your lazy
carcase
an inch or so, an' it suits you.
The beetle-browed sentinel Balvardo, and his
companion Hugo of the sinister eye, looked upon
me with the most unfeigned astonishment, as
throwing my cloak upon the stone pavement, I
proceeded to lay my person upon its bedizened
folds.
Well, Sir Malapert, cried Balvardo, thou art
surely moonstruck. In the fiend's name what
mean you by thus sprawling out upon the
pavement
,
like a cat near the end of her ninth life, eh,
Sir Page?
Here Hugo chimed in with his say, consisting
of a by'r Lady! expressed in tones of the most
interesting wonder, which he finished with a
w-h-e-w! given with twisted lips and great
musical
effect.
Why, noble Sir, of the bull-head, I answered,
and right worthy Sir of the Squinting Orb, I
intend
to watch the coming forth of my Lord Adrian,
an' it please your lordshipsand, as I wish to
sleep, I will thank thee Balvardo to turn thy ugly
visage another way, for, an' I shut my eyes after
looking at thee, I'll be certain to dream of
half-a-dozen
devils or so. Hugo,
do
try and look straight
ahead for only an instant, or the warriors in my
dreams will all be cross-eyedby St. Guiseppo!
Hist! thou magpie, exclaimed Hugo, hear'st
thou not a noise, Balvardo?
The sound that rivetted Hugo's ear, proceeded
from the Doomed Cell, and was certainly the most
curious of all sounds. It was not exactly like the
mewing of a cat, neither did it altogether resemble
the howling of a cur, and it certainly did not
sound like the bellowing of a bull, or the
chattering
of a magpie, yet in good sooth, it seemed as if
all these noises had been caught and put in a sack,
and having been shaken well together, produced
the most infernal discord that ever saluted mortal
ear.
The Saints preserve us! shrieked Balvardo.
Surely the devil has taken possession of the
murderer
hark
how
he howls!
Ho
indeed! cried Hugo, it's not only
he
;
by'r Lady, there's a score of them. There it goes
again. Beshrew thee but 'tis like the howl of a
whipped cur
Nay Hugo, nay Hugo, 'tis like the spitting
and mewing of an hundred cats
Or the chattering of a score of magpies.
Now it bellows like a bull.
St. Peter be good to us! exclaimed Balvardo,
as the howling grew louder and louder. It is
the yelling of devils, and naught else. Hark!
Didst ever hear such a horrible noise, Sir Page?
I answered his question by repeated bursts of
laughter; for although my heart was full heavy
at the fate of Adrian Di Albarone, yet for my soul
I could not hear such whimsical sounds without
giving full rein to my laughing humour.
Suddenly the noise ceased. In an instant a
voice shouted from the inside of the cellHo!
guards, without there! guards!
I was thunderstruck at the tones of this voice,
which I at once knew could not belong to the
Doomed Adrian.
Well! exclaimed Balvardo, if the devil hasn't
stolen the voice of our gracious Lord the Duke!
Hugo pursed up his lips and gave his musical
whew! which was intended to express
astonishment
itself astonished.
W-h-e-w!By'r Lady, but the devil
does
speak
in the voice of our Lord the Duke.
I am the Duke of Florence!shouted the
voice from the cell. Open the door, ye slaves!
Avoid thee Sathanas! quoth Balvardo.
Be quiet, fiend! cried Hugo.
Exquisite sportexquisite! muttered I to
myself
,
as a curious idea flitted thro' my brain. Ho
hoho! The Duke of Florence locked up in
one of his own prisons! Hahaha!
Louder rose the shout of the voice within the
cell, and louder and fiercer swelled the
exclamations
of the sentinels; until having strained every
bone in my body, with excessive laughter, I fell
asleep thro' mere weariness.
When I awoke, the first beams of morning were
streaming along the prison galleries, and engaged
in earnest converse with Hugo and Balvardo,
stood the ill-looking, wry mouthed, and
hump-backed
Doomsman of Florence.
The irons are hot, and the wheel is ready,
said the deformed caitiff, bring your prisoner
forth. The cauldron of lead is hissing and
seething
while it awaits his coming. 'Tis long since
I've tried my hand upon one of noble blood. Bring
forth this noble boy, and let me see what mettle
his flesh is made of. Thanks, Balvardothanks,
Hugo, for 'twas ye that gave him to the
Doomsman
!
Here the villain performed several very
graceful
actions, such as tying an imaginary knot
around his neck, with a `chick;' and then
rehearsing
in dumb show the whole process of
punishment
upon the wheel; concluding with an
animated
waving, pushing and thrusting of his hands,
descriptive of the entire manner of
disembowelling
.
And this, this was to be the fate of Adrian
Lord of Albarone!
Meanwhile Hugo had unlocked the door of
the Doomed Cell, and called the name of the
prisoner
without receiving an answer.
I'll wake him, quoth the Doomsman, entering
the cell; see! he lays flat upon his face. Get up,
Sir Parricide; get up. Therethere, he
concluded
,
bestowing a few kicks upon the prostrate
occupant
of the cell.
The prisoner replied with a groan.
Ho! ho!You will not stir, will you?
continued
the Doomsman, as he dragged the prisoner
from the cell into the gallery:See, Hugo, how
the caitiff's hat is slouched over his face, and his
hands are bound with his own belt. By St. Judas,
this is a rare sight!
His hands bound! exclaimed Balvardo. This
is not my work!
Nor mine! responded Hugo.
Remove his slouched hat, one of ye,
exclaimed
the Doomsman, see ye not that both of my
hands are employed in holding his carcase?
Hugo reached forth his hand and removed his
slouched hatO! an' I live till fourscore, I'll never
forget the scene that followed. There, his arms
ignominiously
bound, resting in the embrace of the
Doomsman, lay the Duke of Floerence, his face
pale with ire, his mouth frothing like a madman's,
and his eyes bloodshot; and there stood the
Doomsman
,
his grey eyes protruding with astonishment,
until they seemed about to drop from their
sockets
,
his mouth agape and his tongue lolling out
upon his bearded chin; and there, likewise, stood
Hugo and Balvardo, looking first at one another,
then at the Duke, and then clasping their hands,
they fall upon their knees and screaming for
mercyand there in the background, his cloak
muffled over his face, and his frame shaking with
laughter while his eyes run over with tears of
mirth, stands his grace's page,'the trim Guiseppo.
Was't not a rich scene, Rosalind?
CHAPTER THE TENTH.
THE MEMORY OF GUILT.
On the stately couch in the Red-Chamber, with
the Count Aldarin bending over him, lay his Grace
the Duke of Florence, attired in his boots and hose,
with his under shirt thrown back, revealing the
left shoulder of the Prince laid open in a deep
gash.
As the Count Aldarin, holding a light in one
hand, peered earnestly at the wound, the Duke
exclaimed
A horrid gash, Count? eh! Damnation! to
be foiled by the villain twicebound in my own
dungeon like a criminalstruck down in that
cursed cavern like a dogdamnation seize the
ah! Count some wine; for the Saint's sake some
wine, I pray thee.
The Count turned hurriedly to the beaufet, and
filling a goblet with wine that sparkled in the
light with a ruddy glow, he hasted to give it to
the wounded Duke, who raised it until it nearly
touched his lips, when, as if struck by a strange
fancy, he suddenly held it out at arm's length
exclaiming as he gazed at Aldarin with a
lack-lustre
eye
I say, Count, suppose there should be some
white dust
at the bottom of this goblet?and
and
a ring
? eh? Count?Ugh!Take it away
ugh!
He flung the goblet from him, scattering the
wine over the couch, while the vessel rolled
clanging over the marble floor.
How
Sir
? cried the Count, speaking in a
deep-toned voice that thrilled to the very heart of
the Duke,
what mean'st thou?
The dark grey
eyes of the Scholar flashed like living coals of fire,
as he spoke.
O, nothing, responded the Duke, nothing
only I thought the murderer Adrian mightdost
understand? A truce to all this. My Lord Count,
what didst thou with those men-at-arms who
raised their swords in the cause of the
murderer
?
Right glad was the Count Aldarin to recover
his usual calm demeanour as he answered this
inquiry.
Of the fifty treacherous caitiffs who raised
their swords against the person of your grace,
forty lie bleeding and dead upon the cavern floor.
As for the others he finished the sentence by
pointing to the arched window of the
Red-Chamber
.
The Duke looked over his shoulder and beheld
through the opened window the black and gloomy
timbers of a gibbet towering like an evil omen
high over the walls of the castle, and backed by
the soft azure of a cloudless summer night. The
beams of the moon fell upon ten ghastly and death
writhen faces, and ten figures swung to and fro,
while the groaning cords as they grated against
the creaking timbers over their heads, seemed
shrieking their death wail.
Curse the traitorsthey have their deserts!
the Duke exclaimed with a meaning smile. The
Count said nothing, but bending over the form of
the Prince, proceeded to dress his wounded
shoulder
,
after the manner prescribed by his scholarly
studies.
And as the Scholar bent over the form of the
Duke, the hangings of the couch, sweeping behind
the Prince, waved to and fro, with a slight
motion
,
as though the summer breeze disturbed their
folds, and a dark form, robed in garments of sable,
with a monkish cowl dropping over its face, glided
noiselessly along the floor, and in a moment stood
at the back of his Grace of Florence, holding aloft,
above his very head, a slender-bladed and
glittering
dagger. The Figure stood silent and
immoveable
,
its face shrouded and its form robed from
view, the dagger glittering above the head of the
Duke, brilliant as a spiral flame, while the light of
the lamp held by Aldarin, shone on the upraised
hand, revealing the sinews, stretched to their
utmost
tension, while the clutched fingers prepared
to strike the blow of death.
And at the very instant, as the Figure of Sable
emerged from the hangings of the couch, at the
back of the Prince, there silently strode from the
folds of the tapestry on the other side of the bed,
a veiled form, clad from head to foot, in a robe of
ghastly white. While the Figure in garments of
sable, raised the dagger above the head of the
Duke, the strange Form, arrayed in the sweeping
robe of white, disappeared behind the hangings of
the couch, on the side opposite the Scholar
Aldarin
.
Curse the traitorsthey have their deserts!
again exclaimed the Duke. Count, how
succeeds
my suit with the Ladye Annabel? Dost
think she affects me? Eh, Count?
Marry, does she, my Lord Dukethis slight
wound in thy shoulder will detain thee at the
castle for a few days. Thou wilt have every op
portunity to urge thy suit, and, andthe day of
your nuptials shall be named whenever thou dost
wish!
And as Aldarin spoke, the knife rose glittering
in the hands of the Sable Figure, and a pale face,
marked by the glare of a wild and flashing eye,
was thrust from the folds of the robe of black. It
was the face of Albertine.
Now, by St. Antonia, but that is pleasant to
think of, exclaimed the Duke, as, complacently
surveying his figure, he passed his hand over his
bearded chin and whiskered lipas thou wishest
me to name the day, my Lord Count, be assured,
I shall not return to Florence without being
accompanied
by my fair bride
Ladye Annabel
Dutchess of Florence
. It sounds welleh,
Count?
A smile passed over the compressed lips of the
Count, and a glance of wild joy lit up his piercing
eyes, as he thought of the fulfilment of the dream
of ambition that had haunted his soul for years.
It does indeed sound well, my Lord Duke,
he calmly replied, as he proceeded in his
employment
of dressing the wound. There was a pause
for a moment, a strange, dread pause, while the
hands of the Sable Figure trembled, as though
Albertine, was nerving his soul for the work of
death.
My Lord Count, how curious it seems? eh?
Count? exclaimed the Duke in a tone of vacant
wonder.
To what does your Grace refer? answered
the Count.
Why, Count, but three short days ago, upon
this very couch lay your gallant brother; here he
folded to his arms his Adrian. Now that very
son is amurderera parricide. I rest upon the
very couch that supported the murdered remains
of the late Count, and thou, Aldarin, his
brother
His murderer
! exclaimed a voice that
thrilled to the very heart of Aldarin, and made
the Duke start with terror. And as he started the
knife came hissing through the air, it grazed the
robe of the Duke, it sank to the very hilt in the
death couch. The start of the Duke saved him
from the steel.
Eh! Count, what's that? Who spoke? eh?
The eyes of the Count distended, and his lips
parted with affright as he spoke.
D
The Count looked up and beheld a sight that
froze his very blood. On the opposite side of the
bed, among the crimson hangings, stood a figure
robed in white, and there, two eyes, blazing like
coals of red-hot flame, from beneath a half veiled
brow, as pale as death, looked steadily upon the
trembling Aldarin. The checks of that pale
countenance
were dug into fearful hollows, and the
eyes were surrounded by circles of livid blue.
The Count gazed with intense horror at this
apparition and the Sable Figure, who had
hurriedly
stooped, in the effort to wrench the dagger from
the couch, with a noiseless grasp, looked up and
started hastily backward, as his eye rested upon
the ghastly face, appearing amid the hangings in
the opposite side of the bed.
It is the face of the deadmuttered Albertine,
gliding hurriedly toward his place of concealment
while the Duke was absorbed in one fixed look at
the awe-stricken visage of Aldarin, whose very
soul seemed starting from his eyes as he gazed
upon the aparitionIt is the face of the dead
The time of the Betrayer hath not yet come!
And as he spoke he disappeared, without being
observed by either the Duke or Aldarin, while the
Scholar, beheld the curtains on the opposite side
of the couch rustling to and frohe looked and
the Spectre was gone.
This is some vile trick! cried Aldarin,
grasping
the sword of the Duke from the couch as he
spoke. Let the mummers, whoe'er they are,
beware the vengeance of the Scholar!
He rushed to the other side of the couch, he
lifted the hangings, but discovered no one. With
a hurried step, he turned to the tapestry that
adorned the walls, and thrust aside the
embroidered
folds. The secret door was closed, and he
beheld
neither sign nor mark, that might tell of
aught concealed within its pannels.
And as Aldarin continued his hurrled search,
the Duke leaning back on the couch, felt some
hard substance pressing against his side.
Thrusting
his hand along the couch, he felt the handle
of a dagger, thrust from its resting place, and with
a trembling arm, held the steel aloft in the light.
It bears an inscriptionSaints of Heaven,
let me read
`
The Vengeance of the Monks of the Holy
Steel
.'
And at the same moment, the Count Aldarin,
leaned trembling against a pillar for support, and
quaking in every nerve, one fearful thought
possessed
his soul as he murmured in a hollow
whisper
,
Haunted, forever hauntedby thy gloomy
shade, my murdered brother!
BOOK THE THIRD.
The Drial.
The Cloud is Dark with Doom and Fate.
CHAPTER THE FIRST.
THE MAIDEN IN HER BOWER.
ALDARIN PICTURES TO THE LADYE ANNABEL
THE GLORIES OF A LIVING-TOMB.
A lamp of alabaster, placed upon a small table
of ebony, beside which was seated the Ladye
Annabel
,
threw its softened beams around the
apartment
,
and leaving the hangings, the stately bed,
and the luxurious couches, wrapt in twilight
shadow, cast a lovelier tint upon a vase of flowers
standing upon the table, and revealed the fair
maiden's countenance and figure in soft and rosy
light.
Her flaxen tresses, unrestrained by band or
cincture, fell in a golden shower over her delicate
neck and finely-turned shoulders; and streaming
along the full and swelling bosom, but half
concealed
by the boddice of white, bordered by finest
lace they flowed soft and waving down to her
very feet.
The figure of the Ladye Annabel realized an
old saying, that nature shows all her art, and
lavishes
the richest of her beauties, upon her
smallest
creations.
In form slight and delicate, in stature somewhat
below the usual size, the proportions of Annabel
were of the most exquisite tracery of outline; her
arms, full and softly rounded, were terminated by
hands small and white, with tapering fingers; her
feet, thin and slender, and marked by an high
instep
,
supported ancles as finely turned, as the
movements of the maiden were light and graceful;
the well-proportioned waist arose in lovely
gradation
into the bosom of rich and budding promise;
the neck, gently arching, and graceful in every
attitude, blended sweetly into the small and half
dimpling chin, that harmonized with the face of
loveliness and soul. Right beauteous shone those
eyes of blue, says the chronicler of the ancient
MS., glancing pure thoughts and light-hearted
fancies; and right lovely were those glowing
cheeks, in which the snow-white of the fair
countenance
bloomed into a roseate hue; and lovely
was the small mouth of parting lips, delicious in
their maiden ripeness; and sweet, surpassing
sweet, was the expression of that face, where love
and innocence beaming from every feature,
seemed
like the golden fruit of fairy land, only
waiting
to be gathered.
Her face was a poem, written by the finger of
God, in characters of youth and bloom; a poem
whose theme was ever beauty and love, speaking
its meaning through the deep glance of a shadowy
eye, sending forth its messages of sweetness from
the smile of the wreathing lip, or preaching its
lessons of thought and purity by the calm glory
of the unclouded brow.
A face lovely as a dream, when dreams are
loveliest, with an outline of youth and bloom; a
brow clear, calm, and cloudless, over-arching the
eyes of azure, whose brightness seemed
unfathomable
;
with full and swelling cheeks, varying the
snow-white of the maiden's countenance by the
damask of the budding rose; a small mouth, with
curving lips; a chin all roundness and dimple,
receding
,
with a waving outline, into the neck, all
lightness and grace; while all around, the
luxuriance
of her golden hair, unbound and
uncinctured
,
fell sweeping and waving, with a soft, airy
motion, as though the sunbeams shimmered round
the fairy countenance of the maiden.
Alone in her bower sate the Ladye Annabel,
her lip curving with scorn while she glanced at the
letter of his grace of Florence, as it was flung
along the floor, unopened and unheeded.
Her soul was agitated by the fearful memory of
the last three days of mystery and blood, and then
came confused and wandering thoughts of the
scenes she had witnessed but an hour since, in
the cavern of the dead. Her mind was lost in a
maze of never-ending doubts, when she
contemplated
the fearful death of the late Count. She
had never for an instant believed that Adrian
could be guilty of the accursed act, neither had
she dreamed that it was her father's hand that
dealt the blow. The thought would have driven
her mad.
Suddenly her thoughts were agitated by a
fearful
picture. She saw Adrian stretched bleeding
and dead upon the wheelhis limbs severed and
torn, and his brow scarred by the instruments of
torture, while the doomsman's laugh rang in her
ears! As the picture grew upon her mind in all
its horrible details: the glazed eye and the
writhen
lip, the chest heaving with the convulsive sobs
of death, and the throat straining with the death
rattle, the maiden covered her face with her hands,
and shrieked:
Save me, holy Mary, save me from these
fearful
fancies!
And as she spoke, the maiden burst into a
flood of tears.
Annabel!
whispered a voice at once
deeptened
and full of affection.
She looked up, and her father, the Count
Aldarin
,
stood before her.
My daughter, he continued, drawing a seat
beside her, how dost thou like these?
He opened a casket which he held in his hand,
and the light of the alabaster lamp flashed upon
ornaments of gold and silver, such as might not
shame a queen to wear. There were bracelets
for the wrists, there were chains for the arching
neck, gems for the brow, pearls to be woven in
the flowing hair; and as their bright and star-like
blaze met the eye of the Ladye Annabel, she gave
utterance to a cry of delight.
I thank thee, father, I thank thee! she
exclaimed
,
as, clasping a bracelet of gold, bordered
by pearls, around her fair and well-rounded wrist,
she received it with a glance of admiration. See,
father, see! How beauteous are those pearls,
how bright that gold, and the shapehow
exquisite
!
O! father, this is kind of thee! 'Tis
indeed
a rich gift!
It is a bridal gift!
exclaimed the Count, in
a low and quiet tone, and with his eyes fixed upon
his daughter's countenance, as if to note each
varying
expression of the fair and lovely features.
Annabel started as if an adder had stung her.
A bridal gift? Said you not so? A bridal
gift? From whom is it, my father?
His grace, the Duke of Florence, sends thee
this rare and costly present. He sends it with
his ardent wishes for thy health. He sends these
jewels with the hope that ere three days have run
their sands, he may behold them shining on the
brow of his fair bridethe Ladye Annabel,
Duchess
of Florence.
As in a calm and determined tone he spoke
these words, a deadly paleness came over the
damsel's
face; her lips dropped apart, and her fair
blue eyes distended with a vacant look, the
slender
fingers of each hand slowly straightened,
unclasping
their grasp of the casket, which fell
heavily to the floor, as her arms dropped listlessly
by her side.
The old man surveyed his child for an instant
with a look which told of his deep, his yearning
affection, combined with the strange fancies ruling
his destiny through life. In an instant he again
spoke, and his voice, as it came from the depths
of his chest, sounded wild and thrilling to the
maiden's ear.
My daughter!
said he, taking her by the
hand,
thou shalt wed this man!
Annabel replied not.
Thou shalt, I say, wed the Lord of Florence.
It must be so; therefore it were well that thou
dost prepare thee for the bridal. I say it shall be
so, my daughter. The word of Aldarin is passed!
Father, replied the Ladye Annabel, in
tremulous
tones; father, O! look not so sternly at
me, your eyes chill my very heart. I would do
your biddingthe Virgin and all the saints
witness
me, I wouldbut, father
Annabel, said the Count, in his deep tones
of enthusiasm, I have said, it, and it shall be
soWed
the Duke of Florence, and behold thyself a
queen! All that heart can wish, or the wildest
fancy desire, shalt thou possess, and claim as thine
own. Wealth shall lavish its stores around thee,
and honour shall bring the fairest and the noblest
to bow low at the feet of the Ladye Annabel,
Duchess of Florence! Lo! thou art in the ducal
hall of Florence: behold thyself encircled by the
gay and glittering throng; a thousand eyes are
fixed upon thee in admiration, a thousand tongues
speak their words of eloquence but to syllable that
admiration, and a thousand swords, flashing in
the light, are slaves to the slightest word of Ladye
Annabelthe queen. The robes of a queen shall
gird this lovely form, the stars of a coronet shall
flash from that beauteous brow, and this fair hand,
so beautiful in its alabuster whiteness, shall wave
the sceptre over the heads of kneeling myriads!
With a queenly port and a flashing eye, thou
shalt look around thee, and behold the princely
halls illumined by lamps, diffusing at once both
light, soft as moonbeams, and fragrance sweeter
than the breath of spring flowers. The lofty
windows
,
with their rare carvings, shall give to view
gardens rich with golden fruit, won from the fair
lands of the East, fragrant with shrubbery and
gay with flowers, while ancient trees, in leafy
magnificence, sweep their arching bows overhead.
Fountains fling their columns of liquid diamonds
up from the arbored paths, lulling waterfalls soothe
the ear, distant music wakes delightful visions in
the soul, solemn palaces, in all their grandeur of
outline, break through the air of night! Palaces,
gardens, unbounded wealth, rank, pride, place,
honorall, all shall be thine own!
All, my father, allallbut love.
As Annabel spoke, her eyes filled with tears,
and her voice was choked with the sobs that
convulsed
her bosom. To say that the picture of the
Count had no effect upon the maiden, would be
uttering an absurd and unnatural fiction. In
bright and glowing colors arose the gorgeous
pageantry
before the mind of Annabel: it was all
that a woman could wish, the fruition of a woman's
most ardent aspiration. With Adrian, the
companion
of her childhood, the princely palace would
have been like an abode of fairy land; with the
Duke, it would have been a living-tomba golden
sepulchre for the living-dead.
The answer of Aldarin was contemptous and
bitter.
Love!
a dreama phantoma bubble!
Love
, forsooth! the vision of warm-blooded youth,
which all have felt, and none but fools obey. Girl,
continued he, I have said thou shouldst wed the
Duke, andby my soul!
thou shalt wed him!
My wordthe word of Aldarinis passed. Think
not to deceive
me
. I know thy motive in thus
setting the bidding of a father at defiance. It is
because thou dost affect the murderer of my only
brother,of thy kind uncle,the PARRICIDE,
Adrian
O! father, he cannotcannot be the doer of so
dread a crime.
Who, then, exclaimed the Count, bitterly,
who then was the doer of so dread a crime?
Speak; my fair daughter,
who
was't?
It was thou
! exclaimed a voice that
sounded
strange and hollow through the lonely
apartment
.
Holy Mary, preserve us! shrieked Annabel.
Father, whence came that fearful voice?
The Count Aldarin replied not. The
convulsive
motion that heaved his breast, and strained
the lineaments of his countenance, showed that
he was making a desperate attempt to command
his soul.
'Tis naught, my daughter, he began; 'tis
fancy'tis
He finished the sentence by a howl of horror,
that might have been uttered by a lost soul.
Annabel
beheld him gazing fixedly at some object
behind her. She turned her head and saw a
vision
that drove the life current back from her
heart.
A figure arrayed in the snow-white attire of
the grave, looked with a pale and ghastly
countenance
,
and hollow eyes, from among the folds of
the crimson tapestry on the opposite side of the
apartment.
With freezing blood, Annabel beheld the figure
advance with a slow and measured step towards
her. Her consciousness failed, and she fell
insensible
on the floor, at the same instant that Aldarin
sank down with a yell of despair, while his mouth
frothed, and his eyes glared like those of a maniac.
On toward the light advanced the figure in
white. In a moment it stood beside the prostrate
forms of the father and child, and having gazed at
them for an instant, it threw back the robe from
its head, and the beams of the lamp flashed over
the wan and ghastly face of the strange figure.
Hahaha! he laughed, in tones
sepulchral
with famine, methinks I've frightened the
old caitiff enow! O, St. Withold! but I do feel
this fiend, Hunger, gnawing with its serpent teeth
at my very heart! Nothing to eat for three days
and as many nights! And this handhalf
severed
at the finger jointsthrobbing with pain all
the while! Thanks to the hard lessons of a
soldier's
life, that taught me to wrap this rough
bandage
round the wound! Had it been my good right
handSt. Withold!Robin had been a dead man
three days ago! True, I did make out to
crawl toward one of the dead soldiers in the
cavern
.
How sweetly the wine in his flask gurgled
down my parched throat! I am faint with lack
of food. By a soldier's faith, I could eat a whole
ox! St. Withold, an' I do not get some
nourishment
in the shortest time possible, I may as well
wrap me up in this pall, so as to be ready for
burial
!
Ugh! the priest shall not say his prayers
over thee yet, my friend Robin; courage.
Having first divested himself of the funeral pall
of the late lord, the famished soldier strode across
the apartment, and opening the door that led into
the ante chamber, he discovered Guiseppo and
Rosalind seated upon one of the couches,
apparently
in the most amiable humor with each other.
Look ye, sir page, exclaimed Robin, as he
showed his wan and wasted features through the
opened door, an' ye stir not yourself right
quickly
,
your master will be dead; and, fair damsel,
the same may be said of your mistress, the Ladye
Annabel.
Rosalind shrieked with affright at the hollow
voice and shrunken figure of the bold yeoman,
and Guiseppo sprang with one bound from the
couch half way across the apartment.
Fear not, Rosalind, he cried drawing his
dagger. If it be a devil, I defy it in God's name;
and if it be a man why I will try what this good
steel can do.
Tut, tut, exclaimed Robin, put up your
cheese-knife boy. Come hither. Know you me
not?
No more than I do the devil.
Mayhap then, fair Sir, you have heard of a
certain youth
, who on the night before he departed
from the castlethe castle where his infancy had
been passedto be a page at court, took occasion
to pour a sleeping potion into the wine of a
certain
yeoman
; and then shaving one side of the
yeoman's
face; concluded by tying a dead cat around
his neck, thus making an honest soldier a mock of
laughter for all the castle. Did'st ever hear of
such a page? Eh? Guiseppo?
Why the Virgin bless me, exclaimed
Rosalind
,
It's Rough Robin!
Eh? cried the page with a stare of
astonishment
.
If you value your life, Guiseppo, continued
the yeoman; Hie away, and bring me a dozen
flasks of wine or so, and a round of beef. Speak
not a word, but haste away. I am nigh starved to
death, and the devil may tempt me to cut a slice
from the trim figure of a certain page; away!
As Guiseppo, left the apartment, Rosalind
asked
the bold yeoman, where he had been for the
past three days, and wherefore he looked so much
like a ghost risen from the dead merely for its own
amusement.
My Lord the Count Aldarin
, replied Robin
with a grim smile,
despatched meupon a long
journey, to arrange matters of business entirely
relating to himself
.
Having thus spoken, he again entered the bower
of the Ladye Annabel, and laying hold of the
senseless body of Aldarin, he dragged him into the
ante-chamber, and then returned to assist the
damsel Rosalind in the recovery of her mistress.
CHAPTER THE SECOND.
THE LADY AND THE YEOMAN.
When the Ladye Annabel opened her fair blue
eyes, she gazed hurriedly around the apartment
until her glance was met by that of the bold
yeoman
.
She gave a faint scream, and her form
trembled
with affright.
`St. Withold! exclaimed the yeomanbut I
do seem to frighten every one that looks at me,
into fits. Fear me not, Ladye Annabel'Tis I
Rough RobinI would speak a few words to thee.
The import of what I have to say is of a fearful
nature.
Ah! said Annabel, of what would you
speak?
Robin whispered a word in her ear.
The maiden gave a convulsive start. She
clasped
her hands and looked wildly in the yeoman's
face, as she exclaimed
How was't done?The doer of this deedwho
was't?
Pardon me, Lady. For three long days and
nights have I been without sustenanceI am faint
my brain burns, and mine hands tremble.
The Ladye Annabel made a sign to Rosalind,
who was leaving the room, when she was met at
the door by Guiseppo, bearing a wine flask in one
hand, while the other supported a dish containing
the fragments of a venison pasty.
Bold Robin, said Guiseppo, I contrived to
abstract these from the wine cellar and the kitchen,
without being noticed. I thought your business
might require secrecy.
Thanks, Sir Page, thanksand now,
continued
the yeomanan thou lovest thy Lord Adrian,
wait in the ante-chamber, and see that no one
enters
.
Fair Rosalind, I am waiting to close the
door.
As he said this he gently pushed the damsel
thro' the doorway, and carefully drawing the bolt
he seated himself opposite Annabel. He then
placed the pasty on his knee, and with a trembling
hand filled a silver goblet to the very brim with
wine. With all the nervous eagerness of famine,
he lifted the capacious vessel to his lips, when he
beheld a pale, cadaverous, spectre-like face
dancing
in the ruddy glow of the wine.
St. Withold! 'Tis no wonder I have scared
every body with my dried up visage! He
drained
the goblet to the last drop. S'death I'm
frightened
at that deaths-head myself.
He then plunged one hand into the pasty, and
raising a piece of the rich crust, he devoured it in
an instant; then lifting the flask to his mouth, he
poured the luscious liquid down his throat, and
his sinews and veins began to rise and well, a
ruddy glow ran over his ashy face, while the
supernatural
brightness of his eyes, gave place to a
healthy, twinkling glance.
There was a pause of some ten minutes.
St. Withold! but I thank thee! cried the
yeoman
,
as his eyes filled with a liquid which bore a
strange resemblance to tears of joyHoly Mary,
Holy Peter, and Holy Paul, ye shall have a wax
candle apiece; instead of one to all of ye!
The Ladye Annabel who had watched his
movements
with the greatest impatience, now
exclaimed
For heaven's sake, good Robin, speak. What
dost thou know of the fearful deedshe looked
hurriedly around the room
Of the murder?
Ladye replied the yeoman, I'm a rough,
blunt soldierI know little of courtly manners,
but so help me St. Withold, I would perilI
would sacrifice my life, to serve thee andLord
Adrian
Adrian? What knowest thou of Adrian? For
heaven's sake speak. Her very soul glanced
from her eyes as she continued.Oh, God! thou
surely wilt not say that heAdrianisis
The
Murderer
?
St. Withold! muttered Robin, but I have got
myself into a nice predicament. Ladye I would
say no such falsehood.
It is a falsehood then?ThanksHoly Mary,
from my soul, unfeigned thanks!
It is not Adrian: but Ladyeheaven help thee
to bear itthe murderer is one who is mayhap as
beloved of thee, as is Lord Adrian.
One as beloved?
murmured Annabel
surely
there is no one as beloved as Adrian, no
one save my father. Thou triflest with me,
Robin
.
Nay Ladye I trifle notagain I say it is
the
one who is as dear to thee as Lord Adrian.
One word came from the maiden's lips.
O!
God
! she shrieked, as if some awful thought
had riven her brain. She said never a word more,
but her bosom which a moment past rose and fell
convulsively, now became stilled; the excited flush
of her cheeks died away into an ashy paleness,
her lip lost its eager expression, her eyelids
closed
stiffly, and she fell heavily as a corse from her
seat.
Robin sprang forward and extended his arms in
time to prevent her from falling to the floor.
I am a very fool, he said, bitterly reproaching
himselfa dolt, an idiota mere wearer of the
motley doubleta jingler of the belled cap would
have known better. St. Withold, but
I am
an
ass!
Having his own reasons for not calling
assistance
from the ante-room, he used all kinds of
expedients
to restore the Ladye Annabel to
consciousness
.
He chafed the fair and delicate hands,
he deluged the brow as white as snow, with
perfumed
liquids contained in silver bottles standing
upon the table; and after a lapse of a quarter of an
hour he had the gratification of seeing her eyes
unclose, and feeling her heart beat as he held her
form in his arms.
The Ladye Annabel faintly spokeI have had
a fearfulfearful dream. The Virgin save me
from the dark spirits that inspire such fancies. I
thought of
thee
of
thee
, my father! She paused
suddenly as she caught a view of the yeoman's
face.
Thou
here! she exclaimed in surprise,
wherefore is this?
St. Withold! muttered the confused Robin,
fearful of again referring to the late subject of
horror
.
Why Ladye, in truth I am herebecause
I amnot herethat is to says'death Ladye, I
came here to serve ye.
To serve
me?
said Annabel wonderingly,
how wouldst thou serve
me?
Ladye, cried the yeoman in utter despair of
his ability to convey his ideas in a circuitous
manner
.
Ladye would you wed this Duke of
Florence
?
Sooner would I die!
How will you avoid the bridal?
God only knows, said Annabel, as she stood
erect, to his care do I confide myself. I have
read legends of dames and damsels who have
raised the dagger against their own lives when
terrors such as threaten me, rose before their eyes,
but I cannotcannot do it! All I can doand
her head sunk low upon her bosom, and her arms
drooped by her sideall I can do is, to pray,
earnestly pray; upon my bended knees
beseech
the Virgin that I may
die!
Cheer thee up, fair ladyecheer thee up,
thus Robin spoke, by the troth of an honest
soldier, I swear that I will be near thee when the
hour of thy peril draws nigh. I swear that my
life shall be sacrificed to save thee!And now I
must be gone. This castle can no longer be Rough
Robin's home. God be with ye!
The Ladye Annabel placed a purse of gold in
Robin's hand, and with many blessing on his
head, she beheld him disappear into the
anteroom
.
Rosalind entered the roomAnnabel
exclaimed
Retire for a little while, fair coz: I would be
alone.
As the black-eyed maiden retired, the Ladye
Annabel sank down into a seat, and gave herself
up to the wild and agitating thoughts that flashed
through her brain.
The first beams of the coming morn shot
through the tapestry that well nigh concealed the
casement of the maiden's bower.
Annabel had fallen into a welcome slumber,
and the soft beams of the lamp fell upon her calm
and innocent face, revealing each feature in the
mildest light, and softest shade.
A figure emerged from the tapestry, and
advanced
to the light. Adrian stood beside the
sleeping maiden. His face was exceedingly pale
and covered with blood, as also was the helmet,
and the plates of the armour of azure steel. In
one hand he grasped the furled banner of the
Winged Leopard.
He turned and sought his place of
concealment
with a heavy heart; but ere he turned, he
cast one deep, one agonizing look upon the lovely
maiden.
She is happy!my wrongs shall not disturb
her innocent soulFarewellmy own loved
Annabelfarewell.
A kiss that told of heart-felt affection he
impressed
upon her ruby lips, and as he took a last
fond, ardent gaze, a burning tear fell upon the
unstained cheek of the Ladye Annabel.
CHAPTER THE THIRD.
THE VALLEY OF THE BOWL.
THE SCENE CHANGES TO THE MOUNTAIN
LAKE, WHERE THE TRAGEDY OF THE
HOUSE OF ALBARONE WILL AT
LAST COME TO AN END.
Far away among the mountains, the sunlight
loves to linger, and the moonbeam is wont to dwell
among the quiet recesses of a lovely valley
overshadowed
by rugged steeps, that frown above and
darken around a calm and silvery lake,
embosomed
amid the solitudes of the wild forest hills.
Around on every side, arise the hills, magnifi
cent with the shade of the sombre pine, leafy
with the branching oak, or verdant with the
luxuriance
of the green chesnut tree, while chasms
yawn in the sunlight, ravines darken, and
fearful
rocks, bare and rugged in their outline, tower
far above the forest trees, away into the clear
azure of the summer sky.
The hills sweep round the valley in a circular
form, describing the outlines of the sides of a
drinking goblet, while far below, the limpid
waters
of the lake, repose in the depths of this
collossal
vessel, giving a clue to the strange name of
this place of solitude
The Valley of the
Bowl
.
This quiet vale is situated some few miles from
Florence, amid the same wild range of mountains
that encircle the haunt of the members of the
Holy Steel.
The light of the summer morning sun, was
streaming gaily over the roofs of a wild mountain
hamlet, clustered beside the shores of the lake,
flinging its golden beams over the outline of each
rugged hut, with tottering walls, or rustic
tenement
,
with its ancient stones overgrown with
leafy vines, when a group of peasants were
gathered
along the roadside, at some small distance
from the village, in earnest and energetic
conversation
.
A short, thick-set and bow-legged youth, clad
in the garish apparel of a Postillion of the olden
times, stood in the centre of the group, while
around him were clustered a circle of the buxom
mountain damsels, with their heads inclined
towards
each other, their arms and hands moving
in animated gestures, as a boisterous chorus broke
on the air, from the glib prattling of their busy
tongues.
Now, Dolabella, said the young man to a
tall, black-eyed, dark-haired damsel, of a very
swarthy skin; now, Dolabella, it's in vain you
try to make a fool of me. I don't believe any such
thingthat's all.
Having thus spoken, he searched earnestly with
his finger along his chin, and at last discovered
a starved fragment of beard, which he pulled with
great gravity, at the same time looking intently
upwards, as if bent on discovering the evening
star in broad day-light.
Well! our Lady take care of your wits, good
Signior Rattlebrain, thus answered the buxom
Dolabella, whether you believe it or not, makes
not a whit of difference to me. But I tell you,
Theresa, and you, Loretta, that last night, just
about dark, as I was walking near you cottage
on the hill, with a beech tree on one side, and a
chestnut on the other
What! interrupted the small, hazed-eyed
Loretta
,
mean you the cottage which the tall, strange
old woman hired but yesterday?
The very same. Well, just as I was walking
there, all alone, I heard a footstep!
Our Lady! exclaimed Theresa, who was
distinguished
by hair of glowing red.
Our Lady!but you do not say so?
exclaimed
the other.
I heard a footstep, and stepping aside into the
bushes, I saw a dark looking monk enter the
cottage
,
and he was followed by a big, rough soldier;
and
he
was followed by
such
a handsome cavalier,
dressed in such a gay dress, and O! bless ye all
he wore
such
a fine, dancing feather in his cap!
Upon my word, it waved like a sunbeam in the
evening twilight!
What colour were his eyes? asked Loretta.
Was he tall or short? inquired Theresa.
I suppose you will say next, that he had a
manly
figure? eh? and the youth pulled his
slouched hat fiercely over his right ear, and then
halting on one leg, he threw the other forward,
while with his arms placed akimbo, he seemed
waiting for somebody or other to take his
portrait
.
To be sure he had a
manly
figure, returned
Dolabella, glancing contemptuously at the
bow-legged
youth; he was none of your
whipper-snapping
,
strutting, and boasting postillions; he
was none of your conceited
Dolabella!
exclaimed the youth in a pathetic
tone.
Well, Signior Francisco?
Dolabella, do you see the convent of St.
Benedict
yonder?
He pointed to the dark and time-worn walls of
the monastery, which rising among the
forest-trees
on the western side of the lake, was crected
on the height of a precipitous cliff, that arose in
rugged grandeur from the bosom of the mountain
waters.
The cheerful sunbeam was shining over the
dark towers of the monastery, over the
surrounding
forest-trees, and along the recesses of the
gardens
,
that varied the appearance of the wild-wood
beyond the ancient walls, and the white cliff gave
its broad surface to the light of day, yet there was
an air of gloom resting upon the entire view, the
dark towers, the white cliff, and the luxuriant
gardens
,
while the reflection of the scene in the deep
and mirror-like waters of the lake, was so calm,
so clear, so perfect in the faintest outline, that it
looked more like the creation of an artist's pencil,
than a landscape of the living world.
As the pompous Francisco pointed to the dark
walls of the monastery, an involuntary thrill ran
around the group of peasant damsels, and there
was a pause of strange silence for a single
moment
.
The Monastery of St. Benedict! murmured
Dolabella, Francisco, fear you not to make you
strange house the subject of your jests, even in
broad daylight? The cheek of the boldest peasant
of these mountains grows pale at the mention of
yon gloomy fabric!
'Tis said the ancient Dukes of Florence held
strange festivals within those dark grey walls in
the olden time.
Even now, no one knows anything concerning
the monks of this monastery. They give to the
mountain poor with a free hand and a liberal
blessingyet, beshrew me, strange rumors are
abroad, and muttered whispers speak of midnight
orgies that it would shame an honest maiden to
name, held within yon darksome house!
I jest not! exclaimed the postillion; I jest
not. I am in earnestby the True Cross, am I.
Did you ever hear of the legend of yon whitened
precipice? How a desperate youth threw himself
from the rock, down into the ravineandand
mark meif on some very bright and agreeable
morning I should be found laying at the foot of
the awful steep, scattered into a thousand
fragments
then
think of the victim of your perfidy,
Dolabella. And you, Theresa, and you, Loretta,
think of the miserable fate of Franciscoyour
victimwith remorsewith bitter remorse!
Having thus given the damsels to understand
that among them all, his heart was certainly
broken
,
the little postillion strutted away with folded
arms and a measured step. Indeed, by the
immense
strides he took with his inverted legs, it did
really seem that he had been hired to measure the
greatest possible quantity of ground, in the
shortest
possible number of steps.
The damsels replied to this pathetic appeal by
a burst of laughter.
I'll tell you what we shall do, said Dolabella.
This little whipper-snapper has been making love
to all three of us, for nearly two years. Let us
pretend to be desperately enamoured of this strange
cavalier at the cottage.
O yesyes! cried Theresa.
Certainly! O certainly! exclaimed Loretta.
That will bring Signior Postillion to terms,
continued the tall damsel, and besides, girls, we'll
learn all about this strange old woman.
This strange priest! said Loretta.
And this handsome cavalier! cried Theresa.
And presently they separated; each determining
to out-wit the other; both in regard to the strangers
in the cottage on the hill, and to the securing of
the gallant postillion Francisco, who to do him
justice, had those two important qualities
necessary
to winning the heart of a vain womana
glib tongue and a rare knack of making presents
of all sorts of garish finery.
CHAPTER THE FOURTH.
THE BRIDAL EVE.
THE HEBREW AND THE ARAB-MUTE ENTER
THE COURT YARD OF ALBARONE, WHILE
THE LADYE ANNABEL IS PASSING
TO THE CHAPEL OF SAINT
GEORGE.
The azure sky was glowing with the mild
warmth of the summer twilight, the zenith was
all mellowed with the light of the declining day,
the western horizon was varied by alternate flashes
of gold and crimson, when the ancient Castle of
Albarone, thro' every hall and corridor, rang with
the shouts of merriment, and the gay sounds of
festival revelry.
Streaming from the various towers of the castle,
pennons of strange colors and curious
emblazonry
,
waved fluttering in the evening air, each flag,
the trophy of some hard fought battle, while high
over all, waving from the loftiest tower, the broad
banner of the House of Albarone, gave its
gorgeous
folds, its rich armorial bearings, the motto
in letters of gold, and the Winged Leopard, to the
ruddy glare of the western sky.
The lowered drawbridge, and the raised
portcullis
,
gave admittance to numerous bands of
peasantry, wending from the various tenements,
that dotted the domains of Albarone, all clad in
their holiday costume, while the air echoed with
their light-hearted laughter, as the merry jest, or
the gay carol, rang from side to side. All along
the hill, leading to the castle gate, and thro' the
luxuriant wood, circling round its base, hurried
the peasant bands, their attire of picturesque
beauty, giving variety and contrast to the
scene, while now loitering in groups, now
hastening
one by one toward the castle, they peopled the
highway, and thronged over the drawbridge into
the court yard of the castle.
Walking amid these gay parties, yet alone and
unaccompanied save by a solitary attendant there
strode wearily forward a personage who to all
appearance
ranked among a far-scattered people, at
once the scorn and fear of Christendom.
Clad in a long coat of the coarsest serge, varied
by numerous patches, with a piked staff in his
hand, and a pack somewhat extensive in shape,
strapped over his broad shoulders, the slouching
hat which defended the head of the Jew, revealed
a face, dark and tawny in hue, stern in expression,
marked by a sharp and searching eye, whose glance
seemed skilled in reading the hearts of men, a
bold prominent nose, while the lower part of his
checks, his chin and upper lip, were covered by
a stout beard, which, black as jet, descended to his
girdle, mingling with the long and curling locks
of sable hue, that gave their impressive relief to
the outline of the Hebrew's countenance.
By his side walked his slender-shaped
attendant
,
to all appearance a youth of some twenty
winters
,
yet his tawny face, marked by bold and
regular
features, half-concealed by masses of jet black
hair, falling aside from his forehead, in elf-like
curls, was marked by a deep wrinkle between the
brows, a stern compression of the lip, and a wild
and wandering eye, that glanced from side to side
with a restless and nervous glance, that seemed
to peruse the face of every man who came within
its gaze, and read the characters and motives of
all who journeyed onward to the castle.
Attired like his master, in garments of the
coarsest
serge, the Servitor of the Hebrew, bore on his
shoulder, a voluminous pack, which seemed to
oppress its bearer with an unusal weight, for he
well-nigh tottered under the load.
Without heeding the sneer, and the jest which
assailed him from every side, the Hebrew crossed
the drawbridge, and passing under the portcullis
he presently stood in the midst of the castle yard
where unstrapping his pack, he displayed his rich
and gaudy stores to the eyes of the wondering
multitude, while his servitor also displayed his
pack to their gaze, but stood silent and unmoveable,
his arms folded, and his wild eyes glaring
strangely over the faces of the crowd.
Who'll buywho'll buy? cried the Hebrew,
in the suppliant voice of trade, as casting his eyes
around the court-yard, he surveyed the brilliant
scene at a glance.
Around, all dark and time-worn, the walls of
the castleeach casement blazing with torches
looked down upon various groups of the peasantry
and servitors of Albarone, some engaged in light
and gleesome gossip, while others were hurrying
hither and thither, on errands pertaining to the
feast which was to grace the castle hall on the
morrow.
In front of the high arching roof of the kitchen
stood the grey haired, sharp featured, and sharp
voiced Steward of the castle, engaged in
superintending
the operations of a number of hinds, who
were severing the limbs of various fat bucks, and
cutting up certain lusty beeves, and preparing
various
kinds of game, for the vast fire that blazed on
the kitchen hearth.
Farther on, a minstrel was entertaining a circle
of peasants, with the song of love, or the tale of
knightly valor; at a short distance, the privileged
fool, with his cap and bells, and fantastic dress,
was uttering his merry quips and far-fetched jests,
which ever and anon he varied by a nimble
summersault
,
while the gaping crowd held their sides
as their boisterous laughter broke upon the ear,
with all its jovial discord and dissonance.
Who'll buy! who'll buy! shouted the Jew,
here's broaches for ye damsels fairbroaches and
gauds, rings for your fingers, and crosses of ebony
for your bosoms. Look ye how this heart of gold
would sink and swell on a maiden's snow white
breast! Here's plumes for the warriors' helmet;
daggers for his belt, and trappings for his steed.
Who'll buy! who'll buy!Here's ornaments of
gold and silver for the doublet of the page, essences
for his flowing hair, and chains for his neck.
Who'll buywho'll buy.Broaches, gauds, rings,
gems, plumes, belts, trappings, perfumes, chains,
lace of gold! Who'll buy! Who'll buy! Gentles,
list ye all! Chains, laces of gold, perfumes,
trappings
,
belts, plumes, gems, rings, gauds, broaches.
Who'll buy! who'll buy!
The Virgin save us all! exclaimed Guiseppo
who stood among the crowd that gathered round
the Israelite, the Virgin save us all, but
there's
a tongue for you, my good folks.
This was said with an attitude of mock
astonishment
,
and corresponding grimace of the
features
.
An' my tongue suits ye so well, gentle sir,
mayhap
you'll try some of my wares?
What have you, Sir Gripe-fist, that it would
become
me
to buy?
Everything to suit a gallant page, everything.
Except three wares with which the great merchant
Nature
must provide him, or else he'll make
but a sorry page.
And those wareshow do you style them?
asked the page.
The first, replied the Jew with a demure
look, the first ware is somewhat dull and heavy,
it is labelled
Impudence
may it please thee
fair Page.
Thou heathen hound, thou! exclaimed
Guiseppo
,
half amused and half angered. How name
you the second ware? Eh? Leatherface?
The second ware, the Jew replied meekly
the second ware is light and feathery. It bears
the name
Self-conceit
. As for the third
Aye the third, interrupted the page. Go on
my black bearded friendgo onI'll borrow a
good oaken towel to rub you down, when you
have done.
As for the third, it is the stuff of which the two
others are made. It is heavier and duller than
Impudence
, and lighter and more feathery than
Self conceit
, they style it
Ignorance
. And these
three wares are the sole contents of the
cob-webhung
storehouse of Sir Page's brain. An' it likes
thee, fair sir?
The Israelite bowed low as he spoke.
Hahaha! fairly hit! Hohoho! The
Jew turns Scholar, and preaches like a monk.
Hehehe! The trim Page is hitfairly hit.
Such were the exclamations that went around the
laughing crowd.
Now receive thy pay, thou son of Sathanas!
exclaimed Guiseppo, brandishing an oaken staff;
here's at thee!
Nay, nay! exclaimed one of the spectators,
thou art fairly hit, sir Guiseppo.
Aye, aye, fairly hit, cried another; and
The Jew has paid thee in thine own coin, a
third shouted, throwing himself in the path of the
page.
Nay, nay, let him come! cried the Jew, with
a sneer. Let him come. I'll tame his
page-ship
.
Dost thou mock me, thou dog! As he spoke,
the page raised his oaken staff, and whirling it
around his head, he aimed with all his strength at
the sconce of the Jew, who coolly turned aside
the blow with his upraised arm, and in an instant
he had Guiseppo by the throat. He whispered a
word in the ear of the page, and then, unloosing
his hold, he began to gather up his wares.
The eyebrows of the page elevated with
astonishment
,
and his lips parted. The bystanders
gathered around Guiseppo with various
expressions
of their surprise at the sudden change that
had passed over him.
Why stare you so? exclaimed a peasant
maid.
Art mad? asked one of the yeomen of the
guard.
Perhaps moon-struck? suggested another.
Guiseppo made no reply, but walked slowly
away, while the Jew remained standing in the
centre of the group, with his servitor waiting
silently
by his side.
Look ye, son of Moses, cried one of the
yeomen
,
advancing toward the Jew, why stands this
man of thine so silent and still? He moves not,
nor does he speak; but his wild eye is glancing
hither and thither like a fire-coal. Why does he
stand thus mute and speechless?
A grim smile passed over the bearded features of
the Jew.
Ask a post why it does not speak, or ask a
war-horse to troll ye a merry song! You are a
keen yeoman and a shrewd, yet did it ne'er strike
ye that my servitor might be incapable of speech?
A poor Arab boy, gentle sirs and damsels, whose
dying father gave him to my care, when
perishing
on the field of battle, in the wilds of Palestine,
some twenty years agone.
A son of the paynim Mahound, muttered
the yeoman, with a look of scorn.
Nay, he is of the faith of Christ, interrupted
the Jew. Behold, he wears the cross of Rome!
A sweet youth, and gentle-faced, though
somewhat
sad in look, murmured a pleasant matron,
gazing with a look of pity upon the tawny face of
the Arab mute.
And while the group of peasant men and
women
clustered around the Jew and his Arab boy,
a cry ran through the castle yard, echoed from
lip to lip, and repeated by the crowd thronging
the place, until the air seemed alive with the shout:
She comes, she comes! The fair Ladye
Annabel
is passing to the chapel of St. George! Make
way for the betrothed! Make way for the Ladye
Annabel!
Make way for the Duchess of
Florence
!
In a moment the court-yard was occupied by
two files of men-at-arms, who extended from the
great steps, ascending to the massive door of the
castle hall, along the level space, making a lane
for the passage of the Ladye Annabel and her
train, while the crowd came thronging to the
backs of the warriors, gathering around the
staircase
,
and blackening on every side, eager to
behold
the betrothed of his grace the Duke of
Florence
.
Foremost among the throng at the bottom of
the stairway, his pack lashed to his back, and a
small casket in his hands, the black-bearded Jew
appeared to take great interest in the scene
progressing
before his eyes. The Arab mute stood
at his back, half concealed from view, and unseen
or unnoticed by well nigh all the servitors and
vassals of Albarone, In after times, some of the
vassals remembered well that they observed the
wild eyes of the Arabian glaring fiercely over the
shoulder of the Jew, while his right hand was
thrust within the folds of his coarse gaberdine,
and his entire appearance denoted a mind agitated
by some fierce resolve or determined purpose.
A low, solemn peal of music broke on the air,
and a ruddy blaze of light was thrown from the
recesses of the massive hall doors. In a moment
a band of cavaliers, attired in all the glitter of
spangled cloak and waving plume, came issuing
from the hall, and took their position along either
side of the staircase, each gay cavalier holding a
torch on high, while the gleaming light revealed
each handsome face, wearing the polished smile,
and the costumes varied with strange fancies of
embroidery, and fashioned after every manner of
device, were disclosed in all their luxuriance and
splendor.
A murmur ran through the crowd, and the
gaily-attired form of his grace of Florence issued
from the hall door, followed by the slight figure of
the Count Aldarin. As they took their positions
on either side of the hall door, the crowd below
had time to notice the strange contrast between
the Lord of Albarone and the Duke of Florence.
Aldarin, pale in face, slender in form, attired in
his robes of solemn black, the cap of costly fur on
his forehead, with the blaze of a single gem
relieving
its midnight darkness, standing silent and
motionless on one side of the hall door, his keen
grey eyes half hidden by his brows, as though he
was absent with thoughts of more than mortal
interest
.
The Duke, the gallant Duke, all show,
and glitter, and costume, a doublet of white satin
encircling his well-proportioned form, a cloak of
the most delicate crimson depending from his left
shoulder, the hilt of his jewelled sword glittering
in the light; while his dainty cap of pink velvet,
with the snow-white plume thrown aside from its
front, surmounted his vacant face, marked by the
neatly circled hair, the carefully trimmed
moustache
and beard. His eyes glared vacantly to and
fro, and it might easily be seen tkat his grace of
Florence was on a mental excursion after his
looking
glass.
The flashing of torches heralded the approach
of the Ladye Annabel, who presently emerged
from the hall door, followed by a long line of the
bower maidens, arrayed, like their mistress, in
flowing robes, white as the mountain snow
untouched
by the summer sun. The face of the
Ladye
Annabel was pale as the attire that enveloped
her slender form, and she leaned for support on
the arm of her black-eyed cousin, the damsel
Rosalind
.
Pale and beautiful, the victim of the sacrifice of
the morrow neither returned the deep inclination
of the head with which the Duke of Florence
greeted her appearance nor glanced upon the
countenance
of her father; but slowly moved down
the steps of stone, her eyes downcast, and her face
calm as the sculptured marble.
She is pale, murmured Aldarin, pale as
death! She walks with the measured step of the
victim walking to the living tomb!
I'faith, she is beautiful! muttered the Duke.
My bride will hang like a pleasant costume on
this royal arm!
The black-bearded Hebrew gazed upon the
Ladye
Annabel with a keen and searching eye, while
the Arab mute, standing at his back, bowed his
head low on his breast, and veiled his face with
one hand, as the other was thrust within the
folds of his coarse doublet.
Slowly the procession ascended the steps of
stone, one foot of the betrothed was upon the
pavement
of the castle yard, when a rushing sound
was heard, a hurried footstep, and the Jew rushed
through the men-at-armsflinging himself at the
maiden's feet, he threw open the casket which he
held in his hand.
Fair ladye, he cried, in a deep-toned voice,
It is the lacethe lace of price, which two days
since I promised to procure thee. 'Tis worth its
weight in goldaye, an hundred times over!
Look, ladye'tis the best that gold or favor might
procure.
The Ladye Annabel started at the uncouth
appearance
and bearded face of the Jew, while the
bystanders seemed struck dumb with his
audacity
.
In an instant cries of execration arose on all
sides. The Count Aldarin advanced hastily to his
daughter's side, while the Duke of Florence
muttured
an involuntary oath, as two of the
men-at-arms
raised their swords to hew the Israelite to
the very earth. It was a fearful moment, and the
Jew seemed to feel that his fate was wavering
like the sunbeam on the point of a brightened
dagger. He made a quick gesture to the Arab
mute, he seized the wrist of the fair Rosalind, and
looking her earnestly in the face, whispered a
hurried word in the maiden's ear, deep and piercing
in its import, yet inaudible to the group clustered
around.
Rosalind turned pale, started quickly aside, but
in a moment seemed chiding herself for this folly,
as with a smile on her lip she spoke to the Ladye
Annabel in a low and murmured tone. Annabel
started, with the quick convulsive start that follows
an overwhelming surprise.
She started, but in a moment recovering
herself
,
she exclaimed with a firm voice, and extended
arms
Touch him notdo the Jew no harm! It is
by my command that he is here. Sir Merchant,
she continued, with a smile of kindly meaning,
you will wait for me, in the hall of the castle
there will I look at your wares when the evening
mass is done.
This is wondrous strange, murmured Aldarin.
Some changing woman's fancy, I trow
Certes, the lace must be rare in texture, and
quaint in device! half muttered the Duke. Yet
I never knew that there was magic in the mere
mention of such costly gear, before this
moment
!
The men-at-arms released the Jew, and the
procession passed on towards the more distant
precincts of the castle, where the light of many
torches presently streamed from the arching
windows
of the chapel of St. George of Albarone,
showing
in full and beautiful relief the snow-white
forms of the maidens, passing through the sacred
door of the church, followed by the Count Aldarin
and the Duke, environed by the glittering throng
of cavaliers.
Meanwhile, alone and in the darkness, deserted
by the crowd, near the halt door, stood the Hebrew
and his Mute Servitor, gazing ardently upon the
receding procession, until the last cavalier
disappeared
within the walls of the chapel. Then it
was that a grim smile passed over the bearded face
of the Jew, while the Arab boy started wildly
aside clenching his hands with sudden agitation,
as the strains of the Holy Mass, floating from the
chapel, broke upon his ear.
An hour passed. The holy ceremonies of
religion
had ceased to echo through the walls of the
chapel, the Ladye Annabel attended by her
maidens
had again passed into the castle hall; and
beside
one of the pillars of the lofty door, stood the
gallant Guiseppo, his arms folded and his eyes
fixed upon the heavens above. Guiseppo was
enrapt
in the mysteries of a sombre study. He was
just wondering what the stars could be made of,
whether they were veritable balls of fire, unstable
meteors, or angel's eyeshow it chanced that
they were lighted up so regularly every night,
stormy ones of course exceptedwhere they went
in day-timeand then he fell to thinking of
angels
,
fairies, and other beings made all out of air
and from angels it was quite natural that his
thoughts should pass to woman; and with the
thought of woman came dim, floating visions of
ancles well turned, black eyes beaming like living
things, ruby lips wreathing in a smile, while they
wooed the kiss of love. There is no knowing how
far his musings might have gone, had he not been
disturbed by the sound of a footstep breaking the
silence of the castle yard. He looked in the
direction
from whence the sound proceeded, and
beheld
a strange figure, clad in solemn black,
approaching
from the gloom of the court-yard. It
drew nearer and nearer, and Guiseppo beheld the
form of the Scholar Aldarin. He came slowly
onward
,
toward the light burning over the hail door'
and the Page remembered in after life that his
face was most ghastly to behold, most fearful to
look upon.
His head drooped upon his breast over his
folded
arms, his eyes dilated to their utmost, glaring
vacantly on the earth, while his lips moved in
broken murmurs, the Scholar ascended the steps
of stone, as the Page observed him from the
shadow
of a massive pillar.
It hastens, it hastens to perfectionTHE MIGHTY
SPELL! The marriageha, ha, Duchess of
Florence
!
He
shall live againha, ha! the world
shall not say Aldarin toiled in vain! The secret
a few more days
Aldarin lives forever
!
And as the murmurs broke wildly from his
lips the Scholar disappeared within the shadow of
the hall door, leaving the careless Guiseppo to the
memory of that fearful face, while his cheek grew
pale, and his whole frame trembled with an
indefinable
fear. How long he remained in this state
he knew not, but after a long lapse of dreamy
reverie, he was startled by a slight tap on his
shoulder.
Looking around, he beheld the beaming eyes of
the fair Rosalind fixed upon him with a glance
which for the moment banished the face of Aldarin
from his mind, and made his heart knock sadly
against his breast.
What wouldst have, Rosalind?
The maiden whispered in his ear
.
It was curious to see the change that came over
the countenance of the page; the pallor vanished
from his visage, which swelled out on either side
as though he had an orange in each cheek, his lips
were curiously pursed, while his eyes rolled about
in his head after a strange fashion.
Eh? Rosalind? he cried, as if he had not
understood
her aright.
Again did the maiden whisper in his ear.
By our Lady! exclaimed Guiseppo, but this
does exceed everything that I ever did hear. Art
not crazed, sweetheart?
Say, Guiseppo, wilt do it for my sake?
The bewitching smile with which this was said,
appeared to complete the conquest of the page.
I'll obey thee, he cried, but surely 'tis a
strange request.
Strange?
nonsense! Never call the whim of
woman
strange!
Hie thee away and do't
immediately
.
I will tell thee more concerning this
matter in the evening. Away! away!
And as the lovely damsel tripped lightly down
the steps and wended her way toward the castle
gate, on an errand whose import may possibly be
revealed in future pages of this history, the Page
Guiseppo entered the hall of the castle, while his
frame shook with a pleasant fit of inward laughter.
CHAPTER THE FIFTH.
THE BRIDAL MORN.
THE WEDDING GUESTS CIRCLE ROUND THE
HOLY ALTAR, WHILE THE SCHOLAR
ALDARIN STRIKES HIS
DAGGER
AT THE
INTANGIBLE
AIR.
The first flash of the morn that was to gild the
fair brow of the Ladye Annabel with a ducal
coronet
,
glowed faintly in the eastern sky, and the
black-beared Jew stood iu the court-yard, casting
his eyes earnestly about him, as if waiting the
approach of one with whom he had made an
appointment
.
Not long did he wait, for presently emerging
from a small door inserted in a wing of the castle,
near the chapel of St. George, the page Guiseppo
approached, with his form muffled up in his cloak
of blue velvet and gold embroidery; while his
slouching hat, drooping over his face, concealed
his features entirely form the view. By his side,
at a respectful distance, walked the Arab mute,
his head bowed low, and his face half concealed
by his jet-black locks, while he tottered under the
weight of his heavy burden. As Guiseppo gained
the side of the Jew, a sentinel was passing.
Ho, sir page! exclaimed the Hebrew, thou
seem'st fearful of the morning breeze. Hurry
alonghurry alongor beshrew me, thou wilt
not get the rare lace for the Ladye Annabelthe
rare lace worth its weight in gold a hundred
times told. Haste theehaste thee!
They crossed the court-yard, and presently
stood before the vast pillars of the castle gate,
which was guarded by four sentinels, attired in
the livery of his grace of Florence.
Fair sir, exclaimed the Jew, addressing one
of the men-at-arms, I would pass through the
castle gate. I am bound for the village hard by
the castle. Albarone, I think you call it?
Wherefore abroad so early? asked the
sentinel
;
and why goes Guiseppo with you?
Yesternight, when I journeyed toward the
castle, some of my most precious wares I left be
hind me at the hostel of the village below. The
Ladye Annabel wishes to purchase some rare and
costly laces. My business calls me and this poor
dumb youth away to the north, and therefore is
the page sent with me; he is sent to receive the
wares purchased by the Ladye Annabel. Hast
any thing further to ask, sir sentinel?
And as he asked the question, the page Guisep
po and the Arabian drew nearer to the Jew,
awaiting the answer with evident interest. It was
observable that the right hand of the mute was
thrust within the folds of his doublet, while his
blue eye, so strangely contrasting with his dark
brows and darker hair, glared fiercely over the
faces of the sentinels.
I have nothing more to ask of thee,
now
,
exclaimed
another sentinel, advancing. But had
not the Duke sent me this pass for thee, thy
servitor
,
and the page Guiseppo, the foul fiend take
me, but I would have seen thy heathen carcase at
the devil, ere a bolt should be drawn for thee to
pass forth at this unseasonable hour. Thy way
lies before thee, Jew!
As he spoke, he applied a key to a small door
which was cut into the massive timbers of the
castle gate. The door flew open, and through
the opened space the drawbridge was seen
descending
.
One foot of the Jew was passed through
the narrow entrance, when the sentinel who held
the pass of the Duke, exclaimed:
Why, Guiseppo, what aileth thee?
Wherefore
art muffled up in this fashion? Where are
thy merry jests? Where is that magpie tongue
of thine? Hast forgotten all thy mischievous
prankseh, sir page?
A low, moaning noise came from the mouth of
the mute, as he seemed impatient of the delay.
I have no time to trifle in idle converse,
exclaimed
the Jew. Come on, fair sir, the
morning
breaks, and I must be on my way.
He took the page by the shoulder, and gently
pulled him through the doorway, leaving the
sentinels
to their surprise at the strange silence of
the mirthful Guiseppo, while the unfortunate mute
slowly followed in the footsteps of the Jew, his
right hand trembling with a scarce perceptible
motion, as he buried it within the folds of his
doublet.
With a hurried step, the Jew and his
companion
passed over the drawbridge, and in a moment
standing upon the summit of the hill upon whose
stern foundations the castle was founded, they
viewed the winding road beneath.
The page turned his headstill concealed by
his slouched hathe turned his head for a moment
toward the castle, and a slight tremor pervaded
his frame. Then his hand was extended,
grasping
the hand of the Arab mute, who returned the
grasp with a firm pressure upon the white fingers
of the dainty page.
Let us onward! Let us onward!
whispered
the Jew. A long journey have we before us.
Onward, I pray ye!
They hurriedly wended down the hill, and ere
an hundred could be told, their forms were lost to
sight in the shades of the forest.
All bright and glorious came on the rising day,
lighting up the cloudless azure with its kindly
beams, shimmering over the waves of the broad,
deep river, filling the wild-wood glade with
glimpses
of golden light; while the far-off mountains
towered into the heavens, the white clouds
crowning
their rugged peaks, radiant with the changing
hues of the morning sun.
And while the day wore slowly on, the paths
leading through the valley toward the castle, the
winding ways that passed through the recesses of
the wild wood, and the great highway sweeping
on toward Florence the Fair, were all alive with
crowds of peasants, in their holiday attire,
wrinkled
age and red-lipped youth, mature manhood
and careless boyhood, all hastening onward toward
the castle of Albarone, anxious to behold the
marriage
of the Duke and the Ladye Annahel.
The day wore on, and the court-yard was
thronged by strange and contrasted bands; the
peasant in his gay costume, the vassal in his
rich livery, side by side with the man-at-arms clad
in glittering mail, while the servitors of the house
ran hurriedly to and fro, passing with hasty steps
from hall to hall, from gallery to corridor, as the
confused sounds of preparation for the bridal feast
awoke the echoes of the arching corridor or
pillared
hall.
The first quarter of the day had passed, and the
shadow of the dial plate in the castle yard, was
gliding over the path of high noon. As gay a
bridal party as ever the sun shone upon, waited
within the walls of the chapel of St. George. They
waited for the coming of the bridegroom and
bride. There were queenly ladies and beauteous
damsels, gallant lords and gay cavaliers, blazing
in gorgeous attire; there, mingling with the
men-at-arms
of Albarone, throughed the retainers of the
Duke, robed in the royal livery of his house; and
beside the altar stood the priest and the father,
the venerable abbot of St. Peters, arrayed in his
sacred robes, and the sage and thoughtful Aldarin,
Count Di Albarone, attired, as was his wont, in
the plain tunic of sable velvet, relieved by the
sweeping robe of black, with his pale forehead
surmounted by the cap of fur, glittering with a
single gem.
Long will it be, by my troth, very longthus
runs the words of the ancient MS.ere the light
of day will look down upon a scene so full of
gaiety and grandeur. The tall and swelling forms
of the noble dames, arrayed in all the richest
silks that the East might furnish, covered with
gold and brilliant with jewels; the noble figures
of the cavaliers, their gay doublets hung with the
symbols of the various orders of chivalry, their
belts of every variety of ornament, and of every
fancy of embroidery, their diamond-hilted swords,
their jewelled caps, surmounted by nodding plumes
and their cloaks of the finest velvet depending
carelessly from their right shoulder, and falling in
graceful folds over the arm, combined with the
glare of Milan steel worn by the men-at-arms,
and the glitter of the rich liveries of the retainers
of the Duke, formed a scene of vivid and
contrasting
interest.
The gallant party began to express their
wonder
at the long delayed approach of the Duke and
his fair bride, and even the venerable abbot
betrayed
marks of impatience. It was worthy of
note, that for the space of ten minutes or more,
the Count Aldarin had stood beside the priest,
silent
and motionless, with his eyebrows knit, and
his lips compressed, while he gazed steadily at the
slabs of the mosaic pavement in front of the altar,
which, for the space of some half score paces or
more, was left bare and unoccupied by the crowd.
At last, placing his lips to the ear of the abbot,
and hurriedly glancing around, as if fearful of
being
observed, the Count whispered
What doth
HE
here?
he said, pointing to the
pavement in front of the altar.
To whom dost thou refer, my Lord Count?
inquired the Priest.
S'life! exclaimed the Count in a voice that
trembled from some unknown cause; S'life! I
mean the
stranger
he in the dark armour, with
the raised vizor and that ghastly face. Dost not
see him?
My Lord, there is no one before the altar attired
in armour. Around us are the throng of Lords
and Ladiesbut all are arrayed in robes of peace.
Mayhap you speak of one of the men-at-arms
who stand yonder, near the door of the chapel?
Shaveling! I mean
the stranger
who stands in
front of the altar. He with the plume as dark as
death falling over that pale and lofty forehead. He
who gazes so fixedly with those glassy eyesgazes
and looks, yet speaks no word. By Heavens, he
means to mock me. I will strike him down even
where he stands!
He advanced hurriedly to the front of the altar,
and in an instant the bystanders beheld him
striking his dagger in the air, while his pale
features
were convulsed by a strange expression.
Thou shalt not escape me! he shouted.
Elude me notI'll have thee, coward! This to
thy very heart! What, art thou dagger proof?
Guards, I say, seize this traitor! Albarone to the
rescue!
It was with a feeling of indefinable awe, that
the bridal throng beheld the Count Aldarin
standing
with his eyes strained from their very sockets,
his brows woven together, and his whole face
stamped with an expression which was neither
terror nor hate, but seemed a mingling of terror,
hate, and despair.
Two courtiers sprang at the same time from
the group, crying as they drew their swords
My Lord, where is the traitor? Who is't?
Shall I be slain upon my own ground? Where
is the traitor? Before your eyes he stands.
He!
I mean. Looklook! Behold! he leans upon
the altar! He smiles in scornhe mocks me!
Aldarin stamped his foot with rage, and
shrieked
By the Eternal God! but this is brave! Will
ye see me murdered before your eyes! Seize
I sayseize the traitor!
Benedicite! muttered the venerable abbot,
gazing upon the wild face of Aldarin; the fiend
is among us!
As he spoke, the Duke of Florence all daintily
appareled in his wedding dress, with surprise and
vexation pictured in every lineament of his
countenance
,
broke through the throng, exclaiming
My Lord Count, thy daughter is no where to
be found. The Ladye Annabel hath gone: no one
knoweth whither!
My Lord Duke, said Aldarin in a whisper,
can'st thou tell me who is the stranger?
Eh? exclaimed the astonished Duke, gazing
upon Aldarin with a vacant stare.
He
I mean who standeth by the altar. He in
the sable armourwith the pale brow and the
eyes of firewith the dark plume overshadowing
his helmet! By heavens, I behold under his
plume, the crest of the Winged Leopard!
By our Lady, but thou describest the late
Count Di Albarone. Mayhap he comes from the
grave to witness against his son, the vile parricide,
he who hath fled with thy daughter. May the
fiend curse him for't!
Fled with my daughter? my daughter fled?
shouted Aldarin, as he suddenly seemed to break
the spell that bound him.
Pardon me, my friends. Anxiety for my child
grief for my brotherhave driven me mad.
My brain is feveredI am ill. My daughter fled,
say'st thou? How?when? What meanest
thou?
The Duke hurriedly turned to Guiseppo, who
stood among the throng of bower maidens, who
had followed his Grace into the chapel.
Guiseppo, advance. What said the Ladye
Annabel
when thou didst return this morning from
thy errand beyond the castle walls in company
with the Jewish merchant. Eh? Guiseppo?
My Lord Duke, replied the page, I went not
forth this morning from the castle walls
Saving this presence, cried a man-at-arms
pressing forward, saving this presence, Sir Page,
but there thou liest. Did I not see thee go forth
this morning at daybreak?the Jew with thee,
and thy face muffled up as if thou wert ashamed
of thy errand?
How say you? cried Aldarin, whose native
perception had returned. His face muffled?
Come hither, girl, he continued, addressing
Rosalind
,
who stood among the throng of bower
maidens
.
Girl, when didst see thy mistress last?
My Lord Count, said the maiden, I left the
Ladye Annabel last night at twelve: I slept
within
the ante-chamber adjoining her bower. This
morning on knocking at her door I found it
fastened
.
I did not like to disturb her, so I waited
here Rosalind seemed confused, while the blush
deepened over her cheek. I waited, my Lord
Count, hour after hour, until my Lord the Duke
came to lead the bride to church. Thenthen
By the body of God, but I see it all! thus
exclaimed
the Count Aldarin. I have been fooled
duped, and by thee, girl! Thou art my own
sister's child, but think not to escape the vengeance
of Aldarin! I see allmy daughterthe
wanton
!has
fled in the attire of this page, he too is
a plotter, he who oweth lifefortuneeverything
to me! Guards, seize the miscreant! Tremble
well thou may'st! Thou hast invoked the axe
beware its fall! To the lowest dungeon of the
castle with him! away! To horseto horse!
continued Aldarin, glancing round upon the
astonished
assemblage. To horseto horse!
E
mount every man! Scour every road, every path
in the domains of Albarone! Sweep the highway
to Florence! A thousand pieces of gold to him
who brings the haggard back!
CHAPTER THE SIXTH.
SIR GEOFFREY O' TH' LONGSWORD.
THE SPIRIT OF THE CHRONICLE THROWS
BACK THE CURTAIN OF FATE, AND GIVES
TO VIEW SOME GLIMPSES OF THE LAST
SCENE, IN WHICH THE BARBS OF
ARIMANES
BECOME THE AVENGERS OF
HEAVEN
.
Along a mossy, winding path, that led
through the sunlit glades and shady recesses of
a green and bowery forest, two travellers, one a
stripling, and the other a man of some forty
winters
,
were wending their way, while the dew was
yet upon the turf, and while the morning carol of
innumerable birds arose from the bosom of the
rich foliage.
The cheeks of the youth were strangely puffed
out, his lips were gathered like the mouth of a
purse, while he whistled with an earnestness that
was certainly wonderful. Presently he spoke
By'r Ladye, but that was the most exquisite
thing of all. Eh? Good Robin? The idea of thy
carcase being perched upon the back of the
Demon
Statue in that pestilent cavern. And
frightening
the old Count into fits, too! Ha! ha! ha!
'Twas rich! By the Saints it was! Oh, Robin,
thou art certainly the very devil for mischief!
That prank of gagging the old Israelite, and
stealing
his beard, coat, pack and all, was cruel, by my
troth it was! where didst thou leave the old
gripe-fist
?
As I told thee before, thou rattlebrained
popinjay
!
the other replied with a good natured smile
With a full heavy heart I wended along the
highway
,
on the eve of the bridal, thinking of the fair
Ladye Annabel, when who should I behold
trudging
before me, but this good son of Moses. I laid
him upon the earth in a winkgagged him, and
concealed him in the cottage of a peasant, whose
ears I filled with a terrible tale of the Jew's roguery;
how he had stolen the plate of the castle, and
so on. I then disguised myself in the Hebrew's
attire; with what success you are already aware.
After I had effected the deliverance of the Ladye
Annabel, I released the Jew who ran beardless
and affrighted, as fast as his legs could carry him,
out of the demesnes of Albarone!
Where didst leave the Ladye Annabel,
Robin
?
Who was the Arab Mute? Where is he now?'
I left her
in safety
, most sagacious Guiseppo.
And as for the MuteI'll tell thee anon. How
didst feel when I came to assist thee in escaping
from the dungeon; oh?
O! St. Peter! By my troth it would make
a picture. There I sat upon the bench of stone;
the dim taper flinging its beams around the rough
walls of the damp cell; my elbows resting upon
my knees, and my face supported by my clenched
hands; my mind full of dark and gloomy thoughts,
and my fancy forming various pleasant pictures
of the gibbet, which was to bear my dainty figure
on the morrow. Imagine this delicate form
swinging
on a gibbetugh! Thus was I employed;
when I heard a noise like the drawing of bolts.
I started, expecting to behold the Count Aldarin;
he had
visited
the cell an hour or so past, and
informed that I had the honor of beingmark ye,
my soldier
his son
. I started and beheldthy
welcome visage, my good Robin.
Marry it was well for thee that the secret
passage
was known to me. How sayest thou? Did
the murderer aver that he was thy father?
Even so. The Count Aldarin, has ever been
kind to me, yet I never thought I was connected
to him by any ties of blood. I have always been
known throughout the castle as
the foundling:
Pleasant nameeh, Robin? The tale runs that
a peasant returning home, on an autumn night,
discovered a child some three years old, crying,
in the forest. That child the Scholar Aldarin
adopted, and called Guiseppo; which title was
occasionally
varied by the servitors of Albarone, to
that of
Guiseppo Stray-Devil, Lost-Elf
, and others
of like pleasing character. But whither are we
wandering now, good Robin? This is the second
day of our flight; whither are we bound?
Thou wilt know ere long. Didst ever hear of
Sir Geoffrey O' Th' Longsword?
What, the stout Englisher! The brave knight
who now commands the soldiers of our late Lord,
in Palestine? He that is noted for the strength of
his arm, and the daring of his spirit? Why
all Christendom rings with his feats.
Well, my bird of a page, I have lately heard
by a wandering palmer, that a truce has been
made, between that son of Mahound, Saladin, and
the princes of Christendom. Further it is said,
that a body of the crusaders have sailed from
Cyprus
,
and are bound to Italy. Dost see aught in
this, my popinjay?
The Saints help thy senses! Surely you do
not mean to say that the soldiers of Albarone are
returning home?
Marry but I do. I mean to wend towards the
nearest seaport; I mean to
By our Lady, interrupted Guiseppo, I spy
the dawning of our Lord Adrian's day. I do by
heaven!
And thus conversing they pursued their way
along the forest path.
Higher and higher rose the sun in the Heavens,
and its beams shone upon the armour of a gallant
company that journeyed in brilliant array along
a bye-road leading thro' a wide and extensive
forest.
Near the head of the company, on a stout black
steed, rode a tall, stalwart man, full six feet high,
broad shouldered, in form, with a stern, weather,
beaten countenance. His long white hair, escaping
from beneath his helmet, the vizor of which was
raised, fell upon his mail-clad shoulders, and his
beard, frosted by time and battle toil, swept over
the iron plate that detended his muscular chest.
On either side rode his Esquires, mounted
on horses dark and stout, as that of their knight
commander. They were brothers, and side by
side had fought in a thousand battles.
Both tall, muscular, and dark featured; both
having dark eyes, dark shaggy brows, stiff hair
and beard of the like hue, they were known among
the ranks of the crusaders as the twin brothers
the brave Esquire Damian, and the gallant
Esquire
Halbert. Hard matter it were to tell one
from the other, so much they looked alike, had it
not been that the visage of Damian, was marked
by a sword wound, which extending from the
right eyebrow, passed over his swarthy forehead
and terminated near the left temple; while a deep
gash cut into the right cheek of Halbert, served
to distinguish him from his brother.
In front of the knight, the standard-bearer,
mounted on a cream coloured steed, bore aloft a
broad banner of azure. A winged leopard was
pictured on its folds, and the inscription read thus
Grasp boldly and bravely strike!
In the rear of the grey haired warrior, a stout
Englishman, riding on a dappled grey, held on
high a crimson banner, bordered by white, on
which was pictured a two-edged sword, having a
long, stout blade, and wide hilt. It bore the
motto
Hilt for FriendPoint for Foe
.
Then, riding at their ease, came the
men-at-arms
arrayed from head to foot in their armour of
Milan steel; their lances were in their hands, each
shield hung at the saddle bow, and each sword
depended from the belt of buff. The gallant band
might number an hundred thrice told.
Behind these soldiers came the varlets of the
train, riding beside the baggage wains, conveying
the sick and wounded, who had endured the
burning
sun of Palestine, the toil and dangers of the
seas, and were now returning to the land of their
birth.
And there, riding before the baggage wains,
four dark-skinned Moors, mounted on prancing
nags, led each man of them, a steed black as
night at his bridle rein. Untamed they were
and wild, their eyes gave forth a gleam like the
light of the fire-coal, their necks were proudly
arched, their manes flung waving to the breeze,
while with a disdainful toss of their quivering
nostrils, and a light and springing step, the barbs
trode the earth as gallantly as though they still
swept over the desert plains of Araby.
Linked with the chain of this wierd
chronicle
,
by a strange decree of Fate, these barbs, in
the course of a few brief days, became the
Instruments
of the fearful vengeance of Heaven
.
Damian, said the stalwart knight, as
glancing
over the long line of men-at-arms, he gazed
upon the Arab steeds,How the eye of Lord
Julian will glisten when he gazes upon yonder
rearing barbs! I' faith it makes an old warrior's
heart beat, to look upon their arching crests, their
eyes of fire, and their skins, black as death!
A Paynim warrior gave these steeds in
ransom
for his freedom? Is that the story Sir
Geoffrey
?
asked Halbert, Infidel though he was,
he gave a most princely ransom.
Hast ever heard the strange legend which
the Arabs tell, concerning this race of steeds?
They prize them, highly as their weight in good,
red gold. It is said that in the olden time, when
Arimanes was hurled from his throne of Evil, by
the Great Being of Good, the spirits of his
followers
,
accursed and doomed, sought refuge in the
bodies of a race of ebon-colored barbs, that
scoured
the plains of Araby with the fleetness of the
wind, herding together in the vast solitudes of the
desert, and untameable by man. At last, after a
long lapse of centuries, the most daring of the
Arab-chiefs, secured and subjugated to the control
of man, two of these wild horses, from which
sprung the mighty race of the Barbs of Arimanes,
or Demon-Steeds. Yonder steeds, prancing and
rearing in the grasp of the tawny Moors, are of
this race. By my soul, their flashing eyes, give
them some title to the name they bearthe Barbs
of Arimanes!
It joys a warrior's heart to look upon their
sinewy forms, exclaimed the Esquire Halbert,
with a flashing eye.
They are slender and graceful as the wild
gazelle, said Damian, and yet your stout
warhorse
of the north, bears not fatigue or toil, with
a better grace!
Damian, said the stalwart knight, Damian,
art thou not sorrowed at the thought of leaving the
Holy Landthe glorious scene of so many hard
fought frays? I trow, we will all wish to be
again in the midst of the gallant mellay; shall we
not pine for the rugged encounter with the
Paynim
host
!
What sayst thou, Halbert?
He that leaves so brave a battle plain, as is
the Land of the Holy Sepulchre, without a sigh
of regret, is unworthy of the lay of minstrel, or
love of lady. For my part I would all these
truces were at the devil!
I say amen to thy prayer, good brother.
Well, well, we shall soon reach the castle Di
Albarone, we shall behold our brave leader the
gallant Count Julian. By the body of God, it
stirs one's blood to think of his charge, that ever
mowed down the Paynim ranks as though a
thunderbolt
had smote them! St. George! but I have
seen glorious days.
By 'r Lady, but I have a sneaking fear that
the wound of the Count may prove fatal.
Fatal? shouted Sir Geoffrey, in a voice of
thunder. Fatal? Say it not again, Halbert!
Fatal, indeed! By my troth, Lord Julian Di
Albarone
,
shall again lead
armies
to battle.
I wonder, said Damian, I wonder if that
skulking half brother of the Count, still lives? I
mean, he who accompanied the Lord Julian to the
Holy Lond, some score of years since. How was
he styled? eh, Halbert?
Aldarin, I think they called him. Sir Geoffrey,
hadst not a quarrel with the bookworm? Didst
not strike him before the Count at Jerusalem, in
the presence of all the princes of Christendom?
Tush, a mere trifle! I mind it no more than
I would the spurning of a peevish cur. But see!
What have we here? Two wayfarers. Ha! one
seems like a disbanded soldier! Spur forward,
my merry men! They may tell us of our
whereabouts
:
they may give us some news of Albarone
Spur forward!
CHAPTER THE SEVENTH.
THE STUDENT AND THE FAIR
STRANGER.
The bell of the convent of St. Benedict struck
the hour of noon, when a young man, attired after
the manner of a student, or Neophyte of the
monastic
order, was slowly wending his way along
the path that led to the cottage on the hill, while
on his arm there hung a youth of calm, mild
features
,
shaded by light locks of golden hair, and of
a slender, yet graceful figure.
Tall, sinewy, and well-proportioned in form, the
face of the student was marked by features bold
and decisive in their expression; his blue eye was
full of thought, and his forehead, high and
massive
,
shaded by the cap of velvet, gave the idea of
a mind powerful, energetic, and formed to rule
His hair fell in clustering locks of gold down over
his neck and shoulders; his plain tunic of dark
velvet descended to his knees, revealing a doublet
of like material and color worn underneath, fitting
closely to his manly form; while his throat was
enveloped by a simple collar of snow-white lace.
His companion wore a neat doublet of light
blue, fitting close around the neck, scarce
allowing
the pretty ruffle that circled the fair throat to
be seen, and reaching half way down the leg, it
was gathered around the slender waist by a girdle
of plain doe skin. His light hair was covered by
a hat, with the rim drawn up to the crown on one
side, and slouching upon the other, while it was
topped by delicate white plumes, fastened by a
diamond broach.
Winding amid the fragrant shrubbery that
enclosed
the path, the student and his companion
attained
the top of the hill, and passing through the
small garden, they presently stood before the neat
cottage, which, shadowed by a spreading beach on
one side, meeting the foliage of a leafy chesnut
on the other, was overrun in front by a spicy vine,
that clomb over the timbers of the doorway, and
twined round the solitary casement, the broad
green leaves quivering in the beams of the sun,
and the trumpet-shaped flowers swinging to and
fro in the wooing air.
The student tapped at the door. It was opened
by a woman somewhat advanced in life, attired in
the dress of a peasant, yet with a cross of chony
strung from her neck. Her look was somewhat
severe and stern, her demeanour was
commanding
,
and her figure still retained some remains of
youthful beauty.
She started as she opened the door, and an
unfinished
word burst from her lips.
Ah! Adrtush! Leone, I meanthou art
early home to-day, my son.
Mother, said the student, this is my fellow
scholar Florian, son to the Baron Diarmo of
Florence
.
In yonder convent we pursue our studies
side by side, in one apartment. An hour since,
as we strolled through the gardens adjoining the
convent, my friend missed his footing, and
severely
bruised his ancle. Our home being nearer
than the convent, I thought I could not do better
than bring him hither. I need not commend him
to thy care.
Thou art welcome, fair sir, the dame replied,
with a kindly smile. Enter our abode; 'tis
humble, yet 'tis sacred, for the bounty of the
convent
bestows it upon my son and me, while he is
preparing for the priesthood. Come in, gentle
Florian.
They entered the cottage, and the door was
closed.
No sooner had they disappeared than
something
rustled in the bushes, and the bow-legged
postillion, Francisco, emerged into the light.
Ohho! he cried, here's a mystery. The
convent allow old Mistress Vinegar-face to reside
on their land, in their cottage, while her son is
preparing for the priesthood! A likely story, by'r
our lady! I see it all'tis as I supposethese
two striplings are those for whom such an immense
reward has been offered in the neighboring towns
and villages. Will not gold line my pouch as well
as any other wight'seh? Via! Francisco!
Postillion no longer, but henceforth Signior
Francisco
!
Via!
Thus saying, he walked away with folded arms
and a gigantic stride; and as he stalked away,
the tall Dollabella, the red-haired Theresa, and
black-eyed Loretta appeared from the bushes on
the other side of the cot, and, bursting into a loud
laugh, they tripped after the swelling postillion.
Meanwhile, within the cot, resting on a
cushioned
seat, the gentle Florian submitted his foot
to the hands of the dame, who drew off the shoe
and stocking, and applied ointment to the bruise;
remarking, at the same time, that the foot was
one of the smallest, and the ancle one of the
prettiest
in the wide world.
The student glanced at Florian, and smiled.
Mother, said he, I must away to the convent.
Methinks it were better for gentle Florian to rest
him here awhile. I will return anon, and
accompany
my fellow scholar along the shores of the
lake to the monastery.
He kissed the cheek of the fair boy, and
departed
.
Looking up into the rosy face, and catching
the glance of the bright blue eye of the modest
youth, the dame exclaimed, as she finished the
dressing of the wound:
Fair sir, if it please thee to grace our humble
tenement with thy presence for the night, thou
canst share the bed of my son. Methinks it were
best for thee not to stir hence until the morrow.
I thank thee, kind lady, the youth began, in
a voice sweet as infancy.
Lady
, say'st thou? I am but a peasant
woman
.
Florian blushed.
Nay, pardon meI meant no offence.
Indeed
,
it seemed
The youth paused, while the blush deepened on
his cheek.
Never heed it, fair sir. This way is Leon's
room. Mayhap thou wouldst like to repose thee
awhile.
Florian followed her into a small apartment,
with a window toward the east, a neat bed in one
corner, a crucifix on the mantle, and a table, on
which lay a missal of devotion. The dame
retired
.
Florian stole noiselessly to the door, and
drew the bolt. Then seating himself upon the
bed, he covered his face with his hands, and the
tears stole between the fair fingers fast and bright,
like drops of sunlit rain.
CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.
THE CASTLE GATE.
THE GROUP CLUSTERED BESIDE THE
CASTLE-GATE
ARE STARTLED BY THE PEAL
OF A STRANGE TRUMPET.
Well-a-day! It's a sad thing to dwell in this
lonely place, now that all of the ancient house are
dead and gone!
`
Dead and gone
,' sir huntsman! Where
didst learn to shape thy words? The Count
Aldarin
lives!
By my troth, he does, good Balvardo; and a
right quiet time we peaceful folks have had for a
day or so past. Here have we no boisterous
merriment
,
no sound of your squeaking pipe or
tabret
awakes the silence of these walls, no runlets of
wine flow in the beakers of the banquet hall. All
is quiet and still. Thanks to Our Lady for't!
Such quiet and such stillness, i'faith! Why,
man, you cannot walk along the solitary corridors
of the castle, without trembling at your own
starved shadow. Didst ever see a place swept by
the plagueall its living folk carried to the
grave-yard
,
leaving old Death to take care of deserted
chamber and lonely hall? Look around the
court-yard
of Albarone, and ask your heartif heart
you havewhether a plague has not swept this
place? The saints defend me! it chills my soul
to look upon these lonesome walls!
And Ilook ye, gossipsI, Griselden,
tire-woman
of my Ladye Annabel, have never,
damosel
or dame, for two score long yearsI am two
score and six years, come next Mass o' Christ,
not an hour more, i'faithI have never, for two
score long years, felt so dead in heart as I do
now! In my Ladye's bower lie her garments of
price: the tunic of blue and gold which she wore
in her happy days, the white plume that once
drooped over her fair brow, the snow-white bridal
dressall, all are there! But where is my Ladye
Annabel? Grammercy, but these are doleful
days!
Blood o' th' Turk! Tell me, good folk, are
ye paid to howl in chorus? Hugo, didst ever
hear such growling?
Faith, they do growl somewhat like a herd of
untamed bears! Yet, Balvardo, bethink thee
there's reason for't. W-h-e-w! When I think
of the queer things that have chanced within these
few days, I might wonder, I might growl; yes,
Balvardo, I might growl, I might wonder!
Here, for three long days, since my lord of
Florence left the castle, have we seen no sight of
the Count Aldarin, exclaimed the huntsman.
Mayhap he has buried himself alivemayhap
he has gone up to heaven, or more likely he has
gone to's life, what a stitch in my side!
Softly, softly, sir huntsman, softly! Wise
folk speak not lightly of the Count Aldarin. The
rope on yonder gibbet swings loosely in the
summer
windthy neck may be the first to stretch
its fibres!
Blood o' th' Turk, yet it does seem queer when
one comes to think of it! Not three days ago, it
was nothing but `saddle me your horses, scour
every road, bring back the traitor Guiseppo, and
hew off his caitiff head!
Now
blood o' th'
Turk, it puzzles me!
Now
, sir Balvardo, the word is: `Pay all
respect
to Guiseppo; honor the youth as myself
he is dear to me in blood, dear to me in heart,
honor Guiseppo, he rules the castle in my
absence
.
Sancta Maria! cried the ancient tire-woman.
Tell me, gossip, tell me, sir huntsman, how
came this about?
Not two nights agone, there enters the castle
gate a wandering palmer, clad in rags. Not
satisfied
with asking alms at the hall door, he must
wander along the corridors of the castle, and prowl
around the door of the cell where the damsel
Rosalind
is imprisoned. My Count Aldarin's
suspicions
are roused: he flings the beggar's robes from
the palmer's face, and we all behold thetrim
page Guiseppo!
Wonder of all wonders! Now, I'll never be
astonished again in all my life!
Not even if any one should chance to believe
the story of thy age, which thou art wont to tell!
Hugo, look at gossip tire-woman, how her eyes
are dropping from their sockets!
There stood the page Guiseppothere stood
the Count Aldarin! Nice groupeh? Axes
and gibbets were the mildest things in our
thoughts, when my lord takes the page by the
hand, smiles kindly, and leads him away. An
hour passes: the supper is spread in the banquet
hall: my Lord Aldarin appears, and with him
comes Guiseppo, clad in garments of cost
And then comes the word: `Pay Sir Guiseppo
all respecthonor him as myself.' Is't not so
good gossip?
By my huntsman's word, it is even so! Now
tell me, sir sentinels, waiting at the castle gate,
while the Count Aldarin is buried in the depths of
the earth, sir Hugo and Balvardo, sir steward and
dame Griseldea, all of ye servitors of Albarone, is
not this matter enough for a nine day's wonder?
By'r our Lady, I never heard the like!
Blood o' th' Turk, 'tis wonderful!
W-h-e-w! 'Tis passing strange!
HistHugo! What sound is that? 'Tis
like the tramp of war steeds!
Hark! The peal of a trumpet! This is
wondrous!
And for a single moment the strangely
contrasted
group gathered at the castle gate, in the mild
evening hour, stood motionless as statues, with the
right of the setting sun falling over each face and
figure. There was Hugo, with his vacant face
and sinister eye, clad like his comrade, Balvardo
of the beetle brow, in glittering armor of Milan
steel, each standing breast to breast, as, with pikes
half raised, they listened to the trumpet peal
swelling
from the distance; there was the bluff
huntsman
of the castle, his rugged visage affording a
striking contrast to the sharp features of the
ancient
steward, and the thin, withered countenance
of the tire-woman, standing on either side, while
all around were clustered the servitors of Albarone,
their gay liveries flashing in the light of the
setting
sun.
Hark, Balvardo! The trumpet peal swells
louder. I hear the trampling of an hundred
steeds. Up, up to the tower of the castle gate,
and tell us what is to be seen!
Balvardo hastily disappeared, and while the
group clustered round the lofty pillar awaited the
result of his observations with the utmost suspense,
ascended to the tower by a staircase built in the
massive wall.
What dost see, comrade? shouted Hugo
The trumpet peal grows louder, and I hear the
tramp of war steeds pattering along the road to
the castle gate. What dost see, Balvardo?
I see a strange sight, i'faith! Horsemen
issue
from the shadow of the wood toward Florence
horsemen arrayed in strange robes, black as
night. I count one, two, three,by my life,
there's thirteen o' them, all mounted on
cream-colored
steeds!
Are they men-at-arms? Bear they a pennon
at their head?
Blood o' th' Turk, I see no men-at-arms!
They are clad in long robes, that fall sweeping
almost
to the very ground. Their robes are black
as the death-pall, yet are they faced with a goodly
border of glittering gold. Now the wind sweeps
the robe of the foremost horseman aside. By my
sword, he is clad in the attire of a paynim dog!
Loose, flowing garments, with a belt of curious
embroidery, while a dark turban surmounts his
swarthy form.
Ride they toward the castle?
They ride forward two abreast; the tall figure
rides at their head. Tramp, trampGod send
they be not wizards in disguise! A new wonder,
comrade, one of the party spurs his
cream-colored
barb to the fronthe is speeding toward the
astle gate! Blood o' th' Turk, he holds a
trumpet
in his grasp!
A trumpet, Balvardo? This should be the
herald of the companie.
He rides up the hill, he reins his steed on the
very edge of the moat. Hark, how his trumpet
peals!
And while the shrill and piercing sound of the
trumpet broke on the air, the group listening
beside
the castle gate were startled by the sound of
a measured footstep. With one start they turned
in the direction of the sound, and beheld the
person
of the new comer. He was a young cavalier,
with a smooth face, unvisited by beard, yet
stamped
with the marks of premature and sudden
experience
,
while his slender form, clad in a jewelled
doublet, was half hidden by the folds of a
sweeping
robe of purple, that fell from his shoulders,
varied
by a border of snow-white ermine.
It is
him
the page Guiseppo, murmured the
huntsman. Mark ye, how changed he looks!
His arms folded, and his merry face clad in a
frown. Well-a-day! The world is all bewitched,
or I'm no sinful man!
The page Guiseppo, whispered the
shrillvoiced
steward. Know ye not his new title?
`My Lord Guiseppo, Baron of Masserio'nephew
of the Count Aldarin. Masserio is the name of
one of the smaller baronies annexed by my lord of
Florence to the domains of Albarone. 'Tis said
'twas confiscated to the state, because its master
meddled with the strange Order of the Steel, whose
fame has been in our ear for these four months
past.
Sir sentinel, canst tell me what means this
peal of trumpet, this clamor at the gates of
Albarone
?
As Guiseppo advanced and spoke, every one in
the group was impressed to the very heart with
the change that had so lately passed over the
appearance
and manner of the page. A score of
years could not have added more solemnity to his
visage, or given a more deep-toned sternness to
his voice.
In a moment the Lord Guisepposuch is now
his titlewas possessed of the cause of the clamor
at the castle-gate, and was about to speak, when
the trumpet peal ceased, and the clear bold voice
of the herald, broke upon the air.
Peace to the Lord Julian of Albarone! My
master salutes the gallant knight and craves
entrance
into the shelter of his lordly castle! Peace
to the Lord Julian of Albarone!
Be thy master, the Paynim, Mahound himself,
or the Devil his fatherrang out the hoarse tones
of Balvardo, from the tower aboveHe is a few
days behind old Death in his salutation. Lord
Julian of Albarone sleeps in the Charnel-House!
Then Sir Warder of the castle-gate, by thy
soldierly courtesy, I pray thee inform medoth
his brother, the Scholar Aldarin yet live?
The
Count Aldarin
reigns
Lord of Albarone!
'
Then I pray thee, bear the salutation of my
master to the Count Aldarin, and with his
greeting
bear this scroll!
'S lifehere's a net for a man to tangle his
feet with! the group below heard the growling
words break from BalvardoMy Lord
Guiseppo
he
exclaimed aloud, looking from the window
of the towerWhat answer shall I make to this
Wizard Herald of yon Paynim band!
A sudden contortion passed over the features of
Guiseppo, he raised his hand wildly to his brow,
and trembled as he stood beside the castle-gate.
The spasm-like expression that passed over his
face, was scarce human in its meaning, and the
spectators started back with a sudden fear. There
are times, when the soul is shaken to its centre
by the fierce war of contending emotions, when
the heart struggles with the brain, while the reason
totters, and the intellect reels on its throne. A
contest wild as this, seemed warring between the
heart and brain of Guiseppo, the new created Lord
of Masserio.
One moment, good BalvardoHugo, I am faint
some wine, I prithee!
Hugo offered his arm to the tottering Guiseppo,
and in a moment the Lord of Masserio, found
himself sitting on a rough bench of stone, within
the confines of the lower chamber of the
Warder's
Tower, while Hugo stood motionless before
him, holding the brimming goblet of wine.
Thanks, good Hugoretire a moment, and I
will be my own man againlet me think, he
muttered
in a half-whisper as the Sentinel retired
Its like a dreamand yet the reality presses on
my brain likelead! I feel no joy in my
lordship
.
Three little daysSaints of Heaven
behold
the change! Three days ago, a poor Page,
journeyed with a band of gallant soldiers! He
disappeared, no one save himself knew whither.
He came to this castle in his Palmer's rags and
perilled his life to rescue his Ladye love. He was
discoveredhe already beheld the object of omen,
held above his headhe expected the axeand
Sincta Maria! A coronet fell glittering at his feet.
His
son
his
son! Great God how dark the
mystery
!
My brain whirlsthe wine, ha, hathe
wine.
Sir Sentinelarose the voice of the Herald
withoutWilt thou bear this scroll to the Lord
Aldarin?
And
she
is yet imprisoned!
He
my father!
As God lives I'm bound to stand by him to the
death! Robin's storyis it, is it true? The dark
hints of the men at-arms, with their leader Sir
Geoffry
might
not this trumpet peal serve to unvarel
their meaning? The wine gives me nervemy
brain whirls no more. And Adrian and Annabel
must I desert their cause? Methinks I feel my
heart strings crack, at the very word! And
he
is
my father;
he
loads me with favors, burdens me with
kindnessthe half crazed Guiseppo looked around
the confined chamber with a fixed and steady eye
I will stand by my father Aldarin to the
death!
Sir Warden, this delay is far from courteous
For the last time, wilt thou bear the scroll!
Let the men-at-arms be ranged, along the
castle
gatespoke the determined voice of Lord
Guiseppo, as with a steady step and unfaltering
manner he issued from the lower chamber of the
Warden's TowerCall the men-at-arms of his
Grace of Florence, now loitering in the halls of
the castle, call the vassals of Albarone, silently
yet hastily hither! Away Hugoand thou Sir
Huntsman! Let it be done without delay.
Balvardo
mark
ye, when I give the word let the
drawbridge be lowered and the portcullis raised.
We shall see what manner of men are these
strangers
the
Lord Aldarin shall judge them by their
scroll!
CHAPTER THE NINTH.
ALDARIN AND HIS FUTURE.
The beams of the declining day, glanced gaily
thro' the arched windows of the Red-chamber,
and the Count Aldarin paced with a hurried step
across the marble floor, and his chest rose and fell,
and his cheek flushed and paled, and now his
voice was choked by rage, and again it was clear
and deep-toned with hate.
Baffled! and by whom? my own child. I have
laid schemesI have planned, I have plotted, and
all for Annabelmy daughter. And she returns
mecontempt and scorn. If, within the bowels
of the earth, there is a place of torture, a
boundless, illimitable and ever burning hell
if within the fire of the stars, there is written
a Doom for the Damned, then to the very hell of
hell, then to the very Doom of the Damned, have
I sold myself, and all for thee, my daughter!
What! a tear?Shall I play the woman?No
I will brace me up!I will show the world the
power of one who hates the whole accursed
race!There was a time when I could weep, aye
and talk of feeling and prate of the tenderness of
humanity with any of them!They gave me
scorn, they heaped insult upon me!
He looked around as tho' he would compass the
whole human race with his glance, and an
expression
of demoniac hate came over his features
while he whispered between his clenched teeth.
Have I paid the debt?
Ha! ha! Let those who
wronged me answer.
Have I paid the debt?
The
man never lived who struck the meek Scholar and
saw another sun. Not one! not one!Nay there
was one. He scorned me before the Princes of
Christendomit was at JerusalemI gave him
scorn for scornwith his mailed hand he
struck me to the floor! I swore revengethe
steel was false, the dagger failed, but on his life
and heart have I wreaked vengeance, such as
man never wreaked before! The revenge of
Aldarin
must not be fed with the blood of his foe? No
by the fiendno! But with the very life drops
of his soul! My victim fights for the glory of
Albarone
.
Little wot's he, who now doth rule the
ancient house.Miserable fool, he toils and wars
far in Palestinehe toilshe wars for
me! Me!
his ancient, his sworn and unrelenting foe!
Ha!
whence is that noise? Ha! ha! Surely it is not
a groan from yon couch?
Pausing for a moment, he eagerly listened, and
again he spoke.
Let me gather my thoughts. Let me nerve
my soul for the trial of this night. The stake
I hold in my hand is a fearful onethe hand
that would grasp the very secrets of the grave, the
weird mysteries of Old Death, should never
tremble.
He paced the floor yet more hurriedly, and was
silent for a few moments.
It is the very night!
he exclaimed, after a
pause of intense thought.
The grand problem upon
which I have bestowed my youthmy mindmy
soulmy allwill soon be solved. This very
night completes the thrice seven years. For
thrice seven years has the beechen flame burned
beneath
the alembic, in my laboratory, in war,
in difficulty, in danger, and in death, has the
azure flame still burned on with undying lustre.
Unbounded wealth is mine!
Immortal life
.
In after-time, when long, long centuries have
passed away, men will speak of the glory, the
mysteryand perchance the crime, that encircled
the life of Aldarin the Scholar! And as the cheek
of the listener grows pale, IIwill be there, a
listener to the story of my own fate! Aldarin will
be there, but oh, how changed! Aldarin, no longer
weak, trembling, bent with agebut Aldarin,
young and mighty, with the signet of eternal youth
and might stamped upon his unfading brow!
Gold, gold, the talisman that rules the sould of
man, gold that buys wisdom from the sage, hope
from the priest, life from the leech, honour from
the mighty, and virtue from woman, gold will be
mine!
How strange has been the course of my life!
Let me gaze backward over the dark path I have
troddenthis night thrice seven long yearsamid
the gloom of the Syrian battle plain, a dark eyed
Arabian gave me in ransom for his life, the mighty
book of his race, which he dared not read! And
there in that lone hour, as midnight gathered over
the corses of the dead, did he sware by the
Eternal
Flame of the Fire-worshipper, that in body or
in soul, he would be with my heart, and by my
side this very night! The mighty book spoke in
words of fire of the secretthe glorious secret, and
andby my soul I have heard no message from
the Arab Prince for three long years! He
cannot
,
will not fail me now!
The door of the Red-Chamber was flung
suddenly
open, and the Lord Guiseppo hastily
advanced
,
with an expression of deep gloom stamped
on his brow. He held a scroll of parchment in his
extended hand.
Ha! My Lord Guiseppo son of mine. I greet
thee! Hast thou any message for me?
A strange man clad in Paynim costume,
attended
by a train of twelve, attired strangely as
himself
,
wait at the castle gate. He sends his greeting
and this simple scroll.
A strange man clad in Paynim costume
murmured Aldarin in a whispering toneA
scroll! Give it me, GuiseppoHa! What words
are these
Ibrahim-Ben-Malakim salutes his
brother
,
Aldarin the Scholar!
A warm flush like the glow of sunshine passed
over the face of Aldarin, his eye gleamed and
brightened until it seemed burning its very
socket
,
and the Scholar stood for a moment silent and
motionless.
Guiseppo! he shouted in a voice of thunder
as he turned towards the youthful LordAway,
away, to the castle gate and answer the giver of
this scroll with the wordsAldarin greets his
brother Ibrahim!
And then my Lord Aldarin
Lead the stranger to my presence!
And while Guiseppo turned to obey the behest
of the Scholar, the Count Aldarin, strode with a
hurried step along the floor of the Red Chamber,
with his arms folded and his head drooped low
upon his breast. There was a long pause of
absorbing
thought.
He comeshe comes, with the last scroll of
the Magic-Book! He comes with the Charm,
which in the hands of Aldarin shall wake the dead!
When the last scroll is read, when the last
charm is spoken, then, then, Aldarin lives forever!
And Ibrahimha, ha, 'twere but fair that the
blood of the Priest, who first awoke this mighty
thought within my bosom, should mingle with
the blood of the victims, slain at the shrine of the
Mighty Thought!
A dark and meaning smile passed over the lip
of Aldarin, and again he communed with his own
thoughts. A foostep sounded thro' the
ante-chamber
;
in a moment the tall and majestic stranger
stood before the Scholar.
Ibrahim gives peace and joy to Aldarin!
Peace and joy to Ibrahim-Ben-Malakim!,
As thus they saluted each other, in the Arabian
tongue, the native language of the one, and the
familiar
study of the other, Aldarin advanced and
gazed upon the stranger.
His face was most impressive. Regular in
feature
,
dark and tawny in hue, the countenance of
the stranger was marked by a high forehead,
thick and bushy eye-brows white as snow, giving
a strange effect to the glance of the full dark eyes,
that looked forth from beneath their shadow, a
compressed lip, half hidden by the venerable beard,
that well-nigh covered his rounded chin and
dark brown cheeks, descending to his breast
in waving locks, frosted by age and toil, while a
cap of sable fur surmounting his forehead,
imparted
a striking relief to the visage of the Arabian.
His attire was simple and majestic. A mantle
or robe of black cloth, gathered around the throat,
by a chain of gold, with a collar of snow-white fur,
fell in long folds to his knees, bordered by lace
of gold. As the robe waved suddenly aside from
his commanding frame, it might be seen that the
tunic which gathered around his form, was
fashioned of the finest velvet, glistening white in
color, with a border of strange and mystic
characters
,
while his legs were encased in dark hose,
and slouching boots of costly doe-skin, glittering
with the knightly spur of gold.
Thou art changed, Ibrahim!
And
thou
Aldarin!
There was a long pause, while the Scholar and
the Arab Prince perused each others features.
When they again spoke it was in the rich
Arabian
tongue, each word a word of fire, each
sentence
a sentence of wild enthusiasm.
Twenty-one years, this very night, on the
battle-plain
amid the Syrian wilds, an Arab prince
owed his life to the intercession of Aldarin the
Scholar. He offered the Scholar gold for his
ransom
the
scholar refused the proffered dust.
Speak I the truth, Aldarin?
Thou dost!
Struck by the noble nature of the thoughtful
Italian, the Arab prince gave him a gift priceless
in value, not to be bought with gold, or purchased
with gems of price! A Book a mighty book
had descended to him, thro' a long line of gallant
ancestors. The founder of the race of Ibrahim was a
man of dark thoughts, and mysterious studies.
Swept from the path of life in the midst of his
mystic
researches, he left the mighty book to his
children
,
with the last and most terrible Mystery, the
final Charm, which gave importance to the whole
volume, confided to their trust, in oral words
These words thou wouldst speak to mine own
ear and heart?
Even so, brother Aldarin! When I gave
thee the Mighty Book, fraught with strange
mysteries
,
an oath, a fearful oath, sworn by each heir
of the race of Ben-malakim, bound me to keep
the last words, which make the book complete
secret from thine ear, until I was assured thou
hadst won the merit of the confidence.
Thou didst swear by the Eternal Flame, thou
wouldst meet me this very night, in the soul or
in the body, living or dead!
I am here! The far-east rings with the fame
of Aldarin the Scholarthe last secret is thine!
This night, at the hour of midnight, over the
Altar of Marble, where the Heart of the Dead
mingles its crimson-drops with the White Waters
of the Alembic, there, there will I crave the last
Secret at thy hands!
There is one condition first.
Name it!
Lo! it is written in the Scroll which contains
the Mighty Secret. The Prince of Ben-Malakim
must be a spectator in the lone chamber where
the SECRET is carried into action, he must
command
in the Halls of the Scholar, who may
receive
the mystery, while the solemn ceremonies
named by the Book, are in progress.
The condition is strangeyet
So read the words of the Book!
Its behests shall be obeyed.
Then mighty Scholar, let the twelve warriors
who follow in my train, take the place of the
sentinels
at the castle-gate, let them command in the
castle-hall, and be obeyed as thyself until the
morrow
morn!
It shall be done! And now, my brother,
draw near to the casement, let the warm glow of
the setting sun fall over thy features! I would
look upon thy face, as was my wont in the
ancient
time. By my soul thou art sadly changed
fearful wrinkles traverse thy countenance, thy
hair and beard are grey, thine eyebrows white! A
sad and fearful change!
The touch of time falls heaviest on the man
of thought, good Aldarin. Thou too, art sadly,
fearfully changed!
And yet this night shall crown the toil of
twenty-one years, with a boon almost beyond
mortal
hope! Yesyes, he continued in a deep
whisper
,
as the full glow of the setting sun fell over
his faceThe sun sinks down in glory, his
beams fall over the form of the mortal Scholar
Lo! his beams gild the sky on the morrow
morn andhow my nerves fire, my heart is full
to bursting
Aldarin lives forever
!
CHAPTER THE TENTH.
THE SCHOLAR ALDARIN AND THE
LORD GUISEPPO.
THE LAST INTERVIEW BEFORE THE
GRAND SCENE, FOR WHICH ALDARIN
HAS TOILED, STRUGGLED AND
ENDURED FOR THRICE
SEVEN YEARS.
Come hither Guiseppo, son of mine, let me
look upon thy face. Ah! I remember wellher
countenance lives again in thine Boy, walk by
my side, along this solitary chamber; I would
converse
with thee. Hast thou not oftentimes
thought me a dark and stern old man?
My Lord, I have. The story of the soldier,
Rough Robin
Name not the slave! Name him not. Have
I not scattered his fable of lies to the winds? Art
not satisfied with the guilt of thisAdrian?
Speak Guiseppohave I not told thee a fair and
open story?
I fear meoh! Saints of HeavenI fear me
that thy story is true!
Thou
fearest
that my story is true! Is this
well Guiseppo? Wouldst rather thy
father
had
been guilty!
My Lord
`
My father
' would sound as well.
My father, then; an' I may speak the name;
I thank God from my very heart that I know thee
guiltless. Yet I had much ratherthe Saints
witness my truthI had much rather this spot of
blood were washed from the garments of all who
bear the name of Albarone.
And do I not join in the wish! oh Guiseppo
Guiseppo Di Albarone, for I will call thee by thine
own true namelook upon me, mark my face,
gaze in mine eye! Thou hast known me for
years, a man prematurely old, bent with age ere
the sands of my manhood's prime had fallen in
the glass. Thus hast thou known me
Guiseppo
.
I have my Lord,my father, and wondered
at the cause.
Yet hast thou ever noted the change, the
fearful change, that has passed over this face
within a few brief days? Dost mark the pallor
of this cheek, the blaze of this eye? Dost see
this forehead seamed by a single wrinkle between
the brows, dost note these wan and wasted
features
?
Yes, yes my father, I do. What hath wrought
this fearful change?
Canst thou ask? A mighty grief has been
swelling the channels of my soulgrief for the
crime of Adrian
, grief that
his
hands, the hands
of the son, should be redred with his own
father's
blood! and yet, even in this hour of agony,
the resemblance, the sad resemblance, that has
haunted me for years, comes back to my soul
The resemblance, my father?
Boy, I tell thee, thy face is like
her
face!
Even now I see it!
Her face?
The face of thy mother!
I tremble my father, mine eyes are wet with
burning tears. Tell meoh, tell me of
her
my
mother!
Twenty years ago, a nameless Scholar, who
disdaining the din and battle of war, gave his soul
to higher and purer thoughts, won the love of a
proud and peerless Ladye. They might not wed,
for she was the scion of a Royal line. It was
evening
,
boy, calm and gorgeous eveningwell do I
remember the scenewhen the proud Ladye
gazed
from the portico of a kingly palace, over the
temples and the towers of Jerusalem. The glow of
sunset was streaming over her face of beauty, and
her full dark eyes, kindled with the grandeur of
the scene, when, when,listen Guiseppo,her
boy, her laughing boy, lay prattling on her knee.
The Scholar stood by her sidehe was silent, for
his heart was fulloh, God! methinks I see
myself
as I was then, even through the long lapse
of years
Thyself? The boy, who was'tthe boy?
Listen, hear the sequel of this dark story.
There, there, concealed by a column of that lofty
portico, listening to the words of love that broke
murmuringly from the lips of the Ladye, gazing
upon the face of her bright-eyed boy, all smiles
and laughter, there, unknown and unsuspected,
stood the Fiend and the Destroyer. Guiseppo
pass thy hand over my browsee, see, even after
the lapse of twenty years, the cold, beaded drops,
like death-sweat, stand out from my forehead at
the memory.
I am breathless, my fatherthe Destroyer
who stood listeninghe was
Guiseppo, Guiseppo, let me whisper a world
of horror to thine ear in a single word. The light
of the setting sun, fell over thythy mother's
face, proud, peerless and beautifulher child
prattling
on her knee, her lover by her sidethe first
beams of the morrow's sun beheld her form, her
form of grace and loveliness, flung prostrate over
the marble floor of her chamber
outraged,
bleeding
,
dead
.
Oh, God! my brain whirls! And the
Destroyer
?
Was a knight, a leader among the Princes
of the Christian Host who won Jerusalem from
the Paynim legions. He had been scorned,
rejected
,
despised by the Ladyethy motherand
behold,oh fiends of hellbehold his
vengence
!
His name? Whowhoswept this devil
from the earth?
He lives!
Lives?
and thou couldst wield a dagger!
Boy wouldst thou wreak full and terrible
vengeance on the ravisher of thy mother?
Sate he upon the throne, slept he within the
bridal chamber, knelt he at the altar, I would have
his blood!
To thy knees, to thy knees, and take the
oath of vengeance.
I kneel, father, I kneel. The oath, the oath!
What manner of oath dost thou hold most
sacred? Wilt swear by the Cross, by the Holy
Trinity, by the Death of the Incarnate, or by the
awful existence of God?
By my mother's name
!
Place the cross to thy lips, raise thy hands to
heaven. Swearby the Holy Cross, by the
Awful Trinity, by the Incarnate Godby thy
Mother's Name, that when thy eye first beholds
the wronger and the ravisher, then, then shall
thy dagger seek his heart.
I swearI swear!
Though he sate on the throne, though he
slept within the bridal chamber, though he knelt
beside the altar!
I swearI swear!
And the hollow echoes of the Red-Chamber
gave back the echoSwearswear! It was
in sooth a strange and impressive scene. The
dim light afforded by the lamp of silver, pendent
from the ceiling, flung over the hangings of the
fated bed, along the folds of the tapestry and
around the massive furniture of the roomthe
figures of the scene, the aged man and the
kneeling
boy, Aldarin with his face agitated by
contending
passions, with his eye gathering a
brightness
that seemed supernatural, while Guiseppo half
prostrate at his feet, raised his hands to Heaven and
with every feature of his countenance darkened
by revenge, looked above with flashing eyes as he
uttered the responseI swearI swear! It
was a strange and impressive sceneand the
flitting
shadows that fell wavering over the
hangings
of the bed and along the floor, seemed to
start into life at the deep earnest tones of the
Avenger.
The name of the Destroyermy fatherhis
namehis name!
The Count Aldarin stooped low, and whispered
in a quick and hissing tone the name of the
Destroyer
,
to the ear of Guiseppo. The kneeling
Lord turned pale as death, as with a trembling
voice he repeated the well known name. He
bowed his head on his breast and clasped his hands
in very agony.
My fate, he shrieked, is darkoh God of
Heaven, most dark!
Rise Guiseppo, my son, shouted the Count
Aldarin in a commanding tone. Rise Guiseppo,
Lord of Albarone!
My fatheryour look is serious, and yet you
utter but a merry jest. Methinks it ill becomes
the hour.
Guiseppo, Aldarin never deals in that buffoon's
playthinga jest. Nono my son, I jest not.
Listen Guiseppo, and hear the solemn
determination
of my soul. The events of these few brief
days, the fearful death of my brother, the
knowledge
that THE SON was the MURDERER, the flight
of mymy daughter, all have conspired to
confirm
that determination. I have resolved to retire
and retire forever from the world. Not within
the gloom of the monastery, not within the
shadow
of the cloister, does Aldarin seek refuge from
the sorrows of the world. Nono. Within the
recess of the most secret chamber of the Castle,
dead to the world, unseen by living man, save
thee Guiseppo, companioned by those Holy Men
who this very night, arrived at Albarone, from the
far eastern lands, in penitence and in prayer will
Aldarin seek to win favor from heaven for this
thiswretch, this father-murderer. GuiseppoI
charge theelet men believe me dead, and when
thy right to the Lordship of Albarone is
questioned
,
speak boldly of the favor of his Grace of
Florence
.
He will defend the castle from wrong and
shelter thee from outrage.
My Lordmy father, this is a strange
determination
!
I beseech thee, do not burden me with
the rule of the Castle.
It must be so Guiseppo! From this night
henceforth, Aldarin is dead to the world. Whene'er
thou wouldst say aught with me, a sealed
parchment
,
placed within a secret drawer arranged in
the side of the beaufet, will reach my hands.
And mark yelet not a single noon pass over thy
head, without looking into the secret drawer of the
beaufet.
This is most wonderful! I ever thought
thee a bold, ambitious man, and now I behold
Aldarin whom all men name with fear, retire
from the world, without a sigh.
One word more, Guiseppo. When thou hast
stricken the blowwhen the Destroyer of thy
mother's honor, lies low in death, then, then,
hasten to the Round Roomthou hast heard of
the chamberand within the solitudes of its
silent walls, read this pacquetit contains the
fearful story of thy mother's wrongs!
Forgive me, forgive me, my father
shrieked
Guiseppo, as if struck by some sudden thought
Swayed by alternate affection for thee asmy
fatherand regard for Adrian asmy friend, I
have locked within the silence of my bosom an
important secretSir Geoffrey o' th' Longsword
has returned from Palestine!
Had a thunderbolt fallen at the very feet of
Aldarin, he could not have started more suddenly
backward, or thrown his arms aloft with a wilder
gesture.
Sir Geoffrey o' th' Longsword returned from
Palestine! he shoutedwhere is he now? How
far from the Castle? How many soldiers ride in
his train? Was the murderer Adrian with him?
Fatherit was his band I left, when disguised
as a Palmer, I hastened toward the Castle. He
lurks within the recesses of the mountains, some
score of miles awaythree hundred men ride in
his trainAdrian, whom I believed guiltless, is
with him.
Did he speak aught of attacking the Castle
Di Albarone?
After a lapse of seven days, it was resolved
to attempt the surprisal of the Castle. From the
vague hints I gathered, it seemed that their plans
were not well matured. Three days of the seven
are now passed, and
The attack will be made four days from this!
By the body of God it pleases me! Hahaha
Guiseppo, remember thy oath, the steel and the
pacquet!
And as he spoke the Count Aldarin strode
toward the door, his face marked by a wild gleam
of exultation, as he communed with himself in a
low, murmured tone.
Four dayshahaha! Four days glide
byand
Aldarin is immortal
!
Guiseppo was alone. He gazed wildly around
the gloom of the Red Chamber and passed his
hands over his eyes, as if in the effort to awake
from some fearful dream. All was still, solemn
and silent around him, and he resigned his soul
to dark memories and bitter thoughts, while the
weary moments of that fearful night glided
slowly
on.
At last he sank down on the cold floor and slept.
A vision of his mother, his own beautiful and
dark-eyed mother, rose smiling above the waves of
sleep, and then the boy thought she stood beside
him, holding a dagger in her fair white hand,
while she backoned him on to the work of
vengeance
.
He awoke. His form was pinioned in
the embrace of two soft arms, and a beaming face
was gazing upon him with the glance of two fond
dark eyes, mingling with his own.
Rosalind! he shrieked as he sprang to his
feet with surpriseRosalind here, in this lone
chamber!
I am hereshe exclaimed as she fell
weeping
on his bosom'Tis a strange story
Guiseppo
,
butSancta Maria, my heart feels chilled
when I think of the fearful scene that made this
Red Chamber a place of death. An hour ago, I
slept within the bower of the Ladye Annabel,
which the Count alloted for my prison, when a
strange figure, clad in robes of sable, strode into
the chamber, and bade me enjoy my freedom, as
he pointed to the open door! I hastened along
the corridor, I descended the stairway, and sought
refuge in this chamber, from two dark figures who
seemed pursuing me, when I found thee,
Guiseppo
,
flung prostrate along the cold floor, and
Thou didst watch over me, when sleeping,
love of mine? Thy prison hath not stolen the
bloom from thy cheek or the fire from thine eye.
As he spoke the door of the Red Chamber was
flung suddenly open, and the aged Steward of the
Castle rushed to the side of Guiseppo, with hasty
steps and a disordered manner, shouting as his
grey hairs waved in the night wind
A message, Lord Guiseppoa message of
life and death! The Count Aldarin sends thee
thisread, and read without delayfor I tell
thee 'tis a scroll of life and death.
Guiseppo perused the scroll, and,
The spirit of the Chronicle beckens us on to
the most dark and fearful scene of the Historie.
CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH.
THE WHITE WATERS OF THE
ALEMBIC.
ALDARIN AND IBRAHIM, GATHERED WITHIN
THE CONFINES OF THE ROUND ROOM, HOLD
THEIR SOLEMN WATCH, WHILE THE
LAST SECONDS OF THE MYSTIC AGE
ARE PASSING TO ETERNITY.
Tread lightly and with a softened footstep,
Ibrahim, for the place in which you stand has
been the home of the Mighty-Thought for
twenty-one
long years! Lookhow the azure flame
ascends in tongues of flame around the sides of
the hanging alembicit is the last night of its
existence! On and on, through calm and cloud,
through sunshine and shadow, for twenty-one long
years has it silently burneda little while, and the
sands in yon glass will be spentthe Mighty
Thought springs into birth, and the azure flame
will be quenched forever!
With his slender form elevated to its full height,
his arm extended, and his sweeping robe of black
thrown back from his shoulder, Aldar in the Scholar
glanced around the room, while his grey eye
flashed and brightened as though his very soul
looked forth in its glance. His brow was calm,
clear and unclouded, his compressed lip wore an
expression of fixed determination, and a slight
flush pervaded his pale countenance.
The light of the pendant lamp fell over the form
of the venerable stranger, his dark-hued face, with
the thick eyebrows, the waving hair, and the
flowing beard, all snow white in hue, standing out
boldly in the ruddy beams, while his dress of
sable
,
relieved by the border of glittering gold, gave
solemnity and dignity to his appearance. He
stood calm and erect, gazing with his eyes of
midnight darkness, upon the strange altar, with
its ever-burning flame of azure, or fixing his
glance upon the wild and speaking features of
Aldarin
the Scholar.
Advance, Ibrahimadvance to the altar of
marbleexclaimed the Scholar, with all the
proud consciousness of the possession of a power
beyond the reach of the multitudeGaze within
the alembicwhat see'st thou there?
I see a liquid clear as crystal, calm,
motionless
,
and unruffled. The most gorgeous mirror
might fail to rival its shadowy brightness. The
alembic is heated to a white heat, yet the liquid
bubbles not, nor seethes, nor wears any appear
ance of the effect of heat. It is beautifulmost
beautiful!
Every drop is worth a life. Within the
recesses
of this altar another flame, fanned by
subterranean
currents, burns beneath the Crucible,
which at last will give forth the Secret of Gold.
Gaze upon yon hour-glass, Ibrahimthe glass
standing upon the corner of the altar
The sands have fallen to within a half-hour of
midnight
When the last grain of sand falls in the glass
then will be complete the mystic age of toil. The
waters of life will then be pure, the secret of gold
will then be perfect. Twenty-one years will then
be past since first I sat me down to watch yon
never-ceasing flame. Twenty-one yearsearth
never beheld such yearseach day an age, each
year an eternity!
Thy toil hath been most difficult! exclaimed
Ibrahim, in his deep-toned voicethe end draws
nigh!
It was in that home of magnificent thoughts
and mighty memoriesthe city of Jerusalem, that
the Glorious Thought dawned upon my soul!
`To live forever,' I cried as I gazed upon the wide
city, with its palaces and towers basking in the
sunlightto pass beyond the years of mortal
men, to exist while whole nations sink down to the
slumber of the grave, while kings succeed kings
and millions of the mass of men glide away on
their solemn march to the grave! To live
forever
to
feel life throbbing in my veins, health
flooding my very heart, youth, eternal youth
crowning my brow, when Old Earth shall have
been stamped with the footsteps of ten thousand
yearsoh glorious boon, oh guerdon worthy an
age of toil to win!' I sought the boon when first
I trod the Syrian soil, but my search was wild
and vagueyon massive volume was placed in my
hands
And then the search became clear and
distinct
?
Yesyes! Truth after truth dawned upon
me, ingredient after ingredient was added to the
contents of the alembic,
[1]
[1]
It is observable that the chronicler of the ancient
MSS. applies the word Alembic to an open vessel
resembling a crucible in shape.
and rash man that I was
but stay a moment, Ibrahim. Gaze again
upon the liquid of the alembic, and tell me what
thou see'st.
The same clear and undimmed liquid, resting
calm and motionless within the depths of the
vessel.
Behold yon circular glass, resting beside the
parchment scroll, on the corner of the altar. It
will magnify an insect until it swells to the
dimensions
of the strange animal that haunts the
forests of the far desert of Indiathe elephant,
methinks 'tis called. Apply the glass to thine
eye, and gaze within the depths of the vessel.
A strange and magnificent spectacle! The
clear liquid spreads out into a magnificent lake,
calm, unshadowed and rippleless. Yet stay'tis
shadowed by a small island floating in the centre,
an island composed of some unknown substance,
black as jet, yet scarcely perceptible even through
the wonderous medium of this glass!
When that speck of jet shall have vanished,
then will the charm be perfect! I have said that
I was rash and indiscreetlet my story witness.
I disregarded the words of the Book, I thought
twenty-one years too long and weary a time for
me to sit in solemn silence while I watched the
progress of the Secret. A few words in the
volume
hinted darkly and vaguely at a consummation
of the Thought, attainable by one bold graspthat
grasp I madeyes, yes, though my very soul was
shaken to the centre, and my brain reeled in the
effortII
slew her!
Slew her? Great God, what dark confession
is this!
YesyesI slew her, slew her as she slept
in my arms and smiled in my face. I drove
the steel to her heartI dabbled her long dark
locks in the warm blood that gushed from her
bosom! Nay, start not man, nor turn aside with
such sudden horrorhast not perused yon volume
know'st thou not the mystic words
The pure
blood, warm from the heart of her thou lovest more
than aught in earth or heaven, poured into the
liquid floating within the mystic vessel, will do
the work of years in a single hour
And sheshe was thy
My wife, my wife! My own, my dark-eyed
Ilmerine. Her blood, the pure current of her
very
heart, purpled the White Waters of the
Alembic
andand,
fool that I was, I would not even
wait the hour of trial, I drank the liquid, greedily,
and with loud exclamations of joy I drank, and
paid the price of my rashness. I neglected to
use the microscopic glass; the black speck had not
vanished from the surface of the liquid. I lay for
days insensible, when I awoke to reason I found
this frame grown prematurely old. Had I but
waited
the little hour, the draught would have infused
immortal life into my veins. I was rash, hasty
wild with the madness of my joy, and the draught
proved poison.
All thy efforts were then foiled.
I was foiled, but I did not despair. Again I
built the fire on the altar, again I added
ingredient
to ingredient, the corses of the dead I
searched
for the last and most powerful Charm; years
passed, and the consummation of the Idea of my
life approached, whenFiend of HellI
discoved
that the price of my rashness was not yet paid!
As I pored over the leaves of the mystic volume,
a fearful thought, expressed in dim and shadowy
words, sunk in my very soul
Methinks I see some new horror, lowering
over the black cloud of guilt and blood that
darkens
the sky of thy life.
Blood, there was, yes, yes, but no guilt. By
the Awful Influence that has ruled my life, there
was none! The Martyr of the Christian, strides
to the stake, that is to cut short the brief thread
of his puny life, with a few moments of pain,
suffers
,
dies and is glorified. Is there no glory for
Aldarin! Have I not also been a martyr? There
there, ever before me, was the
One Great Idea
,
leading me on, and on, filling me with high hopes
and grand thoughts, that all pointed to the final
good of mankind
Thou didst at first dream the Secret would
benefit the mass of men? Hahathou wouldst
have made the
Mob
, immortal!
It is past, the dream is past. Yes, yes,
Ibrahim
I join in thy laugh. I would have made the
Mob
immortal! Haha! The multitude, what
are they? Now the autumn leaf, blown to and
fro by the wind; now the hurricane that a breath
may raise; to-day all sunshine, to-morrow all storm
and cloud!
The Mob
! To-day, they strew
palmbranches
in the path of the Nazarene, and send
their hozannas echoing to the sky,`Hail, hail
king of the Jews!' To-morrow, the Nazarene
stands bound and pinioned in the halls of Pilate
and their cry,the cry of the Mobcomes
shrieking
through the casement `
crucify, crucify him!
'
This, this is the many-headed mob.
Have I not been a Martyr? Others have
offered up their blood at the shrine of their Faith,
I, I have given the very blood of my soul! I have
made a sacrifice of love; love such as the man of
thought alone can feel; I have rushed beyond the
boundaries of thought, that confine the opinions of
common men; I have dared the vengeance of the
Faith beside whose altars I was reared, the arm
of the God, whose existence was imprinted on my
brain from infancy; I, I have dared the most
terrible
doom of allthe remorse of my own soul!
The words of the Scrollthe dim and
shadowy
wordswhat were they?
Hast thou ne'er perused you volume of Fate?
A fear of the dark and terrible mysteries
inscribed
on its pages, ever deterred the Princes of
Ben-Malakim from the perusal of the Mystic
volume
.
A dark passage on the Scroll, vaguely hinted
that in case the Seeker failed in the first bold
experiment
,
in case the life drops of
her
dearest to
his heart, were spilt in vain, then, then another
sacrifice
was to be offered, ere the Crystal Waters
would be undimmed by the speck of jetand,
andIbrahim, behold yon funeral urn!
It stands upon the shelf, amid a heap of
massive
volumes, and time-eaten parchments. What
means this funeral urn?
I cannot, cannot tell thee now. But Ibrahim
listenafter long care and thought, care and
thought such as never wrinkled the brow of
mortal
man before, I have arrived at certain, fixed
principles of beliet. These principles relate to the
consummation of the
Secret
the last Charm
which will make it completethe manner in
which the Water of Life is to be tested, ere it is
imbibed by mortal man. The Last Roll of the
Mystic Volume, which thou hast borne from the
far east, may stamp these principles of belief
true
, or declare them
false
, but it can teach
Aldarin
nothing. Look, Ibrahim, the sands have
fallen to within the fourth part of an hour of
mid-night
!
Give me the last Scroll, I would read!
Ibrahim drew the scroll from his breast. It
was a massive roll of parchment, sealed at
either end with an intricate seal of dark wax,
stamped with strange characters. Aldarin
eagerly
extended his hand, he seized the scroll, he tore
the seals from either end, and unrolled the
time-worn
parchment.
And there, while with trembling hands and a
flashing eye, the Scholar glanced over the strange
Arabic characters, there nothing his every glance,
his every gesture, stood the solemn stranger, his
eye dark as midnight gazing with one fixed look
upon the face of Aldarin, as tho' he would peruse
the contents of the scroll, from the changing
expression
of the reader's countenance. It was
strange to note the contrasted gestures of the
Scholar and the stranger, as the few last minutes
of the mystic age wore slowly on. While the
Scholar eagerly perused the ancient manuscript,
his eye gradually acquired a brilliancy and
intensity
of expression that seemed supernatural, his
lip trembled, his quivering hands rattled the
time-worn
parchment, until the Round Room echoed
with the sound, and the Prince
Ibrahim-Ben-Malakim
standing slightly aside, raised his hands to
his brow with a sudden gesture as tho' he wished
to stifle some bitter memory, or nerve his soul for
the accomplishment of some fell purpose.
Awful Soul of the Universe!
shrieked
Aldarin as he shook the parchment aloft, in the
wildness of his joyI thank thee! I thank
thee! Allall is written herethe principles of
my belief aretrue! Yesyes! The last charm
the method of the trial of the Secretthe
raising
of the mighty deadall, all are here!
Ibrahim
Ibrahim,
give me joy! Lo! I unveil to
thy gaze the secret of the funeral urn!
And with wild steps, and hasty manner,
Aldarin
strode across the oaken floor, he uncovered the
funeral urn, he placed his trembling hands within
its depths.
Beholdhe shriekedIbrahim behold the
sacrifice!
Ibrahim looked, he beheld the upraised hand of
Aldarin, but he dared not look again. Thrilled
with horror at the sight, he, veiled his face in his
hands, while Aldarin strode hurriedly toward the
altar. All was still as death in the Round Room.
Listen, Ibrahim, listen! exclaimed Aldarin
Hark! how the red drops fall pattering into the
white waters!
Ibrahim listened in horror, but dared not look.
In a moment, the funeral urn, again enclosed the
object of horror, and the voice of Aldarin broke
whispering on the air.
Ibrahim, brother of mine, haste thee to the
altarseize the microscopic glass, and gaze upon
the white waters of the alembic! I dare notI
dare not gaze upon the working of the charm!
And as Ibrahim raised the glass to his eye,
Aldarin
stood with his back to the altar and his face
to the wall, his wild eye glaring on vacancy, while
he counted the last seconds of the mystic age by
the motion of his trembling fingers.
The sands of the glass have fallen to within
ten minutes of midnight, exclaimed Ibrahim. I
gaze upon the white waters of the alembic! They
spread before mine eyes in a calm and silver lake
The surface is crimsoned by waves of bloodthe
island of jet enlarges and widens!
Waves of bloodthe island of jet widens!
shrieked Aldarin. Two minutes of the ten are
past! Oh, fiend of doom! can the charm prove
false at last?
The waves of blood are dying away; the
black substance diminishes in size!
Art sure, good Ibrahim? Gaze again upon
the waters: do not, do not deceive me!
The waters are colored with a purple dye.
It hastensit hastens! Haha! So read
the words of the book! Why dost pause,
Ibrahim
?
Four minutes of the ten are past!
The object of black still diminishes; and now
the purple hue of the waters is fading away!
My heart, my heart is bursting; I cannot,
cannot breath! Ibrahim, Ibrahim, tell, oh! tell
me, what hue do the waters assume? Thou art
silent! I dare not turn and gaze with mine own
eyes; do not mock me thus, Ibrahim!
A calm lake, cloudless, waveless, and ripleless
opens to my gaze. The waters are clear as
crystal
.
No shadow dims their unfathomable
brilliancy
,
no object of blackness floats upon the surface.
The sands have fallen in the glass
Speak, speak, Ibrahim, or I will fall to the
floor! Is there no shadow resting upon the
surface
of the white waters?
None, by my soul, none!
ThenthenAldarinisimmortal!
CHAPTER THE TWELFTH.
THE TRIAL OF THE WATERS OF LIFE.
AS THE SANDS OF THE THIRD HOUR SINK IN
THE GLASSTHE DEAD SHALL ARISE.
Arising in tongues of fire, from the floor of
stone, a flame of crackling wood, cast its ruddy
glare around the Cavern of the Dead, flinging
vivid glimpses of blood-red light along the
earth-hidden
roof, and imparting a strange appearance
of warmth and life, to the circling figures,
scattered
along the pavement of the vault.
Turned to burning red by the full glare of the
flame, the gigantic Figure of Stone, arising above
the Mound of Death, seemed starting into life, as
with arms thrown wildly aloft, and downcast eyes,
it gazed upon the strange spectacle, extended at
the foot of the mound. Ascending from the
cavern
floor, a square tent, for by that name alone it
F
may be designated, formed of hanging curtains of
jet-black leather, gave three of its sides to the glare
of the flame, while the fourth was wrapt in
shadow
.
The hangings of black leather, were
inscribed
with strange and contrasted characters,
fashioned in shapes of glittering gold, while from
the aperture at the top, where the roof of the tent
should have been placed, there arose, in dark and
murky folds, thick columns of lurid smoke,
winding
upward to the far-off ceiling of the cavern.
Near the tent of embroidered leather, arose a
small, square and compact structure of ebony, in
shape resembling a small table, designed to serve
the purposes of an altar. On the top of the altar
of ebony was laid an hour glass, standing between
a funeral urn, and a phial of glittering silver,
placed beside a massive volume of time-eaten
parchments, with an unbound scroll, falling to the
very floor of the cavern.
Within the compass of a fathom's length from
the tent of leather, was erected the fire of massive
oaken wood which threw its ruddy glare around
the spot, and flung vivid though flickering glimpses
of light along the distant recesses of the cavern.
And there in that lone cavern, beneath the
frown of the Demon-Form, with the ruddy blaze
of the oaken fire, disclosing their faces and figures
in bold and strong relief, there, while the hours of
that fearful night, dragged heavily on, watched
and waited Aldarin and Ibrahim the
[2]
[2]
Ibrahim Ben-Malakim (Arabic) the Son of the Kings.
Son of the
Kings.
Ibrahim, calm, solemn and erect, stood beside
the Altar of Ebony, his sable attire, his dark hued
face, with the grey hair, the white eye-brows and
the flowing beard disclosed in the light, while he
gazed in wonder and awe around the immensity
of that cavern, where the last and most terrible
scene in the Mortal Life of Aldarin, was to add
another legend of horror to the teeming Archives
of Albarone. With slow and measured steps,
Aldarin paced the pavement of the cavern,
extending
in front of the sable tent, while the light of
the flame revealed his face, pale and colorless,
stamped with an expression, calm and immovable
it is true, yet fraught with strange and mysterious
meaning.
It is a dark and gloomy placedost not think
so Ibrahim? exclaimed the Scholar advancing
to the side of the Arab-Prince. Look around!
Behold the flashes of flame-light falling along the
floor of the dread cavern, giving a lurid glare to
the ceiling as it arises above our heads, like an
earth-hidden sky, or casting their ruddy glare over
the face and form of yon dark figure of giant
rock. Is't not a dark and gloomy place, Ibrahim?
Here, along this gloomy cavern, might the
warrior of a thousand battles walk and tremble as
he walked, without the blush of shame for his
coward fear. As I gaze around upon the dark
mysteries of this funereal vault, methinks I behold
the demons of the unreal world, clustering around
me, laughing in my face, or mocking my very soul
with their gestures of scorn!
Here will the last scene in the Mortal Life of
Aldarin, startle the very gaze of yon dark dread
face of stone. Tell me Ibrahim, how long hast
waited in this solemn vault.
Twice have I turned your hour glass since
first we entered the cavernit wanes toward the
third hour after midnight.
Thou hast not asked me any question
concerning
these dark hangings of embroidered
leather
.
Thou hast not asked me why yon dark and
lurid smoke wends upward from the confines of
this sable tent. Nor hast thou spoken a word
in relation to the secrets of this Tabernacle of
Lifeso the Book calls the sable tent.
Ibrahim has waited the pleasure of Aldarin.
Then listen, dark Arabian, when I tell thee
the dead, the mighty dead shall live again!
These words are mysteries to me!
Read yon mystic scroll, Ibrahim, and all shall
be as the light of day to theeread those words
of fearful knowledge.
And with a whispered and trembling voice, the
Arabian gave to the air of the Cavern, the dark
and mysterious words of the scroll:
Lo! The Waters of Life are free from
stain or pollution of earth. Wouldst thou prove
them pure? Within the hollow of the coffin-like
vessel of iron, place the remains of the Sacrificed
and pile the fire of beechen wood around. When
the iron pales from red to white, then warm the
Heart of the Sacrificed with the white waters of
the Alembicwhen the heart throbs, then let it
mingle with the Corse of the Coffin, and Lo! As
the sands of the third hour sink in the glass
the dead shall arise!
Theretherewithin the Tabernacle of
Life, shouted Aldarin, with an upraised arm and
kindling eyeThere rests the Corse of the
Sacrificed
,
there ascends the fire of beechen wood,
beating the coffin of iron to a white heatwithin
the confines of yon funeral urn, rests the Heart,
and the phial of silver by its side, contains the
priceless Waters of Life! Behold the sands of
the third hour are falling in the glassa little
while and  how the thought stirs my very
soulthe dead will live again!
The dead? echoed Ibrahim with a gaze of
wonderHow meanest thou, Aldarin?
Must I then, unclose the darkest place in this
seared bosom to thy gaze? Man, I tell theehis
formthe form of my brother shall live again!
Thy brotherAwful God! whispered the
Arabian in a tone, whose horror may not be
described
Thy
brother then was thy last victim?
Pity me, Ibrahim, pity me! shrieked
Aldarin
.
Swayed by two mingling and opposing
motivesthe one, ambition for the welfare of my
childthe other, the all-absorbing desire for the
Immortal Life on earth; but a few short days
ago, I beheld approach the last moment of the
Mystic Age of Toil. Thenthen, I first learned
the necessity of the fearful sacrifice, and then,
then I drugged the bowl of death!
Thisthis is too horrible for belief!
muttered
Ibrahim in a whispered voice; Nownow
my soul is firm for the work of the night!
Was I to falter when the hour of fear and
doom drew nigh? shrieked Aldarin, as his
slender
form rose proudly erect, and his wild face
shone in the full light of the blazing flame. Was
I, I who had strode on to the guerdon of all my
toil, unfearing and undismayed, though the dead
body of my wife lay in my path, though the hopes
of my heart fell withering and dead around me,
while the spirit of my love for
her
, plead and
plead in vain for pity; was I, Aldarin, to spare
the blow, when that blow would crown my earthly
ambition, and complete my immortal toil? Ha
ha! The thought is vain!
Hadst thou no mercy?
In such a cause, I answer
none!
I tell thee
man, had my brother pleaded for his life, and
sprinkled my feet with his tears, had he pleaded
for his life in the calm, soft tones of childhood, the
tones that brought back the memory of those
days when our arms and hands were interlocked,
had he sprinkled my feet with such tears as wet
this seared face, when I rescued him from the
waters
of the river that rolls without these walls,
some thirty years agothen, even then I could
not have spared him! No, no, no! It was to be,
and it was!
He shall rise from the dead, thou sayst? In
what form shall he appear?
Fair, and young, and beautiful; youth shrined
in his heart and power throned on his brow! His
mind will be fresh with new-born vigor, yet
Memory
of the Past, shall never darken his bosom!
The babe is not more unconscious of its
pre-existence
in another and a far-off world, than will be
Julian my brother of the Past, with all its
darkness
and doom.
How dost thou know, that he will arise in this
form?
Spoke the Nazarine truth, when he said, `Faith
can remove mountains?' The Will of the Soul,
mighty in the consciousness of its immortal
powers
and infinite sympathies, can do more!
The
Will
, determined and inflexible, can bend the
invisible
mysteries of the universe to its bidding, call
up the fearful influences, ever at work within the
bosom of Nature, and chain them, slaves of its
power
;
bind the wild elements of man's heart in
subjection
,
and awe the souls of the multitude, when
aroused by passion, or maddened by revenge
The Will can sway the heart of man, to the
windings of a path, dark as the way I have
trodden
,
leading the Soul onward through mystery,
and doom, and blood; teaching it to trample on
Fear, laugh at the ghastly face of Remorse, and
scorn the uplifted arm of God! `Faith can
remove
mountains!' I cannot, may not, at this
fearful
hour, trace the operations of the Invisible
Might! Suffice it to sayAldarin wills that the
Re-created shall walk forth in a form of youth and
power, and it shall be so!
Lo! The sands of the hour glass are well
nigh spent. One-half of the last hour alone
remains
!
I will gaze within the Tabernacle of Life!
Aldarin advanced, swept the sable hangings
aside, and in a moment was lost to view.
Ibrahim
also advanced to the front of the Tabernacle
as the mystic jargon of the Scholar named the
testand listened with hushed breath and
absorbing
interest. He could hear the subdued hissing
of the flames within the Tabernacle, he could hear
a low, scarce perceptible sound, like the
seething
of boiling lend, and a penetrating perfume of
mingled frankincense and myrrh, saluted his
senses, mingled with the odor of decaying
mortality
.
A single moment passed while Ibrahim
listened
,
and then he advanced to the verge of the vast
fire, burning on the cavern floor, and stood for a
moment wrapt in stern and solitary thought.
Clasping his hands across his chest, he drooped
his head low upon his bosom, while the trembling
lip and dilated eye attested the violence of the
struggle at work within his inmost soul.
He raised his head and looked round. Tall and
erect, the ruddy glow of the fire, streaming over
his majestic face, disclosing every outline of his
imposing costume, the Arabian gazed around, and
beheld the stern sublimity of the cavern of the
dead. Save the hissing of the flame, all was still
and silent. Not a word, not a whisper. Silence
dwelt supreme, the Spirit and the Divinity of the
place.
Far, far above, the cavern roof, extending like a
sky, received on each rugged projection, the
ruddy
glow of the flame, while long belts of
flickering
light were thrown along the pavement of
stone, for a moment revealing the strange and
fantastic forms scattered around the dim walls of
the vault, in strong and startling relief; and then
again the fire would suddenly subside, leaving
everything, save the floor in its immediate
vicinity
,
wrapt in thick and sombre darkness.
A strange fancy, murmured Ibrahim,
Methought
I saw yonder statues moving to and fro,
a wild delirium of my fancy!
It throbsit throbsit palpitates! a
deep-toned
,
yet wild and thrilling voice broke the
silence
of the cavernLook, Ibrahim, how the
Waters of Life, hasten the completion of the
Mighty Labour!
Ibrahim hurriedly turned and beheld Aldarin,
standing beside the Altar of Ebony, grasping the
phial of silver in one hand, while with the other
he raised on high the Secret of the Funeral Urn,
that may not be named by man, or written down
on this page, lest incredulity should smile in
ignorant
scorn, and shallow unbelief make a mock
of the Dark Fanaticism of the Past.
It throbsit throbsit warms with life!
again shricked Aldarin, as he rushed within the
confines of the hangings of sableLo! The
coffin of iron is heated to a white heat; the charm
hastens to perfection!
Mine eyes are cheated by vain delusions!'
muttered Ibrahim, But a moment agone, and
methought the arabesque figures were flitting to
and fro, and nowas I live, there 'tis againI
behold dim shadows gliding round yon funeral
pile!
As he spoke the fire waned, and a sudden
darkness
,
only relieved by the faint flashes of light
came down like midnight upon the cavern.
Ibrahim
looked around and beheld Aldarin standing
near his side, holding an opened missal in his
hand, which disclosed a hollow casketinstead
of the emblazoned leaves of a book of devotion,
glittering with a gem that shone through the
gathering darkness like a star. And as the
Arabian
looked he beheld Aldarin apply the mouth
of a small silver phial which he held in his hand,
to the surface of the gem, while a meaning smile
stole over his face. The fire blazing on the
cavern
floor, lighted up with sudden vigor, and white
columns of smoke, rolling from the silver phial,
gathered in waving folds above the head of
Aldarin
,
and swept far away, like the wings of a
mighty
bird, until they encircled the giant outline of
the Demon Form, towering far, far overhead.
Ibrahim, my brother, cried the voice of
Aldarin
,
I would welcome the Arisen-Dead with
sweet perfumes and fragrant incense. 'Tis thus
the Book commands!
He looked forth from the cloud of smoke that
enveloped his form, and started in surprise as he
beheld the erect form of the Arabian. The
chymical
spell, from whose influence the Scholar had
defended himself, took no effect on the form of
the Arabian Prince.
The all-penetrating essence of the dead
pervading
the air and imbucing the atmosphere,
renders the spell powerless! he murmured with
a frown of impatience. And yet Aldarin and his
new-risen brother must have no witness of their
mighty mysteries! Though he had a thousand
lives, still must he carry my secret where 'twill
be safetoha, ha, to the grave!
The sands of the glass are falling, cried
Ibrahim
advancing, one-fourth of the last hour alone
remains!
And while that fragment of time is gathered
to eternity, the Water of Life is darting like
lightning
through the body of the deadandand
yet hold a moment, good Ibrahim! Dost thou
not envy my immortal career? Dost desire to
drink the Water of Life? Lo, the flagon is a
thy commanddrink, Ibrahim, and become
immortal
!
Drink I will! exclaimed Ibrahim with a
meaning smile, as he took the flagon in his grasp
which the Scholar had substituted for the phial
containing the Water of LifeDrink I will, but
first I will give thee a proof of my power!
Thy power? I am all amazement!
Learn, mighty Scholar, that the children of
the race of Ben-Malakim hold the power of calling
the spirits of the dead up from the silence of the
grave, or summoning the spectres of the living
from the uttermost parts of the earth!
These are idle words. Ibrahim, thou triflest
with me!
Aldarin gaze around theeall is dark and
indistinct
,
the fire has burned to its embers, and the
cavern beyoud is wrapt in shadow. Aldarin, cast
thy memory backward over the scenes of thy life,
and tell mewhich of thine enemies wouldst thou
summon before thee in this scene of gloom?
He will drink the flagon at last, muttered
Aldarin; I'll even humor his whim. I would
behold the forms of two slaves, whom I hate as
darkly as my soul can hate. I would behold
he whispered the names between his clenched
teethsummon the slaves before me, if thou
can'st!
Lo! it is done,shouted the Arabian
Spirits of Ben-Malakim, appearin the name of
God, appear!
I hear a hushed sound like the tread of
armies
,
murmured AldarinYet all is dark
around me!
Scarce had the words passed from his lips when
a dim yet lurid light, issuing from an invisible
source, streamed around the cavern, and the face
of Aldarin, tinted by the ghastly radiance, was
stamped with an expression of wonder and awe.
Around, on every side, gathered along the rude
pavement, shoulder to shoulder, a shadowy
multitude
stood dimly revealed in the lurid light, with
dark and immoveable faces looking from beneath
the shadow of sable helmets ponderous with
waving
plumes. And as Aldarin looked, the cavern
was for a single moment wrapt in the darkness of
midnight. The gloom was again succeeded by
the lurid light, and before the very eyes of the
Scholar, gazing him sternly and fixedly in the
face, stood two warrior forms, silent and motionless
as statues. One was a stern old knight, clad in
glittering armour, with long waving locks of
snow-white hue falling far beneath his helmet,
along his venerable countenance and over his
iron-robed chest. The other, wore the appearance
of a bluff soldier, next in rank to an Esquire, for
he was clad in attire of substantial buff, with the
rugged outline of his unplumed cap surmounting
a massive forehead, seamed by wrinkles and
hardened
by battle-toil.
There was something intensely horrible in the
wild glow of triumph with which Aldarin
regarded
the spectres.
Haha! The vulgar hind, whom this hand
consigned to darkness, arises to swell the triumph
of the Scholar! But the other form'tis the form
of my mortal foe! He comes in spirit to look
upon the glory of Aldarin! A few brief days and
over his heart and brain will blacken the vengeance
of the Scholarvengeance such as never
shadowed
earth or darkened hell! Away with these
phantoms, Ibrahimmy brain is 'wildered with
much joyaway!
Through the gloom, he advanced toward the
figures, he reached forth his hand, expecting to
grasp the intangible air, when it rattled against
the rugged plates of iron defending the breast of
the venerable warrior. The echo of the rattling
armour was returned by a clanking sound that
rang to the very cavern's roof, like the clashing of
a thousand swords. There was a dark and
fearful
pause. Aldarin held his breath and his hands
clutched convulsively at his throat.
Behold, shouted the voice of Ibrahim,
behold
the spectres by the light of a thousand
torches!
And at the magic word, the Cavern of Death
was all alive with light, the light of blazing torches,
grasped by the mailed hands of warriors, while
the stalwart forms of the men-at-arms gathered
in one dense and blackening multitude along the
pavement of stone, rose clear and distinctly in the
ruddy beams, and their sable plumes waved like a
forest in the air. Aldarin looked from side to
sidehe passed his hand wildly over his forehead,
he strove to arouse his soul from this fearful
dream. It was no dream, Great God of Truth
and Vengeance! it was no dream. On every
side the gleam of arms broke on the eye of
Aldarin
,
on every side the frown of warlike visages
met his gaze, and his glance was returned by the
flashing glare of a thousand eyes.
The spell brokethe reality sank down upon
the soul of Aldarin. His face was stamped with
an expression that brought to the minds of the
gazers the horror of a soul plunged into eternal
torment from the very battlements of heaven; he
extended his right arm with a wild gesture, and
clenched the hand until the sinews seemed
bursting
from the skin, his lips parted, his jaw sank
down to his very breast, while his full grey eye
glared like the eye of the tiger at bay, rolling its
glance from side to side, dilating every moment,
and flashing like a meteor.
IbrahimIbrahimI am betrayed! he
shricked
,
turning to the Arabian. Albarone to the
rescue!
He turned to the Arabian, he beheld him
standing
calm and erect beside the altar of ebony. He
advanced to his side, and as he raised his hand to
grasp the robe of the stranger, he started
backward
with a howl of despair whose emphasis of
horror may not be described in words. The
snow-white beard, the grey hair, the white
eye-brows
,
fell from the tawny face of Ben-Malakim,
and Aldarin beheld the visage of
Albertine, the
Monk!
Then it was that the soul of the old man sank
within him, then it was that he raised his
trembling
hands aloft, shaking them madly in the air,
while a wild yell of execration burst from the
Phantom Band.
Men of Albarone! arose the shout of the
grey-haired knight; Behold the murderer of your
Lord!
Behold the brother-murderer! shricked the
stout yeoman, standing at the side of Sir Geoffrey.
`These eyes beheld him hug his brother in the
foul embrace of murder!
And as he spoke the band of men-at-arms came
pressing slowly and solemnly on, glittering swords
flashed in the light, and low muttered cries of
vengeance broke on the air. Closer and more
close they gathered, while Albertine stood silent
and motionless regarding the scene.
The sands have fallen to within five minutes
of the time! madly shrieked Aldarin. The
charm may yet be complete!
He wildly turned from the advancing knights
and yeomen, he turned towards the Tabernacle,
he heeded not the cries of execration that arose on
every side, he trembled not at the frown of the
Demon Form towering far, far above. He turned
towards the Tabernacle, he was about to rush
within the folds of the sable hangings, when he
started back to the very breast of Sir Geoffry o' th'
Long-sword, with a wild exclamation of joy.
There, before his very eyes, in front of the
sable
tent, stood a youthful form, clad in a dress of
glittering white, his arms folded on his breast,
while with his face drooped on his bosom he gazed
fixedly at the visage of Aldarin, and as he gazed
the night-wind played with the floating locks of
his golden hair.
Behold, behold, men of Albarone, shouted
Aldarin, with a wild laugh of joy, your lord hath
arisen from the dead! Before your eyes he
stands, calm and mighty; youth in his heart, and
power on his brow! Hahaha! I didI
did slay him! But I have raised him from the
sleep of death! Beholdha, ha, ha!behold!
Slave of thine own wild delusion, exclaimed
Sir Geoffrey o' th' Longsword, as he advanced,
thou art gazing upon the form of Adrian Di
Albarone
!
The avenger of his father's blood! shouted
the form, advancing to the light. Murderer,
behold
thy doomsman!
Aldarin bowed his face low on his breast, and
veiled his eyes in his hands, while a sound like
the death groan rattled in his throat. His was no
common agony. His was no mortal sorrow. His
bosom trembled not with the throes of grief for
the wife slain by death, or the child torn from his
embrace by unknown hands; the tears he wept
were not visible tears, pouring from his eyes along
the furrowed cheek. No, no. His soul wept
within him tears such as giant souls alone can
weep, when a mighty thought is slain, when the
idea of a life is crushed.
Avengers of your lord, advance, shricked Sir
Geoffrey o' th' Longsword; advance, and seize
the murderer!
Aldarin turned; a thought flashed over his soul
Three minutes of the last hour yet remained.
The sands of the glass had not yet fallen. That
little shed of time gained, he might yet complete
the charm; the mystic age of toil might yet be
rewarded by the immortal boon.
He flung himself at the feet of Sir Geoffrey o
th' Longsword; yes, yes, the proud and mighty
Aldarin threw his form prostrate on the cavern
floor, and, with upturned gaze, clutched the knees
of the knight.
Give me, give me but three minutes of life
three minutes alone, and then ye may lead me to
the death.
The knight trembled: he had been prepared
for scorn and defiance, but not for tears.
Away with his magical pranks, away with
his works of hell! arose the shout of the stout
yeoman, as, with one rude grasp, he tore the
tented hanging of the Tabernacle from the poles
that supported their folds. `St. Withold! what
infernal cookery have we here? Thus, thus I
scatter the magical firethus I overturn this
coffin
of iron! Gather around, ye men of Albarone:
scatter the works of this demon along the floor of
the cavern!
It was the work of an instant. While Sir
Geoffrey
trembled; while the monk Albertine stood
beside
the altar of ebony, veiling his face in his
hands; while even Adrian, the son of the
murdered
,
hesitated and paused, ere the request of
Aldarin
was refused, the men-at-arms, led on by
Rough Robin, overturned the coffin of iron,
heated
as it was to a white heat, scattered the embers
of the fire along the surface of the floor, and
concealed
the nameless secret of the coffin with the
dark hangings of leather, which they flung over
the disgorged contents of the receptacle of the
dead.
Aldarin slowly arose on his feet. All emotion
had vanished from his face. Stern, calm, and
fearless, he gazed around. He looked over the
vast expanse of the cavern roof, he marked the
dread face of the demon form towering far above,
he gazed upon the hurrying forms and wild faces
of the men-at-arms.
Lead me, lead me to my death spoke the
fierce tones of Aldarin, the scholar. I scorn and
defy ye all.
Albertine, the monk, still clad in the dark robe
and majestic attire of Ibrahim Ben Malakim,
strode suddenly to the side of the scholar, and
thrust a parchment roll in his hands.
Man, I betrayed thee, he whispered, in tones
that attested his agony. Man, I betrayed thee,
though my heart smote me in the act. Yet I will
not scorn thee in this thy final hour. The
parchment
,
the parchmentgrasp it with a grasp like
death; the phial, the phial! He turned, and
continued in a loud voice, audible to the avengers:
Sinner, receive this book of prayer; it may
comfort
thy final hour.
Aldarin took the parchment, and calmly folded
it to his bosom.
I scorn ye all, he shrieked. I defy your
vengeance, I dare the doom ye would inflict.
Aldarin
fears not death.
To the gibbet with the murderer, shouted
Sir Geoffrey o' th' Longsword. Aye, upon the
same gibbet where blacken the forms of the brave
soldiers of Lord Julian; there, there let the
miscreant
dangle.
And the men-at-arms echoed the shout, until
the vast cavern roof resounded with the words of
doom: To the gibbetto the gibbet with the
fratricide!
In a moment the cavern was left to silence and
eternal night. Never since that fearful hour has
human foot trode the funeral vaults of Albarone.
Along dark passages, through subterranean
corridors
,
and up tottering stairways, poured the flood
of men-at-arms, bearing with them the scholar
and fratricide. At last, winding through the
same passages traversed three hours agone by
Aldarin
and Ibrahim, passing through the chymical
laboratory, which has never been disclosed to the
eye of the reader, the crowd of avengers reached
the Round Room. The altar was overturned, the
books and parchments torn from the shelves, yet
the scholar quailed not, nor uttered word of
lamentation
.
Gloomy corridors were then traversed,
massive stairways ascended, the hall of the castle
passed, and at last Aldarin emerged from the
castle
door, and stood upon the slab of stone
surmounting
the flight of steps. He gazed around,
while the avengers came thronging at his back;
and as he gazed, the court-yard of the castle
became
the scene of a strange spectacle.
CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH.
THE OATH.
THE VENGEANCE OF ALDARIN, THE SCHOLAR.
It is a fair day, and the sun shines brightly.
Haha! The sky above is clear, and the earth
seems laughing with joy in the very face of day!
Aldarin smiled as he spoke, and gazed above.
It was the hour of early dawn. The first beams
of the sun shone over the eastern battlements of
the castle, mellowing the azure sky with their
radiance
,
while the fresh and balmy air of the
summer
morn fanned the burning forehead of the
scholar. It was the last time he would behold the
beams of the dawning day; it was the last time
his burning brow should be freshened by the kiss
of the morning breeze, and yet he smiled.
Aldarin gazed around. A yell of horror broke
upon the summer air, and far along the court-yard
extended the living sea of men-at-arms, arrayed in
their sable armor, mingling with the vast masses
of the peasant vassals, while the beams of the
rising
sun shone over a thousand brandished swords,
as each man swelled the reiterated shout of
vengeance
,
and each man shook in the light such a
weapon as the frenzy of that fearful moment
enabled
him to obtain.
Look where he might, on every side, the gleam
of flashing eyes met the gaze of Aldarin; all along
the court-yard the blackened mass swayed to and
fro, like the waves of the ocean in a storm; and
again heaven gave back to earth the combined
yells of innumerable voices mingling together in
that fearful soundthe shout of a vast body of
men, maddened and crazed by the impulses of a
moment of wild excitement.
To the gibbet! arose that shout of doom.
To the gibbet with the brother-murderer!
With one glance Aldarin surveyed the scene
around him. There, grouped along the steps of
stone, stood the stout yeoman, his brow wearing
one fixed and steady frown, as, with his sword
half drawn from the scabbard, he gazed upon the
face of Aldarin; there stood two figures veiled in
robes of sweeping sable, while the erect form and
venerable face of the knight o' th' Longsword
confronted the scholar, standing on the slab of
stone.
Sir knight, exclaimed Aldarin, with a smile
wreathing his pinched lip, though ye are
somewhat
hurried in your work of doom, I would
make one brief request, ere I am borne hence.
Is there no one in all this crowd that will bear a
message from me to my son, the Lord Guiseppo?
That will I, exclaimed the sharp-featured
steward of the castle, advancing from the crowd.
`Guilty thou mayst be, and thy hands stained
with a brother's blood, yet the request of a dying
man may not be refused. Give me the scroll.
Aldarin bared the withered flesh of his left arm:
he drew a poignard, small and delicate in shape,
from his girdle, and while the crowd looked on
in wonder and in fear, he stained the point of the
stilletto with his blood. Another moment passed,
and, with the dagger's point, he hurriedly wrote
on the surface of a small slip of parchment which
he also drew from his girdle.
Bear this away, he shouted, bear this away
to the Lord Guiseppo, and tell him that his father
is on his way to the gibbetha, ha!
Man of blood and crime, exclaimed Sir
Geoffrey
o' th' Longsword, as he advanced to the side
of Aldarin, thy life has been full of dark and
fearful mystery; hast thou no dying words of
repentance
to speak, ere the cord tightens round
thy neck? It is not well to dare the presence of
God, with so much blood upon thy soul.
Aldarin bowed his head low on his breast, and
the bystanders whispered one to the other that the
dread old man was wrapt in thought.
A confession I have to makedying words of
repentance I have to speak, exclaimed Aldarin,
as he gazed around upon the crowded castle yard.
Thou dost remember, Sir Geoffrey, that twenty
years agone we saw each other's faces in the
wilds of Palestine?
I do, I do! exclaimed the knight, as a
mingled
expression of bitter memory and deep feeling
passed over his wrinkled visage. Twenty years
agone, we saw each other's faces within the walls
of Jerusalem.
The sound of a quick and trampling footstep
broke upon the air, then a wild shout came
shrieking
from the castle hall, and in an instant the
Lord Guiseppo rushed from the massive hall door
and stood facing the scholar Aldarin, his face pale
as death, his eyes rolling madly to and fro, while
his trembling right hand shook the parchment
scroll above his head.
This scroll, my father: what mean its words
of omen? Yon blackening crowdtheir looks
of vengeancewhat means it all, my father?
Aldarin advanced, and flung his arms around
the form of his son, gathering him to his heart in
the embrace of a father. And as he gathered him
to his heart, he whispered a few brief words in the
ear of the Lord Guiseppo, that thrilled the youth
to the very soul; for his eye flashed brighter than
ever, and his cheek grew yet more pale.
Thy oaththy oath! hissed the hollow
whisper of Aldarin.
Guiseppo turned suddenly round, he flung
himself
at the feet of Sir Geoffrey, and looked up into
his face with a voice of anguish, as he shrieked:
Spare my fatherspare, oh! spare the weak
old man!
Though the angels of God plead for his life
still must he die!
Then die, wronger and betrayer! Then die,
midnight assassin and ravisher! The spirit of
my mother nerves my arm and points the steel!
And as the words fell shrieking from his lips,
ere an arm could be raised, or a word of horror
spoken, Guiseppo sprang to the very throat of the
knight, grasping his long grey hair with one hand,
while with the other he inserted the glittering
dagger between the armour plates of his victim,
and drove the steel down from the left shoulder to
his very heart.
It was the work of a moment; the lightning
flash might not be swifter, nor the thunderbolt
more sudden. One instant the spectators beheld
the kneeling youth, and the warrior waving his
hand with stern determination, as he turned from
the prayer of mercy; the next moment their eyes
were startled by the upraised dagger, and the
blow of vengeance, while the knight tottered
heavily
to and fro, looked wildly around, and then
sank in the arms of Robin the Rough, with the
haft of the dagger protruding from the armour
plates of his left shoulder.
Father! shrieked Guiseppo, shaking wildly
above his head the right hand that winged the
dagger. Father, my mother is avenged: behold
the doom of the ravisher!
Thou hast done well! spoke Aldarin, in a
quiet, yet trembling tone, while his lip wore an
even smile. Boy, thou hast done well! Now,
Guiseppo, read, read the pacquetthe pacquet in
thy bosom!
And while the horror-stricken spectators
Robin
the Rough, the figures in sable robes, the
peasant-vassals, and the men-at-armsremained
awed into a fearful pause of silence by the scene,
the silence that ever precedes the march of
death,Guiseppo thrust his hand within his
bosom
,
drew the pacquet fram its resting place, and
with his trembling fingers broke the seal.
Man of guilt and bloodshed, exclaimed the
dying knight, as he convulsively placed his hands
on the wound near his heart, I am dyingmy
heart grows cold, and mine eyes are dimthy
vengeance is gratified; now, now, tell me
Hadst thon ever a child, Sir Geoffrey,
interrupted
Aldarin, advancing to the side of the knight:
a fair-haired and soft-voiced boy, whose smile
was thy joy, whose presence was thy sunshine?
Speak, speakwhat knowest thou of my boy?
gasped the dying knight, as a look of agony
passed
over his face. 'Tis sixteen years since I
beheld
his face in the land of his birth, the city of
Jerusalem. He was torn from my embrace by
an unknown hand.
Aldarin looked around over the sea of faces,
and smiled as he beheld a peasant whetting his
knife on the very stone on which he stood.
That smile of incarnate scorn seemed to break
the spell of horror that bound the multitude.
To the gibbet, to the gibbet with the
fratricide
!
again arose the fierce yell of vengeance,
and the men-at-arms came crowding up the steps,
while a score of upraised daggers were about to
drink the blood of the doomed murderer, when
Robin the Rough threw himself before the object
of their vengeance.
Stain not your steel, he shouted; stain not
your steel with the traitor's blood; away to the
castle gate with him! Let the dog die a dog's
death!
And at the word, the Esquires Halbert and his
gallant brother Damian advanced from the crowd,
and seizing Aldarin by the arms, they dragged
him down the steps of stone, while the multitude
gave way on either side, shrinking from the touch
of the murderer, as one would shrink from the
garments of the plague-smitten.
There is fire in my heart, there is hell in my
brain! arose a shrieking voice, that was heard
far along the castle yard, thrilling the bystanders
to the very soul. God of mercy, it is, it is not
true! The parchment is a liea falsehood
written
by the very fiend of hell! I did notno, no,
I did notwing the
blow
to
his
heart! God of
heaven witness me, I raised not the steel for
his
blood!
And as the multitude, bearing Aldarin to his
doom, heard that shrieking voice, they looked
back, and beheld the Lord Guiseppo standing
over the prostrate form of his victim, his face pale
and colorless, his lip livid as with the touch of
death, while his eyes rolled their ghastly glance
over the faces of the crowd, and his arms hung
palsied by his side, with the fatal parchment
quivering in the grasp of the trembling hand.
Father, father
! his fearful shriek again
arose on the air, as he knelt by the side of his
victim; FATHER, THE MURDERER IS THY SON!
The old man raised himself on one hand, and,
with a look of speechless meaning, grasped the
hand of the maddened boy, as he gazed silently
over his face, while his very soul seemed
absorbed
in some unreal dream of horror.
My son, he whispered with a ghastly smile,
and the dagger in my heart!
Thy son!ha, ha!I could laugh till the
very heavens echoed my voice! and, as he spoke,
Aldarin, the Scholar, looked backward toward the
castle steps, where the boy knelt beside the dying
knight. Thy son,ha, ha, ha!and the dagger
in thy heart! Yes, yes, it is thy son! Sir
Geofrey
,
a parting word: dost thou remember a blow
aye, a blow from the mailed hand of a warrior
that felled the scholar to the floor, while the
princes
of Christendom stood laughing round the scene?
Dost thou remember the insult, the contumely,
the scorn? Then look upon the face of thy boy,
whom I stole and reared to be thy murderer
look upon his youthful face, peruse each feature,
andha, ha, ha!
think of the vengeance of
Aldarin
,
the Scholar!
With cries of execration and fierce yells of
vengeance the men-at-arms gathered around the
fratricide, and as their brandished swords shone
in the light, they bore him toward the castle gate,
leaving the slab of stone before the pillars of the
castle door to the solitary companionship of the
father and son.
It was truedarkly and fearfully true
Guiseppo
was the son of Sir Geoffrey o' th'
Longsword
.
Guiseppo was kneeling upon the stone; his
arms were gathered around the form of his father,
and his eyes were fixed in one long gaze of agony
upon the face of the dying man.
He marked the hue of that venerable
countenance
as it grew paler every moment: the lip
white and colorless, the eyes wild and wavering
in their glance, the livid circles gathering like the
taint of corruption beneath each eye; he beheld
the signs and heralds of coming death; he heard
the quick gasping struggle for breath, and yet he
spoke no word, he uttered no sound of agony.
I see her face in thine, murmured the old
man, as he gazed upward upon the countenance
of his son. It is no dream,andandthy
dagger is resting in my heart!
Guiseppo was silent.
Boy, look not upon me with such fearful
agony
thou
art forgiven! gasped the old man.
Raise the hilt of my sword to my lips: I would
kiss the cross ere I die. And now thy hand is
firm, seize the haft of the dagger, and draw the
blade from my heart.
Guiseppo gazed upon the face of his father
with a vacant look, yet still he uttered no word.
Draw the dagger from my heart! gasped the
dying man.
Guiseppo seized the haft of the dagger, and
slowly drew the blade from the heart of the
murdered
man.
CHAPTER THE FOURTEENTH.
THE FATE OF THE FRATRICIDE.
THE ELEMEMTS ARISE IN BATTLE,
DARKENING
THE EARTH WITH THEIR
STRIFE, AS THE WIND SHRIEKS
THE DEATH-WAIL OF
ALDARIN THE SCHOLAR.
Onward toward the castle gate, walking to his
death, and yet receding from the grave at every
step, with the fierce faces of the avengers frowning
around him, with cries of execration and deep
muttered oaths of vengeance deafening his ear,
onward
toward the castle gate, with an even step and
an erect form, strode the Scholar Aldarin, the
smile of scorn on his lip and the glance of
contempt
in his eye.
He knew not why they bore him onward
fearless
of death, come in what form it might, he
cared not.
The castle gate was reached. A dark-robed
monk rushed from the shadow of the massive
pillars
,
and while his white hairs waved in the
morning
breeze, he raised a cross of iron aloft in the
sunbeams
Sinnerthere is mercy abovemercy even
for thee! Behold the symbol of that mercy!
Hahacurses on thee and thy symbol of
mercy! thou shaveling! Were not my hands
stayed by these cowards I would strike ye down
in my very path! I curse ye all! he shrieked
gazing around the crowdI blaspheme your
religion
,
I mock your ***! Will ye not strike?
Aldarin laughs at the steel! Are we afraid of a
weak and trembling old man? Fear ye the
Scholar, even in his last hour? Lo! my breast
is bareI defy the blow!
Thou wilt have striking enough presently,
cried Robin the RoughThrow open the castle
gate there. Let the portcullis be raised and the
drawbridge lowered.
The gate was passed, and the drawbridge
crossed
.
Aldarin stood upon the platform of turf
surmounting
the summit of the hill; beneath him
descended the road into the valley, on either side
yawned chasms dark and deep, while the rocks
upon whose massive piles the castle was founded,
threw their fantastic forms from amid clumps of
brushwood, and here and there the massive stones
rose brightly into the sunshine from the depths
of the gloomy void.
Aldarin looked around, and beheld the face of
nature clad in the smile of sunshine, the forests
of foliage rising in the light, the broad and
mirror-like
bosom of the Arno seen through the
intervals
of undulating hills, the mighty Appenines
frowning in the far distance, and the calm blue
sky, glowing with the first kiss of morn, arching
above.
Aldarin looked around upon the face of nature,
but another spectacle fixed his attention and excited
his wonder. Near his very side four dark steeds
were rearing and springing on the sod, while their
grooms, four sable-hued and swarthy Moors, whose
distorted faces looked more like the visages of
beasts of the forest than the countenances of
human
things, were forced to exert all their
giant-strength
in the effort to hold the wild horses of
the desert.
Wildly with their hoofs the barbs tore the sod,
scattering the loosened earth in the very face of
Aldarin, their eyes flashed like coals of flame,
their sinews seemed to creep under the smooth
and glossy skin, black as midnight, their crests
proudly arching gave their manes, long and dark,
to the breeze, while with quivering nostrils and a
shrill piercing neigh they seemed panting to break
loose from all restraint and dart like lightning
down the steep.
What would ye with me now? exclaimed
Aldarin, as a strange wonder and a darker fear
gathered around his heart. Cowards that ye are'
ye still delay your work of murder. I would
this merry mysterie were finished
To the gibbet with the brother-murderer!
arose the thunder-shout of the multitude. To
the gibbet with the wizard and sorcerer!
To the Doom, to the Doom! shouted the
stout yeoman.
To the Doom
, but not to the
gibbet
!
Robin the Rough smiled and waved his hand to
the Moors who led the barbs of Arimanes down
the steep, while Damian and Halbert followed at
their heels, bearing the Fratricide to his doom.
Meanwhile the multitude thronging from the
castle-gate, in one dense crowd, begun to darken
over the rocks that hedged in the moat, as the
men-at-arms followed Aldarin down the hilly road,
their upraised swords glittering in the first beams
of the morning sun.
At the foot of the hill there lay a piece of level
earth, some hundred paces square, sloping toward
the east into a green meadow, backed by a wood,
on the west it was hedged in by the forest trees,
on the north was the road leading to the castle,
while toward the south the highway to Florence
wound upward along the brow of a precipitous
hill.
Arrived at this level spacethe theatre of the
last and most fearful scene in his lifeAldarin
beheld
the stout yeoman ranging the men-at-arms
along the foot of the hill, shoulder to shoulder,
presenting
one firm and compact front, their upraised
swords glittering above each sable plume, their
armour of steel shining in the morning light,
while at his very side, in the centre of the level
space, the wild horses of the desert were rearing
and plunging in the hold of their grooms, as their
shrill and piercing neigh broke on the air.
Aldarin cast his gaze above. There crowding
along the rocks, that confined the most, form after
form, face after face, thronged the vassals of
Albarone
,
gazing with silence and awe, upon the strange
scene passing in the valley below. For the
moment
every voice was stilled, every cry was
silenced
,
and with hushed breath and fixed brows, the
men of Albarone, awaited the last scene of this
fearful tradgedy.
And as Aldarin gazed around he beheld two
soldiers advance, holding thongs in their hands
twisted out of the hide of the wild bull, while the
tawny Moors, at a sign from Rough Robin, placed
their steeds haunch to hauch, the heads of two of
the barbs looking toward the east, while the others
were turned toward the west.
Robin the Rongh advanced. He gazed for a
moment around the scene, and then approaching
the side of Aldarin, spoke in a calm and even tone,
as though the dignity of his solemn office, the
avenger of the dead, imbued his very soul.
Thou hast invoked the blow, thou hast defied
the steel, blasphemed our religion, and mocked our
God! Traitor and Fratricideturn thee and behold
the vengeance of that God! Behold the manner of
thy deathMurderer, look at these barbs of the
desert
,
see how they paw the earth, how their
quiveing
nostrils snuff the airmark those forms of
strength, those sinews of iron! Ere an hundred
can be told, lashed to the backs of these horses,
thine accursed carcase shall be scattered to the
winds of heaven, while thy blood-stained soul,
goes, trembling to its last account! Thou art a
brave manwe would listen to thee, while thou
makest a merry mock of death, and such a death
as this!
Aldarin turned, he looked at the wild horses,
placed haunch to haunch, the deformed Moor
holding
each steed, he marked their forms of strength,
their sinews of iron, and a slight tremor, scarce
perceptible
,
passed over his frame.
I am readyhe slowly and distinctly spoke,
with a calm smile of scornI am ready even
for this death. Cowards and slaves I defy ye!
Thou art a wise managain spoke Robin the
Rough in his mocking toneand yet mere fools
have deceived and duped thee! Yesternight,
within
the confines of the Red-Chamber, thou didst
wait the coming of a brother-wizard who was to
journey from the far wilds of the cast. Thy
brother-wizard
twenty-four hours agone, rode from
the very walls of Florence, secured by the favor
of this tyrant-dukeHa! dost thou tremble?
Thisthisis false! gasped Aldarin
Ibrahim
journeyed not from the wilds of the east.
He came from the east attended by a train of
twelve Arab knights and a band of Christian
warriors
,
whom the courtesy of the Crusaders, gave to
the service of the friend of Saladin. He arrived
at Florence, he beheld the tyrant duke, and at
high noon yesterday rode from the walls of the
city, bound for the Castle of Albarone. He was
a venerable man and a mighty, this Ibrahimfor
his long beardha,hatrailed down to his very
breast! Who was it that made captives of his
companic, and confined his own royal person in
bonds, while the men of Sir Geoffrey wended to
the castle clad in the garments of the Arabians
retinue? Old man breathe the question in a
murmured
voice for it was the work ofTHE
Invisible
!
Aldarin veilded his face in his hands, and
pressed
his lips between his teeth, until the blood
trickled down to his very chin.
Off with the murderer's attire! shrieked
Robin
the Roughoff with tunic and hose, belt and
boots! Strip him to the very skin! Demon, thy
magical pranks shall not avail thee now! We
will lead thee to thy death, unarmed with magic
casket or wizard phial! Advance comrades and
disrobe the murderer!
Aldarin raised his head, as the soldiers with the
thongs advanced, while the men-at-arms noted
that his face was ghastly white in hue, yet
calm as the Summer morn dawning in the eastern
sky.
Is there not one man in all this crowd, who
will bear a message from a father to his
daughter
?
he slowly exclaimedThe Ladye Annabel,
she is my child, andby the fiend ye dare not
refuse
a father's request!
There was a pause of silence, while two figures
clad and veiled in sweeping robes of sable, stole
silently thro' the throng of men-at-arms, and
stood beside Robin the Rough.
Will no man bear the last words of afather
to his child?
IIwill bear the messageexclaimed the
most upright of the Sable Figures, speaking from
the folds of his robeI will bear thy dying words
to the Ladye Annabel!
Aldarin trembled. He knew the voice, and
strange memories came crowding round him, as
he fancied the tones of his murdered brother,
living
again in that husky sound.
Bear the parchment scroll to the Ladye
Annabel
.
Tell hertell herit came from the hands
of
one
who loved her thro' life, and gave his last
thoughts to
her
, in the hour of a fearful death.
And look ye manhe continued in quick and
gasping tonesye need not tell her, how her
father
diedye need not speak of his doomsay to
her, that Aldarin died in his bed!
I willI willas God lives I will!
Tell her that Aldarin with his last word,
blessed
her with the blessing of the God in whom she
believes!
It shall be done! exclaimed the voice, and the
hand of the veiled Figure grasped the parchment
scrollIt shall be done!
Robin turned from this scene, and gazed above.
How say ye men of Albaronehe shouted
pointing to the Barbs of Arimanesshall the
Wild Horses, rend the body of the murderer into
atoms? Is our sentence just?
There arose from rock, from hill, from valley
one shoutIt is the judgment of Heaventhe
judgment of Heaven!
Slowly and silently the soldiers disrobed the
scholar, and at last he stood disclosed in the light
with the folds of his under tunic floating around his
slender form.
Lead him to his doom! shouted Robin the
Rough.
Ye shall not lead the old man to this fearful
death! arose the shriek of the Figure who had
received the parchment from the hands of the
scholarI forbid this work of doom!
The robe fell from the form of the stranger, and
Adrian Di Albarone confronted the stout yeoman,
his hands upraised, and his blue eye gleaming
with a wild light, as he shrieked forth the words,
I forbid this work of doom!
Adrian Di Albarone, exclaimed the deep-toned
voice of Robin the Rough, as he seemed inspired
with an awful feeling of the duty he owed the dead,
to morrow, these gallant men, the vassals
clustering
round yon heights, and thy poor servitor, who
stands before thee, will joy to call theeLord!
This day is sacred to another master, to another
Lordthis day is sacred to the God of vengeance.
This day we own no earthly rule, we stand apart
from all human things; we have sworn to eat, nor
drink, nor sleep until we have fulfilled the work
of doom!
Thou wilt not scorn my prayer for mercy?
Adrian Di Albarone asks the old man's life of thee!
He is stained with my father's blood, but I would
not have him die this fearful deathspare the old
man's life!
I am the avenger of Lord Julian of Albarone!
Ask the God above to spare the fratricidefor I
cannot, cannot stay his doom!
Adrian turned away, for the stern faces of the
men-at-arms told him that his pleadings were all
in vain. And as he glided from the place of death,
the robes were thrust aside from the face of the
other figure, and every eye beheld the visage of
Albertine the monk.
Old man, exclaimed the voice of Albertine,
from the shrouded folds of his robe, hast thou no
prayer to offer, no words of penitence to speak, ere
thou art led to thy doom?
I am ready for my death; exclaimed Aldarin,
extending his armsI seorn your whining
prayers
,
and as for your words of penitencelook ye
is there aught of repentance written on this
cheek or brow?
To whom dost thou resign thy soul?
To the
Awful Soul of the Universe
!
exclaimed
the fated man, as his slender form rose
proudly erect, while his extended hands were raised
in the act of solemn appeal. Ye may tear this
body into fragments, ye may rend this carcase
into atoms, doom me to the death of fire, or
consign
this form to the decay of the charnel-house,
yet ye cannot destroy Aldarin!
His soul will live
and live forever! It may float on the unseen
winds, it may glare in the lightning's flash, or
strike in the thunderbolt; it may come back to the
earth, in the storm, the horror and the doom: or it
may wander far, far into the solitudes of the
Vast
Unknown
, where eternal fires lash the shores of
desolated worldsstill will it live and live forever!
A beam of
the awful soul
can never die!
Albertine gazed upon the erect form and
flashing
eye of the scholar and saw that his labor was
in vain. With a look of mingled and contrasted
feelings, he turned away from the scene, gathering
the folds of his robe over his face as he disappeared.
Lead me to the death! cried Aldarin in a tone
of bitter scorn. Or are ye afraid of a weak and
withered old man? Haha! ye are brave men!
Lead him to his death! echoed Robin the
Rough.
Attired in his under tunic, Aldarin was led
forward
.
Damian seized him by the shoulders and
Halbert grasped his feet. They raised him upon
the haunches of the steeds, with his head to the
east. Robin the Rough advanced, and grasping a
thong, twisted out of the wild bull's hide, from the
hands of one of the men-at arms, slowly wound
the cord around the body of one of the wild horses,
and looping it in a firm knot, secured the right
arm of Aldarin to the back of the restless steed;
while Damian bound the left to the other steed,
Halbert, assisted by the men-at-arms, bound his
legs to the backs of the opposite steeds, winding
the thongs again and again, around the bodies of
the impatient Arabs, until the blood spouted from
he withered flesh of the fratricide.
Wind your thongs yet tighter friends of mine!
the sneer broke gaspingly from the lips of the
doomed. I defy your malice and laugh at your
doom!
The interest now was most absorbing and
intense
.
Along the whole extent of blackened rocks,
frowning above the level space, gathered the
multitude
gazing on the scene with gasping breath and
woven brows; while the men-at-arms, circling along
the base of the hill, stood silent and motionless,
their upraised swords glittering in the first beams
of the morning sun.
And there, in the centre of the space of
highway
earth, placed haunch to haunch, stood the
bsrbs of Arimanes, their eyes flashing as though
the demon-soul lived and moved within their
sinewy
forms; there were gathered the deformed
Moors, each sable groom holding an eager steed
by the nostrils, for the bridles were now cast aside;
there, standing at the side of each wild horse, the
avengers of the dead, with the right leg advanced
and daggers drawn, awaited the word of vengeance;
and there, with his face turned upward to heaven,
helpless and motionless, intense pain shooting
through every vein, and quivering along every
sinew, filling his brain with fire, his heart with
ice, Aldarin the fratricide smiled in scorn, as the
moment of his doom came hurrying on.
Avengers of your Lord shouted Robin the
Rough, raise your daggers, and as the word
shrieks from my lips, bury them to the hilt in
the flank of each steed!
A worda single word, whispered Aldarin,
in a subdued voice. Draw nearI would say
my last farewell
What would'st thou have? exclaimed one of
the men-at-arms, advancing.
When I am dying, ere the heart is cold, or
the brow chill, approach and gaze upon my
countenance
,
and as you gaze, take to your very
soul,
Speakman of bloodthy moments are
well-nigh
spent.
Take to your very soul, whispered the
Fratricide
,
as he slowly, and with difficulty, brought
his head round to his right shoulder
The Curse
of Aldarin
!
Avengers of your Lord, exclaimed the stout
yeomanstrike deep every man into the flanks
of his steed!
The curse
, shricked a hollow voice,
The
Curse of Aldarin!
Strike, I saystrike!
The daggers sunk hissing into the flanks of the
horses, buried to the hilts, the Moors leaped back,
the maddened steeds sprang forward, with one
wild bound, straining every sinew in the effort to
free themselves from their accursed burden. It
was in vain. They sank back, with a maddening
howl, each steed upon his haunches, the accursed
fratricide uttered a yell of intense and
overwhelming
agonyit died on his lips! With eyes
of fire, with streaming manes, their nostrils
extended
,
and all their vigor gathered for the effort,
the steeds again leaped forward, springing madly
from each other, and darting into the air, with
one terrible impulsethe scene swam for an
instant
before the vision of the spectators!
They looked again. A limbless trunk lay in
the dust of the highway, spouting streams of blood
along the green meadow careered two black
steedsthrough the dense forests thundered the
others.
One of the men-at-arms, approaching the
carcase
,
gazed for a momet at the dread face, and
while his eye glanced over the fearful expression of
the features, convulsed by the throes of the parting
soul, the eyes yet fired with hate, the lip still
curved
with scorn, the sunken jaw, oozing blood from
every pore, the quivering flesh and the changing
hues of the ghastly visage, while all the
ghastliness
and fear of the countenance, met his vision
at a glance, he uttered a howl of horror, and fell
stiffened upon the earth, as the last spark of life
fled from the remains of the fratricide. When the
soldier awoke, his eye was vacant, and his reason
gone. He was a maniac! He had received the
last words of the Doomed, and the Curse was on
him forever.
Another moment passed, and the crowd came
rushing from the rocky steeps, filling the air with
fierce shouts, and wild yells of execration, while
the men-at-arms, circle round the bleeding trunk,
gazing upon the wild and unearthly countenance
of the Scholar, in wonder and in awe, each man
whispering to his comrade, a sentence of fear, as
he marked the expression of blasphemous and
fiend-like scorn, stamped upon the visage of the
fratricide.
And while they circled round, struck dumb
with a nameless awe, two Figures, arrayed in
robes of sable, rushed through the throng and
confronting
Robin the Rough, as he stood stern,
silent
and awe-stricken, they gazed upon the face
of the Dead.
It isexclaimed the solemn voice of Adrian
Di AlbaroneIt is the judgment of Heaven!
From rock, from hill, from valley, from forest
and from castle-wall, arose the stern echo,
The Judgment of Heaventhe Judgment of
Heaven!
On, on, like lightning, darted the ebon steeds,
bearing the torn and shattered limbs, reeking with
the life blood, yet warm and smoking. On, on,
as tho' the spirit of the lost, had entered their
maddened forms. On, on, they flew!
Onward! and onward! sped the wild horses,
tracking their course with blood, and rushing
past the cottages of the affrighted peasantry, like
beings of the unreal world, fired with the soul
of Arimanes, cursed with the Spirit of the
Evil
One!
Onward and onward! One brave barb,
came plunging from the depths of a wood, and a
precipice mighty and steep, was before him, but
he heeded it not. Down an hundred fathoms into
the boiling waters he fell. Another black steed
sank in the calm waters of a placid river; another
reached the sea, and plunging in its depths, swam
far, far, into the wide expanse of waves and was
heard of no more. The lastswept like the wind,
by hamlet and tower and town. The live-long
day he urged on his career. The blood streaming
from his nostrils, his limbs weakened, and his
sinews
unstrung, he entered the confines of a lone
valley, where a calm lake, gave its bosom to the
evening sun. His pace was unsteady and he
staggered to and fro, yet still did the bloody
fragment
hang at his back. At last he fell and died,
and the scene of his death was before a pleasant
cottage on a green hill side. Much wondered the
solitary student of the cot, at the carcase of the
beauteous steed. Little did he wot from whence
he sped or the cause of his flight.
Meanwhile gathering around the shapeless
trunk, the men of Albarone built a pile of the
branches of oaks, tht had lain mouldering for
years in the forest, and soon a broad bright flame
arose, and it burned till the setting of the sun,
when a storm gathered in the west, and heralded
by thunder, and armed with lightning, it swept
over the earth, and the ashes of the fratricide,
mingling with the whirlwind, never more polluted
the green bosom of the earth.
Thus runs the legend of the Doom of the
Poisoner
,
thus runs the legend of the death that befel
Aldarin the Fratricide
.
BOOK THE FOURTH.
The Grabe.
The Fate and the Doom Unite and the Cloud Bursts.
CHAPTER THE FIRST.
A SILVERY MOON AND A CLOUDLESS
SKY.
Night among the mountainsoh, glorious
and beautiful! arose the voice of the Wanderer,
as with one bold grasp he attained the topmost
rock of the hoary steep, rising far above forest and
streamNight among the mountainsthe calm
moonbeams sleeping on the lakethe boundless
azure arching abovethe rolling sweep of forest
and the rugged outline of precipice and steep
the far-off convent, its towers looming thro' the
distance, like a cloud of evil omenNight among
the mountains, glorious and grand and beautiful!
Thank God for the breeze, the cool and
freshning
breeze! It sweeps over my forehead, burning
as with the ravages of hidden flame, it bears the
fever from my cheek, and the madness from my
brain. And yet I must on, and onafar I
behold
the peaceful cot, appearing amid the
luxuriance
of the hill-side vinesmy steed lays
bleeding
and dead in the vale below, still must I on,
and on!
God of Heaven, will that face never depart
from my soul, the brow darkened by superhuman
hate, the eyes all aflame with the Curse of the
Fratricide, the white lips, and the sunken jaw;
with the blood oozing from every pore! Even now
I behold the face! And to her earhelp me
Saints of Lightto
her
ear must I bear the
manner
of his doom!
The moon shines in the heavens, calm and
beautifulwhen the mild radiance of her beams
pales before the glory of the uprising sunthen,
then, will the angels of fate, write in the books
of the Unknown, the Doom of Adrian, the last of
the race of Albarone!
And as the words broke murmuring from his
lips, he flung his form from the summit of
the steep, and grasping with eager hands the
point of each projecting rock, at last descended
to the bed of the valley, and sped onward on his
errand of woe, while higher in the heavens up
rose the moon.
High in the heavens arose the full orbed moon,
and calm and lovely was the sight, as enthroned
in the very zenith of the boundless azure, this
thing of beauty and of beams, shed a shower of
silver radiance down on the silent bosom of the
quiet vale, mirroring her rounded glory, in the
deep waters of the mountain lake, giving a ghastly
lustre to the white precipice, from whose
foundations
arose the walls of the lonely convent, mossy
with age and darkened by time.
In this wide world of oursso runs the wild
rhapsody of the Chronicler of the ancient MSS.
in this wide world of ours,there are, I ween, many
things sublime and beautiful and grand, yet what
sight may compare with a cloudless heaven, a
silvery moon and a lovely extent of woody hills
and grassy vales? Never minstrel struck harp
never romancer spoke the fancies of his brain,
that did not hymn thy praise, O! beauteous thing
of brilliance and of beams! For ages and for
ages thou hast held thy way of glory thro' the
arching heavensthou hast looked down upon
warriors marching in all their pomp, and thou
hast beheld their withered forms strewn over the
battle plain;lovers have poured forth their love
beneath thy light, and again thou hast looked
down upon their quiet graves;nations have risen
and fallen;monuments that gave promise of
eternal duration, have crumbled in the dust;
cities have towered in deserts, and deserts have
won the place of gorgeous cities, yet still kind
nurturer of holy thoughts, inspirer of heavenly
fancies, yet still thou passest on in thy course of
light, and thus, with brilliance unpaling and
unpaled
,
glorious as when God first bade thee roll
thro' the azure expanse, shalt thou urge thy way
until the final trump of doom.
Arising in the calm moonbeams, the roof of the
lonely cottage gave its wreathing vines, all gay
with flowers, to the waving motion of the night
air, while the gleam of a taper, shooting from a
crevice of the closed lattice, varied the shadows
flung along one side of the tenement, by a
glittering
thread of light.
Meanwhile the beams of the taper gave light to
the principal chamber of the cottage, where the
stately mother of Leon the student, sate wrapt
in deep meditation.
Strange!thus she murmuredStrange!
Scarce seven days since we first concealed
ourselves
in this lonely vale, and Adrianha! I may
be overheardLeon, has won the friendship of
this noble youth of Florence. Not that he
acquires
honor therebyby my troth, no!the
youth is a good youth, and a fair, but the
friendship
of Emperors cannot add glory to the heir of
Albaronefool that I am!ever repeating the
name of our race! Strange it is, very strange,
that the gentle Florian should take up his abode,
in our cot! He is ever with Leone!They walk,
they eat, they drink together, and together they
pursue their studies! The fair stranger shall in
time become the leader of armiesbut my son
the last of an honored race, shall become a
monk
.
The thought is maddening!
The dame arose and hurriedly paced the room.
As she strode to and fro she perceived the door
of Leon's apartment slightly ajar, and impelled
by mere restlessness, she took a mother's
privilege
,
and softly entered the room.
No sooner had she opened the door, than a
sight met her gaze, that caused her to start back
to the very threshold with astonishment.
Seated beside the table, on which a taper cast
its dim light, over the opened volume, the chairs
of the students were drawn close together, their
backs were turned to the dame, the arm of Leon
was around the slender waist of the gentle Florian,
and with their heads laid one against the other,
the rich golden locks of Leon mingled with a
shower of flaxen tresses that fell over the shoulders
and down the back of the fair stranger.
Treading on tip-toe and much wondering at
the unusual length of Florian's hair, the dame
approached
.
Thou art weary, my lovethe whisper
broke from Florian's lipsthy dress is soiled with
dust and torn by travelthy face is wan and
haggard, andthe Virgin save methine eyes
are bloodshot! Thou hast been absent two long
and weary days. Hast journeyed far to-day
Adrian
?
A score of miles, since the sunset hour.
And thou didst see the old castle yet again?
Adrian replied in a whisper, and then as they
conversed in low murmurs, the dame observed the
form of her son agitated by a slight trembling
motion
,
while ever and anon he turned his head
aside veiling his face in his hands.
Nearer drew the dame, and looking over the
heads of the students, a tremor of surprise ran
over her frame, her hands were involuntarily
raised
,
her thin lips parted, her grey eyes expanded,
and her eyebrows arose to the very roots of her
hair. Silent she stood and motionless as a
statue
.
The evening being somewhat warm, the broach
that fastened Florian's doublet at the neck, was
unloosed and the opening garment gave to view a
neck of the most surpassing whiteness, spreading
into shoulders of flowing outline, budding into a
bosom of virgin tracery of form, all glowing with
the warm blood of youth, and heaving with the
pulsations of passion.
CHAPTER THE SECOND.
THE CLOUD GATHERS AND THE SKY
DARKENS.
The dame essayed to speak. Her voice died
away in an unmeaning rattle of the throat. One
hand she extended, and seizing Leon by the
shoulder, with the other she tore the maiden from
his embrace
Apostate! she began in tones that trembled
with rage, is it thus thou honorest the race whose
name thou bearest. Away!I will never look
upon thee more! Away!and with thee take
thy , I will not speak the title of shame;
Away!
As she spoke she raised her hand to strike the
shrinking maiden, who, with head drooped on her
bosom, and quick blushes coursing over her face,
strove hurriedly to fasten the broach of her
doublet
.
Strike her not, mother! cried Leon,
throwing
himself before the damsel, Assail her not
with words of shame!
He took the hand of the blushing maiden and
continuedFear not, love, there is none to harm
thee. Mother, behold my bride!
Annabel!Thy bride? Wherefore this
concealment
?
Why this unmaidenly disguise? How
is't, my sonhow is't?
As for the disguise it was assumed to aid her
escape, and then,he whispered into his
mother's
earand then I thought thou wouldst not
affect the niece of thethes'life, mother, I
cannot
speak the word of any one connected with
Annabel!
My son, my son! what hast thou done?
Answer
mebefits such doings with thy profession?
Art thou not intended for a minister of Heaven?
While the dame spoke, the figure of a monk
darkened the opened doorway, advancing to
Leon he threw back his cowl, and discovered the
dark brow, the wan face, the flashing eyes of
Albertine, the monk.
Lord Adrian, whispered the Monk, at
the hour of sunset, when the dark storm arose,
howling its requiem over the remains of the
Fratricide
,
thou didst hasten from the castle of
Albarone
,
bound for this lovely valley. Thou hadst
not gone an hour's journey from the castle walls,
when I tracked thy footsteps, bearing news of
fearful import. Thy haunt hath been betrayed to
the tyrant, by a traitor from the lonely vally.
Even now, the Duke spurs his steed toward the
valley of the mountain lake, attended by a band
of minions; even now the voices of his bravoes,
startle the air, shrieking for thy blood!
And the
Invisible
? whispered Adrian
where is their dagger of vengeance, while the
tyrant rides abroad on his errands of wrong?
Listen, Lord Adrian! This very night, while
the Duke is absent from the walls of Florence
will Lord and Monk, Prince and Peasant, joined
in the solemn oath of the holy steel, arise in the
might of men who have sworn at the very Altar
of God to be free, and ere the morrow's sun,
Florence the Fair and Beautiful, will own another
Sovereign! The Invisible work in secret, as doth
the hidden earthquakeman alone beholds the
bursting of the storm!
Hark! I hear the sound of horses' hoofs,
mingled
with the clatter of arms!
God of Heaven! The Duke approaches!
shouted the MonkI must be goneall thought
of escape for thee and thy bride is vain! Adrian,
Adrian, bear a firm heart through the perils of
this night, and in the morrow's dawn will blaze
the star of thy Mighty Fortune! Hath the Duke
any issue, or is he the last of his line?
He is the last of his race, answered Adrian,
why dost thou ask?
Thou wilt learn anon! exclaimed the Monk.
He turned and sought the door, but as if struck
by a sudden thought, he again approached Adrian,
and whispered in tones that seemed to come from
his very soul `Fare-thee-well, Adrian,
fare-thee-well
!
I have loved thee much, very much;
There was a time when my heart was as young
as thine, my soul as pure. But nowHa!
now
I would have my revenge, although the chasm of
hell yawned beneath menay, although between
me and the object of my hate yawned the gulf of
perdition, I would leap the abyss and drag him
down, down to the eternal flames that now
hunger
for his accursed soulFare-thee-well, Adrian
I'll never see thee more!
The Monk was gone. The fearful look that
fired his countenance, and the awful tones in
which he spoke, haunted Adrian Di Albarone
until
his dying hour.
Scarcely had Albertine disappeared, when there
was the sound of trampling feet in the outer
G
apartment, and presently the figure of his Grace
of Florence occupied the doorway, while the heads
of his followers were seen looking over his
shoulders
.
He looked around the apartment with a curious
eye, as if he sought the wanderers. At last his
glance rested upon the form of the disguised
Annabel
,
and advancing toward the damsel, he
flung himself at her feet, exclaiming with all the
grace of attitude and expression at his command,
Fair Ladye, it is with joy beyond the power
of words to tell, that I hail thee by the title of the
Fair Ladye Annabel, Countess Di Albarone!
How sayst thou? exclaimed Annabel,
forgetting
her boyish disguise in her eagerness, how
sayst thou?
Me
Ladye of Albarone?
Aye, fair Ladye. Thou art
now
the
Courtess
Di Albarone, soon shalt thou be my own
loved Annabel, Duchess of Florence.
The Duke leaned earnestly forward, trying to
look as much like a lover as might behis face
wore an expression of deep solemnity, his
protruding
eyes made an effort to sparkle, and his
attempt to soften his voice, gave one the idea of
a magpie trying to sing.
Annabel cast an agonized look at the Duke
Sayst thou nought of my father? she
exclaimed
.
Is he sick?is he ill?Tell me that
I may hurry to him!For heaven's sake tell me!
my father is
Dead
! cried the Duke.
Dead! echoed the dame, starting with
surprise
.
Annabel heard no more.
Coward and tyrant, shouted Lord Adrian,
as he caught the sinking maiden in his arms,
away with thee from this humble tenement.
Defile not my bride with the pollution of thy touch
God of Heaven I would give the brightest
jewel in the coronet of Albarone, for one good
blow at the carcase of this craven hound!
Ho! art thou here my gay springald?
Thy
bride
, indeed?Guards advance, seize the
miscreant
!I
will teach him to raise his unholy
hand against his liege Lord!away with him to
the lowest dungeon of yon convent. On the
morrow
he shall be carried to Florence, there to
answer
for his treason!
Unarmed and weaponless Adrian beheld
himself
at the mercy of the tyrant. The soldiers ad
vanced,in vain was his defencein an instant
he found himself in the hands of his foes, and as
the minions bound his hands behind his back, he
heard the beetle-browed Balvardofor he was
among the throngwhisper in the ear of the
Duke
At what hour my Lord?
'Slife canst not do it without my bidding?
When all in the convent is stillat midnight
let it be done!See to't!
Aye, aye, my Lord, at midnight it shall be
done!
And the Bridal, cried the Duke, turning to
the Ladye Annabel, as she rested in the arms of
the Countess. The hour after midnight shall
witness the joyous scenethe marriage of the
Duke and his betrothed!
CHAPTER THE THIRD.
THE DEATH-BOWL.
THE FOOTSTEPS OF THE RAVISHER STARTLE,
THE SILENCE OF THE MAIDEN'S CELL,
WHILE ADRIAN PREPARES
FOR HIS DOOM IN THE
VAULTS BELOW.
It was in a lone chamber, where the dark walls
arching above and circling around, unrelieved by
tapestry or wainscotting, were rendered yet more
dark and gloomy by the fitful flashes of a taper,
placed upon a small table of blackened oak, while
the sable hangings of the couch standing in one
corner, the floor of stone, wearing the same dead
and fearful hue, the massive furniture of the room,
and the grotesque carvings ornamenting the
heavy
pillars, all were in unison with the grave-like
silence of the air, heavy with doom and burdened
with death.
In the centre of the apartment, her white walls
loosely flowing around her peerless form, with
her fair and rounded arms upraised, her head
slightly inclined to one side, her cheek, now warm
with hope, now pale with fear, stood the Ladye
Annabel; her hair of sunshine richness swept back
over her neck and shoulders, while her bosom rose
heaving in the light, and her breath came thick
and fast, the convulsive gasps, breaking the
death-like
silence of the apartment, with an echo of
strange emphasis.
Sleep had fled from her eyelids. She arose and
watched, she knew not why, but still she watched
and trembled as she listened to the slightest
sound.
I listen, I tremble, and my heart is chilled
with a nameless fear, murmured the Ladye
Annabel, pacing the dark floor of the apartment
with indecisive and hurried steps. The hour
wears slowly on, the fatal hour after midnight,
when this unrelenting Duke will claim my hand,
this hand already given to another, by the
minister
of Heaven! Great God, behold the bridal
a lonely cell, hidden in the depths of this fearful
monastery, the altar of black, the dark-robed
monk, the tyrant-Duke and the victim; the time,
the hour after the bell has tolled midnight, no
hope, no aid, afar from human consolation, or the
voice of human friendsuch will be the second
bridal of Annabel, wife of Adrian Di Albarone!
She paused with an inward thrill of fear, as the
vivid details of the picture rose before her mental
vision, and then came another thought of horror
the bride must be widowed ere she weds a
second
time
.
While dark and fearful imaginings haunted her
soul, and well nigh crazed her brain, the fair and
gentle Ladye Annabel felt a strange and
deadening
sleep stealing over her frame, and with a
half-muttered
prayer to the Virgin, she sank
slumbering
on the couch, the hangings of sable closing
over her form, and concealing her from the sight.
All is silent within the cell. Low, suppressed
sounds break from distant parts of the monastery,
half-heard shrieks, and deep-muttered groans. For
a dreary half hour, the cell is left to silence and
solitude; when a distant footstep is heard, then a
strange echo runs along the corridors of the
Convent
,
and the small door of the lonely room,
grating
on its hinges slowly opens, and a Figure,
buried in the folds of a sweeping robe of black,
and bearing a small lamp of iron in an extended
hand, stalks cautiously along the floor of stone.
The Figure paused with a trembling and
indicisive
movement in the centre of the floor, and
then a face flushed by wine, and ruddy with
excitement
,
was thrust from the folds of the robe of
black.
All silent and still, exclaimed a voice,
indistinct
with wine. An half hour of midnightthe
sleeping potion has taken effect! It has, by St.,
Antonia!
He approached the bedside, and with the
trembling
hand of a coward, flung beck the sable
hangings
of the couch. The light of his lamp, fell
vividly over the form of the sleeping maiden, as
she reclined on the sable furs covering the couch,
while her flowing robes, white as the undriven
snow, gave a strange contrast to the ebony
darkness
of the bed.
I' faith she is beautifuleh, Aldarin? Faugh!
I forgotthe man is dead! That bloom upon her
cheek'tis like the opening rose. How soft that
heave of the bosom as it rises from the folds of the
white robetorn to pieces by wild horsesthat
arm, with the dress falling softly around its
out-lines
,
the small hand, the tapering fingersa most
accursed fateand the attitude, the cheek
reclining
on the arm, the form laid so carelessly along
the couch, the feet, small, delicatetorn into a
thousand fragments, an arm here, a leg there, and
By the Saints I must e'en crave a kiss of this
sleeping beauty
And stooping slowly over the bed, with the
lamp extended in one hand, the Duke glanced
nervously around the room, and then with a rude
grasp of the flaxen tresses, he wound the other
around the maiden's neck, his unholy hands
touched
her virgin bosom with its globes of beauty,
heaving and throbbing as his fingers pressed the
snow-white skin, while his sensual lips, steaming
with wine, were pressed upon her unstained
cheek, his grasp growing closer, and his eyes
gloating over the Ladye's face and form, as that
kiss of pollution rested on her cheek.
Haha!the sleeping potion,she is mine
she is mine. The braggart Adrian hugs his
death in the vaults belowI gather his bride to
my arm in the cell above. Hahathe sleeping
potion!
No thought of mercy, no whispering of pity, no
silent pleading of right, for a moment restrained
the purpose of the ravisher. He gathered her
form closer to that breast which had never been
the home of one ennobling thought, he wound his
hand around her neck; again was her bosom
and cheek polluted by the plague-spot of his touch.
She is mine! chuckled the ravisher. Mine,
and none other than mine!
The Ladye Annabel murmured in that fatal
sleep, she tossed her rounded arms wildly to and
fro; the potion was in her veins, and around her
heart, and the nightmare on her soul.
Another start, and she awoke. She slowly
unclosed
her large blue eyes, she fixed their glance
upon the flushed countenance of the ravisher,
with a look that went to his very soul, and caused
the arm that encircled her form to tremble like a
leaf tossed to and fro by the wind.
Murderer! The solitary word broke from
her lips, and her look of meaning was again fixed
upon his face. He trembled before her glance
he quailed like a whipped houndhe unloosed his
hold.
I am not, he muttered, springing backward
from the couch. It was not me. He is not
dead; he lives
Murderer! she again murmured, in that
low, deep-toned voice, while her face of calm and
dreamy beauty was stamped with a weird
expression
that awed the ravisher to the very soul.
Even now thy evil angel writes thee liar, in the
book of thy misdeeds. Even now thy victim
writhes in the throes of death within the vaults
below; aye, aye, beneath thy very feet he dies.
Why stand ye over the corse? Doth not the pale
face and the cold brow fright ye? On whom is
fixed the glare of those stony eyeson whom?
On thee, murderer, on thee; on thee they glare
with the accusing glance of death!
She is crazed! Save me, all good saints
she is crazed! She sweeps toward me with a
measured stride! Great God! she walks not
she glides slowly on; she moves like a spirit
a thing of air!
He shrunk back, cringing before the glance of
those eyes from which all reason had fled; he
shrunk back step by step as she advanced, awed
by the upraised arms, with the robes of white
waving slowly to and fro; awed by the
supernatural
look visible in every line of the face of the
Ladye Annabel, and in a moment found himself
leaning for support against a dark stone pillar of
the cell.
Murderer! she murmured, looking him full
in the face. I hear thy victim groan, I hear
him writhe. Look ye, good angels, he denies it,
and look, look how the red blood drops from his
trembling hands!
With a look of wild and prophetic meaning, she
glided backward step by step, she reached the
small door of the cell, and flung it open with her
outspread hands.
He denies it, he denies it; and the bloodha
ha, ha!hark how it patters on the floor!
With that low, muttered laugh which chilled
his very blood, for it was the laugh of madness,
the Ladye Annabel again awed the Duke of Flo
rencethe ravisher in heartwith her gaze, and
then springing through the cell door, her form,
with its waving robes of snow, was lost to his
sight.
He saw her form no more, but a low muttered
laugh came whispering along the galleries of the
monastery, and half-formed words broke on his
ear. Where is now the ravisher, flushed with
wine and maddened with lust; where is now the
proud Duke, haughtily attired in robes of price,
with dishonor on his heart, and the foul purpose
on his soul?
Crouching against the wall, trembling in every
limb, his eyes vacant with terror, his whiskered
jaw half dropped upon his heart, his hand still
nervously grasping the iron lamp, he listens to the
low, muttered laugh creeping to his ear from the
far distant corridors; he listens and shakes with
fear, but says no word.
Along the dark galleries she flees, filling the
old arches with echoes of that low muttered laugh;
through the midnight passages she winds,
stair-ways
she ascends, and her delicate feet descend
the dampened steps of stone; alone, in darkness,
and in nameless fear, she glides on her flight of
terror.
The cool air sweeps over her fevered brow, the
dampness of the atmosphere chills her bosom, and
by slow degrees the flight of madness, caused by
the drugged potion, passed from her soul, and the
Ladye Annabel is restored to reason and to
thought.
Oh! fearful reason, oh! terrible thought, to
which madness were joy, insanity, in its wildest
flight, happiness the most intense.
The bride must be widowed, ere she weds a
second time!
She rushed on, never heeding the darkness;
she rushed on, never heeding the cold. She might
save him yet; oh! even yet she might save him.
And through the dark passages of that strange
and deserted part of the monastery she wound,
until her hands, extended on either side, touched
the opposite walls, wet with moisture, and
crawling
with vermin; when the echo of the arches,
superseded by a dead, deafening murmur, told
Annabel that she strode along a confined corridor,
far under ground, growing narrow and yet
narrower
at every step.
A moment passed, and her extended hands
were met by waving folds of tapestry, that swept
across her path, and terminated the narrow corr
dor. Thrusting her hands eagerly among the
hangings, she turned them suddenly aside, and
started back with surprise, as a broad belt of light
was thrown along the gloomy passage. With
hushed breath and a beating heart, she gazed
beyond
the hangings of dark leather, and while her
blue eyes dilated with wonder and fear, she beheld
a strange and startling scene.
Two figures were kneeling upon the floor of a
small apartment, narrow and confined, as regards
dimensions, and square in shape, hung with
gorgeous
folds of embroidered tapestry, dark-green
in hue, with matting of strange pattern and
curious
device, brought from the far Eastern lands,
strewn over the pavement of the room; while the
only object that broke the uniformity of the place,
was a dark robe flung over some massive body in
an obscure corner.
The light, clear and brilliant in its flame, placed
on the matting between the kneeling men, threw
its vivid beams on each face and form, over every
line of their features, over every point of their
apparel
.
The Ladye Annabel stifled an expression of
surprise which rose to her lips at the vision of this
luxuriously furnished cell, in the midst of gloom
and damp, and then with a beating heart took in
the details of this strange picture.
One of the kneeling figures was a soldier, the
other was a monk. The soldier, with his
muscular
hand laid on his bent knee, grasped a massive
sword, his beetle brow surmounted by stiff and
matted hair, giving a darker expression to his
small and ferret-like eyes; while his companion,
robed in the dark attire of a monk, with a pale,
solemn face, lighted by the glare of an eye that
seemed to dilate and burn, looked upon the
man-at-arms
with a glance meant to read more than
the rugged visagemeant to read his very soul.
The Ladye Annabel listened to their low and
muttered conversation with her very heart
mounting
to her throat.
Thou wilt do iteh, Albertine? Thou
knowest
my orders, sir monk?
The steel or the bowl?
The same, by the fiend! The hourwhen
the clock of the tower strikes twelve. He said so
thou knowest whom I mean. Why that dark
and bitter smile? Blood o' th' Turk, monk, that
smile shows thy white teethI like it not!
Nay, good Balvardo, be not angered with me.
I was but painting a quiet picture to my fancy.
Our victim, his eyes rolling in the death-struggle,
his blue lips whitened with foam, his arms
outstretched
with the last convulsive spasm, and then
ha, ha!the music of the death rattle! 'Tis
excellent, i'faith, the pictureha, ha ha!
Look ye, monk or devil, whate'er ye be, I'm
your man, when a good deed of cut-and-thrust is
to be done, and the wretch is despatched with a
blow. But as for this merry-making over the
dead, I like it not. Blood o' Mahound, not a whit
of it! I can wet my sword in a man's blood as
nicely as your next man, but it likes me not to
wet my tusks with the vile puddle, and grin while
the red drops fall from my lips. No more o' your
death grins, monk, or's death!we quarrel!
Hohoho! so the humor suits ye not,
honest
Balvardo. Dost know the depth of the sea, or
the number of the millions slain by old Death?
Then know the hate I bear
my
victim; then count
the lives I would crush in my revenge, had he as
many as the millions trampled under the feet of
Death! Is't not cause former riment,
good
Balvardo
?
Look ye, sir monk, thou hast ever been known
as the prime tool of his grace,'s life! I should
mention no names,and therefore do I resign my
part in this night's work to thy hands. When
'tis done, thou knowest
Where shall I place the body?
Here! cried the hoarse voice of the soldier,
and the Ladye Annabel saw him rise; she beheld
him striding across the matted floor, toward an
obscure corner of the apartment; she beheld him
as he placed his rough hand upon the dark robe
flung over the rising object. Here let him
rest, he cried, raising the robe, and rest
forever
!
The Ladye Annabel beheld a sight that
gathered
the big beaded drops of sweat thick as the
death dew on her forehead. Her heart seemed
swelled to bursting, and she turned away from
the sight for a single moment, with the impulse
of overpowering horror.
When she looked again, the black cloth was
again resting on that object of terror, while
Balvardo
was advancing toward the monk with his
usual heavy and measured stride.
Hast aught to hold the wine,
good
Balvardo?
In yonder closet thou wilt find the wine. Here
iscurse this cloak, how its folds tangle about
my body!here is the goblet.
The Ladye Annabel felt the death-like feeling
of ice creeping around her heart; and as she
looked
,
she thought she beheld the monk Albertine
grow pale with horror, while his compressed lip
seemed to tell a story of fearful yet hushed
emotion
.
The goblet held forth in the hand of the
Sworder
,
was the goblet of gold with which the poisoner
of the Red Chamber had administered death to
the lips of Julian, Lord of Albarone
.
Man! exclaimed Albertine, with a blazing
eye and livid lip, how came this gobletthis
death-bowlin thy possession?
'S life! Dost not know the story? One of
the witnesses who gave testimony against that
thatI mean
he
who sleeps in yonder chamber
received this goblet as a mark of the accuser's
gratitude. I was that witness. Blood o' th'
Turk! there goes the clockone, two, three. Sir
monk to thy duty.
Great God of mercy, he is false at last!
And as the words broke from the Ladye
Annabel's
lips, she beheld the monk take the goblet in
his hands; she beheld him empty a paper filled
with white powder into its depths.
She could look no more; a cold, icy feeling
seemed to freeze the very blood around her heart;
her limbs refused their support; she sank slowly
down upon the damp floor, and yet the words
spoken in the adjoining room came to her ear like
the echo of far-off shouts.
Four, five, six. Monk, wilt delay all night?
To thy victim!
The monk strode across the cell, holding the
goblet under his robe; he approached a spot
where the tapestried hangings, slightly swept
aside, disclosed the entrance into another room.
Adrian, whispered the monk, dost sleep?
Sleep! echoed a hollow voice from the inner
cell. Sleep, when there is fever in my brain,
and fire in my heart! Dost jest, good Albertine?
Nay, nay, Adrian, I jest not. I have a
sleeping
potion which will give thee rest.
The rest of the grave, in the arms of the
skeleton-god
,
muttered Balvardo, with a low chuckle.
Would that thy potion could minister sleep
eternal, spoke the hollow voice, and a hasty
footstep was heard. And yet I would not die
yetno, no! She still lives. I would not die,
save in her arms, and by her side!
And as the voice sounded strange and hollow
through the cell, the tapestry rustled, and Adrian
Di Albarone stood before the monk. Adrian Di
Albarone it was, but the manly form was bent
with chains, the black velvet attire of the student
was soiled and torn; while the faded countenance,
the sunken cheek, the lips compressed, the
hollow
eye sockets, and the quick and fiery eye, all
told a tale of the agony of years endured within
the compass of a single hour.
He stood before the monk, and his chains
clanked
as he stood, while his wild eye drank in each
line of Albertine's visage.
You spoke of a soothing potion, good
Albertine
.
Seven, eight, nine
,
muttered Balvardo
.
The monk spoke not a word; he strode to the
closethe seized the flask of winehe filled the
goblet to the brim.
Drink, Adrian, he cried, drink, and be
refreshed
!
Adrian raised the goblet to his mouth with his
chained right handhe wet his lips with the
ruddy
wine; and then, as if seized by some fearful
spell, he stood motionless as death, while his right
arm straightened slowly out from his body, with
the hand convulsively clutching the bowl of death.
It is, it is! he shricked. It is the goblet of
the Red Chamber! God of Heaven, what means
this mystery? Speak, Albertine. Wouldst thou
betray me?
Ten!
meanwhile continued Balvardo, in
the background
.
Adrian! cried the monk, starting back with
a solemn gesture, I stand upon the verge of the
cliff of Time; beneath me roll the surges of that
shoreless ocean which men name
Eternity
!
Ere the morrow's dawn, I leap from the cliff;
the surges of that awful sea will bear me onon
to the vast Unknown! Thinkest thou I would
betray thee? Drink, and be refreshed.
Eleven, twelve! the time is up!
soliloquized
the sworder
.
I drink, cried Adrian, with a wild gesture,
I drink; for thy words are truth, and thine eye
bears no falsehood in its glance! I drink the
goblet
of the Red Chamber to the dregs!
A shriek that might never be forgotten rang
through the corridor and chamber, and a slight
form, arrayed in robes of white came rushing
from the folds of the tapestry, and Adrian beheld
the dreamy face of the Ladye Annabel, her cheek
pale as the robes she wore, while, with glaring
eye and voice of horror, she shrieked:
Drink notin God's name do not drinkthe
bowl is drugged with death!
He flung the bowl aside, but ere it left his hand
it was received in the quick grasp of the monk, he
raised his chained hands on high, and ere they
were lowered, his Bride lay panting on his breast!
Oh, where is the magic of human words that may
picture the deep and fearful interest of that
meeting
,
the gush of contending feelings, the rapture
sparkling in the eye and beaming from, the lip,
the heart all pulsation, the blood all fire, the arms
flung convulsively round each other's neck, the
look of the Doomed, the long, last, lingering look
upon the face of the beloved, her upturned eyes,
her cheek now crimson and now snow, her tresses
of gold waving over her robes of white, and her
form of beauty flung over his bosom with every
vein swelling with delight, every nerve quivering
with joy!
They meet as lovers meet, when standing on
the opposing rocks of Time and Destiny; they
fling their arms across the chasm, nor heed the
vast eternity that yawns below, ready to engulf
and destroy.
Drink not, oh, Adrian, drink notthe bowl is
drugged with death!
The time is up, muttered the hoarse voice of
BalvardoThe guards are within call, good
monk an' he refuses the dose.
Adrian Di Albarone, cried the monk, fixing
his full and solemn eyes upon the chained knight,
drink the bowl, I implore thee! By the
memory
of the Cell of the Doomed, by the memory of
the Chapel of the Rocks, by the memory of the
perils we have shared, the deaths we dared
together
,
in the name of thy father, whose ghost
now looks down upon thee, in His name, most
solemn and most dread, I adjure theedrain the
goblet to the dregs!
Dark and mysterious man, cried Adrian,
sharing the wild glance of Albertine, give me
the bowl, I drink
Adrian, for my sake touch it notpoison
nestles like a snake within its depths!
Hold me not, Annabelgrasp not my arm
For the sake of God, oh do not, do not drink!
I must, I must! It is not thy hand, Albertine
that gives the bowlit is the hand of Fate, thrust
from yon blackening cloud, which all my life has
thrown its shadow over my path! Give me the
bowlthough ten thousand deaths were darting
from each sparkle of the wine, stillI drink, and
drain the goblet to the dregs!
In vain the upraised arm of the Ladye Annabel,
in vain her look of fear, her voice of horror! As
she clung to his chained arms, he raised the
goblet
to his lips, he drained it to the dregs.
He smiles, muttered Balvardo, the monk
smiles as he gives the death-bowl! I see not his
cloven foot, nor do I see his hornsnot a whit o'
'em. Else might I suspect the devil were lurking
in yon monkish robe.
Adrian handed the goblet to the monk.
Albertine
received it with a deep and meaning
smile. Scarce had the hand of Adrian been
extended
in the act, than his arm fell like a weight
of lead to his side, and Annabel felt her lover
leaning heavily upon her shoulder, while her fair
arms might scarce stay him in his fall to the
floor.
Monk, cried Adrian as sinking upon one knee
he fixed his ghastly eyes upon the face of
Albertine
;
monk, I trusted thee, and thou art false!
His brow is cold, murmured the Ladye
Annabel
,
as sinking on her knees by his side, she
supported Adrian's head upon her virgin bosom.
See! the big drops of the death-dew stand out
from his foreheadand this, monk, this is thy
work!
As the terrible look of the dying man met his
eye, Albertine seemed struggling with some
terrible
inward pang, but when the words of Annabel
and her look of intense agony came like a
death-bolt
to his heart, he hurriedly advanced, he looked
at the group, he spoke in a voice tremulous with
agitation yet deep and solemn in its every
accent
Ye scorn me now, fair Ladye, and raise your
hands in a gesture of reproach most terrible to
bear; yet the day will come, when the voice of
scorn will be changed to the sound of pity, when
those very hands will strew fresh flowers over my
grave!
Has  given up its model of devils!
muttered
Balvardo, in the background. 'S life, I can
murder
a man in hot blood or cold blood, but as for
this heaping taunt on tauntI like it notby the
Blood o' th' Turk!
He is deadcold and dead, murmured the
Ladye Annabel, as she gazed upon the pallid face
of Adrian. He does not breathe; Mother of
Heaven, I cannot feel the beating of his heart!
Ere the words had passed her lips, the dying
man sprang with one wild bound to his feet; and
while his bloodshot eyes rolled ghastily from face
to face, he flung his arms aloft, and tottered across
the chamber, laughing wildly and with maniac
glee, as he pointed to the dark object rising from
the floor, covered with the folds of the dark robe,
that swept over its surface like a pall of death.
Monk, beholdbehold the doom of Adrian of
Albarone! he shouted, with a wild and husky
voice, as he stooped, with a sudden movement,
and tore the robe from the object which it
concealed
.
There, there stands the assassin, here
the victim, andha, ha, ha!
behold the coffin!
He swayed heavily from side to side; he flung
his arms hurriedly aloft in the vain effort to
preserve
his balance, and then with a fixed and
staring
eye, he gazed upon the face of Albertine with
a look that froze his blood.
Monk, I trusted thee, and thou art false!
The sound of a falling body echoed round the
room, and the lifeless form of Adrian Di Albarone
lay extended across the coffin, while the outspread
hands clutched the dark panels with the
convulsive
grasp of death.
Wait one hour, muttered the monk to
Balvardo
;
wait one hour, ere thou bearest the corse
to the grave. 'Tis now near the midnight hour:
an hour from this time, the Dukeha, ha!will
wed his bride; an hour from this time, and thou
mayst bear the corse to the grave!
Be it so, growled Balvardo. Then this
pestilent Adrian will trouble me no more! Blood
o' Mahound, the grave is a wondrous sure prison;
it needs nor bolt nor bar: old Death stands jailor
at its door!
Ladye! cried the monk, as he advanced to
the side of the Ladye Annabel, raising the maiden,
whose senses seemed stupified with horror, from
the floor, behold the corse of thy love! Advance,
ladyerest thee by its sidegather the head of
the corse to thy bosom! Watch beside the corse
one houra single hourand let nor man nor
devil wrest the lifeless body from thy grasp!
The Ladye Annabel opened her large blue
eyes with a stare of vacant wander, and smiled as
she gathered the head of the corpse to her bosom,
twining her fair and delicate fingers in the golden
hair of the dead.
CHAPTER THE FOURTH.
THE CELL OF ST. ARELINE.
A lamp of iron, all rusted and time-eaten,
suspended
from the arched ceiling of a small apart
ment of the convent of St. Benedict, reserved in
especial for strangers, threw a dim light over the
figure of his grace of Florence, reposing on a
velvet
couch, and upon the blazing armor of the
attending
men-at-arms, who waited beside their
lord.
A smile, full of self-satisfaction, rested upon the
lip of the Duke, and a glance full of agreeable
fancies lit up his eye, as he contemplated the
fulfilment
of all his schemes.
The forward boy punished for his insolence,
thus run his musingsdone to death for the
treasonable act of lifting his hand against his liege
lordthis accomplished, the fair Annabel is mine,
and with her I acquire the rich domains of
Albarone
.
A servitor but a moment since bears me
intelligence that she has recovered from her
madness
.
By'r Ladye, my exhausted coffers shall be
replenished to the brim! Hahaha! Then
I shall war and conquer. Why not
I
as well as
others of my rank and power? I shall warI
shall conquerI shall
My Lord Duke, exclaimed a sentinel,
thrusting
his head from between the folds of a sable
curtain that hung across the apartment, dividing
it from an adjoining chamber, within whose walls
were the followers of his grace. My Lord Duke,
a monk of the convent craves audience with your
graceshall I admit him?
Aye, let him enter.
And in a moment, there stood before the Duke
a monk attired in the dark robe of his order: his
hood was drawn over his face, and, with
depressed
head and folded arms, he seemed to wait the
commands of his grace of Florence
Thy errand, sir monk?
I come by the bidding of the Father Abbot,
to lead thee to the cell of the blessed St. Areline.
Ah! I remember me. As I dismounted at
the castle gate, the reverend abbot told me that it
had been a custom, from time past memory, for
all strangers visiting the holy house of St.
Benedict
,
to pass an hour in the cell of this saintSt.
Areline, methinks she is styled. Further, he told
me the saint has the power of revealing future
events. Is't so, holy father?
Even so, my Lord Duke. When besought,
on bended knee, in the silence of midnight, the
form of the blessed saint appears fired with
supernatural
life: her eyes flash and her lips move,
and the doom of the suppliantwhether for good
or for evilis revealed.
At midnight, say'st thou? 'Tis a lone hour.
By'r our Ladye, but the evil one may have
something
to do with the matter.
That may not be, my Lord Duke. The holy
Areline died in the odour of sanctity. The
scorner
and the outcast of heaven alone doubt her
holiness
and power. For three centuries hath the
fame of St. Areline been sounded abroad, and now
it were sin unpardonable to say aught against her
sacred name.
Lead on, holy father; in God's name, lead
on: I'll follow thee. Hugo! I say, Hugo!
The face of the ill-looking sentinel with the
squinting eye, appeared among the folds of the
sable curtain.
Hugo, where is Balvardo, thy comradeeh?
Speak quicklywhere is Balvardo?
The sinister eye of the sentinel squinted yet
more fearfully; he looked confusedly round, and
stammered forth:
My Lord Duke, he ishe is
He paused suddenly, and finished the sentence
by pointing downward with the forefinger of the
right hand, with a sort of diving motion.
Ah! I had forgotten
that
, good Hugo! Thou
wilt attend me, vassals; and ye, sirs, shall also
accompany me to this midnight ceremony.
While he thus spoke, the monk threw open a
door at the end of the apartment opposite the
sable
curtain, and, followed by the Duke, attended
by Hugo and the two men-at-arms, with torches
in their hands, he presently was traversing a long
gallery, with his head still depressed and his arms
still folded on his breast.
By'r our Lady, but thou art wondrous chary
of thy good looks!eh, sir monk?
It becomes not a sinner like me to be
otherwise
than humble. It becomes not a poor brother
of St. Benedict to assume an erect port and a bold
countenance before
his grace of Florence!
Well said, by my troth! Whither art
leading
me, holy father? Ha! a stairway; it extends
above us as though it had no end. Ugh! how
those torches glarehow gloomy these arches
seem! Lead on, sir monk!
Ascending the stairway, they found themselves
in a winding gallery, with floor of stone, low
arching roof, and narrow walls. Through the
mazes of this passage they swiftly wound, and
presently they stood at the foot of another
stair-way
.
By St. Peter! exclaimed the Duke, but
these passages are like the windings of a witch's
den. How runs the night, holy father?
When I left the halls of the convent, the
sands of the hour glass had fallen to within an
half hour of midnight.
Ah! we shall be just in time for the trial of
St. Areline's power. Another gallery! By'r
Ladye, but this is wondrous! In the name of thy
patron, St. Benedict, I adjure thee, monk, tell me
are we not near our journey's end?
See'st thou yon oaken door that terminates
the gallery? The oaken door with large panels,
and topped by arches of dark stone? There, an
it please thee, my Lord Duke, must thou leave
thy attendants, and alone, and in the dark, we
shall enter the cell of the blessed St. Areline.
How? Leave my attendants? `Alone,' sayst
thou? `In the dark,'? Beshrew mete,h sir
monk, but this saint of thine is somewhat difficult
of audience!
The reward she offereth is beyond price. A
knowledge of the futurethe dim and shadowy
future! Thou shalt behold thy coming deeds
written in characters of light; thy future
conquests
shall spread themselves before thee like the
varying beauties of a lovely landscape. Thou
shalt
'S life! thou talkest well! Enough: we
stand before the oaken door. EnterI'll follow
thee!
The monk passed his hand over one of the
panels of the huge door, and pressing a secret
spring, a narrow passage was opened, through
which the brother of St. Benedict disappeared,
followed by his grace of Florence.
There they go, Hugo exclaimed as the panel
closed. There they go upon their madcap
adventure
.
The saints save me from all such folly!
And me, comrade, cried the tallest of the
men-at-arms, letting the sheath of his sword fall
heavily upon the pavement of stone.
I say amen to your prayers, exclaimed the
other, looking very wise in the torchlight.
Ha! what noise is that? cried Hugo, as he
gave a sudden start.
'Tis down in the court-yard, exclaimed the
tall man-at-arms. Hark! 'tis the clashing of
swordsthe rattling of spearsthe clashing of
armour.
Shouts, too! cried the other soldier, Ha!
war cries! 'S life! it sounds as if they were
battering down the gates! Hark! again! and
again!
And thus, while the sounds waxed louder, and
the cries grew fiercer in the court-yard below, the
men-at-arms, and their companion, Hugo, waited
with the utmost impatience the coming of their
lord. An hour passed. The Duke had not
appeared
.
The tall man-at-arms fixed his eyes upon
the massive door, and struck the secret panel with
his spear, urged by all the vigor of his stalwart
arm. Another and another blow. The wood
yielded, and the open space gave passage to the
man-at-arms, who forced his way through,
followed
by his comrade and Hugo of the sinister eye.
Their torches flashed upon the walls of a square
apartment, with floor and roof of stone. No
living
creature was there. A small, narrow door
gave entrance to another apartment. Three
pillars
of time-worn stone supported the arched roof,
and divided the place into three sides, with floor
of variegated stone. One side of the apartment
was concealed by a curtain of sable velvet. This
Hugo hurriedly drew, and in an instant his
ungainly
figure was reflected in a vast mirror of
dazzling
steel, which, reaching to the arched ceiling
above, twice the height of a man, extended on
either
side as wide as it was high. Around the
apartment was no sign of passage way or secret
door; all was bare and rugged stone, and the
place was without bench, stool, couch, or furniture
of any kind.
By'r Ladye! shouted Hugo, that monk
was thedevil, and he has run away with our
lord! W-h-e-w!
And the three fairly shook with mingled
surprise
and terror, which was presently increased to
alarm and horror by the clashing of arms in the
outer apartment.
CHAPTER THE FIFTH.
THE WONDERS OF ST. ARELINE.
No sooner had the oaken panel closed behind
him, than the Duke found himself cautiously
groping his way in utter darkness, being guided
by the sound of the footsteps of the Monk.
Presently the Monk laid hand upon the Duke's
shoulder.
Kneel, mortal, kneel, he exclaimed in a
voice which the Duke thought wondrously
changed
of a sudden, kneel and behold the wonders
of St. Areline! Speak not upon the peril of thy
immortal soul!
Upon the pavement of stone the Duke sank
down, and the Monk began to murmur certain
mysterious words, in a low, yet deep tone, and
thus he continued for the space of the fourth part
of an hour, when a light was seen dimly gleaming
at one end of the place, and presently another and
another, and gradually increasing in radiance they
soon appeared to the wondering eyes of the Duke,
dancing within the surface of a vast mirror of
dazzling steel. Strange it was that although the
meteors,for such they seemed,grew more
brilliant
every moment, and shed a more intense
brightness along the surface of the mirror in
which they shone, yet not a ray of light escaped
to illumine the apartment, and the figures of the
Duke and the Monk were wrapt in mid-night
shadow.
And now soft clouds of feathery mist began
to roll within the surface of the mirror, and the
meteors gradually faded away into an universal
brightness, which like the mellow beams that
herald
the coming day, poured a flood of rosy light
over the tumultuous chaos within the dazzling
steel.
Behold! cried the Monk, behold the
blessed
St. Areline!
A dim and ghastly form arose from amid the
rolling clouds, far in the distance; nearer it drew
and nearer, and presently the outlines of a nun,
attired in the solemn hood, and sweeping robes of
white, became clear and perceptible. Advancing
to the front of the mirror with a gliding motion,
the hands of the spectre were folded upon its
breast, and the hood of white, hung drooping
over its face.
The Duke trembled with terror, and his brow
was wet with large drops of moisture that oozed
from his shivering skin.
Mortal!
exclaimed a voice, soft as the tones
of a spirit of light,
mortal, what wouldst thou
know?
The voice came from the shrouded face
of the spectre.
With tremulous voice, and as if urged by some
invisible power, the Duke shrieked forth
I would know my doomI would know my
fate!
The hood fell back from the head of the
Spectre
,
and its arms slowly extended!
O Jesu! shrieked the Duke,Look, look!
the skeleton hands, the fleshless skull, the
hollow
eyes! One hand grasps a cross, and one a
grinning skull.Look, look!
Speak not! whispered the Monk, speak
not upon pain of eternal doom!
The voice again sounded through the cell.
Dost thou seek in the name of the Holy One?
Dost thou ask trusting in his Saints?
I do!
Thou art answered! and the bare and
hideous
bones of the spectre head were covered,
quick as a flash of light, with ruddy and healthy
flesh, the hollow sockets gleamed with dark and
brilliant orbs, and the skeleton hands glowed with
life, as skin of rosy loveliness shrouded the
disjointed
bones.
Thou art answered! and as the spectre
whispered the words, a skeleton form came
gliding
along the mirror, holding an hour-glass in its
fleshless hand.
Behold!
exclaimed the vision pointing to the
things of graves,
behold thy doom?
A shriek of horror came from the lips of the
Duke.
O, horror of horrors! he shouted, It is the
form of Death!Look! look! Behold! He turns,
he turns with a ghastly smilehe points to the
hourglass! The tyrant, assassin and betrayer
started forward with every nerve quivering with
the intensity of his terror. O God of Heaven!
The Sands of the glass are run!
Ha! shrieked the Monk, with a wild yell,
that sounded like the howl of a dying war-horse.
Heaven wills it, thy sands are run, thy doom
is fixed!
A stream of light poured around the cell,
brighter
than the blaze of the noon-day sun, and a
clap of thunder shook the pillars to their very
centre
.
With his eyes rolling with affright, the Duke
glanced upward, and beheld the Monk standing
erect, his arms outstretched, and his hood cast
backward from his face.
O God!
Thou
here! Albertinethou here!
Ha! It is
I!
Thy fatethy cursethy
doom!
The Duke felt himself seized in a grasp of
iron, and hurriedly dragged along the pavement
of stone.
In a moment he heard the sharp spring of a
door closing behind him, and brushing his hand
over his eyes, to restore his fading vision, he
looked
around. A spur of the whitened steep on which
the convent was founded, arising some twenty
feet above the body of the mass of rock, was
imbeded
in the darkened wall of the tower, with its
summit extending in a platform some three feet
square, toppling over the dark abyss below. Level
as the sun-dial and smooth as polished steel, the
summit of the rock, projecting from the tower,
might scarce afford a resting place for footstep of
human thing. In silence and in awe the Duke
gazed around. Above was the moonlit sky, below
far, far below, a hundred fathoms down sunk the
dark and shadowy abyss, separated from the waters
of the lake by a ridge of rocks, that arose along
the shores of the mountain tarne, overlooking the
sullen blackness of the impenetrable void, on one
side, while on the other towered and frowned the
walls of the gloomy convent. Gazing hurriedly
around, the Duke beheld the walls of the
Monastery
,
extending on either side of the tower, in whose
stones the platform-rock was imbedded, all smooth,
even and moss-grown; at his back leading into
the cell of St. Areline, was the secret door,
fashioned
in complete resemblance to the wall around,
fast closed and secured, while high overhead arose
the dark and frowning fabric of the tower, its
rugged
outline, rising like a thing of omen into the
dim blue of the midnight sky.
This platform of rock was never looked upon
by the peasantry of the valley, save with wonder
and with awea thousand dark traditions, named
the tower as the scene of many a deed of murder,
and a thousand legends dyed the platform-stone
with the crimson drops of innocent blood.
Where am I, shrieked the Duke with a low,
murmured whisper. It is a dream, a dream
of horror!
Thou art in the temple of my vengeance! the
response came hissing between the clenched teeth
of the monk. Behold its roof, yon sky, the walls,
the boundless horizon, the floor, the wide earth;
and the place of sacrifice, yon bottomless abyss!
CHAPTER THE SIXTH.
THE WATCH BESIDE THE DEAD.
Allall is dark! the voice broke wild and
whisperingly thro' the midnight gloom of the
placeI have been dreamingah mea sad and
darksome dream! Methought Adrian lay cold and
dead in my arms, while my hand was entwined in
the locks of his clustering hair, as they fell over
his lifeless face. It was a dream, a fearful dream
yetmother of heavendo I still dream, or is
this darkness real?
She extended her hands, she passed them
hurriedly
along the floor, where her form lay prostrate,
and as she thus wildly sought to grasp the form
so lately reposing in her arms, she exclaimed with
a murmured shriek
It flashes on me! All is realThe coffin and
the corse, the assassin and the bowl of deathall
is dark and terrible reality!
Passing her cold and stiffened hands, slowly
along her forehead, the Ladye Annabel
endeavored
to recall the tragedy of that fearful night, in
all its details of horror, and as scene after scene,
action after action, word succeeding word, came
back to her memory, another fearful mystery
passed like a shadow over her brain.
The corse reposed in these armswhere is it
now? Who hath stolen the body of the dead
from my embrace? And the coffinit is gone!
They have borne him to the grave!
And as the low whispers broke from her lips,
this fair and gentle creature, whose nature was
soft and yielding, as is ever the nature of a
true
woman
, in moments of calm and sunshine, yet
susceptible of deeds of the highest courage and
noblest
determination, in the hour of storm and cloud
now arose from the floor, her frame all chilled
and stiffened by the hard repose of that fearful
watch, and extending her hands she wandered
slowly around the chamber, seeking with hushed
breath, for the coffin and the corse.
All was darkness, thick and intense darkness.
Slowly and with cautious steps she paced around
the room, passing her hands along the folds of the
tapestry, or extending her small and delicate foot
in the effort to touch the coffin, but her search
was all in vain. She wandered around the
chamber
,
until her recollection of the particular features
of the room became vague and indistinct, and at
last with trembling hands and a bewildered brain,
she stood erect and motionless.
Allall is vain! she criedcorse and coffin
all are gone. They have borne him to the
grave!
While the weary moments dragged heavily on,
she stood silent and unmoveable, endeavoring to
catch the faintest echo of a sound, or hear the
slightest whisper of a voice, but all was silent as
death. At last a distant and moaning murmur
reached her ears. Gradually tho' slowly it
deepened
into a booming sound, and at last the
subterranean
arches of the old convent, seemed alive
with gathering echoes, and the long corridors
gave back the tramp of footsteps and the hum of
human voices.
They comethey comewhispered the
Ladye AnnabelThey come to bear me to the
bridal!
The bell of the convent, deep-toned and
booming
,
rang out the hour ofonethe fatal hour
after
midnight.
Strike for the Winged Leopardstrike for
Albarone! the shout came echoing along the
corridors
.
Strike for Albarone and Florence! the
mingling
war-cry reached the ears of the maiden.
And in a moment, the tapestry, concealing the
entrance to the room from which Adrian had
issued
ere he drank the bowl, was hurriedly thrust
aside, and amid the blaze of torches, the Ladye
Annabel, beheld the glare of armour and the flash
of upraised swords, while the stern visage of the
warrior-band were gazing upon her pale
countenance
and trembling form.
Saved, by St. Withold! shouted a soldier,
springing from the crowdLadye tell us, in
God's name, where is the Lord Adrian?
They have borne him to the grave! was the
whispered and ghastly response.
The bluff soldier turned aside, and it might
be noted that his blue eyes were wet with tears.
In a moment he again faced the crowd of warriors.
Behold the Queen! he shouted and the
men-at-arms
,
sank kneeling to the floorall hail the
fair Ladye Annabel, Duchess of Florence!
And the solitary chamber rung with the echo of
the thunder shout
All hail the Fair Ladye Annabel, Duchess of
Florence!
CHAPTER THE SEVENTH.
THE COFFIN AND THE CORSE.
THE CLOCK STRIKES ONE, AND THE
SWORDER
SEALS HIS FATE BY A TOUCH
OF THE FATAL SPRING.
Far beneath the Convent, down in the very
bosom of the earth, far beneath the chamber of
the death-bowl, alone and in darkness, rested the
coffin and the corse for the space of an hour,
awaiting the spade and the Sexton, the priest
with his prayers, and the grave with its silence.
The sound of trampling feet, broke along the
silence of the earth-hidden passage, and presently,
through the crevices of the dungeon door, thin
rays of light streamed along the cell. Then there
was drawing of bolts, and rattling of chains, and
in an instant the ruddy glare of torches, revealed
the ill-looking form of Balvardo, standing in the
doorway, and beside him stood a short, thin old
man, with slight locks of grey hair, falling upon
his coarse doublet. There was a vacant and
wandering
expression in his eye, while his parched
lips, hanging apart, gave an idiotic appearance to
his countenance. The long, talon-like fingers of
his withered right hand, grasped a spade covered
with rust, and eaten by time.
Haha! laughed Balvardo. The potion
which I gave
her
, some hours ago, wrapt her in
a sleep, like the slumber of old death. Blood o'
the Turk, how her hands clutched the body o'
the dead, when I first tried to tear it from her
armseven in her sleep she clutched it! I have
him at lastsound and sure! He escaped me
in the cell of the Doomed, escaped this sword in
the Cavern of the Dead, andandnow, by the
fiend I have him at last!
The Sworder advanced to the Coffin, he gazed
upon the pale face of the dead, with a long and
anxious look.
He, he, he, chuckled the old man, Why
didst thou hate him, noble Captain?
I know not, muttered Balvardo, with an
absent
air, yet I always had a sneaking suspicion
that one day or other, this man, now a corse,
would work my death! A queer feeling always
haunted me, that made me feel like the felon
walking
to his doom, so long as thisfather-murderer
remained alive! Now he is dead, but I fear him
yet, and will fear him till he is safely buried i' the
earth!
Thou wouldst cover his face with this rich,
yellow earth? sneered the ancient man,He,
he he! The grave hides all secrets!
To thy duty, Old Gibber-jabber, exclaimed
Balvardo, Here's thy man. Lay hold of him
and help me to drag the coffin to the other side
of the dungeon. Pull him alongtherethere!
Throwing the coffin upon the damp earth, the
old man placed a smoking lamp near the prostrate
head of the corse, and then intently watched the
motions of Balvardo, who was drawing the point
of his sword along the surface of the earth.
Let me do't, let me do't, most noble captain,
exclaimed the old man, pushing Balvardo aside,
for years, and years, and years, man and boy,
have I wielded this good spade, here in these
nice, cozy, comfortable chambers! Hehehe!
To think a fellow like thee, with that miserable
tool, that is unworthy to be called aspadeto
think that a stranger like thee, should think to
excel meOld Glow-wormin laying out a
grave!Hehehe!
Old Glow-worm!Ha ha ha!a choice
name by my soul!
A very good name;
they
call me sothey
who bring me food every daythey poke it
through the big door through which thou didst
pass, most noble captain. A merry time we've
had of it herea merry time!
We!
who dost thou mean?
Well! Thou art a fool, beshrew me!
we
I and my comrades, who always receive our food
at the big iron door. Here, long, long, very long,
we have lived in these nice cozy chambers.
Sometimes
they
fight and kill one another
then I dig their graves! See! how nicely the rich
earth turns up! This is a spade!
Prattling after this fashion, the poor old idiot
turned up the earth till he stood in a square hole
about a foot in depth, when a glance at the pale
visage of Adrian arrested his attention.
He, he, he!
They always look so!
Queer,
eh, noble captain?
What! hast ever had any other business of
this sort?
Why, bless ye, most noble captain, I've put
scores and scores of them under the rich, yellow
earth.
They
bring 'em to me
they
at the big
iron door. This is earth for ye! Look! how the
spade sinks into the mould!He, he, he!
What an old devil! muttered Balvardo to
himself. How canst thou be merry in these
glomy pits? eh, Old One?
Merry?He, he, he!
Merry
didst say, why
bless ye, when I and my comrades gather round our
food, I am as merry as is the sound of this spade,
driving into the earth! Merry! why I sing, most
noble captain, I sing!
Thou
sing! Ha ha ha! Thou indeed!
Why not I, eh? Beshrew me but thou art a
fool! I can sing such a right mirthful songbut
they never like itthey my comrades!
By Saint Peter, I'll wager a stoup of wine,
that thou didst never see the light of dayeh,
old rat?
Day!
what is that?But for my songhere
goes!,'
And then busily plying the spade, in a cracked
voice he sang the following words, in a sort of
wild chaunt, which he occasionally varied by
sounds that resembled the yell of a screech-owl.
THE SONG OF THE ANCIENT MAN.
[3]
[3]
This song is taken from an old Monkish
Chaunt, and makes no pretensions to poetic
beauty.
DIG THE GRAVE AND DIG IT DEEP.
Dig the grave and dig it deep
Straight with the mattock dig each side,
Dig it low, and dig it steep
Dig it long and dig it wide!
As he sang, the old man plunged the spade
lustily
into the earth, and throwing aside the large
lumps of clay, he continued with great glee
Here while nations rise and fall,
Here while ages glide,
Here wrapt within its earthy pall,
Must the crumbling corse abide!
Then raise the chaunt,
Then swell the stave,
Here's to death, all grim and gaunt,
And to his homethe grave!
He wound this up with an unnatural noise,
half shrick, and half yell, and hollow and dread
the dungeon arches gave back the strain.
He, he, he!I know a merrier catch than
that! List ye, my noble captain.
He then made a motion with his hand, as if in
the act of drinking, and then a shout of wild
laughter sounded through the cell.
Ha, ha! Ha, ha!Drink to the full,
Drink to the sound of the clanking bone;
Fill high with wine the fleshless skull,
And swell the toast without a moan
Hurra! for Death with his bony hands,
Hurra! for Death with his skeleton form,
He hold the thunderbolt.On high he stands,
He mows them down in calm or storm
He swept his spade around with maniac glee,
and then in a voice louder and shriller, while his
shrunken breast heaved with the wildness of his
emotion, he sang,
Then raise the chaunt,
Then swell the stave.
Here's to death, all grim and gaunt,
And to his homethe grave.
A brave song! Ha ha ha! By my faith a
brave song! Where didst pick it up, Old
Screech-Owl
,
eh?
Glow-worm is my name, replied the other
demurely,Glow-wormah! but this is rich
earth! Look! what big, lusty, clumps. He, he,
he! How cold and pale he lookshe that I am
to hurySee!
He doth look cold and pale! muttered
Balvardo
.
Is the grave deep enough,
Devil-darkness
?
Let's house him i' th' earth without
delay
.
The grave scarce reaches to my middledeeper
let us dig it, noble captaindeeper!
I tell thee, Devil-darkness, I cannot look upon
the cold and stony face of the dead! Deeper
thou mayst dig the gravebut the body must be
kidden from sight in the meanwhile. 'SlifeI left
my cloak in the vaults above, and I have no robe
to throw over the coffin!
Hehehe, thou'rt a brave man, yet poor
old Glow-worm knows more than thee! Look
around the cell, most noble captain, and tell me
what thou see'st?
I see the rough walls of stone, the roof of rock
the floor of clay. Not a whit more, by the
Fiend!
Look againpass thine eyes along the wall
opposite yon oaken door. What seest thou now,
most noble captain?
I see a bolt of iron, rusted and time-eaten,
projecting
from the wall
Wouldst know how to open a passage into
the stone-room, next to this cell? Move the bolt
quickly to and fro, and yon massy stone will roll
back into the stone-room! Thou canst lay the
coffin within its walls, until the grave is deep
enow.
The bolt movesha! The stone, the massive
stone glides from the wallanother push at the
bolt! Thereblood o' Mahound, I behold a dark
passage into this dismal room! 'Slife! there is
a current of air rushing from this open space
what may it mean?
Dost wish to hide the corse? Ehmost
noble
captain? Lay hold of t'other end o' th'
coffin
.
and I will raise this end. We'll bear it to the
stone-room!
In a moment they raised the coffin, and bearing
it toward the open space, Balvardo retreated
backwards
,
through the passage, and in another
instant
was lost to view, while the foot of the coffin
still projected into the dungeon-cell.
Bear it through the passage, Glow-worm!
cried Balvardo. In a moment we will have it
laid along the floor of this dreary place!
It is heavy, cried the old man; my strength
fails me. Thou wilt have to bear the burden
thyself
,
most noble captain! Glow-worm lifts no
heavy burden!
Be it so, growled Balvardo. 'Slife I like
not to be alone with the dead! Slowly, slowly, drag
the coffin along the floor of stone, thereit rests
against the wall! Now for the grave.
What dreary sound is that, thundering far
above? Oft have I heard it, yet ne'er could tell
what it might mean?
The Convent clock strikesone! muttered
Balvardo. A few moments and my reward is
sure!
Beware the secret spring! shrieked the old man,
as tho' his crazed mind had been fixed by some
sudden thought. Beware the secret spring! It
sticks from the floor near the very wall, where
thou hast laid the coffin. An' thy foot presses
the spring the stone rolls back, andhe, he, he
thou art buried alive!
It was too late! Even as the old man spoke,
Balvardo
stumbled along the floor of the stone-room
his foot pressed the point of iron projecting from
the floor, and the massive rock rolled back to its
place, in the masonry of the substantial wall.
I fear, I fear, murmured the old man gazing
around with an affrighted look; I fear
they
,
pointing
above,
they
will lash me for this! He, he,
he! I bade him beware of the spring within the
stone room, and he would not. I cannot turn
this bolt, the old man is not strong enough. Ha,
ha, here is a torch; Glow-worm has not had a torch
in his hand for years! Ho, ho, ho, the noble
captain
came here to bury the dead, and, ho, ho, ho,
he
is buried alive!
CHAPTER THE EIGHTH.
THE FATE OF THE BETRAYER.
SWEETER THAN THE LOVE OF WOMAN,
DEARER THAN GLORY TO THE WARRIOR,
POWER TO THE PRINCE, OR HEAVEN TO
THE DEVOTEE, IS THE CONSUMMATION
OF A LONG SOUGHT AND SILENTLY
TREASURED
REVENGE.
Where am I? shrieked the Duke, as he stood
upon the platform of the convent tower. 'Tis
a hideous dream, 'tis a fearful nightmare! Ha!
my brain reels. I'll gaze no longer down the
fearful
abyss! Is there none to awake me, none?
Horror
of horrors! This demon hand will strangle
me, closer and tighter it winds around my throat,
ah!
A wild laugh of intense joy came from the chest
of the Monk. I feast upon thy misery, he cried
wretch, I banquet upon thy agony! Ha, ha, ha!
The glory of this moment I would not barter for
all the joys of heaven!
Dost thou shiver, dost
thou tremble, well thou mayst! Look down, far,
far below! Dost see any hope there, what says
the whitened precipice? Hath the dark abyss no
voice? Look above, canst glean naught from the
frown of the tower that is over thy doomed and
devoted head? Or mayhap the secret door may
afford thee consolation? Speakthou for whose
crime earth hath no word, hell no name, speak
that I may feast upon the music of thy quailing
voice!
Tighter he wound his grasp around the throat
of the trembling wretch, and with his dark eye
flashing with all the frenzy of supernatural
revenge
he shook the form of the Duke over the
awfu
abyss.
1s't thou, good Albertine? Hold, hold, or I
shall fall. 'Tis a fearful steep! Behold, a flock of
snow white sheep are grazing in you distant
vale, they seem but as mice at this fearful height.
Thou, thou wilt not harm me, good Albertine?
Look, look!Behold her pale form is floating
in the moonlight, her face is wan, and her look
is that of despair! Ha! her glazing eyes are fixed
upon thee
thee
her BETRAVER! She beckons me
over the steep!I comeI come!
Nay, good Albertine, grasp me not so tight!
Bring to mind the days when we were sworn
friends
Friends?
Doomed man, the memory of
former
days shall but hurl added torture upon
thy head!
Friends
?Ah! like a dream it comes
over my mind! I was a peasant boythou didst
raise me to rank and power, and I have loved ye
as brother loves brother. Could my life have
served
thee, it would have been laid at thy feet. My
life thou did'st not take. No! no! But the
treasured
hope of years, the glowing fancies of a
musing boy, the anticipations of happiness that
haunted my dreams by night, and lived in
my thoughts by day; theseat one fell remorseless
blow, thou did'st sweep away. It was upon
her
grave; the grave of thy victim, that one thought
possessed my soul. For years and years have I
planned, have I schemed, nay wept,
prayed
for
the fulfilment of that thought. And now it is
fulfilled. I have thee in my grasp! Think'st
thou a thousand worlds would buy thy craven life?
That heaven or hell would tear thee from my
hand?
Again he gave utterance to the frenzied joy of his
soul in a loud wild laugh, that burst fearfully
upon
the midnight air.
Albertine spare me, spare me! Take not my
life.
Spare thee? and you pale form waving me
onward
?
spare thee? wretch I tell thee all nature
is celebrating thy doom! The moon is sinking
below the horizon, and the stars gleam thro' the
gathering pall of darkness like funeral fires!
Spare thee!
Ha! whence come those shouts! I may yet be
be saved!
Thou mayst be savedhahaha! It gives
me joy to drag thee o'er this steep, craving and
hoping for life, to thy latest grasp! Look around
Urbano, Duke of Florence, look around and
behold
the fair and beautiful earth, scene of thy
crimesnay, nay THY CRIMEbehold the earth
for the last time!
It was a weird and awful scene. The dizzy
height of the platform rock, the vast azure with
its boundless horizon, all beaming with the
grandeur
of the stars, the massive hills sweeping
around the mountain-lake, darkening the clear
waters with their midnight shadow, the pile of
rocks uprising beyond the darkness of the
unathomable
abyss, the silence and the awe that
rested upon the hour, broken by the sound of
far-off
shouts, while on the very verge of the eastern
sky, bloody and red, the full-orbed moon was
sinking
slowly down, casting a dim and lurid light
over mountain and stream, convent and plainall
formed a scene of dark and fearful interest. The
Universe, awful and vast seemed to hold a strange
sympathy with the Revenge of Albertine the Monk,
the stars gave their solemn light to the scene,
and the blood-red moon lit up the funeral pile
of the Doomed.
I gazed around, 'tis an awful scene. And
thou, thou wilt spare me, good Albertine?
As thou didst spare thy victim, when her
voice rung in thy ears of stone, shrieking for pity!
The response came hissing thro' the clenched
teeth of Albertine! Betrayer, I again tell thee all
nature is celebrating thy doom! The moon is
sinking below the horizon, and the stars gleam
thro' the gathering pall of darkness like funeral
fires!
Thrilled with terror and appalled to the very
soul, by the erect form and flashing eye of the
Monk, the Duke stood trembling and quivering
like a reed, on the verge of the platform rock.
Choose the manner of thy death! Leap from
the rock, or behold, I raise before thy very eyes
this dagger; the dagger of the Holy Steel!
Thou wilt not slay me thus, good Albertine,
shrieked the Duke. Mercyfor the sake of God
mercy!
Thine own
mercy
I give back to thee! Leap
from the rock, or this dagger seeks thy heart.
Ha! that pale form, that dim and shadowy face,
floating in the midnight air, with the eyes of
speechless woe! She beckons me onward. He
comes, pale spiritthy betrayer comes! An
instant
,
and lo! before the bar of eternity he shall
tremble at the frown of the Unknown!
It was a scene of sickening horror, yet dignified
and consecrated by the mighty revenge of the
monk. His face pale as death, his lips livid with
fear, his eyes rolling and vacant in their glance,
the Duke stepped trembling backward, while the
monk strode one step forward, raising the keen
steel aloft, with a slow movement, yet with a
quick eye and a determined arm.
Leapleapor the dagger seeks thy heart!
The Duke looked wildly around, and, shaking
his hands aloft, gnashed his teeth in very despair.
Another moment! The monk alone stood on the
platform, while a rushing sound swept through
the air, far, far below, as though a weight of iron
had been toppled from the rock. Albertine slowly
advanced to the edge of the platform, and gazed
into the void below. With a fixed and glaring
eye, with the dagger raised aloft in his right hand,
he gazed below, and beheld the folds of a garment
waving through the darkened air, while a yell
most fearful and maddening to hear, came
shrieking
from the darkness of the void, resounding to
the very heavens above, until the air grew
animate
with the sound of despairunutterable
despair
.
Then came a crashing sound, as though a heavy
body had fallen against the projecting points of
the rugged rocks, and then all became silent.
Silence
gathered over the universe, like one vast
brooding shadow of omen and doom.
The wild flush of excitement vanished from the
face of the monk. With a calm brow, a
compressed
lip, a cheek pale as death, and a full dark eye,
that seemed blazing forth from the shadow of the
brow, he folded his arms silently on his breast,
and looked up to the midnight heavens.
She beckons me over the beckons, she beckons
me; and, with her burning eyes fixed upon my
face, she waves her hands, and bids meon, on!
She points to the scenes of the past: God of my
soul, how real, how vivid, how like the pictures of
memory! The cottage in the vale; the sunshine
sleeping on the roof sheltered by vines; the lordly
hall and the friend
the friend
the outrage, the
lifeless form, and then comes the spirit of my
desolation
,
laughing with scorn as he points to the
shadow blackening o'er the dial plate of destiny!
Nay, nay, wave not thy hands with that slow
and solemn motionglide not so ghastily to and
frothine eyes burn in my very soul! I come,
I come! Albertine glides onward to his bride!
With folded arms, with calm and immovable
countenance, fixing his glance upon the vacant air,
without a fear, a sorrow, or a sight, the avenger
stepped from the platform rock, and with the speed
of an arrow driven home by the strong arm of the
archer, he sunk into the darkness of the abyss.
There was a low moaning exclamation of joy,
and the setting moon looked on the falling form no
more.
CHAPTER THE NINTH.
THREE DAYS ELAPSE.
JOY COMES AND POWER, BUT DEATH HAS
GRASPED THE VICTIM.
The morning sunshine, streaming through the
deep silled casement of the convent cell, filled the
lonely chamber with light; the arching roof and
the pavement of stone, the dark grey walls,
thronged
with monkish effigies, and the distant corner
of the room, all glowing with warm glimpses of
the daybeams, while a solitary soldier strode
slowly along the floor, his brow darkening with a
frown, as, with his clear blue eyes fixed on vacancy
his mind was absorbed in dark and painful
thought.
St Withold! and all the Saints in heaven or
earth save me now! he absently muttered, as his
right hand grasped the hilt of his good sword.
Here's a new wonder, a fresh mysterie! Three
three days agonewe were all fighting and
slashing, leading murderers to death, and pulling
Dukes from their thrones, daring death in as many
shapes as swords are fashioned, and all for my
Lord Adrian, and lo! we bend all things to our
will, dethrone the tyrant, and fill the people's
throats with an outcry for the new duke, and
what comes next? Answer my good Robin
answer my old friendwhere is the new duke?
God knows, and the Saints might tell, an' we
knew how to ask them, but not a white does Rough
Robin know about the matter. The old priest
was wont to tell me that the ways of
Him
above
off with thy cap, Robinwere full of mysterie.
I never knew what he meant till now
The small door of the cell slowly grated on its
hinges, and as the yeoman turned to discover the
cause, he beheld standing before him a cavalier
whose form was attired in glossy purple and
bright gold, yet all soiled and tarnished with dust,
while his young face, all pale and careworn, bore
H
traces of the fearful struggle that had shaken his
soul within the past few days.
AhGuiseppo! Pale and carewornthine
attire covered with dustthy broken plume
sweeping
o'er thy browwhence came ye boy, in
such attire and in such a ghastly trim?
I greet thee, good Robin. Yesternight I left
the Castle of Albaronethis morn I journeyed
from the walls of Florence.
Thou dost bear a message?
I come from the nobles and the people of
Florence! Three nights agone the old walls of
the fair city rung with the clash of arms and the
peal of trumpet, while the tramp of contending
foemen shook the floor of the ducal palace, and
the glimmer of their swords was reflected in the
very mirrors of the Tyrant-Duke. The morning
dawned at last, and dawned on Florence, no
longer oppressed by the tyrant or awed by the
vassals of his power. Then it was that the
nobles
of Florence named their new Duke, then it
was that the people confirmed their choice, while
the solemn
High Priest of the Invisible
, by
a parchment scroll affixed to a pillar of the grand
cathedral, pronounced his blessing on the fortune
of Adrian, Count of Albarone and Duke of
Florence
Thus far all was well. Then ye learned the
mysterious disappearance of Lord Adrian? Speak
I the truth, Guiseppo? The dark scenes which
three nights agone gave new legends of horror to
the walls of this convent of darkness? The
death-bowl administered by the hands of Albertine
the watch of the Ladye Annabel beside the
corsethe disappearance of the body, and what
troubles me but little, the disappearance of the
tyrant-duke? A thousand such dukes might
disappear
,
and we could tell, without a doubt, what
became of them all, `the devil takes care of his
own' saith the adage
Hast thou no word of the Lord Adrian?
Ask the tombs in the aisles of the convent
chapel, which yesternoon we ransacked in search
of his body, and let their yawning mouths tell
the story of our fruitless labor. St Withold!
scarce a foot of earth in the convent garden that
we did not turn to the sun in our searchnot a
cell in the earth-hidden recesses of this foul den,
that we failed to illumine with the glare of our
torches, not a wizard nook or a blood-stained
corner in this devil's hall, but was laid open to
the light, in our strange chase after the body of
the dead! And it was all in vain, Guiseppo, all
in vain!
The Ladye Annabelhast thou no word of
her, Rough Robin?
St. Withold, I see her now! Traversed we
the dark walls in search of the corse? She went
with us, tho' her feet sunk ankle-deep in the dust
of the dead, at every step. She led us on to the
fatal room, where the corse had been stolen from
her grasp, while bewitched by the drugged potion;
she pointed the way to the dark cavern beneath
the convent, and when every heart failed, awed
with supernatural fear, she, even the fair and
gentle
Ladye Annabel, still cried on, and on! An'
the saints shower not their blessings on her head,
I'll turn Paynim-hound, and kiss the crescent!
Dwelleth the Ladye still within the Convent
walls?
Since the hour of our search yesternight, she
hath shrouded herself within the recesses of the
apartments furnished for her use by the vassa
of Albarone, when they hastened hither, two days
agone. Hast thou a message for the Ladye?
I bear a message for the Ladye, and a
parchment
scroll for the
Invisible
! Robin come
hithera word in thy ear!
With the mystic sign of a Neophyte of the
Holy Steel, he asked the way to the solemn place,
where the order assembled holding their secret yet
mighty councils.
Even now they hold their solemn council,
within
these convent walls, answered Robin the
RoughIn a moment I'll lead thee to the secret
chamber. Yet stay a single moment Guiseppo.
Thou knowest I left the castle on that fearful day,
when, when, od's death I cannot name the deed
That blow, Great God, will the
memory
never
pass from my brain! Thou wouldst speak ofof
my father?
Does the old man live?
When thou didst leave the castle, I stood
watching silently beside the door of the chamber
where lay my father, my own father, stricken down
by the hand  the hand of his own son.
You watched beside the door, while the leech
who had been hurried from the City of Florence
disrobed your father, and probed the dagger
wound?
And II, stood trembling beside the door
waiting the appearance of the leech, every moment
expecting to hear the words`thy father is dead!
Dead
murdered by his
son!
' I stood beside the
chamber door, all alive with horror, my fancy
picturing
the dagger, which but a few hours agone, I
had drawn from his heart, the point crimsoned
with one fearful stain of blood, there I stood, fire
in my brain, and hell in my heart, when
Ha, ha, haHo, ho, ho! I have the brand,
the flaming brand, a wild and maddened voice
awoke the echoes of the corridor leading to the
cell, with its tones of maniac yell. Ho, ho, ho! I
have the brand, the flaming brand! Look ye how
it flashes on high, 'tis a serpont, a merry serpent
with tongue of fire! Ha, ha, for the brand, the
flaming brand!
The small door of the cell, grated on its hinges,
and in the very centre of the pavement,
brandishing
a fire brand over his head, there stood, a weak
and trembling old man, his thin face, with the
vacant
eye and hanging lip, flushed with madness,
while his voice half shriek and half yell, rang
echoing
round the room. The brand, ha, ha the
flaming
brand! Ha, ha, ye brought the old man no
food! Ho, ho, ho, Old Glow-worm and his comrades
starve, yet there is a merry blaze in the vault below
I trow! Rafters are all aflame, massy bolts are red
with fire, and my comrades go shouting merrily
thro' the long vaults, waving their brands on high,
and singing a joyous song as they go
Then raise the chaunt,
Then swell the stave
Here's to Death, all grim and gaunt,
And to his home, the grave!
CHAPTER THE TENTH.
THE MYSTERIES OF THE CHRONICLE.
TO BE READ BY ALL WHO WOULD LOOK
BEHIND THE CURTAIN OF FATE, AND
GAZE UPON THE SECRET SPRINGS
THAT MOVE MEN TO DEEDS OF WOE
AND WAR AND DEATH.
Florence is free!
Florence is free! echoed the Monks of the
Holy Steel, and the shout resounded through the
circular room of the tower, repeated by the
Neophytes
of the Order, with one wild acclaim.
Florence
the fair and beautiful is free!
Slowly the High Priest of the Order arose. The
light fell dimly and obscured from the dome of the
tower-room some twenty feet overhead, over the
forms of Monks seated around the square table,
all robed and muffled in sweeping garments of
sable, over the figures of the Neophytes grouped
around the Superiors of the order, clustered along
the circular wall of the twilight chamber standing
shoulder to shoulder, each right hand raising
aloft the keen and glittering dagger, as the left
held the torch on high, with the light
extinguished
,
the fire quenched, while stately and erect, in
the midst of the scene towered the tall figure of the
High Priest, his form robed and muffled, and his
face concealed from the day-beams, his hands
extended over the heads of the secret brethren in
the gesture of benediction.
And at the other end of the table sate the
veiled
Doomsman, his rough hand appearing from
the folds of the black robe, laid along the handle
of the axe, whose steel was crusted with the rust
of blood.
Three years ago, thus spoke the high priest,
the cry of blood, day and night, unceasingly and
forever, went shriecking up to the throne of God
for vengeance. From the walls of the fair city
it shrieked, from the plain it echoed, from the
mountain side that low moaning voice rose up to
the blue sky, pleading for the doom of the assassin,
the death of the tyrant. Then it was in times of
blood-shed and slaughter, in the days of foul
misrule
and galling wrong, when the grim bravo
whetted his knife on the stones of the altar,
and the corses of the murdered crowded the
sanctuary
of God, then it was, that a few brave and
determined men, evoked from the shadows of the
past, a
Power
, mighty yet secret, blasting as the
thunder-stroke, yet invisible as the grave!
The
Power
of the
Steel
winged by the
hands of those twin-sisters of vengeance,
Secrecy
and
Mystery
.
Three years past, and on the lips of men, there
grew a mighty wordthe Steel, the Holy Steel!
The bravo still smote his victim in the silence of
the night, but ere the morrow's sun, the corse of
the assassin lay prostrate beside the murdered;
the wronger still pursued his work of violence, but
it was by stealth and in secrecy; the tyrant still
filled the air with shrieks of death and cries of
despair, but the trembling tones of his own guilty
voice mingled with the last words of the slain; the
secret band, were abroadthe invisible struck
their keen dagger suddenly and without mercy
from the shelter of the cloud that enclosed their
existence, and more terrible on the lips of men
grew that sound of fear
The vengeance of the
Holy Steel
.
Not many days agone, the work which the
Order had sworn to fulfil, was hastened by a
new crime of the tyrant. The last baron of the race
of Albarone, whom the brethren of the steel had
resolved to invest with the royal robes of the
Ducal
throne, awaited within the walls of a dungeon
the coming of the morrow, which was to bring to
his head the woe and the doom, the axe, the wheel,
the scaffold, and the stake. Doomed on a false
accusation, doomed on the testimony of forsworn
tools of power, Adrian of Albarone had laid him
down to die, when the Messenger of the Steel
appeared, the rescue was planned, and the morrow
morn beheld the prisoner free.
The march of fate trode swiftly on. All men
named our brothermay God receive his soulas
the tool and minion of the Duke, whileit gives
me joy to say ithe walked abroad the messenger
of the steel.
All hail the spirit of Albertine! arose the
solemn exclamation of the brethrenall hail
the incarnate spirit of our order!
The last scene came hastening on. And the
hand of fate pointed to this lonely Convent of the
Mountain Lake, as the place where the wrongs of
years should be avenged, where the Tyrant should
meet his secret and fearful doom. For long years
these halls had been peopled by a monkish band,
who wore their sacred robes as a cleak for
blasphemies
too horrible to name; while the Dukes,
the Tyrant-Dukes of Florence, startled these
ancient
walls with the noonday debauch, the
mid-night
orgie, the sunshine murder, or the
torchlight
massacre!
Here not many days agone, came Albertine
the Monk. Still in the confidence of the Duke
for a specious tale blinded the eyes of the Tyrant
with regard to the part our brother bore in the
escape of the Doomedstill in the confidence of
the Duke, the convent doors flew open at his word,
Lord Adrian found a home within these walls,
and day by day, secretly and surely, Albertine
made converts of the Abbot and the Brethren of
this Monastery of crime. A few days past, the
tools and minions of the Duke, they now became
the sworn Neophytes of the Order of the Holy
Steel: It was the purpose of Albertine, to lure
the Duke to the lonely Convent, and while the
sound of his midnight wassail, awoke the echoes
of the old walls, the Avenger would strike the
dagger to his heart. The treachery of a peasant
of the lonely valley hastened his schemes to their
completion.
The last night came. The Duke, flushed with
pride, and made reckless by revenge, rode through
the convent gates, companioned by his bravoes, who
held their knives on high, shouting for the blood
of Adrian, the Traitor. And while they prepared
the doom of Lord Adrian, in the lonely valley,
the
Invisible
bestrode the mighty storm of
vengeance
that darkened over the night in Florence.
The morning dawned on Florence the Free!
The morning dawned over the lonely valley,
and the blood-stained Convent. Along the halls,
and through the vaults of the ancient fabric were
heaped the corses of the bravoes, while the
Brethren
of our Order, ran from hall to hall, from vault
to vault, lifting the red steel on high, as they
sought for new victims, while the shout of
vengeance
rang pealing from roof to floor, until the
air seemed animate with the cry of death.
The Monks of the Steel came hurrying to the
convent, two hours after midnight, but they came
too late. The Duke, Albertine and Lord Adrian,
all had disappeared. The morning dawned on
Florence, unshackled and free, but the Duke,
chosen
of God, was gone. Brethren, ye have all heard
the fearful story of that night of terrorthe
farewell
of Albertine, uttered in the hillside cot, his
sudden re-appearance before the eyes of Adrian,
when awaiting his doom in the earth-hidden vault
ye have heard how the bowl of death was given
to the Duke-elect by the monkthe singular
disappearance
of Albertine and the Duke when they
entered the Chamber of St. Arelineall has
reached
your ears, and all is wrapt in mystery
The dark story of the bowl of death, hath
been darkening o'er my soul since that night of
terror and joy, exclaimed a veiled Monk of the
Order through the folds of his robe as he slowly
rose from his seat. A light breaks over the chaos
of doubt and mysterya sad and fearful light.
Albertine crazed by revenge, maddened by his
thirst for the blood of the Tyrant-Duke, beheld the
midnight hour approach, while the Brothers of
the Invisible still delayed their coming. The
Duke bade him perform this work of doom.
Albertine
must either refuse, or excite the suspicion
of the tyrant. 'Twas a terrible thingoh, most
terrible to poison the young Lord at the bidding
of this changeling Duke, but Albertine had no
alternative. The plans of revenge were not yet
altogether ripe, an hour would warm them into
life. He was forced to slay Adrian to retain the
confidence of the Tyrantsooner would Albertine
make the Fair City itself a desert of whitened
bones, than the Duke, against whom his very soul
had sworn vengeance, should live. He slow Lord
Adrian, though his heart wept blood-drops in the
actand then came his strange and mysterious
vengeance on the Tyrant.
A low deep murmur ran round the walls of the
Tower-room. Every heart was impressed with
the terrible truth shadowed in the words of the
Brother of the Steel, and in a pause of intense
silence
,
each heart solemnly mused on the dark
story of Albertine, his last crime, and his last
revenge
.
Adrian sleeps with his murdered father,
again spoke the High-Priest. Brothers of the
Holy Steel, prince and peasant, lord and monk,
joined in the work of vengeance on the Wronger,
death to the slayer, ye who won for the Fair City,
peace and freedom, ye who rule her destines,
guide her fate, your High-Priest asks you the
solemn
questionWho shall wear the Ducal
Coronet
of Florence?
The bold words were yet ringing on his lips
when a shout from the stairway leading to the
tower, rung through the circular room
Hahaha! I bear the brandthe flaming
brand! Seehow it whirls on highlook how
it blazes! Ye sought well and ye sought long,
but ye could not find old Glow-worm and his
comrades
!
The small door of the tower-room was flung
suddenly open, and rushing through the aperture,
the slender form of the weak and trembling maniac
stood disclosed before the vision of the secret
brothers; the blazing torch he grasped in his right
hand flinging a blood-red light over the veiled
figures of monk and neophyte, while the walls of
the room were illumined with fitful glimpses
of the ruddy beams.
Hahaha! The brand, the flaming brand!
Ye sought well and ye sought longbut ye might
not find the nest of old Glow-worm and his
brothers! Merry was the fire they builtmerry,
oh, merry! Cheerily the flame aroseoh cheerily!
And nowha, ha, stone burns, roof burns, floor
burns, all is fireand ha, ha, I bear the brand,
the flaming brand!
And as the maniac swung the burning brand,
whirling and hissing round his head, there came
hastening through the narrow doorway a gaily
attired cavalier, bearing the trembling form of a
young and lovely woman in his arms, followed by
a stout and bluff soldier, whose face was stamped
with an expression of alarm most strange to see
on his determined features, while he aided the
youth and maiden onward in their flight from
the fire and flame below.
Health to the Holy Steel! cried the cavalier
rushing forward; I bear a message from the Lords
and People of Florence!
Ye will have to be wondrous hasty with your
messages, I tell ye! exclaimed the bluff soldier.
For d'ye seeall below us is flame and death
the convent is on fire, by St. Withold!
Brethren of the Holy Steel, exclaimed the
High Priest, as opening the pacquet he gazed
calmly round over the erect forms of the uprisen
monks and neophytes of the orderwho shall
wear the ducal crown of Florence?
The Ladye Annabel! echoed the Brethren of
the Holy Steel with one unanimous shout. Live
the Ladye Annabel, Queen of Florence!
A moment passesbehold the spectacle!
A fair andlovely form, clad in robes of fluttering
white, stands trembling in the midst of the group
of black-robed men who cluster round, kneeling on
the pavement, as they raise their hands in one
hurried movement and shout with wild acclaim
Live the Queenlive the Ladye Annabel,
Duchess of Florence!
And as the Secret Brethren sank kneeling round,
priest and neophyte, all with heads bent low,
before
the form of the Ladye Annabel, who gazed
around with a wild and wondering look, there
standing erect with a flushed cheek and a rolling
eye, the ancient man of the vault flung the brand
aloft, whirling the flame round and round again,
as he shouted
'Tis merry, 'tis merry, ha, ha! 'Tis merry,
'tis merryhurrah! Old Glow-worm is a demon
these all are demons! Ha, ha! Fire above,
and fire belowold Glow-worm is king! On
onbrothersonlight up the cozy nooks with
the red flamefire the timbers, heat the old rocks,
scare old Death with the light! Hahaha!
The stone rolled back, and he
was buried alive!
'
Up, upan' ye bear the hearts of menup
and save yourselves and save the Queen! shouted
Robin the Rough. The fire has chased us through
the long galleries of the convent, from chamber to
chamber, from room to room, has it followed
roaring at our heels! Up, and save the Queen!
Her attendants have escaped or fallen in the flames.
Yonder by the window of the stairway is our only
hope! A staircase of massive stone, built outside
the walls of this tower, leads downward to the
southern wing of the convent, yet untouched by
flame! Up, and save the Queen!
Listen, Brothers of the Invisible, listen to the
last words ye shall ever hear from your High
Priest. Our oath is fulfilled, the Tyrant is dead,
Florence is free! And here in this lofty tower,
environed by flame, with the hissing of the fire
filling our ears, and the lurid smoke rolling up to
the heavens, with flame and death all around, here
in this dark and blood-stained House of St.
Benedict
,
do I, your High Priest and Sire, dissolve the
Order of the Monks of the Holy Steel! When
Wrong arises, then shall ye again spring into life,
when Murder walks abroad in the sunshine,
aughing in the face of God, then shall His
ministers
again raise the Invisible steel! Till then I
dissolve your band, give back your oath.
Prince and peasant, lord and monkoff with
your sacred garments, off with the vestments in
which ye have been robed as the avengers of God,
off with hood and cowlstand forth as ye are and
raise the shoutLive the Ladye Annabel. Live
the Queen!
Live the Ladye Annabelthe shout rang
pealing to the tower-roofLive the Queen!
It was like magic!
Down fell hood and cowl, down fell sable
vestments
and midnight robes, and there disclosed
in the light of the flaming brand, stood the prince
in his jewelled robes, the knight in surcoat of
glittering velvet, the lord in his gay doublet, the
merchant in his silken tunic, the peasant in coat
of serge, the priest arrayed in sacerdotal white,
glittering with the sacred insignia of gold, the
scholar in his flowing gown of sable, all stood
there, rising stately erect in the light, proud
representatives
of their various classes, types of the
Gothic Man
[4]
[4]
The author uses the phrase as a general and
comprehensive term, to designate the `
man of the
feudal times!
'
, however named, or styled, all joined
in the holiest cause on earth, the freedom of their
native land, lifting up their hands and voices in
one wild burst of enthusiasm, as they hailed the
Ladye Annabel, Queen of Florence, chosen by the
people, chosen by the lords, chosen by the priests,
chosen by God!
A strange smile of delight stole over the lovely
face of the Ladye Annabel, as standing calm and
erect, her blue eyes was fixed on the vacant air,
with the gaze of one entranced by some vision of
far-off bliss.
We shall meet againshe said and smiled
Oh joy, we shall meet again!
Buried aliveho, ho! shrieked the ancient
man, in a low chaunting voiceHaha! The
stone rolls backI have the brand, and thenho,
ho, hurrah!
Buried alive!
CHAPTER THE ELEVENTH.
THE BURIED ALIVE.
THE SPIRIT OF THE CHRONICLE, LEADING
THE WAY THROUGH THE CHAMBERS OF
SLEEP, AND TRANCE, AND DEATH,
SOLVES THE MYSTERIE OF THE LIFE OF
ADRIAN DI ALBARONE.
Afar through the gloom and twilight that hangs
between the visible and the unreal world, we
behold
the Spirit of the Chronicle, leading us
onward
to a dim and shadowy land peopled by
Dreams and thronged with Thoughts, robed in
forms of light or clad in shapes of doom. It is the
land of Deaththe land of the Grave. The awful
region, where the soul, parted from its house of
clay, looks over the wide expanse of shadow, and
beholds every thought that ever visited its mortal
form, spring up into tangible being and life, now
gladdening its eternal vision with images of
loveliness
and beauty, and again affrighting the pale
Spirit with shapes of ghastliness and woe.
Death
mighty and irresistible, look down
upon the cold corse, and tell us, when does thy
hand first unveil the Eternal to the eye of the
Soul
Life
, thou mockery and blasphemy, gaze
thou upon the form of the Mortal Thing, and give
us to know, when does thy power cease, when
does thy victim pass from thy grasp? Ye each
dispute the possession of the Soul, upon a
shadowy
battle-field, and now the victory sways
to the skeleton, and now to the thing of Flesh.
Men know this battle-field by various names, they
call it
Sleep
, they call it
Trance
, they call it
Death
. First the body sleeps, then it is
entranced
,
then it dies. First the Soul gazes with a dim
eye upon the Eternal World, then its vision is
enwrapt
and absorbed, and at last, as the clay dies, it
is all Spirit, and Thought, and Dream.
Come with us, reader, with hushed breath and
a solemn footstep come with us, while we tread
the halls of Old Death, tracing the Soul through
the chambers of Sleep and Trance, into the full
light of the AWFUL UNKNOWN!
Adrian Di Albarone drank the Bowl, and
drained
it to the dregs, and as he drank the lovely face
of Annabel swam round him in wild confusion,
mingling with the dark countenance of
Albertine
,
and the bronzed visage of the Sworder, while
his heart seemed turning to fire, and his brain to
molten lead.
He drained the bowl to the dregs, and then
fell prostrate over the coffin, and then came a cold
and unconscious pause, when his heart, his brain,
were wrapt in forgetfulness, covering his soul
like a thick mist, or the deep darkness of midnight.
Awaking slowly from this oblivion of soul, he
beheld
looking him calmly, yet fixedly in the face,
the countenance of his father, Lord Julian of
Albarone, pale as death, and livid with the hues
of corruption yet lighted by the deep glance of
those shadowy eyes, that seemed to burn in their
very sockets, like meteors seen through the
dimness
of the daybreak mist. As this face so wild,
so lofty and so ghastly in its supernatural
expression
,
faded slowly away from the vision of
Adrian
,
his soul became the prisoner of mighty Dreams,
the Spirits of the Grave, who called up before his
eye, this dark and startling Mysterie.
THE MYSTERIE OF LIFE.
He stood in the courtyard of an ancient
castle
,
with the frown of the old walls towering over
his head, while the blaze of the festal lights
thrown from the lofty windows, gave a ruddy
light to the scene, as the bounding strains of
music
,
the light-hearted laugh of the reveller, or the
gay carol of the minstrel came echoing to his ear.
He looked around the courtyard, and beheld
ranged under the shadow of the ancient wall the
chariots of the great and proud, extending in long
and brilliant array, as far as eye could see, each
chariot with its panels blazing with heraldic
emblazonings
boasting its gallant attendance of four
noble steeds, decorated with gay housings and
waving plumes, red, azure and snow-white in hue,
while numerous servitors, attired in liveries of
every colour and gaudy device, ran to and fro,
their shouts of boisterous merriment, mingling
with the voices of their Lords, joining in the glee
song of the banquet hall.
Ascending a massive stairway, with snow white
marble steps, and rare paintings adorning the wall;
Adrian made his way through the crowds of
feasters, passing to and fro, through the stream of
servitors bearing dainty viands to the revellers
above, and in a single moment stood within the
glare and glitter of the Festival Hall.
It was in sooth, a grand and magnificent scene.
The pillars of a lofty hall swept away from the
spot where he stood, in grand perspective, each
lofty column bearing its burden of wild flowers,
quaintly wreathed around sculptured frieze and
capital, hanging in long festoons to the floor, or
borne to and fro by the summer breeze, while the
glare of ten thousand lamps, arranged amid the
intricate ornaments of the arching ceiling, hung
along the towering columns, or pendant in the
night air, gave a dazzling light to the scene, as the
dancers went merrily over the bounding floor,
each eye gleaming with revelry, each cheek
glowing
with the merriment of the hour, and the Spirit
of the Dance giving life to every step, animation
to every motion of the revellers.
Placed on the balcony above his head, the
band of minstrels filled the air with music; pillar
and column, ceiling-arch and obscure nook, gave
back the strains with redoubled echoes, until the
air seemed animated with melody, instinct with
the life of joy, while floating on the waves of
sound, the forms of dame and damsel, lord and
cavalier, seemed swimming in the atmosphere,
their eyes flashing light, their hands gaily
upraised
,
their voices mingling in a festal song, as they
undulated to and fro, now circling here, now
grouping there, now clustering in a crowd, and
again darting away over the floor, like a flock of
frightened birds scared by the wild swoop of the
falcon.
Adrian gazed over the scene, until his eye grew
sick with loveliness, his ears deafened by the
sounds of mirth, revelry and music, he gazed
around and marked the forms of beauty swaying
in the dance, here the blooming form of mature
womanhood, bounding amid the dancers, there
the blushing cheek of girlhood, receiving the warm
blaze of the festal lights on the velvet skin, here
soft lips and azure eyes, mingling their messages
of love, there delicate hands pressed thrillingly
together
,
on every side the form of a queenly dame
revealed in the light, or the soft bosom of a
princely
damsel, heaving from the folds of her vestment,
on all sides beauty and grace, music and motion,
comingling their fascinations, while the heart filled
with melody, and the pulse throbbed with joy.
And as Adrian looked, with a wild thrill of
delight
,
he beheld one lovely form, standing apart
from the dancers, while her face of dreamy beauty
was gazing sadly over the scene, the deep blue eye
gleaming with thought, and the swelling cheek
paled by melancholy, as the strains of festival
music
came to her ear. It was the Ladye Annabel!
With a wild cry of delight Adrian sprang
forward
,
and as he spraug, his bride turned, beheld
his face, and came swimming into his arms. Another
moment and they joined the throng of dancers
speeding
gayly over the floor, their hands interlocked
while their glances mingled, and the soft whispers
of each voice, spoke of the dear memories of the
olden time.
It was when the dance swelled gayest, when the
minstrels gave forth their most joyous notes, when
all around was life and music and the waters of
joy came bubbling to the brim of every heart, that
a strange voice, deep, and whispering in its tones,
broke over the very heart of Adrain.
Man, thou art full of joy, and around thee
every cheek glows with health, every eye sparkles
with life. Behold, I show thee the Mysterie of
Life and Death! Thou art doomed to return to
this Festal Hall, one hundred years from this
night, when thou shalt behold the Festal Scene,
which death will open to thy gaze!
And at the very word, Adrian lost his bride in
the throng of dancers, and all grew dark as
mid-night
.
The music and the dancers, the forms of
beauty and the pillared hall, all, all were gone, and
a strange consciousness was impressed upon the
brain of Adrian, that one hundred years from the
festal night had passed away, that he had been
wrapt in slumber for a long and dreary century of
time.
THE MYSTERIE OF DEATH.
He stood in the court-yard of the ancient
castle
yet again. A broad blaze of light poured from
the windows of the festal hall, while the peals of
strange and unknown music broke murmuringly
on the air. Adrian gazed around the court-yard,
with a feeling of awe, gathering heavy and dark
around his heart. There was the castle yard, the
same as in the olden time, yet not altogether the
same. Gleams of moonlight stole thro' the chinks
in the tottering walls of the court-yard, wild vines
threw their long branches from among the age-worn
stones, and the owl, like a thing of evil omen
disturbed
the air with its sullen murmur. Gazing
along the court yard, Adrian beheld a strange and
ghastly spectacle. Beneath the shadow of the
dark grey walls, along the very space occupied
by the array of chariots, one hundred years before,
there extended a long line of death-cars, hearse
succeeding hearse, all draped in folds of black, with
four dark steeds, heavy with hangings of dark
velvet
,
attached to each chariot of the grave, while the
coachman's seat was tenanted by a grisly skeleton,
attired in the gay livery of the noble lord whom
he served in life.
With maddened steps, Adrain hastened along
the whole line of hearses, he beheld each
death-car
,
with its four black steeds, their heads
decorated
with sable plumes, their bodies concealed by
folds of black velvet, he beheld the skeleton driver
seated on every hearse; he saw the parephenalia of
death and the grave, and as the horror grew darker
at his heart, he shouted aloud, asking in tones of
wild amazement, the cause of this fearful panorama
of woe and gloom. There came no answer to his
shout. All was silent, save the murmur of the
owl and the peals of strange music floating from
the windows of the Festal Hall.
What means this fearful scene? whispered
Adrian, as he seized the skeleton servitor of a
gloomy hearse by the armWhat means the long
array of death cars?
The skeleton extended his fleshless jaws, in a
hideous grin, and with his skeleton hand,
brushed
the dust of the grave from his gay doublet
of blue and silver, and arranged the tasteful knot
of his silken sash. Still no voice came from his
unbared teeth, no answer came from his fleshless
visage.
Fiend of hell, shouted Adrain, this sight will
drive me mad.
Nay, nay, good youth, exclaimed a soft and
whispered voice at his very shoulder. Be not
alarmed, 'tis but a festal scene. One hundred
years from this night we all thronged yonder
dancing
hall, 'tis our pleasure, or mayhap our doom
to return to the scene of our former gaiety. I was
master of ceremonies an hundred years ago, I am
master of ceremonies ha, ha, yet once again. Will
it please ye to chose a partner?
With a feeling of involuntary horror, Adrian
turned and beheld a Figure, clad in a gay robe of
purple, faced with snow-white ermine, holding the
rod of office in his hand, while a group of
rainbow-hued
plumes, hung drooping over his brow. Adrian
dashed the plumes aside, he beheld, oh sight of
mockery, the fleshless skull, the hollow eye sockets,
the cavity of the nose, the grinning teeth, and the
hanging jaw, while the hand grasping the wand of
office, was a grisly skelton hand.
He turned from the bowing skeleton, and was
rushing away with horror, when a new wonder
fixed his attention. The master of ceremonies
waved his wand, and each skeleton driver leaped
from his hearse. Another signal and the long line
of skeletons, each attired in gay and contrasted
livery, extended their skeleton hands, and lifting
the pall on high disclosed the gloomy burden of
each death-car, the coffin draped in black, with the
heraldic plate of gold, affixed to each coffin lid. A
third wave of the wand from the master of
ceremonies
,
and the skeleton drivers, unscrewed each
coffin lid, and Adrian beheld the occupant of every
tenement of death, slowly rise from their last
resting
place, gazing beneath the shadow of the uplifted
folds of the funeral pall, around upon the
court-yard
.
As they gazed, Adrain beheld each fleshless
skull, wearing the horrible grimace of death,
looking
forth from beneath their gaudy head-gear, the
plumed cap, or the jewelled coronet, while their
skeleton hands, arranged the folds of their attire,
brushing the coffin dust from the gay robe, or
fixing
the tarnished ruffle around the neck with a yet
more dainty grace, while the skeleton drivers,
slowly
let down the steps of each hearse fashioned in
ts sable side. The last signal was given by the
master of ceremonies.
And with a low bow, each skeleton servitor
extended
hishand, to receive his fair lord or ladye, his
fair young mistress or his gallant young master,
as arising from their coffin, they placed their feet
on the steps of the hearse, and slowly descended
into the court yard of the ancient castle.
Great God, they are thronging around me,
shouted Adrian, skeleton after skelton, clad in the
gay costume of life, descend from the funeral hearse
wending in one ghastly throng toward the hall
door, on their way to the festal scene. Oh, ghastly
mockery! here are the forms of those who died when
young, and the trembling skeletons of those whom
death summoned when bending with the weight
of years. Here are the skeletons of warrior and
courtier, knight and minstrel. All wear glittering
costumes, all mimic the actions of life.
Cavalier
takes the hand of Damosel, and Lord supports
the form of Ladye, while the fleshless jaws, extend
and grimace but speak no word. They utter a
low moaning sound like the deaf mute when he
essays to speak. 'Tis horrible, most horrible, this
ghastly array of mockery, and harkstrange peals
of music, are floating from yon lofty windows of
the banquet hall!
And as he spoke, the spectral train disappeared
within the shadow of the hall door, and he was
left alone with the long line of hearses and the
skeleton servitors.
So please ye, gentle sir, wilt thou not trip a
measure in the joyous dance? spoke a voice at his
shoulder, Lo! the peals of merry music, lo! the
hum of the dancers feet, moving merrily over the
floor. Wilt please thee to take my arm?
Adrian turned and beheld the bowing skeleton,
Master of Ceremonies.
I'll e'en secure thee a fair partner! whispered
the skeleton as he led Adrian thro' the hall door
and along the massive stairway. Look, good youth,
the paintings are somewhat tarnished, very little
tarnished since we beheld them last and, ha, ha,
well, well, such things will come to pass, the
marble
steps of the staircase are cracked by the footstep
of time. This way, this way, my good youth.
Lo! we are in the festal hall!
With a gaze of horror, Adrian beheld the hall,
whose floor he had trodden some hundred years
agone, he beheld the lofty pillars, the magnificent
arch, the balcony for the minstrels, all illumined
by the glare of pendent lamps, all, all the same,
yet still all changed, sadly and fearfully changed.
The lofty columns were decorated with evergreens,
but flowers gathered by the hand of beauty from
the wild wood glade no more adorned capital and
frieze. The ivy, green companion of old time,
clomb round the towering pillars, and swept its
canopy of leaves along the arching ceiling, while
the night-wind rustling through the worm-eaten
tapestries agitated the long tendrils of the trailing
vine with a gentle yet solemn motion.
Lo! the dancersha, ha, the dancers!
Circling and whirling, grouping and
clustering
,
the skeleton-band went swaying over the
floor, their gay dresses fluttering in the light,
while the ruddy lamp-beams fell quivering over
each bared brow, tinting the hollow sockets with
a crimson glow, and giving a more ghastly grimace
to the array of whitened teeth.
Lo! the minstrelsa skeleton-band, whose
fleshless skulls appear above the lattice-work of
yon balcony. Merry music they makeclank,
clank, clank! They beat the hollow skull with
the cross-boneclank, clank, clank! Each
skeleton
minstrel waves on high a human bone, striking
it on the bollow skullclank, clank. Clank,
clank. Clank, clank, clank!
And as the grinning skeleton, master of
ceremonies
,
pointed above to the spectral minstrels,
Adrian listened to the music that echoed round
the hall. A wild clanking sound assailed his
ears, with a hollow mockery of music, while a
deep, booming, rolling sound like the echo of a
distant
battle-drum broke on the air, maddening the
skeleton-dancers with its weird melody, while the
revel swelled fiercer, and the mirth grew louder,
awaking the echoes of the ancient hall with one
deafening murmur.
Lo! the dancers dividebehold the spectacle!
On yonder side extend the lords and cavaliers, on
this the dames and damozels. They prepare for
a merry dancewill it please thee chose a
partner
?
And as the skeleton spoke, he pointed to the
form of a maiden, clad in snow-white robes, who
with her face turned from Adrian, seemed
absorbed
in watching the motions of the dancers.
Adrian gazed upon this maidenly form with a
beating heart, and advanced to her side.
Behold thy partner! cried the master of
ceremonies
.
The maiden turned her face to Adrian, and he
stood spell-bound to the spot with sudden horror.
Looking from beneath a drooping plume,
snow-white
in hue, a ghastly skull stared him in the
face, with the orbless sockets, the cavity of the
nose, and the grinning teeth turned to glowing red
by the light of the pendent lamps. Adrian stood
spell-bound but the form advanced, flinging her
skeleton hands on high
Adrian, Adrian, whispered a soft woman's
voice issuing from the fleshless skull; Joy to me
now, for I behold thee once again!
I know thee not shrieked Adrian with a voice
of fearI know thee not, thou thing of death!
Wherefore whisper my name with the voice of
her whom this heart loved a hundred years ago,
and will love forever? Offoffthou mockery,
nor clutch thy skeleton arms around my neck, nor
gather me in thy foul embrace!
And thou lovest me not! spoke the sad and
complaining voice of the skeletonAdrian,
Adrian
,
gaze upon me, I am thine own, thine now
and thine forever!
And this, whispered Adrian, as the fearful
consciousness gradually stole over his soulAnd
this is my lovemy Annabel! Death, oh ghastly
and invisible Death, couldst thou not spare even
her!
Advance dames and damosels! rung out the
words of the master of ceremonies.
And at the word, the long line of
skeleton-dames
and damosels, arrayed in rarest silks,
blazing with jewels and glittering with ornaments
of gold, came swaying quickly forward, extending
their skeleton hands to their partners, who half
advanced from the opposite side of the hall, and
then they all swept back to their places, with one
sudden movement rattling their skeleton fingers
with a gesture of boundless joy, as they stood
beneath
the glare of the dazzling lights.
Advance lords and cavaliers!
Quickly and with lightsome steps the skeletons
arrayed in costly robe and glittering doublet
advanced
to the sound of the unearthly music, and
gaining the centre of the hall, sprang nimbly in
the air, performing the evolutions of the dance
with the celerity of lightning, and having greeted
their fair partners again retired to the opposite
side of the hall, uttering a low and moaning sound
of laughter as they regained their places.
Minstrels strike up a merrier peal! Clank,
clank. Clank, clank. Clank, clankclank!
Merrier, merrierlouder, louderlet the old roof
echo with your peals of melody! Now gentles
advance, seize your fair partners and whirl them
in the dance!
With one wild bound the skeletons sprang
forward
from opposite sides of the hall, pairing off,
two by two, lord and ladye, cavalier and damosel,
and in a moment the whole array of revellers
swept circling round the hall, moving forward to
a merry measure, clanking their skeleton hands
on high and uttering low peals of laughter as they
whirled around the bounding floor.
Adrian gazed upon the scene in wild
amazement
,
while the skeleton arms of
her he loved
gathered closer round his neck, and as he gazed
he became inspired with the wild excitement of
the scene, he clapped his hands on high, he joined
in the low muttered laughter, he mingled in the
mad whirl of the spectral dance.
Faster and faster, whirling two by two, their
fleshless skulls turned to glowing red by the glare
of a thousand lights, their hands of bone clanking
wildly above their heads, while the low moaning
chorus of unreal laughter echoed around the hall,
faster and faster circled the skeleton dancers, gay
doublets glittering in the lamp-beams, robes of silk
flung wavingly to the breeze, on and on with the
speed of wind they swept, these merry denizens of
the grave, pacing their march of mockery, their
dance of woe, with a ghastly mimicry of life, reality
and joy.
And as Adrian flung his arms around the
skeleton-form
of his bride, gathering her to his bosom,
while thier voices joined in the moaning chaunt
of unreal laughter, the voice which he had heard
an hundred years before, again came whispering
to his ear
Behold the Mysterie of Life and Death!
To-day
the children of men live and love, hate and
destroy. Where are their lives, their loves, their
hatreds, and their wars, in an hundred years?
Beholdha, ha, ha!
Behold the Mysterie of
their life and their death!
THE REAL MORE TERRIBLE THAN
THE UNREAL.
All was dark. Not a ray of light, not even the
gleaming of a distant star, but deep and utter
darkness. Adrian awoke from his dream. Did
he awake to another dream, or to a reality yet
more terrible? He lay prostrate, and he felt his
limbs confined as though they were bound with
cords. He extended his hand, and it touched a
smooth panel of wood, extending along his right
side. A strange horror, to which the horrors of
his late dream were joy intense, gathered like a
deadening weight around his heart. He threw
forth his left hand, and felt a like panel of smooth
wood extending along his other side. Raising
himself slowly from his prostrate position, with
every nerve and fibre of his frame stiffened and
cramped by his hard resting place, he passed his
quivering hands along the panels of wood, and
with that insupportable horror deadening over his
heart, he felt and examined the shape of his
Coffin
!
Bowing his head between his hands, the
wretched
man essayed toweep, but the fountain of his
tears was exhausted. He could not weep. And
then, as with trembling hands he examined his
emaciated face, with the cheek-bones pressing
hard against the parched skin, he beheld rising
before his soul, one ghastly idea, which would pale
the cheek of the bravest man that ever went to
battle, or chill with horror and despair, the heart
of the holiest Priest that ever offered prayers to
God, an idea to which all other horrors were as
nothing, all terrors, all fears, all deaths trifling and
insignificantand the nameless thought, his
husky
voice gave to the air in a hollow whisper
Buried-Alive
!
And a hollow echo returned the word
alive,
alive!
It comes back to my soul, he slowly
murmured
,
the scene in the chamber of the convent
the Monkoh, curses on the traitorthe
potion
,
all, all come back to me! Buried Alive! Devil
in human shapehe did not drug the bowl with
death, but withsleep! This, this is the revenge
of the Duke, and, and Albertine was the tool of
the triple murderer! Buried Alive! He tried to
arise from the coffin, but for a long time his efforts
were in vain. His frame was stiffened in every
sinew, and his limbs were benumbed by his long
repose. At last he stood erect upon the floor of
stone, and extending his hands, grasped the
massive
walls.
There is yet one hope, he murmured, there
may be some outlet from the funeral vault!
With slow and leaden footsteps he passed
along the wall, measuring its length. It was five
paces long. The stones were all solid, massive,
and firm. His upraised hand touched the ceiling,
as it extended some three inches higher than his
head. Clutching the massive stones, he paced
along the other walls or sides of the room, with
weary and difficult footsteps, and at last traversed
the three sides, and leaning against the wall, he
endeavored to impress his wandering mind with
some definite idea of the shape and dimensions of
the vault.
I stand in a small room, with floor and walls
of massive stone, he slowly muttered, it is
square in shape, and each side of the cell is
five paces in length, and somewhat more than
the stature of a man in height. The stones are
solid, and to all appearance are some three feet
thick. There is no outlet, no passage from the
vault. I am indeedBuried, and buried alive!
He passed with difficult steps along the fourth
wall of the vault, determined to repose his
shattered
frame awhile, even though his resting place
was his coffin. In a moment measuring three
paces, he arrived at the spot where he supposed
he had left the coffin. Extending his foot to
and fro, in search of his late tenement, he was
struck with a new horror:
It is gonethe coffin is gone!
Words cannot picture the utter horror with
which this was spoken. All the despair that an
Angel of God might feel, when toppled from the
battlements of Heaven into the infernal abyss,
then visited the breast of Adrian Di Albarone.
It is a mere phantasy, he exclaimed, I have
chanced upon the wrong side of the room.
Again the sides of the vault were paced, and
yet the coffin was not within his reach. It was
gone from its position near the wall, and his
physical
strength did not suffice to advance toward
the centre of the room.
What invisible hand was it, that removed the
Coffin? As the question was asked by the heart
of the wretched man, it found its answer in one
fearful doubt.
And am I, in truth, within the bounds of that
fearful place, which wild Poets have fancied, and
dark-robed Monks have preached? Am I in
sooth lost, and lost forever? Is death a dream?
or an eternal succession of realities that seem but
dreamshorrors too fearful for even the damned
to believe? And this, this ishell! I could bear
the tortures of the eternal fire, the lash of the
fiends I might defy, the lightnings of wrath
would inspire with me with some portion of the
Awful Spirit who winged their bolts of vengeance
but this narrow cell this eternal confinement
in a place visited only by Dreams, while hunger
tortures and thirst burns, hope animates, and
despair
holds but half the human heartthis, this is
too horrible. God of vengeance, give me, oh give,
the punishment of the undying worm, the torture
of the eternal flame, but spare, oh spare me
this!
He fell on his knees, and kissed the cold floor
as he bent his forehead against his clenched hands,
making the narrow cell all alive with his shrick
Spare; oh spare me
this!
As he bowed low on the floor, a singular sound
most singular in such a placemet his ear. It
was but a low sound, yet it was a fearful one.
He
heard the deep breathing of a living creature!
It might be the echo of his own broken gasps, the
thought flashed over the mind of Adrian, and for
a moment he held his breath, and listened with all
his soul absorbed in the result. Again the deep
breathing of a human creature met his ear
Is it man or devil? thus ran the thoughts of
AdrianMayhap he may give me water to
quench my thirst, or mayhap he willha, ha,
take my accursed life. Could I but speakfor my
voice does nought but murmurI'd even ask him
to plunge his poignard in my heart.
A whizzing sound disturbed the air, and at the
very instant the blow of a sword descended on the
left arm of Adrian Di Albarone, while a heavy
body fell to the floor, within two paces of the
spot where he knelt.
The blood flows from the wound, the glad
thought darted over the mind of the Buried-Alive,
Would I had strength to tear the doublet-sleeve
from the arm, then I might drink my own blood.
Yet holdthe blood oozes through the gash in
the sleeve, and, and Great God! I may drink my
own blood!
He raised the wounded arm to his mouth and
greedily drank the blood. In a moment he felt
the influence of the draught. His veins seemed
fired with new life, his brain became for the
moment
calm and clear, his heart regained its vigor,
and gifted with temporary strength he arose on
his feet, grasping the sword of the unknown in
his good right hand. Another moment passed,
and with his right hand he wound a bandage of
linen, torn from his bosom, around the wounded
arm, securing it by a knot tied with the teeth and
hand.
Meanwhile he heard the sound of gasping
breath, not two paces distant from the spot where
he stood, and as he listened a deep-muttered groan
broke on his ear.
Calling all his powers of mental and physical
vigor to his aid he spoke in a faint yet determined
voice
Who art thou? he exclaimed.
Thy murderer! was the gasping response.
How long hast thou been in this place of
death?
Longenoughto starve! Hell and devils!
I burnthirststarve!
What wouldst thou have?
Bread, bread! WaterI'd sell my soul for
water!
Wherefore didst thou strike me?
I thought ye a spiritandandI wanted to
test your quality. Kill me, an' thou art a man of
flesh and bloodkill me, kill me!
Thy voice is strange and hollow, yet methinks
I remember your tones. Thy name is
Balvardo
!
'Twas I that swore thy life away, 'twas I that
brought thee to these vaults to bury thy corse
beneath
the earth kill me, kill me!
Is there no opening to this vault?
A secret doora passagethe spring, that
opens on the other sidethe spring that shuts
on this side. Iha, ha, may hell seize my soul,
I buried myself aliveand kill me!
Adrian shuddered with horror. He could hear
the gasping of the poor wretch as he struggled for
breath, he could hear the groans of his unseen
assassin; well he knew that long absence from
nourishment from food alone could lay the
sworder
helpless as an infant along the floor.
And as his mind struggled with the mighty
horrors that gathered round him, his attention
was arrested by a singular circumstance. While
the hushed and whispered conversation had been
in progress between Adrian and Balvardo, the
room had been gradually growing warmer and
warmer, and at last the walls became heated, the
ceiling emitting a warmth almost insupportable,
while the confined air of the cell grew like the
atmosphere
of a furnace.
Great God, what new horror is this! shoutei
Adran. Tell me, how hast thou existed thus
long in this vault of death, without air?
A well, gasped the wretch, centre of the
stone-roomcurrent of air from under the earth.
Impressed by these gasping words, Adrian
advanced
slowly along the floor, avoiding the pros
trate body, and in a moment stood near the
centre
of the room. He extended his footit
touched
a substance that gave back a slight sound; it
was his coffin. Another extension of his foot,
and a whizzing sound assailed his ears, ploughing
the air far, far below his feet, then the rebound of
wood splintered to pieces on a pointed rock came
welling up from earth-hidden depths and echoed
around the room. He listened with hushed
breath for a long and weary moment. The
plunging sound of a pebble falling in water, far,
far below, came dimly and faintly to his ear, like
the pattering of the water-drop upon the age-worn
rock.
Ha! A well, deep as the fathomless abyss,
sinks down from the centre of the room. Let
me measure its widthtwo good paces. The
coffin has whirled down into its bottomless depths
I hear the splintered pieces falling in the water
far, far below. A slight current of air issues from
the welland the heat of this vault of death grows
fiercer every moment
`Kill me, and then thank God thou hast strength
left to hurl thee down the dark abyssI burn,
oh, fiend of hell, with thirst and flame I burn!
Adrian sate him down on the edge of the well,
with his feet dangling in the abyss, and gave his
very soul to one long and painful effort of thought
Death clutched him with a thousand arms, death
was in the heated air, death came gibbering and
laughing in the form of famine, and from the very
depths of the abyss the doomed lord could fancy
he beheld the form of the Skeleton-God, with arms
outstretched to grasp his victim as he fell.
There was no hope.
He must die. Great God he must die afar
rom the voice of friend, afar from the sight of
earth, or the vision of the blue sky, he must die
by the slow gnawings of famine, the gradua
withering of fire, or by one sudden plunge into
the abyss below. He sate him down to diehis
arms were folded, and yet with an eager gesture
he held his face over the darkness of the abyss in
the nervous effort to inhale each breath of air.
He strove to compose his mind to prayer, but
the gasping of the wretch lying near his side
diverted
his attention from thoughts of God and
the better world.
Why didst thou hate me? he slowly asked.
I was afraidthouwouldstlive to do me
wrong. Thou art revengedI die by inches!
The wretch groaned in very agony, and Adrian
could hear his fingers clutching convulsively along
the floor of stone.
My God, my God, cried the doomed lord, as
his very soul was wrung by the woe of the
forsaken
wretch; would I had one cup of water to
cool his burning tongue
Hahaha! He mocks me with the name
of water! Tell me, thou fiend, is
he
not
revenged
?
The heat grows fiercerthe air of this vault
is turning to fire! He gasps for breath. Man
give me thy hand. Let me drag thee near the
wellthe freshning air may cool the fire in thy
heart and veins.
And extending his hands through the darkness,
with his body inclined to a level with the
pavement
,
he sought the form of the famine-striken
sworder. He grasped the hands of the wretch;
the fingers were thin and wasted, resembling the
bones of a skeleton rather than the hands of a
living man. Slowly and with a careful motion
Adrian dragged the dying man along the
pavement
,
he laid his head on his knee, as he sat on
the verge of the well, and passed his hand over
the massive brow of his assassin. He shuddered
in the very act. Clear and distinct, like the
unbared
skull of the grave, the harsh outline of the
withered brow, pressed against his hand, and he
could feel the eye sunken far in its socket, and
the cheeks hollowed by the touch of famine.
I feel the fresh air on my brow, gasped
Balvardo
;
my feet are withering with heat, and
mine hands burn! Oh fiend of hellI see a
fountain, a cool and showery fountainthe clear
waters are streaming over pebbled stones, and
the green moss is wet with the sparkling drops.
Hist! I will crawl to the fountain side, I will bury
my face in the watersha, ha, ha, I will drink, I
will drink! Fiend, fiendcurses on thee, thou
hast changed the waters to
blood!
He uttered a wild yell of horror, and the vault
of the dead gave back the echoBlood, blood!
while Adrian passed his hands over the
beetle-brow
of his murderer, and parting the matted hair
aside held the famine-eaten face in the full
current
of the subterranean air.
All was dark as chaos ere the fiat of God spoke
worlds into being, yet here was a spectacle that
the angels of His throne, veiling their awful
faces before the Presence, might gaze upon even
through the darkness, and gaze with tears of joy.
Here was the assassin, the sworder, the
false-witness
,
and the foe, resting in the arms of the man
whose body his oath had given to the doomsman
and the wheel, whose footsteps he had tracked
like the bloodhound snuffing the footprints of his
victim, fierce, unrelenting, and hungering after
blood, here was the wretch who had borne him to
this vault, placed his body in the house of death,
consigned him to the famine and the fire, the
nameless horror and the agony that the cheek
grows livid to name, here was the man who had
buried him alive, and yet he held him in his arms,
fanned his withered face, and brought the fresh
air to his parched lips and burning brow. It was
as the sworder had gaspingly uttered a fierce
revenge
,
and yet such vengeance as the Man of the
Cross, the God shrined in flesh, would have taken
on his most blood-thirsty foe.
The end drew nigh. The moments, those
moments
of horror, which seemed lengthened to
years, dragged on with steps of lead, and the room
grew like a furnace, the walls gave forth an
intolerable
heat, the ceiling was rapidly becoming a
canopy of invisible fire, while the air changed to
unseen flame, began to burn into the flesh of
Adrian
,
as the wretch in his arms writhed and
writhed in helpless agony.
Waterwaterwater! gasped the Sworder.
A thought flashed over the mind of Adrian.
There may be water in this wella fountain
may spring bubbling from its depths, while we
perish
on the brink! The way is deep and darka
single misplaced grasp or foothold, and my body
goes whirling to the abyss below; yet I am urged
on by a power I cannot nameI will descend the
well!
A moment and the head of Balvardo lay on the
pavement of the stone-room, while the body of
Adrian hung swinging in the abyss, as, with his
hands grasping the projecting stones, he began that
fearful descent of danger and of death.
I go to bring thee water! he shouted in the
ear of the famished wretchI go to bring thee
water for thy burning tongue and brow.
Then, then take
this
was the gasping
response
,
and Adrian felt a substance of metal
pressed
against his brow by an extended hand; 'twill
hold thethe water, or, ha, the blood!'
Hanging over the abyss by the grasp of one
trembling hand, Adrian seized the metal substance
with the other. It was a goblet, a goblet of gold,
embossed with strange shapen flowers, and heraldic
insignia, and as Adrian placed the vessel within the
confines of his doublet, a shudder of horror caused
his frame to quiver over the unknown void. It
was the goblet of the Red Chamber.
First grasping a pointed stone with one hand,
then inserting his foot in a crevice of the masonry,
then clutching another stone with the other hand,
while his remaining foot rested in another crevice,
he slowly began the fearful descent of the well.
This then is the foul den of torture, built by the
tyrants of Florence, long, long ago! The thought
crossed his brain. The well hath been fashioned
by the tools of the mason, yet the damp has worn
deep hollows between the rugged stones. Hark!
he uttered the involuntary exclamation, a stone
has fallen from my graspI hear no soundnone,
none! The abyss may be without bottom or
depth. Hist! a hollow murmur breaks the silence
of the air, far, far, belowthe stone has sounded the
depth of the well!s.
Water, watermen or devils, give me water!
the shrieking tones of the wretch in the stone-room
came faintly to his ear. Ha, ha! Thanks, thanks
they hand me a cup, a cup of good, clear water,
and I drinkoh, horror, horror,it turns to
blood!
With every nerve quivering, his hand trembling
as he grasped the stones, his foot shaking with a
nervous tremor as it sought the crevice which might
give it momentary support, Adrian continued his
terrible descent, until some twenty yards of the
subterranean well rose above his head, while the
low moans, the piercing shricks, and the hollow
laughter of the Sworder came fainter, and yet more
faint to his ear.
Extending his foot in search of a crevice, he was
astonished to find it resting on a solid rock, that
hung jutting over the abyss, at a point where the
well, diverging from its perpendicular course, made
a slight inclination to the opposite side. Grasping
the rugged stones with the eager grasp of his
trembling
hands, Adrian hung swinging over the abyss,
as with extended feet, he examined the formation
of the well at this particular point, and tested the
extent of the jutting rock.
He looked over his shoulder, and a wild thrill of
surprise ran over his frame.
Mine eyes burn with famine, he slowly
murmured
;
they deceive me! Great God they mock
me with a wild dreamI fancy the well grows
lighter and lighterbut 'tis a dream, a mocking
dream!
As he spoke, a cold substance pressed against the
palm of his right hand as it grasped the stoneit
moved and writhed, while a hissing sound broke on
the ear. Two points of flame, like minute yet
intensely
brilliant fire coals, glared before the very
eyes of Adrian, and as the hissing grew louder, he
found that a vile serpent wriggled between the
fingers
of his right hand.
With a sensation of unutterable disgust, he
suspended
his body by the left hand, and dashed the
monster down the abyss with one quick motion of
his hand. The impulse with which he flung the
serpent from his grasp, caused his body to quiver
and tremble over the abyss, while the sinews of
the left hand seemed bursting from the skin, as
with the nervous grasp of despair, the doomed
lord strove to recover the stone lately clutched by
the other hand. With one wild sweep he regained
his grasp, springing heavily on the jutting rock in
the action, while a deep rumbling sound disturbed
the silence of the well. Another moment passed.
Well was it for Adrian that he had refrained from
trusting to the rock for support. The massive
stone slowly swung to and fro, trembling over
the depths of the well, and then with a crash like
thunder, went whizzing down the abyss. Up, up,
from the fathomless depths, thundering and
shrieking
,
arose the deafening echoes, yelling like
spirit-voices
in the ear of the trembling man, as he
swayed
to and fro over the blackness of the void. It
was a moment ere Adrian might recall his
wandering
thoughts. He looked over his shoulder, he
gazed upon the opposite side of the well. God of
Mercy, was it a dream, a phantasmal creation of
fancy, a mocking delusion of his crazed brain?
There, before his very eyes, gilding the opposite
side of the wall, a golden space, large as the human
hand, shone in his very face.
It is the light of day! muttered Adrian, as his
heart rose to his very throat; it is, it is the light
of day!
Ha, ha, ha! water! the shriek came yelling
from the room far, far, far abovewater, water!
Grasping the stones below, Adrian descended
another yard, when a ray of light shone on his face
from a crevice in the wall of the well to which he
hung, trembling with a new joy, quivering in
every nerve with a new life. He thrust his right
hand into the hollow of the crevice, and as a large
flat stone fell echoing before him, a blaze of light
streamed through the wide aperture into the
darkness
of the abyss.
I stand within a rock-bound passage!
exclaimed
Adrian' 'tis narrow as the grave, narrow as a
coffin, yet twenty yards beyond I see the light of
day! Great God give me strength; do not, do not
fail me now! Streagth, a little strength, and I may
yet be saved!
Prostrate along the floor of the narrow passage,
which the falling of the stone had disclosed, he
turned his body, and, thrusting his face into the
gloom of the well, once more gazed far, far above.
Murderer that he is, I will not desert him! he
cried; he has been my comrade in the living
tombhe shall be my comrade in the light of God's
own day!
No sooner did the words pass his lips, than a
shriek of intense horror, came yelling down the
abyss, a mass of red fire crowned the summit of the
well, and hot cinders, and burning coals swept
through the darkness of the void, hissing by the
very face of Adrian, and marking their flight with
long lines of streaming flame. Adrian withdrew
his head from the well and listened.
A low moan, a choaking groan, and then a
succession
of yells, resounded through the void. Then
the crackling of flames, then the falling of age
cemented
masonry; then a wild shriek, and then a
voice of horror
I burn, I burn! oh fiend of hell, I burn!
The air was cloven by the rushing of a falling
body, and thundering down the well, with arms
outspread, with his face all crushed and blackened,
stamped with a look of agony that might never be
forgotten, Balvardo was for a moment disclosed by
the light shining through the aperture, before the
very eye of Adrian, and then there was a whirling
noise, followed by a heaving rebound, and then all
was still.
The soul of Balvardo, the Sworder, stood beside
the soul of his master in the judgment halls of the
Unknown.
Away, away! shouted Adrian, maddened by the
sight of that ghastly face; away from this
earth-hidden
hell! Strength, my God, oh give me
strength, and I may yet be saved.
Creeping on hands and knees, he sped along the
subterranean passage, the light growing brighter at
every step, and at last the twenty paces were left
behind, he crawled from the rock, he stood in the
open air.
His voice failed him, he gazed around. Far,
far above him, ascended the whitened steep on
which the Convent was reared, far, far above him,
he beheld the blue sky, tinted with the glow of
the dying day, he beheld the platform rock and
the frowning tower, wrapt in clouds of lurid smoke,
while tongues of forked flame, swept up to the
very azure, turning the glow of the setting sun to
bloody red.
He stood on the side of a ravine, with the deep
darkness of the wild abyss sinking far below him,
while the rugged ascent of rocks on the
opposite
side rose towering before his eye, veiling the
mountain lake from his sight, and giving a faint
glimpse of the eastern sky. Dark and dreary,
tangled with gnarled shrubs, rough with rifted
rocks, a score of fathoms down, sunk the wild
abyss, with the hills, or rather the overhanging
cliff gathering around its blackness, like the sides
of one vast death-bowl of ebony.
With a wild glance, Adrian beheld the smoke
and flame, the Convent and the blue sky above,
the glimpe of the eastern horizon, the rocks
ascending on the opposite of the ravine, and the
blackness of the abyss below, and then his soul
was riveted to a spectable of horror extended at
his very feet.
There before his very eyes, a mangled carcase,
was thrown along the surface of a rugged rock,
the trunk, the limbs, the arms, the garments and
draperies of gold, all mingled in one foul mass of
corruption, while the face was buried amid a cluster
of stunted shrubs of laurel. Adrian reached forth
his hand, he raised the face, he beheld the blue
tint of corruption, the eyes lolling from their
sockets, the blackened tongue hanging from the
mouth!
The Duke, he shrieked, the Duke of
Florence
!
He turned from the sight with intolerable
disgust
,
and as he turned, he beheld appearing from
amid the shrubs, on the other side of the small
platform of sand on which he stood, a bared arm
flung along the earth grasping a keen and
slender-bladed
dagger, with a grasp that death and
corruption
could not unclose.
Adrian sprang forward, he unwound the
dagger
from the grasp of the hand, he beheld a
parchment scroll secured around the haft of the
glittering steel. He tore the scroll from the
dagger
,
he flung it open to the light, and beheld these
words written in a fair unwavering hand
Brothers of the Invisible! When this hand
that writes these words is cold in death, the scroll
of Albertine the Monk, will tell the story of his
vengeance on the Tyrant-Duke. The midnight
hour is now pastI go to plunge the dagger of
the Holy Steel in the Heart of the Doomed. Ask
ye for the Heir of Albarone! Three hours ago, ere
the Duke arrived in the valley, I bade him
farewell
forever. Midnight came and I learned that
the Son of Lord Julian, was about to meet his
death in the vaults of the Convent. One way
of rescue alone remained. Protected by my
supposed
love for the Duke, I blinded the eyes of
the assassin, and offered to do his work of death.
Then mingling a potion, which would minister
sleep,not death,I gave it to Lord Adrian
even now his bride gathers his slumbering form
to her embrace in the vaults of the Conventeven
now the assassin waits to bear the body to the
grave. One hour from this ye will arrive in the
valley, and your eyes will behold the
slumbering
form of your Princethe lifeless Corse of the
Tyrant! I go to finish
The scroll broke off abruptly, yet there was
sufficient
written to fill the heart of Adrian with an
emotion of joy, he had never felt before.
He sprang among the bushes, he dashed the
laurel leaves, he turned the blackening face of the
mangled corse to the light. He clasped his hands
on high in silent prayer, while thick burning tears
fell streaming over the face of Albertine the Monk.
Meanwhile gathered along the green sward of
a level meadow, extending from the Convent gates,
to the south of the mountain lake, a band of
gallant
warriors, reined their war-steeds along the
turf, their upraised spears marking their numbers,
by long lines of glittering light, while a thousand
banners waved streaming in the sunset air, and
the peal of bugle, and the stirring notes of the
trumpet went echoing upward to the old convent
walls wrapt in smoke, lighted by giant-pillars of
blood red flame.
In front of the band of warriors, a group of
noble
lords and high-born dames, plumed cavaliers
and gay-robed damosels,all mounted on
prancing
steeds, swept circling around the figure of a
fair and beautiful Ladye, whose jet-black barb,
with its watchful groom, stood reined in their
midst, while every tongue was silent, and every
eye was fixed upon the death-like paleness of the
maiden's countenance, contrasting strangely with
the gorgeous robes of purple and gold that
drooped
round her young and lovely form.
Her head bowed slowly on the neck of her
steed, and the tears of a never-dying grief came
gushing between the fair and delicate fingers that
strove to veil her face. She wept, the fair Ladye
Annabel, whose steed was about to spring forward
in the triumphal procession, that would soon give
Florence its lovely queen; the coronet was on her
brow, the swords of a thousand warriors were at
her beck, and yet she wept.
Suddenly a wild murmur ran through the
warrior-throng
.
Uprising in the light of the burning
Convent,that dark haunt of blood and awe,
now toppling to its foundation, a grey rock, its
base concealed by stunted shrubs, while its brow
was turned to the flame-beams, attracted the gaze
of every eye, as a strange spectacle hushed the
whispers of every voice.
A hand, ghastly and white, was thrust from
behind the rock, lifting a goblet of gold in the
light of the setting sun. Deep muttered whispers
broke along the warrior-throng, every voice spoke
of some new omen crowning the horrors of the
convent during the last hour of its existence, and
the murmurs of the lords and ladies clustering at
her side, attracted the attention of the Ladye
Annabel
.
She slowly turned, she gazed upon the
uplifted hand with the goblet of gold rising above
the verge of the grey rocknot more than
twenty
paces from her sideshe gazed in wonder
and in awe. And as she gazed, a wan and
ghastly
face appeared above the rock, and a wasted
and trembling form, clad in garments of price all
soiled and torn, stood on the verge of the massive
stone, flinging the goblet wildly aloft, as a peal
of maniac laughter came thrilling to the maiden's
ear.
It was a solemn and impressive scene!
There swept the knightly host along the green
meadow, their spears gleaming on high, there
darkened the smoke and lightened the blaze of the
burning convent, there the calm lake extending
I
rippleless along its mountain-shores, gave its
silent
bosom to the crimson glare of the flame,
and there standing erect upon the brow of the
grey rock, his slender form boldly and clearly
relieved
by the background of the convent walls, the
light of the flame, the beams of the setting sun;
Adrian Di Albarone, crazed by famine, and
maddened
with new-risen joy, shook wildly aloft the
Goblet of Gold, while his maniac laugh broke
echoing on the evening air.
CHAPTER THE LAST.
THE CATHEDRAL OF FLORENCE.
THE TASK OF THE WIERD SPIRIT IS DONE
THE CURTAIN OF FATE FALLS
OVER THE TRAGEDY OF THE
HOUSE OF ALBARONE.
Joy to Florence now, oh joy to the fair city in
her streets and thro' her lordly halls, joy to the
prince of the palace and the peasant of the cot,
joy to the mountain and the dell, joy to the hill
and the valley, joy to the silvery river, joy to the
homes of men, joy to the shrines of God, joy, joy,
forever joy!
The Duke, the people's Duke is come to reign!
Baptized by trial, chosen by the People, crowned
by the Invisible, anointed by God, he comes to
reign!
There are light voices filling the air, there are
soft steps tripping thro' the lordly halls, there are
costly draperies sweeping over marble floors, there
are strains of music awaking the echoes of ancient
domes, there are processions thronging the streets
in all the pomp of crucifix and banner, gallant
knights ride to and fro, shaking the glitter of their
snowy plumes aloft, the poor creep from their dens
of want, the mighty pour from their homes of pride,
the sordid miser forgets his money bags, the
merchant
his wares of cost, the scholar his musty
book, the bravo his knife, the children of misery
their care, and all, aye all, come thronging to the
high Cathedral of Florence, where the solemn
priest wili, ere an hour, amid the glad shouts of
thousands, anoint Adrian Di Albarone, Lord Duke
of Florence, and crown his fair bride, the Ladye
Annabel, with the coronet for which Aldarin gave
his soul.
It is morning, glad and joyous morning, the
calm azure arches over the fair city, gorgeous with
temple-dome and palace tower while the gay
parties
hasten to the grand Cathedral, anxious to
behold
the Duke and his fair bride.
THE POSTILLION AND THE BUXOM DAMSELS.
And there tripping gayly along were three
peasant
damsels, arrayed in their holiday attire, and with
them a bow-legged youth attired as a postillion,
strutted on his way with extended stride and lofty
air, which seemed to say, that all this parade and
show, was made for his sole benefit and especial
amusement.
Sancta Maria! How he trips it along! thus
spoke the tallest of the damsels beshrew, but Sir
Francisco is wondrous proud, since he was
knighted
by the Duke!
How! knighted! cried the damsel of the merry
black eye.
What mean you? cried the red-haired maiden,
and the bow-legged postillion looked over his
shoulder
with a vacant stare.
Was he not honored with the collar, the
hempen
collar? cried the tall-maiden. Did not that
rough soldier of the Count Di Albarone that was,
the Duke of Florence that is now, did not Rough
Robin knight Sir Francisco with his own hands?
How dull you are!
Ugh! exclaimed the postillion shrugging his
shoulders. What unpleasant things you do
remember
!
And yet the Duke said something very
flattering, when he directed the rope to be taken
from my neck. He said, says he, he said, I tell
youthat I
Was a little, impertinent, insignificant,
busy-body
,
exclaimed Theresa, laughing. But
Francisco
what mean you to do with the reward, you
received from the Duke that was murdered, eh?
Francisco?
Yes, yes, what are you going to do with all
that gold? cried Dollabella, and the three
gathered
around the youth with evident interest,
expressed
in each face in the glittering eyes and the parted
lips.
Why Theresa, Dollabella, and Loretta,
answered
the postillion, looking slowly round, with
an expression of the deepest solemnity, I mean
tothat is, I intendby'r Ladye the Cathedral
bell is ringing. Come along, girls!
Ha, ha, ha! 'Tis a fair day and a bright,
laughed a shrill voice at the elbow of Francisco,
Florence is full of joy and e'en I, I am glad.
A tremor of fear ran round the group as they
beheld the form of the speaker, the distorted face,
the wide mouth, the large rolling eyes, and
the deformed figure with the unsightly hump on
the shoulders, giving a half-brutal appearance
to the stranger, while from lip to lip, ran the
whisper
The Doomsman, the Doomsman!
Aye, aye, the Doomsman! And why not pray?
Dare not the Doomsman laugh? Ha, ha, ha!
What a fine neck thou hast for the axe, good youth;
or now that I think o't it would stretch a rope
passing well. 'Tis a fine day, good folk, and I'm
hastening to the Cathedral, to behold the
crowning
of one of my children, that is Children of the
Axe.
Thy children? echoed Francisco, aghast with
fear. Can a shadow like thee, have children?
Children o' th' axe, boy. I' faith if all the world
had their own, I'd have thy necka merry jest,
nothing
more boy, ho, ho, ho! Do'st see these
fingers
.
Vulture's talons rather!
These, these were round his royal throat, while
the lead, the melted lead waited for his princely
body, and the wheel of torture was arrayed for his
lordly repose. Ha, ha, ha! I would see him
crowned, by the fiend would I! But come boy,
thou knowest somewhat of city gossip, tell me, does
this Sir Geoffrey O' Th' Longsword, stabbed by
his own son, a good boy, he, he, he, does he yet
live?
Have not prayers been offered in all the
Cathedrals
for the miracle?
The miracle? Enlighten me, good youth!
Hast thou not heard, how the force of the blow
was swayed aside, by a piece of the true wood o'
th' cross, which the old soldier had worn over his
heart for years? A miracle, old shadow, a miracle!
Nay, nay, call me not shadow, I'll never darken
thy way to the gallows. But tell me, fair sir
did not the dagger pierce the old man's heart?
It grazed the heart, but did not pierce it. Any
city goosip might tell thee this, old thunder
cloud!
And so the old man lives?
He doth! Thou art wondrous sorry that he
still breathes the air, I warrant me?
Nay, nay, good youth. I bear Sir Geoffrey
no harm, but dost seethe wheel, the axe and the
boiling lead, all were ready for the boy Guiseppo,
and, and, but 'tis the will of heaven! I can bear
disappointment, he, he, he, in all matters, save in
one. Thy neck boy, ha, ha, ha, the Doomsman's
fingers itch for thy neck!
And while the peasant-group, the three buxom
damsels, and the light-brained postillion, shrunk
back from the touch of the distorted being with
disgust, and stood thrilled with the fear of his words
of omen, the Doomsman glided away, mingling
with the vast crowd who thronged the streets of the
wide city.
THE CORONATION.
Standing upon the throne of gold, attired in the
purple robes of a prince, Adrian Di Albarone,
glanced
with a brightening eye, and a swelling heart,
upon the gorgeous scene around him, and then his
glance was fixed upon the fair and lovely maiden
by his side, whose eyes of dreamy beauty were
downward cast, while a soft flush deepened the
hue of her cheek, as she seemed to shrink from the
gaze of the vast multitude, extending over the
pavement
,
and along the aisles of the cathedral.
Adrian cast his eyes upon the throng around the
throne, and there stood bold Robin, the stout
Yeoman
,
attired in a garish appareling, which he
seemed to like not half so well as his plain suit of
buff, defended by armour plates of steel; and there
his locks of grey, falling on his knightly surcoat,
emblazoned on the breast with the red cross of the
crusaders, stood the brave Sir Geoffrey O' Th'
Longsword, pale and worn with the traces of
his late wound, attended on either side by the
gallant
esquires Damian and Halbert, each with a
grim smile on his scarred face, as they grimly
surveyed
the pomp and show glittering along the
cathedral aisles.
Standing at the back of his father, his eye
downcast
,
and his cheek pale with deep and bitter
thoughts, Guiseppo seemed musing on the fearful
blow, which had well nigh burdened his soul with
the nameless crime. He said nothing, nor spoke
of the pomp around him, but with folded arms
stood silent and apart.
Standing beside her queenly cousin, with a
group of bower maidens clustering around, the
damosel Rosalind glanced from side to side with a
merry twinkle of her eye, and look of maidenly
wonder, as the glare and the glitter, the pomp and
the show of the scene broke on her vision, and
came thundering on her ear.
Amid the throng of noble dames, towered the
stately form of the Lady Di Albarone, with a proud
smile on her lip, and a haughty glance in her eye,
as she looked with all a mother's pride upon her
son's advancement to his right of birth and honor.
And higher grew the sound of pipe and cymbal,
mingling with the roll of drum, and the peal of
trumpet, and deeply booming along the arches of
the cathedral, came the voice of the swelling organ
seeming as though some spirit of light had trained
the mountain thunder to the strains of harmony,
now soft and gentle, now awful, now sublime, and
ever filling the soul with high and glowing
thoughts.
And now the bright sunbeams came flaunting
through the arched windows of the cathedral, and
every eye was fixed upon the throne, and every
voice was hushed in expectation, as the moment of
the approaching ceremony drew uigh.
A murmur ran along the aisles of the cathedral,
and it deepened into a cry
He comes, the holy abbot of St. Peter's of
Florence!
And every sound was hushed, as the venerable
man of heaven raised the golden coronet, set with
rarest jewels, and the sceptre of ivory from the
altar of the cathedral, and ascending the steps of
the throne he was received by Adrian Di Albarone
with lowered head, and bended knee.
Sound heralds, sound!
And then the heralds, standing one on either
side of the throne, gave a blast loud and long to the
air, and proclaiming the lineage, the title, and the
birth of Lord Adrian Count Di Albarone, they
flung, each man, his glove upon the marble floor,
challenging all the world to say aught against the
right of descent claimed by the duke elect. There
came no answer to the challenge.
Lord Adrian Count Di Albarone, thus spoke
the abbot; in the name of God, in the name of
Christ and St. Peter, and by the rule of the Holy
Vicar of Christ upon earth, I proclaim thee Sover
eign Lord of Florence, the city and the field, the
mountain and the stream! I bestow upon thee
the golden coronetwear it with glory and honor.
I place this sceptre of ivory in thy graspwield it
with justice and truth. Adrian,
Lord Duke
of Florence
!
As thus he spoke, with his mind glowing with
the memory of the day when he had mingled in
the battle fray, side by side, with the sire of the
gallant youth who knelt at his feet, the tones of
the abbot's voice rose high and clear, and with eyes
upraised to heaven, and outspread hands, he seemed
to implore a benizen upon the bridal pair.
One shout, long and deep, ascended from the
multitude. Adrian arose upon his feet, and lifted
the gorgeous coronet from his brow. He took the
fair lady Annabel by the hand, and as the blushes
grew deeper on her cheek, he impressed upon her
brow a kiss that told at once of the love of the
youth for his mistress, and the admiration of the
knight for his fair ladye.
He extended his hand, and in an instant the
coronet rested upon the brow of the lovely bride.
The vast cathedral roof echoed with the thunder
shout of myriad voices, the strains of the swelling
music filled the air, at each pause of the loud and
deafening cries of joy; the warriors flung their
swords in the air, the fair dames and damozels
awved their snow white hands on high, and one
universal gush of joy hailed the fair Annabel Ladye
Duchess of Florence!
My own fair bride, Adrian whispered, the
night has passed, and our morning cometh.
THE HOMAGE.
While her heart yet throbbed with indefinable
emotion, Adrian led his gentle bride to the ducal
chair, and side by side, they awaited the homage
of the noble throng of lords and ladies, knights and
damozels.
Many a noble lord, and many a haughty dame,
advancing to the throne, bowed low at the feet of
the Duke Adrian, and kissed the fair hand of the
Duchess Annabel.
At last a man of lofty stature, and commanding
port, with locks of grey hair falling back from a
stern, determined face, paled by disease, and wan
with thought, and ascending the steps of the throne,
sank on one knee before the duke.
Rise, brave knight, exclaimed Adrian; rise
brave Sir Geoffry O' Th' Longsword; rise lord
keeper of our castle Di Albarone. Thy youth has
been wasted fighting for the cause of the late
venerated
lord; thy age shall be rendered calm and
peaceful within the walls of the castle, with whose
brave soldiers thou hast so often gone forth to the
ranks of battle.
And placing the baton of command within the
hand of the brave knight, he raised him from his
kneeling position. Sir Geoffrey o' th' Longsword
replied not to the Duke with words of flattery.
One glance of the eye, and one grasp of the hand,
was all the answer that greeted the Duke
Adrian
.
Then came Robin the Rough, ascending the
throne with a half-solemn air, as though he were
afraid of soiling the steps of gold. With a true
soldier's salute he drooped on one knee, awaiting
the command of the Duke to rise.
Arise, bold Robin, said Adrian, unsheathing
the sword that hung at his sideAriseno
longer
Robin the stout yeoman, but Sir Roberto Di
Capello, Lord of the Lands of Capello!
No sooner did bold Robin feel the sword of the
Duke slightly pressed upon his shoulder conferring
knighthood, than he sprang upon his feet, and
looked around with surprise and wonder
expressed
in his distended eyes and parted lips.
Hast any boon to ask, Sir Roberto?
exclaimed
the Duke.
Why, an' it please thee, my Lord Duke,
answered
Robin, recovering from his surprise
Why an' it please thee, I have a boon to ask.
I had much rather follow thee to battle in my old
attire, in my coat of buff and my armour of steel.
I like not this dainty trim.
With a smile the Duke granted his characteristic
request, and as the bold soldier retired, Adrian
waved his hand to one who stood in the throng
around the throne. From the ancient chronicle
we gather these words concerning.
THE ROMANCER.
A man attired in a tunic of dark velvet
reaching
to his knee, and with long locks of dark brown
hair falling beneath the velvet cap of the scholar,
now came forward and ascended the throne. In
stature he was of the middle height, slim and well
formed, with a face marked by irregular features,
full cheeks, a mouth with large lips, while his
hazel eyes, looking from beneath dark eyebrows,
warmed with the inward soul.
Most famed Romancerthus spoke the Duke
to the person who knelt before him. Most
famed Romancer of the North, wear this signet
for my sake. Men shall long keep in memory
the wondrous Histories which thy pen, full of
fancy, hath pictured. Add now to the number
the Historie of the House Di Albarone. Take
this ring as an earnest of future bounty. Thou
shalt away with me to the Holy Land, thou shalt
chronicle the wars of the Christian and the
Paynim
.
Ericci Il Normani
arise!
Thus spoke the flattery of the Duke to the
humble Romancer, thus he bade me indite my
poor Historie, which, should it ever outlive this
century, will serve at least to give some small
glimpses of the crimes, the glory and the fame of
the House Di Albarone.
And now, with his beaming eye no longer
glowing with gaiety, but dark and thoughtful,
came the Page Guiseppo; and side by side with
the damsel Rosalind he knelt and did homage to
his Lord. But why tell of Guiseppo and
Rosalind
Is
not the story of their fortunes found in
the Historic of the Page and the Damsel?
THE SPECTRE FATHER.
The Duke turned to the vast multitude. He
raised his sword on high. Witness ye gallant
knights, witness ye fair dames, I now swear upon
the hilt of my sword, that the morrow's sun shall
behold me and my followers bound for Palestine,
there to fight for the Holy Sepulchre. And so
help me God and St. George!
And there stood Adrian, with his ducal robe of
purple thrown back from his shoulders, his right
hand pressing his sword hilt to his lip, his left
arm raised to the heavens, while his eyes flashed
with all the enthusiasm of his soul.
The cry ran like a lightning flash through the
temple, every voice was for Palestine, every tongue
shoutedonon to the rescueGod for the
Holy Sepulchre! Sir Geoffrey o' th'
Long-sword
raised his sword on high, the Ladye
Annabel
,
fired by the holy feeling of the moment, lifted
the cross of ebony depending from her neck to
her lips, as a thunder-shout arose from the
multitude
,
and while all was exultation and joy, bold
Robin the stout yeoman flung the broad banner of
the Duke to the air, and the bright sunbeams
shining upon the azure folds gilded with dazzling
light the blazonry of gold, and every eye beheld
the armorial bearings of the Lord of Florence,
with the words in letters of gold
Grasp boldly and bravely Strike!
It is past, the dark and fearful night, again
repeated
Adrian, as he gazed over this scene of wild
enthusiasm; Lo! the morning cometh!
As he spoke the cathedral was suddenly
darkened
,
a thick mist filled the Church, and one man
could scarce distinguish the form of another by his
side.
A wild, wild laugh sounded to the very roof of
the cathedral, it rung upon the senses of the vast
multitude, and was echoed from every aisle of the
solemn temple.
What means this darkness? Adrian shouted,
drawing his sword; Hist! I hear a footstep. It
passes over the throne. It passes between me and
thee Annabel; yet I see no form, I hear no voice.
Ha, ha, ha! The wild laugh again arose upon
the dark and twilight air.
He stands by my side! shrieked the lady
Annabel
;
It is
he
it is my father!
And she trembled with affright, and leaned
shrinking upon the arm of the duke, while her fair
blue eyes dilated with a strange expression, and
her glance was fixed in one wild dread look upon
the darkened air.
It is done! exclaimed a voice breaking from
the vacancy of the air;
It is done! Fair
daughter
of mine, thou art Duchess of Florencethe
coronet is on thy browall is fulfilled!
Holy Mary save me! shrieked Annabel in a
low whispered tone; an icy hand is pressed upon
my brow. It is like the hand of death.
And as there she stood upon the throne of gold,
her form upraised to its full height, her eye fixed
on vacancy, and her fair white hands trembling
with an unreal fear, a feeling of terrible and
overwhelming
AWE overshadowed each heart, and
paled each face, while the solemn tones of the spirit
voice broke on the ear of the lovely bride.
In life thou wert my ambition, and in the
solemn
walks of death, amid the fear that may not be
named, and the gloom that may be dared, thy father,
maiden, is still the evil angel of all who wish thee
harm, or do thee wrong.
A low moaning sound broke on the air, and
again the words of the spirit voice came to the
Lady Annabel
The last behest of thy fatherthe parchment
scroll, and the phial of silver confided to thy hands
hast thou obeyed the dying words of Aldarin?
The cheek of the Lady Annabel became pale as
death, and her eye grew bright with supernatural
lustre. The hurried words of the scroll, written in
the blood of the doomed man, the fearful request,
the dark hints at the re-vivification of his mortal
body, by the action of the water of life, all to be
accomplished by the devotion of his daughter
flashed over her brain at the moment, when the
gloom of the presence of the dead, darkened the joy
of the living, and the Ladye turned to Adrian, and
murmured with a whisper of hollow emphasis
The corse, Adrian, the corse of my father
where doth it rest?
It hath no place of repose on earth, was the
solemn answer. Given to the invisible air, the
mortal frame finds nor home, nor resting place in
sacred chapel, or in wild wood glade; but mingled
with the unseen winds, floating in the atmosphere
of heaven; on, and on forever wanders the earthly
dust of the Scholar, denied repose on earth,
refused
judgment by heaven, condemned to the eternal
solitudes of the disembodied spirit; on, and on it
wanders seeking companionship with the mighty
soul of Aldarin!
And a low and solemn voice, speaking from the
invisible air, murmured the wordsIt is finished,
It is finished!