VOL. II. 2
ENGLISH
COUNTRY GENTLEMEN.
His certain life, that never can deceive him,
Is full of thousand sweets, and rich content;
The smooth-leav'd beeches in the field receive him
With coolest shade, till noon-tide's heat be spent.
His life is neither tost in boist'rous seas,
Or the vexatious world, or lost in slothful ease.
Pleas'd and full blest he lives, when he his God can please.
Phineas Fletcher
.
I take
great pleasure in accompanying the
Squire in his perambulations about his estate,
in which he is often attended by a kind of cabinet
council. His prime minister, the steward, is a
very worthy and honest old man, and one of those
veteran retainers that assume a right of way;
that is to say, a right to have his own way, from
having lived time out of mind on the place. He
loves the estate even better than he does the
Squire, and thwarts the latter sadly in many of
his projects of improvement and alteration.
Indeed
,
the old man is a little apt to oppose every
plan that does not originate with himself, and
will hold long arguments about it, over a stile,
or on a rise of ground, until the Squire, who has
a high opinion of his ability and integrity, is fain
to give up the point. Such concession
immediately
mollifies the old steward; and it often
happens
,
that after walking a field or two in silence
with his hands behind his back, chewing the cud
of reflection, he will suddenly observe, that he
has been turning the matter over in his mind,
and, upon the whole, he thinks he will take his
honour's advice.
Christy, the huntsman, is another of the Squire's
frequent attendants to whom he continually
refers
,
in matters of local history, as to a
chronicle
of the estate, having been in a manner
acquainted
with many of the trees from the very
time that they were acorns. Old Nimrod, as I
have already shown, is rather pragmatical on all
these points of knowledge upon which he values
himself; but the Squire never contradicts him;
and is certainly one of the most indulgent
potentates
that was ever hen-pecked by his
ministers
.
He often laughs about it himself, and
evidently
yields to these old men in compliance
with the bent of his own humour; he likes this
honest independence of old age, for with all his
aristocratical feelings there is nothing that
disgusts
him sooner than any appearance of
fawning
or servility.
I really have seen no display of royal state
that could compare with one of the Squire's
progresses about his paternal fields, and through
his hereditary woodlands, with several of these
faithful adherents about him, and followed by a
body guard of dogs. He encourages a
frankness
and manliness of deportment among his
dependants, and is the personal friend of his
tenants; inquiring into their concerns, and
assisting
them in times of difficulty and hardship.
This has rendered him one of the most popular,
and, of course, one of the happiest of
landlords
.
Indeed, I do not know a more enviable
condition
of life than that of an English gentleman
of sound judgment and good feelings, who passes
the greater part of his time on an hereditary
estate
in the country. From the excellence of the
roads, and the rapidity and exactness of the
public
conveyances, he is enabled to command all
the comforts and conveniences, all the
intelligence
and novelties of the capital; while he is
removed from its hurry and distractions. He
has ample means of occupation and amusement
within his own domains; he may diversify his
time by rural occupations; by rural sports; by
study, and by the delights of friendly society
collected within his own hospitable halls.
Or if his views and feelings are of a more
extensive
and liberal nature, he has it greatly in his
power to do good, and to have that good
immediately
reflected back upon himself. He can
render essential service to his country, by
assisting
in the disinterested administration of the
laws; by watching over the opinions and
principles
of the lower orders around him; by
diffusing
among them those lights which may be
important to their welfare; by mingling frankly
among them; gaining their confidence;
becoming
the immediate auditor of their
complaints
;
informing himself of their wants;
making
himself a channel through which their
grievances
may be quietly communicated to the
proper
sources of mitigation and relief; or by
becoming, if need be, the intrepid and
incorruptible
guardian of their liberties, the
enlightened
champion of their rights.
All this, it appears to me, can be done without
any sacrifice of personal dignity; without any
degrading arts of popularity; without any
truckling
to vulgar prejudices, or concurrence in
vulgar
clamour; but by the steady influence of
sincere
and friendly council; of fair, upright, and
generous deportment. Whatever may be said of
English mobs and English demagogues, I have
never met with a people more open to reason;
more considerate in their tempers; more
tractable
by argument in the roughest times, than the
English. They are remarkably quick at
discerning
and appreciating whatever is manly and
honourable. They are by nature and habit
methodical
and orderly, and feel the value of all
that is regular and respectable. They may
occasionally
be deceived by sophistry, and excited
into turbulence by public distresses and the
misrepresentations
of designing men; but open their
eyes, and they will eventually rally round the
landmarks of steady truth and deliberate good
sense. They are fond of established customs;
they are fond of long established names; and
that love of order and quiet which characterizes
the nation, gives a vast influence to the
descendants
of the old families, whose forefathers have
been lords of the soil from time immemorial.
It is when the rich, and well educated, and
highly privileged classes neglect their duties;
when they neglect to study the interests, and
conciliate the affections, and instruct the
opinions
,
and champion the rights of the people,
that the latter become discontented and
turbulent
,
and fall into the hands of demagogues.
The demagogue always steps in where the
patriot
is wanting. There is a common high
handed cant, among high feeding, and, as they
fancy themselves, high minded men, about
putting
down the mobbut all true physicians
know that it is better to sweeten the blood than
to attack the tumour; to apply the emollient
rather than the cautery.
It is absurd in a country like England, where
there is so much freedom, and such a jealousy
of right, for any man to assume an
aristocratical
tone, and to talk superciliously of the
common
people. There is no rank that makes him
independent of the opinion and affections of his
fellow men; there is no rank nor distinction
that severs him from his fellow subject; and if
by any gradual neglect or assumption on the
one side, and discontent and jealousy on the
other, the orders of society should really
separate
,
let those that stand on the eminence
beware
that the chasm is not mining at their feet.
The orders of society in all well constituted
governments are mutually bound together, and
important to each other; there can be no such
thing in a free government as a vacuum; and
wherever one is likely to take place by the
drawing off of the rich and intelligent from the
poor, the bad passions of society will rush in,
to fill up the space, and rend the whole asunder.
Though born and brought up in a republic,
and more and more confirmed in republican
principles by every year's observation and
experience
,
yet I am not insensible to the
excellence
that may exist in other forms of
government
;
nor to the fact that they may be more
suitable to the situation and circumstances of
the countries in which they exist. I have
endeavoured
rather to look at them as they are,
and to observe how they are calculated to effect
the end which they propose. Considering,
therefore, the mixed nature of the government
of this country, and its representative form, I
have looked with admiration at the manner in
which the wealth, and influence, and
intelligence
,
were spread over its whole surface; not,
as in some monarchies, drained from the
country
,
and collected in towns and cities. I have
VOL. II. 3
considered the great rural establishments of the
nobility, and the lesser establishments of the
gentry, as so many reservoirs of wealth and
intelligence
distributed about the kingdom, apart
from the towns, to irrigate, freshen, and
fertilize
the surrounding country. I have looked
upon them, too, as the august retreats of
patriots
and statesmen, where, in the enjoyment of
honourable independence and elegant leisure,
they might train up their minds to appear in
those legislative assemblies, whose debates and
decisions form the study and precedents of
other nations, and involve the interests of the
world.
I have been both surprised and disappointed,
therefore, at finding that on this subject I was
often indulging in a Utopian dream rather than
a well grounded opinion. I have been
concerned
at finding that these fine estates were too
often involved, and mortgaged or placed in the
hands of creditors, and the owners exiled from
their paternal lands. There is an extravagance,
I am told, that runs parallel with wealth; a lavish
expenditure among the great; a senseless
competition
among the aspiring; a heedless, joyless
dissipation among all the upper ranks, that often
beggars even these splendid establishments,
breaks down the pride and principles of their
possessors, and makes too many of them mere
place hunters, or shifting absentees. It is thus
that so many are thrown into the hands of
government
;
and a court, which ought to be the
most pure and honourable in Europe, is so often
degraded by noble but importunate time-servers.
It is thus, too, that so many become exiles from
their native land; crowding the hotels of foreign
nations, and expending upon thankless strangers
the wealth so hardly drained from their laborious
peasantry. Having, as it were, their roots in their
own country, but spreading forth their branches
and bearing their fruits in another. I have
looked
upon these latter with a mixture of censure
and concern. Knowing the almost bigotted
fondness of an Englishman for his native home,
I can conceive what must be their compunction
and regret, when they call to mind, amidst the
sun-burnt plains of France, the green fields of
England; the hereditary groves which they have
abandoned; the hospitable roof of their fathers,
which they have left desolate, or to be inhabited
by strangers. But retrenchment is no plea for
an abandonment of country. They have risen
with the prosperity of the landlet them abide its
fluctuations, and conform to its fortunes. It is
not for the rich to draw off from the country
because
it is suffering. Let them share, in their
relative proportion, the common lot; they owe
it to the land that has elevated them to honour
and affluence. When the poor have to diminish
their scanty morsel of bread; when they have
to compound with the cravings of nature, and
study with how little they can do, and not be
starved; it is not then for the rich to fly, and
diminish still farther the resources of the poor,
that they themselves may live in splendour in a
cheaper country. Let them rather retire to their
estates, and there practise retrenchment. Let
them return to that noble simplicity, that
practical
good sense, that honest pride, which form the
foundation of true English character, and from
them they may again rear the edifice of fair and
honourable prosperity.
On the rural habits of the English nobility
and gentryon the manner in which they
discharge
their duties on their patrimonial
possessions
depend
greatly the virtue and welfare of
the nation. So long as they pass the greater
part of their time in the quiet and purity of the
country; surrounded by the monuments of their
illustrious ancestors; surrounded by every thing
that can inspire generous pride, noble
emulation
,
and amiable and magnanimous sentiment,
so long they are safe, and in them the nation
may repose its interests and its honour. But
the moment that they become the servile
throngers
of court avenues, and give themselves up to
the political intrigues and heartless dissipations
of the metropolis, that moment they lose the
real nobility of their natures, and become the
mere leeches of the country.
That the great majority of nobility and
gentry
in England are endowed with high notions
of honour and independence I thoroughly
believe
.
They have evidenced it lately, on very
important questions; and have given an
example
of adherence to principle in preference to
party and power, that must have astonished
many of the venal and obsequious courts of
Europe. Such are the glorious effects of
freedom
,
even when infused into a constitution. But
it seems to me that they are apt to forget the
positive
nature of their duties; and to fancy that
their eminent privileges are only so many means
of self indulgence. They should recollect that
in a constitution like that of England, the titled
orders are intended to be as useful as they are
ornamental; and it is their virtues alone that
can render them both. Their duties are divided
between the sovereign and the subject;
surrounding
and giving lustre and dignity to the throne,
and at the same time tempering and mitigating
its rays, until they are transmitted in mild and
genial radiance to the people. Born to leisure
and opulence, they owe the exercise of their
talents and the expenditure of their wealth, to
their native country. They may be compared
to the clouds, which being drawn up by the
sun and elevated in the heavens, reflect and
magnify his splendour; while they repay the
earth from which they derive their sustenance,
by returning their treasures to its bosom in
fertilizing
showers.
A BACHELOR'S CONFESSIONS.
I'll live a private, pensive, single life.
The Collier of Croydon
.
I was
sitting in my room, a morning or two
since, reading, when some one tapped at the
door, and Master Simon entered. He had an
unusually fresh appearance; he had put on a
bright green riding coat, with a bunch of
violets
in the button hole, and had the air of an old
bachelor trying to rejuvenate himself. He had
not, however, his usual briskness and vivacity,
but loitered about the room with somewhat of
absence of manner, humming the old song, go
lovely rose, tell her that wastes her time and
me; and then, leaning against the window, and
looking upon the landscape, he uttered a very
audible
sigh. As I had not been accustomed to
see Master Simon in a pensive mood, I thought
there might be some vexation preying on his
mind, and I endeavoured to introduce a cheerful
strain of conversation; but he was not in the
vein to follow it up, and proposed that we should
take a walk. It was a beautiful morning, of
that soft vernal temperature that seems to thaw
all the frost out of one's blood, and to set all
nature
in a ferment. The very fishes felt its
influence
:
the cautious trout ventured out of his dark
hole to seek his mate; the roach and the dace
rose up to the surface of the brook to bask in the
sunshine, and the amorous frog piped from among
the rushes. If ever an oyster can really fall in
love, as has been said or sung, it must be on such
a morning.
The weather certainly had its effect even upon
Master Simon; for he seemed obstinately bent
upon the pensive mood. Instead of skipping
briskly along, smacking his dog whip, whistling
quaint ditties, or telling sporting anecdotes, he
leaned on my arm, and talked about the
approaching
VOL. II. 4
nuptials; from whence he made
several
digressions upon the character of women;
touched a little upon the tender passion; and
made sundry very excellent, though rather trite,
observations upon disappointments in love. It
was evident that he had something on his mind
which he wished to impart, but felt awkward in
approaching it. I was curious to see to what
this strain would lead, but I was determined not
to assist him. Indeed, I mischievously
pretended
to turn the conversation, and talked of his
usual topics, dogs, horses, and hunting; but he
was very brief in his replies, and invariably got
back, by hook or by crook, into the sentimental
vein. At length we came to a clump of trees
that overhung a whispering brook, with a rustic
bench at their feet. The trees were grievously
scored with letters and devices, which had grown
out of all shape and size by the growth of the
bark; and it appeared that this grove had served
as a kind of register of the family loves from
time immemorial. Here Master Simon made
a pause; pulled up a tuft of flowers; threw
them one by one into the water, and at length
turning somewhat abruptly upon me, asked me
if I had ever been in love. I confess the
question
startled me a little, as I am not over fond of
making confessions of my amorous follies; and,
above all, should never dream of choosing my
friend Master Simon for a confidant. He did
not wait, however, for a reply; the inquiry was
merely a prelude to a confession on his own
part, and after several circumlocutions and
whimsical
preambles, he fairly disburthened himself
of a very tolerable story of his having been
crossed
in love.
The reader will very probably suppose that it
related to the gay widow, who jilted him, not
long since, at Doncaster races. No such thing.
It was about a sentimental passion that he
once had for a most beautiful young lady, who
wrote poetry and played on the harp. He used
to serenade her, and indeed he described several
tender and gallant scenes, in which he evidently
was picturing himself, in his mind's eye, as some
elegant hero of romance; though unfortunately
for the tale, I only saw him as he stood before
me, a dapper little old bachelor, with a face like
an apple that has dried with the bloom on it.
What were the particulars of this tender tale,
I have already forgotten; indeed, I listened to it
with a heart like a very pebble stone; having
hard work to repress a smile, while Master
Simon
was putting on the amorous swain, uttering
every now and then a sigh, and endeavouring to
look sentimental and melancholy.
All that I recollect is, that the lady, according
to his account, was certainly a little touched,
for she used to accept all the music that he
copied for her harp, and the patterns that he
drew for her dresses; and he began to flatter
himself, after a long course of delicate attentions,
that he was gradually fanning a gentle flame in
her heart, when she suddenly accepted the hand
of a rich boisterous fox-hunting Baronet,
without
either music or sentiment, who carried her
by storm after a fortnight's courtship. Master
Simon could not help concluding by some
observation
,
about modest merit, and the power
of gold over the sex. As a remembrance of
his passion, he pointed out a heart carved on
the bark of one of the trees, but which in the
process of time had grown out into a large
excrescence; and he showed me a lock of her
hair, which he wore in a true lover's knot, in a
large gold brooch.
I have seldom met with an old bachelor that
had not, some time or other, his nonsensical
moment
,
when he would become tender and
sentimental
,
talk about the concerns of the heart,
and have some confession of a delicate nature
to make. Almost every man has some little
tract of romance in his life to which he looks
back with fondness, and about which he is apt
to grow garrulous occasionally. He recollects
himself, as he was at the time, young and
gamesome
;
and forgets that his hearers have no other
idea of the hero of the tale, but such as he may
appear at the time of telling it, peradventure a
withered, whimsical, spindle-shanked old
gentlemen
.
With married men, it is true, this is not
so frequently the case; their amorous romance
is apt to decline after marriage; why, I cannot
for the life of me imagine; but with a bachelor,
though it may slumber, it never dies. It is
always
liable to break out again in transient flashes,
and never so much as on a spring morning in the
country; or on a winter evening, when seated in
his solitary chamber, stirring up the fire, and
talking of matrimony.
The moment that Master Simon had gone
through his confession, and, to use the common
phrase, had made a clean breast of it, he
became
quite himself again. He had settled the
point which had been worrying his mind, and,
doubtless, considered himself established as a
man of sentiment in my opinion. Before we
had finished our morning's stroll, he was
singing
as blythe as a grasshopper; whistling to his
dogs, and telling droll stories; and I recollect
that he was particularly facetious that day, at
dinner, on the subject of matrimony; and uttered
several excellent jokes, not to be found in Joe
Miller, that made the future bride blush, and
look down, but set all the old gentlemen at the
table in a roar, and absolutely brought tears into
the general's eyes.
ENGLISH GRAVITY.
Merrie England!
Ancient Phrase
.
There
is nothing so rare as for a man to
ride his hobby without molestation. I find the
Squire has been repeatedly thwarted in his
humours
,
and has suffered a kind of well meaning
persecution of late, by a Mr. Faddy, an old
gentleman
of some weight, at least of purse, who
has moved into the neighbourhood. He is a
worthy manufacturer, who having accumulated
a large fortune by steam and spinning jennies,
has retired from business, and buried himself in
the shades of the country.
He has taken an old country seat, and refitted
it and painted it, until it looks not unlike his
own manufactory. He has been particularly
careful in mending the walls and hedges; and
putting up notices of spring guns and men traps
in every part of his premises. Indeed, he shows
great jealousy in asserting his territorial rights,
having stopped up a foot path that led across
one of his fields, and given notice, in staring
letters, that whoever was found trespassing
on these grounds would be prosecuted with
the utmost rigour of the law. He has brought
into the country with him all his trite
maxims
and practical habits of business; and is
one of those intolerably prosing, sensible,
useful
,
troublesome old gentlemen, that go about
wearying and worrying society with plans of
public utility.
He is very much disposed to be on good
terms with the Squire, and is every now and
then calling upon him with some excellent
measure
for the good of the neighbourhood; which
happens to run diametrically opposite to some
one or other of the Squire's peculiar notions;
but which is too sensible a measure to be
openly opposed.
VOL. II. 5
Thus he has annoyed him excessively by
enforcing
the vagrant laws, expelling the gypsies,
punishing poachers, and endeavouring to
suppress
country wakes and rustic games, which
he considers great nuisances, and causes of the
deadly sin of idleness. I have observed,
however
,
that the manufacturer is gradually
swelling
into the aristocrat; he is losing sight of his
origin, or fancying that others have lost sight of
it, and is attempting, in a casual way, to shuffle
himself into the pack of gentility. He has a
great deal to say about the common people;
talks of his park, his gamekeeper, and the
necessity
of keeping up the game laws; and
makes frequent use of the phrase, the gentry
of the neighbourhood.
He came to the Hall lately with a face full of
business, to consult with the Squire about some
mode of putting a stop to the frolicking at the
village
on the approaching May-day, as it drew idle
people together from all parts of the
neighbourhood
,
who spent the day fiddling, and drinking,
and dancing, instead of staying at home to work
for their families. As the Squire is at the
bottom
of these May-day revels, it may be
supposed
that the suggestions of the matter-of-fact,
Mr. Faddy were not received with the best grace
in the world. After he was gone the Squire could
not contain his indignation at having his
poetical
cobwebs invaded by this buzzing blue bottle
fly of traffick.
In the warmth of his feelings he made a
whimsical tirade at the whole race of
manufacturers
,
whom he accused of being the marrers
of the face of the country, and the destroyers of
rural manners. Sir, said he with emotion,
it makes my heart bleed to see all our fine
streams dammed up and bestrode by cotton
mills; our valleys smoking with steam engines;
to hear the din of the hammer and the loom
scaring away all our rural delights; to see our
sturdy peasantry metamorphosed into pin
makers
and stocking weavers; and merry
Sherwood
,
and all the green wood haunts of Robin
Hood, covered with manufacturing towns.
Sir, I have stood on the tottering ruins of
Dudley Castle, and looked round with an aching
heart, on what were once beautiful vales and
fertile hills, now turned into a mere Campus
Phlegr. The whole country reeking with
coal pits; a region of fire, where furnaces and
smelting houses were vomiting forth flames and
smoke. The people, pale and ghastly, looked
more like demons than human beings, as they
toiled among these noxious exhalations; and the
clanking wheels and engines seen through the
murky atmosphere, looked like instruments of
torture in this terrestrial pandemonium! What
is to become of the country with these evils
rankling
in its very core? Sir, these manufacturers
will be the ruin of the national character! They
will not leave materials for a line of poetry!
There was something in this lamentation
over public improvements and national industry
that amused me exceedingly; but I find that the
Squire really grieves over the growing spirit of
trade as destroying the charm of life. He
considers
every new short-hand mode of doing things
as an inroad of snug sordid method; and thinks
that this will soon become a mere
matter-of-fact
world, where life will be reduced to a
mathematical
calculation of conveniences, and every
thing will be done by steam.
He maintains, also, that the nation has
declined
in its free and joyous spirit, in proportion
as it has turned its attention to commerce and
manufactures; and that in old times, when
England
was an idler, it was also a merrier little
island.
Indeed, the old gentleman adduces a number
of authorities, that in some measure bear him
out in his notions. If we may judge from the
frequency and extravagance of ancient festivals
and merry-makings, and the hearty spirit with
which they were kept up by all classes of
people
,
the English were a much gayer people than
at present.
Stow, in his survey of London, gives us many
animating pictures of the revels on holydays, at
the inns of court, and the mummeries,
masquings
,
and bonfires about the streets. London then
resembled the continental cities in its manners
and amusements.
The court used to dance after dinner on
public
occasions. After the coronation dinner of
Richard II. the king, the prelates, the nobles,
the knights, and the rest of the company, danced
in Westminster Hall to the music of the
minstrels
.
The example of the court was followed by
the middling classes, who spent much of the
time in dancing.
Stow gives us a gay city picture, that
resembles
the lively groups one may often see in
Paris
;
for he tells us, that on holydays, after
evening prayers, the maidens used to assemble
before the door, in sight of their masters and
dames, and while one played on a timbrel, the
others would dance for garlands hanged athwart
the street.
Of the gayety that prevailed in dress
throughout
all ranks of society, we have abundant
testimony
in the rich and fanciful costumes preserved
in books and paintings. I have myself, says
Gervaise Markham, met an ordinary tapster
in his silk stockins, garters deepe fringed with
gold lace, the rest of his apparell suitable, with
cloake lined with velvet. Nashe, too, who
wrote in 1593, exclaims at the folly and finery
of the nation. England, the players' stage of
gorgeous attyre, the ape of all nations'
superfluities
,
the continual masquer in outlandish
habiliments
.
These and many such authorities are quoted
by the Squire, by way of contrasting the former
spirit and vivacity of the nation with its present
monotonous habits and appearance. John
Bull, he will say, was then a gay cavalier,
with a feather in his cap and a sword by his side;
but he is now a plodding citizen, in snuff
coloured
coat and gaiters.
But what in fact has caused such a decline
of gayety in the national character, that the
country has almost lost all right to its favourite
old title of Merry England? It may be
attributed
in part to the growing hardships of the
times, and the necessity of turning the whole
attention
to the means of subsistence; but
England's
gayest customs prevailed at times when
her common people enjoyed comparatively few
of the comforts and conveniences that they do
at present. It may be still more attributed to
the universal spirit of gain, and the calculating
habits of business that commerce has introduced;
but I am inclined to attribute it chiefly to the
gradual increase of the liberty of the subject,
and the general freedom and activity of opinion.
A free people are apt to be grave and
thoughtful
.
They have high and important matters to
occupy their thoughts. They feel it is their
right, their interest, and their duty, to mingle in
public concerns, and to watch over the general
welfare.
The continual exercise of the mind on
political
topics gives intenser habits of thinking, and
a more serious and earnest demeanour. A
nation
becomes less gay, but more intellectually
active and vigorous. It evinces less play of
the fancy, but more power of the imagination;
less taste and elegance, but more grandeur of
mind; less animated vivacity, but deeper
enthusiasm
.
It is when men are shut out of the regions of
manly thought, by a despotic government; when
every grave and lofty theme is rendered perilous to
discussion and almost to reflection; it is then that
they turn to the safer occupations of taste and
amusement, trifles rise to importance, and occupy
the craving activity of intellect.
No being is more void of care and reflection
than the slave; none dances more gayly in his
intervals of labour; but make him free, give
him rights and interests to guard, and he
becomes
thoughtful and laborious.
The French are a gayer people than the
English
.
Why? Partly from temperament perhaps;
but greatly because they have been accustomed
to governments which surrounded the free
exercise
of thought with danger, and where he only
was safe who shut his eyes and ears to public
events, and enjoyed the passing pleasure of the
day. Within late years they have had more
opportunities
of exercising their minds, and within
VOL. II. 6
late years the national character has essentially
changed. Never did the French enjoy such a
degree of freedom as they do at this moment;
and at this moment the French are comparatively
a grave people.
GIPSIES.
What's that to absolute freedom; such as the very beggars have;
to feast and revel here to day, and yonder to-morrow; next day
where they please, and so on still, the whole country or kingdom
over? There's liberty! the birds of the air can take no more.
Jovial Crew
.
Since
the rencontre with the gipsies, which I
have related in a former paper, I have observed
several of them haunting the purlieus of the
Hall, in spite of a positive interdiction of the
Squire's. They are part of a gang that has
long kept about this neighbourhood, to the great
annoyance of the farmers; whose poultry yards
often suffer from their nocturnal invasions. They
are, however, in some measure patronized by the
Squire, who considers the race as belonging to
the good old times, which, to confess the
private truth, seem to have abounded with good
for nothing characters.
This roving crew is called Star-light Tom's
gang, from the name of its chieftain, a
notorious
poacher. I have heard repeatedly of the
misdeeds of this minion of the moon; for
every midnight depredation that takes place in
park, or fold, or farm yard, is laid to his charge.
Star-light Tom in fact answers to his name; he
seems to walk in darkness, and like a fox, to be
traced in the mornings by the mischief he has
done. He reminds me of that fearful
personage
in the nursery rhyme:
Who goes round the house at night?
None but bloody Tom!
Who steals all the sheep at night?
None, but one by one!
In short, Star-light Tom is the scape-goat of
the neighbourhood; but as cunning and adroit
that there is no detecting him. Old Christy
and the gamekeeper have watched many a night
in hopes of entrapping him; and Christy often
patrols the park with his dogs, for the purpose,
but all in vain. It is said that the Squire winks
hard at his misdeeds, having an indulgent
feeling
toward the vagabond, because of his being
very expert at all kinds of games, a great shot
with the cross bow, and the best morrice dancer
in the country.
The Squire also suffers the gang to lurk
unmolested
about the skirts of his estate, on
condition
that they do not come about the house. The
approaching wedding, however, has made a kind
of saturnalia at the Hall, and has caused a
suspension
of all sober rule. It has produced a
great sensation throughout the female part of the
household; not a housemaid but dreams of
wedding
favours, and has a husband running in her
head. Such a time is a harvest for the gipsies.
There is a public footpath leading across one
part of the park, by which they have free ingress;
and they are continually hovering about the
grounds, telling the servant girls' fortunes, or
getting smuggled in to the young ladies.
I believe the Oxonian amuses himself very
much by furnishing them with hints in private,
and bewildering all the weak brains in the house
with their wonderful revelations. The general
certainly was very much astonished by the
communications
made to him the other evening by
the gipsy girl; he kept a wary silence towards
us on the subject, and affected to treat it lightly;
but I have noticed that he has since redoubled his
attentions to Lady Lillycraft and her dogs.
I have seen, also, Phoebe Wilkins, the
house-keeper's
pretty and love-sick niece, holding a
long conference with one of these old sybils
behind
a large tree in the avenue, and often
looking
round to see that she was not observed. I
make no doubt that she was endeavouring to get
some favourable augury about the result of her
love quarrel with young Ready-Money, as
oracles
have always been more consulted on love
affairs than upon any thing else. I fear,
however
,
that in this instance the response was not
as favourable as usual, for I perceived poor
Phoebe returning pensively towards the house,
her head hanging down, her hat in her hand, and
the ribband trailing along the ground.
At another time, as I turned a corner of a
terrace, at the bottom of the garden, just by a
clump of trees and a large stone urn, I came
upon a bevy of the young girls of the family,
attended by this same Phoebe Wilkins. I was
at a loss to comprehend the meaning of their
blushing and giggling, and their apparent
agitation
,
until I saw the red cloak of a gipsy
vanishing
among the shrubbery. A few moments
after I caught sight of Master Simon and the
Oxonian stealing along one of the walks in the
garden, chuckling and laughing at their
successful
waggery, having evidently put the gipsy
up to the thing, and instructed her what to
say.
After all, there is something strangely
pleasing
in these tamperings with the future, even
where we are convinced of the fallacy of the
prediction. It is singular how willingly the
mind will half deceive itself, and with what a
degree of awe we will listen to these babblers
about futurity. For my part I cannot feel angry
with those poor vagabonds, that seek to deceive
us into bright hopes and expectations. I have
always been something of a castle builder, and
have found my liveliest pleasures arising from
the illusions which fancy has cast over
common-placed
realities. As I get on in life, I find it
more difficult to deceive myself in this
delightful
manner; and I should be thankful to any
prophet, however false, that should conjure the
clouds which hang over futurity into palaces,
and all its doubtful regions into fairy land.
The Squire, who, as I have observed, has a
private good will toward gipsies, has suffered
considerable annoyance on their account. Not
that they requite his indulgence with ingratitude,
for they do not depredate very flagrantly on his
estate, but because their pilferings and
misdeeds
occasion loud murmurs in the village.
For my own part, I have a great toleration
for all kinds of vagrant, sunshiny existence, and
must confess I take a pleasure in observing the
ways of gipsies. The English, who are
accustomed
to them from childhood, and often suffer
from their petty depredations, consider them as
mere nuisances; but I have been very much
struck with their peculiarities. I like to behold
their clear olive complexions, their romantic
black eyes, their raven locks, their lithe
slender
figures, and to hear them, in low silver
tones, dealing forth magnificent promises of
honours and estates, of world's wealth, and
ladies' love.
Their mode of life, too, has something in it
very fanciful and picturesque. They are the
denizens of nature, and maintain a primitive
independence in spite of law and gospel, of
county gaols and country magistrates. It is
curious
to see this obstinate adherence to the wild
unsettled habits of savage life transmitted from
generation to generation, and preserved in the
midst of one of the most cultivated, populous,
and systematic countries in the world. They
are totally distinct from the busy, thrifty people
about them. They seem to be like Indians,
either above or below the ordinary cares and
anxieties of mankind. Heedless of power, of
honour, of wealth; and indifferent to the
fluctuations
of the times, the rise or fall of grain, or
stock, or empires; they seem to laugh at the
toiling
,
VOL. II. 7
fretting world around them, and to live
according
to the philosophy of the old song:
Who would ambition shun
And loves to lie i' the sun,
Seeking the food he eats,
And please with what he gets,
Come hither, come hither, come hither,
Here shall he see
No enemy,
But winter and rough weather.
In this way they wander from county to county,
keeping about the purlieus of villages, or in
plenteous neighbourhoods, where there are fat
farms and rich country seats. Their
encampments
are generally made in some beautiful spot;
either a green shady nook of a road, or on the
border of a common, under a sheltering hedge,
or on the skirts of a fine spreading wood. They
are always to be found lurking about fairs and
races, and rustic gatherings, wherever there is
pleasure, and throng, and idleness. They are
the oracles of milkmaids and simple serving
girls; and sometimes have even the honour of
perusing the white hands of gentlemen's
daughters
,
when rambling about their father's grounds.
They are the bane of good housewives and
thrifty farmers, and odious in the eyes of
country
justices; but, like all vagabond beings, they
have something to commend them to the fancy.
They are among the last traces, in these
matter-of-fact
days, of the motly population of former
times; and are whimsically associated in my
mind with fairies and witches, Robin Good
Fellow
,
Robin Hood, and the other fantastical
personages
of poetry.
MAY-DAY CUSTOMS.
Happy the age, and harmless were the dayes,
(For then true love and amity was found)
When every village did a May-pole raise,
And Whitson-ales and May-games did abound;
And all the lusty yonkers, in a rout,
With merry lasses daunc'd the rod about,
Then friendship to their banquets bid the guests,
And poore men fared the better for their feasts.
Then lords of castles, mannors, townes, and towers,
Rejoic'd when they beheld the farmers flourish,
And would come downe unto the summer-bowers
To see the country-gallants dance the Morrice.
Pasquil's Palinodia
. 1634.
The
month of April has nearly passed away,
and we are fast approaching that poetical day
which was considered, in old times, as the
boundary that parted the frontiers of winter and
summer. With all its caprices, however, I like
the month of April. I like these laughing and
crying days, when sunshine and shade seem to
run in billows over the landscape. I like to
see the sudden shower coming over the meadows
and giving all nature a greener smile, and the
bright sunbeams chasing the flying cloud, and
turning all its drops into diamonds.
I was enjoying a morning of the kind in
company
with the Squire in one of the finest parts of
the park.
We were skirting a beautiful grove, and he
was giving me a kind of biographical account
of several of his favourite forest trees, when we
heard the strokes of an axe from the midst of a
thick copse. The Squire paused and listened,
with manifest signs of uneasiness. He turned
his steps in the direction of the sound. The
strokes grew louder and louder as we advanced;
there was evidently a vigorous arm wielding the
axe. The Squire quickened his pace, but in
vain; a loud crack and a succeeding crash told
that the mischief had been done, and some child
of the forest laid low. When we came to the
place we found Master Simon and several others
standing about a tall and beautifully straight
young larch which had just been felled.
The Squire, though a man of most
harmonious
disposition, was completely put out of
tune by this circumstance. He felt like a
monarch
witnessing the murder of one of his liege
subjects, and demanded, with some asperity, the
meaning of the outrage. It turned out to be an
affair of Master Simon's; who had selected the
tree, from its height and straightness, for a
May-pole
;
the old one which stood on the village
green being unfit for farther service.
If any thing could have soothed the ire of my
worthy host, it would have been the reflection
that his tree had fallen in a good cause, and I
saw that there was a great struggle between his
fondness for his groves, and his devotion to
May-day
.
He could not contemplate the prostrate tree,
however, without indulging in lamentation, and
making a kind of funeral eulogy, and he forbad
that any tree should thenceforward be cut down
on his estate without a warrant from himself;
being determined, he said, to hold the sovereign
power of life and death in his own hands.
This mention of the May-pole struck my
attention
,
and I inquired whether the old customs
connected with it were still kept up with any
spirit in this part of the country.
The Squire shook his head mournfully, and I
found I had touched on one of his tender points,
for he grew quite melancholy in bewailing the
total decline of old May-day. Though it is
regularly
celebrated in the neighbouring village,
yet it has been merely resuscitated by his
countenance
,
and is kept up in a forced state of
existence
at his expense. He meets with continual
discouragements, and finds great difficulty in
getting the country bumpkins to play their parts
tolerably.
He manages to have every year a Queen of
the May; but as to Robin Hood, Friar Tuck,
the Dragon, the Hobby Horse, and all the other
motly crew that used to enliven the day with
their mummery, he has not ventured to introduce
them.
Still, I look forward with some interest to the
promised shadow of old May-day, even though
it be but a shadow; and I feel more and more
pleased with this whimsical, yet harmless hobby
of my host, which is surrounding him with
agreeable
associations, and making a little world of
poetry about him.
Brought up, as I have been, in a new country,
I may appreciate too highly the faint vestiges of
ancient customs which I now and then meet
with; and the interest I express in them may
provoke a smile from those who are negligently
suffering them to pass away. But with
whatever
indifference they may be regarded by those
to the manner born, yet, in my mind, the
lingering flavour of them imparts a charm to
rustic life, which nothing else could readily
supply
.
I shall never forget the delight I felt on first
seeing a May-pole. It was on the banks of the
Dee, close by the picturesque old bridge, that
stretches across that river from the quaint little
city of Chester. I had already been carried
back into former days by the antiquities of that
venerable place, the examination of which is
equal to turning over the pages of a black letter
volume, or gazing on the pictures in Froissart.
The May-pole on the margin of that poetic
stream completed the illusion. My fancy
adorned
it with wreaths of flowers, and peopled the
green bank with all the dancing revelry of
May-day
.
The mere sight of the May-pole gave a
glow to my feelings, and spread a charm over
the country for the rest of the day; and as I
traversed a part of the fair plain of Cheshire,
and the beautiful borders of Wales, and looked
from among swelling hills down a long green
valley, through which the Deva wound its
wizard stream, my imagination turned all into
a perfect Arcadia.
Whether it be owing to such poetical
associations
,
early instilled into my mind; or whether
there is, as it were, a sympathetic revival and
budding forth of the feelings at this season,
certain
it is, that I always experience, wherever I
may be placed, a delightful expansion of the heart
at the return of May. It is said that birds about
this time will become restless in their cages, as if
VOL. II. 8
instinct with the season, conscious of the revelry
that is going on in the groves, and impatient to
break from their bondage and join in the jubilee
of the year.
In like manner I have felt myself excited even
in the midst of the metropolis, when the
windows
which had been churlishly closed all
winter
,
were again thrown open to receive the balmy
breath of May; when the sweets of the
country
were breathed into the town, and flowers
were cried about the streets.
I have considered the treasure of flowers thus
poured in, as so many missives from nature
inviting
us forth to enjoy the virgin beauty of the
year, before its freshness is exhaled by the
heats of sunny summer.
One can readily imagine what a gay scene it
must have been in jolly old London, on a
May-day
in former times, when the doors were
decorated
with flowering branches; when every hat
was decked with hawthorn, and Robin Hood,
Friar Tuck, Maid Marian, the morrice dancers,
and all the other fantastic masks and revellers
were performing their antics about the May-pole
in every part of the city.
I am not a bigoted admirer of old times and
old customs merely because of their antiquity.
But while I rejoice in the decline of many of
the rude usages and coarse amusements of
former
days, I cannot but regret that this innocent
and fanciful festival has fallen into disuse. It
seemed appropriate to this verdant and pastoral
country, and calculated to light up the too
pervading
gravity of the nation. I value every
custom that tends to infuse poetical feeling into
the common people, and to sweeten and soften
the rudeness of rustic manners, without
destroying
their simplicity. Indeed, it is to the decline
of this happy simplicity that the decline of this
custom may be traced; and the rural dance on
the green, and the homely May-day pageant,
have gradually disappeared, in proportion as the
peasantry have become expensive and artificial
in their pleasures, and too knowing for simple
enjoyment.
Some attempts, the Squire informs me, have
been made of late years by men of both taste
and learning, to rally back the popular feeling
to these standards of primitive simplicity; but
the time has gone by; the feeling has become
chilled by habits of gain and traffick; the
country
apes the manners and amusements of the
town, and little is heard of May-day at present
excepting from the lamentations of authors, who
sigh after it from among the brick walls of the
city.
For O, for O, the Hobby Horse is forgot.
VILLAGE WORTHIES.
Nay, I tell you, I am so well beloved in our town, that not the
worst dog in the street will hurt my little finger.
Collier of Croydon
.
As the neighbouring village is one of those
out-of-the-way, but gossipping little places,
where a small matter makes a great stir, it is
not to be supposed that the approach of a
festival
like that of May-day can be regarded with
indifference; especially, since it is made a matter
of such moment by the great folks at the Hall.
Master Simon, who is the faithful factotum of
the worthy Squire, and jumps with his humour
in every thing, is frequent just now in his visits
to the village, to give directions for the
impending
fte, and as I have taken the liberty
occasionally
of accompanying him, I have been
enabled to get some insight into the characters
and internal politics of this very sagacious
little community.
Master Simon is in fact the Csar of the
village
.
It is true the Squire is the protecting
power, but his factotum is the active and busy
agent. He intermeddles in all its concerns;
is acquainted with all the inhabitants and their
domestic history; gives counsel to the old folks
in their business matters, and the young folks
in their love affairs, and enjoys the proud
satisfaction
of being a great man in a little world.
He is the dispenser too of the Squire's charity,
which is bounteous; and, to do Master Simon
justice, he performs this part of his functions
with great alacrity. Indeed, I have been
entertained
with the mixture of bustle, importance,
and kind heartedness which he displays. He
is of too vivacious a temperament to comfort
the afflicted by sitting down moping and
whining
and blowing noses in concert, but goes
whisking about, like a sparrow, chirping
consolation
into every hole and corner of the village.
I have seen an old woman, in a red cloak, hold
him for half an hour together with some long
phthisical tale of distress, to which Master
Simon
listened, with many a bob of the head,
smack of his whip, and other symptoms of
impatience
;
though he afterwards made a most
faithful and circumstantial report of the case to
the Squire. I have watched him, too, during
one of his pop visits into the cottage of a
superannuated
villager, who is a pensioner of the
Squire's; where he fidgetted about the room
without sitting down; made many excellent
off-hand
reflections, with the old invalid, who was
propped up in his chair, about the shortness of
life, the certainty of death, and the necessity of
preparing for that awful change; quoted
several texts of scripture very incorrectly, but
much to the edification of the cottager's wife;
and on coming out pinched the daughter's rosy
cheek, and wondered what was in the young
men that such a pretty face did not get a
husband
.
He has, also, his cabinet councillors in the
village, with whom he is very busy just now,
preparing for the May-day ceremonies. Among
these is the village tailor, a pale-faced fellow, that
plays the clarionet in the church choir, and being
a great musical genius, has frequent meetings of
the band at his house, where they make night
hideous by their concerts. He is, in
consequence
,
high in favour with Master Simon; and
through his influence has the making, or rather
marring, of all the liveries of the Hall, which
generally
look as though they had been cut out by
one of those scientific tailors of the Flying Island
of Laputa, who took measure of their customers
with a quadrant. The tailor, in fact, might rise
to be one of the monied men of the village, if he
were not rather too prone to gossip, and keep
holydays, and give concerts, and blow all his
substance, real and personal, through his
clarionet
;
which literally keeps him poor both in
body and estate. He has for the present thrown
by all his regular work, and suffered the breeches
of the village to go unmade and unmended,
while he is occupied in making garlands of
parti-coloured
rags, in imitation of flowers, for the
decoration of the May-pole.
Another of Master Simon's councillors is the
apothecary, a short, and rather fat man, with a
pair of prominent eyes that diverge like those of
a lobster. He is the village wise man; very
sententious, and full of profound remarks on
shallow subjects. Master Simon often quotes
his sayings, and mentions him as rather an
extraordinary
man; and even consults him
occasionally
in desperate cases of the dogs and horses.
Indeed, he seems to have been overwhelmed by
the apothecary's philosophy, which is exactly
one observation deep, consisting of indisputable
maxims, such as may be gathered from the
mottoes
of tobacco boxes. I had a specimen of his
philosophy in my very first conversation with
him; in the course of which, he observed, with
great solemnity and emphasis, that man is a
compound of wisdom and folly; upon which
Master Simon, who had hold of my arm,
pressed
very hard upon it, and whispered in my ear,
that's a devilish shrewd remark!
VOL. II. 9
THE SCHOOLMASTER.
There will no mosse stick to the stone of Sisiphus, no grasse hang
on the heeles of Mercury, no butter cleave on the bread of a
traveller
.
For as the eagle at every flight loseth a feather, which maketh
her bauld in her age, so the traveller in every country loseth some
fleece, which maketh him a beggar in his youth, by buying that for a
pound which he cannot sell again for a pennyrepentance.
Lilly's Euphues
.
Among
the worthies of the village that enjoy
the peculiar confidence of Master Simon, is one
who has struck my fancy so much, that I have
thought him worthy of a separate notice. It is
Slingsby, the schoolmaster; a thin elderly man,
rather threadbare and slovenly; somewhat
indolent
in manner, and with an easy good humoured
look, not often met with in his craft. I have
been interested in his favour by a few anecdotes
which I have picked up concerning him.
He is a native of the village, and was a
contemporary
and playmate of Ready Money Jack's,
in the days of their boyhood. Indeed, they
carried
on a kind of league of mutual good offices.
Slingsby was rather puny, and withall somewhat
of a coward; but very apt at his learning: Jack,
on the contrary, was a bullyboy out of doors,
but a sad laggard at his books. Slingsby helped
Jack therefore to all his lessons, and Jack fought
all Slingsby's battles, and they were inseparable
friends. This mutual kindness continued even
after they left the school, notwithstanding the
dissimilarity of their characters. Jack took to
ploughing and reaping, and prepared himself to
till his paternal acres; while the other loitered
negligently on in the path of learning, until he
penetrated even into the confines of Latin and
mathemathics. In an unlucky hour, however,
he took to reading voyages and travels, and was
smitten with a desire to see the world. This
desire increased upon him as he grew up. So,
early one bright sunny morning, he put all his
effects in a knapsack, slung it on his back, took
staff in hand, and called in his way to take leave
of his early schoolmate. Jack was just going
out with the plough; the friends shook hands
over the farm house gate; Jack drove his team
a-field, and Slingsby whistled over the hills
and far away, and sallied forth gayly to seek
his fortune.
Years and years passed by, and young Tom
Slingsby was forgotten; when, one mellow
Sunday
afternoon in autumn, a thin man, somewhat
advanced in life, with a coat out at elbows,
a pair of old nankeen gaiters, and a few things
tied in a handkerchief and slung on the end of
a stick, was seen loitering through the village.
He appeared to regard several houses
attentively
,
to peer into the windows that were open,
to eye the villagers wistfully as they returned
from church, and then to pass some time in the
church-yard reading the tomb-stones.
At length he found his way to the farm house
of Ready Money Jack, but paused ere he
attempted
the wicket; contemplating the picture
of substantial independence before him. In
the porch of the house sat Ready Money Jack,
in his Sunday dress; with his hat upon his head,
his pipe in his mouth, and his tankard before
him, the monarch of all he surveyed. Beside
him lay his fat house dog. The varied sounds
of poultry were heard from the well stocked
farm yard, the bees hummed from their hives in
the garden, the cattle lowed in the rich meadow;
while the crammed barns and ample stacks bore
proof of an abundant harvest.
The stranger opened the gate and advanced
dubiously toward the house. The mastiff
growled
at the sight of him, but was immediately
silenced by his master; who, taking his pipe
from his mouth, awaited with inquiring aspect
the address of this equivocal personage. The
stranger eyed old Jack for a moment, so portly
in his dimensions, and decked out in gorgeous
apparel; then cast a glance upon his own
threadbare
and starveling condition and the scanty
bundle which he held in his hand; then giving
his shrunk waistcoat a twitch to make it meet
his receding waistband, and casting another
look, half sad, half humorous, at the sturdy
yeoman.I suppose, said he, Mr. Tibbets,
you have forgot old times and old playmates.
The latter gazed at him with scrutinizing
look, but acknowledged that he had no
recollection
of him.
Like enough, like enough, said the
stranger, every body seems to have forgotten
poor Slingsby.
Why no, sure! it can't be Tom Slingsby!
Yes, but it is, though, replied the other,
shaking his head.
Ready Money Jack was on his feet in a
twinkling; thrust out his hand; gave his ancient
crony the gripe of a giant, and slapping the
other hand on a bench, sit down there, cried
he, Tom Slingsby!
A long conversation ensued about old times,
while Slingsby was regaled with the best cheer
that the farm house afforded; for he was hungry
as well as wayworn, and had the keen appetite
of a poor pedestrian. The early playmates
then talked over their lives and adventures.
Jack had but little to relate, and was never good
at a long story. A prosperous life, passed at
home, has little incident for narration; it is only
poor devils that are tossed about the world that
are the true heroes of story. Jack had stuck by
the paternal farm; followed the same plough that
his forefathers had driven, and had waxed richer
and richer as he grew older. As to Tom
Slingsby
,
he was an exemplification of the old proverb,
a rolling stone gathers no moss. He had
sought his fortune about the world without ever
finding it; being a thing oftener found at home
than abroad. He had been in all kinds of
situations
;
had learnt a dozen different modes of
making
a living; but had found his way back to
his native village rather poorer than when he
left it; his knapsack having dwindled down into
a scanty bundle.
As luck would have it, the Squire was
passing
by the farm house that very evening, and
called there as is often his custom. He found
the two schoolmates still gossiping in the porch,
and, according to the good old Scottish song,
taking a cup of kindness yet for auld lang
syne. The Squire was struck by the
contrast
in appearance and fortunes of these early
playmates. Ready Money Jack, seated in
lordly
state, surrounded by the good things of this
life, with golden guineas hanging to his very
watch chain, and the poor pilgrim, Slingsby,
thin as a weazel, with all his worldly effects
his bundle, hat, and walking staff, lying on the
ground beside him.
The good Squire's heart warmed towards the
cosmopolite; for he is a little prone to like such
half vagrant kind of characters. He cast about
in his mind how he should contrive once more to
anchor Slingsby in his native village. Honest
Jack had already offered him a present shelter
under his roof, in spite of the hints, and winks,
and half remonstrances of the shrewd Dame
Tibbets
;
but how to provide for his permanent
maintenance, was the question. Luckily the
Squire bethought himself that the village school
was without a teacher. A little farther
conversation
convinced him that Slingsby was
as fit for that as for any thing else; and
in a day or two he was seen swaying the rod of
empire in the very school-house where he had
often been horsed in the days of his boyhood.
Here he has remained for several years, and
being honoured by the countenance of the Squire,
and the fast friendship of Mr. Tibbets, he has
grown into much importance and consideration
in the village. I am told, however, that he still
shows, now and then, a degree of restlessness,
and a disposition to rove abroad again and see a
little more of the world ; an inclination which
seems particularly to haunt him about spring
time. There is nothing so difficult to conquer
as the vagrant humour, when once it has been
fully indulged.
Since I have heard these anecdotes of poor
Slingsby, I have more than once mused upon
the picture presented by him and his schoolmate,
Ready Money Jack, on their coming together
again after so long a separation. It is difficult
to determine between lots in life, where each is
attended with its peculiar discontents. He who
never leaves his home repines at his monotonous
VOL. II. 10
existence, and envies the traveller whose life is a
constant tissue of wonder and adventure; while
he who is tossed about the world looks back with
many a sigh on the safe and quiet shore which
he has abandoned. I cannot help thinking,
however, that the man that stays at home and
cultivates the comforts and pleasures daily
springing
up around him, stands the best chance for
happiness. There is nothing so fascinating to a
young mind as the idea of travelling, and there
is very witchcraft in the old phrase found in
every nursery tale, of going to seek one's
fortune
.
A continual change of place and change
of object promises a continual succession of
adventure
and gratification of curiosity. But there
is a limit to all our enjoyments, and every
desire
bears its death in its very gratification.
Curiosity
languishes under repeated stimulants;
novelties cease to excite surprise, until at length
we cannot wonder even at a miracle. He who
has sallied forth into the world like poor
Slingsby
,
full of sunny anticipations, finds too soon
how different the distant scene becomes when
visited. The smooth place roughens as he
approaches
;
the wild place becomes tame and
barren
;
the fairy tints that beguiled him on, still fly
to the distant hill, or gather upon the land he
has left behind, and every part of the landscape is
greener than the spot he stands on.
THE SCHOOL.
But to come down from great men and higher matters to my little
children and poor school house again; I will, God willing, go
forward
orderly, as I purposed to instruct children and young men both
for learning and manners.
Roger Ascham
.
Having
given the reader a slight sketch of
the village schoolmaster, he may be curious to
learn something concerning his school. As the
Squire takes much interest in the education of the
neighbouring children, he put into the hands of
the teacher, on first installing him in office, a
copy of Roger Ascham's Schoolmaster; and
advised him, moreover, to con over that portion
of old Peacham which treats of the duty of
masters, and which condemns the favourite
method of making boys wise by flagellation.
He exhorted Slingsby not to break down or
depress the free spirit of the boys by harshness
and slavish fear, but to lead them freely and
joyously on in the path of knowledge, making
it pleasant and desirable in their eyes. He
wished to see the youth trained up in the
manners
and habitudes of the peasantry of the good
old times; and thus to lay a foundation for the
accomplishment of his favourite object, the
revival
of old English customs and character.
He recommended that all the ancient holydays
should be observed; and that the sports of the
boys in their hours of play should be regulated
according to the standard authorities laid down
in Strutt, a copy of whose invaluable work,
decorated with plates, was deposited in the
school house. Above all, he exhorted the
pedagogue
to abstain from the use of birch, an
instrument
of instruction which the good Squire
regards with abhorrence, as fit only for the
coercion of brute natures, that cannot be
reasoned
with.
Mr. Slingsby has followed the Squire's
instructions
to the best of his disposition and
abilities
.
He never flogs the boys, because he is too
easy, good-humoured a creature to inflict pain
on a worm. He is bountiful in holydays,
because
he loves holydays himself, and has a
sympathy
with the urchins' impatience of
confinement
,
from having divers times experienced its
irksomeness during the time that he was seeing
the world.
As to sports and pastimes, the boys are
faithfully
exercised in all that are on record: quoits,
races, prison bars, tip-cat, trap-ball, bandy-ball,
wrestling, leaping, and what not. The only
misfortune is, that having banished the birch,
honest Slingsby has not studied Roger Ascham
sufficiently to find out a substitute; or rather he
has not the management in his nature to apply
one. His school, therefore, though one of the
happiest, is one of the most unruly in the
country
;
and never was a pedagogue more liked, or
less heeded by his disciples, than Slingsby.
He has lately taken a coadjutor worthy of
himself, being another stray sheep that has
returned
to the village fold. This is no other than
the son of the musical tailor, who had bestowed
some cost upon his education, hoping to see him
one day arrive at the dignity of an exciseman, or
at least of a parish clerk. The lad grew up,
however, as idle and musical as his father; and
being captivated by the drum and fife of a
recruiting
party, he followed them off to the army.
He returned not long since, out of money and
out at the elbows, the prodigal son of the
village
.
He remained for some time lounging
about the place in a half tattered soldier's dress,
with a foraging cap on one side of his head,
jerking stones across the brook, or loitering about
the tavern door, a burthen to his father, and
regarded
with great coldness by all the warm
householders.
Something, however, drew honest Slingsby
towards the youth. It might be the kindness
he bore to his father, who is one of the
school-master's
great cronies; it might be that secret
sympathy which draws men of vagrant
propensities
towards each other, for there is something
truly magnetic in the vagabond feeling; or it
might be that he remembered the time when he
himself had come back like this youngster, a
wreck to his native place. At any rate,
whatever
the motive, Slingsby drew towards the
youth. They had many conversations in the
village tap-room about foreign parts, and the
various scenes and places they had witnessed
during their way-faring about the world. The
more Slingsby talked with him the more he
found him to his taste, and finding him almost
as learned as himself, he forthwith engaged
him as an assistant or usher in the school.
Under such admirable tuition the school, as
may be supposed, flourishes apace; and, if the
scholars do not become versed in all the holyday
accomplishments of the good old times to the
Squire's heart's content, it will not be the fault
of their teachers. The prodigal son has become
almost as popular among the boys as the
pedagogue
himself. His instructions are not limited
to the school hours; and, having inherited the
musical taste and talents of his father, he has
bitten the whole school with the mania. He
is a great hand at beating a drum, which is often
heard rumbling from the rear of the school house.
He is teaching half the boys of the village, also,
to play the fife and the pandean pipes, and they
weary the whole neighbourhood with their
vague pipings, as they sit perched on stiles, or
loitering about the barn doors in the evenings.
Among the other exercises of the school, also,
he has introduced the ancient art of archery,
(one of the Squire's favourite themes,) with
such success, that the whipsters roam in truant
bands about the neighbourhood, practising with
their bows and arrows upon the birds of the air
and the beasts of the field. In a word, so
completely
are the ancient English customs and
habits
cultivated at this school, that I should not be
surprised if the Squire should live to see one of
his poetic visions realized, and a brood reared up,
worthy successors to Robin Hood and his merry
gang of outlaws.
VOL. II. 11
POPULAR SUPERSTITIONS.
Farewell Rewards and Fairies,
Good housewives now may say;
For now fowle sluts in Dairies
Do fare as well as they:
And though they sweepe their hearth's no lesse
Than maids were wont to doe,
Yet who of late for cleanlinesse
Finds six pence in her shooe?
Bishop Corbet
.
I have
mentioned the Squire's fondness for
the marvellous, and his predilection for legends
and romances. His library contains a curious
collection of old works of this kind, which bear
evident marks of having been much read. In
his great love for all that is antiquated he
cherishes
popular superstitions, and listens with very
grave attention to every tale however strange;
so that, through his countenance, the household,
and indeed the whole neighbourhood, is well
stocked with wonderful stories; and if ever a
doubt is expressed of any one of them, the
narrator
will generally observe, that the Squire
thinks there's something in it.
The Hall of course comes in for its share, the
common people having always a propensity to
furnish a great superannuated building of the
kind with supernatural inhabitants. The gloomy
galleries of such old family mansions; the stately
chambers adorned with grotesque carvings and
faded paintings; the sounds that vaguely echo
about them; the moaning of the wind; the cries
of rooks and ravens from the trees and chimney
topsall produce a state of mind favourable to
superstitious fancies.
In one chamber of the Hall, just opposite a
door which opens upon a dusky passage, there
is a full length portrait of a warrior in armour;
when, on suddenly turning into this passage,
I have caught a sight of the portrait, thrown into
strong relief by the dark pannelling against
which it hangs, I have more than once been
startled, as though it were a figure advancing
towards me. To superstitious minds, therefore,
predisposed by the strange and melancholy
stories
that are often connected with family
paintings
,
it needs but little stretch of fancy, on a
moonlight night, or by the flickering light of a
candle, to set the old pictures on the walls in
motion, sweeping in their robes and trains about
the galleries.
To tell the truth, the Squire confesses that
he used to take a pleasure, in his younger days,
in setting marvellous stories afloat, and
connecting
them with the lonely and peculiar places of
the neighbourhood. Whenever he read any
legend of a striking nature, he endeavoured to
transplant it, and give it a local habitation
among the scenes of his boyhood. Many of
these stories took root, and he says he is often
amused with the odd shapes in which they will
come back to him in some old woman's
narrative
,
after they have been circulating for years
among the peasantry, and undergoing rustic
additions
and amendments. Among these may
doubtless be numbered that of the crusader's
ghost, which I have mentioned in the account of
my Christmas visit; and another, about the
hard-riding squire of yore, the family Nimrod,
who is sometimes heard, on stormy winter
nights, galloping, with hound and horn, over a
wild moor, a few miles distant from the Hall.
This I apprehend to have had its origin in the
famous story of the Wild Huntsman, the
favourite
goblin in German tales; though by the
bye, as I was talking on the subject with Master
Simon the other evening, in the dark avenue, he
hinted that he had himself once or twice heard
strange sounds at night, very like a pack of
hounds in cry; and that once as he was
returning
rather late from a hunting dinner, he had
seen a strange figure galloping along this same
moor; but as he was riding rather fast at the
time, and in a hurry to get home, he did not
stop to ascertain what it was.
Popular superstitions are fast fading away in
England, owing to the general diffusion of
knowledge
,
and the bustling intercourse kept up
throughout the country. Still, they have their
strong holds, and lingering places, and a retired
neighbourhood like this is apt to be one of them.
The parson tells me that he meets with many
traditional
beliefs and notions among the common
people; which he has been able to draw from them
in the course of familiar conversation; though they
are rather shy of avowing them to strangers, and
particularly to the gentry, who are apt to
laugh at them. He says there are several of his
old parishoners who remember when the village
had its Bar-guest, or Bar-ghost, a spirit supposed
to belong to a town or village, and to predict any
impending misfortune, by midnight shrieks and
wailings. The last time it was heard was just
before the death of Mr. Bracebridge's father,
who was much beloved throughout the
neighbourhood
;
though there are not wanting some
obstinate unbelievers, who insist that it was
nothing
but the howling of a watch dog.
I have been greatly delighted, however, at
meeting with some traces of my old favourite,
Robin Good Fellow, though under a different
appellation from any of those by which I have
heretofore heard him called. The parson
assures
me that many of the peasantry believe in
household goblins called Dobbies, which live
about particular farms and houses, in the same
way that Robin Good Fellow did of old.
Sometimes
they haunt the barns and outhouses; and
now and then will assist the farmer wonderfully,
by getting in all his hay or corn in a single night.
In general, however, they prefer to live within
doors, and are fond of keeping about the great
hearths, and basking at night, after the family
have gone to bed, by the glowing embers. When
put into particular good humour by the warmth
of their lodgings, and the tidiness of the
house-maids
,
they will overcome their natural laziness,
and do a vast deal of household work before
morning; churning the cream; brewing the
beer, or spinning all the good dame's flax. All
this is precisely the conduct of Robin Good
Fellow; described so charmingly by Milton:
Tells how the drudging goblin sweat,
To earn his cream-bowl duly set,
When in one night, 'ere glimpse of morn,
His shadowy flail had thresh'd the corn
That ten day-labourers could not end;
Then lays him down the lubbar-fiend,
And stretched out all the chimney's length,
Basks at the fire his hairy strength,
And, crop-full, out of door he flings,
Ere the first cock his matin rings.
But, beside these household Dobbies, there are
others of a more gloomy and unsocial nature;
that keep about lonely barns, at a distance from
any dwelling house; or about ruins, and old
bridges. These are full of mischievous and
often malignant tricks; and are fond of
playing
pranks upon benighted travellers. There
is a story among the old people of one that
haunted a ruined mill, just by a bridge that
crosses a small stream; how that late one night,
as a traveller was passing on horseback, the
Dobbie jumped up behind him, and grasped him
so close round the body, that he had no power
to help himself, but expected to be squeezed to
death; luckily his heels were loose, with which
he plied the sides of his steed, and was carried,
with the wonderful instinct of a traveller's
horse, straight to the village inn. Had the inn
been at any greater distance, there is no doubt
but he would have been strangled to death; as
it was, the good people were a long time in
bringing him to his senses; and it was remarked
that the first sign he showed of returning
consciousness
was to call for a bottom of brandy.
The only instance of one of the household
Dobbies that the parson has met with, is one
that was said to keep about the old farm house
of Ready Money Jack. It has long been
traditional
,
I am told, that one of these good natured
goblins is attached to the Tibbets' family, and
came with them when they moved into this part
of the country, for it is remarked that they keep
with certain families, and follow them wherever
they remove. There is a large old fashioned
fireplace in the farm house, which affords fine
quarters for a chimney corner sprite of the kind,
that likes to lie warm; especially as Ready
Money Jack keeps up rousing fires in the winter
time. The old people of the village recollect
many stories that were told about this goblin in
VOL. II. 12
their young days. It was thought to have
brought good luck to the house, and to be the
reason why the Tibbets were always
before-hand
in the world; why their farm was
always
in better order; their hay got in sooner;
and their corn better stacked than that of their
neighbours. The present Mrs. Tibbets, at the
time of her courtship, had a number of these
stories told her by the country gossips, and when
married was a little fearful about living in a
house where such a hobgoblin was said to haunt.
Jack, however, who has always treated this story
with great contempt, assured her that there was
no spirit kept about his house that he could not
at any time lay in the Red Sea with one flourish
of his cudgel. Still, his wife has never got
completely
over her notions on the subject; she
has had a horse-shoe nailed on the threshold,
and keeps a branch of rauntry, or mountain ash,
with its red berries, suspended from one of the
great beams in the parloursure protections from
all evil spirits.
These stories, however, as I before observed,
are fast fading away, and in another generation
or two will probably be completely forgotten.
There is something, however, about these rural
superstitions that is extremely pleasing to the
imagination. I allude to those concerning the
good humoured race of household demons, and,
indeed, to the whole fairy mythology. The
English have given an inexpressible charm to
these superstitious, by the manner in which they
have associated them with whatever is most
home-felt and delightful in rustic life, or
refreshing
and beautiful in nature. I do not know a
more fascinating race of beings than these little
fabled people that haunted the southern sides of
hills and mountains; lurked in flowers and about
fountain heads; glided through keyholes into
ancient
halls; watched over farm houses and dairies;
danced on the green by summer moonlight, and on
the kitchen hearth in winter. They seem to me to
accord with the nature of English housekeeping
and English scenery. I always have them in mind
when I see a fine old English mansion, with its
wide hall and spacious kitchen; or a venerable
farm house, in which there is so much fireside
comfort and good housewifery. There was
something
of national character in their love of order
and cleanliness. In the vigilance with which
they watched over the economy of the kitchen
and the functions of the servants; munificently
rewarding, with silver sixpence in shoe, the tidy
housemaid; but venting their direful wrath, in
midnight bobs and pinches, upon the sluttish
dairy maid. I think I can trace the good effects
of this ancient fairy sway over household
concerns
,
in the care that prevails to the present day
among English housemaids, to put their kitchens
in order before they go to bed.
I have said, too, that these fairy superstitions
seemed to me to accord with the nature of
English
scenery. They suit these small landscapes,
which are divided by honey-suckled hedges into
sheltered fields and meadows, where the grass
is mingled with daisies, butter cups, and hare
bells. When I first found myself among
English
scenery I was continually reminded of the
sweet pastoral images which distinguish their
fairy mythology; and when, for the first time, a
circle in the grass was pointed out to me, as one
of the rings where they were formerly supposed
to have held their moonlight revels, it seemed
for a moment as if fairy land were no longer
a fable.
Browne, in his Britannia's Pastorals, gives a
picture of the kind of scenery to which I allude.
A pleasant mead
Where fairies often did their measures tread
Which in the meadows make such circles green
As if with garlands it had crowned been.
Within one of these rounds was to be seen
A hillock rise, where oft the Fairy Queen
At twilight sat.
And there is another picture of the same in a
poem ascribed to Ben Jonson.
By wells and rills, in meadows green
We nightly dance our hey-day guise,
And to our fairy King and Queen
We chaunt our moonlight minstrelsies.
Indeed, it seems to me that the older British
poets, with that true feeling for nature which
distinguishes them, have closely adhered to the
simple and familiar imagery which they found
in these popular superstitions; and have thus
given to their fairy mythology those continual
allusions to the farm house and the dairy, the
green meadow and the fountain head, that fill
our minds with the delightful associations of
rural life. It is curious to observe how the
most beautiful fictions have their origin among
the rude and ignorant. There is an
indescribable
charm about the illusions with which
chimerical
ignorance once clothed every subject.
These twilight views of nature are often more
captivating than any which are revealed by the
rays of enlightened philosophy. The most
accomplished
and poetical minds, therefore, have
been fain to search back into these accidental
conceptions of what are termed barbarous ages,
and to draw from thence their finest imagery
and machinery. If we look through our most
admired poets we shall find that their minds
have been impregnated by these popular
fancies
;
and that those have succeeded best who
have adhered closest to the simplicity of their
rustic originals. Such is the case with
Shakspeare
in his Midsummer's Night's Dream,
which so minutely describes the employments
and amusements of fairies, and embodies all
the notions concerning them, which were current
among the vulgar.
It is thus that poetry, in England, has
echoed back every rustic note, softened into
perfect melody: it is thus that it has spread its
charms over every day life; displacing nothing;
taking things as it found them; but tinting them
up with its own magical hues; until every green
hill, and fountain head every fresh meadow,
nay, every humble flower is full of song and
story.
I am dwelling too long, perhaps, upon a
threadbare
subject; yet it brings up with it a thousand
delicious recollections of those happy days of
childhood, when the imperfect knowledge I have
since obtained had not yet dawned upon my
mind; and when a fairy tale was true history to
me. I have often been so transported by the
pleasure of these recollections as almost to wish
that I had been born in the days when the
fictions
of poetry were believed; even now I
cannot
look upon these fanciful creations of
ignorance
and credulity without a lurking regret that
they have all passed away. The experience of
my early days tells me that they were sources of
exquisite delight; and I sometimes question
whether the naturalist who can dissect the flowers
of the field, receives half the pleasure from
contemplating
them, that he did who considered
them the abodes of elves and fairies. I feel
convinced
that the true interests and solid happiness
of man, are promoted by the advancement of
truth; yet I cannot but mourn over the pleasant
errors which it has trampled down in its progress.
The fawns and sylphs; the household sprite; the
moonlight revel; Oberon, Queen Mab, and the
delicious realms of fairy land, all vanish before the
light of true philosophy; but who does not
sometimes
turn with distaste from the cold realities of
morning, and seek to recall the sweet visions of
the night?
In
an old play entitled the Mayds
Metamorphosis
,
there is a scene resembling in many
respects Nick Bottom's dialogue with the fairies
in Midsummer's Night's Dream. The edition
that I saw was printed in 1600, and was bound
up in the same volume with an edition of
Mid-summer's
Night's Dream published in the same
year. Which of these plays was written first,
I do not know; though it is very possible
Shakspeare
may have taken his idea from the other
play, and improved upon it; as he took the hint
of his witch scenes in Macbeth from a play of
Marlow's. I subjoin the scene alluded to from
the Mayds Metamorphosis.
Mapso
.
But soft, who comes here?
[Enter the Fairies, singing and dancing.]
VOL. II. 13
By the moone we sport and play
With the night begins our day;
As we daunce the deaw doth fall,
Trip it little urchins all:
Lightly as the little Bee,
Two by two and three by three:
And about go we, and about go we.
Joculo.
What Mawmets are these?
Frisco.
O they be the Fayries that haunt these woods.
Mopso.
O we shall be pincht most cruelly.
1
st. Fay.
Will you have any musicke sir?
2
d. Fay.
Will you have any fine musicke sir?
3
d. Fay.
Most daintie musicke?
Mopso.
We must set a face on it now, there's no flying
No sir; we are very merry I thank you.
1
st. Fay.
O but you shall sir.
Fris.
No. I pray you save your labour.
2
d. Fay.
O sir, it shall not cost you a penny.
Joculo.
Where be your fiddles?
3
d. Fay.
You shall have most daintie instruments sir.
Mopso.
I pray you what might I call you?
1
st. Fay.
My name is Penny.
Mopso.
I am sorry I cannot purse you.
Frisco.
I pray you what might I call you?
2
d. Fay.
My name is Cricket.
Frisco.
I would I were a chimney for your sake.
*  *  *  *  *  *  *  *
1
st. Fay.
I do come about the coppes
Leaping upon flowers toppes:
Then I get upon a flie
She carries me above the skie:
And trip and goe.
2
d. Fay.
When a deaw drop falleth downe,
And doth light upon my crowne,
Then I shake my head and skip:
And about I trip.
3
d. Fay.
When I feele a gyrle a sleepe,
Underneathe her frocke I peepe,
There to sport, and there I play,
Then I byte her like a flea,
And about I skip.
Joculo.
I, I thought I should have you.
1
st. Fay.
Wilt please you daunce, sir?
Joculo.
Indeed, sir, I cannot handle my legges.
2
d. Fay.
O you must needs daunce and sing,
Which if you refuse to doo,
We will pinch you blacke and blew,
And about we goe.
[They all daunce in a ring, and sing as followeth:]
Round about, round about in a fine ring a,
Thus we daunce, thus we daunce, and thus we sing a,
Trip and go, too and fro, over this greene a:
All about, in and out, for our brave queen a, &c.
A VILLAGE POLITICIAN.
I'm a rogue if I do not think I was designed for the helm of state;
I am so full of nimble stratagems that I should have ordered affairs
and carried it against the stream of a faction with as much ease as a
skipper would laver against the wind.
The Goblins
.
In
one of my visits to the village with Master
Simon, he proposed that we should stop at the
inn, which he wanted to show me, as a specimen
of a real country inn, the head quarters of
village
gossip. I had remarked it before, in my
perambulations about the place. It has a deep
old fashioned porch; leading into a large hall,
which serves for a tap room and traveller's room,
having a wide fireplace, with high-backed
settles
on each side; where the wise men of the
village gossip over their ale, and hold their
sessions
during the long winter evenings. The
landlord is an easy indolent fellow, shaped a
little
like one of his own beer barrels, who is apt
to stand gossiping at his door, with his wig on
one side, and his hands in his pockets, whilst his
wife and daughter attend to customers. His
wife, however, is fully competent to manage the
establishment; and, indeed, from long habitude,
rules over all the frequenters of the tap room as
completely as if they were her dependents,
instead
of her patrons. Not a veteran ale bibber
but pays homage to her, having no doubt been
often in her arrears. I have already hinted that
she is on very good terms with Ready Money
Jack. He was a sweetheart of her's in early
life, and has always countenanced the tavern on
her account. Indeed, he is quite the cock of
the walk at the tap room.
As we approached the inn, we heard some
one talk with great volubility, and distinguished
the ominous words, taxes, poor's rates,
and agricultural distress. It proved to be a
thin loquacious fellow, who had got the landlord
pinned up in one corner of the porch, with his
hands in his pockets as usual, listening with an
air of the most vacant acquiescence.
The sight seemed to have a curious effect on
Master Simon, as he squeezed my arm, and,
altering
his course, sheered wide of the porch as
though he had not had any idea of entering.
This evident evasion made me notice the orator
more particularly. He was meagre, but active
in his make, with a long, pale, bilious face; a
black beard, so ill shaven as to bloody his
shirt-collar
,
a feverish eye, and a hat sharpened up at
the sides into a most pragmatical shape. He
had a newspaper in his hand, and seemed to be
commenting on its contents, to the thorough
conviction
of mine host. At the sight of Master
Simon, the landlord was a little flurried, and
began to rub his hands, edge away from his
corner
,
and make several profound publican bows;
while the orator took no other notice of my
companion
than to talk rather louder than before,
and with, as I thought, something of an air of
defiance. Master Simon, however, as I have
before said, sheered off from the porch and
passed
on, pressing my arm within his, and
whispering
as we got by, in a tone of awe and
horror
,
that's a radical! he reads Cobbett!
I endeavoured to get a more particular
account
of him from my companion; but he
seemed unwilling even to talk about him,
assuring
me only in general terms, that he was
a cursed busy fellow, that had a confounded
trick of talking, and was apt to bother one
about the national debt, and such nonsense;
from which I suspected that Master Simon had
been rendered wary of him by some accidental
encounter on the field of argument; for these
radicals are continually roving about in quest of
wordy warfare, and never so happy as when
they can tilt a gentleman logician out of his
saddle.
On subsequent inquiry my suspicions have
been confirmed. I find the radical has but
recently
found his way into the village, where he
threatens to commit fearful devastation with his
doctrines. He has already made two or three
complete converts or new lights; has shaken the
faith of several others; and has grievously
puzzled
the brains of many of the oldest villagers,
who had never thought about politics or scarce
any thing else during their whole lives.
He is lean and meagre, from the constant
restlessness
of mind and body; worrying about with
newspapers and pamphlets in his pockets, which
he is ready to pull out on all occasions. He has
shocked several of the staunchest villagers by
talking lightly of the Squire and his family, and
hinting it would be better the park should be
cut up into small farms and kitchen gardens, or
feed good mutton instead of worthless deer.
He is a great thorn in the side of the Squire,
who is sadly afraid he will introduce politics into
the village, and turn it into an unhappy,
thinking
community. He is a still greater grievance
to Master Simon, who has hitherto been able to
sway the political opinions of the place without
much cost of learning or of logic; but has been
very much puzzled, of late, to weed out the doubts
and heresies already sown by this champion of
reform. Indeed, the latter has taken complete
VOL. II. 14
command at the tap room of the tavern, not so
much because he has convinced, as because he
has out talked all the old established oracles.
The apothecary, with all his philosophy, has
been as naught before him. He has convinced
and converted the landlord, at least a dozen times,
who, however, is liable to be convinced and
converted
the other way by the next person with
whom he talks. It is true, the radical has a
violent
antagonist in the landlady, who is
vehemently
loyal, and thoroughly devoted to the king,
Master Simon, and the Squire. She now and
then comes out upon the reformer, with all the
the fierceness of a cat-a-mountain; and does not
spare her own soft headed husband, for listening
to what she terms such low lived politics.
What makes the good woman the more violent,
is the perfect coolness with which the radical
listens to her attacks; drawing his face up into
a provoking supercilious smile; and when she
has talked herself out of breath, quietly asking
her for a taste of her home-brewed.
The only person that is in any way a match
for this redoubtable politician is Ready Money
Jack Tibbets; who maintains his stand in the
tap room in defiance of the radical and all his
works. Jack is one of the most loyal men in the
country, without being able to reason about the
matter. He has that admirable quality for a
tough arguer, also, that he never knows when
he is beat. He has half a dozen old maxims,
which he advances on all occasions; and though
his antagonist may overturn them never so often,
yet he always brings them anew to the field.
He is like the robber in Ariosto, who, though
his head might be cut off half a hundred times,
yet whipped it on his shoulders again in a
twinkling
,
and returned as sound a man as ever to the
charge.
Whatever does not square with Jack's simple
and obvious creed he sets down for French
politics, for, notwithstanding the peace, he
cannot be persuaded the French are not still
laying plots to ruin the nation and get hold of the
Bank of England. The radical attempted to
overwhelm him one day by a long passage from
a newspaper, but Jack neither reads nor
believes
in newspapers. In reply, he gave him
one of the stanzas which he has by heart from
his favourite, and indeed only author, old
Tusser
,
and which he calls his golden rules:
Leave princes' affairs undescanted on,
And tend to such doings as stand thee upon,
Fear God and offend not the king nor his laws,
And keep thyself out of the magistrate's claws.
When Tibbets had pronounced this with great
emphasis, he pulled out a well-filled leathern
purse; took out a handful of gold and silver,
paid his score at the bar with great punctuality,
returned his money, piece by piece, into his
purse, his purse into his pocket, which he
buttoned
up; and then, giving his cudgel a stout
thump upon the floor, and bidding the
radical
good morning, sir, with the tone of
a man who conceives he has completely done
for his antagonist, he walked with lion-like
gravity
out of the house. Two or three of Jack's
admirers who were present, and were afraid
to take the field themselves, looked upon this
as a perfect triumph, and winked at each other,
when the radical's back was turned. Aye,
aye! said mine host, as soon as the radical
was out of hearing, let old Jack alone, I'll
warrant he'll give him his own.
TRAVELLING.
A citizen, for recreation sake,
To see the country, would a journey take
Some dozen mile, or very little more,
Taking his leave with friends two months before,
With drinking healths, and shaking by the hand,
As he had travail'd to some new-found land.
Doctor Mirrie-Man
, 1609.
The
Squire has lately received another shock
in the saddle, and been almost unseated by his
marplot neighbour, the indefatigable Mr. Faddy,
who rides his jog-trot hobby with equal zeal,
and is so bent upon improving and reforming
the neighbourhood, that the Squire thinks in a
little while it will be scarce worth living in. The
enormity that has just discomposed my worthy
host, is an attempt of the manufacturer to have
a line of coaches established, that shall diverge
from the old route, and pass through the
neighbouring
village. I believe I have mentioned that
the Hall is situated in a retired part of the
country
,
at a distance from any great coach road; in
so much that the arrival of a traveller is apt to
make every one look out of the window, and to
cause some talk among the ale drinkers at the
little inn. I was at a loss, therefore, to account
for the Squire's indignation at a measure
apparently
fraught with convenience and advantage,
until I found that the conveniences of travelling
were among his greatest grievances.
In fact, he rails against stage coaches, post
chaises, and turnpike roads, as serious causes of
the corruption of English rural manners. They
have given facilities, he says, to every hum-drum
citizen to trundle his family about the kingdom,
and have sent the follies and fashions of town
whirling in coach loads to the remotest parts of
the island. The whole country, he says, is
traversed
by these flying cargoes; every by-road is
explored by enterprizing tourists from Cheapside
and the Poultry; and every gentleman's park
and lawns invaded by cockney sketchers of both
sexes, with portable chairs and portfolios for
drawing.
He laments over this as destroying the charm
of privacy, and interrupting the quiet of
country
life; but more especially as affecting the
simplicity of the peasantry, and filling their
heads with half city notions. A great coach
inn, he says, is enough to ruin the manners of
a whole village. It creates a horde of sots and
idlers; makes gapers, and gazers, and
news-mongers
of the common people, and knowing
jockies of the country bumpkins. The Squire
has something of the old feudal feeling. He
looks back with regret to the good old times,
when journeys were only made on horseback,
and the extraordinary difficulties of travelling,
owing to bad roads, bad accommodations, and
highway robbers, seemed to separate each
village
and hamlet from the rest of the world.
The lord of the manor was then a kind of
monarch in the little realm around him. He
held his court in his paternal hall, and was
looked up to with almost as much loyalty and
deference as the king himself. Every
neighbourhood
was a little world within itself; having its
local manners and customs; its local history and
local opinions. The inhabitants were fonder of
their homes, and thought less of wandering. It
was looked upon as an expedition to travel
out of sight of the parish steeple; and a man
that had been to London was a village oracle for
the rest of his life.
What a difference between the mode of
travelling
in those days and at present; at that
time, when a gentlemen went on a distant visit,
he set forth like a knight errant on an
enterprize
;
and every family excursion was a
pageant
.
How splendid and fanciful must one of
those domestic cavalcades have been. When
the beautiful dames were mounted on palfreys
magnificently caparisoned, with embroidered
harness, all tinkling with silver bells; attended
by cavaliers richly attired, on prancing steeds,
and followed by pages and serving men, as we
see them represented in old tapestry. The
gentry
,
VOL. II. 15
as they travelled about in those days, were
like moving pictures. They delighted the eyes
and awakened the admiration of the common
people, and passed before them like superior
beings; and they were so; there was a hardy
and healthful exercise connected with this
equestrian style, that made them generous and
noble.
In his fondness for the old style of travelling
the Squire makes most of his journeys on
horseback
;
though he laments the modern deficiency
of incident on the road, from the want of
fellow
wayfarers, and the rapidity with which every
one else is whirled along in coaches and post
chaises. In the good old times, on the
contrary
,
a cavalier jogged on through bog and mire
from town to town, and hamlet to hamlet,
conversing
with friars and Franklins, and all other
chance companions of the road; beguiling the
way with travellers' tales, which then were truly
wonderful, for every thing beyond one's
neighbourhood
was full of marvel and romance;
stoping
at night at some hostel, where the bush
over the door proclaimed good wine, or a
pretty
hostess made bad wine palatable; meeting at
supper with travellers like himself; discussing
their day's adventures, or listening to the song
or merry story of the host, who was generally a
boon companion, and presided at his own
board; for, according to old Tusser's
Innholder's
Poise:
At meales my friend who vitleth here
And sitteth with his host,
Shall both be sure of better cheere,
And 'scape with lesser cost.
The Squire is fond, too, of stopping at those
inns which may be met with here and there, in
ancient houses of wood and plaister, or
Callimanco
houses, as they are called by antiquaries,
with deep porches, diamond-paned bow
windows
,
and panelled rooms and great fireplaces.
He will prefer them to more spacious and
modern
inns, and will cheerfully put up with bad
cheer and bad accommodations, in the
gratification
of his humour. They give him, he says,
the feeling of old times, insomuch that he
almost
expects in the dusk of the evening to see
some party of weary travellers ride up to the
door, with plumes, and mantles, trunk hose, wide
boots, and long rapiers.
The good Squire's remarks brought to mind
a visit which I once paid to the Tabard Inn,
famous
for being the place of assemblage, from
whence Chaucer's pilgrims set forth for
Canterbury
.
It is in the borough of Southwark, not
far from London bridge, and bears, at present,
the name of the Talbot. It has sadly declined
in dignity since the days of Chaucer, being a
mere rendezvous and packing place of the great
wagons that travel into Kent. The court yard,
which was anciently the mustering place of the
pilgrims previous to their departure, was now
lumbered with huge wagons. Crates, boxes,
hampers and baskets, containing the good things
of town and country, were piled about them;
while, among the straw and litter, the motherly
hens scratched and clucked, with their hungry
broods at their heels. Instead of Chaucer's
motly and splendid throng, I only saw a group
of wagoners and stable boys, enjoying a
circulating
pot of ale; while a long bodied dog sat
by, with head on one side, one ear cocked up,
and wistful gaze, as if waiting for his turn of
the tankard.
Notwithstanding this grievous declension,
however, I was gratified at perceiving that the
present occupants were not unconscious of the
poetical renown of their mansion.
An inscription over the gate-way proclaimed
it to be the inn where Chaucer's pilgrims slept
on the night previous to their departure, and at
the bottom of the yard was a magnificent sign,
representing them in the act of sallying forth.
I was pleased too at noticing, that though the
present inn was comparatively modern, yet
the form of the old inn was preserved. There
were galleries round the yard, as in old times, on
which opened the chambers of the guests. To
these ancient inns have antiquaries ascribed the
present forms of our theatres. Plays were
originally
acted in inn yards.
The guests lolled over the galleries, which
answered to our modern dress circle; the critical
mob clustered in the yard instead of the pit; and
the groups gazing from the garret windows were
no bad representatives of the gods of the shilling
gallery. When, therefore, the drama grew
important
enough to have a house of its own, the
architects took a hint for its construction from
the yard of the ancient Hostel.
I was so well pleased at finding these
remembrances
of Chaucer and his poem, that I took my
dinner in the little parlour of the Talbot. Whilst
it was preparing, I sat by the window musing and
gazing into the court yard, and conjuring up
recollections
of the scenes depicted in such lively
colours by the poet, until by degrees bales, boxes,
and hampers, boys, wagoners, and dogs, faded
from sight, and my fancy peopled the place with
the motly throng of Canterbury pilgrims. The
galleries once more swarmed with idle gazers,
in the rich dresses of Chaucer's time, and the
whole cavalcade seemed to pass before me.
There was the stately knight on sober steed, who
had ridden in Heathenesse, and had foughten
for our faith at Tramissene. And his son, the
young Squire, a lover and a lusty bachelor, with
curled locks and gay embroidery, a bold rider, a
dancer, and a writer of verses, singing and fluting
all day long, and fresh as the month of May.
And his knot beaded yeoman, a bold forester in
green, with horn and baldric and dagger, a mighty
bow in hand, and a sheaf of peacock arrows
shining beneath his belt. And the coy, smiling,
simple nun, with her gray eyes, her small red
mouth, and fair forehead, her coral beads about
her arm, her golden broach with a love motto,
and her pretty oath by Saint Eloy. And the
marchant solemn in speech and high on horse,
with forked beard and Flaunderish bever hat.
And the sleek lusty monk, on berry brown
palfrey
;
his hood fastened with gold pin wrought
with a love knot, his bald head shining like
glass, and his face glistening as though it had
been anointed. And the lean, logical,
sententious
clerke of Oxenforde upon his half-starved
scholar-like horse. And the bowsing sompnour,
red haired miller playing the bag-pipes before
them, and the ancient host of the Tabard, giving
them his farewell God-send to Canterbury.
When I told the Squire of the existence of
this legitimate descendant of the ancient Tabard
Inn, his eyes absolutely glistened with delight.
He determined to hunt it up the very first time
he visited London, and to eat a dinner there, and
drink a cup of mine host's best wine, in memory
of old Chaucer.
The general, who happened to be present,
immediately
begged to be of the party, for he liked
to encourage these long established houses, as
they are apt to have choice old wines.
VOL. II. 16
MAY-DAY.
Now the bright morning star, day's harbinger,
Comes dancing from the east, and leads with her
The flow'ry May, who from her green lap throws
The yellow cowslip and the pale primrose.
Hail bounteous May! that dost inspire
Mirth and youth and warm desire;
Woods and groves are of thy dressing,
Hill and dale doth boast thy blessing.
MILTON.
As I was lying in bed this morning, enjoying
one of those half dreams, half reveries, which
are so pleasant in the country, when the birds are
singing about the window, and the sunbeams
peeping through the curtains, I was roused by
the sound of music. On going down stairs I
found a number of villagers, drest in their
holy-day
clothes, bearing a pole ornamented with
garlands
and ribbands, and accompanied by the
village
band of music under the direction of the
tailor, the pale fellow who plays on the clarionet.
They had all sprigs of hawthorn, or as it is
called
,
the May, in their hats, and had brought
green branches and flowers to decorate the Hall
door and windows. They had come to give
notice
that the May-pole was reared on the green,
and to invite the household to witness the sports.
The Hall, according to custom, became a scene
of hurry and delighted confusion. The servants
were all agog with May and music; and there
was no keeping the tongues or the feet of the
maids quiet, who were anticipating the sports of
the green, and the evening dance.
I repaired to the village at an early hour to
enjoy the merry-making. The morning was
pure and sunny, such as a May-morning is always
described. The fields were white with daisies;
the hawthorn was covered with its fragrant
blossoms
;
the bee hummed about every bank, and
the swallow played high in the air about the
village
steeple. It was one of those days when
we seem to draw in pleasure with the very air
we breathe, and to feel happy we know not why.
Whoever has felt the worth of worthy man, or
has doated on lovely woman, will, on such a day,
call them tenderly to mind, and feel his heart all
alive with long buried recollections.
Before reaching the village I saw the
May-pole
,
towering above the cottages, with its gay
garlands and streamers, and heard the sound of
music. I found that there had been booths set
up near it, for the reception of company, and a
bower of green branches and flowers for the
Queen of May, a fresh rosy-cheeked girl of the
village.
A band of morrice dancers were capering on
the green in their fantastic dresses, jingling with
hawks' bells, with a boy dressed up as Maid
Marian, and the attendant fool rattling his box
to collect contributions from the bystanders.
I noticed, also, the gipsy women, already
plying their mystery in byecorners of the
village
,
reading the hands of the simple country
girls, and no doubt promising them all good
husbands and tribes of children.
The Squire made his appearance in the
course of the morning, attended by the parson,
and was received with loud acclamations. He
mingled among the country people, throughout
the day, giving and receiving pleasure wherever
he went.
The amusements of the day were under the
management of Slingsby, the schoolmaster;
who is not merely lord of misrule in his
school, but likewise master of the revels to the
village. He was bustling about with the
perplexed
and anxious air of a man who has the
oppressive burthen of promoting other people's
merriment upon his mind. He had involved
himself in a dozen scrapes, in consequence of
a politic intrigue; which, by the bye, Master
Simon and the Oxonian were at the bottom of,
which had for object the election of the Queen
of May. He had met with violent opposition
from a faction of ale drinkers, who were in favour
of a bouncing bar maid, the daughter of the
tavern
keeper; but he had been too strongly
backed
not to carry his point; though it shows that
these crowns, like all others, are objects of
great ambition and heart burning. I am told
that Master Simon takes great interest, though
in an underhand way, in the election of these
May-day Queens, and that the chaplet is
generally
secured for some rustic beauty that has
found favour in his eyes.
In the course of the day there were various
games of strength and agility on the green, at
which a knot of village veterans presided, as
judges of the lists. Among these I perceived
that Ready Money Jack took the lead, looking
with a learned and critical eye on the merits of
the different candidates. His hat was drawn a
little on one side over his brow, which gave
additional effect to his decisions; and though he
was very laconic and sometimes merely expressed
himself by a nod; yet it was evident that his
opinions far outweighed those of the most
loquacious.
Young Jack Tibbets was the hero of the day,
and carried off most of the prizes; though in
some of the feats of agility he was rivalled by the
prodigal son, who appeared much in his
element on this occasion; but his most
formidable
competitor was the notorious gipsy, the
redoubtable
Star-light Tom. I was rejoiced at
having an opportunity of seeing this minion
of the moon in broad daylight. I found him
to be a tall, swarthy, good-looking fellow, with
a lofty, air something like I have seen in an Indian
chieftain, and with a certain lounging, easy, and
almost graceful carriage, which I have often
remarked
in beings of the lazaroni order, that
lead an idle loitering life, and have a
gentlemanlike
contempt of labour.
Master Simon and the general reconnoitred
the ground together, indulging a vast deal of
harmless raking among the buxom country girls.
Master Simon would give some of them a kiss
on meeting with them, and would ask after their
sisters, for he is acquainted with most of the
farmers'
families. Sometimes he would whisper
and affect to talk mischievously with them, and
if bantered on the subject, would turn it off with
a laugh; though it was evident he liked to be
suspected of being a gay Lothario amongst
them.
He had much to say to the farmers about their
farms, and seemed to know all their horses by
name. There was an old fellow with a round
ruddy face and a night cap under his hat, who
is the wit of the village, and who took several
occasions to crack a joke with Master Simon in
the hearing of his companions, to whom he
would turn and wink hard when Master Simon
had passed.
The harmony of the day, however, had nearly
at one time been interrupted by the appearance
of the radical on the ground with two or three
of his disciples. He soon got engaged in
argument
in the very thick of the throng, above
which I could hear his voice, and now and then
see his meagre hand, half a mile out of the
sleeve, elevated in the air in violent gesticulation,
and flourishing a pamphlet by way of truncheon.
He was decrying these idle nonsensical
amusements
in times of public distress, when it was
every one's business to think of other matters,
and to be miserable. The honest village
logicians
could make no stand against him, especially
as he was seconded by his proselytes, when, to
their great joy, Master Simon and the general
got embroiled in the discussion. I saw that the
former rather entered into it with an ill grace,
from which I was persuaded that he must before
this have had a brush with the radical; but the
general was too loyal to suffer such talk in his
hearing, and thought, no doubt, that a look and
a word from a gentleman would be sufficient to
shut up so shabby an orator. The latter,
however
,
was no respecter of persons, but rather
seemed to exult in having such important
antagonists
.
He talked with greater volubility than
ever, and soon drowned them in declamation on
the subject of taxes, poor's rates, and the
national
debt. Master Simon endeavoured to
brush along in his usual excursive manner, which
had always answered amazingly well with the
villagers; but the radical was one of those
pestilent
fellows that pin a man down to facts, and,
indeed, he had two or three pamphlets in his
VOL. II. 17
pocket to support every thing he advanced by
printed documents. In a word, the two worthies
from the Hall were completely dumb-founded,
and this too in the presence of several of Master
Simon's staunch admirers; who had always
looked up to him as infallible. I do not know
how he and the general would have managed to
draw their forces decently from the field, had
there not been a match of grinning through a
horse-collar announced; whereupon the radical
retired with great expression of contempt; and as
soon as his back was turned, the argument was
carried against him all hollow.
In the latter part of the day the ladies from
the Hall paid a visit to the green. The fair
Julia made her appearance, leaning on her
lover's
arm; and looking extremely pale and
interesting. As she is a great favourite in
the village, where she has been known from
childhood, and as her late accident had been
much talked about, the sight of her caused very
manifest delight, and some of the old women of
the village blessed her sweet face as she passed.
While they were walking about I noticed the
little schoolmaster in earnest conversation with
the young girl that represented the Queen of
May, evidently endeavouring to spirit her up to
some formidable undertaking. At length, as the
party from the Hall approached her bower, she
came forth, faltering at every step, until she
reached the spot where the fair Julia stood
between
her lover and Lady Lillycraft. The
little
queen then took the chaplet of flowers from
her head, and attempted to put it on that of the
bride elect; but the confusion of both was so
great that the wreath would have fallen to the
ground, had not the officer caught it, and,
laughing, placed it upon the blushing brows of
his mistress. There was something charming
in the very embarrassment of these two young
creatures, both so beautiful, yet so different in
their kinds of beauty. Master Simon told me
afterwards, that the Queen of May was to have
spoken a few verses which the schoolmaster had
written for her; but that she had neither wit to
understand, nor memory to recollect them.
Besides, added he, between you and I, she
murders the king's English abominably; so
she has acted the part of a wise woman, in
holding her tongue and trusting to her pretty
face.
Among the other characters from the Hall
was Mrs. Hannah, my Lady Lillycraft's
gentlewoman
;
to my surprise she was escorted by
old Christy, the huntsman, and followed by his
ghost of a grayhound; but I find they are very
old acquaintances, being drawn together by
some sympathy of disposition. Mrs. Hannah
moved about with starched dignity among the
rustics, who drew back from her with more awe
than they did from her mistress. Her mouth
seemed shut as with a clasp; excepting that I
now and then heard the word fellows, escape
from between her lips, as she got accidentally
jostled in the crowd.
But there was one other heart present that did
not enter into the merriment of the scene; which
was that of the simple Phoebe Wilkins, the
housekeeper's niece. The poor girl has
continued
to pine and whine for some time past,
in consequence of the obstinate coldness of her
lover; never was a little flirtation more severely
punished. She appeared this day on the green,
gallanted by a smart servant out of livery, and
had evidently resolved to try the hazardous
experiment
of awakening the jealousy of her lover.
She was dressed out in her very best; affected
an air of great gayety, talked loud and girlishly,
and laughed when there was nothing to laugh at.
There was, however, an aching heavy heart in
the poor baggage's bosom, under all this levity.
I saw her eye, in the midst of her mirth, turn
with an anxious expression every now and then
in quest of her reckless swain, and her cheek
turned pale, and her fictitious gayety vanished,
on his paying his rustic homage to the little
May-day Queen.
My attention was now diverted by a fresh stir
and bustle. Music was heard at a distance;
a banner was seen advancing up the road,
preceded
by a rustic band playing something like
a march, and followed by a sturdy throng, the
chivalry of a neighbouring and rival village.
No sooner had they reached the green, than they
challenged the heroes of the day to new trials of
strength and activity. Several gymnastic
contests
ensued for the honour of the respective
villages. In the course of these exercises young
Tibbets and the champion of the adverse party
had an obstinate match at wrestling. They
tugged, and strained, and panted, without either
getting the mastery, until both came to the
ground, and rolled upon the green.
Just then the disconsolate Phoebe came by.
She saw her recreant lover, in fierce contest, as
she thought, and in danger. In a moment, pride,
pique, and coquetry were forgotten; she darted
into the ring, seized upon the rival champion by
the hair, and was on the point of wreaking on
him her puny vengeance, when a buxom,
strapping
country lass, the sweetheart of the prostrate
swain, pounced upon her like a hawk, and would
have stripped her of her fine plumage in an
instant
,
had she not been seized in her turn.
A complete tumult ensued. The chivalry of
the two villages became embroiled. Blows
began to be dealt, and sticks to be flourished.
Phoebe was carried off from the field in hysterics.
In vain did the sages of the village interfere.
I saw the sententious apothecary tumbled into
the dirt as he was endeavouring to spread the oil
of wisdom over this tempestuous sea of passion.
Slingsby, who is a great lover of peace, went
into the midst of the throng, as marshal of the
day, to put an end to the commotion, but was
speedily rent in twain, and came out with his
garment hanging in two strips from his
shoulders
;
while the prodigal son dashed in with fury
to revenge the insult which his patron had
sustained
.
The tumult thickened. I caught glimpses of
the jockey cap of old Christy, like the helmet of
a chieftain, bobbing about in the midst of the
scuffle; while Mistress Hannah, separated from
her doughty protector, was squalling and striking
at right and left with a faded parasol, being
tossed
and tousled about by the crowd, in such wise
as was never maiden gentlewoman before.
At length I beheld old Ready Money Jack
making his way into the very thickest of the
throng; tearing it, as it were, apart, and
enforcing
peace
vi et armis
. It was surprising to see
the sudden quiet that ensued. The storm settled
down into tranquillity. The parties having no
real grounds of hostility, became readily pacified,
and in fact were a little at a loss to know why
they had got by the ears. The schoolmaster
was pinned together again by his wife; Mrs.
Hannah drew on one side, to plume her rumpled
feathers, and then swept back again to the Hall,
ten times more bitter against mankind than ever.
The Tibbets' family alone seemed slow in
recovering
from the agitation of the scene. Young
Jack was evidently very much moved by the
heroism
of the unlucky Phoebe. His mother,
who had been summoned to the field of action
by news of the affray, was in a sad panic; and
had need of all her management to keep him
from following his mistress and having a perfect
reconciliation.
What heightened the alarm and perplexity of
the good managing dame was, that the matter
had aroused the slow apprehension of old
Ready Money himself, who was very much
struck by the intrepid interference of so pretty
and delicate a girl, and was sadly puzzled to
understand
the meaning of the violent agitation in
his family.
When all this came to the ears of the Squire,
he was grievously scandalized that his May-day
fte should have been disgraced by such a brawl.
He ordered Phoebe to appear before him, but the
girl was so frightened and distressed that she
appeared sobbing and trembling, and could make
no answer to his questions.
Lady Lillycraft, who had understood there
was an affair of the heart at the bottom of this
distress, immediately took the girl into great
favour and protection, and made her peace with
the Squire.
This was the only thing that disturbed the
harmony
of the day, if we except the discomfiture
of Master Simon and the general by the radical.
VOL. II. 18
Upon the whole, therefore, the Squire had very
fair reason to be satisfied that he had rode his
hobby throughout the day without any other
molestation.
The reader, learned in these matters, will
perceive
that all this was but a faint shadow of the
once gay and fanciful rites of May. The
peasantry
have lost the proper feeling for these rites,
and have grown almost as strange to them, as the
boors of La Mancha were to the customs of
chivalry in the days of the valorous Don
Quixote
.
Indeed, I considered it a proof of the
discretion
with which the Squire rides his Hobby,
that he had not pushed the thing any farther,
nor attempted to revive many obsolete usages of
the day, which in the present matter-of-fact
times would appear affected and absurd. I must
say, however, though I do it under the rose, that
the general brawl in which this festival had
nearly
terminated, has made me doubt whether these
rural customs of the good old times, were
always so very loving and innocent as we are
apt to fancy them; and whether the peasantry
in those times were really so Arcadian as they
have been fondly represented. I begin to fear
Those days were never; airy dreams
Sat for the picture; and the poet's hand,
Imparting substance to an empty shade,
Impos'd a gay delirium for a truth.
Grant it; I still must envy them an age
That favoured such a dream.
THE MANUSCRIPT.
Yesterday
was a day of quiet and repose
after the bustle of May-day. During the
morning
I joined the ladies in a small sitting room,
the windows of which came down to the floor,
and opened upon a terrace of the garden, which
was set out with delicate shrubs and flowers.
The soft sunshine that fell into the room through
the branches of trees that overhung the
windows
;
the sweet smell of the flowers; and the
singing of the birds, seemed to produce a
pleasing
yet calming effect on the whole party, for
some time elapsed without any one speaking.
Lady Lillycraft and Miss Templeton were
sitting by an elegant work table, near one of the
windows, occupied with some pretty lady-like
work. The captain was on a stool at his
mistress'
feet, looking over some music, and poor
Phoebe Wilkins, who has always been a kind of
pet among the ladies, but who has risen vastly in
favour with Lady Lillycraft, in consequence of
some tender confessions, sat in one corner, with
swoln eyes; working pensively at some of the
fair Julia's wedding ornaments. The silence
was interrupted by her ladyship, who suddenly
proposed a task to the captain. I am in your
debt, said she, for that tale you read to us the
other day; I will now furnish one in return, if
you'll read it; and it is just suited to this sweet
May morning, for it is all about love!
The proposition seemed to delight every one
present. The captain smiled assent. Her
ladyship
rang for her page in green, and
despatched
him to her room for the manuscript.
As the captain, said she, gave us an
account
of the author of his story, it is but right
I should give one of mine. It was written by
the parson of the parish where I reside; a
thin, elderly man, of a delicate constitution, but
positively one of the most charming men that
ever lived. He lost his wife a few years since,
one of the sweetest women you ever saw. He
has two sons, whom he educates himself, both
of whom already write delightful poetry. This
parsonage is a lovely place, close by the church;
all overrun with ivy and honeysuckles; with
the sweetest flower garden about it; for you
know our country clergymen are almost always
fond of flowers, and make their parsonages
perfect
pictures.
His living is a very good one; and he is
very much beloved, and does a great deal of
good in the neighbourhood, and among the poor.
And then such sermons as he preaches! Oh, if
you could only hear one taken from a text in
Solomon's Songs, all about love and
matrimony
one
of the sweetest things you ever heard.
He preaches it at least once a year, in spring
time, for he knows I am fond of it.
He always dines with me on Sundays, and
often brings me some of the sweetest pieces of
poetry, all about the pleasures of melancholy,
and such subjects; that make me cry so, you
can't think.
I wish he would publish; I think he has
some things as sweet as any thing in Moore or
Lord Byron.
He fell into very ill health some time ago,
and was advised to go to the continent, and I
gave him no peace until he went, and promised
to take care of his two boys until he returned.
He was gone for above a year, and was quite
restored. When he came back, he sent me the
tale I'm going to show youoh, here it is, said
she, as the page put in her hands a beautiful
box of satin wood. She unlocked it, and from
among several parcels of notes on embossed
paper
cards of charades, and copies of verses,
she drew out a crimson velvet case, that smelt
very much of perfumes.
From this she took a manuscript daintily
written
on gilt-edged vellum paper, and stitched
with a light blue ribband. This she handed to
the captain, who read the following tale, which
I have procured for the satisfaction of the reader.
ANNETTE DELARBRE.
Oh, wander no more on the storm beaten shore,
Nor heed the loud whistling gale;
Nor strain thy sad eye to where sea meets with sky,
In search of thy true lover's sail.
Anon
.
In
the course of a tour that I once made in
Lower Normandy, I remained for a day or two
at the old town of Honfleur, which stands near
the mouth of the Seine. It was the time of a fte,
and all the world was thronging in the evening
to dance at the fair held before the chapel of our
Lady of Grace. As I like all kinds of innocent
merry making I joined the throng.
The chapel is situated on the top of a high
hill, or promontory; from whence its bell may
be heard at a distance by the mariner at night.
It is said to have given the name to the port of
of Havre de Grace; which lies directly opposite,
on the other side of the Seine. The road up to
the chapel went in a zig-zag course along the
brow of the steep coast; it was shaded by trees,
from between which I had beautiful peeps at
the ancient towers of Honfleur below; the
varied
scenery of the opposite shore; the white
buildings of Havre in the distance; and the
wide sea beyond. The road was enlivened by
groups of peasant girls, in their bright crimson
dresses, and tall caps; and I found all the flower
of the neighbourhood assembled on the green
that crowns the summit of the hill.
The chapel of Notre Dame de Grace is a
favourite resort of the inhabitants of Honfleur
and its vicinity, both for pleasure and devotion.
At this little chapel prayers are put up by the
mariners of the port previous to their voyages,
and by their friends during their absence; and
votive offerings are hung about its walls, in
fulfilment
of vows made during times of shipwreck
and disaster. The chapel is surrounded by
trees. Over the portal is an image of the virgin
VOL. II. 19
and child, with an inscription which struck me
as being quite poetical:
Etoile de la mer, priez pour nous!
(Star of the sea pray for us.)
On a level spot near the chapel, under a grove
of noble trees, the populace dance on fine
summer
evenings; and here are held frequent fairs
and ftes, which assemble all the rustic beauty
of the loveliest parts of Lower Normandy. The
present was an occasion of the kind. Booths
and tents were erected among the trees; there
were the usual displays of finery to tempt the
rural coquette; of wonderful shows to entice
the curious; mountebanks were exerting their
eloquence; jugglers and fortune-tellers
astonishing
the credulous; while whole rows of
grotesque
saints, in wood and wax-work, were
offered
for the purchase of the pious.
The fte had assembled in one view all the
picturesque costumes of the Pays D'Ange, and
the Cot de Caux. I beheld tall stately caps and
trim boddices, according to fashions which have
been handed down from mother to daughter for
centuries; the exact counterparts of those worn
in the time of the Conqueror, and which
surprised
me by their faithful resemblance to those
which I had seen in the old pictures of
Froissart's
Chronicles, and in the paintings of
illuminated
manuscripts. Any one, also, that has been
in Lower Normandy, must have remarked the
beauty of the peasantry; and that air of native
elegance which prevails among them. It is to
this country, undoubtedly, that the English owe
their good looks. It was from hence that the
bright carnation, the fine blue eye, the light
auburn
hair, passed over to England in the train
of the Conqueror, and filled the land with beauty.
The scene before me was perfectly
enchanting
.
The assemblage of so many fresh and
blooming faces; the gay groups in fanciful
dresses; some dancing on the green; others
strolling about, or seated on the grass; the fine
clumps of trees in the foreground, bordering the
brow of this airy height; and the broad green
sea, sleeping in summer tranquillity in the
distance
.
Whilst I was regarding this animated picture,
I was struck with the appearance of a beautiful
girl, who passed through the crowd, without
seeming to take any interest in their amusements.
She was slender and delicate in her form; she
had not the bloom upon her cheek that is usual
among the peasantry of Normandy; and her
blue eyes had a singular and melancholy
expression
.
She was accompanied by a venerable
looking man, whom I presumed to be er father.
There was a whisper among the bystanders, and
a wistful look after her as she passed; the young
men touched their hats, and some of the children
followed her at a little distance, watching her
movements. She approached the edge of the
hill, where there is a little platform, from whence
the people of Honfleur look out for the approach
of vessels. Here she stood for some time, gazing
on the sea, and waving her handkerchief, though
there was nothing to be seen but two or three
fishing boats, far below, like mere specks on the
bosom of the distant ocean.
These circumstances excited my curiosity, and
I made some inquiries about her, which were
answered with readiness and intelligence by a
priest of the neighbouring chapel. Our
conversation
drew together several of the bystanders,
each of whom had something to communicate,
and from them all I gathered the following
particulars
:
Annette Delarbre was the only daughter of
one of the higher order of farmers, or small
proprietors
,
as they are called, who lived at Pont
L'Eveque, a pleasant village, not far from
Honfleur
,
in that rich pastoral part of Lower
Normandy
called the Pays D'Ange. Annette was
the pride and delight of her parents, and was
brought up with the fondest indulgence. She
was gay, tender, petulant, and susceptible. All
her feelings were quick and ardent; and having
never experienced contradiction or restraint, she
was little practised in self-control. Nothing but
the native goodness of her heart kept her from
running continually into error.
Even while a child, her susceptibility was
evinced in an attachment which she formed to a
playmate, Eugene La Forgue, the only son of a
widow who lived in the neighbourhood. Their
childish love was an epitome of maturer passion;
it had its caprices, and jealousies, and quarrels,
and reconciliations. It was assuming something
of a graver character as Annette entered her
fifteenth
,
and Eugene his nineteenth year, when
he was suddenly carried off to the army by the
conscription. It was a heavy blow to his
widowed
mother, for he was her only pride and
comfort
;
but it was one of those sudden
bereavements
which mothers were perpetually doomed
to feel in France, during the time that continual
and bloody wars were incessantly draining her
youth. It was a temporary affliction also to
Annette
,
to lose her lover. With tender embraces,
half childish, half womanish, she parted from
him. The tears streamed from her blue eyes as
she bound a long braid of her fair hair round his
wrist; but the smiles still broke through; for
she was yet too young to feel how serious a thing
is separation, and how many chances there are,
when parting in this wide world, against our ever
meeting again.
Weeks, months, years flew by. Annette
increased
in beauty as she increased in years; and
was the reigning belle of the neighbourhood. Her
time passed innocently and happily. Her father
was a man of some consequence in the rural
community, and his house was the resort of the
gayest of the village. Annette held a kind of rural
court; she was always surrounded by
companions
of her own age, among whom she shone
unrivalled. Much of their time was past in
making lace, the prevalent manufacture of the
neighbourhood. As they sat at this delicate and
feminine labour, the merry tale and sprightly
song went round; none laughed with a lighter
heart than Annette; and if she sang, her voice
was perfect melody. Their evenings were
enlivened
by the dance, or by those pleasant social
games so prevalent among the French; and
when she appeared at the village ball on Sunday
evenings, she was the theme of universal
admiration
.
As she was a rural heiress she did not want
for suitors. Many advantageous offers were
made her, but she refused them all. She
laughed
at the pretended pangs of her admirers, and
triumphed over them with the caprice of
buoyant
youth and conscious beauty. With all her
apparent levity, however, could any one have
read the story of her heart, they might have
traced
in it some fond remembrance of her early
playmate; not so deeply graven as to be painful;
but too deep to be easily obliterated; and they
might have noticed, amidst all her gayety, the
tenderness that marked her manner towards the
mother of Eugene. She would often steal away
from her youthful companions and their
amusements
,
to pass whole days with the good widow;
listening to her fond talk about her boy; and
blushing with secret pleasure when his letters
were read, at finding herself a constant theme
of recollection and inquiry.
At length the sudden return of peace, which
sent many a warrior to his native cottage, brought
back Eugene, a young sunburnt soldier to the
village. I need not say how rapturously his
return
was greeted by his mother; who saw in
him the pride and staff of her old age. He had
risen in the service by his merit, but brought
away little from the wars excepting a
soldier-like
air, a gallant name, and a scar across the
forehead. He brought back, however, a nature
unspoiled by the camp. He was frank, open,
generous, and ardent. His heart was quick and
kind in its impulses, and was perhaps a little
softer from having suffered; it was full of
tenderness
for Annette. He had received frequent
accounts of her from his mother, and the
mention
of her kindness to his lonely parent, had
rendered her doubly dear to him. He had been
wounded; he had been a prisoner; he had been
in various troubles; but he had always preserved
the braid of her hair which she had bound round
his arm. It had been a kind of talisman to
him; when wounded and in prison, he had many
VOL. II. 20
a time looked upon it, as he lay on the hard
ground; and the thought that he might one day
see Annette again, and the fair fields about his
native village, had cheered his heart, and enabled
him to bear up against every hardship.
He had left Annette almost a child; he found
her a blooming woman. If he had loved her
before, he now adored her. Annette was equally
struck with the improvement which time had
made in her lover. She noticed, with secret
admiration
,
his superiority to the other young men
of the village; the frank, lofty, military air that
distinguished him from all the rest at their rural
gatherings. The more she saw of him, the more
her light playful fondness of former years
deepened
into ardent and powerful affection. But
Annette was a rural belle. She had tasted the
sweets of dominion; and had been rendered
wilful and capricious by constant indulgence at
home and admiration abroad. She was
conscious
of her power over Eugene, and delighted
in exercising it. She sometimes treated him
with petulant caprice, enjoying the pain which
she inflicted by her frowns, from the idea how
soon she would chace it away again by her
smiles. She took a pleasure in alarming his
fears, by affecting a temporary preference to some
one or other of his rivals; and then would
delight
in allaying them by an ample measure of
returning kindness. Perhaps there was some
degree of vanity gratified by all this; it might be
a matter of triumph to show her absolute power
over the young soldier, who was the universal
object of female admiration. Eugene, however,
was of too serious and ardent a nature to be
trifled with. He loved too fervently not to be
filled with doubt. He saw Annette surrounded
by admirers, and full of animation; the gayest
among the gay at all their rural festivities;
and apparently most gay when he was most
dejected, Every one saw through this caprice,
but himself; every one saw that in reality she
doated on him; but Eugene alone suspected the
sincerity of her affection. For some time he
bore this coquetry with secret impatience and
distrust; but his feelings grew sore and irritable,
and overcame his self command. A slight
misunderstanding
took place; a quarrel ensued.
Annette, unaccustomed to be thwarted and
contradicted
,
and full of the insolence of youthful
beauty, assumed an air of disdain. She refused
all explanations to her lover, and they parted in
anger. That very evening Eugene saw her full
of gayety, dancing with one of his rivals; and
as her eye caught his, his fixed on her with
unfeigned
distress, it sparkled with more than usual
vivacity. It was a finishing blow to his hopes,
already so much impaired by secret distrust.
Pride and resentment both struggled in his breast;
and seemed to rouse his spirit to all its wonted
energy. He retired from her presence with
the hasty determination never to see her again.
A woman is more considerate in affairs of
love than man; because love is more the study
and business of her life. Annette soon repented
of her indiscretion. She felt that she had used
her lover unkindly; she felt that she had trifled
with his sincere and generous natureand then
he looked so handsome when he parted after
their quarrel, his fine features lighted up by
indignation
.
She had intended making up with him
at the evening dance, but his sudden departure
prevented her. She now promised herself that
when next they met, she would amply repay
him by the sweets of a perfect reconciliation,
and that thenceforward she would nevernever
tease him more!
That promise was not to be fulfilled. Day
after day passed; but Eugene did not make his
appearance. Sunday evening came, the usual
time when all the gayety of the village
assembled
,
but Eugene was not there. She inquired
after him: he had left the village. She now
became alarmed; and forgetting all coyness and
affected indifference, called on Eugene's mother
for an explanation. She found her full of
affliction
,
and learnt with surprise and consternation
that Eugene had gone to sea.
While his feelings were yet smarting with
her affected disdain, and his heart a prey to
alternate
indignation and despair, he had suddenly
embraced an invitation which had repeatedly
been made him by a relative, who was fitting
out a ship from the port of Honfleur, and who
wished him to be the companion of his voyage.
Absence appeared to him the only cure for his
unlucky passion; and in the temporary
transports
of his feelings there was something
gratifying
in the idea of having half the world
intervene
between them. The hurry necessary for
his departure left no time for cool reflection; it
rendered him deaf to the remonstrances of his
afflicted mother. He hastened to Honfleur just
in time to make the needful preparations for the
voyage; and the first news that Annette received
of this sudden determination, was a letter
delivered
by his mother, returning her pledges of
affection, particularly the long treasured braid
of her hair; and bidding her a last farewell, in
terms more full of sorrow and tenderness than
upbraiding.
This was the first stroke of real anguish that
Annette had ever received, and it overcame her.
The vivacity of her spirits were apt to hurry her
to extremes; she for a time gave way to
ungovernable
transports of affliction and remorse, and
discovered by her violent exclamations the real
ardour of her affection. The thought occurred
to her that the ship might not yet have sailed;
she seized on the hope with eagerness, and
hastened
with her father to Honfleur. The ship
had sailed that very morning. From the heights
above the town she saw it lessening to a speck
on the broad bosom of the ocean, and before
evening the white sail had faded from her sight.
She turned, full of anguish, to the neighbouring
chapel of our Lady of Grace, and throwing
herself on the pavement, poured out prayers and
tears for the safe return of her lover.
When she returned home the cheerfulness of
her spirits was at an end. She looked back with
remorse and self upbraiding at her past caprices;
she turned with distaste from the adulation of
her admirers, and had no longer any relish for
the amusements of the village. With
humiliation
and diffidence she sought the widowed
mother
of Eugene; but was received by her with
an overflowing heart; for she only beheld in her
one who could sympathize in her doating
fondness
for her son. It seemed some alleviation of
her remorse, to sit by the mother all day; to
study her wants; to beguile her heavy hours;
to hang about her with the caressing endearments
of a daughter; and to seek by every means, if
possible
,
to supply the place of the son, whom she
reproached herself with having driven away.
In the mean time the ship made a prosperous
voyage to her destined port. Eugene's mother
received a letter from him, in which he lamented
the precipitancy of his departure. The voyage
had given him time for sober reflection. If
Annette
had been unkind to him, he ought not to
have forgotten what was due to his mother, who
was now advanced in years. He accused
himself
of selfishness in only listening to the
suggestions
of his own inconsiderate passions. He
promised to return with the ship; to make his
mind up to his disappointment; and to think of
nothing but making his mother happy. And
when he does return, said Annette, clasping her
hands with transport, it shall not be my fault
if he ever leaves us again!
The time approached for the ship's return.
She was daily expected, when the weather
became
dreadfully tempestuous. Day after day
brought news of vessels foundered or driven on
shore, and the sea coast was strewed with
wrecks. Intelligence was received of the looked
for ship having been seen dismasted in a violent
storm, and the greatest fears were entertained for
her safety.
Annette never left the side of Eugene's
mother
.
She watched every change of her
countenance
with painful solicitude, and endeavoured
to cheer her with hopes, while her own mind
was racked by anxiety. She tasked her efforts
to be gay; but it was a forced and unnatural
gayety; a sigh from the mother would
completely
check it; and when she could no longer
restrain the rising tears, she would hurry away
and pour out her agony in secret.
Every anxious look; every anxious inquiry of
the mother, whenever a door opened, or a strange
VOL. II. 21
face appeared, was an arrow to her soul. She
considered every disappointment as a pang of her
own infliction; and her heart sickened under the
care-worn expression of the maternal eye. At
length this suspense became insupportable. She
left the village and hastened to Honfleur, hoping
every hour, every moment, to receive some tidings
of her lover. She paced the pier, and wearied
the seamen of the port with her inquiries. She
made a daily pilgrimage to the chapel of our
Lady of Grace; hung votive garlands on the
wall; and passed hours either kneeling before
the altar, or looking out from the brow of the
hill upon the angry sea.
At length word was brought that the long
wished for vessel was in sight. She was seen
standing into the mouth of the Seine, shattered
and crippled, bearing marks of having been sadly
tempest tost. There was a general joy diffused
by her return, and there was not a brighter eye
nor a lighter heart than Annette's in the little
port of Honfleur. The ship came to anchor in
the river, and shortly after a boat put off for the
shore. The populace crowded down to the
pier head to welcome it. Annette stood
blushing
,
and smiling, and trembling, and weeping;
for a thousand painfully pleasing emotions
agitated
her breast, at the thoughts of the meeting
and the reconciliation that was about to take
place. Her heart throbbed to pour itself out
and atone to her gallant lover for all its errors.
Her agitation increased as the boat drew near;
until it became distressing. At one moment
she placed herself in a conspicuous place, where
she might at once catch his view, and surprize
him by her welcome; the next moment she
shrunk among the throng, trembling, and faint,
and gasping with her emotions.
It was almost a relief to her when she
perceived
that her lover was not in the boat; she
presumed that he had remained on board to
prepare
for his return home, and she felt as if the
delay would enable her to gather more
self-possession
for the meeting. As the boat was
nearing
the shore there were a thousand inquiries
made and laconic answers returned. At length
Annette heard some one inquire after her lover.
Her heart palpitated: there was a moment's
pause: the reply was brief but awful. He had
been washed from the deck with two of the
crew in the midst of a stormy night, when it
was impossible to render any assistance. A
piercing shriek broke from among the crowd,
and Annette had nearly fallen into the waves.
The sudden revulsion of feelings after such
wearing anxiety was too much for her frame.
She was carried home senseless. Her life was
for some time despaired of, and it was months
before she recovered her health; but she never
had perfectly recovered her mind: it still
remained
unsettled with respect to her lover's
fate.
The subject, continued my informer, is
never mentioned in her hearing; but she
sometimes
speaks of it, and it seems as though there
were some vague train of impressions in her
mind, in which hope and fear are strangely
mingled, some imperfect idea of his shipwreck,
and yet some expectation of his return.
Her parents have tried every means to cheer
her up, and to banish these gloomy images from
her thoughts. They assemble round her the
young companions in whose society she used to
delight; and they will work, and chat, and sing,
and laugh as formerly; but she will sit silently
among them, and will sometimes weep in the
midst of their gayety; and if spoken to will
make no reply, but look up with streaming eyes
and sing a dismal little song which she has learnt
somewhere, about a shipwreck. It makes every
one's heart ache to see her in this way; for she
used to be the happiest creature in the village.
She passes the greater part of the time with
Eugene's mother, whose only consolation is her
society, and who doats on her with a mother's
tenderness. She is the only one that has perfect
influence over Annette in every mood. The
poor girl seems, as formerly, to make an effort to
be cheerful in her company; but will sometimes
gaze upon her with the most piteous look, and
then put back her cap, and kiss her gray hairs,
and fall on her neck and weep.
She is not always melancholy, however;
she has occasional intervals when she will be
bright and animated for days together; but there
is a degree of wildness attending these fits of
gayety, that prevents their yielding any
encouragement
to her friends. At such times she will
arrange her room, which is all covered with
pictures
of ships, and legends of saints; and will
wreath a white chaplet, as if for a wedding, and
prepare wedding ornaments. She will listen
anxiously at the door, and look frequently at the
window, as if expecting some one's arrival. It
is supposed that at such times she is looking for
her lover's return; but as no one touches upon
the theme, or mentions his name in her presence,
the current of her thoughts are for the most part
merely conjecture.
Now and then she will make a pilgrimage
to the chapel of Notre Dame de Grace; where
she will pray for hours at the altar, and decorate
the images with wreaths that she has woven; or
will wave her handkerchief from the terrace,
as you have seen, if there is any vessel to be
seen in the distance.
Nearly two years, he informed me, had
now elapsed, without effacing from her mind
this singular taint of insanity; still her friends
hoped it might gradually wear away. They
had at one time removed her to a distant part of
the country, in hopes that absence from the scenes
connected with her story might have a salutary
effect; but, when her periodical melancholy
returned
she became more restless and wretched
than usual, and, privately escaping from her
friends, set out on foot, without knowing the
road, on one of her pilgrimages to the chapel.
This little story entirely drew my attention
from the gay scene of the fte, and fixed it upon
the beautiful Annette. While she was yet
standing
on the terrace the vesper bell was rung from
the neighbouring chapel. She listened for a
moment
,
and then, drawing a small rosary from her
bosom, walked in that direction. Several of the
peasantry followed her in silence; and I felt too
much interested not to do the same.
The chapel, as I said before, is in the midst of
a grove on the high promontory. The inside is
hung round with miniature ships, and rude
paintings
of wrecks and perils at sea, and providential
deliverances; the votive offerings of captains and
crews that have been saved. On entering,
Annette
paused for a moment before a picture of the
virgin; which I observed had recently been
decorated
with a wreath of artificial flowers. When
she reached the middle of the chapel she knelt
down, and those who followed her involuntarily
did the same at a little distance. The evening
sun shone softly through the chequered grove into
one window of the chapel. A perfect stillness
reigned within; and this stillness was the more
impressive contrasted with the distant sound of
music and merriment of the fair.
I could not take my eyes off from the poor
suppliant. Her lips moved as she told her beads;
but her prayers were breathed in silence. It
might have been mere fancy excited by the scene,
that, as she raised her eyes to heaven, I thought
they had an expression truly seraphic; but I am
easily affected by female beauty, and there was
something in this mixture of love, devotion, and
partial insanity, that was inexpressibly
touching
.
As the poor girl left the chapel there was a
sweet serenity in her looks, and I was told that
she would now return home, and in all
probability
be calm and cheerful for days and even
weeks; in which time it was supposed that hope
predominated in her mental malady; and that
when the dark side of her mind, as her friends
called it, was about to turn up, it would be known
by her neglecting her distaff or her lace; singing
plaintive songs, and weeping in silence.
She passed on from the chapel without
noticing
the fte, but smiling and speaking to many
as she passed. I followed her with my eye as
she descended the winding road towards
Honfleur
,
leaning on her father's arm. Heaven,
thought I, has ever its store of balms for the
hurt mind and wounded spirit, and may in time
raise up this broken flower to be once more the
pride and joy of the valley. The very delusion
VOL. II. 22
in which the poor girl walks, may be one of
those mists kindly diffused by Providence over
the regions of thought, when they become too
fruitful of misery. The veil may gradually be
raised which obscures the horizon of her mind,
as she is enabled steadily and calmly to
contemplate
the sorrows at present hidden in mercy
from her view.
[ANNETTE DELARBRE] PART II.
On
my return from Paris, about a year
afterwards
,
I turned off from the beaten route at
Rouen, to revisit some of the most striking scenes
of Lower Normandy. Having passed through
the lovely country of the Pays D'Ange, I
reached
Honfleur on a fine afternoon, intending to
cross to Havre the next morning, and embark for
England. As I had no other way of passing
the evening, I strolled up the hill to enjoy the
fine prospect from the chapel of Notre Dame de
Grace, and while there I thought of inquiring
after the fate of poor Annette Delarbre. The
priest who had told me her story was officiating
at vespers, after which I accosted him and learnt
from him the remaining circumstances.
He told me, that from the time I had seen her
at the chapel her disorder took a sudden turn for
the worse, and her health rapidly declined. Her
cheerful intervals became shorter, and less
frequent
,
and attended with more incoherency. She
grew languid, silent, and moody in her
melancholy
;
her form was wasted; her looks pale
and disconsolate; and it was feared she would
never recover. She became impatient of all
sounds of gayety, and was never so contented
as when Eugene's mother was near her. The
good woman watched over her with patient and
yearning solicitude, and in seeking to beguile
her sorrows would half forget her own.
Sometimes
as she sat looking upon her pallid face, the
tears would fill her eyes, which, when Annette
perceived, she would anxiously wipe them away,
and tell her not to grieve, for that Eugene would
soon return; and then she would affect a forced
gayety, as in former times, and sing a lively air;
but a sudden recollection would come over her,
and she would burst into tears, hang on the poor
mother's neck, and entreat her not to curse her
for having destroyed her son.
Just at this time, to the astonishment of every
one, news was received of Eugene; who, it
appeared
,
was still living. When almost drowned
he had fortunately seized upon a spar which had
been washed from the ship's deck. Finding
himself nearly exhausted he had fastened himself
to it, and floated for a day and a night until all
sense had left him. On recovering he had found
himself on board a vessel bound to India; but so
ill as not to move without assistance. His health
had continued precarious throughout the voyage;
on arriving in India he had experienced many
vicissitudes; and had been transferred from ship
to ship, and hospital to hospital. His
constitution
had enabled him to struggle through every
hardship, and he was now in a distant port,
waiting only for the sailing of a ship to return
home.
Great caution was necessary in imparting
these tidings to the mother, and even then she
was nearly overcome by the transports of her
joy. But how to impart them to Annette was a
matter of still greater perplexity. Her state of
mind had been so morbid; she had been subject to
such violent changes; and the cause of her
derangement
had been of such an inconsolable
and hopeless kind, that her friends had always
forbore to tamper with her feelings. They had
never even hinted at the subject of her griefs;
nor encouraged the theme when she adverted to
it; but had passed it over in silence, hoping that
time would gradually wear the traces of it from
her recollection, or at least would render them
less painful. They now felt at a loss how to
undeceive
her even in her misery; lest the sudden
recurrence of happiness might confirm the
estrangement
of her reason, or might overpower
her enfeebled frame. They ventured, however,
to probe those wounds which they formerly did
not dare to touch; for they now had the balm to
pour into them. They led the conversation to
those topics which they had hitherto shunned;
and endeavoured to ascertain the current of her
thoughts in those varying moods that had
formerly
perplexed them. They found, however,
that her mind was even more affected than they
had imagined. All her ideas were confused and
wandering. Her bright and cheerful moods,
which now grew seldomer than ever, were all
the effects of mental delusion. At such times
she had no recollection of her lover's having
been in danger, but was only anticipating his
arrival. When the winter has passed away,
said she, and the trees put on their blossoms,
and the swallow comes back over the sea, he
will return. When she was drooping and
desponding
,
it was in vain to remind her of what she
had said in her gayer moments, and to assure
her that Eugene would indeed return shortly.
She wept on in silence and appeared insensible to
their words. But at times her agitation became
violent when she would upbraid herself with
having driven Eugene from his mother, and
brought sorrow on her gray hairs. Her mind
admitted but one leading idea at a time, which
nothing could divert or efface; or if they ever
succeeded in interrupting the current of her fancy,
it only became the more incoherent, and
increased
the feverishness that preyed upon both mind
and body. Her friends felt more alarm for her
than ever, for they feared that her senses were
irrecoverably gone, and her constitution
completely
undermined.
In the mean time Eugene returned to the
village
.
He was violently affected when the story
of Annette was told him. With bitterness of
heart he upbraided his own rashness and
infatuation
,
that had hurried him away from her; and
accused himself as the author of all her woes.
His mother would describe to him all the
anguish
and remorse of poor Annette; the
tenderness
with which she clung to her, and
endeavoured
,
even in the midst of her insanity, to
console her for the loss of her son; and the
touching expressions of affection that were
mingled with her most incoherent wanderings
of thought; until his feelings would be wound
up to agony, and he would intreat her to desist
from the recital. They did not dare as yet to
bring him into Annette's sight, but he was
permitted
to see her when she was sleeping. The
tears streamed down his sunburnt cheeks as he
contemplated the ravages which grief and
malady
had made, and his heart swelled almost to
breaking as he beheld round her neck the very
braid of hair which she once gave him in token
of girlish affection, and which he had returned
to her in anger.
At length the physician that attended her
determined
to adventure upon an experiment; to
take advantage of one of those cheerful moods,
when her mind was visited by hope, and to
endeavour
to engraft, as it were, the reality upon
the delusions of her fancy. These moods had
now become very rare, for nature was sinking
under the continual pressure of her mental
malady, and the principle of reaction was daily
growing weaker. Every effort was tried to
bring on a cheerful interval of the kind.
Several
of her most favourite companions were kept
continually about her. They chatted gayly;
they laughed, and sang, and danced; but
Annette
reclined with languid frame and hollow
eye, and took no part in their gayety. At length
the winter was gone; the trees put forth their
leaves; the swallow began to build in the eaves
of the house, and the robin and wren piped all
VOL. II. 23
day beneath the window. Annette's spirits
gradually
revived. She began to deck her person
with unusual care, and bringing forth a basket of
artificial flowers, she went to work to wreathe
a bridal chaplet of white roses. Her
companions
asked her why she prepared the
chaplet
.
What! said she with a smile, have
you not noticed the trees putting on their
wedding
dresses of blossoms; has not the swallow
flown back over the sea; do you not know that
the time is come for Eugene to return, that he
will be home to-morrow, and that on Sunday
we are to be married?
Her words were reported to the physician,
and he seized on them at once. He directed
that her idea should be encouraged and acted
upon. Her words were echoed through the
house. Every one talked of the return of
Eugene
as a matter of course; they congratulated
her upon her approaching happiness, and
assisted
her in her preparations. The next morning
the same theme was resumed. She was dressed
out to receive her lover. Every bosom fluttered
with anxiety. A cabriolet drove into the
village
.
Eugene is coming, was the cry. She
saw him alight at the door, and rushed, with a
shriek, into his arms.
Her friends trembled for the result of this
critical experiment; but she did not sink under
it, for her fancy had prepared her for his return.
She was as one in a dream, to whom a tide of
unlooked for prosperity, that would have
over-whelmed
his waking reason, seems but the
natural
current of circumstances. Her
conversation
,
however, showed that her senses were
wandering. There was an absolute
forgetfulness
of all past sorrow; a wild and feverish
gayety that at times was incoherent.
The next morning she awoke languid and
exhausted
.
All the occurrences of the preceding
day had passed away from her mind as though
they had been the mere illusions of her fancy.
She rose melancholy and abstracted, and as she
dressed herself was heard to sing one of her
plaintive ballads. When she entered the
parlour
her eyes were swoln with weeping. She
heard Eugene's voice without, and started. She
passed her hand across her forehead, and stood
musing like one endeavouring to recall a dream.
Eugene entered the room, and advanced towards
her; she looked at him with an eager searching
look, murmured some indistinct words, and
before
he could reach her, sunk upon the floor.
She relapsed into a wild and unsettled state of
mind, but now that the first shock was over, the
Physician ordered that Eugene should keep
continually
in her sight. Sometimes she did not
know him; at other times she would talk to him
as if he were going to sea, and would implore
him not to part from her in anger; and when he
was not present she would speak of him as buried
in the ocean, and would sit, with clasped hands,
looking upon the ground, the picture of
despair
.
As the agitation of her feelings subsided, and
her frame recovered from the shock which it
had received, she became more placid and
coherent
.
Eugene kept almost continually near her.
He formed the real object round which her
scattered
ideas once more gathered, and which linked
them once more with the realities of life. But
her changeful disorder now appeared to take a
new turn. She became languid and inert, and
would sit for hours silent and almost in a state of
lethargy. If roused from this stupor, it seemed
as if her mind would make some attempts to
follow up a train of thought, but soon became
confused. She would regard every one that
approached
her with an anxious and inquiring eye,
that seemed continually to disappoint itself.
Sometimes as her lover sat holding her hand she
would look pensively in his face without saying
a word, until his heart was overcome; and after
these transient fits of intellectual exertion she
would sink again into lethargy.
By degrees this stupor increased; her mind
appeared to have subsided into a stagnant and
almost deathlike calm. For the greater part of
the time her eyes were closed; her face
almost
as fixed and passionless as that of a
corpse. She no longer took any notice of
surrounding objects. There was an awfulness
in this tranquillity that filled her friends with
apprehension. The physician ordered that she
should be kept perfectly quiet; or that if she
evinced any agitation she should be gently lulled,
like a child, by some favourite tune.
She remained in this state for hours, hardly
seeming to breathe, and apparently sinking into
the sleep of death. Her chamber was
profoundly
still. The attendants moved about it
with noiseless tread; every thing was
communicated
by signs and whispers. Her lover sat by
her side, watching her with painful anxiety, and
fearing that every breath which stole from her
pale lips would be the last.
At length she heaved a deep sigh; and from
some convulsive motions appeared to be
troubled
in her sleep. Her agitation increased,
accompanied
by an indistinct moaning. One of
her companions, remembering the physician's
instructions
,
endeavoured to lull her, by singing
in a low voice a tender little air, which was a
particular favourite of Annette's. Probably it
had some connection in her mind with her story;
for every fond girl has some ditty of the kind,
linked in her thoughts with sweet and sad
re-membrances
.
As she sang the agitation of Annette
subsided
.
A streak of faint colour came into her
cheeks; her eyelids became swoln with rising
tears, which trembled there for a moment, and
then stealing forth, coursed down her pallid
cheek. When the song was ended she opened
her eyes and looked about her as one awaking
in a strange place.
Oh Eugene! Eugene! said she, it seems
as if I have had a long and dismal dream. What
has happened, and what has been the matter
with me?
The questions were embarrassing; and before
they could be answered, the physician, who was
in the next room, entered; she took him by the
hand, looked up in his face, and made the same
inquiry. He endeavoured to put her off with
some evasive answer. No! No! cried she,
I know I've been ill, and I have been dreaming
strangely. I thought Eugene had left us; and
that he had gone to seaand thatand that he
was drowned!But he has been to sea!
added
she, earnestly, as recollection kept flashing
upon her, and he has been wreckedand we
were all so wretchedand he came home again
one bright morningandoh! said she,
pressing her hand against her forehead with a
sickly smile, I see how it is; all has not been
right here. I begin to recollectbut it is all
past nowEugene is here! and his mother is
happyand we shall never, never part again
shall we, Eugene?
She sunk back in her chair exhausted. The
tears streamed down her cheeks. Her
companions
hovered round her, not knowing what to
make of this sudden dawn of reason. Her lover
sobbed aloud. She opened her eyes again, and
looked upon them with an air of the sweetest
acknowledgment. You are all so good to me!
said she faintly.
The physician drew the father aside. Your
daughter's mind is restored, said he, she is
sensible that she has been deranged; she is
growing conscious of the past, and conscious of
the present. All that now remains is to keep
her calm and quiet until her health is
re-established
,
and then let her be married, in God's
name!
The wedding took place, said the good
priest, but a short time since; they were here
at the last fte during their honey moon, and a
handsomer and happier couple was not to be seen
as they danced under yonder trees. The young
man, his wife, and mother, now live on a fine
farm at Pont L'Eveque; and that model of a
ship which you see yonder, with white flowers
wreathed round it, is Annette's offering of thanks
to our Lady of Grace, for having listened to her
prayers, and protected her lover in the hour of
peril.
VOL. II. 24
The
captain having finished, there was a
momentary silence. The tender hearted Lady
Lillycraft, who knew the story by heart, had led
the way in weeping, and indeed, had often
begun
to shed tears before they had come to the
right place. The fair Julia was a little flurried
at the passage where wedding preparations were
mentioned; but the auditor most affected was the
simple Phoebe Wilkins. She had gradually
dropt her work in her lap, and sat sobbing through
the latter part of the story until towards the end,
when the happy reverse had nearly produced
another scene of hystericks.Go take this
case to my room again, child, said Lady
Lillycraft
kindly, and don't cry so much.
I won't, an't please your Ladyship, if I can
help it; but I'm glad they made all up again
and were married.
By the way, the case of this lovelorn damsel
begins to make some talk in the household,
especially
among certain little ladies, not far in
their teens, of whom she has made confidants.
She is a great favourite with them all, but
particularly so since she has confided to them
her love secrets.
They enter into her concerns with all the
violent zeal and overwhelming sympathy with
which little boarding school ladies engage in the
politics of a love affair. I have noticed them
frequently clustering about her in private
conferences
;
or walking up and down the garden
terrace, under my window, listening to some long
and dolorous story of her afflictions, of which
I could now and then distinguish the ever
recurring
phrases, says he and says she.
I accidentally interrupted one of these little
councils of war, when they were all huddled
together
under a tree, and seemed to be earnestly
considering some interesting document.
The flutter at my approach showed that there
were some secrets under discussion; and I
observed
the disconsolate Phoebe crumpling into
her bosom either a love letter or an old valentine,
and brushing away the tears from her cheeks.
The girl is a good girl, of a soft, melting
nature
,
and shows her concern at the cruelty of
her lover only in tears and drooping looks; but
with the little ladies who have espoused her
cause, it sparkles up into fiery indignation; and
I have noticed on Sunday many a glance
darted at the pew of the Tibbets' enough to
melt down the silver buttons on old Ready
Money's
jacket.
THE CULPRIT.
From fire, from water, and all things amiss,
Deliver the house of an honest justice.
The Widow
.
The
serenity of the Hall has been suddenly
interrupted by a very important occurrence. In
the course of this morning a poss of villagers
was seen trooping up the avenue; with boys
shouting in advance. As it drew near we
perceived
Ready Money Jack Tibbets striding
along, wielding his cudgel in one hand, and
with the other grasping the collar of a tall
fellow
,
whom on still nearer approach we
recognised
for the redoubtable gipsy hero, Star-light
Tom. He was now, however, completely
cowed and crest-faller and his courage seemed
to have quailed in the iron gripe of the
lionhearted
Jack.
The whole gang of gipsy women and children
came draggling in the rear; some in tears, others
making a violent clamour about the ears of old
Ready Money; who, however, trudged on in
silence with his prey, heeding their abuse as
little
as a hawk, that has pounced upon a
barndoor
hero, regards the outcries and cacklings of
his whole feathered seraglio.
He had passed through the village on his way
to the Hall; and of course had made a great
sensation in that most excitable place; where
every event is a matter of gaze and gossip. The
report had circulated like wildfire, that old
Tibbets
had taken Star-light Tom prisoner. The
ale drinkers forthwith abandoned the tap room,
Slingsby's school broke loose without waiting to
be dismissed, and masters and boys swelled the
tide that came rolling at the heels of old Ready
Money and his captive. The uproar increased
as they approached the Hall; it aroused the
whole garrison of dogs, and the crew of
hangers
on. The great mastiff barked from the
dog-house
;
the staghound and the grayhound and
the spaniel came barking from the Hall door, and
my Lady Lillycraft's little dogs barked from the
parlour windows. I remarked, however, that
the gipsy dogs made no reply to all these
menaces
and insults; but crept close to the gang,
looking round with a guilty, poaching air, and
now and then glancing up a dubious eye to their
owners; which shows that the moral characters
even of dogs may be ruined by bad company!
When the throng reached the front of the
house, they were brought to a halt by a kind of
advanced guard composed of old Christy, the
gamekeeper, and two or three servants of the
house, who had been brought out by the noise.
The common herd of the village fell back with
respect; the boys were driven back by old
Christy and his compeers; while Ready Money
Jack maintained his ground and his hold of the
prisoner, and was surrounded by the tailor, the
schoolmaster, and several other dignitaries of the
village, and by the clamorous brood of gipsies,
who were neither to be silenced nor intimidated.
By this time the whole household were brought
to the doors and windows, and the Squire to the
portal. An audience was demanded by Ready
Money Jack, who had detected the prisoner in
the very act of sheep stealing on his domains,
and had borne him off to be examined before
the Squire, who is in the commission of the
peace.
A kind of tribunal was immediately held in
the servant's hall; a large chamber, with a stone
floor, and a long table in the centre, at one end
of which, just under an enormous clock, was
placed the Squire's chair of justice, while
Master
Simon took his place at the table as clerk of
the court. An attempt had been made by old
Christy to keep out the gipsy gang, but in vain;
and they, with the village worthies, and the
household, half filled the Hall. The old
housekeeper
and the butler were in a panic at this
dangerous
irruption. They hurried away all the
valuable things and portable articles that were at
hand, and even kept a dragon watch on the
gipsies
lest they should carry off the house clock or
the deal table.
Old Christy, and his faithful coadjutor the
gamekeeper, acted as constables to guard the
prisoner, and appeared to trimph in having at
last got this terrible night-walking offender in
their clutches. By the bye I am inclined to
suspect
that the old huntsman bore some peevish
recollection of having been handled rather
roughly
by the gipsy in the chance medley affray of
May-day.
Silence was now commanded by Master Simon,
but it was difficult to be enforced in such a motly
assemblage. There was a continual snarling
and yelping of dogs, and as fast as it was
quelled
in one corner, it broke out in another. The
poor gipsy curs, who, like arrant thieves, could
not hold up their heads in an honest house, were
worried and insulted by the gentlemen dogs of
the establishment, without offering to make
resistance
;
the very curs of my Lady Lillycraft
bullied them with impunity.
VOL. II. 25
The examination was conducted with great
mildness and indulgence by the Squire, partly
from the kindness of his nature, and partly, I
suspect, because his heart yearned towards the
culprit, who, as I have before mentioned, had
found great favour in his eyes from the skill he
had at various times displayed in archery,
morrice
dancing, and other obsolete
accomplishments
.
Proofs, however, were too strong. Ready
Money Jack told his story in a straight forward,
independent way; nothing daunted by the
presence
in which he found himself. He had
suffered
from various depredations on his sheepfold
and poultry yard; and had at length kept watch,
and caught the delinquent in the very act of
making off with a sheep on his shoulders.
Tibbets was repeatedly interrupted in the
course of his testimony, by the culprit's mother,
a furious old beldame with an insufferable tongue,
and who, in fact, was several times on the point
of flying at him, tooth and nail. The wife of
the prisoner, whom I am told he does not beat
above half a dozen times a week, completely
interested
Lady Lillycraft in her husband's behalf,
by her tears and supplications, and several of the
other gipsy women were awakening strong
sympathy
among the young girls and maid servants
in the back ground. The pretty black eyed
gipsy girl whom I have mentioned on a former
occasion as the sybil that read the fortunes of
the general, now endeavoured to wheedle that
doughty warrior into their interests, and even
made some approaches to her old acquaintance,
Master Simon, but was repelled by the latter
with all the dignity of office, having assumed a
gravity and importance suitable to the occasion.
I was a little surprised, at first, to find honest
Slingsby, the schoolmaster, rather opposed to his
old crony, Tibbets, and coming forward as a
kind of advocate for the accused. It seems that
he had taken compassion on the forlorn fortunes
of Star-light Tom, and had been trying his
eloquence
in his favour the whole way from the
village
,
but without effect. During the
examination
of Ready Money Jack, also, Slingsby had
stood like dejected pity at his side, seeking
every now and then, by a soft word, to soothe any
exacerbation of his ire, or to qualify any harsh
expression. He now ventured to make a few
observations to the Squire in palliation of the
delinquent's offences, but poor Slingsby spoke
more from the heart than the head, and was
evidently
actuated merely by a general sympathy
for any poor devil in trouble, and a liberal
toleration
for all kinds of vagabond existence.
The ladies, too, large and small, with the
kind-heartedness of the sex, were zealous on the
side of mercy, and interceded strenuously with
the Squire, insomuch that the prisoner, finding
himself unexpectedly surrounded by active
friends, once more reared his crest, and seemed
disposed for a time to put on the airs of injured
innocence. The Squire, however, with all his
benevolence of heart, and his lurking
weakness
towards the prisoner, was too conscientious
to swerve from the strict path of justice. There
was abundant concurring testimony, that made
the proof of guilt incontrovertible, and
Star-light
Tom's mittimus was made out accordingly.
The sympathy of the ladies was now greater
than ever; they even made some attempts to
mollify the ire of Ready Money Jack; but that
sturdy potentate had been too much incensed
by the repeated incursions that had been made
into his territories by the predatory band of
Star-light Tom, and he was resolved, he said,
to drive the varment reptiles out of the
neighbourhood. To avoid all further
importunities
,
as soon as the mittimus was made out,
he girded up his loins, and strode back to his
seat of empire, accompanied by his interceding
friend, Slingsby, and followed by a detachment
of the gipsy gang; who hung on his rear,
assailing
him with mingled prayers and
execracrations
.
The question now was how to dispose of the
prisoner; a matter of great moment in this
peaceful establishment, where so formidable a
character as Star-light Tom was like a hawk
entrapped in a dove cote. As the hubbub and
examination had occupied a considerable time
it was too late in the day to send him to the
county prison, and that of the village was sadly
out of repair, from long want of occupation.
Old Christy, who took great interest in the affair,
proposed that the culprit should be committed
for the night to an upper loft of a kind of tower
in one of the outhouses, where he and the
gamekeeper would mount guard. After much
deliberation this measure was adopted; the
premises
in question were examined and made
secure
,
and Christy and his trusty ally, the one
armed with a fowling piece, the other with an
ancient blunderbuss, turned out as sentries to
keep watch over this donjon keep.
Such is the momentous affair that has just
taken place, and it is an event of too great
moment
in this quiet little world not to turn it
completely topsy-turvy. Labour is at a stand.
The house has been a scene of confusion the
whole evening. The mansion has been
beleagured
by gipsy women, with their children on
their backs, wailing and lamenting. While the old
virago of a mother has cruised up and down
before
the house, shaking her head and muttering
to herself, and now and then breaking into a
paroxysm of rage, brandishing her fist at the
Hall, and denouncing ill luck upon Ready
Money
Jack and even upon the Squire himself.
Lady Lillycraft has given repeated audiences
to the culprit's weeping wife at the hall door; and
the servant maids have stole out to confer with
the gipsy women under the trees. As to the
little ladies of the family, they are all outrageous
at Ready Money Jack; whom they look upon
in the light of a tyrannical giant of fairy tale.
Phoebe Wilkins, contrary to her usual nature,
is the only female that is pitiless in this affair.
She thinks Mr. Tibbets quite in the right; and
thinks the gipsies deserve to be punished
severely
for meddling with the sheep of the Tibbets'.
In the mean time the females of the family
have evinced all the provident kindness of the
sex, ever ready to soothe and succour the
distressed
,
right or wrong. Lady Lillycraft has had a
mattress taken to the outhouse, and comforts
and delicacies of all kinds have been taken to the
prisoner; even the little girls have sent their
cakes and sweetmeats; so that, I'll warrant, the
vagabond has never fared so well in his life
before
.
Old Christy, it is true, looks upon every
thing with a wary eye; struts about with his
blunderbuss with the air of a veteran campaigner,
keeps every one at bay, and will hardly allow
himself to be spoken to. The gipsy women
dare not come within gunshot, and every
tatter-demalion
of a boy has been frightened from the
park. The old fellow is determined to lodge
Star-light Tom in prison with his own hands,
and hopes, he says, to see one of the poaching
crew made an example of.
I doubt, after all, whether the worthy Squire
is not the greatest sufferer in the whole affair.
His honourable sense of duty obliges him to be
rigid, but the overflowing kindness of his
nature
makes this a grievous trial to him. He is
not accustomed to have such demands upon his
justice, in his truly patriarchal domain; and it
wounds his benevolent spirit, that, while
prosperity
and happiness are flowing in thus
bounteously
upon him, he should have to inflict
misery upon a fellow being.
He has been troubled and cast down the whole
evening; took leave of the family on going to
bed with a sigh, instead of his usual hearty and
affectionate tone; and will in all probability have
a far more sleepless night than his prisoner.
Indeed
this unlucky affair has cast a damp upon the
whole househould; as there appears to be an
universal opinion that the unlucky culprit will
come to the gallows.
Morning
. The clouds of last evening are
all blown over. A load has been taken from
the Squire's heart, and every face is once more
in smiles. The gamekeeper made his
appearance
at an early hour, completely shamefaced
and chapfallen. Star-light Tom had made his
escape in the night; how he had got out of the
loft no one could tell; the Devil must have
assisted
him. Old Christy was so mortified that
he would not show his face, but had shut
himself
up in his strong hold at the dog-kennel, and
VOL. II. 26
would not be spoken with. What has
particularly
relieved the Squire, is that there is very
little likelihood of the culprit's being retaken,
having gone off on one of the old gentleman's
best hunters.
THE HISTORIAN.
I HAVE forborne to recount various tales which
have been told during the evenings at the Hall,
because some of them were rather hackneyed
and tedious, and others I did not feel warranted
in betraying into print. I was suddenly startled
lately by a call from the Squire to furnish a story
in my turn, and having been a profound listener
to those of others, I could not in conscience
refuse
;
so I begged leave to read a manuscript tale
from the pen of the late Mr. Deidrich
Knickerbocker
,
the historian of New-York.
As some curiosity was expressed about the
author
,
I had to explain, that he was a native of
New-York, a descendant of one of the ancient
Dutch families that originally settled that
province
,
and remained there after it was taken
possession of by the English, in 1664. That
the descendants of these Dutch families still
remained
in villages and neighbourhoods in
various
parts of the country; retaining with singular
fidelity, the dresses, manners, and even language
of their ancestors, and forming a very distinct
and curious feature in the population of the
state.
That Mr. Knickerbocker had written a history
of his native city, comprising the reign of the
three first governors who held a delegated sway
under the Hogen Mogens of Holland. That in
this the worthy little Dutchman had displayed
great historical research, and a wonderful sense
of the dignity of his subject; but that his work
had been so little understood as to be pronounced
a mere work of humour; satirizing the follies
of the times in politics and morals, and giving
whimsical views of human nature.
That among the papers left behind him were
several tales of a lighter nature, apparently
thrown together from materials which he had
gathered during his profound researches for his
history; and which he seemed to have thrown
by with neglect, as unworthy of publication.
That these had fallen into my hands by an
accident
which it was needless to mention, and one
of those stories, with its prelude, in the words of
Mr. Knickerbocker, I now undertook to read,
by way of acquitting myself of the debt which
I owed to the other story-tellers in company.
THE HAUNTED HOUSE.
FROM THE MSS. OF THE LATE DEIDRICH KNICKERBOCKER.
Formerly almost every place had a house of this kind. If a house
was seated on some melancholy place, or built in some old
romantic
manner; or if any particular accident had happened in it; such
as murder, sudden death, or the like, to be sure that house had a
mark set on it, and was afterwards esteemed the habitation of a
ghost.
Bourne's Antiquities
.
In
the neighbourhood of the ancient City of
Manhattoes there stood, not very many years
since, an old mansion, which, when I was a boy,
went by the name of the Haunted House. It was
one of the very few remains of the architecture
of the early Dutch settlers, and must have been
a house of some consequence at the time when
it was built. It consisted of a centre and two
wings, the gable ends of which were shaped
like stairs. It was built partly of wood, and
partly of small Dutch bricks, such as the
worthy
colonists brought with them from Holland;
before they discovered that bricks could be
manufactured elsewhere. The house stood
remote
from the road, in the centre of a large
field, with an avenue of old locust
*
*
Acacias.
trees
leading
up to it, several of which had been
shivered
by lightning, and two or three blown down.
A few apple trees grew straggling about the
field; there were traces also of what had been
a kitchen garden, but the fences were broken
down, the vegetables had disappeared, or had
grown wild and turned to little better than
weeds, with here and there a ragged rose bush
or a tall sunflower shooting up from among the
brambles, and hanging its head sorrowfully, as
if contemplating the desolation around it. Part
of the roof of the old house had fallen in; the
windows were shattered; the pannels of the
doors broken, and mended with rough boards;
and there were two rusty weathercocks at the
ends of the house, which made a great jingling
and whistling as they whirled about, but always
pointed wrong. The appearance of the whole
was forlorn and desolate at the best of times;
but in unruly weather, the howling of the wind
about the crazy old mansion; the screeching of
the weathercocks; the slamming and banging
of a few loose window shuttershad altogether
so wild and dreary an effect, that the
neighbourhood
stood perfectly in awe of the place, and
pronounced it the rendezvous of hobgoblins I
recollect the old building well, for I recollect
how many times, when an idle, unlucky urchin,
I have prowled round its precincts with some
of my graceless companions, on holyday
afternoons
,
when out on a freebooting cruise among
the orchards.
There was a tree standing near the house
that bore the most beautiful and tempting fruit;
but then it was on enchanted ground, for the
place was so charmed by frightful stories that we
dreaded to approach it. Sometimes we would
venture, in a body, and get near the Hesperian
tree, keeping an eye upon the old mansion, and
darting fearful glances into its shattered
windows
;
when, just as we were about to seize
upon our prize, an exclamation from some one
of the gang, or an accidental noise, would throw
us all into a panic, and we would scamper
headlong
from the place, nor ever stop until we had
got quite into the road. Then there were sure
to be a host of anecdotes told about strange
cries, and groans; or of some hideous face,
suddenly
seen staring out of one of the windows.
By degrees we ceased to venture into these
lonely
grounds; but would stand at a distance, and
throw stones at the building; and there was
something
fearfully pleasing in the sound, as they
rattled along the roof, or sometimes struck some
jingling fragments of glass out of the windows.
The origin of the house was lost in the
obscurity
that covers the early period of the province,
whilst under the government of their High
Mightinesses the States General. Some
reported
it to have been a country residence of
Wilhelmus
Kieft, commonly called the Testy, one of
the Dutch governors of New-Amsterdam; others
VOL. II. 27
said that it had been built by a naval
commander
,
who served under Van Tromp, and who, on
being disappointed of preferment, retired from
the service in disgust; became a philosopher
through sheer spite; and brought over all his
wealth to the province, that he might live
according
to his humour, and despise the world. The
reason of its having fallen to decay was likewise
a matter of dispute: some said that it was in
chancery, and had already cost more than its
worth in legal expenses; but the most current,
and of course the most probable account was,
that it was haunted; and that nobody could live
quietly in it. There can in fact be very little
doubt that this last was the case; there were so
many corroborating stories to prove it; not an
old woman in the neighbourhood but could
furnish
at least a score. There was a gray headed
curmudgeon of a negro that lived hard by, who
had a whole budget of them to tell; many of
which had happened to himself.
I recollect many a time stopping with my
schoolmates and getting him to relate some.
The old crone lived in a hovel, in the midst of a
small patch of potatoes and Indian corn, which
his master had given him on setting him free.
He would come to us, with his hoe in his hand,
and, as we sat perched like a row of swallows,
on the rail of the fence, in the mellow twilight
of a summer evening, he would tell us such
fearful stories, accompanied by such awful
rollings of his white eyes, that we were almost
afraid of our own footsteps as we returned home
afterwards in the dark.
Poor old Pompey! many years are past since
he died, and went to keep company with the
ghosts he was so fond of talking about.
He was buried in a corner of his own little
potato patch; the plough soon passed over his
grave, and levelled it with the rest of the field,
and nobody thought any more of the gray headed
negro. By singular chance I was strolling in
that neighbourhood several years afterwards,
when I had grown up to be a young man, and I
found a knot of gossips speculating on a skull
which had just been turned up by a
plough-share
.
They of course determined it to be the
remains
of some one that had been murdered; and
they had raked up with it some of the
traditionary
tales of the haunted house. I knew it at
once to be the relique of poor Pompey, but I
held my tongue; for I am too considerate of
other people's enjoyment, ever to mar a story of
a ghost or a murder. I took care, however, to
see the bones of my old friend once more buried,
in a place where they were not likely to be
disturbed
.
As I sat on the turf and watched the
interment, I fell into a long conversation with an
old gentleman of the neighbourhood, John Josse
Vandermoere, a pleasant gossiping man, whose
whole life was spent in hearing and telling the
news of the province. He recollected old
Pompey
and his stories about the haunted house;
but he assured me he could give me one still
more strange than any that Pompey had related;
and on my expressing a great curiosity to hear it,
he sat down beside me on the turf, and told the
following tale. I have endeavoured to give it as
nearly as possible in his words; but it is now
many years since, and I am grown old, and my
memory is not over good. I cannot, therefore,
vouch for the language; but I am always
scrupulous
as to facts.
D. K.
DOLPH HEYLIGER.
I take the town of Concord, where I dwell,
All Kilborn be my witness, if I were not
Begot in bashfulness, brought up in shamefacedness;
Let 'un bring a dog but to my vace that can
Zay I have beat 'un, and without a vault;
Or but a cat will swear upon a book
I have as much as zet a vire her tail,
And I will give him or her a crown for 'mends.
Old Play of the Tale of a Tub
.
In
the early times of the province of
New-York
,
while it groaned under the tyranny of the
English governor, Lord Cornbury, who carried
his cruelties toward the Dutch inhabitants so far
as to allow no dominie nor schoolmaster to
officiate
in their language, without his special
license
;
about this time there lived, in the jolly
little
old city of the Manhattoes, a kind, motherly
dame, known by the name of Dame Heyliger.
She was the widow of a Dutch sea captain,
who died suddenly of a fever, in consequence of
working too hard, and eating too heartily, at
the time when all the inhabitants turned out in
a panic, to fortify the place against the invasion
of a small French privateer.
*
*
1705.
He left her with
very little money, and one infant son, the only
survivor of several children. The good woman
had need of much management to make both
ends meet, and keep up a decent appearance.
However, as her husband had fallen a victim to
his zeal for the public safety, it was universally
agreed that something ought to be done for the
widow; and on the hopes of this something
she lived very tolerably for some years; in the
mean time every body pitied and spoke well of
her; and that helped along.
She lived in a small house, in a small street,
called Garden Street; very probably from a
garden which may have flourished there some
time or other. As her necessities every year
grew greater, and the talk of the public about
doing something for her, grew less, she had
to cast about for some mode of doing something
for herself by way of helping out her slender
means, and maintaining her independence, of
which she was somewhat tenacious.
Living in a mercantile town, she had caught
something of the spirit, and determined to
venture
a little in the great lottery of commerce.
On a sudden, therefore, to the great surprise of
the street, there appeared at her window a grand
array of gingerbread kings and queens, with
their arms stuck a-kimbo, after the invariable
royal manner. There were also several broken
tumblers, some filled with sugar plumbs, some
with marbles; there were, moreover, cakes of
various kinds; and barley sugar, and Holland
dolls, and wooden horses; with here and there
gilt covered picture books, and now and then a
skein of thread, or a dangling pound of candles.
At the door of the house sat the good old
dame's cat; a decent demure looking personage,
that seemed to scan every body that passed; to
criticise their dress; and now and then to stretch
her neck, and look out with sudden curiosity, to
see what was going on at the other end of the
street; but if by chance any idle vagabond dog
came by and offered to be uncivilhoity-toity!
how she would bristle up, and growl, and spit,
and strike out her paws; she was as indignant
as ever was an ancient and ugly spinster on the
approach of some graceless profligate.
But though the good woman had to come
down to those humble means of subsistence, yet
she still kept up a feeling of family pride;
having
descended from the Vanderspiegels of
Amsterdam
;
and she had the family arms painted
and framed, and hung over her mantlepiece. She
was in truth much respected by all the poorer
people of the place; her house was quite a
resort
of the old wives of the neighbourhood; they
would drop in there of a winter's afternoon, as
she sat knitting on one side of her fireplace, her
cat purring on the other, and the tea-kettle
singing
before it; and they would gossip with her
until late in the evening. There was always an
arm-chair for old Peter de Groodt, sometimes
called long Peter, and sometimes Peter long-legs,
VOL. II. 28
the clerk and sexton of the little Lutheran
church; who was her great crony, and, indeed,
the oracle of her fireside. Nay, the dominie
himself did not disdain now and then to stop in,
converse about the state of her mind, and take a
glass of her especial good cherry brandy.
Indeed
,
he never failed to call on new year's day
and wish her a happy new year; and the good
dame, who was a little vain on some points,
always
piqued herself on giving him as large a cake
as any one in town.
I have said that she had one son. He was
the child of her old age; but could hardly be
called the comfort; for, of all unlucky urchins,
Dolph Heyliger was the most mischievous. Not
that the whipster was really vicious; he was
only full of fun and frolick; and had that daring
gamesome spirit which is extolled in a rich man's
child; but execrated in a poor man's. He was
continually getting into scrapes; his mother was
incessantly harassed with complaints of some
waggish prank which he had played off; bills
were sent in for windows that he had broken; in
a word, he had not reached his fourteenth year,
before he was pronounced, by all the
neighbourhood
,
to be a wicked dog, the wickedest dog
in the street! Nay, one old gentleman in a
claret coloured coat, with a thin red face and
ferret eyes, went so far as to assure Dame
Heyliger
that her son would one day or other come
to the gallows!
Yet, notwithstanding all this, the poor old soul
loved her boy. It seemed as though she loved
him the better the worse he behaved; and that
he grew more in her favour the more he grew
out of favour with the world. Mothers are
foolish, fond hearted beings; there's no
reasoning
them out of their dotage; and, indeed, this
poor woman's child was all that was left to love
her in this world; so we must not think it hard
that she turned a deaf ear to her good friends
who sought to prove to her that Dolph must
inevitably
come to a halter. To do the varlet
justice
,
too, he was strongly attached to his parent.
He would not willingly have given her pain on
any account; and when he had been doing wrong,
it was but for him to catch his poor mother's eye
fixed wistfully and sorrowfully upon him, to fill
his heart with bitterness and contrition. But he
was a heedless youngster, and could not, for the
life of him, resist any new temptation to fun and
mischief. Though quick at his learning,
whenever
he could be brought to apply himself, yet he
was always prone to be led away by idle
company
;
and would play truant to hunt after bird's
nests, to rob orchards, or to swim in the
Hudson
.
In this way he grew up, a tall, lubberly boy,
and his mother began to be greatly perplexed
what to do with him; or how to put him in a
way to do for himself; for he had acquired such
an unlucky reputation, that no one seemed
willing
to employ him. Many was the consultation
that she held with Peter de Groodt, the clerk
and sexton, who was her prime councillor.
Peter was as much perplexed as herself, for he
had no great opinion of the boy, and thought he
would never come to good. He at one time
advised her to send him to sea; a piece of advice
only given in the most desperate cases; but Dame
Heyliger would not listen to such an idea; she
could not think of letting Dolph go out of her
sight. She was sitting one day knitting by her
fireside, in great perplexity, when the sexton
entered with an air of unusual vivacity and
briskness
.
He had just come from a funeral. It had
been that of a boy of Dolph's years, who had
been apprentice to a famous German doctor,
who had died of a consumption. It is true there
had been a whisper that the deceased had been
brought to his end by being made the subject of
the doctor's experiments; on which he was apt
to try the effects of a new compound, or a
quieting
draught. This, however, it is likely, was a
mere scandal; at any rate Peter de Groodt did
not think it worth mentioning; though, had we
time to philosophize, it would be a curious
matter
for speculation, why a doctor's family is apt
to be so lean and cadaverous, and a butcher's so
jolly and rubicund.
Peter de Groodt, as I said before, entered the
house of Dame Heyliger with unusual alacrity.
He was full of a bright idea that had popped
into his head at the funeral, and over which he
had chuckled as he shovelled the earth into the
grave of the doctor's disciple. It had occurred
to him that, as the situation of the deceased was
vacant at the doctor's, it would be the very
place for Dolph. The boy had parts, and could
pound a pestle and run an errand with any boy in
the town; and what more was wanted in a
student
?
The suggestion of the sage Peter was a vision
of glory to the mother; she already saw Dolph
in her mind's eye, with a cane at his nose, a
knocker at his door, and an M. D. at the end
of his name; one of the established dignitaries of
the town!
The matter once undertaken was soon
effected
:
the sexton had some influence with the
doctor, they having had much dealing together
in the way of their separate professions; and
the very next morning he called and conducted
the urchin, clad in his Sunday clothes, to undergo
the inspection of Doctor Karl Lodovich
Knipperhausen
.
They found the doctor seated in an elbow
chair in one corner of his study or laboratory,
with a large volume in German print before him.
He was a short, fat man, with a dark square
face, rendered more dark by a black velvet cap.
He had a little nobbed nose, not unlike the ace
of spades, with a pair of spectacles gleaming
on each side of his dusky countenance, like a
couple of bow windows.
Dolph felt struck with awe on entering into
the presence of this learned man; and gazed
about him with boyish wonder at the furniture
of this chamber of knowledge; which appeared
to him almost as the den of a magician. In the
centre stood a clawfooted table, with pestle and
mortar, phials, and gallipots, and a pair of small
burnished scales. At one end was a heavy
clothes press, turned into a receptacle for drugs
and compounds, against which hung the doctor's
hat, and cloak, and gold-headed cane; and on
the top grinned a human scull. Along the
mantlepiece
were glass vessels holding snakes and
lizards, and a human ftus preserved in spirits.
A closet, the doors of which were taken off,
contained three whole shelves full of books, and
some, too, of mighty folio dimensions; a
collection
,
the like of which Dolph had never
before
heheld. As, however, the library did not
take up the whole of the closet, the doctor's
thrifty housekeeper had occupied the rest with
pots of pickles and preserves; and had hung
about the room, among awful implements of the
healing art, strings of red peppers and corpulent
cucumbers, carefully preserved for seed.
Peter de Groodt and his proteg were
received
with great gravity and stateliness by the
doctor, who was a very wise, dignified little
man, and never smiled. He surveyed Dolph
from head to foot, above, and under, and through
his spectacles, and the poor lad's heart quailed as
these great glasses glared on him like two full
moons. The doctor heard all that Peter de
Groodt had to say in favour of the youthful
candidate
;
and then, wetting his thumb with the
end of his tongue, he began deliberately to turn
over page after page of the great black volume
before him. At length, after many hums, and
haws, and strokings of the chin; and all that
hesitation
and deliberation with which a wise man
proceeds to do what he intended to do from the
very first, the doctor agreed to take the lad as a
disciple; to give him bed, board, and clothing,
and to instruct him in the healing art; in return
for which he was to have his services until his
twenty-first year. Behold, then, our hero, all at
once transformed from an unlucky urchin,
running
wild about the streets, to a student of
medicine
,
diligently pounding a pestle under the
auspices
of the learned Doctor Karl Lodovich
Knipperhausen. It was a happy transition for
his fond old mother. She was delighted with
the idea of her boy's being brought up worthy
of his ancestors, and anticipated the day when
he would be able to hold up his head with the
lawyer that lived in the large door opposite; or
peradventure with the dominie himself.
VOL. II. 29
Doctor Knipperhausen was a native of the
Palatinate
in Germany; from whence, in company
with many of his countrymen, he had taken
refuge
in England, on account of religious
persecution
.
He was one of nearly three thousand
Palatines who came over from England in 1710,
under the protection of Governor Hunter. Where
the doctor had studied; how he had acquired
his medical knowledge; and where he had
received
his diploma, it is hard at present to say,
for nobody knew at the time; yet it is certain
that his profound skill and abstruse knowledge
were the talk and wonder of the common
people
,
far and near. His practice was totally
different
from that of any other physician, consisting
in mysterious compounds known only to
himself
;
in the preparing and administering of
which, it was said, he always consulted the stars.
So high an opinion was entertained of his skill,
particularly by the German and Dutch
inhabitants
,
that they always resorted to him in
desperate
cases. He was one of those infallible
doctors
that are always effecting sudden and
surprising
cures, when the patient has been given up
by all the regular physicians; unless, as is
shrewdly observed, the case has been left too
long before it was put into his hands. The
doctor's library was the talk and marvel of the
neighbourhood, I might almost say of the entire
burgh. The good people looked with reverence
at a man that had read three whole shelves full
of books, and some of them too as large as a
family bible. There were many disputes among
the members of the little Lutheran church, as
to which was the wisest man, the doctor or the
dominie; some of his admirers even went so far
as to say that he knew more than the governor
himselfin a word, it was thought that there
was no end to his knowledge!
No sooner was Dolph received into the
doctor's
family than he was put in possession of the
lodgings of his predecessor. It was a garret
room of a steep roofed Dutch house, where the
rain pattered on the shingles, and the lightning
gleamed, and the wind piped through the
crannies
in stormy weather, and where whole troops
of hungry rats galloped about, like Don
Cossacks
in defiance of traps and ratsbane.
He was soon up to his ears in medical studies,
being employed, morning, noon, and night, in
rolling pills, filtering tinctures, or pounding the
pestle and mortar in one corner of the
laboratory
;
while the doctor would take his seat in
another corner, when he had nothing else to do,
or expected visiters, and arrayed in his morning
gown and velvet cap, would pore over the
contents
of some folio volume. It is true that the
regular thumping of Dolph's pestle, or, perhaps,
the drowsy buzzing of the summer flies would
now and then lull the little man into a slumber;
but then his spectacles were always wide awake,
and studiously regarding the book.
There was another personage in the house,
however, to whom Dolph was obliged to pay
allegiance. Though a bachelor, and a man of
such great dignity and importance, yet the
doctor
was, like many other wise men, subject to
petticoat government. He was completely under
the sway of his housekeeper, a spare, busy,
fretting housewife, in a little, round, quilted
German cap, with a huge bunch of keys
jingling
at the girdle of an exceedingly long waist.
Frau Ils (or Frow Ilsy as it was pronounced)
had accompanied him in his various migrations,
from Germany to England, and from England
to the province; managing his establishment
and himself too; ruling him, it is true, with a
gentle hand; but carrying a high hand with all
the world beside. How she had acquired such
ascendancy I do not pretend to say. People,
it is true, did talkbut have not people been
prone to talk ever since the world began? Who
can tell how women generally contrive to get
the upper hand? A husband, it is true, may
now and then be master in his own house; but
who ever knew a bachelor that was not
managed
by his housekeeper?
Indeed, Frau Ilsy's power was not confined
to the doctor's household. She was one of
those prying gossips that know every one's
business
better than they do themselves; and
whose all-seeing eyes and all-telling tongues
are terrors throughout a neighbourhood.
Nothing
of any moment transpired in the world of
scandal of this little burgh but it was known
to Frau Ilsy. She had her crew of cronies
that were perpetually hurrying to her little
parlour
,
with some precious bit of news; nay, she
would sometimes discuss a whole volume of
secret
history, as she held the street door ajar, and
gossiped with one of those garrulous crones,
in the very teeth of a December blast.
Between the doctor and the housekeeper it
may easily be supposed that Dolph had a busy
life of it. As Frau Ilsy kept the keys, and
literally
ruled the roast, it was starvation to offend
her, though he found the study of her temper
more perplexing even than that of medicine.
When not busy in the laboratory she kept him
running hither and thither on her own errands;
and on Sundays he was obliged to accompany
her to and from church, and carry her bible; and
many a time has the poor varlet stood shivering
and blowing his fingers, or holding his
frost-bitten
nose in the church yard, while Frau Ilsy
and her cronies were huddled together,
wagging
their heads and tearing some unlucky
character
to pieces.
With all his advantages, however, Dolph made
but very slow progress in his art. This was no
fault of the doctor's, certainly, for he took
unwearied
pains with the lad; keeping him close
to the pestle and mortar, or on the trot about
town with phials and pill-boxes; and if he ever
flagged in his industry, which he was rather apt
to do, the doctor would fly into a passion, and
ask him if he ever expected to learn his profession,
unless he applied himself closer to the study.
The fact is, he still retained the fondness for
sport and mischief that had marked his
childhood
;
the habit indeed strengthened with his
years, and gained force from being thwarted and
constrained. He daily grew more and more
untractable
;
and lost favour in the eyes both of the
doctor and the housekeeper.
In the mean time the doctor went on, waxing
wealthy and renowned. He was famous for his
skill in managing cases not laid down in the
books. He had cured several old women and
young girls of witchcraft; a terrible complaint
nearly as prevalent in the province in those days
as hydrophobia is at present; he had even
restored
one strapping country girl to perfect health
who had gone so far as to vomit crooked pins
and needles; which is considered a desperate
stage of the malady. It was whispered, also,
that he was possessed of the art of preparing
love powders; and many applications had he in
consequence from love-sick patients of both
sexes; but all these cases formed the mysterious
part of his practice, in which, according to the
cant phrase, secrecy and honour might be
depended on. Dolph therefore was obliged to
turn out of the study when such consultations
occurred, though it is said he learnt more of the
secrets of the art at the key hole, than byall the
rest of his studies put together.
As the doctor increased in wealth he began to
extend his possessions, and to look forward, like
other great men, to the time when he should
retire
to the repose of a country seat. For this
purpose he had purchased a farm, or as the
Dutch settlers called it, a Bowerie, a few miles
from town. It had been the residence of a
wealthy
family that had returned some time since to
Holland. A large mansion house stood in the
centre of it, very much out of repair, and which,
in consequence of certain reports, had received
the appellation of the Haunted House. Either
from these reports, or from its actual dreariness,
the doctor had found it impossible to get a
tenant
;
and, that the place might not fall to ruin
before he could reside in it himself, he had placed
a country boor with his family, in one wing,
with the privilege of cultivating the farm on
shares.
The doctor now felt all the dignity of a
land-holder
rising within him. He had a little of the
German pride of territory in his composition,
and almost looked upon himself as owner of a
principality. He began to complain of the
fatigue
of business, and was fond of riding out
to look at his estate His little expeditions
to his lands were attended with a bustle and
parade
VOL. II. 30
that created a sensation throughout the
neighbourhood. His wall eyed horse stood
stamping
and whisking off the flies for a full hour
before
the house. Then the doctor's saddle bags
would be brought out and adjusted; then after
a little while his cloak would be rolled up and
strapped to the saddle; then his umbrella would
be buckled to the cloak; while, in the mean
time, a group of ragged boys, that observant
class of beings, would gather before the door.
At length the doctor would issue forth in a pair
of jack boots that reached above his knees, and
a cocked hat flapped down in front. As he was
a short fat man he took some time to mount
into the saddle, and when there, he took some
time to have the saddle and stirrups properly
adjusted; enjoying the wonder and admiration
of the urchin crowd. Even after he had set
off, he would pause in the middle of the street;
or trot back two or three times to give some
parting orders, which were answered by the
housekeeper from the door, or Dolph from the
study, or the black cook from the cellar, or the
chambermaid from the garret window, and
there were generally some last words bawled
after him, just as he was turning the corner.
The whole neighbourhood would be aroused
by this pomp and circumstance. The cobbler
would leave his last; the barber would thrust
out his frizzed head, with a comb sticking in it;
a knot would collect at the grocer's door; and
the word would be buzzed, from one end of the
street to the other, the doctor's riding out to
his country seat!
These were golden moments for Dolph. No
sooner was the doctor out of sight, than pestle
and mortar were abandoned; the laboratory was
left to take care of itself; and the student was
off on some madcap frolick. Indeed, it must be
confessed, the youngster, as he grew up, seemed
in a fair way to fulfil the prediction of the old
claret coloured gentleman. He was the
ring-leader
of all holyday sports and midnight
gambols
;
ready for all kinds of mischievous pranks,
and hare-brained adventure. There is nothing
so troublesome as a hero on a small scale; or
rather a hero in a small town. Dolph soon
became
the abhorrence of all drowsy,
housekeeping
old citizens, who hated noise, and had no
relish
for waggery. The good dames, too,
considered
him as little better than a reprobate;
gathered their daughters under their wings
whenever he approached, and pointed him out
as a warning to their sons. No one seemed to
hold him in much regard, excepting the wild
striplings of the place who were captivated by
his open-hearted daring manners; and the
negroes
,
who always look upon every idle,
do-nothing
youngster, as a kind of gentleman. Even
the good Peter de Groodt, who had considered
himself a kind of patron of the lad, began to
despair of him; and would shake his head
dubiously
,
as he listened to a long complaint of the
housekeeper's, and sipped a glass of her
raspberry
brandy.
Still, his mother was not to be wearied out
of her affection by all the waywardness of her
boy, nor disheartened by the stories of his
misdeeds
with which her good friends were
continually
regaling her. She had, it is true, very
little of the pleasure which rich people enjoy,
in always hearing their children praised; but
she considered all this ill will as a kind of
persecution
which he suffered, and she liked him
the better on that account. She saw him
growing
up a fine, tall, good looking youngster, and
she looked at him with the secret pride of a
mother's
heart. It was her great desire that Dolph
should appear like a gentleman, and all the
money
she could save went towards helping out
his pocket and his wardrobe. She would look
out of the window after him as he sallied forth
in his best, and her heart would yearn with
delight
;
and once, when Peter de Groodt, struck
with the youngster's gallant appearance on a
bright Sunday morning, observed, well, after
all, Dolph does grow a comely fellowthe
tear of pride started into the mother's eye; ah,
neighbour! neighbour! exclaimed she, they
may say what they please, poor Dolph will yet
hold up his head with the best of them!
Dolph Heyliger had now nearly attained his
one-and-twentieth year, and the term of his
medical studies was just expiring; yet it must
be confessed that he knew little more of the
profession
than when he first entered the doctor's
doors. This, however, could not be from any
want of quickness of parts, for he showed
amazing
aptness in mastering other branches of
knowledge which he could only have studied at
intervals. He was, for instance, a sure
marksman
,
and won all the geese and turkeys at
Christmas
holydays. He was a bold rider; he was
famous for leaping and wrestling; he played
tolerably
on the fiddle; could swim like a fish,
and was the best hand in the whole place at
fives and ninepins.
All these accomplishments, however, procured
him no favour in the eyes of the doctor, who
grew more and more crabbed and intolerant the
nearer the term of apprenticeship approached.
Frau Ilsy, too, was forever finding some
occasion
to raise a windy tempest about his ears;
and seldom encountered him about the house
without a clatter of the tongue; so that, at length,
the jingling of her keys as she approached was
to Dolph like the ringing of the prompter's bell,
that gives notice of a theatrical thunder storm.
Nothing but the infinite good humour of the
heedless youngster enabled him to bear all this
domestic tyranny without open rebellion. It
was evident that the doctor and his housekeeper
were preparing to beat the poor youth out of the
nest the moment his term should have expired;
a short-hand mode which the doctor had of
providing
for useless disciples.
Indeed, the little man had been rendered more
than usually irritable lately, in consequence of
various cares and vexations which his country
estate had brought upon him. The doctor had
been repeatedly annoyed by the rumours and
tales which prevailed concerning the old
mansion
,
and found it difficult to prevail even upon
the countryman and his family to remain there
rent free. Every time he rode out to the farm
he was teased by some fresh complaint of strange
noises and fearful sights with which the tenants
were disturbed at night; and the doctor would
come home fretting and fuming, and vent his
spleen upon the whole household. It was,
indeed
,
a sore grievance, that affected him both in
pride and purse. He was threatened with an
absolute loss of the profits of his property; and
then what a blow to his territorial consequence,
to be the landlord of a haunted house. It was
observed, however, that with all his vexation,
the doctor never proposed to sleep in the house
himself; nay, he could never be prevailed upon
to remain on the premises after dark; but made
the best of his way for town as soon as the bats
began to flit about in the twilight. The fact
was, the doctor was a secret believer in ghosts,
having passed the early part of his life in a
country
where they particularly abound; and,
indeed
,
the story went, that when a boy he had
once seen the Devil upon the Hartz Mountains
in Germany.
At length the doctor's vexations on this head
were brought to a crisis. One morning as he
sat dozing over a volume in his study, he was
suddenly startled from his slumbers by the
bustling
in of the housekeeper.
Here's a fine to-do! cried she, as she
entered
the room. Here's Claus Hopper come
in bag and baggage from the farm, and swears
he'll have nothing more to do with it. The
whole family have been frightened out of their
wits; for there's such racketing and rummaging
about the old house that they can't sleep quiet
in their beds.
Donner und Blitzen! cried the doctor,
impatiently, will they never have done
chattering
about that house? What a pack of fools
to let a few hungry rats and mice frighten them
out of good quarters.
Nay, nay, said the housekeeper, wagging
her head knowingly, and piqued at having a
good ghost story doubted, there's more in it
than rats and mice. All the neighbourhood talks
about the house; and then such sights have
been seen in it!Peter de Groodt tells me that
the family that sold you the house and went to
Holland dropped several strange hints about it,
VOL. II. 31
and said `they wished you joy of your bargain;'
and you know yourself there's no getting any
family to live in it.
Peter de Groodt's a ninny, an old woman,
said the doctor peevishly; I'll warrant he's
been filling these people's heads full of stories.
It's just like his nonsense about the ghost that
haunted the church belfry, as an excuse for not
ringing the bell that cold night when Hermanus
Brinkerhoff's house was on fire.Send Claus
to me.
Claus Hopper now made his appearance. A
simple country lout, full of awe at finding
himself
in the very study of Dr. Knipperhausen, and
too much embarrassed to enter into much detail
of the matters that had caused his alarm. He
stood twirling his hat in one hand; resting
sometimes
on one leg, sometimes on the other;
looking
occasionally at the doctor, and now and then
stealing a fearful glance at the death's head that
seemed ogling him from the top of the clothes
press.
The doctor tried every means to persuade him
to return to the farm, but all in vain. He
maintained
a dogged determination on the subject;
and at the close of every argument or solicitation,
would make the same brief, inflexible reply.
Ich kan nicht, mynheer.
The doctor was a little pot and soon hot,
his patience was exhausted by these continual
vexations about his estate. The stuborn
refusal
of Claus Hopper seemed to him like flat
rebellion; his temper suddenly boiled over, and
Claus was glad to make a rapid retreat to
escape
scalding.
When the bumpkin got to the housekeeper's
room he found Peter de Groodt and several other
true believers ready to receive him. Here he
indemnified himself for the restraint he had
suffered in the study, and opened a budget of
stories about the Haunted House that astonished
all his hearers. The housekeeper believed them
all, if it was only to spite the doctor, for having
received her intelligence so uncourteously. Peter
de Groodt matched them with many a wonderful
legend of the times of the Dutch dynasty; and
of the Devil's stepping stones; and of the pirate
that was hanged at Gibbet Island, and continued
to swing there at night, long after the gallows
was taken down; and of the ghost of the
unfortunate
German, Leisler, who was hanged for
treason; which haunted the old fort and the
government
house. The gossiping knot dispersed,
each charged with direful intelligence. The
sexton disburthened himself at a vestry meeting
that was held that very day; and the black
cook forsook her kitchen, and spent half of the
day at the street pump, that gossiping place of
servants, dealing forth the news to all that came
for water. In a little while the whole town was
in a buzz with tales about the Haunted House.
Some said that Claus Hopper had seen the
Devil; while others hinted that the house was
haunted by the ghosts of some of the patients,
which the doctor had physicked out of the
world; and that was the reason why he did not
venture to live in it himself.
All this put the little doctor in a terrible fume.
He threatened vengeance on any one who
should affect the value of his property by
exciting
popular prejudices. He complained
loudy
of thus being in a manner dispossessed of his
territories by mere bugbears; but he secretly
determined to have the house exorcised by the
dominie.
Great was his relief, therefore, when, in the
midst of his perplexities, Dolph stepped forward
and undertook to garrison the haunted house.
The youngster had been listening to all the
stories
of Claus Hopper, and Peter de Groodt; he
was fond of adventure; he loved the
marvellous
;
and his imagination had become quite
excited
by these tales of wonder. Besides, he had
led such an uncomfortable life at the doctor's,
being subjected to the intolerable thraldom of
early hours, that he was delighted at the prospect
of having a house to himself, even though it
should be a haunted one. His offer was eagerly
accepted, and it was determined that he should
mount guard that very night. His only
stipulation
was, that the enterprize should be kept
secret
from his mother; for he knew the poor soul
would not sleep a wink if she knew that her son
was waging war with the powers of darkness.
When night came on he set out on this
perilous
expedition. The old black cook, his only
friend in the household, had provided him with
a little mess for supper, and a rushlight; and
she tied round his neck an amulet given her
by an African conjuror as a charm against evil
spirits. Dolph was escorted on his way by the
doctor and Peter de Groodt, who had agreed to
accompany him to the house, and to see him safe
lodged.
The night was overcast, and it was very dark
when they arrived at the grounds which
surrounded
the mansion. The sexton led the way
with a lanthorn. As they walked along the
avenue
of acacias, the fitful light, catching from
bush to bush, and tree to tree, often startled the
doughty Peter, and made him fall back upon his
followers; and the doctor grappled still closer
hold of Dolph's arm, observing that the ground
was very slippery and uneven. At one time they
were nearly put to total rout by a bat which
came flitting about the lanthorn; and the notes
of the insects from the trees, and the frogs from
a neighbouring pond, formed a most drowsy and
doleful concert.
The front door of the mansion opened with a
grating sound that made the doctor turn pale.
They entered a tolerably large hall, such as is
common in American country houses, to serve
for sitting rooms in warm weather. From hence
they went up a wide staircase, that groaned and
creaked as they trod, every step making its
particular
note, like the key of a harpsichord. This
led to another hall on the second story, from
whence they entered the room where Dolph was
to sleep. It was large, and scantily furnished.
The shutters were closed; but as they were
much shattered, there was not want of a
circulation
of air. It appeared to have been that
sacred
chamber known among Dutch housewives
by the name of the best bed room; which is
the best furnished, but in which scarce any body
is ever permitted to sleep. Its splendour,
however
,
was all at an end. A few broken articles
of furniture were about the walls, and in the
centre of the room was a heavy deal table, and
a large arm chair; both which had the look of
being coeval with the mansion. The fireplace
was wide, and had been faced with Dutch tiles,
representing scripture stories; but several of
them had fallen out of their places, and lay
shattered
about the hearth.
The sexton had lit the rushlight, and the
doctor
,
looking fearfully about the room, was just
exhorting Dolph to be of good cheer, and to
pluck up a stout heart, when a noise in the
chimney
like voices and struggling, struck a
sudden
panic into the sexton. He took to his
heels, with the lanthorn, the doctor followed
hard after him; the stairs groaned and whistled
as they hurried down, increasing their agitation
and speed by its noises. The front door slammed
after them, and Dolph heard them scrambling
down the avenue, till the sound of their feet
was lost in the distance. That he did not join in
this precipitate retreat, might have been owing
to his possessing a little more courage than his
companions; or, perhaps, that he had caught a
glimpse of the cause of their dismay in a nest
of chimney swallows that came tumbling down
into the fireplace.
Being now left to himself, he secured the front
door by a strong bolt and bar, and having seen
that the other entrances were fastened, he
returned
to his desolate chamber. Having made his
supper from the basket which the good old cook
had provided, he locked the chamber door and
retired to rest on a mattress in one corner. The
night was calm and still, and nothing broke
upon the profound quiet but the lonely chirping
of a cricket from the chimney of a distant
chamber
.
The rushlight, which stood in the centre
of the deal table, shed a feeble yellow ray,
dimly
illumining the chamber, and making uncouth
shapes and shadows on the walls, from the clothes
which Dolph had thrown over a chair.
With all his boldness of heart there was
something
subduing in this desolate scene; and he
felt his spirits flag within him, as he lay on his
hard bed and gazed about the room. He was
VOL. II. 32
turning over in his mind his idle habits, his
doubtful prospects, and now and then heaving
a heavy sigh as he thought on his poor old
mother
;
for there is nothing like the silence and
loneliness of night to bring dark shadows over
the brightest mind. By and bye he thought he
heard a sound as if some one was walking below
stairs. He listened, and distinctly heard a step
on the great staircase. It approached solemnly
and slowly, tramptramptramp! It was
evidently the tread of some heavy personage;
and yet how could he have got into the house
without making a noise? He had examined all
the fastenings, and was certain that every
entrance
was secured. Still the steps advanced,
tramptramptramp! It was evident that
the person approaching could not be a robber;
the step was too loud and deliberate; a robber's
would be either stealthy or precipitate. And
now the footsteps had ascended the staircase;
they were slowly advancing along the passage,
resounding through the silent and empty
apartments
.
The very cricket had ceased its
melancholy
note, and nothing interrupted their awful
distinctness. The door, which had been locked
on the inside, slowly swung open as if self moved.
The footsteps entered the room: but no one
was to be seen. They passed slowly and
audibly
across it, tramptramptramp! but
whatever
made the sound was invisible. Dolph
rubbed
his eyes, and stared about him; he could see
to every part of the dimly lighted chamber; all
was vacant; yet still he heard these mysterious
footsteps solemnly walking about the chamber.
They ceased, and all was dead silence. There
was something more appalling in this invisible
visitation, than there would have been in any
thing that addressed itself to the eyesight. It
was awfully vague and indefinite. He felt his
heart beat hard against his ribs; a cold sweat
broke out upon his forehead; he lay for some
time in a state of violent agitation. Nothing,
however, occurred to increase his alarm His
light gradually burnt down into the socket, and
he felt asleep. When he awoke it was broad
daylight. The sun was peering through the
cracks of the window shutters, and the birds
were merrily singing about the house. The
bright cheery day soon put to flight all the
terrors
of the preceding night. Dolph laughed, or
rather tried to laugh, at all that had passed; and
endeavoured to persuade himself that it was a
mere freak of the imagination, conjured up by
the stories he had heard; but he was a little
puzzled to find he door of his room locked on
the inside, notwithstanding that he had
positively
seen it swing open as the footsteps entered.
He returned to town in a state of considerable
perplexity; but he determined to say nothing on
the subject until his doubts were either
confirmed
or removed by another night's watching.
His silence was a grievous disappointment to the
gossips who had gathered at the doctor's
mansion
.
They had prepared their minds to hear
direful tales, and they were almost in a rage at
being assured that he had nothing to relate.
The next night, then, Dolph repeated his
vigil. He now entered the house with some
trepidation. He was particular in examining
the fastenings of all the doors, and securing
them well. He locked the door of his
chamber
,
and placed a chair upon it; then having
despatched his supper he threw himself on his
mattress and endeavoured to sleep. It was all
in vain. A thousand crowding fancies kept him
waking. The time slowly dragged on as if
minutes were spinning themselves out into
hours. As the night advanced he grew more
and more nervous, and he almost started from
his couch when he heard the mysterious
foot-step
again on the staircase. Up it came, as
before, solemnly and slowly, tramptramp
tramp! It approached along the passage. The
door again swung open, as if there had been
neither lock nor impediment, and a strange
looking figure stalked into the room. It was
an elderly man, large and robust, clothed in the
old Flemish fashion. He had on a kind of short
cloak, with a garment under it, belted round
the waist. A pair of russet boots, very large
at top, and standing widely from his legs. He
had trunk hose, with great bunches at the
knees. His hat was broad and slouched, with
a feather trailing over one side. His iron gray
hair hung in thick masses in his neck, and he
had a short grizzled beard. He walked slowly
round the room, as if examining that all was
safe; then, hanging his hat on a peg beside the
door, he sat down in the elbow chair, and
leaning
his elbow on the table, fixed his eyes on
Dolph with an unmoving and deadening stare.
Dolph was not naturally a coward; but he
had been brought up in an implicit belief in
ghosts and goblins. A thousand stories came
swarming to his mind, that he had heard about
this building; and, as he looked at this strange
personage
,
with his uncouth garb, his pale visage,
his grizzly beard, and his fixed, staring, fish-like
eye, his teeth began to chatter, his hair to rise
on his head, and a cold sweat to break out all
over his body. How long he remained in this
situation he could not tell, for he was like one
fascinated. He could not take his gaze off
from the spectre, but lay staring at him, with
his whole intellect absorbed in the
contemplation
.
The old man remained seated behind the
table, without stirring or turning an eye;
always
keeping a dead steady glare upon Dolph.
At length the household cock from a
neighbouring
farm clapped his wings, and gave a loud
cheerful crow that rung over the fields. At the
sound the old man slowly rose and took down
his hat from the peg; the door opened, and
closed after him; he was heard to go slowly
down the staircase, tramptramptramp! and
when he had got to the bottom, all was again
silent. Dolph lay and listened earnestly: counted
every foot fall; listened and listened if the steps
should return; until, exhausted with watching
and agitation, he fell into a troubled sleep.
Daylight again brought fresh courage and
assurance
.
He would fain have considered all that
had passed as a mere dream. Yet, there stood
the chair in which the unknown had seated
himself
;
there was the table on which he had
leaned
;
there was the peg on which he had hung his
hat; and there was the door locked precisely as
he himself locked it, with the chair placed against
it. He hastened down stairs and examined the
doors and windows; all were exactly in the same
state in which he had left them, and there was
no apparent way by which any being could have
entered and left the house without leaving some
trace behind. Pooh! said Dolph to himself,
it was all a dream; but it would not do; the
more he endeavoured to shake the scene off from
his mind, the more it haunted him.
Though he persisted in a strict silence as to
all that he had seen and heard, yet his looks
betrayed
the uncomfortable night that he had
passed
.
It was evident there was something
wonderful
hidden under this mysterious reserve. The
doctor took him into the study, locked the door,
and sought to have a full and confidential
communication
;
but he could get nothing out of him.
Frau Ils took him aside into the pantry, but to
as little purpose; and Peter de Groodt held him
by the button for a full hour, in the churchyard,
the very place to get at the bottom of a ghost
story; but came off not a whit wiser than the
rest. It is always the case, however, that one
truth concealed, makes a dozen current lies. It
is like a guinea locked up in a bank, that has a
dozen paper representatives. Before the day
was over, the neighbourhood was full of reports.
Some said that Dolph Heyliger watched in the
Haunted House, with pistols loaded with silver
bullets; others that he had had a long talk with a
spectre without a head; others that Doctor
Knipperhausen and the sexton had been hunted
down the Bowery-Lane, and quite into town, by
a legion of ghosts of their old customers. Some
shook their heads, and thought it a shame that
the doctor should put Dolph to pass the night
alone in that dismal house, where he might be
spirited away no one knew whither; while others
observed, with a shrug, that if the devil did carry
off the youngster, it would but be taking his
own.
These rumours at length reached the ears of
the good Dame Heyliger, and, as may be
supposed
,
threw her into a terrible alarm. For her
son to have exposed himself to dangers from
living
foes, would have been nothing so dreadful
VOL. II. 33
in her eyes, as to dare alone the terrors of the
Haunted House. She hastened to the doctor's,
and passed a great part of the day in attempting
to dissuade Dolph from repeating his vigil; she
told him a score of tales which her gossiping
friends had just related to her, of persons who
had been carried off when watching alone in old
ruinous houses. It was all to no effect. Dolph's
pride, as well as curiosity, was piqued. He
endeavoured
to calm the apprehensions of his
mother
,
and to assure her that there was no truth
in all the rumours she had heard. She looked
at him dubiously, and shook her head; but
finding
his determination was not to be shaken, she
brought him a little thick Dutch bible, with brass
clasps, to take with him as a sword wherewith
to fight the powers of darkness; and lest that
might not be sufficient, the housekeeper gave him
the Heidelberg Catechism by way of dagger.
The next night, therefore, Dolph took up his
quarters, for the third time, in the old mansion.
Whether dream or not, the same thing was
repeated
.
Towards midnight, when every thing
was still, the same sound echoed through the
empty halls, tramptramptramp! The stairs
were again ascended; the door again swung
open; the old man entered; walked round the
room; hung up his hat, and seated himself by
the table. The same fear and trembling came
over poor Dolph, though not in so violent a
degree
.
He lay in the same way, motionless and
fascinated, staring at the figure; which
regarded
him as before, with a dead, fixed, chilling
gaze. In this way they remained for a long
time, till by degrees Dolph's courage began
gradually
to revive. Whether alive or dead, this
being had certainly some object in his visitation,
and he recollected to have heard it said, that
spirits have no power to speak until they are
spoken to. Summoning up resolution, therefore,
and making two or three attempts, before he
could get his parched tongue in motion, he
addressed
the unknown in the most solemn form
of adjuration that he could recollect, and
demanded
to know what was the motive of his
visit.
No sooner had he finished than the old man
rose and took down his hat; the door opened, and
he went out, looking back upon Dolph just as
he crossed the threshold, as if expecting him to
follow. The youngster did not hesitate an
instant
.
He took the candle in his hand and the
bible under his arm, and obeyed the tacit
invitation
.
The candle emitted a feeble, uncertain
ray, but still he could see the figure before him
slowly descending the stairs. He followed
trembling
.
When it had reached the bottom of the
stairs it turned through the hall towards the back
door of the mansion. Dolph held the light over
ballustrades, but, in his eagerness to catch a sight
of the unknown, he flared his feeble taper so
suddenly, that it went out. Still there was
sufficient light from the pale moon beams that
fell through a narrow window, to give him an
indistinct view of the figure, near the door. He
followed, therefore, down stairs, and turned
towards the place; but when he got there
the unknown had disappeared. The door
remained
fast barred and bolted; there was no
other mode of exit; yet the being, whatever he
might be, was gone. He unfastened the door
and looked out into the fields. It was a hazy
moonlight night; so that the eye could
distinguish
objects at some distance. He thought he
saw the unknown in a footpath, that led from
the door. He was not mistaken; but how had
he got out of the house? He did not pause to
think, but followed on. The old man proceeded
at a measured pace, without looking about him,
his footsteps sounding on the hard ground. He
passed through the orchard of apple trees, that
stood near the house, always keeping to the
footpath
.
It led to a well, situated in a little hollow,
which had supplied the farm with water. Just
at this well Dolph lost sight of him. He
rubbed
his eyes and looked again; but nothing was
to be seen of the unknown. He reached the
well, but nobody was there. All the
surrounding
ground was open and clear; there was no
bush nor hiding place. He looked down the
well, and saw, at a great depth, the reflection of
the sky in the still water. After remaining here
for some time, without seeing or hearing any
thing more of his mysterious conductor; he
returned
to the house full of awe and wonder.
He bolted the door; groped his way back to
bed; and it was long before he could compose
himself to sleep.
His dreams were strange and troubled. He
thought he was following the old man along the
side of a great river, until they came to a vessel
that was on the point of sailing, and that his
conductor led him on board and vanished. He
remembered the commander of the vessel, a short
swarthy man, with crisped black hair, blind of
one eye, and lame of one leg; but the rest of his
dream was very confused. Sometimes he was
sailing, sometimes on shore; now amidst storms
and tempests, and now wandering quietly in
unknown
streets. The figure of the unknown was
strangely mingled up with the incidents of the
dream; and the whole distinctly wound up by
his finding himself on board of the vessel again,
returning home with a great bag of money!
When he woke, the gray cool light of dawn
was streaking the horizon, and the cocks passing
the reveil from farm to farm throughout the
country. He rose more harassed and perplexed
than ever. He was singularly confounded by
all that he had seen and dreamt, and began to
doubt whether his mind was not affected, and
whether all that was passing in his thoughts
might not be mere feverish fantasy. In his
present
state of mind he did not feel disposed to
return immediately to the doctor's, and undergo
the cross-questioning of the household. He
made a scanty breakfast, therefore, on the
remains
of his last night's provisions; and then
wandered out into the fields to meditate on all
that had befallen him. Lost in thought, he
rambled
about, gradually approaching the town, until
the morning was far advanced, when he was
roused by a hurry and bustle around him. He
found himself near the water's edge in a throng
of people, hurrying to a pier where there was a
vessel ready to make sail. He was unconsciously
carried along by the impulse of the crowd, and
found that it was a sloop, on the point of sailing
up the Hudson to Albany. There was much
leave-taking, and kissing of old women and
children, and great activity in carrying on board
baskets of bread and cakes, and provisions of all
kinds, notwithstanding the mighty joints of
meat that dangled over the stern; for a voyage
to Albany was an expedition of great moment
in those days. The commander of the sloop
was hurrying about and giving a world of
orders
,
which were not very strictly attended to;
one man being busy in lighting his pipe, and
another
in sharpening his snicker-snee.
The appearance of the commander suddenly
caught Dolph's attention; he was short and
swarthy
,
with crisped black hair, blind of one eye
and lame of one legthe very commander that
he had seen in his dream! Surprized and
aroused
he considered the scene more attentively, and
recalled still further traces of his dream; the
appearance of the vessel, of the river, and of a
a variety of other objects, accorded with the
imperfect
images vaguely rising to recollection.
As he stood musing on these circumstances,
the captain suddenly called to him in Dutch,
step on board, young man; or you'll be left
behind! He was startled by the summons;
he saw that the sloop was cast loose, and was
actually moving from the pier; it seemed as if he
was actuated by some irresistible impulse; he
sprung upon the deck, and the next moment the
sloop was hurried off by the wind and tide.
Dolph's thoughts and feelings were all in
tumult
and confusion. He had been strongly
worked upon by the events that had recently
befallen him, and could not but think that there
was some connexion between his present
situation
and his last night's dream. He felt as if he
was under supernatural influence; and he tried
to assure himself with an old and favourite
maxim
of his, that one way or other all would turn
out for the best. For a moment, the
indignation
of the doctor at his departure without leave,
passed across his mind, but that was a matter of
little moment; then he thought of the distress of
his mother at his strange disappearance; and the
VOL. II. 34
idea gave him a sudden pang. He would have
intreated to be put on shore, but he knew with
such wind and tide the entreaty would have been
in vain. Then the inspiring love of novelty and
adventure came rushing in full tide through his
bosom; he felt himself launched, strangely and
suddenly on the world, and under full way to
explore
the regions of wonder that lay up this mighty
river, and beyond those blue mountains that had
bounded his horizon since childhood. While he
was lost in this whirl of thought, the sails strained
to the breeze; the shores seemed to hurry away
behind him; and, before he perfectly recovered
his self-possession, the sloop was ploughing her
way past Spiking Devil and Yonkers, and the
tallest chimney of the Manhattoes had faded
from his sight.
I have said that a voyage up the Hudson in
those days was an undertaking of some
moment
;
indeed it was as much thought of as a
voyage to Europe is at present. The sloops
were often many days on the way; the cautious
navigators taking in sail when it blew fresh, and
coming to anchor at night; and stopping to send
the boat ashore for milk for tea, without which
it was impossible for the worthy old lady
passengers
to subsist. And then there were the
much talked of perils of the Tappaan Zee, and
the Highlands. In short, a prudent Dutch
burgher
would talk of such a voyage for months and
even years before hand; and never undertook
it without putting his affairs in order, making
his will, and having prayers said for him in the
Low Dutch churches.
In the course of such a voyage, therefore,
Dolph was satisfied he would have time enough
to reflect, and to make up his mind what he
should do when he arrived at Albany. The
captain
with his blind eye and lame leg, would, it is
true, bring his strange dream to mind, and perplex
him sadly for a few moments; but of late his
life had been made up so much of dreams and
realities; his nights and days had been so
jumbled
together, that he seemed to be moving
continually
in a delusion. There is always,
however
,
a kind of vagabond consolation in a man's
having nothing in this world to lose; with this
Dolph comforted his heart, and determined
to make the most of the present enjoyment.
In the second day of their voyage they came
to the Highlands. It was the latter part of a
calm, sultry day that they floated gently with
the tide between these stern mountains There
was that perfect quiet which prevails over
nature
in the languor of summer heat. The
turning
of a plank, or the accidental falling of an
oar on deck, was echoed from the mountain side
and reverberated along the shores; and if by
chance the captain gave a shout of command,
there were airy tongues that mocked it from
every cliff.
Dolph gazed about him in mute delight and
wonder at these scenes of nature's magnificence.
To the left the Dunderberg heaved its woody
precipices, height over height, forest over forest,
away into the deep summer sky. To the right
strutted forth the bold promontory of Anthony's
Nose, with a solitary eagle wheeling about it;
while beyond, mountain succeeded to mountain,
until they seemed to lock their arms together,
and confine this mighty river in their embraces.
There was a feeling of quiet luxury in gazing
at the broad green bosoms here and there
scooped
out among the precipices; or at woodlands
high in air, nodding over the edge of some
beetling
bluff, and all transparent in the yellow
sunshine.
In the midst of his admiration Dolph
remarked
a pile of bright snowy clouds peering above
the western heights. It was succeeded by
another, and another, each seemingly pushing
onwards its predecessor, and towering, with
dazzling
brilliancy, in the deep blue atmosphere.
And now muttering peals of thunder were faintly
heard, rolling behind the mountains. The river,
hitherto still and glassy, reflecting pictures of
the sky and land, now showed a dark ripple
at a distance, as the breeze came creeping up it.
The fish hawks wheeled and screamed, and
sought their nests on the high dry trees; the
crows flew clamorously to the crevices of the
rocks, and all nature seemed conscious of the
approaching
thunder gust.
The clouds now rolled in volumes over the
mountain tops; their summits still bright and
snowy, but the lower parts of an inky
blackness
.
The rain began to patter down in broad
and scattered drops; the wind freshened and
curled up the waves; at length it seemed as if
the bellying clouds were torn open by the
mountain
tops, and complete torrents of rain came
rattling down. The lightning leaped from cloud
to cloud; and streamed quivering against the
rocks, splitting and rending the stoutest forest
trees. The thunder burst in tremendous
explosions
;
the peals were echoed from mountain to
mountain; they crashed upon Dunderberg, and
then rolled up the long defile of the Highlands;
each headland making a new echo, until old
Bull Hill seemed to bellow back the storm.
For a time the scudding rack and mist, and
the sheeted rain almost hid the landscape from
the sight; there was a fearful gloom, illumined
still more fearfully by the streams of lightning
which glittered among the rain drops. Never
had Dolph beheld such an absolute warring of
the elements; it seemed as if the storm was
tearing and rending its way through this
mountain
defile, and had brought all the artillery of
Heaven into action.
The vessel was hurried on by the increasing
wind, until she came to where the river makes
a sudden bend, the only one in the whole course
of its majestic career.
*
*
This must have been the bend at West Point.
Just as they turned the
point a violent flaw of wind came sweeping down
a mountain gully, bending the forest before it,
and in a moment lashing up the river into white
froth and foam. The captain saw the danger,
and cried out to lower the sail. Before the order
could be obeyed the flaw struck the sloop and
threw her on her beam ends. Every thing now
was fright and confusion. The flapping of the
sails; the whistling and rushing of the wind;
the bawling of the captain and crew; the
shrieking
of the passengers;all mingled with the
rolling
and bellowing of the thunder. In the midst
of the uproar the sloop righted. At the same
time the mainsail shifted; the boom came
sweeping
the quarter-deck; and Dolph, who was
gazing
unguardedly at the clouds, found himself, in
a moment, floundering in the river.
For once in his life one of his idle
accomplishments
was of use to him. The many truant
hours which he had devoted to sporting in the
Hudson, had made him an expert swimmer;
yet, with all his strength and skill, he found
great difficulty in reaching the shore. His
disappearance
from the deck had not been noticed
by the crew, who were all occupied with their
own danger. The sloop was driven along with
inconceivable rapidity. She had hard work to
weather a long promontory on the eastern shore,
round which the river turned, and which
completely
shut her from Dolph's view.
It was on a point of the western shore that
he landed, and scrambling up the rocks he
threw himself, faint and exhausted, at the foot
of a tree. By degrees the thunder gust passed
over. The clouds rolled away to the east,
where they lay piled in feathery masses, tinted
with the last rosy rays of the sun. The distant
play of the lightning might be still seen about
their dark bases, and now and then might be
heard the faint muttering of the thunder.
Dolph rose and sought about, to see if any path
led from the shore, but all was savage and
trackless. The rocks were piled upon each
other; great trunks of trees lay shattered about,
as they had been blown down by the strong
winds which draw through these mountains, or
had fallen through age. The rocks, too, were
overhung with wild vines and briars, which
completely matted themselves together, and
opposed
a barrier to all ingress; every movement
that he made shook down a shower from the
dripping foliage. He attempted to scale one of
these almost perpendicular heights; he was
strong and agile, but he found it an Herculean
undertaking. Often he was supported merely
by crumbling projections of the rock, and
sometimes
he clung to roots and branches of trees,
VOL. II. 35
and hung almost suspended in the air. The
wood pigeon came cleaving his whistling flight
by him, and the eagle screamed from the brow
of the impending cliff. As he was thus
clambering
,
he was on the point of seizing hold of
a shrub, to aid his ascent, when something rustled
swiftly among the leaves, and he saw a snake
quivering along like lightning, almost from
under
his hand. It coiled itself up immediately,
in an attitude of defiance, with flattened head,
distended jaws, and quickly vibrating tongue,
that played like a little flame about its mouth.
Dolph's heart turned faint within him, and he
had well nigh let go his hold, and tumbled
down the precipice. The serpent stood on the
defensive but for an instant; it was an
instinctive
movement of defence; and, finding there
was no attack, it glided away into a cleft of the
rock. Dolph's eye followed it with fearful
intensity
,
and he saw at a glance that he was in
the vicinity of a nest of adders, that lay
knotted
and writhing and hissing in the chasm.
He hastened with all speed to escape from so
frightful a neighbourhood. His imagination
was full of this new horror; he saw an adder
in every curling vine, and heard the tail of a
rattle
snake in every dry leaf that rustled.
At length he succeeded in scrambling to the
summit of a precipice; but it was covered by a
dense forest. Wherever he could gain a look
out between the trees, he saw that the coast rose
into heights and cliffs, one rising beyond another,
until huge mountains overtopped the whole.
There were no signs of cultivation, nor any
smoke curling from among the trees to indicate
a human residence. Every thing was wild and
solitary. As he was standing on the edge of a
precipice that overlooked a deep ravine, fringed
with trees, his feet detached a great fragment of
rock; it fell crashing its way through the tree
tops, down into the chasm. A loud whoop or
rather a yell issued from the bottom of the glen;
the moment after there was the report of a gun,
and a ball came whistling over his head, cutting
the twigs and leaves, and burying itself deep in
the bark of a chestnut tree.
Dolph did not wait for a second shot, but made
a precipitate retreat; fearing every moment to
hear the enemy in pursuit He succeeded,
however
,
in returning unmolested to the shore, and
determined to penetrate no farther into a country
so beset with savage perils.
He sat himself down, dripping disconsolately,
on a wet stone. What was to be done? where
was he to shelter himself? The hour of repose
was approaching; the birds were seeking their
nests; the bat began to flit about in the twilight;
and the night hawk soaring high in heaven,
seemed
to be calling out the stars. Night gradually
closed in and wrapped every thing in gloom; and
though it was the latter part of summer, yet the
breeze, stealing along the river, and among these
dripping forests, was chilly and penetrating,
especially to a half-drowned man.
As he sat drooping and despondent in this
comfortless
condition, he perceived a light gleaming
through the trees near the shore, where the
winding of the river made a deep bay. It
cheered him with the hopes that here might be
some human habitation, where he might get
something to appease the clamorous cravings of
his stomach, and, what was equally necessary in
his shipwrecked condition, a comfortable shelter
for the night. It was with extreme difficulty
that he made his way towards the light; along
ledges of rocks, down which he was in danger
of sliding into the river; and over great trunks
of fallen trees, some of which had been blown
down in the late storm, and lay so thickly
together
that he had to struggle through their
branches. At length he came to the brow of a
rock that overhung a small dell, from whence
the light proceeded. It was from a fire at the
foot of a great tree that stood in the midst of a
grassy interval or plat among the rocks. The
fire cast up a red glare among the gray crags and
impending trees, leaving chasms of deep gloom,
that looked like entrances to caverns. A small
brook rippled close by, betrayed by the
quivering
reflection of the flame. There were two
figures moving about the fire, and others
squatted
before it. As they were between him and
the light they were in complete shadow; but one
of them happening to move round to the opposite
side, Dolph was startled at perceiving, by the
full glare falling on painted features, and
glittering
on silver ornaments, that he was an Indian.
He now looked more narrowly, and saw guns
leaning against a tree, and a dead body lying on
the ground.
Dolph now began to doubt whether he was
not in a worse condition than before; here was
the very foe that had fired at him from the glen.
He endeavoured to retreat quietly, not caring to
intrust himself to these half human beings, in so
savage and lonely a place. It was too late. The
Indian, with that eagle quickness of eye so
remarkable
in his race, perceived something
stirring
among the bushes on the rock. He seized
one of the guns that leaned against the tree; a
moment more and Dolph might have had his
passion for adventure cured by a bullet. He
hallooed loudly in the Indian salutation of
friendship
.
The whole party sprang upon their feet;
the salutation was returned, and the straggler
was invited to join them at the fire.
On approaching he found, to his consolation,
that the party was composed of white men, as
well as Indians. One, who was evidently the
principal personage, or commander, was seated
on a trunk of a tree before the fire. He was a
large stout man, somewhat advanced in life,
but hale and hearty. His face was bronzed
almost
to the colour of an Indian's, with strong
but rather jovial features, an aquiline nose, and
a mouth shaped like a mastiff's. His face was
half thrown in shade by a broad hat, with a
buck's tail in it. His iron gray hair hung short
in his neck. He wore a hunting frock, with
Indian leggings, and mockasons, and a
tomahawk
in the broad wampum belt round his waist.
As Dolph caught a distinct view of his person
and features, he was struck with something that
reminded him of the old man of the Haunted
House. The man before him, however, was
different
in his dress and age; he was more cheery
too in his aspect, and it was hard to define where
the vague resemblance lay; but a resemblance
there certainly was. Dolph felt some degree of
awe in approaching him; but was assured by
the frank, hearty welcome with which he was
received. As he cast his eyes about, too, he
was still farther encouraged by perceiving that
the dead body which had caused him some alarm,
was that of a deer; and his satisfaction was
complete in discovering, by the savoury steams
which issued from a kettle suspended by a
hooked stick over the fire, that there was a part
cooking for the evening's repast. He now found
that he had fallen in with a rambling hunting
party, such as often took place in those days
among the settlers along the river. The hunter is
always hospitable, and nothing makes men more
social and unceremonious than meeting in the
wilderness. The commander of the party
poured him out a dram of cheering liquor, which
he gave him, with a merry leer, to warm his
heart, and ordered one of his followers to fetch
some garments from a pinnace, which was
moored in a cove close by; while those in
which our hero was dripping, might be dried
before the fire.
Dolph found, as he had suspected, that the
shot from the glen which had come so near
giving him his quietus when on the precipice,
was from the party before him. He had nearly
crushed one of them by the fragment of rock
which he had detached; and the jovial old
hunter, in the broad hat and bucktail, had fired
at the place where he saw the bushes move,
supposing it to be some wild animal. He
laughed heartily at the blunder; it being what
is considered an exceeding good joke among
hunters; but faith, my lad, said he, if I
had but caught a glimpse of you to take sight
at, you would have followed the rock. Antony
Vander Heyden is seldom known to miss his
aim. These last words were at once a clue
to Dolph's curiosity; and a few questions let
him completely into the character of the man
before him, and of his band of woodland
rangers
.
The commander in the broad hat and
hunting frock, was no less a personage than the
Heer Antony Vander Heyden, of Albany, of
whom Dolph had many a time heard. He was,
VOL. II. 36
in fact, the hero of many a story; being a man of
singular humours, and whimsical habits, that
were matters of wonder to his quiet Dutch
neighbours
.
As he was a man of property, having
had a father before him from whom he inherited
large tracts of wild land, and whole barrels full
of wampum, he could indulge his humours
without control. Instead of staying quietly at
home, eating and drinking at regular meal times,
amusing himself by smoking his pipe on the
bench before the door, and then turning into a
comfortable bed at night, he delighted in all
kinds of rough, wild expeditions. He was
never so happy as when on a hunting party in
the wilderness, sleeping under trees or bark
sheds; or cruising down the river, or on some
woodland lake, fishing, and fowling, and
living
,
the Lord knows how.
He was a great friend to Indians, and to an
Indian mode of life, which he considered true
natural liberty and manly enjoyment. When at
home he had always several Indian hangers-on,
who loitered about his house, sleeping like
hounds in the sunshine, or preparing hunting and
fishing tackle for some new expedition; or
shooting
at marks with bows and arrows. Over these
vagrant beings Heer Antony had as perfect
command
as a huntsman over his pack; though they
were great nuisances to the regular people of his
neighbourhood. As he was a rich man, no one
ventured to thwart his humours; indeed, he had
a hearty joyous manner about him that made him
universally popular. He would troll a Dutch
song as he tramped along the street; hail every
one half a mile off; and when he entered a house,
he would slap the good man familiarly on his
back, shake him by the hand till he roared, and
kiss his wife and daughters before his facein
short, there was no pride nor ill humour about
Heer Antony.
Beside his Indian hangers-on, he had three
or four humble friends among the white men,
who looked up to him as a patron, and had the
run of his kitchen, and the favour of being taken
with him occasionally on his expeditions. It
was with a medley of such retainers that he was
at present on a cruize along the shores of the
Hudson, in a pinnace which he kept for his own
recreation. There were two white men with
him, dressed partly in the Indian style, with
mockasons and hunting shirts; the rest of his
crew consisted of four favourite Indians. They
had been prowling about the river, without any
definite object, until they had found themselves
in the Highlands, where they had passed two or
three days, hunting the deer which still lingered
among those mountains.
It is a lucky circumstance, young man,
said Antony Vander Heyden, that you
happened
to be knocked overboard to-day; as
tomorrow
morning we start early on our return
homewards; and you might then have looked
in vain for a meal among these mountains.
But come, lads; stir about! stir about! Let's
see what prog we have for supper; the kettle
has boiled long enough; my stomach cries
cupboard
;
and I'll warrant our guest is in no mood
to dally with his trencher.
There was a bustle now in the little
encampment
;
one took off the kettle and turned apart of
the contents into a huge wooden bowl; another
prepared a flat rock for a table; while a third
brought various utensils from the pinnace which
was moored close by, and Heer Antony himself
brought a flask or two of precious liquor from
his own private locker, knowing his boon
companions
too well to trust any of them with the
key. A rude but hearty repast was soon spread;
consisting of smoking venison, and cold bacon,
with Indian corn and round brown loaves of
good household bread. Never had Dolph made
a more delicious repast; and when he had
washed
it down by two or three draughts from the
Heer Antony's flask, and felt the jolly liquor send
ing its warmth through his veins and glowing
round his heart, he would not have changed his
situationno, not with the Governor of the
province.
The Heer Antony, too, grew chirping and
joyous; he told half a dozen fat stories, at which
his white followers laughed immoderately,
though the Indians as usual maintained an
invincible
gravity. This is your true life, my
boy, would he say, slapping Dolph on the
shoulder, a man is never a man till he can
defy wind and weather; range in the woods,
sleep under a tree, and live on bass wood leaves!
And then he would sit, with his hat on one side,
swaying a short squab Dutch bottle in his hand,
and sing a stave or two of a Dutch drinking
song, to which his myrmidons would join in
chorus.
With all his joviality, however, he mingled
discretion. Though he pushed the bottle
unreservedly
to Dolph, yet he always took care to
help his followers himself; and was particular in
only granting a certain allowance to the Indians.
Heer Antony knew the kind of beings he had to
deal with.
The repast was now at an end. The Indians
had made their supper in silence, from the
contents
of the kettle, and having drank their
allowance
and smoked their pipes, they wrapped
themselves in their blankets, stretched themselves
on the ground with their feet to the fire, and
soon fell asleep. The others remained chatting
before the fire, which the gloom of the forest and
the dampness of the air from the late storm,
rendered
extremely comfortable and cheering.
The conversation gradually moderated from
the hilarity of supper time, and turned upon
hunting adventures and exploits and perils in the
wilderness; many of which were so strange and
improbable, that I will not venture to repeat
them, lest the veracity of Heer Antony and his
comrades be brought into question. There were
many legendary tales told, also, about the river
and the settlements on its borders; and as Heer
Antony sat in a twisted root of a fallen tree, that
served him for a kind of arm chair, and told these
wild stories, with the fire gleaming on his
strongly
marked face, Dolph was again repeatedly
struck with something in his looks that reminded
him of the nightly visiter to the Haunted House.
The circumstance of Dolph's falling overboard
led to the relation of anecdotes of mishaps that
had befallen voyagers on this great river; many
of which were attributed to supernatural causes.
On Dolph's staring at this suggestion, Antony
Vander Heyden assured him that it was very
currently believed, among the settlers along the
river, that these Highlands were under the
dominion
of supernatural and mischievous beings;
which seemed particularly to vent their spleen
upon the Dutch skippers. Some, he said,
believed
them to be the evil spirits, conjured up by
the Indian wizards, in the early times of the
province, to revenge themselves on the strangers
who had dispossessed them of their country; the
greater part, however, accounted for them by
the legend of the Storm Ship, which haunted
Point-no-point. Finding Dolph to be utterly
ignorant of this tradition, Heer Antony
undertook
to tell it, in the very words in which it had
been written out by Mynheer Selyn, an early
poet of the New-Nederlandts. Giving therefore
a stir to the fire, he adjusted himself
comfortably
in his root of a tree, and throwing back his
head and closing his eyes for a few moments to
summon up his recollection, he related the
following
legend.
THE STORM SHIP.
In
the golden age of the province of the
New Netherlands, when it was under the sway
of Wouter Van Twiller, otherwise called
Walter
the Doubter, the people of the Manhattoes
were alarmed, one sultry afternoon, just about
the time of the summer solstice, by a tremendous
storm of thunder and lightning. The rain
descended
in such torrents as absolutely to spatter
up and smoke along the ground. It seemed as
if the thunder rattled and rolled over the very
roofs of the houses. The lightning was seen
to play about the church of St. Nicholas, and
to strive three times, in vain, to strike its
weather
cock. Garret Van Horne's new chimney
was split almost from top to bottom, and Doffue
Mildeberger was struck speechless from his bald
faced mare, just as as he was riding into town.
In a word, it was one of those unparalleled
storms that only happen once within the
memory
VOL. II. 37
of that venerable personage, known in all
towns by the appellation of the oldest
inhabitant
.
Great was the terror of the good old women
of the Manhattoes; they gathered their children
together and took refuge in the cellars, after
having hung a shoe on the iron point of every
bed post, lest they should attract the lightning.
At length the storm abated; the thunder sunk
into a growl, and the setting sun breaking from
under the fringed borders of the clouds, made
the broad bosom of the bay to gleam like a sea
of molten gold.
The word was given from the fort that a ship
was standing up the bay. It passed from mouth
to mouth, and street to street, and soon put the
little capital in a bustle. The arrival of a ship,
in those early times of the settlement, was an
event of vast importance to the inhabitants. It
brought them news from the old world, from the
land of their birth, from which they were so
completely
severed. To the yearly ship, too, they
looked for their supply of luxuries, of finery, of
comforts, and almost of necessaries. The good
vrouw could not have her new cap, nor new
gown, until the arrival of the ship; the artist
waited for it for his tools; the burgomaster for
his pipe and his supply of hollands; the
schoolboy
for his top and marbles; and the lordly
landholder for the bricks with which he was to
build his new mansion. Thus every one, rich
and poor, great and small, looked out for the
arrival
of The Ship. It was the great yearly
event of the town of New Amsterdam; and
from one end of the year to the other, the ship
the shipthe shipwas the continual topic
of conversation.
The news from the fort, therefore, brought all
the populace down to the battery, to behold the
wished-for sight. It was not exactly the time
when she had been expected to arrive, and the
circumstance was a matter of some speculation.
Many were the groups collected about the battery.
Here and there might be seen a burgomaster of
slow and pompous gravity, giving his opinion
with, great confidence, to a crowd of old women
and idle boys. At another place was a knot of
old weather beaten fellows, who had been
seamen
or fishermen in their times, and were great
authorities on such occasions: these gave
different
opinions, and caused great disputes among
their several adherents. But the man most
looked up to, and followed, and watched by the
crowd was Hans Van Pelt, an old Dutch sea
captain
retired from service; the nautical oracle of
the place. He reconnoitred the ship through
an ancient telescope, covered with tarry canvas,
hummed a Dutch tune to himself, and said
nothing
a
hum, however, from Hans Van Pelt
had always more weight with the public than
a speech from another man.
In the mean time the ship became more
distinct
to the naked eye. She was a stout, round,
Dutch built vessel, with high bow and poop, and
bearing Dutch colours. The evening sun
gilded
her bellying canvas, as she came riding over
the long waving billows. The sentinel who had
given notice of her approach declared, that he
first got sight of her when she was in the centre
of the bay; and that she broke suddenly upon
his sight, just as if she had come out of the
bosom
of the black thunder cloud. The
by-standers
looked at Hans Van Pelt to see what he
would say to this report. Hans Van Pelt
screwed
his mouth closer together and said nothing;
upon which some shook their heads, and others
shrugged their shoulders.
The ship was now repeatedly hailed, but made
no reply, and passing by the fort, stood on up the
Hudson. A gun was brought to bear on her,
and, with some difficulty loaded and fired by
Hans Van Pelt, the garrison not being expert in
artillery. The shot seemed absolutely to pass
through the ship, and to skip along the water
on the other side, but no notice was taken of it.
What was strange, she had all her sails set, and
sailed right against wind and tide, which were
both down the river.
Upon this Hans Van Pelt, who was likewise
harbour master, ordered his boat, and set off to
board her, but after rowing for two or three hours
he returned without success. Sometimes he
would get within one or two hundred yards of
her, and then, in a twinkling, she would be half
a mile off. Some said it was because his
oarsmen
,
who were rather pursy and short winded,
stopped every now and then to take breath, and
spit on their hands; but this, it is probable, was a
mere scandal. He got near enough, however, to
see the crew, who were all dressed in the Dutch
style; the officers in doublets and high hats and
feathers. Not a word was spoken by any one
on board; they stood as motionless as so many
statues; and the ship seemed as if left to her own
government. Thus she kept on, away up the
river, lessening and lessening in the evening
sunshine
,
until she faded from sight, like a little
white cloud, melting away in a summer sky.
The appearance of this ship threw the
governor
into one of the deepest doubts that ever
beset
him in the whole course of his administration.
Fears were entertained for the security of the
infant settlements on the river, lest this might
be an enemy's ship in disguise sent to take
possession. The governor called together his
counsel repeatedly to assist him with their
conjectures
.
He sat in his chair of state, built of
timber from the sacred forest of the Hague; and
smoked his long jasmin pipe; and listened to
all that his counsellors had to say, on a subject
about which they knew nothing; but in spite of
all the conjecturing of the sagest and oldest heads,
the governor still continued to doubt.
Messengers were despatched to different places
on the river; but they returned without any
tidings; the ship had made no port. Day after
day, and week after week elapsed; but she never
returned down the Hudson. As, however, the
council seemed solicitous for intelligence, they
soon had it in abundance. The captains of the
sloops seldom arrived without bringing some
report
of having seen the strange ship, at different
parts of the river. Sometimes near the
Pallisadoes
;
sometimes off Croton point; and
sometimes
in the Highlands; but she was never
reported
as having been seen above the Highlands.
The crews of the sloops, it is true, generally
differed
among themselves in their accounts of
these apparitions; but that may have arisen
from the uncertain situations in which they saw
her. Sometimes it was by the flashes of a
thunder
storm, lighting up a pitchy night, and giving
glimpses of her careering across Tappaan Zee, or
the wide waste of Haverstraw Bay. At one
moment she would appear close upon them, as if
likely to run them down; and would throw
them into great bustle and alarm, when the next
flash would show her far off; always sailing
against the wind. Sometimes, in quiet
moon-light
nights, she would be seen under some high
bluff of the Highlands, all in deep shadow,
excepting
her top-sails glittering in the
moon-beams
.
By the time, however, that the voyagers
would reach the place, there would be no ship
to be seen; and when they had passed on for
some distance, and looked back, behold! there
she was again, with her top-sails in the
moon-shine
!
Her appearance was always just after,
or just before, or just in the midst of unruly
weather; and she was known by all the skippers
and voyagers of the Hudson by the name of the
Storm Ship.
These reports perplexed the governor and his
council more than ever; and it would be
endless
to repeat the conjectures and opinions that
were uttered on the subject. Some quoted
cases in point of ships seen off the coast of
New-England navigated by witches and
goblins
.
Old Hans Van Pelt, who had been more
than once to the Dutch colony at the Cape of
Good Hope, insisted that this must be the
Flying
Dutchman, which had so long haunted
Table
Bay, but being unable to make port, had
now sought another harbour. Others suggested
that, if it really was a supernatural apparition,
as there was every natural reason to believe,
it might be Hendrick Hudson and his crew of
the Half Moon; who, it was well known, had
once run aground in the upper part of the river,
in seeking a north-west passage to China. This
opinion had very little weight with the governor;
but it passed current out of doors. Indeed, it
had already been reported that Hendrick
Hudson
and his crew haunted the Kaatskill
Mountain
;
and it appeared very reasonable to
suppose
VOL. II. 38
that his ship might infest the river where
the enterprise was baffled; or that it might bear
the shadowy crew to their periodical revels in
the mountain.
Other events occurred to occupy the thoughts
and doubts of the sage Wouter and his council;
and the Storm Ship ceased to be a subject of
deliberation at the board. It continued,
however
,
to be a matter of popular belief and
marvellous
anecdote throughout the whole time of
the Dutch government; and particularly just
before
the capture of New-Amsterdam, and the
subjugation of the province, by the English
squadron. About that time the Storm Ship
was repeatedly seen in the Tappaan Zee; about
Weehawk, and even down as far as Hoboken,
and her appearance was supposed to be
ominous
of the approaching squall in public affairs,
and the downfall of Dutch domination.
Since that time we have no authentic
accounts
of her, though it is said she still haunts
the Highlands, and cruises about Point-no-point.
People who live along the river insist that they
sometimes see her in summer moonlight; and
that in a deep, still midnight, they have heard
the chant of her crew, as if heaving the lead;
but sights and sounds are so deceptive along
the mountainous shores, and about the wide
bays and long reaches of this great river, that
I confess I have very strong doubts upon the
subject.
It is certain, nevertheless, that strange things
have been seen in these Highlands in storms,
which are considered as connected with the old
story of the ship. The captains of the river
craft talk of a little bulbous-bottomed Dutch
goblin, in trunk hose, and sugar-loaf'd hat, with
a speaking trumpet in his hand; which they say
keeps about the Dunderberg Mountain. They
declare that they have heard him, in stormy
weather, in the midst of the turmoil, giving orders
in low Dutch for the piping up of a fresh gust of
wind, or the rattling off of another thunder clap.
That sometimes he has been seen surrounded by
a crew of little imps in broad breeches and short
doublets, tumbling head over heels in the rack
and mist, and playing a thousand gambols in
the air; or buzzing like a swarm of flies about
Antony's Nose; and that, at such time, the
hurry-scurry of the storm was always greatest.
One time a sloop, in passing by Dunderberg,
was overtaken by a thundergust that came
scouring down from the mountain, and seemed
to burst just over the vessel. Though tight and
well ballasted, yet she laboured dreadfully and
rocked until the water came over the gunwale.
All the crew were amazed; when it was
discovered
that there was a little white sugar-loaf hat on
the mast head; which was known at once for
the hat of the Heer of the Dunderberg.
Nobody
,
however, dared to climb to the mast head
and get rid of this terrible hat. The sloop
continued
labouring and rocking as if she would
have rolled her mast overboard. She seemed
in continual danger either of upsetting or of
running
on shore. In this way she drove quite
through the Highlands, until she had passed
Pollopel's Island; where, it is said, the
jurisdiction
of the Dunderberg potentate ceases. No
sooner had she passed this bourne, than the little
hat all at once spun up into the air like a top;
whirled up all the clouds into a vortex; and
hurried them back to the summit of the
Dunderberg
;
while the sloop righted herself, and sailed
on as quietly as if in a mill-pond. Nothing
saved her from utter wreck but the fortunate
circumstance of having a horse shoe nailed
against the mast; a wise precaution against evil
spirits, which has since been adopted by all the
Dutch captains that navigate this haunted river.
There is another story told of this foul
weather
urchin, by Skipper Daniel Ouslesticker of
Fishkill, who was never known to tell a lie.
He declared that in a severe squall he saw him
seated astride of his bowsprit, riding the sloop
ashore, full butt, against Antony's Nose,
and that he was exorcised by Dominie Van
Gieson of Esopus, who happened to be on
board, and who sung the hymn of St. Nicholas;
whereupon the goblin threw himself up in the
air like a ball, and went off in a whirlwind,
carrying away with him the nightcap of the
dominie's wife, which was discovered the next
Sunday morning hanging on the weathercock
of Esopus church steeple, at least forty miles
off! After several events of this kind had taken
place the regular skippers of the river, for a
long time, did not venture to pass the
Dunderberg
without lowering their peak, out of
homage
to the Heer of the Mountain; and it was
observed that all such as paid this tribute of
respect
were suffered to pass unmolested.
Such, said Antony Vander Heyden, are
a few of the stories written down by Selyn, the
poet, concerning this Storm Ship; which he
affirms
to have brought this colony of mischievous
imps into the province from some old
ghost-ridden
country of Europe. I could give you a
host more if necessary; for all the accidents
that so often befall the river craft in the
Highlands
are said to be tricks played off by these
imps of the Dunderberg; but I see that you are
nodding, so let us turn in for the night.
The moon had now just raised her silver
horns above the round back of old Bull Hill;
and lit up the gray rocks and shagged forests;
and glittered on the waving bosom of the river.
The night dew was falling, and the late gloomy
mountains began to soften and put on a gray
aerial tint in the dewy light. The hunters
stirred
the fire and threw on fresh fuel to qualify
the damp of the night air. They then
prepared
a bed of branches and dry leaves under a
ledge of rocks for Dolph; while Antony
Vander
Heyden, wrapping himself up in a huge coat
made of skins, stretched himself before the fire.
It was some time, however, before Dolph
could close his eyes. He lay contemplating the
strange scene before him. The wild woods and
rocks around; the fire throwing fitful gleams on
the faces of the sleeping savages. And the Heer
Antony, too, who so singularly, yet vaguely,
reminded
him of the nightly visitant to the
Haunted
House. Now and then he heard the cry of
some animal from the forest; or the hooting of
the owl; or the notes of the whippoorwill which
seemed to abound among these solitudes; or the
splash of a sturgeon, leaping out of the river,
and falling back full length on its placid surface.
He contrasted all this with his accustomed nest
in the garret room of the doctor's mansion;
where the only sounds he heard at night were
the church clock telling the hour; the drowsy
voice of the watchman drawling out that all was
well; the deep snoring of the doctor's clubbed
nose from below stairs; or the cautious labours
of some carpenter rat, gnawing in the wainscot.
His thoughts then wandered to his poor old
mother: what would she think of his
mysterious
disappearance; what anxiety and distress
would she not suffer? This was the thought that
would continually intrude itself to mar his
present
enjoyment. It brought with it a feeling of
pain and compunction, and he fell asleep with
the tears yet standing in his eyes.
Were this a mere tale of fancy, here would
be a fine opportunity for weaving in strange
adventures
,
among these wild mountains, and
roving
hunters; and, after involving my hero in
a variety of perils, and unheard-of difficulties,
rescuing him from them all by some
miraculous
contrivance; but as this is absolutely a true
story, I must content myself with simple facts,
and keep to probabilities.
At an early hour of the next day, therefore,
after
a hearty morning's meal, the encampment
broke up, and our adventurers embarked in the
pinnace of Antony Vander Heyden. There being
no wind for the sails, the Indians rowed her
gently along, keeping time to a kind of chant
of one of the white men. The day was serene
and beautiful; the river without a wave; and
as the vessel cleft the glassy water, it left a long
undulating track behind. The crows who had
scented the hunters' banquet were already
gathering and hovering in the air, just where a
column of thin blue smoke, rising from among
the trees, showed the place of their last night's
quarters. As they coasted along the bases of
the mountains the Heer Antony pointed out to
VOL. II. 39
Dolph a bald eagle, the sovereign of these
regions
,
who sat perched on a dry tree that
projected
over the river; and with eye turned
upwards
,
seemed to be drinking in the splendour
of the morning sun. Their approach disturbed
the monarch's meditations. He first spread one
wing, and then the other; balanced himself for
a moment; and then, quitting his perch with
dignified composure, wheeled slowly over their
heads. Dolph snatched up a gun, and sent a
whistling ball after him, that cut some of the
feathers from his wing; the report of the gun
leaped sharply from rock to rock, and
awakened
a thousand echoes; but the monarch of the
air sailed calmly on, ascending higher and
higher
,
and wheeling widely as he ascended;
soaring
up the green bosom of the woody mountain,
until he disappeared over the brow of a beetling
precipice. Dolph felt in a manner rebuked by
this proud tranquillity, and almost reproached
himself for having so wantonly insulted this
majestic bird. Heer Antony told him, laughing,
to remember that he was not yet out of the
territories
of the lord of the Dunderberg; and an old
Indian shook his head, and observed that there
was bad luck in killing an eagle; the hunter, on
the contrary, should always leave him a portion
of his spoils.
Nothing, however, occurred to molest them
on their voyage. They passed pleasantly through
these magnificent and lonely scenes until they
came to where Pollopel's Island lies like a
floating
bower at the extremity of the Highlands.
Here they landed until the heat of the day should
abate, or a breeze spring up that might supersede
the labour of the oar. Some prepared the
midday
meal, while others reposed under the shade
of the trees in luxurious summer indolence;
looking drowsily forth upon the beauty of the
scene. On the one side were the Highlands,
vast and cragged, feathered to the top with
forests
,
and throwing their shadows on the glassy
water that dimpled at their feet; on the other
side was a wide expanse of the river, like a
broad lake, with long sunny reaches and green
headlands; and the distant line of Shawungunk
Mountains waving along a clear horizon, or
chequered
by a fleecy cloud.
But I forbear to dwell on the particulars of
their cruize along the river. This vagrant
amphibious
life, careering across silver sheets of
water; coasting wild woodland shores;
banquetting
on shady promontories; with the
spreading
tree overhead, the river curling its light foam
to one's feet, and distant mountain, and rock and
tree, and snowy cloud, and deep blue sky, all
mingling in summer beauty before one; all this,
though never cloying in the enjoyment, would
be but tedious in narration.
When encamped by the water side, some of
the party would go into the woods and hunt;
others would fish; sometimes they would amuse
themselves by shooting at a mark, by leaping, by
running, by wrestling; and Dolph gained great
favour in the eyes of Antony Vander Heyden,
by his skill and adroitness in all these exercises,
which the Heer considered as the highest of
manly accomplishments.
Thus did they coast jollily on, choosing only
the pleasant hours for voyaging; sometimes in
the cool morning dawn; sometimes in the sober
evening twilight; and sometimes when the
moonshine spangled the crisp curling waves,
that whispered along the sides of their little bark.
Never had Dolph felt so completely in his
element
;
never had he met with any thing so
completely
to his taste as this wild, hap-hazard life.
He was the very man to second Antony Vander
Heyden in his rambling humours, and gained
continually on his affections. The heart of the
old bushwhacker yearned towards the young
man, who seemed thus growing up in his own
likeness; and as they approached the end of their
voyage he could not help inquiring a little into
his history. Dolph frankly told him his course
of life, his severe medical studies, his little
proficiency
,
and his very dubious prospects. The
Heer was shocked to find that such amazing
talents and accomplishments were to be cramped
and buried under a doctor's wig. He had a
sovereign
contempt for the healing art, having never
had any other physician than the butcher. He
bore a mortal grudge to all kinds of study also,
ever since he had been flogged about an
unintelligible
book when he was a boy. But to think
that a young fellow like Dolph, of such
wonderful
abilities, who could shoot, fish, run, jump,
ride and wrestle, should be obliged to roll pills
and administer juleps for a living'twas
monstrous
!
He told Dolph never to despair, but to
throw physic to the dogs, for a young fellow
of his prodigious talents could never fail to make
his way. As you seem to have no acquaintance
in Albany, said Heer Antony, you shall go
home with me, and remain under my roof until
you can look about you; and, in the mean time,
we can take an occasional bout at shooting and
fishing, for it is a pity such talents should be
idle.
Dolph, who was at the mercy of chance, was
not hard to be persuaded. Indeed, on turning
over matters in his mind, which he did very sagely
and deliberately, he could not but think that
Antony
Vander Heyden was, somehow or other,
connected with the story of the Haunted House;
that the misadventure in the Highlands which
had thrown them so strangely together was,
somehow or other, to work out something
good; in short, there is nothing so convenient as
this somehow or other way of
accommodating
one's self to circumstances; it is the main
stay of a heedless actor and tardy reasoner, like
Dolph Heyliger; and he who can, in this loose,
easy way, link foregone evil to anticipated good,
possesses a secret of happiness almost equal to
the philosopher's stone.
On their arrival at Albany, the sight of Dolph's
companion seemed to cause universal
satisfaction
.
Many were the greetings at the river side,
and the salutations in the streets; the dogs
bounded before him; the boys whooped as he
passed; every body seemed to know Antony
Vander Heyden. Dolph followed on in silence,
admiring the neatness of this worthy burgh; for
in those days Albany was in all its glory;
inhabited
almost exclusively by the descendants of
the original Dutch settlers; it had not as yet
been discovered and colonized by the restless
people of New-England. Every thing was quiet
and orderly; every thing was conducted calmly
and leisurely. No hurry, no bustle; no
struggling
and scrambling for existence. The grass
grew about the unpaved streets, and relieved the
eye by its refreshing verdure. Tall sycamores,
or pendent willows, shaded the houses, with
catterpillars
swinging in long silken strings from
their branches, or moths fluttering about like
coxcombs, in joy at their gay transformation.
The houses were built in the old Dutch style,
with the gable ends towards the street. The
thrifty housewife was seated on a bench before
her door, in a close crimped cap, bright flowered
gown and white apron, busily employed in
knitting
.
The husband smoked his pipe on the
opposite
bench, and the little pet negro girl, seated
on the step at her mistress' feet, was
industriously
plying her needle. The swallows sported
about the eaves, or skimmed along the streets
and brought back some rich booty for their
clamorous
young; and the little housekeeping wren
flew in and out of a Lilliputian house, or an old
hat nailed against the wall. The cows were
coming home, lowing through the streets to be
milked at their owners' doors, and if, perchance,
there were any loiterers, some negro urchin with
a long goad was gently urging them homewards.
As Dolph's companion passed on he received
a tranquil nod from the burghers, and a friendly
word from their wives; all calling him familiarly
by the name of Antony, for it was the custom
in this strong hold of the patriarchs, where they
had all grown up together from childhood, to
call every one by the christian name. The
Heer did not pause to have his usual jokes with
them, for he was impatient to reach his home.
At length they arrived at his mansion. It was
of some magnitude, in the Dutch style, with
large iron figures on the gables, that gave the
date of its erection, and showed that it had been
built in the earliest times of the settlement.
The news of Heer Antony's arrival had
preceded
him, and the whole household was on
the look out. A crew of negroes, large and
VOL. II. 40
small, had collected in front of the house to
receive
him. The old white-headed ones, who
had grown gray in his service, grinned for joy,
and made many awkward bows and grimaces;
and the little ones capered about his knees. But
the most happy being in the household was a
little, plump, blooming lass, his only child, and
the darling of his heart. She came bounding
out of the house; but the sight of a strange
young man with her father, called up for a
moment
,
all the bashfulness of a home-bred damsel.
Dolph gazed at her with wonder and delight;
never had he seen, as he thought, any thing so
comely in the shape of woman. She was
dressed
in the good old Dutch taste, with long stays
and full short petticoats, so admirably adapted to
show and set off the female form. Her hair,
turned up under a small round cap, displayed
the fairness of her forehead; she had fine blue
laughing eyes; a trim, slender waist, and soft
swel  but, in a word, she was a little Dutch
divinity, and Dolph, who never stopped half
way in a new impulse, fell desperately in love
with her.
Dolph was now ushered into the house with
a hearty welcome. In the interior was a mingled
display of Heer Antony's taste and habits, and
the opulence of his predecessors. The chambers
were furnished with good old carved mahogany.
The beaufets and cupboards glittered with
embossed
silver and painted china. Over the
parlour
fireplace was, as usual, the family coat of
arms painted and framed, above which was a
long duck fowling piece, flanked by an Indian
pouch and a powder-horn. The room was
decorated
with many Indian articles, such as pipes
of peace, tomahawks, scalping knives, hunting
pouches and belts of wampum, and there were
various kinds of fishing tackle, and two or three
fowling pieces in the corners. The household
affairs seemed to be conducted in some measure
after the master's humours; corrected, perhaps,
by a little quiet management of the daughter's.
There was a great degree of patriarchal
simplicity
,
and good humoured indulgence. The
negroes
came into the room without being called,
merely to look at their master, and hear of his
adventures; they would stand listening at the
door until he had finished a story, and then go
off on a broad grin, to repeat it in the kitchen.
A couple of pet negro children were playing
about the floor with the dogs, and sharing with
them their bread and butter. All the domestics
looked hearty and happy; and when the table
was set for the evening repast, the variety and
abundance of good household luxuries bore
testimony
to the open handed liberality of the Heer,
and the notable housewifery of his daughter.
In the evening there dropped in several of the
worthies of the place, the Van Rennsellaers,
and the Gansevoorts, and the Rosebooms, and
others of Antony Vander Heyden's intimates,
to hear an account of his expedition; for he was
the Sindbad of Albany, and his exploits and
adventures
were favourite topics of conversation
among the inhabitants. While these sat
gossiping
together about the door of the hall, and
telling long twilight stories, Dolph was cosily
seated, entertaining the daughter on a window
bench. He had already got on intimate terms,
for those were not times of false reserve and
idle ceremony; and, besides, there is something
wonderfully propitious to a lover's suit in the
delightful dusk of a long summer evening. It
gives courage to the most timid tongue, and
hides the blushes of the bashful. The stars
alone twinkled brightly, and now and then a
fire-fly streamed his transient light before the
window; or, wandering into the room, flew
gleaming about the ceiling.
What Dolph whispered in her ear that long
summer evening it is impossible to say. His
words were so low and indistinct that they have
never reached the ear of the historian. It is
probable, however, that they were to the
purpose
,
for he had a natural talent at pleasing the
sex, and was never long in company with a
petticoat
without paying proper court to it. In
the mean time, the visiters, one by one, departed.
Antony Vander Heyden, who had fairly talked
himself silent, sat nodding alone in his chair by
the door, when he was suddenly aroused by the
hearty salute with which Dolph Heyliger had
unguardedly rounded off one of his periods, and
which echoed through the still chamber like the
report of a pistol. The Heer started up, rubbed
his eyes, called for lights, and observed that it
was high time to go to bed. On parting for the
night he squeezed Dolph heartily by the hand;
looked waggishly in his face; shook his head
knowinglyAh, Dolph! Dolph! said he,
chuckling, I see you're a sly dogjust like I
was at your age!
The chamber in which our hero was lodged
was spacious, and pannelled with oak. It was
furnished with clothes presses, and mighty chests
of drawers, well waxed and glittering with brass
ornaments. These contained ample stock of
family linen; for the Dutch housewives had
always
a laudable pride in showing off their
household
treasures to strangers.
Dolph's mind, however, was too full to take
particular note of the objects around him; yet
he could not help continually comparing the free
open-hearted cheeriness of this establishment,
with the starveling, sordid, joyless housekeeping
at Doctor Knypperhausen's. Still, there was
something that marred the enjoyment; the idea
that he must take leave of his hearty host, and
pretty hostess, and cast himself once more adrift
upon the world. To linger here would be folly.
He should only get deeper in love; and for a
poor varlet, like himself, to aspire to the
daughter
of the great Heer Vander Heydenit was
madness to think of such a thing! The very
kindness that the girl had shown towards him,
prompted him, on reflection, to hasten his
departure
;
it would be a poor return for the frank
hospitality of his host, to entangle his daughter's
heart in an injudicious attachment. In a word,
Dolph was like many other young reasoners, of
exceeding good hearts, and giddy heads, who
think after they act, and act differently from what
they think; who make excellent determinations
over night, and forget to keep them the next
morning.
This is a fine conclusion, truly, of my
voyage
,
said he, as he almost buried himself in a
sumptuous feather bed, and drew the fresh white
sheets up to his chin. Here am I, instead of
finding a bag of money to carry home, launched
in a strange place, with scarcely a stiver in my
pocket; and, what is worse, have jumped ashore
up to my very ears in love into the bargain.
However, added he, after some pause,
stretching
himself and turning in bed, I'm in good
quarters for the present, at least; so I'll e'en
enjoy the present moment and let the next take
care of itself.I dare say all will work out
`some how or other', for the best.
As he said these words he reached out his hand
to extinguish the candle, when he was suddenly
struck with astonishment and dismay, for he
thought he beheld the spectre of the Haunted
House staring at him from a dusky part of the
chamber. A second look reassured him; as he
perceived that what he had taken for the spectre
was in fact nothing but a Flemish portrait that
hung in a shadowy corner, just behind a clothes
press. It was, however, the precise
representation
of his nightly visiter. The same cloak and
belted jerken; the same grizzled beard and fixed
eye; the same broad slouched hat, with a feather
hanging over one side. Dolph now called to
mind the resemblance he had frequently
remarked
between his host and the old man of the
Haunted
House, and was fully convinced that they were
in some way connected, and that some especial
destiny had governed his voyage. He lay gazing
on the portrait with almost as much awe as he
had gazed on the ghostly original, until the
shrill house clock warned him of the lateness of
the hour. He put out the light; but remained
for a long time turning over these curious
circumstances
and coincidences in his mind, until
he fell asleep. His dreams partook of the
nature
of his waking thoughts. He fancied that he
still lay gazing on the picture until by degrees
it became animated; that the figure descended
from the wall, and walked out of the room.
That he followed it and found himself by the
well, to which the old man pointed, smiled on
him, and disappeared.
VOL. II. 41
In the morning, when Dolph waked, he found
his host standing by his bed side, who gave him
a hearty morning's salutation, and asked him how
he had slept. Dolph answered cheerily, and took
the occasion to inquire about the portrait that
hung against the wall. Ah, said Heer
Antony
,
that's a portrait of old Killian
Vanderspiegel
,
once a burgomaster of Amsterdam, who, on
some popular troubles, abandoned Holland, and
came over to the province during the
government
of Peter Stuyvesant. He was my
ancestor
by the mother's side, and an old miserly
curmudgeon
he was. When the English took
possession of New-Amsterdam, in 1664, he
retired
into the country. He fell into a
melancholy
,
apprehending that his wealth would be
taken from him, and that he would come to
beggary. He turned all his property into cash,
and used to hide it away. He was for a year
or two concealed in various places, fancying
himself sought after by the English, to strip him
of his wealth; and finally was found dead in
his bed one morning, without any one being
able to discover where he had concealed the
greater part of his money.
When his host had left the room Dolph
remained
for some time lost in thought. His
whole mind was occupied by what he had
heard. Vanderspiegel was his mother's family
name, and he recollected to have heard her
speak of this very Killian Vanderspiegel as one
of her ancestors. He had heard her say, too,
that her father was Killian's rightful heir, only
that the old man died without leaving any thing
to be inherited. It now appeared that Heer
Antony was likewise a descendant, and,
perhaps
,
an heir also, of this poor old rich man;
and that thus the Heyligers and the Vander
Heydens were remotely connected. What,
thought he, if after all this is the
interpretation
of my dream, that this is the way I am to
make my fortune by this voyage to Albany;
and that I am to find the old man's hidden
wealth in the bottom of that well? But
what an odd round-about mode of
communicating
the matter! Why the vengeance could not
the old goblin have told me about the well at
once, without sending me all the way to
Albany
,
to hear a story that was to send me all
the way back again?
These thoughts passed through his mind as
he was dressing. He descended the stairs, full
of perplexity, when the bright face of Marie
Vander Heyden suddenly beamed in smiles
upon him, and seemed to give him a clue to the
whole mystery. After all, thought he, the
old goblin is in the right. If am to get his
wealth he means that I shall marry his pretty
descendant; thus both branches of the family
will be again united, and the property go on in
the proper channel.
No sooner did this idea enter his head than it
carried conviction with it. He was now all
impatience
to hurry back and secure the treasure;
which, he did not doubt, lay at the bottom of
the well; and which, he feared, every moment,
might be discovered by some other person.
Who knows, thought he, but this
night-walking
old fellow of the Haunted House may
be in the habit of haunting every visiter, and may
give a hint to some shrewder fellow than myself,
who will take a shorter cut to the well than by
the way of Albany? He wished a thousand
times that the babbling old ghost was laid in the
Red Sea, and his rambling portrait with him.
He was in a perfect fever to depart. Two or
three days elapsed before any opportunity
presented
for returning down the river. They were
ages to Dolph, notwithstanding that he was
basking in the smiles of the pretty Marie, and
daily getting more and more enamoured. At
length the very sloop from which he had been
knocked overboard prepared to make sail. Dolph
made an awkward apology to his host for his
sudden departure. Antony Vander Heyden was
sorely astonished. He had concerted half a
dozen excursions into the wilderness, and his
Indians were actually preparing for a grand
expedition
to one of the lakes. He took Dolph
aside, and exerted his eloquence to get him to
give up all thoughts of business and to remain
with him; but in vain; and he at length gave
up the attempt, observing, that it was a
thousand
pities so fine a young man should throw
himself away. Heer Antony, however, gave
him a hearty shake by the hand at parting, with
a favourite fowling piece, and an invitation to
come to his house whenever he revisited Albany.
The pretty little Marie said nothing; but as he
gave her a farewell kiss, her dimpled cheek
turned pale, and a tear stood in her eye.
Dolph sprang lightly on board of the vessel.
They hoisted sail; the wind was fair; they
soon lost sight of Albany, and its green hills,
and embowered islands. They were wafted
gaily past the Kaatskill mountains, whose fairy
heights were bright and cloudless. They passed
prosperously through the Highlands, without
any molestation from the Dunderberg goblin and
his crew; they swept on across Haverstraw
Bay; and by Croton Point; and through the
Tappaan Zee; and under the Pallisadoes; until,
on the afternoon of the third day, they saw the
promontory of Hoboken hanging like a cloud in
the air, and, shortly after, the roofs of the
Manhattoes
rising out of the water.
Dolph's first care was to repair to his mother's
house, for he was continually goaded by the
idea of the uneasiness she must experience on
his account. On his way thither he
endeavoured
to arrange some mode of accounting for his
absence; but felt sadly at a loss; for, with all his
heedlessness, he was naturally frank and sincere,
and had never deceived her. He had conned
over something that he thought would do, when,
on entering the street in which her house was
situated, he was thunderstruck on beholding it
a heap of ruins. There had been a great fire,
which had destroyed several large houses, and
the humble dwelling of poor Dame Heyliger had
been involved in the conflagration. The walls
were not so completely destroyed but that Dolph
could perceive some traces of the scene of
humble
quiet, the scene of his childhood. The
fireplace
with a few of the tiles yet remained,
though shattered to pieces. The wreck of the
good old dame's elbow chair, and her Dutch
family bible reduced almost to a cinder lay
among the rubbish. For a moment Dolph's
head reeled; he was stunned as with a blow;
but the next was a moment of excruciating
agony, for the idea rushed to his mind that she
had perished in the flames. He was relieved
from the worst of his fears, by one of the
neighbours
who informed him that his mother was
yet alive, but that, overcome with fright and
affliction, she lay ill at the house of old Peter
de Groodt, where she had taken refuge
Dolph hastened thither with the penitent
feeling of the prodigal son. He recalled all
her tenderness, her unwearied attention to his
comfort; her indulgence of his errors; her
fond blindness to his faults; and then he
reflected
on his own idleness and want of
consideration
.
Only let her live, said Dolph
mentally, and clasping his hands, and I'll
show myself indeed a son!
He found old Peter de Groodt coming out
of the house. Peter started back on seeing
him, and was for a moment doubtful whether
it was not a ghost that stood before him. Then
shaking his head, he pointed to the door. Ah,
young man! young man! you're in a hopeful
way truly!go in, go in, and see your poor
mother more sick on your account than her
own.
It required some preparation, however, before
Dolph's return could be made known to his
mother, and even then, the news almost
overcame
her. When he was admitted to see her
he sunk down beside her bed. The poor
woman
threw her arms round his neck.My boy
my boy! art thou still alive? For a time she
seemed to have forgotten all her losses and
troubles in her joy at his return. At length,
recollecting herselfah, my poor Dolph!
said she, thy mother can help thee no longer!
She can no longer help herself! What will
become of thee, my poor son!
Mother, said Dolph, don't talk in that
way. I've been too long a charge upon you;
it's now my part to take care of you in your old
days. But come, be of good heart. I'm here
VOL. II. 42
again, sound and hearty. Something will yet
turn upthings will all `some how or other' turn
out for the best.
As the hour of bed time approached, Dolph
sought his old quarters at the house of Dr.
Knypperhausen
.
The news of his return had
preceded
him. He knocked dubiously at the door,
when the doctor's head in a red nightcap
popped
out of one window, and the housekeeper's,
in a white nightcap, at another. Both were
evidently
primed and charged for the occasion, and
such a volley of hard names and hard language
did they discharge upon the head of the delinquent
disciple, that in a few minutes not a window in
the street but had its particular nightcap.
Suffice
it to saythe doctor's doors were forever
closed upon him; and he was fain, for the night,
to beg a lodging under the same roof that
sheltered
his mother.
The next morning, bright and early, Dolph
was out at the Haunted House. Every thing
appeared just as he had left it. The fields were
grass-grown and matted, and it appeared as if
no body had traversed them since his departure.
With palpitating heart he hastened to the well.
He looked down into it, and saw that it was of
great depth, with water at the bottom. He had
provided himself with a strong line, such as the
fishermen use on the banks of Newfoundland.
At the end was a heavy plummet and a large
fish hook. With this he began to sound the
bottom of the well, and to angle about in the
water. He found that the water was of some
depth; there appeared also to be much rubbish;
stones from the top having fallen in. Several
times his hook got entangled, and he came near
breaking his line. Now and then, too, he
hauled
up mere trash, such as the skull of a horse,
an iron hoop, and a shattered iron-bound bucket.
He had now been for several hours employed
without finding any thing to repay his trouble
or to encourage him to proceed. He began to
think himself a great fool, to be thus decoyed
into
a wild goose chase by mere dreams, and was on
the point of throwing line and all into the well,
and giving up all farther angling. One more
cast of the line, said he, and that shall be the
last! As he sounded, he felt the plummet slip
as it were through the insterstices of loose
stones; and, as he drew back the line, he felt
that the hook had taken hold of something heavy.
He had to manage his line with great caution lest
it should be broken by the strain upon it. By
degrees
the rubbish that lay upon the article which
he had hooked gave way; he drew it to the
surface of the water, and what was his rapture
at seeing something like silver glittering at the
end of his line! Almost breathless with anxiety,
he drew it up to the mouth of the well, surprised
at its great weight, and fearing every instant that
his hook would slip from its hold, and his prize
tumble again to the bottom. At length he
landed
it safe beside the well. It was a great silver
porringer, of an ancient form, richly embossed,
and with armorial bearings similar to those over
his mother's mantlepiece, engraved on its side.
The lid was fastened down by several twists of
wire. Dolph loosened them with a trembling
hand, and on lifting the lid, behold! the vessel
was filled with broad golden pieces, of a coinage
which he had never seen before! It was
evident
he had lit on the place where old Killian
Vanderspiegel had concealed his treasure.
Fearful of being seen by some straggler, he
cautiously retired, and buried his pot of money
in a secret place. He now spread terrible
stories
about the Haunted House, and deterred
every one from approaching it; while he made
frequent visits to it, in stormy days, when no one
was stirring in the neighbouring fields; though,
to tell the truth, he did not care to venture there
in the dark. For once in his life he was
diligent
and industrious; and followed up his new
trade of angling with such perseverance and
success, that in a little while he had hooked up
wealth enough to make him, in those moderate
days, a rich burgher for life.
It would be tedious to detail minutely the
rest of his story. To tell how he gradually
managed to bring his property into use without
exciting surprise and inquiry. How he
satisfied
all scruples with regard to retaining the
property
,
and at the same time gratified his own
feelings by marrying the pretty Marie Vander
Heyden, and how he and Heer Antony had
many a merry and roving expedition together.
I must not omit to say, however, that Dolph
took his mother home to live with him, and
cherished
her in her old days. The good dame, too,
had the satisfaction of no longer hearing her son
made the theme of censure; on the contrary, he
grew daily in public esteem; every body spoke
well of him and his wines; and the lordliest
burgomaster was never known to decline his
invitation
to dinner. Dolph often related, at his
own table, the wicked pranks which had once
been the abhorence of the town; but they were
now considered excellent jokes, and the gravest
dignitary was ready to die with laughing at them.
No one was more struck with Dolph's
increasing
merit than his old master the Doctor; and
so forgiving was Dolph in his temper, that he
absolutely employed the Doctor as his family
physician; only taking care that his
prescriptions
should always be thrown out of the
window
.
His mother had often her junto of old
cronies to take a snug cup of tea with her in her
comfortable little parlour; and Peter de Groodt,
as he sat by the fire side, with one of her
grandchildren
on his knee, would many a time
congratulate
her upon her son's turning out so great
a man; upon which the good old soul would
wag her head with exultation, and exclaim, Ah
neighbour! neighbour! did I not say that Dolph
would one day or other hold up his head with
the best of them?
Thus did Dolph Heyliger go on, cheerily
and prosperously, growing merrier as he grew
older and wiser, and completely falsifying the
old proverb, about money got over the devil's
back; for he made good use of his wealth, and
became a distinguished citizen, and a valuable
member of the community. He was a great
promoter of public institutions, such as
beef-steak
societies, and catch clubs. He presided
at all public dinners, and was the first that
introduced
turtle from the West Indies. He
improved
the breed of race horses, and game cocks;
he was a great patron of modest merit,
insomuch
that any one who could sing a good song,
or tell a good story, was sure to find a place at
his table; and his benevolence became so well
known, that every now and then a bantling was
laid at his door; which he never failed to take
into the house and cherish as his own.
He was a member too of the corporation, made
several laws for the protection of game and
oysters
,
and bequeathed to the board a large silver
punch bowl, made out of the identical porringer
before mentioned, and which is in the possession
of the corporation to this very day.
Finally, he died, at a florid and jolly old age,
of an apoplexy at a corporation feast, and was
buried with great honours, in the yard of the
little
Dutch church in Garden Street, where his
tomb-stone may still be seen, with an epitaph in
Dutch verse, by his friend Mynheer Justus
Benson
,
an ancient and excellent poet of the
Manhattoes
.
The foregoing tale rests on better authority
than most tales of the kind, as I have it at second
hand from the lips of Dolph Heyliger himself.
He never related it until towards the latter part
of his life, and then in great confidence, (for he
was very discreet,) to a few particular cronies at
his own table, over an extra bowl of punch;
and strange as the hobgoblin parts of the story
may seem, there never was a single doubt
expressed
on the subject by any of his guests. It
may not be amiss, before concluding, to observe,
that in addition to his other accomplishments,
Dolph Heyliger was noted for being the ablest
drawer of the long bow in the whole province.
VOL. II. 43
THE WEDDING.
No more, no more; much honor aye betide
The lofty bridegroom, and the lovely bride;
That their succeeding days and years may say
Each day appears like to a marriage day.
Braithwaite
.
The
fair Julia having recovered from the
effects of her fall, the day for the wedding was
at length appointed. As it drew near, there rose
several doubts and conversations between Lady
Lillycraft, Master Simon, and the parson, on the
subject of marrying in the month of May;
against which I find there is an ancient
prejudice
,
as being an unfortunate month for
matrimony
.
From the discussions that took place
on these occasions, I picked up much valuable
information relative to weddings. Such as, that
if there were two celebrated in the same church,
on the same day, the first would be happy, the
second otherwise. If, in going to church, they
should meet the funeral of a female, the bride
would die first; if of a male, the bridegroom.
If the new married couple were to dance
together
on their wedding day, the wife would
thenceforth rule the roast; with many more
curious
facts of the same kind; which made me
ponder, more than ever, upon the perils which
surround this happy state; and how little men
know the awful risks they run in venturing upon
it. I abstain, however, from enlarging on this
topic, as I have no wish to promote the increase
of bachelors.
The Squire, however, though he gave due
weight to all these ancient saws, yet had a host
of poetical authorities in favour of this loving
month, which I suppose were conclusive with
the young couple, as I found they were perfectly
willing to marry in May, and abide the
consequences
.
The wedding has accordingly taken place at
the village church, in presence of a numerous
company of relations and friends, and many of
the tenantry. The Squire must needs have
something of the old ceremonies observed on the
occasion; so, at the gate of the church-yard,
several little girls of the village, dressed in white,
were in readiness with baskets of flowers, which
they strewed before the bride, and the butler
bore before her the bride cup, a great embossed
silver bowl, one of the family reliques from the
days of the hard drinkers. This was filled with
rich wine, and decorated with a branch of
rosemary
tied with gay ribbands, according to
ancient
custom.
Happy is the bride that the sun shines on,
says the old proverb; and it was as sunny and
auspicious a morning as heart could wish. The
bride looked uncommonly beautiful; but in
fact what woman does not look interesting on her
wedding day? There is something extremely
touching in the appearance of a young and timid
bride, in her robes of virgin white, led up
trembling
to the altar; when thus I behold a lovely
girl, in the tenderness of her years, forsaking her
father's house and the home of her childhood,
and giving herself up with implicit confiding to
the man of her choice, in the good old language
of the ceremony, for better for worse, for
richer for poorer, in sickness and in health, to
love, honour, and obey, till death us do part.
It brings to my mind the beautiful self devotion
of Ruth, whither thou goest I will go, and
where thou lodgest I will lodge; thy people shall
be my people, and thy god my god.
The fair Julia was supported on the trying
occasion by Lady Lillycraft, whose heart was
overflowing with its wonted sympathy in all
matters of love and matrimony. As the bride
approached the altar, her face would be one
moment
covered with blushes, and the next deadly
pale, and she seemed almost ready to shrink from
sight among her female companions. I do not
know what it is that makes every one serious
and, as it were, awe struck, at a marriage
ceremony
;
which is generally considered as an
occasion
of festivity and rejoicing. As the
ceremony
was performing, I observed many a rosy
face among the country girls turn pale, and I
did not see a smile throughout the church. The
young ladies from the Hall were almost as much
frightened as if it had been their own case, and
stole many a look of sympathy at their trembling
companion. A tear stood in the eye of the
sensitive
Lady Lillycraft; and as to Phoebe Wilkins,
who was present, the soft hearted baggage
absolutely
wept and sobbed aloud; but it is hard to
tell, half the time, what these fond foolish
creatures
are crying about.
The captain, too, though naturally gay and
unconcerned, was much agitated on the
occasion
,
and in attempting to put the ring upon the
bride's finger, dropped it on the floor, which I am
since told is a very lucky omen. Even Master
Simon had lost his usual vivacity, and had
assumed
a most whimsically solemn face, which
he is apt to do on all occasions of ceremony.
He had much whispering with the parson and
parish clerk, for he is always a busy personage
in the scene; and he echoed the clerk's amen
with a solemnity and devotion that edified the
whole assemblage.
The moment, however, that the ceremony
was over, the transition was magical. The
bride cup was passed round, according to
ancient
usage, for the company to drink to a
happy union; every one's feelings seemed to
break forth from restraint; Master Simon had a
world of bachelor pleasantries to utter; and
as to the gallant general, he bowed and cooed
about the dulcet Lady Lillycraft like a mighty
cock pigeon about his dame.
The villagers gathered in the church-yard to
cheer the happy couple as they left the church,
and the musical tailor had marshalled his band,
and set up a hideous discord, as the blushing
and smiling bride passed through a lane of
honest
peasantry to her carriage. The children
shouted and threw up their hats; the bells rang
a merry peal that threatened to bring down the
battlements of the old tower, and set all the
crows and rooks flying and cawing about the
air; and there was a continual popping off of
rusty firelocks from every part of the
neighbourhood
.
The prodigal son distinguished himself on
the occasion; but had nearly done mischief; as
the horses of the bride's carriage took fright
from the discharge of a row of old gun barrels
which he had mounted as a park of artillery in
front of the school house, to give the captain a
military salute as he passed.
The day passed off with great rustic
rejoicings
.
Tables were spread under the trees in
the park, where all the peasantry of the
neighbourhood
were regaled with roast beef and
plum pudding, and oceans of ale. Ready
Money
Jack presided at one of the tables, and
became
so full of good cheer, as to unbend from
his usual gravity, sing a song out of all tune,
and give two or three shouts of laughter that
almost electrified his neighbours like so
many
peals of thunder. Slingsby, the
school-master
,
and the apothecary, vied with each
other in making speeches over their liquor, and
there were occasional glees and musical
performances
by the village band that must have
frightened every fawn and dryad from the
park.
Old Christy, even, was warmed into a flow on
the occasion. He appeared newly equipped
from top to toe; with bright leather breeches,
and a great wedding favour flaunting in his
jockey cap. The old man drank health and
happiness to the young couple at least a dozen
times; and ended by dancing a hornpipe on
one of the ables, to the great astonishment of
the whole world.
Equal gayety reigned within doors, where a
large party of friends were entertained. Every
one laughed at his own pleasantry without
attending
to that of his neighbour's. The bride
cup was carried about according to ancient form,
and loads of bride cake distributed. The young
ladies were all busy in passing morsels of cake
through the wedding ring, to dream on; and I
myself assisted a fine little boarding school girl
in putting up a quantity for her companions,
which I have no doubt will set all the little
heads in the school gadding, for a week to come.
VOL. II. 44
In the evening we were entertained by a
display
of fire-works got up by the schoolmaster
and apothecary with the assistance of the
prodigal
son; whom the Squire talks of making his
gamekeeper, by way of reward for his
extraordinary
services. The village also was generally
illuminated, excepting the house of the radical,
who has not shown his face during the
rejoicings
.
One wedding makes many, says an old
proverb
,
and I should not be surprised if it holds
good in the present instance. I have seen
several
flirtations among the young people that have
been brought together on this occasion.
Master
Simon, however, has told me in great
confidence
,
that he thinks the old general's case is
desperate with Lady Lillycraft; she having
determined
that he is quite destitute of sentiment.
It is with some concern, therefore, that I have
seen him throwing away tender glances upon
her at the wedding dinner, during the changing
of the dishes.
I am told, moreover, that young Jack
Tibbets
was so touched by the wedding ceremony,
at which he was present, and captivated by the
sensibility of poor Phoebe Wilkins, that he had
a reconcilation with her that very day after
dinner
,
in one of the groves of the park, and danced
with her at the village in the evening, to the
complete confusion of old Dame Tibbets'
domestic politics.
What is more, Lady Lillycraft, who with her
usual benevolence in all concerns of the heart,
had lately taken an interest in this love affair,
on hearing of the reconciliation of the lovers,
undertook the critical task of breaking the
matter
to Ready Money Jack. She thought there
was no time like the present, and attacked the
sturdy old yeoman that very evening in the park,
while his heart was yet lifted up with the Squire's
good cheer. Jack was a little surprised at being
drawn aside by her ladyship, but was not to be
flurried by such an honour; he was still more
surprised by the nature of her communication;
and this first intelligence of an affair that had
been passing under his eye. He listened,
however
,
with his usual gravity, as her ladyship
represented
the advantages of the match, the good
qualities of the girl, and the distress which all
parties had lately suffered; at length his eye
began
to kindle, and his hand to play with the
head of his cudgel. Lady Lillycraft saw that
something in the narrative had gone wrong,
and hastened to mollify his rising ire, by
reiterating
the soft hearted Phoebe's merit and
fidelity, and her great unhappiness; when old
Ready Money suddenly interrupted her by
exclaiming, that if Jack did not marry the
wench, he'd break every bone in his body!
The match, therefore, is considered a settled
thing; Dame Tibbets and the housekeeper have
made friends and drank tea together, and Phoebe
has again recovered her good looks and good
spirits, and is caroling from morning till night
like a lark.
But the most whimsical caprice of Cupid is
one that I should be almost afraid to mention,
did I not know that I was writing for readers
well experienced in the waywardness of this
most mischievous deity. The morning after
the wedding, therefore, while Lady Lillycraft
was making preparations for her departure, an
audience was requested by her immaculate
hand-maid
,
Mrs. Hannah, who, with much primming
of the mouth, and many maidenly hesitations,
requested leave to stay behind, and that Lady
Lillycraft would supply her place with some
other servant. Her ladyship was thunderstruck:
What, Hannah going to quit her that had lived
with her so long!
Why, one could not help it; one must
settle
in life some time or other.
The good lady was still lost in amazement;
at length the secret was gasped from the dry
lips of the maiden gentlewoman; she had been
some time thinking of changing her condition,
and at length had given her word last evening
to Mr. Christy, the huntsman!
How, or when, or where, this singular
courtship
had been carried on, I have not been able to
learn; or how she has been able, with the
vinegar
of her disposition, to soften the stony heart
of old Nimrod. So, however, it is, and it has
astonished every one. With all her ladyship's
love of match making, this last fume of
Hymen's
torch has been too much for her. She
has endeavoured to reason with Mrs. Hannah,
but all in vain; her mind was made up, and she
grew tart on the least contradiction. Lady
Lillycraft
applied to the Squire for his interference:
She did not know what she should do without
Mrs. Hannah, she had been used to have her
about her so long a time.
The Squire, on the contrary, rejoiced in the
match, as relieving the good lady from a kind of
toilette tyrant, under whose sway she had
suffered
for years. Instead of thwarting the affair,
therefore, he has given it his full countenance,
and declares, that he will set up the young
couple in one of the best cottages on his estate.
The approbation of the Squire has been
followed
by that of the whole household; they all
declare, that if ever matches are really made in
Heaven, this must have been; for that old
Christy and Mrs. Hannah were as cordially
formed to be linked together as ever were
pepper
box and vinegar cruet.
As soon as this matter was arranged, Lady
Lillycraft took her leave of the family at the
Hall, taking with her the captain and his
blushing
bride, who are to pass the honey-moon with
her. Master Simon accompanied them on
horseback, and indeed means to ride on a-head
to make preparations. The general, who was
fishing in vain for an invitation to her seat,
handed her ladyship into her carriage with a
heavy sigh; upon which his bosom friend,
Master
Simon, who was just mounting his horse,
gave me a knowing wink, made an abominably
wry face, and leaning from his saddle whispered
loudly in my ear, It wont do! Then
putting
spurs to his horse, away he cantered off.
The general stood for some time waving his
hat after the carriage as it rolled down the
avenue, until he was seized with a fit of
sneezing
from exposing his head to the cool breeze.
The company have now almost all taken
their departure. I have determined to do the
same to-morrow morning, and I hope my reader
may not think that I have already lingered too
long at the Hall. I have been tempted to do so,
however, because I thought I had lit upon one
of the retired places where there are yet some
traces to be met with of old English character.
A little while hence, and all these will have
passed away.
Ready money Jack will sleep with his fathers
The good Squire and all his peculiarities
will be buried in the parish church. The old
Hall will be modernized into a fashionable
country seat, or peradventure a manufactory.
The park will be cut up into kitchen gardens.
A daily coach will run through the village, and
it will become like all other commonplace
villages
,
thronged with coachmen, post-boys,
tipplers
and politicians; and Christmas, May-day,
and all their hearty merry-makings will be
forgotten!
THE END.