CHAPTER I
There
are few portions of our country more
beautiful
,
and none more rich with historic recollections,
than the valley of the Mohawk, Yet few, probably, of
the throngs, who, steam-impelled, pass daily through
this beautiful region, yielding to its many scenes of
enchantment
the tribute of admiration, pause to reflect
upon the fearful and momentous deeds of which it has
been the scene, and which are destined in after ages to
render every inch of its soil classic ground.
But not of thee, beautiful river, peacefully gliding
through the broad and verdant champaign, laving with
thy silvery waters, the lips of the bending flowers upon
thy margin, or with gentle wrath foaming, glistening
and leaping amid the cataracts of Astorogan; nor yet
of you, oh towering mountains, still forest-clad; not of
you, as ye now exist, the scenes and the occasions of
innocent enjoyment, is the historic muse about to speak.
But of man, staining your soil with blood, freighting
your gales with groans, and startling your frightened
echoes with war's discordant notes; and yet of man,
too, thank Heaven, in holier and gentler mood, and less
at war with the beauty and harmony of creation.
It was in the twilight of a calm July evening, just
seventy years ago, that two young men, lightly clad,
and each bearing a rifle, might have been seen loitering
upon the bank of the Mohawk, at a point near to what
is now a large and populous town. Although at first
sight the casual observer would have taken them for
sportsmen in pursuit of game, a little closen
investigation
would have convinced him that such was not the
case, but that their arms were carried only as part of
an habitual system of precaution in those troublous
times, when no man knew at what moment he might
stumble upon a deadly foe. Charles Dudley and Enoch
Waldon were citizens of one neighborhood, and had
been acquaintances from their boyhood. They were
not, however, and never had been, friends. There was
no approach to congeniality in their dispositions, the
first being frank and generous, while the other was
characterized by qualities in every respect the reverse
of those noble traits. They had now met by accident,
and stopped to exchange such few words of constrained
civility as people are wont to utter, who, while they
entertain for each other a secret dislike, are still willing
to avoid an open quarrel. But the deportment of
Waldon
was marked with a sort of obsequiousness to his
companion, which might have indicated to one less
suspicious
than Dudley, some sinister design.
Stirring times are these, he said, glancing at his
weapon, after a moment's pause in conversation. It
becomes one to look well to his flint and flask.
A*
It does, indeed, replied Dudley. I hope there
have been no new massacres committed.
I do n't know exactly about the
massacres
, said
Waldon, emphasising the word. Indians have
their
way of fighting and we have
ours
. But there certainly
was
a night attack made at Shell's Bush night before
last, and houses burnt, lives lost, and prisoners taken,
as usual.
This is fearful intelligence, Mr. Waldon, and, what
is worse, we know not at what hour the bolt may fall
upon us. You will, of course, join the Life Guard which
we are organizing?
I intend to join quite a different service, I assure
you, said Waldon, and one in which a little more
honor and profit can be gained than in guarding a few
old women and their spinning wheels. Col. St. Leger
is now on his approach to Fort Stanwix, and under his
banner I shall enlist without delay. Nay, hear me, he
said, as the withering scorn which had gathered on the
face of his companion indicated a scathing rebuke, St.
Leger will reduce Fort Stanwix in three days. With
the aid of the loyalists in this country, the rebellion in
this section is sure to be immediately quelled, with little
or no bloodshed. Intelligence from the south and east
is equally favorable to the royal cause. If, therefore,
you desire to serve your country effectually, Dudley, be
persuaded to go with me. The most brilliant
inducements
are held out, and for you, in particular,
influential
and brave, a commission would be certainI may
say, ineded, that I am authorized to offer it, by those
who have the full confidence of St. Leger.
Enough has been said, replied Dudley, with
dignity
;
let us part while our blood is cool. Go,join
St. Leger to devastate your native land, or join, if you
prefer, the savage brigands and their more savage allies,
whose atrocities you palliate. When
we
meet again, it
will be as enemies. Thus saying, he turned to depart.
Hold! exclaimed the other, snatching his rifle, as
if he would enforce attention, we are enemies
now!
Stung by resentment, and maddened by the thought
that his plans had been prematurely and uselessly
disclosed
,
his eye now gleamed with undisguised rage.
That still another element entered into his wrath became
evident by his words.
We are enemies
now
, he repeated, and I have a
warning to bestow. You have had thoughts of Miss
Welles. She is mine, affianced and plighted by her
father, who, with me, is about to join the royal standard.
See to it that my rights are regarded. Any invasion
of them in that quarter will be visited by punishment
summary and condign.
He tapped his weapon significantly as he concluded.
Dudley's eyes flashed with anger.
Do you dare to threaten
me?
he said, laying hold
of his companion's rifle with a firm grasp. Me, who
know you, Enoch Waldon, to be as cowardly as
perfidious
?
If you
are
affianced to Ellen Welles, it is because
her pure heart has never detected your baseness. But
words between us are useless. I leave however, no
armed foe in my rear. So saying, he wrested the
weapon of the other suddenly from his grasp,
discharged
its contents into the air, and flinging it upon the
ground, disappeared in the forest.
Mortified and infuriated, Waldon gave utterance to
some impotent imprecations, and then, having
recovered
and re-loaded his gun, rapidly departed in an
opposite
direction.
CHAPTER II.
We
are apt when dwelling in the sunshine of peace,
to look upon the season of war as one of unmitigated
horror. We forget that man is powerless effectually to
mar the fair face of nature, or intercept the smiles of
Heaven. We forget that the fields still are verdant,
the streams still sparkling, the sun-lit canopy by day,
and the starry firmament at night, still beautiful and
sublime, amidst all the puny tempests of human strife.
The mind, too, buoyant and elastic with hope, and
containing
within itself the secret springs of joy, bids
defiance
at times, to every peril, and often seems least
desponding, when dangers and trials are the most
numerous
and severe.
The twilight had gradually disappeared, and the
moon, riding high in the heavens, was illuminating the
landscape, as Dudley pursued his homeward way. Hill,
dale and stream, bathed in a flood of silvery light, lay
spread around him far as the eye could reach, and for
a while engrossed his undivided attention. But sadder
themes soon pressed upon his mind. The massacre at
Shell's Bush, of which Waldon had so unfeelingly
spoken
,
was one of similar deeds to those which had been
already perpetrated in the valley of the Mohawk.
They were the work of savages, aided and instigated
by some of the lowest and vilest of the white
inhabitants
,
who, having declared in favor of the royal cause,
made it a cover for the perpetration of every enormity
which either private revenge or the most sordid
cupidity
could dictate. Although these atrocities usually
occurred
and were most to be dreaded in the darker nights,
they were by no means confined to such seasons, the
full light of the moon, and the broad glare of day,
affording
no protection to the peaceable inhabitants when
the war spirit of their savage foes was fully aroused.
On again viewing the sky, Dudley beheld a belt of
dense clouds skirting the western horizon, from which,
detached fragments were occasionally ascending
zenith-ward
,
threatening ere long to obscure the whole
firmament
;
and he shuddered as he thought that perhaps
some fearful tragedy might be enacted upon that very
night.
Nor were these apprehensions his only source of
disquiet
.
Other griefs of a private and more selfish
nature
also engaged his attention. The claim made by
Waldon on the affections of Miss Welles, although little
worthy of credit, was not without its effect upon his
mind. It had revealed to him the state of his own
feelings
,
of which he had before scarcely been conscious,
and at the same time had conjured up phantoms of
obstacles
to his hopes, which, with all a lover's
variableness
of feeling, at one moment seemed shadowy, and at
the next, insuperable. Ellen Welles was a lady well
calculated to inspire affection in such a heart as
Dudley's
.
The ordinary charms of youth and beauty were
enhanced in her person, by a natural grace of manner,
and an unalloyed sweetness of temper. If a judgment,
just and discriminating, was necessary to prevent such a
character from degenerating into insipidity, that gift
also was Ellen's. Her father was a military man, and
had held a Captain's commission under Sir William
Johnson in the war of 1756. He had purchased at the
close of that contest, a large estate in Tryon county,
which the advancing settlement of the country had
rendered
highly valuable, and at the period now spoken of
was what, in more modern parlance, would be termed
a large landed proprietor.
It was no matter of surprise to Dudley that Captain
Welles should have again offered his services to the
crown; but he wondered much what provisions he had
made for the security of Ellen, who was an only child,
and who had long before been deprived of her other
parent. But had he been so disposed, he might have
solved his curiosity by a direct appeal to the object of
it; for Ellen Welles at that moment stood before him.
She was accompanied by a single domestic, who bore a
few articles of value in his hands; and her deportment
gave token of alarm and agitation. Her answers to his
busy inquiries were exactly what he had expected to
hear. Her father was absent from home; there were
rumors of expected attacks from the Indians, and she
was hastening to place herself under the protection of a
neighboring family; for although Captain Welles was
well known to be loyal in his sentiments, his house was
too secluded, and presented too many temptations to
the plunderers, to be a safe abode for an unprotected
female. That Dudley at once became her escort, that
he strove in every way to soothe her alarm, although far
from considering it unfounded, and that he promised
such protection as he could give, were quite matters of
course. On arriving at the house which Ellen had
selected
for refuge, its inmates were found to be in a state
of alarm nearly equal to her own. The intelligence of
the expected attack had spread like wild-fire through
the little community, where the merciless character of
these onsloughts was well understood. The owner of
the house, Mr. Lee, who was a well-known patriot, was,
together with his sons, busily engaged in making such
hasty preparations for defense, as time allowed. Doors
and windows were barricaded, ammunition prepared,
and weapons put in order with all that bustling activity
which such an emergency might well be supposed to
create.
The panic in the vicinity had become general, and
several other of the immediate neighbors, whose houses
were considered less defensible than Lee's, were soon
seen flocking to his little fort, with their arms and
ammunition
and such of their more valuable effects as they
could conveniently transport. Lee's reputation as a
bold and resolute man, contributed not a little to
produce
this result, although it might be considered a very
questionable prudence which sought shelter under a roof
rendered, by the very reputation of its owner, so
prominent
an object of hostility. The work of defense now
went more rapidly forward. A breastwork of logs was
soon thrown up in front of the house, and another
opposite
the postern door; and upon the roof of the
building
,
blankets, saturated with water, were spread as a
protection from that most formidable engine of Indian
warfarethe fire-brand.
Dudley having become convinced of the reality of the
danger, hastened to summon to Lee's, such other of the
neighbors as did not choose rather to seek the shelter of
the forest, being conscious that their chief hope of
safety
must consist in thus consolidating their strength.
He had no immediate relatives in the vicinity to
awaken
his solicitude, and was able to act the more
efficiently
for the whole. With many injunctions to regard his
personal safety, and one from a voice which he fondly
fancied to be Ellen's, he departed on his mission. He
found the neighborhood everywhere alarmed. Some
were secreting their effects, preparatory to flight; some
were barricading their premises, determined to die, if
necessary, on their hearth-stones; and others, in small
bands, were fleeing to the forests, bearing their children
in their arms, and upholding the tottering steps of the
sick and the aged. The scene was one to draw tears
from the stoutest heart, but the necessity for speedy
action
,
left little room for contemplation. Dudley had a
word of encouragement and hope for all, and although
numbers gladly accepted his proposal, and hastened to
accompany him, the majority preferred to trust to the
hiding-places of the wilderness. He was more
successful
,
however, in gaining refugees than recruits.
Women
and children would add but little to the effective
force of the garrison, and he was, therefore, not a
little delighted at the accession to his numbers of four or
five members of the half-organized band, bearing the
imposing title of the Life Guard. These were all
young men, well-armed, and, by the presence and peril
of those most near and dear to them, furnished them
with the loftiest incentives to action.
CHAPTER III.
The
little company were soon assembled, and set out
together for their temporary fortress. The strictest
silence was enjoined, it being impossible to tell how
near the enemy might be, or where his advanced scouts
would be met. The precaution did not prove
superfluous
,
for they were yet a third of a mile distant from
Lee's, when they received convincing proof of their
langer. The silence was suddenly broken by a
trenendous
war-whoop; shouts and shots echoed through
he air, and soon the kindling light of a deserted
farmhouse
,
revealed the exulting foe, flitting like fiends
around the tenement from which they expected soon
to see their victims issue.
Appalled at this dreadful spectacle, the little party
paused and remained for a while breathless spectators
of the scene. The relative positions of the fugitives,
the foe, and the fort, (for such we must designate the
residence of Lee,) were about as the extremities of an
equal-sided triangle to each other. The latter could
not be gained without emerging from the woods, and
crossing a considerable space of cleared land, which
was an undertaking too hazardous to be contemplated.
Resuming their route, therefore, with the greatest
precaution
,
they obtained the nearest position to Lee's that
the cover of the forest would permit, hoping thence to
pass unperceived across the intervening space, which
had now become diminished to about thirty rods. But
at this moment, the enemy, after an impotent howl of
rage at finding the burning house unoccupied, took up
their march. With frantic gesticulations, some
bearing
lighted fire-brands, and others brandishing their
knives, they bent their course, as had been
apprehended
,
directly toward the fort. But, perceiving some
signs of defense, they made a
detour
around the
premises
,
in a course which threatened to bring them almost
directly to the concealed party.
To remain in the most perfect silence was deemed
safer than any attempt to retreat before the quick eye
and ear of the savages. The available portion of
Dudley's
force, consisting of seven armed men, obeying the
whispered orders of their leader, stood with presented
arms, ready, in case of discovery, to discharge a
sudden
volley upon the enemy, and then, by virtue of the
panic which such an assault would create, either to cut
B
their way through the foe to the fort, or make a rapid
retreat, as circumstances would dictate. Dudley, by
general consent, had been invested with the entire
command. As the savages drew nearer, they were
perceived
to be about sixty in numberincluding perhaps
ten or twelve whites, who, having adopted the dress
and habits of their confederates, may justly be
considered
as entitled also to their appellation. With
glistening
knives, with glaring brands, with exulting shouts,
they came nearer and nearer, until their advance was
scarcely a dozen yards distant from the hidden
encampment
.
Here, they suddenly paused and seemed to hold
a consultation. It was a moment of fearful suspense.
Trembling children cowered closer to their terrified
parents, and with large blue eyes upraised, faithfully
obeyed the often repeated signs of silence. The pause
was but momentary; but at the instant of renewing
their march, one of the concealed company
unfortunately
gave utterance to a slight ejaculation of delight,
which, catching the quick ear of the Indian leader,
produced
a second halt. Pointing to the woods, and
assuming
a listening attitude for a moment, he thus
communicated
to his followers the nature of his suspicions.
A scout was immediately detached to examine the
suspected
cover; but waatchful eyes and active hands
awaited his approach. He directed his course at once
to the encampment, but with such rapid and incautious
steps, that, before perceiving the ambush, he was at
the side of Dudley, who had advanced a step to meet
him.
The expressive huh! rose faintly to his lips as the
firm grasp of the youth encircled his throat, while the
silent knife completed the task, and the dying Indian
was upheld, lest his fall should be heard. The savages,
after the delay of a minute or two, hearing no alarm,
slowly resumed their course, not doubting that their
emissary would soon overtake them.
They pursued their circuitous way about the house
of Lee, evidently calculating their safest plan of attack.
Nothing can be more cowardly than this mode of
Indian
warfare, in which the assailants scarcely consider
themselves as victorious, unless they succeed without
losing a single warrior. As they approached the
opposite
side of the circle, the time had evidently arrived
when, if at all, the fugitives were to emerge from their
concealment, and make a rush for the fort. To remain
longer in the forest, which the Indian scouts would soon
be traversing in every direction, would be imminently
perilous, and with many a word of encouragement,
Dudley put his little company in motion.
Rapidly advancing, they had safely crossed nearly
half the intervening space, when a sudden commotion
in the ranks of the foe, showed that they were
perceived
.
A shout and a rush, with such speed as
Indians
only can accomplish, followed the discovery.
The fugitives, it will be remembered, were now about
fifteen rods from the house, and the savages twice that
distance, in nearly the opposite direction. The race
was exciting, but not long doubtful. The enemy were
still obliged to avoid too close a proximity to the house,
and Dudley, halting with his little band of infantry,
held them in check until the women and children were
out of danger, and then, still facing the foe, with
presented
arms, they retreated into the fort. No shot was
fired.
CHAPTER IV.
A piercing
shrick, which met the ear of Dudley,
upon
his entrance, announced some new calamity. A
little
boy, scarce two years old, had been lost in the
confusion
of the flight, and his mother, borne along by her
impetuous companions, had been unable to make her
vociferations understood until they reached the fort.
Upbraiding herself, upbraiding her friends, and vainly
struggling to escape from their grasp and fly back to
the rescue, the frantic parent rent every heart with her
cries. The moonlight still remaining unobscured, the
infant, on examination, was distinctly seen, about twelve
rods distant, seated quietly upon the grass, and
playing with the flowers, unconscious of danger. The
discovery was made none too soon. An Indian, prone
upon the ground, now lying motionless, like a log, and
now approaching the child with a slow and cat-like
gait, was at the same instant discovered, while the
whole band at a safe distance were silently watching
his hazardous attempt. A dozen rifles were at once
leveled at the miscreant, when Dudley interposed:
For shame! he said, will you let one worthless
dog draw your whole fire, and ensure the capture of
the child, while we are re-loading? The game is Lee's
by discovery. Rogers will stand ready to fire next, if
necessary; and if both fail, leave the scoundrel to me.
Uncle Lee, as he was familiarly called, smiled as he
raised his unerring gun, and its quick report was
accompanied
by a yell that seemed to proclaim the
success
of the shot. The Indian started from his
recumbent
position, and then fell heavily backward.
If he were a Christian now, we might suppose him
dead, exclaimed Rogers, who had watched the effect
of Lee's shot with a look of chagrin, but I have my
doubts. Captain, he said, addressing Dudley, and
raising his gun beseechingly, that fall was a little too
theatrical.
Do n't you go to shooting dead men, Mr. Rogers,
exclaimed Lee, I tell you I have killed him.
Dudley, whose suspicions from the first had been the
same as those of Rogers, made a signal to the latter to
fire, which he had no sooner done than the dead man
rose to his feet, with a screech that could not be
misunderstood
,
then sinking gradually to his knee, he fell
shivering to the ground, with indubitable signs of death.
Rogers smiled grimly as he retorted upon his
companion
:
'T is n't much to
kill
an Indian, Mr. Lee; it 's the
bringing him to life again that shows the skill.
If any doubt had been entertained of the fatality of
the last fire, the yell of wrath which arose from the
Indians
,
and the volley which was discharged at the
helpless
infant, would have effectually dispelled them. But
the distance which the cowardly assailants were
compelled
to keep, and the minuteness of the mark,
fortunately
rendered their fire innocuous. It was evident,
however, that the child in so exposed a situation, could
not long escape.
It is a shame, said Dudley, that a helpless babe
should perish, and twelve strong men look idly on. I
myself will save him.
B*
Thus saying, he threw down his gun, that nothing
might retard his speed, and prepared to rush out. But
the firm grasp of Lee was on his shoulder.
It is certain death, said the old man; you will be
a mark for thirty rifles.
And if it were thirty thousand, I would go,
retorted
Dudley, inpetuously, and tearing himself away.
But at this moment, a singular apparition entered the
room, which, whether or not it was anything more than
a huge tin Dutch oven, surmounted by an inverted pail
of the same material, was certainly nothing less. It
required
a little investigation to perceive signs of a
human
being under this extraordinary coat of mail, but
in a moment more, a voice proceeding from under the
kettle, proclaimed a well-known slave of Lee's by the
name of Nando. Merely announcing his object, the
faithful negro darted out of the house, and, presenting
his shielded side to the enemy, ran hastily toward the
child.
There was one moment of fearful suspense; a yell, a
volley, and a responsive shout of derision from the
slave. At the next, Nando bent over the wondering
child, thrust him hastily within his capacious shield,
and, rushing rapidly back, reached the house in safety.
The cordial greetings, the welcoming grasp, the wet
eyes, and the warm out-pourings of a mother's
gratitude
that here encountered him, astonished and
bewildered
the heroic African; while the marred and
battered
utensil, told eloquently the tale of his danger and
his daring.
CHAPTER V.
The
event most desirable for the savages, and for
which they had probably been waiting, now
unfortunately
occurred. The heavy drifting clouds which had
long blackened the western horizon, began now to
obscure
the whole sky, and a thick darkness soon settled
upon the landscape. To fire the building, and to
compel
its evacuation, and thus to capture and massacre the
whole party, whilst its defenders had no advantage of
shelter, and were impeded by the care of their women
and children, was the chivalrous feat which the
besiegers
now contemplated.
The danger could not be concealed, and hope
consisted
only in meeting it courageously. In a
momentary
interview which Dudley obtained at this period with
Miss Welles, the latter communicated to him the
dreadful
suspicion that one of the leaders of the enemy was
Enoch Waldon, whom she believed that she had
recognized
both by his figure and gait. Although horrified
at the supposition, there was also a gleam of pleasure
in the announcement; for whether Waldon was so
deeply guilty or not, the fact that he could be
obnoxious
to such a suspicion, precluded the idea of her
entertaining
for him partial feeling. Animated by an
increased
hope, Dudley begged Ellen to consider herself
under his especial protection, and, with an earnest and
eloquent look, he added, not to believe herself in
danger
while he continued to live. There was nothing in
the words, but there must have been something in the
manner of the speaker to call the quick blood into the
cheek of Ellen. Hurridly thanking him, she turned
away, and Dudley, with a comparatively light heart,
hastened to prepare for further defense.
Placing two or three men at the several windows,
so as to command, to some extent, every side of the
house, he directed them to keep up a random fire, in
hopes that the besiegers would be intimidated from a
near approach. For a while, this plan seemed to
succeed
,
and no sound of the foe being detected, the belief
was entertained, that they were effectually repulsed.
But the more wary were not disposed to such ready
hope. The silence was too deep and ominous.
Alarmed
by the very quietude without, Dudley, after
ordering
increased vigilance on every side, announced his
determination to ascend to the house-top, and called
upon
three or four of his most resolute companions to
follow
him.
A small sky-light afforded means for effecting this
object, and with extreme silence and caution, Dudley
ascended only until his head had fully emerged into the
open air. Pausing to reconnoitre the adjacent fields,
his eye was immediately arrested by what, at first,
seemed a few fire-flies flitting about the roof. With a
sudden and fearful suspicion, he remained motionless,
and made a close scrutiny. Feeling cautiously about
him, he ascertained that the wetted blankets had been
removed, and the conviction that the roof was already
in possession of the savages, forced itself upon his mind.
His position was nearly at one-extremity of the
building
,
which was long and narrow, with a single
chimney
at the opposite end.
Peering earnestly through the thick darkness, he at
length discovered part of the outline of several figures
in a stooping attitude. The sound of breath, as in
the act of blowing at embers, also reached his ear from
several quarters, and convinced him that the Indians
were at that moment engaged in setting fire to the
building. His prudence for the moment almost
yielded
to the quick feeling of rage which prompted him to
rush headlong upon so diabolical a foe; but
restraining
his wrath, he immediately drew back and
communicated
to his astonished companions the nature of his
discovery. His resolution was immediately taken.
The sky-light, which was gained only by moveable
steps, would admit of only three persons standing
within
it; and having stationed that number of his little
garrison at the foot of the steps with reserve guns, he
called upon Lee and Rogers to follow him, and once
more ascended, with the same perfect silence as before.
Rising until their shoulders were above the roof, the
three remained standing, motionless, with presented
arms. It was, doubtless, a hazardous experiment for
the besieged party to wait for the kindled light of their
own roof to reveal the persons of their foes; but the
importance of striking a signal blow, and one that
might deter the enemy from making any further attack
overcame every other consideration.
The dampened state of the shingles rendered the
process
of ignition slow; but at length, a faint bue flame
made its appearance in the vicinity of the chimney,
where a number of small faggots had been carefully
inserted. Flickering with the wind, now sinking, now
rising, the unsteady blaze was guarded from the air by
both hands of a kneeling Indian, whose fiendish features,
as he bent over the light, could be distinctly traced.
Brighter and brighter rose the blaze, and soon began to
reveal the other objects in its vicinity, while the place
occupied by Dudley and his companions remained in
impenetrable obscurity. Brighter and higher still,
until
the alarmed inmates beneath, saw the fire gleaming
downward through the chinks of the unceiled roof. But
the time for action had arrived. Other faint lights
had sprung up, and the savages, to the number of five,
were distinctly visible, when Dudley having exchanged
signals with his men, in order to select their several
victims, quietly gave the command to fire.
The report of the guns, and the death screech of the
Indians, was a mingled and simultaneous sound. They
each rolled rapidly down the roof and fell heavily to
earth. But although Dudley and his comrades
instantly
handed down their guns and received others from
below, only one of the enemy remained visible when
they were again prepared to fire. Running rapidly
along the apex of the building, he had already gained
hold of the rope, which, thrown lasso-like over the
chimney, had been the means of his ascent, and was
about to swing himself off, when he received the
contents
of Dudley's gun. Still convulsively clutching the
rope he was seen by the now growing light to totter for
a moment on the extreme end of the building, when
Lee, more in pity than in wrath, gave him another ball.
It would have been a hard fall for a living man,
he said, as the noise of the body striking the ground
reached his ear, but a stack of feather beds would n't
have been any mercy to him now.
Do n't be too sure, replied Rogers, banteringly;
your
dead men have a remarkable faculty of coming to
life again, and I think I see the red devil now,
scampering
across the field with the rope in his hand!
And a piece of the chimney, I suppose! retorted
Lee, who understood his comrade's propensity to joke
too well to take offense.
But the triumph which produced this temporary
elation
of spirits in these brave men, was far from being
complete. The fire had gained a headway that
demanded
instant attention, and whoever ventured
within
its light would doubtless be a prominent mark for
the outlaying foe.
No time, however, was to be lost, and two brave
fellows of the Life Guard already stood prepared at
the foot of the stairs for the perilous enterprise.
Bearing
blankets, saturated with water as before, they
rushed hastily to the flames. The expected volley
was discharged, and unhappily, as the groans of the
young men testified, not without effect. One, but
slightly injured, fled hastily back, while the other,
convinced
of the mortal nature of his wounds, nobly
resolved
that his life should prove no idle forfeit.
Stanching
the life-blood with one hand, he dragged himself
feebly from blaze to blaze, until the last flickering light
was extinguished; and then, with the remnant of his
failing strength, crept slowly back to his companions.
Drawn hastily, but gently within, the youth was
deposited
upon a couch, and hasty preparations were made
to examine and relieve his wounds. But observing the
changing expression of his face, and obeying his
significant
gestures to desist, his comrades crowded with
tearful eyes around his bed.
My sister? faintly ejaculated the dying man, as he
slowly turned his face toward the door. A low wail
was heard withoutthe door openedand the fainting
maiden was supported to his bed-side. A placid smile,
like sun-light, stole over the features of the youth; his
lips moved, and the trembling girl bent lower and lower
to hear. The whispered words with which the
parting
soul went upwards, were soft as sound could be, yet
distinctly articulated, they fell upon every ear,
we
shall meet again!
CHAPTER VI.
The
effect on the besieged party of the melancholy
occurrence which has just been narrated, was
dispiriting
in the extreme. They could not but feel that the
lot of their comrade might soon be their own, and
perhaps
with circumstances of aggravated suffering. But
Dudley was not without the strongest hopes that the
severe repulse which the enemy had now met with
would induce them entirely to withdraw, the more
especially
as they were not supposed to know the fatal
result of their late discharge of fire-arms. The
war-whoop
with which they had accompanied that assault,
gradually died away, and the most perfect silence again
prevailed without. Dudley continued to order
occasional
shots from the window, but they elicited no
response
.
The utmost vigilance was used, and every
possible
preventive measure employed, not omitting so
serviceable
an agent against a scaling foe as boiling
water
,
a department of defense under the special
superintendence
of Nando. But these precautions proved
superfluous
,
and the night passed without further alarm.
Baffled and mortified, the savages had retired, bearing
with them the bodies of six of their fallen warriors; a
loss, which seemed to them of almost irreparable
magnitude
.
Thus the gallant defense of Fort Lee the less,
as it was subsequently termed, proved not only the
security
of its inmates, with one lamentable exception,
but, for the time at least, of the whole surrounding
settlement
.
Mutual congratulations on their escape, and
thanks-givings
for so signal a protection of Providence, were
among the earliest employments of the little party on
the ensuing morning. But the panic which had spread
through the neighborhood did not really subside. Some
indeed, returned immediately to their homes, relying in
part upon their private means of defense, but chiefly
confident from their knowledge of Indian character
that the enemy would not soon renew an enterprise
which had proved so disastrous. A more vigilent
police
was organized, and a portion of the citizens nightly
acted as sentinels at the prominent posts of observation.
To Ellen Welles, the events which have been
recorded
had been doubly terrifying for a cause, which has
as yet, been scarcely apparent. Waldon had in reality
been a rejected claimant for her hand. His pretensions
had been favored by her father, who, wrapped in his
selfish and personal schemes, was as far from
appreciating
the worth of his daughter, as he was from
penetrating
the villainous character of her suitor. To his
charge, during his temporary absence from home,
Captain
Welles had especially confided his household,
enjoining
Ellen, in case of danger, to appeal at once to his
protection. And more recently still, Waldon had been
the bearer of a message to Ellen from her father,
informing
her that he was engaged in raising a company
of volunteers, with which he should immediately
proceed
to join St. Leger under the walls of Fort Stanwix.
He fourther informed her that he had made suitable
provision
for her safety during the perilous times that were
like to ensue, and directed her to accept of Waldon's
escort to the place where he was then sojourning.
Dreading his designs in relation to her detested
suitor
,
yet fearing to disobey a parent, who, though harsh,
was her only protector, she hesitated in most painful
incertitude as to her proper course of action. But when
B
the messenger proceeded to hint that he was
empowered
to enforce the commands of his principal, her terror
knew no bounds. If she had before doubted, she was
now decided, and she resolved to brave every other
peril
sooner than to trust herself in the power of her suitor.
But she did not make known her resolutions, and he,
supposing her only to hesitate, specified an hour on the
next day when he would call for her decision, and
withdrew
.
It was on that evening that her flight to Lee's had
occurred. But Waldon had not been a participant in
the affair of the preceding night, and Ellen's suspicions
on that point had doubtless been caused, in part by her
dread of falling into his hands. To express her
gratitude
to Dudley with becoming warmth, and yet with
maidenly reserve, was no difficult task for an intelligent
girl; but it was tremblingly, painfully, and by slow
degrees
alone, that she was able to disclose, in answer to
his earnest and respectful inquiries, the other
particulars
of her unfortunate position.
Beautiful did the timid girl appear as she related
her griefs, and Dudley longed for nothing so much as to
throw himself at her feet and offer her a lifelong
protection
.
But with quick discernment he appreciated the
unfitness of the occasion for any declaration of his
feelings
.
It should be, he thought, proudly, under other
circumstances
,
when he was better entitled to ask, and she
more free to refuse, that he would seek the hand and
heart of one so peerless and so pure. At present, it
became
his duty rather to make provision for her safety,
and on this subject he hastened to speak. He knew that
small volunteer companies, in response to the earnest
appeal
of Col. Gansevoort, were daily flocking to the
relief
of Fort Stanwix, and had learned, on inquiry, that
one of these,
en route
for that military post, was hourly
expected in the neighborhood. He at once proposed
to her to take advantage of such an escort to fly to the
Fort, where she would find numbers of her own sex,
who had sought the same refuge, and whence, if she
should so desire, she could at any moment be
transferred
to her father in the British camp. She could
beattended
,
he said, by her maid, and he, if she would
permit
,
would accompany her and fulfil an intention that
he had long entertained, of seeking service in the
American Army. The same evening found the whole
party, including Rogers, who had enlisted as a private,
safely within the walls of the Fort.
CHAPTER VII.
It
was but a few days subsequent to these events
that Col. Gansevoort found his slightly garrisoned fort
surrounded by a force of seventeen hundred men. His
repeated calls for re-inforcements from the regular
army
,
had met with nothing but promises, and unless
some effectual aid should arrive, there was every
reason
to believe that in a few weeks, at farthest, he would
be compelled to capitulate. Col. St. Leger, Sir John
Johnson and Brant, the renowned Indian Chief, were
among his besiegers; names, which were of themselves
calculated to inspire terror among his undisciplined
troops. They did not, however, deter the gallant Gen.
Herkimer from making a noble effort for the relief of
the garrison. By earnest appeals to the patriotism of
his fellow-citizens, he succeeded in raising an army of
eight hundred men, among whom were many of the
first citizens of Tryon county. With these, he
hastened
forward by rapid marches, and pausing a few miles
from the Fort, despatched couriers to notify the
commandant
of his approach. The discharge of artillery
from the works was to announce the arrival of the
messengers
,
and be the signal for his advance. At the
same time, Col. Gansevoort, by a
sortie
from the Fort,
was expected to assist in making good their entrance.
Such was the sagacious scheme of Herkimer. But the
arrival of the embassy at the Fort was delayed several
hours longer than was anticipated by an accident, and
his officers and men became impatient of delay, and
demanded
to be led forward. Herkimer declined to
advance
until the signal was heard; but galled by the
importunities
and taunts of his officers, who did not
hesitate
to denounce him as a coward, he gave the order
to march. The ambuscade, the surprise and the bloody
battle in the forests of Oriskany, are among the most
memorable events of history. Although the result of
the engagement was one in which it is difficult to
decide
the question of victory, yet the main object of the
expedition was defeated. No portion of Herkimer's
forces reached the garrison, and Col. Gansevoort
remained
in a more hopeless condition than before. He
had fulfilled all that was required on his part. The
sortie
of Col. Willett, who gained and held possession
of Sir John Johnson's camp long enough to transfer
seven wagon loads of spoil, each thrice told, to the Fort,
was a brilliant exploit, for which Congress voted him
the nation's thanks and a sword.
Capt. Welles had effected his object of joining the
loyalists at Fort Stanwix, and there he learned from
Waldon of the flight of Ellen. He immediately
applied
to his commanding officer for permission to despatch
a flag to Col. Gansevoort, requesting safe conduct for
his daughter to the British camp, which was granted.
Had it not been for Waldon, she would not have
hesitated
a moment to yield obedience to the parental
authority
,
but her dread of her suitor had become so
great as to be quite insuperable. She returned a
respectful
answer, in which she dwelt at length upon her
recent perils and her present safety, adding that she
felt unable to bear any new excitement or alarm, and
begging to be allowed to remain in quiet in her
present
abode.
If, she ingeniously concluded, your forces are
repulsed
,
I shall certainly be safer here than in a
traveling
camp; but if, as you so confidently predict, you
will be in possession of the fort within three days, you
will then also be in possession of your affectionate
daughter Ellen.
Dudley had found no small favor in the eyes of Col.
Gansevoort. He bore a conspicuous part in the famous
attack of Col. Willett on the British camp. He
received
a Lieutenant's commission, with the promise of
speedy promotion, while his comrade, Rogers, had been
raised to the rank of Sergeant. But in the mean time
the prospects of the garrison grew daily more gloomy;
and Col. Willett and Dudley undertook the task of
making their escape from the Fort, and making a final
desperate effert to rally the militia of Tryon county.
They succeeded in reaching Fort Dayton, where, to
their joy they learned that Gen. Arnold and Larned
had already been despatched by Gen. Schuyler with
the Massachusetts brigade and the first New York
regiment
to the relief of the Fort. Willett hastened to
meet Arnold at Albany and expedite his movements,
but although the latter soon arrived at Fort Dayton,
countless delays occurred in getting his forces together,
B*
and the danger grew daily more imminent. But
Dudley
had not been idle during the absence of Willett.
Having learned of a secret meeting of the emissaries of
Sir John Johnson in the neighborhood, who were
inciting
the disaffected to take up arms in the royal cause,
he quietly surrounded the place of meeting with a small
force, and in the midst of an eloquent harangue of one
of the leaders, entered the room and made the whole
assembly prisonersof these, several were immediately
tried as spies and sentenced to death. This
circumstance
afforded the means for that memorable
ruse
of
Gen. Arnold, of which the reader needs scarcely to be
reminded. Among the condemned was a half-witted
fellow named Han Yost Schuyler, for whom, at the foot
of the gallows, an aged and widowed mother pleaded
with all that eloquence which affection only can
inspire
.
Arnold spared his life on condition that he
would hasten to the British camp, where he was well
known as a loyalist, and spread the tidings of his
approach with a large force. A brother of the
prisoner
consented to be his hostage, and to suffer death
in his stead if the other failed of fulfilling his contract.
Han Yost proved faithful, and with the aid of a few
friendly Indians, who assisted in his plot, met with
perfect
success. The body of Indians under Brant at once
took the alarm, and as no inducements of St. Leger
could stay them, he was compelled to raise the siege
and retreat with his whole force.
Dudley and Col. Willett hastened to rejoin their
friends at Fort Stanwix. Here Dudley learned that
Ellen had been beguilded by a counterfeit letter,
purporting
to have come from himself, as a prisoner,
wounded
and dying in the British camp, and had left the
Fort under charge of an emissary of Waldon. This
afflicting news was rendered still more alarming by
the intelligence that Capt. Welles was mortally
wounded
in the battle of Oriskany. He also learned that
Rogers, his faithful friend and ally in the affair at Lee's,
had deserted to the enemy.
To pursue the retreating army, to keep in the
neighborhood
of Ellen, and watch the chances which
fortune
might throw in his way for her rescue, was his
immediate resolve. In the Fort he found two Indians
who were willing to accompany him. They were
brave and sagacious fellows, and as his hope of
success
depended less upon force than skill, the small
number
of his confederates was scarcely to be regretted.
CHAPTER VIII.
When
Ellen arrived in the British camp, her delight
at finding the story of Dudley's captivity and wounds
untrue, scarcely left room for indignation at the fraud.
Her father's extreme illness immediately engrossed her
attention, until the day before the retreat of the army,
when it terminated in his death. On the occurrence of
this melancholy event, Ellen applied to Sir John
Johnson
for permission to return to the Fort. But the
artful
Waldon had anticipated this movement. Capt.
Welles had been prevailed upon in his last hours to
constitute Waldon the guardian of his child, an I had
enjoined upon him to see her removed to some more
loyal district. Sir John did not hesitate to say that he
hoped within a few weeks, to see the guardian's power
transformed into that marital authority which the late
Capt. Welles had been so anxious should be
established
.
Convinced that all effort in this quarter was
useless
,
she next resolved to appeal to the generosity of
Waldon. But she little knew the nature of the man
into whose hands she had fallen. He exulted in the
power which he possessed over the person and
property
of his ward. Circumstances required their
immediate
departure for Oswego, at which place he hoped for
leisure and means to effect a change in her views. The
arguments which she undervalued in a lover, would be
more potent from the lips of a husband, in which light
he begged Miss Welles to accustom herself to look
upon
him in future.
Astounded and maddened by these threats, Ellen
continued sitting in the tent which had been allotted to
her use, long after Waldon's departure. When she
revived she perceived that she had another companion,
in whom she recognized the familiar and welcome
countenance of Rogers. Enjoining the strictest
secresy
,
the sergeant informed Ellen that he knew her
danger
,
and that his only business in the British camp was
to attempt her rescue. Rogers had joined the army
as a loyalist, and not being known as a deserter, no
suspicion had attached to him. He cared very little
for the temporary odium of a deserter at home while
he retained the confidence of Dudley, who he believed
would rightly conjecture his designs.
CHAPTER IX.
The
retreating army returned as they came, by way
of Oneida Lake, and he who had watched the large
flotilla on the evening of the second day after the
raising
of the siege, might also have seen a single boat
following
in the distance. It need hardly be said that it
was Dudley who thus daringly followed the flying host.
He was confident that Rogers was in the British camp
only as his friend and ally; and he indulged the faint
hope of now attracting his attention, and by some
means establishing a communication with him. When
the enemy encamped at night on the borders of the
Lake, he retained a position in which he would be
visible
only to the close observer. He knew well that any
attempt personally to enter the British lines, without
the password, would result in his detection and an
ignominious
death. Dudley listened long and earnestly
until
he thought he heard the distant fall of oars. A few
minutes convinced him that he was not mistaken.
Nothing
could be seen, and as the darkness would prove
an equal obstacle to his own position being discovered,
he resolved upon the hazardous experiment of
displaying
a light. The quick and emphatic dash of oars
which succeeded, met with a response in his fast
beating
heart. A momentary silence, and the low, cautious
interchange of the words Dudley and Rogers,
established
the certainty of the anxious hopes of each. In a
moment more the boats were side by side. A few
minutes sufficed to put Dudley in possession of all the
important facts in relation to Ellen's situation.
It is well known to the historical reader that the allied
army, in their hasty departure from the walls of Fort
Stanwix, left behind them, not only their artillery and
many of their tents, but a large portion of their stores
and camp equipage. It was an easy matter for Dudley
to procure apparel from these sources, both of the
civilized
and savage soldier, which might serve as disguise
for himself and companions, nor had he neglected so
obvious an aid to his enterprise. To transform the
Indians
by a change of dress, from the republican
Oneidas
into the royal Mohawks, was no difficult operation,
and Dudley, with equal celerity, was converted into a
private of Sir John Johnson's regiment of American
loyalists. All things being in readiness, the boats
slowly
and silently approached the shore, taking a direction
that would bring them to land a few rods below the
camp. As they drew nigh, the sentinels could be
distinctly
seen and the countersign was carefully
impressed
upon the mind of each of the party. It required no
repetition to the Indians, for the word was Brant.
CHAPTER X.
Reclining
, not sleeping, in her guarded tent, the
unfortunate
Ellen passed the slow watches of the night in
an agony of apprehension. She had heard nothing of
Dudley since the day of his departure for Fort Dayton,
and fears for his safety formed an item in her distress.
She had not even been able to communicate with
Rogers
since the retreat commenced, although the faithful
sergeant had contrived to be allotted to the same boat
which conveyed her, and with two Indians and one of
his fellow privates, constituted its full company. The
vessel which had been selected for Ellen was of a
fanciful
construction, and had received from Waldon the
name of the gondola. Waldon, fearful, perhaps, of
his captive's reproaches, and knowing the impossibility
of her escape, contented himself with occupying the
boat next preceding in the line. The stir and bustle
without, at length announced to Ellen the approach of
day, and the note of preparation for departure fell with
dismal forebodings upon her ear. She was
immediately
in readiness, and although there were yet no signs
of light, she pulled aside the canvas door of her tent
and looked out. She knew that she was closely
guarded
,
but she was not prepared for the uncivil command
which at once forbade her egress. A second speaker,
in a voice still more gruff, approached the door, and
uttering
some well dissembled words of reproof,
contrived
to slip a paper into her hands and immediately
withdrew. By the faint light of a taper, Ellen
perused
the following words: Make every possible delay
in leaving your tent and embarking. Minutes are
worth millions. Be watchful and discreet. Uttering
a hearty ejaculation of thanksgiving for the indefinite
hope thus held out to her, she instantly burned the
paper
,
and hastily divesting herself of part of her apparel,
retired to bed. By feigning a sleep sound and difficult
to dispel, when summoned to arise, by tardiness in
dress and many ingenious resources, she succeeded in
faithfully obeying the directions of her visitor.
The part to be performed by Dudley's party on
obtaining
entrance into the camp was of the most difficult
nature. They were not only to man the boat which
was designed for Ellen in their assumed character, but
it was necessary in some way to get rid of three of its
former crew. Lastly, and almost equally important,
was the necessity of delaying its departure, so that it
might be in the rear of the whole line. Simultaneous
with the first movements in the camp, they proceeded
to take possession of the boat; and Rogers, having
instructed
his disguised companions how to simulate as
nearly as possible the deportment of its former
occupants
,
stepped upon the shore to await their approach.
Many of the boats were already filled, but Waldon,
who had charge of that division of the flotilla, had not
yet arrived. As the two Indians who formed part of
the gondola's crew approached, Rogers hastened to
meet them, and said: The light is breaking on the
hills and the deer are already abroad. There will be
gold for him who brings game for the pale faced
maiden
.
Go quickly, and meet us an hour hence by
yonder
bluff. The Indians were ready armed, either for
war or the chase, and needed no second bidding to so
agreeable a task. For his fellow soldier, who soon
arrived
,
the sergeant was prepared with an equally
ingenious
device. You complained yesterday, he said,
of illness and fatigue. Mr. Waldon has sent us
another
oarsman, and you are to go in either of the large
batteaux. The fellow, unsuspecting, gladly turned
away aud joined a crowd who were filling up one of
the largest sized boats. It was not until many of the
foremost boats had started, that Waldon arrived,
accompanied
by the trembling Ellen. I think I will
take a seat in your boat this morning, Mr. Rogers, he
said. Our fair ally here exhibits unusual alarm, and
may need my personal attention. The gondola draws
much water, was the sergeant's reply, and rows
heavily; but if you choose te take my oar, I can go in
one of the batteaux. By no means, said Waldon,
laughing, the day promises to be too warm for that;
but keep as near in position as possible, and if anything
goes wrong I shall be in easy hailing distance. Hasten
now, or we shall be the very last to embark.
He handed Ellen to the boat and was about to depart,
but suddenly pointing to one of the Oneidas, he said
How's this, sir? Have you changed your crew, or
who is this broad shouldered savage? A light! quick,
bring a lightwe have strange visitors here. Rogers
stood with one foot in the boat and one upon the bank,
and Waldon, standing upon the shore in a stooping
position
,
was looking into the vessel. Dealing a
staggering
blow upon the head of Waldon, the sergeant sprang
into the boat, and seizing an oar, whispered, Pull now
for your lives.
CHAPTER XI.
The
movement had been so instantaneous, the noise
was so slight, and the blow upon Waldon so stunning,
that nearly a minute elapsed before any intelligible
alarm was given. Shouts were then heard from the
shore, with the dash of oars, and all the signs of quick
pursuit. Shots were fired, but the arrowy flight of the
boat had already carried it too far into the obscurity
that yet rested upon the waters, to admit of a distinct
aim. The increasing light soon showed the fugitives
that they were pursued by a batteaux containing twelve
men, all of whom were Indians but one, who it is
scarcely
necessary to say, was Waldon. The distance that
now separated the vessels was about a quarter of a mile.
Their motion was alarmingly accelerated, and the
interval
between the parties was rapidly diminishing;
but the broad shoulders which had once proved so
disastrous
,
were now of essential service. Perceiving the
exigency, Wongah, the elder Indian, requested Dudley
to surrender his oar to him, and taking the forward pair
he bent to his task, like Samson beneath the gates of
Gaza. All looked on in amazement, and expected
momentarily
to see the giant's strength give out; but mile
after mile was overcome without the least abatement of
D
speed. A glad smile of hope and encouragement lit up
every countenance, for the distance between the
vessels
had already more than doubled, notwithstanding
the utmost efforts of the enemy. In vain did Dudley
implore Wongah to spare his strength, lest it might fail
altogether. The quiet smile, the calm, equable
breathing
,
the uniform ponderous motion, told him that there
was as little to fear from fatigue in the huge and
compact
mass of muscles before him, as if it had been some
mighty machine of levers, wheels and springs.
When Dudley had relinquished his oar to the Indian,
his change of position brought him for the first time
near to Ellen; but the excitement of the race, and the
vigilant oversight now required of him, still prevented
him from disclosing himself. Ellen knew nothing of
the process by which her rescue was to be attempted,
and when she found herself once more seated in the
dreaded boat, she gave herself up for lost. The
temporary
sense of relief now experienced by all, afforded
an opportunity to make himself known. The light had
fully dawned, and as he seized an opportune moment,
and turned with a smile of triumph and affection to
Ellen, a speechless surprise, and joy that knew no
utterance
,
pervaded her breast. But a sudden
ejaculation
from the younger Indian, who was looking
westward
with an earnest gaze, now attracted attention.
Turning, he spoke a few words in his native tongue
to his companion, and the latter immediately
suspended
his labors and gazed intently in the same direction.
What do the Oneidas see, Mr. Rogers? inquired
Dudley, with ill-disguised alarm. Rogers listened a
moment to their guttural dialogue, and rising to his feet,
looked earnestly across the waters, then turning to the
lieutenant, he said in a low voice: I see nothing
myself
,
but the Lynx says there are two armed canoes
turning yonder point, and coming down with the speed
of wind.
Is Wongah frightened? said Dudley, turning to
the Indian, who was yet leaning on his oars; does he
think they can evertake us?
Wongah does not fear, was the characteristic
reply
;
but the hawk is swifter than the heron.
This figurative allusion to the fleetness of the birch
canoe, was not misunderstood, and every eye was now
strained to catch a glimpse of the new object of alarm.
The Indian, meanwhile, had resumed his labors with
all his former force, and without the least change of
countenance. The canoes were too much in the shade
of the shore to be perceptible to unpracticed eyes, but
the movement of the batteaux soon furnished
additional
proof of their approach. She turned suddenly about
and hastening to meet her allies, was also soon lost to
view in the shadows. The canoes, dancing like corks
upon the water, were soon seen to emerge from the
obscurity
,
and seemed like distant sea-birds pluming their
wings for flight. They each contained seven men, of
whom, as before, all save one were Indians. It was
useless to disguise the alarm inspired by this new aspect
of affairs; for, although the pursuers were nearly a
mile behind, it was apparent to all that their present
speed would soon bring them up with the gondola.
The latter boat was already taxed to her full capacity,
but no human strength could impart to such a vessel the
impetus which two pairs of well-plied oars give to a
feathery canoe. A hasty consultation was held, at
which Rogers and the Lynx proposed running for the
shore, and trying to make good their retreat through
the forests. Wongah opposed this as fatal, but offered
no substitute. He gave his opinion with stoical
calmness
when called upon, without at all suspending his
labors. Dudley spoke last.
It is idle, he said, to think of escape through
twenty miles of wilderness, with such a pack of
blood-hounds
on our track. But there is a small island which
cannot be many miles distant. Let us gain that, and
once under cover we can at least keep the fiends at
bay until dark, when some means of relief may
possibly
be found.
To this proposition, the Indians responded together,
with their sententious exclamation, good.
So it is good, said Rogers, energetically,
recovering
,
despite the danger, a portion of his natural humor.
If the red devils can land under our four rifles, they
shall be welcome to the scalp of Joe Rogers. Pull
away Mr. Lynx, and three cheers for the skipper.
Endeavoring thus to arouse his own failing spirits,
those of his companions, the noble hearted sergeant
resumed
his labors at the oar. The refuge referred to by
Dudley, was a small wooded islet, scarcely forty rods
in length, which had attracted his attention on the
preceding
day. It became visible on rounding a small
promontory, but still at the distance of several miles.
The pursuers seemed immediately to comprehend the
design of the fugitives, and the question became at
once which party should first reach the island. There
was no way to increas; the gondola's speed, and all
that remained was patiently to watch the chances.
Although the canoes were soon within rifle shot,
neither
party seemed disposed to resort to fire-arms.
Waldon
felt too sure of success to risk the life of Ellen
unnecessarily
,
and Dudley's company were all actively
employed in the management of their boat. For a
third of an hour the most perfect silence was
preserved
in the gondola, while every nerve of the oarsmen
seemed strained to its utmost tension. The eyes of
Ellen wandered incessantly from boat to boat, and
forward
to the island, measuring the rapidly diminishing
intervals between each, and resting occasionally upon
Dudley's countenance, as if they would read there a
solution of her dreadful doubts. At the distance of
half a mile from the island, the forward canoe was
running
nearly abreast of the fugitives, about forty rods
distant, and making for the northern extremity of the
land. There seemed no longer any hope; but at this
critical moment a cracking noise was heard, and one
of the oar blades of the parallel boat was seen floating
astern. The speed of the canoe was sensibly
diminished
;
Wongah's ponderous blows fell with redoubled
rapidity upon the water; the gondola shot ahead, and
in three minutes touched the shore.
CHAPTER XII.
Dudley's
first movement was to place Ellen in a
place of safety, and then to find secure shelter for
himself
and companions, whence they could repel the
advance
of the enemy. All this was but the work of an
instant. The crippled vessel had continued to advance
with no slight velocity, for she had still two effective
oars; but her consort had taken the land, and for a
while had threatened to make at least a simultaneous
landing with the gondola. But when her crew had
perceived this to be impracticable, they hastened to
retire
beyond rifle shot, divining with ready sagacity the
D*
designs of the other party. They were, however, too
late to avoid the effect of one leaden messenger from
the weapon of the active sergeant; a sharp yell and a
sudden commotion in the boat proclaimed its success.
Three more shots were instantly fired, but with no
observable
result. It was far, however, from being the
design of the enemy to abandon the pursuit. They
felt rather like the sportsman, who, having cornered
his game, deliberates only upon the easiest means of
dispatching it. At a safe distance the vessels came
together
in conference, which resulted in one of them
making a
detour
about the island, and taking up a
position
opposite to the other extremity. This movement
made it necessary for Dudley to divide his small force;
yet so minute was the territory to be defended, that
the two divisions of the garrison were not beyond each
other's call. It was now fully expected that the
besiegers
would attempt a simultaneous landing on the
opposite
sidesa course which ordinary courage would
certainly have prompted; but they evidently designed
some less dangerous expedient. To and fro, like sharks
waiting for their prey, through the long and tedious
hours of the day, the canoes glided leisurely about,
maintaining a close watch upon every part of the coast.
It was then, doubtless, for the night that the attack was
designed, and it was with sad forebodings that the
island
prisoners watched the sun beginning to decline
from the meridian. But they had not been idle. The
moment they became convinced that there was no
immediate
danger, a consultation was again held to devise
means of relief; for, as the enemy was discernable
from any part of the coast, and the defenders could be
easily summoned to the point of attack, they were no
longer confined to any one position. But deliberation
seemed of no avail. The calm and unclouded sky
fore-told
a still and star-light night, and one that would
render
a secret embarkation and flight nearly impossible;
and although the same causes would make the landing
somewhat hazardous, there could be no longer any
doubt that they had determined upon taking the risk.
There seemed, indeed, nothing to be done, except to
await the invasion and sell their lives as dearly as
possible
.
Although compelled to contemplate this fearful
issue of all his efforts, Dudley still strove to encourage
Ellen with hopes that he himself could no longer
entertain
.
But new events claimed attention. The
younger
Indian had long been missing from the council, and
on search being made, he was found seated beside a
pile of bark, which had been freshly stripped from the
birch trees around him, while a quantity of sea weed
such as is used by the Indians for thread or cord, was
also collected at his side. It was with no small alarm
that Dudley and Rogers viewed these preparations,
giving indications that their allies were about to desert
them. The southern shore was but about two-thirds of
a mile distant, and a very small canoe might possibly
be constructed before night, capable of transporting one
or two persons across, before they could be overtaken
from the more remote starting points of the enemy.
Dudley hastened to interrogate the Indian as to his
designs
.
The Lynx is not a rat, was the calm reply, to be
beaten to death in a trap.
The Lynx is a coward to desert his friends,
rejoined
Dudley, angrily. What does Wongah say?
Wongah will stay, was the quick reply.
The Lieutenant grasped the hand of the Indian with
emotion, and by that gesture, and by a grateful look
alone, expressed his thanks. Scorning to expostulate
with the other, he was about to turn contemptuously
away, when the low, soft voice of the youth was heard.
Dudley turned to listen, but the words were addressed
to Wongah, and being in the Oneida tongue, were too
rapidly uttered to admit of his comprehending the
meaning. He saw, however, that a smile of merriment
was on the face of the young Indian, and that his whole
countenance was lit up with a look of ingenuousness
and fidelity that could not be mistaken. Wongah
slowly repeated the substance of the words to Dudley
in broken English, and the latter, with extended hands
rushed to his young ally, and having begged pardon
for his late unworthy suspicions, sat down to assist him
at his task. Wongah also lent his aid, and the work
went rapidly forward. The Lynx, like many of his
race, had a spice of humor in his composition, that no
danger could wholly suppress.
CHAPTER XIII.
To construct a canoe of any considerable burthen or
capacity in so short a time, and under so many
disadvantages
,
was of course impossible. To make a frail
machine for the purpose of strategy yet capable of
attaining
some temporary speed, although a far easier
undertaking, still required no small amount of labor.
The sun went down before the task was completed,
although all hands mere employed upon it, not
excepting
those of the gentle Ellen. If falling tears could
have cemented the bark, the work would have been soon
done.
The project which engrossed such general attention
will be best described by the history of its progress.
When the boat was completed, even to its rude but
effective oars, the ingenuity of the Indians was yet to
be more fully displayed. Effigies of every individual
of the company, excepting the Lynx, were
immediately
formed, and with a fidelity both astonishing and
ludicrous
.
The hats and upper garments of the men, and
the bonnet and shawl of Ellen were of course made use
of, while the absent bodies were supplied by sticks and
branches of trees, artfully arranged. The slight and
erect form of Dudley, the graceful bust of Ellen, the
short and robust sergeant, and the broad shouldered
Wongah, with his scant mantle, were all there, and
with a celerity of construction that seemed the work of
magic. In this boat, with these imaginary companions
the Lynx was to start for the southern shore, with a
view to entice the enemy to a distance from the island.
If he were successful in this artifice, the remainder of
the party were at once to embark in the gondola, and
hoped to obtain a sufficient start before the
ruse
was
discovered, to effect their escape. The Indian, when
he gained the shore, if he succeeded in doing so, would
make the best of his way through the wilderness to the
fort.
Where the general hazard was so imminent, it was
useless, perhaps, to calculate degrees of danger; yet
none could refrain from feeling as if an extraordinary
peril was devolved upon the generous savage. The
chance of his being overtaken before he could reach
the shore, was so great, that it seemed as if he was
devoting
himself to immediate death for his associates.
He manifested, however, not the least fear, and made
all his preparations with a coolness that displayed the
utmost presence of mind.
The Mohawks will chase shadows, he said, with a
low laugh; their braves will shoot at blankets.
Rogers with well meant, but needless assiduity,
cautioned
him as to his trail in the forest, if he was so
fortunate
as to reach it, reminding him that a detachment
of the enemy might follow him there. The Indian
looked scornfully as he replied:
Let them track the swallows; the Lynx leaves no
trail.
The night proved, as had been anticipated, still and
starlight; and when the last ray of twilight had
disappeared
,
the boat with its phantom crew was silently
launched, ready for departure on the very first
movement
of the foe. The gondola, in the mean time, had
been transported across the island to the
northeastern
shore, and was also in readiness. They had not
long to wait. Recumbent on the beach, his eyes
brought nearly on a level with the horizon, the Lynx
himself was the first to detect the motionof the enemy.
Lingering for a few minutes, that he might make it
more certain of being discovered, he jumped into his
boat, and pulled quickly for the shore. The flight of
the prisoners being anticipated, he was, of course,
almost
instantly perceived. A long, shrill yell
announced
the discovery from one boat to the other, and the
race immediately commenced. But although trembling
and anxious for the fate of their companion, the
remainder
of the party had but little time to watch the
chase. The moment that the changed position of the
enemy seemed to render it safe, they also embarked,
and at first taking a northerly direction until they had
obtained a considerable offing, they changed their
course and pulied rapidly down the Lake. The race
was for life, and the exertion was proportionate. Not
a word was spoken. All felt conscious that in a very
short time the
ruse
would be discovered. The distance
to the eastern extremity of the Lake was about eight
miles, and from that point to the fort, about fifteen.
Although
this latter course could be chiefly accomplished
by means of the inlet, the navigation of that stream
was difficult, and would give a vast advantage to the
pursuers. A route through the forest was therefore
resolved upon, from some point near the head of the
Lake, if they should succeed in safely reaching that
point.
About ten minutes had elapsed in silence, when a
loud and prolonged yell of many voices was heard from
the direction of the enemy. The oarsmen paused to
listen, and a momentary shudder pervaded every breast,
as the probable fate of their companion was
contemplated
.
`'T is the scalp haloo of the Mohawks, said Rogers,
solemnly; our friend is dead.
All turned to Wongah for his opinion; but the
Indian
,
with one finger raised to enjoin silence, still
remained
listening. At that moment, the well-known war-cry
of the Oneidas rang in one long, shrill note across the
silent waters, waking the slumbering echoes with the
sound.
The Lynx is safe! said the old man, as he again
bent energetically to his task. A single shot was all
the additional noise that was heard, and they now knew
that the foe was in swift pursuit of themselves. The
succeeding hour, fleet-winged as it may have been to
some, was a long age of suspense to the fugitives.
Keeping close to the land, they held their course with
unabated speed, until at length the converging shores
announced that they were near their intended place of
debarkation. But hope seemed only to tantalize and
mock them; for at this moment, a fiendish shout from
the enemy announced that they were again discovered.
The stout heart of Dudley, the merry sergeant, and
even the stoical Wongah, seemed now to despair, while
the terrified and exhausted Ellen fell senseless in the
boat. They did, indeed, hasten toward the land, but it
was with no well-defined hope of either defense or
escape
.
Bloodhounds might possibly have been eluded,
but to elude the pursuit of a dozen Mohawks through
such a wilderness, was impossible. While Dudley and
Rogers lifted the lifeless form of Ellen from the vessel,
another wild yell reached their ears, and the enemy
were distinctly seen making for the shore at a point
about sixty rods below. Still bearing their beautiful
burden, the young men hastened up the bank and
rushed
wildly and aimlessly through the woods. But an
unseen hand was guiding their steps. The rattling of
a bayonet and the quick sharp call of a sentinel
announced
,
what the next moment's glance confirmed, that they
were within the limits of a military encampment.
Stunned by the sudden reaction of his feelings, Dudley
scarcely found words to announce his name and rank;
having done which, he demanded to be conducted
forth-with
to the commander's tent. He knew that he was
in an American camp, but was scarcely prepared for so
great a delight as finding himself in the immediate
presence of Col. Willett, who was on his return from
a pursuit of St. Leger. It was yet early in the night,
and the officers had not retired to rest. Having
hastily
given information of the approach of his pursuers,
orders were instantly given for extinguishing the light
of the camp and calling in the sentinels. Three
detachments
of fifty men each were detailed to take up
positions
,
with short intervals between, stretching
transversely
from the shore. The utmost silence was
preserved
,
and Waldon and the Mohawks rushed
heedlessly
into the trap. Their first notice of danger was the
command to fire, and simultaneous with the sound, eight
of the band, including their vindictive and treacherous
leader, lay stretched upon the ground. The remainder
with one or two exceptions, were taken prisoners.
On Dudley the more agreeable task had devolved of
restoring Ellen to animation, and of witnessing the
first overpowering sense of delight which the
knowledge
of their strange fortunes created. How amply his
own perils and privations were repaid by the fruition of
that affection which only woman's heart can bestow,
need scarcely be said.
On the ensuing day, Col. Willett returned with his
detachment
to the fort, where the Lynx had already safely
arrived. He related with much minuteness the cautious
approach of his pursuers to his deserted vessel upon the
shore, and their successful capture of its non-combatant
crew, concluding by asserting with grave irony that the
Mohawks were great warriors. Himself and the
aged Wongah, like most of the Oneidas, ever continued
faithful to the republican cause, and lived to receive
many
proofs of the gratitude of Dudley and Ellen.
The tide of war during the remaining period of the
revolution, rolled chiefly in a direction remote from the
county of Tryon, but neither Dudley or Rogers were
sufficiently enamoured of martial glory to follow its
retiring
banners. Yet in those minor, but sanguinary
struggles, which long convulsed the beautiful valley of
the Mohawk, they were its most valient defenders, and
received the rich mead of their country's approbation,
and the still richer reward of an approving conscience.