VOL. I. 2
CHAPTER I.
Our Fathers!....Where are they?....Bible.
Yes
, my children, I will no longer delay it. We are
passing, one by one, from the place of contention, one
after another, to the grave; and, in a little time,
you
may sayOur Fathers!the men of the Revolution
where
are
they?..... Yes, I will go about it, in
earnest: I will leave the record behind me, and when
there is nothing else to remind you of your father, and
your children's children, of their ancestornothing
else, to call up his apparition before you, that you may
see his aged and worn foreheadhis white hair in the
wind... you will have but to open the book, that I
shall leave to youand lay your right hand, devoutly,
upon the page. It will have been written in blood
and sweat, with prayer and weeping. But do that
no matter when it is, generations may have passed
awayno matter where I ammy flesh and blood
may have returned to their original element, or taken
innumerable shapes of lovelinessmy very soul may
be standing in the presence of the Most HighYet
do ye this, and I will appear to you, instantly, in the
deepest and dimmest solitude of your memory!
Yes!I will go about it, this very day...
And I do pray you and them, as they shall be born
successively of you, and yours, when all the family are
about their sanctuary, their own fire sidethe holy
and comfortable place, to open the volume, and read it
aloud. Let it be in the depth of winter, if it may be,
when the labour of the year is over, and the heart is
rejoicing in its homeand when you are
alone:
not
that I would frown upon the traveller, or blight the
warm hospitality of your nature, by reproofbut there
are some things, and some places, where the thought of
the stranger is intrusion, the touch and hearing of the
unknown man, little better than profanation. If you
love each other, you will not go abroad for
consolation
:
and if you are wise, you will preserve some
hidden, fountains of your heart, unvisited but by one
or twothe dearest and the best. This should be one
of themI
will
have it so. I would not have your
feeling of holy, and solemn, and high enthusiasm,
broken in upon, by the unprepared, just when you have
been brought, perhaps, to travel in imagination, with
your father, barefooted, over the frozen ground,
leaving
his blood at every step, as he went, desolate,
famished
,
sick, naked, almost broken hearted, and almost
alone, to fight the battles of your country.
No!I would have your thought go in pilgrimage,
over the same ground, remembering that the old men
who travelled it, in the revolution, doing battle at
every step, for your inheritance, were an army
journeying
,
deliberately, to martyrdom. Do this my
childrenand let it be a matter of religion with you:
teach your children to do the same. Let every place
of especial trial and bloodshed, be a Mecca to you and
to themand God's blessing shall be upon you,
forever
and ever!
We have had many a history of our country, many
of the revolution; but none written by men
acquainted
,
by participation therein, with our sorrow, and
trial, and suffering: not one, where the mighty outline
of truth is distinctly visibleno, not one. I make no
exception. All of them are in my mind, at this
moment
there
is not
one
. We wrestled, children as
we were, for eight years, with armed giants: and
wrenched
wrenched!
with our own hands, the spoil
from the spoilerovercame them all, at last, after
eight years of mortal trial, and uninterrupted battle,
even in their strong hold.
I was one of them that helped to do this. There is
a vividness in my recollection that cannot deceive me.
I knew personally, and intimately, the leading men in
this drama. Most of them have gone down to their
graves, dishonoured and trampled upon, in their old
age:many are yet wandering, helpless and dejected,
among the beautiful and vast proportions of that edifice,
which they built up with their blood and boneslike
the spirits of venerable men, that have been driven
away from their dwelling places by bandittiand died
in a foreign land:like shadowy sovereigns, coming
back to a degenerate people, haunting the chambers of
their greatness, in olden time, and re-treading, with
an air of authority and dominionwhich is the scorn
and mockery of men, whose fathers could not have
stood upright in their awful presencethe courts
where they have been dethronedthe ancient palaces,
which they built with their own power and treasure
and from which they have been banished, day by day,
with insult and derision yet, at my bidding
they will appear! and harness and array themselves
and stand before you, as I have seen them stand before
George Washington
a battalion of immoveable,
impregnable, unconquerable old men.
I am familiar with all that they thought and did,
they that were about me, I mean, from the time that I
went among them a passionate, wild boy, till I came
out from them, battered and worn, and bruised and
broken
and scarred all over, with the deep cabala of
premature
old age.
None but an eye witness can tell, as it ought to be
told, the story of individual suffering, protracted for
such a time, the tale of individual heroism, continued
year after year, under privation, cruelty, insult and
toil, beyond all that the men of Rome or of Macedon,
under Alexander himself, would have borne, in the
spring tide of their heart's valour.
Yesthough I would tell the tale before I dieold
as I am, frail as the tenure is, by which I hold to the
earth, I must take my own time for it, and tell that
which I do tell, with the plainness and honesty of my
nature, so that you may depend upon it. You know
that I will tell you nothing which I do not know to be
true. I need not add, therefore, that, where there is a
disagreement between my story, and that which you
will find in the blundering, tedious compilations, which
are called the Histories of our Revolution, you will do
well to rely upon
mine
.
Let this be copied, in a fair hand by Frederick, and
during the next week, I will forward you two or three
sheets more. Make no alteration in itno corrections.
If there be any part illegible, leave a blank, till I have
an opportunity of supplying it. I would have this a
family relick, the legitimate production of your father,
an uneducated, plain soldier, and of him alone. It
will then grow every year, in your veneration: gain
every year, upon your heart, in solemnity and interest.
Naylet this intimation take a higher authority. I
know the sacredness of ancient thingsI command
you therefore, that you lay not your hand upon one
letter of what I write. Men do not talk now as they
used toyou see none of the old fashioned
kingly-looking
people in this generation... nothing of their high
carriage and attitudehear nothing of their powerful
voices, and regal treadtheir thought, the currency of
their heart is base and degenerateit wears no longer
the stamp of sovereignty
is
no longer the coinage of
God's kingdombut the paltry counterfeit thereof
base and showy. Notrust them not. Hold what
there is left to you, of other days, as the regalia of
giants; to be visited only, by torch light, with
downcast
eyes and folded arms. Ye are a fettered people
fettered too, by manacles that would have fallen from
the limbs of your fathers like raindropped from them,
in the indignant heat of their mighty hearts, like the
leaden entrenchments of a furnace.
My children.It has been my nature, from my
childhood, to speak and write for myself. There are
few men upon this earth, in whom it would not be
presumption
to alter what I have written. And you, my
children, are
not
of their number. In you, it would
be wicked and foolish. It would lead to a perpetual
discussion, in your family, about the genuineness of the
VOL. I. 2*
whole, and, in time, destroy all your reverence for me.
Nolet there be no interpolation. My blessing shall
not abide upon him that dares to add, alter, or leave
out, one jot or tittle of the whole. Nolet it go down,
with your blood, the patent of your nobility, to the
elder son, forever and ever; and when you are able,
multiply the copies among all that are descended from
me, as the last legacy, of one, that it would be an
honour
to
them
, whatever they may become, to be the
posterity
of.
My style may often offend you. I do not doubt
that it will. I hope that it will. It will be remembered
the better. It will be the style of a soldier, plain and
direct, where facts are to be narrated; of a man,
roused
and inflamed, when the nature of man is outraged
of a fathera husbanda lover and a child, as the
tale is of one, or of the other.
You have all had a better education than your
father
.
You have, most of you, a pleasant and graceful
way of expressing yourselves on paperand there is
one among youyou know which I meanthe
operations
of whose mind are as vivid and instantaneous,
and beautiful, as flashes of coloured lightbut there is
not one among younot one, that has yet learnt to
talk on paper
. Learn thatlearn it speedilythere is
no time to be lost.
Farewell, my children, farewell: till the next
mail. I shall expect you, a week, at least, before
Christmas.
JONATHAN OADLEY.
CHAPTER II.
Thy spirit, Independence! let me share!
Lord of the Lion-heart and Eagle eye!
Thy steps I follow, with my bosom bare,
Nor heed the storm that howls along the sky.
After
reflecting a good deal upon the subject, my
dear children, I have come to the conclusion, that, if
I interweave with the history, which I have promised
to you, some account of myself and Archibald, of
whom you have heard me relate so many things that
made your nerves shiver, as with electricity, when you
were mere boys, it will do much toward perpetuating
the history of our family, and keeping your attention
alive to the order of events.
And that, at the end of another generation, my
posterity
may not have to inquire, who and what were
their ancestors, I will begin my narrative, with a
rapid sketch of our family, so far as there are now any
traces of them left. I find a tradition among us that
we are of Scotch extraction; and, by looking into the
records of our oldest colony, as Plymouth, you will
find a constant reference to the name of Oadley, as to
one of influence and authority. My grandfather, I
know, was born in a part of New England, since
called the New Hampshire Grants, and, yet more
recently, composing a part of the newly made State of
Vermont:and I have heard my father relate several
anecdotes of his warlike and adventurous character.
It was he that headed the party against King Philip,
as he was called, the Indian of Mount Hope, the season
before his death, and he was the very man that
grappled
with him, in the midst of his young men, who had
decoyed the party into an ambush,thereby, as you
will remember, holding Philip as a hostage, even in
the centre of his wigwam, till he was compelled to
forgo the whole profit of his adventure.... and he
it was, who threw up his commission, before the
Plymouth
fathers, and broke his sword, and swore by the
Everlasting God that he would never draw another,
after the shameful treachery that had been practiced
upon that wary, but high hearted Indian, at the time
of his assassination. Nor did he, till his dying day.
I can but just recollect him. He was a very erect,
stately, stern old man, of few words, and remarkable
stature. This is all that I can recollect of him, except
that he used to talk to the militia of the day, as if they
were children, and relate, with a distinctness that made
my young heart swell violently, many an inroad of the
Indians.
My father, as most of you well remember, was a
pacifick, mild, kind hearted man; and if I add to this,
that, after he removed from Providence Plantations to
the Jerseys, he never saw blood drawn, till the flame
of the revolution had broken out, you will then know
about all that any man knows of his early life. Till
within the last ten years of his life, there was the
same plain, unpretending, substantial good sense in
all that he did; and during many years that we
lived together, I do not remember that I ever saw him
in a passion but twice or three times; and the first
left such an impression on my mind, that I will relate
itit was on seeing my good mother, in the pride of
her beauty, equipped in a new calico gown, flowered
all over with yellow and blue roses, about the size of
cabbages,after the new importation confederacy had
been adopted.The affair had been managed secretly,
and my mother might have passed it all off, without
the loss of her finery, or the rebuke that she received,
had she been able to suppress, a little more, her
natural
spirit for display; but unfortunately, she could
not, and she had passed, and repassed, before my
father, during the first day, so frequently, in her
flaming ruffles and furbelows, that human patience
could endure it no longerPeggy, said my father
what is the meaning of this? She smiled,
coloured
,
bridled a little, and turned about, so as to exhibit
all the proportions of her finely turned waistbefore
she answered.
I was but a little fellow, scarcely old enough to
speak my own name, so as to be understood; but my
father's anger so frightened me, it being the first
explosion
,
that I could not think of it, for sometime
afterward
,
without looking behind me, and holding my
breath.
My mother was the lady of the neighbourhood,
and but for one other lady, would have been the
happiest
of human creatures.
O, my dear; said she, coaxinglyonly a little
spec
of mine; I was going to drink tea, with our
neighbour Arnauld, and I thought
Drink
tea!
said my father, shutting his bible,
with a clap that made me startand standing erect
You remember his heightfew men carried such a
front with them, and of all our blood, he was the
tallest, I believe.Drink
tea
, PeggyDo you not
know, child, that tea is one of the prohibited
things?
My father alluded to the confederacy that had just
been entered into, by all the substantial men of the
country, some in shame, some in terrour, and some from
downright honesty and virtue, not to purchase or
consume
any article whatever, supplied by the mother
country to the colonies; and tea was one of the
enumerated
articles.
My mother turned pale, I remember, but continued
for a moment or two, to defend the visit and tea
drinking
stoutlybut my father was immoveable.
Woman! said he, putting his large hand kindly,
but authoritively, upon her shoulderwhile you are
my wife, not one cup of tea shall pass your lips
unless the confederacy be abandonedAnd if your
neighbour
This
neighbour
, by the way, lived eight miles off, at
the end of an almost inaccessible wood, and was the
lady rival of my mother.
be weak and wicked enough to treat her visiters,
in the present state of her country, with
tea
, you
shall never, with my leave, set your foot within her
doors again.
High times indeed! said my mother, bouncing
away from his hand, (she was the younger, by at least
twelve years; and that gave her an advantage, not to
be overlooked by a handsome and adroit woman)
High times indeed! Jonathan Oadley (his name too,
was Jonathan, as you will recollect)when a body
cannot be allowed to take a drop of tea for
medicine
A drop of hell fire! cried my father, stamping
with wrathA woman of America! the wife of Jo
nathan Oadleywhose husband has signed a paper
with his own blood (a literal fact, my children, for,
in the feeling of the time, no solemnity, and I might
say, no superstition was spared) calling down the
anger of God upon his house, and his wife, and child
ren, if he kept it notshall she be the first to
laugh his obligation to scorngive his household to
destruction, and her husband's name to dishonour.
O, for shame!
I am sure, even now, that, had my father been less
violent, by a little, than he was, there would have
been no trouble in the affair; but my mother was a
high spirited woman, remarkably well bred for the
time, and had married him, in the face and eyes of
all her family
Yeyeyes, said she sobbingjust what I
expected. I was always tttold soI
That I was a
tyrant?
said my father gently
no Peggy, noI am no tyrantbut much, as I love
you, and that boy yonder, I would rather lose
you both, rather see you taking a mortal poison,
both
of you, than a cup of this accursed tea:but
what is thiswhat is the meaning of this? (taking
hold, of the long ruffle, or flounce, at the elbow of her
glittering calico)
new
is itPeggy!
My mother held down her head, whether in shame
and mortification, or in sullenness, I know notbut
there was an awful stillness for a minute or two,and
then my father went up to her, and took her in his
arms and kissed herI declare to you my children,
like some high priest, about to offer up a living
creatures
that he loved, in sacrifice.
He was very pale, and, after uttering a few words,
my mother began, very reluctantly, to unfasten her
girdle
.My
notion was from my own experience in such
matters and the sternness of his countenance, and the
terrour and shame in her's, that he was going to beat
her, and I began to cry lustily; but they gave no heed
to my bawling, and I never stopped, even to get my
breath, till I had seen the beautiful calico gown, torn
into five hundred pieces, and burnt in the firemy
mother clad anew, in a dark brown cotton of her own
weaving, and my father sitting by her, with his arm
round her waist, and her head leaning upon his
shoulder
,
full of affection and duty.
Thus much for my father's temper: it will give you
some notion of his general deportment, when I tell
you that I never saw him transported so far on any
other occasion, for more than twenty years.
Nothing else, I am persuaded, could have disturbed
him, like this wavering of allegiance in his wife. He
loved her ardentlytrulybut he loved her like a man.
And as he never warmed but on one themetill the
cry for independence, rang like a trumpet throughout
the mountainsand that was, whenever the character
of her father, the man of war, was named, I have had
no better opportunity of seeing his nature than you,
yourselves, have had, till within a few years of his
death.
My infancy, boyhood, and manhood too, I might
say, were spent, much as they are with most of the
world, who are born apart from all but a few sober,
plain dealing country neighbours;for I was nearly
twenty-two, and probably the stoutest fellow of my
age in the whole country; and Archibald, a poor
weakly creature, about twenty, when the war of the
revolution broke out, and gave to our characters, and
that of my father, a strange, unexpected power,
revealing
many deeply hidden properties, that might have
been, and no doubt, would have been buried for ever,
but for the events that I am now about to relate.
We were very happy; and though we heard of the
war, and the numerous temptations of bounty and
equipment, and advance, even at our own doors, from
the continental recruiting officers that came among
us, yet nobody, from our neighbourhood, seemed to
regard
it as a possible thing, for one of us, to go really
and truly into battle. We read of such things, and
talked of them; but, some how or other, it never entered
our head, that they who did such feats as we were told
of, were flesh and blood, like ourselves, raw
countrymen
who would turn pale, in the beginning of a
campaign, at the sight of blood; and stand up, before
it had finished, like a veteran, before the roar of
artillery
,
and rattling of bullets, and the sure approach
of the bayonet.
None of our neighbours had actually gone into
service
,
though several had threatened violently, just
before the affair of Long Island, and the abandonment
of Fort Lee and Washington; but when they happened,
one after the other, with some other disasters, in such
rapid succession, it is too true my children, that the
stout hearted among us began to look about for
darkness
to cover them. Sir Henry Clinton was now in
New York; our army had dwindled down to a few
miserable battalions, with no cavalry; and Cornwallis
was mustering in the rear of poor Washington, who
really began to totter, even in the estimation of my
father.
We were about fourteen miles from the high road,
over which our countrymen were afterwards hunted by
Sir William Howe; and already we had heard the
drum beat at dead of night, and seen, away on the
verge of the horizon, the red light of farm houses, set
fire to, by the royal banditti: and once I remember,
when my cousin Arthur, a fine, free spirited fellow, and
Archibald and I, were out upon a high hill, late in the
afternoon, we heard a heavy cannonading in the east,
and were soon after told that there had been a bloody
affair, with some of the outposts, that Sir Henry
Clinton had established to protect his foraging parties.
In the evening as we sat together, in a mournful
silence, Arthur, at last, with a deep sigh, turning to
my father, asked him what he thought of the matter?
The old man shook his head: and his large bony
hands, as they lay on the table before him, were raised,
for a moment, with a convulsive pressure,and then
he shook his head again.
A dreary winter, father; said I,and the
farmers
complain bitterly of the depredations committed
by their own countrymen.
There was another deep silence, of some minutes,
when the old man groaned aloud, as if his heart were
in travail
Archibald arose, and went to him, and put his
hand upon his shoulder, in that silent, strange way,
which was so natural to him, even when a boy, and
lifting his deep blue eyes, with a melancholy look of
determination, said
Surely, sir,
you
do not complain of these things?
no Archy, replied my father, putting his arm round
his waist, no my boy, I do not complain that my
cattle are driven away from me, to feed the poor fel
lows in camp; for I know that Washington has no
other way of feeding them, particularly since the
removal of Commissary Trumbull,but I do com
plain when I see my cattle slaughtered and hewed to
pieces, in my barn yard, and left there, weltering
in their blood, by the savages that are detached from
our Army!
`
Father!
'said Archibald, retreating two or three
paces, folding his arms, and looking him in the face,
as if he thought that he had not heard him aright
VOL. I. 3
I know what you are thinking, Archibald, said
my father: and I cannot blame you. You have not
forgotten my words, when the Declaration of
Independence
was read to ushave you?
No Sir! said my brother, his pale face growing
still paler, and his slender form shivering with the
depth and excess of some inward and unknown feeling
and then added, in a manner that awed me, as much
as if a dumb creature had suddenly found his tongue
for such had been the melancholy, deep and solemn
abstraction of his nature, from the age of about
eighteen
,
that we had learnt never to attempt any
conversation
with him, leaving him alone and unmolested to
his thought, as a poor distempered creature, whom it
was a pity to worry in his humours:and now, when
he broke out upon us, much after the following fashion,
our amazement held us speechless; and that of my
father was dashed with a feeling of shame, that even I
could see, for the red blood shot over his temples, and
up through his bald forehead, showing that he felt the
rebuke of Archibaldeven to his old heart.
No Sir! I have
not
forgotten it; said my brother,
standing motionless before himAnd I did believe
that not one of this house would ever forget it. But
now!
now
in the time of his tribulation, when all
that is dearest to us, our home and Country, is about
to be laid waste with fire and sword,they that have
sworn to stand by George Washington, though Heaven
itself rained fire upon their heads(your own words
Sir)are the first to abandon himwithhold their
succour
drive
off their cattle to the woodsbury their
provisionsand refuse the currency of the country
nay more!the first, to quail at the sound of cannon
the first to lay their hands upon their own children,
and say, you shall
not
fight the battles of your country.
He faltered, as he concluded, and when he had
done, and the echo of his own words came back loudly
to him from the ceiling, he startedand looked about
him, with a troubled air, for a moment, and then put
his thin hands to his forehead and buried them slowly
in his rich brown hair, as if astonished at the sound
of his own voice.
Nor were we less somy cousin Arthur and I
exchanged
two or three glances, and the fire streamed
from his black eyes, as he ran up to Archibald, and
seized him by both his hands, and shook them, for a
whole minute, as if he would shake them off, trying two
or three times, but in vain, to speakand at last
turning away, and wiping his eyeswithout uttering
a word.
Archibald, said my father, rising majestically,
and coming forward to meet him, it is hard to abide
the upbraiding of a child, our own child, our youngest
born
Archibald's head drooped, and the red heat went all
over itlike the light of a furnace.
Yet it is harder, continued my father, to
bear that of our own heart(laying both of his hands,
emphatically, upon his left breast, as he spoke)what
would you have me do?
It was a whole minute before Archibald replied, and
his chin worked up and down, all the while of his
preparation, and a mortal lividness overspread his
face, while his long, dark eyelashes gave an animated
sadness and shadow to his beautiful eyesand when he
did reply, it was, by lifting his head, slowly, to our
father's, planting his foot, and compressing his folded
arms upon his chest, as if to keep down a rebellion
there
Shall I speak the truth? said he; assuredly
answered my father, while Arthur pressed up to me,
and whispered,what possesses the creature?is
that
Archibaldthe weak, peevish boy?I shook my
head; I knew not what to think of it.
Well then, continued Archibald, in a voice that
was just audible? `You ask me what I would have you
do? I answer thus. Sell all that you have. Give all
that you have to your country. Shoulder your
knapsack
,
put another upon John, (he always called me
John), and another upon me; let each of us take his
course through the country, and collect as many as he
can, of the stout yeomanryand then go before George
Washington, and tell him to be of good cheer, for,
come what will, we, at least, will abide with him to
the death.
My father shook his head, but embraced Archibald,
and kissed his white forehead a dozen times at least,
before he answered.
I am proud of your spirit, Archy, said hebut
I cannot say much for your wisdom. What!in
the darkest time of our trial, when the bravest of all
the land are hiding themselves in dismay, shall I be
the first to let out my whole blood, at once, in
desperation
!
YesYes!now is the time!father
now!
even
now!
cried Archibald, pressing upon him.
One such example would electrify the country! What!
would you stand by, and see our little army beaten,
man by man, and wait for a miraculous interposition
of Heaven, for their relief? No! my father! give but
the signalhere are four of us already, and before
tomorrow
night, I will put my head upon the issue, that
I carry forty more with me, on the way to
Washington's
camp. Do thisand before the winter is gone,
he will have turned upon his enemy, and beaten him
back into his hiding placeswhat say you, shall we
buckle on our blankets?
As he said this, he took down an old rifle that lay
athwart the smoked pannel work, over the fire place,
and leant upon it, with a face all on firebut my
father put out his spirit immediately, with a smile, as
he said
No, my boy, Washington would hardly thank me
for an
army
of such striplings.
Archibald bit his lip.
Three of us said he, are stout menyou, and
John, and Arthurand
Arthur may do as he pleases; said my father,
and as for Johnfrom this moment, he hath my
consent
to shoulder his musquet
And join the army! shouted Archibald, leaping
from the floorO,
do
let me go with himIII
am not very strong, but I can
No, Archibald, I cannot part with you. Your
constitution is too delicate.
The best way to harden it, father, said he
Your temper too unsocial and passionate
The best way to cure
that
Silence!I will not hear another word upon the
subject. John may depart whenever he pleases, and,
if Arthur will go, he may have his choice of the
horses
,
and I will furnish both, as well as money can do
it, with equipmentsbut as for
you
, I will not part
with you. They are strong handsome fellows, and
will work their way through the battle, I'll warrant
them, but as for
you
, the first thing that I should hear
of you, would be, that you had been run away with
by your own horse, or trodden to death in the onset
noYou shall be a minister, Archibalda minister of
the Gospel.
Archibald looked at him, a moment, as ifI hardly
dare to say what, for he was the most affectionate
creature
in the world, and till that hour, I had never heard
him speak a loud word in the presence of my father
he had always set apart by himself, musing all the
day long, over some history, or drawing:but it did
appear to me that, all at once, his soul felt new
strength, and that, before the sound of my father's voice
had died away, declaring that he should be a minister of
the gospelhe had determined to be torn in pieces,
first, by wild horsesbut he bowed his head
reverentially
,
to my father, (who left us for awhile,) and went
into the darkest corner of the room;where he stood
for a whole hour, without opening his lips.
Well Jonathan, said my father, returningwhat
say youwhen will you go?
I felt my heart stoppartly with shame, and partly
with feartill he repeated the question, and I saw
Archibald's eyes flashing, impatiently, for my answer
VOL. I. 3*
whenever you please, Sir, said Ithough I would
have given the world to be out of the affair.
Tomorrow then, said Arthur rubbing his hands.
The sorrel mare for meHobson's choice for
you
and the next morning at day light, hourra for the
camp!
I have determined not to disguise one feeling of my
heart, nor one thought of fear, my children; for I
would have you know me thoroughly; and, therefore, I
must own to you that I wondered at the enthusiasm of
Arthur, and would have given my right hand, that
the proposition had not been made: but I was ashamed
to appear less of a man than Arthur, who was a whole
year younger, and therefore, I answered stoutly,
Tomorrow be it then
My father embraced me, and there was a look of
encouragement in the face of my brother, that made
me run up to him; when he caught my hand, and
wrung it with all his might, while the tears rushed
into his eyesand he said, O brother, would God
that I were as strong and handsome as you.
Arthur arose to go.
No, my lad, said my father, you will take a
bed with me to-night, and tomorrow, go round to
your acquaintances, with Arthur and Archy---they
shall both go with you---and bid them good bye---I
will take care, to represent the matter rightly to your
uncle. It is really time, that we did something. I am
ashamed of myself. Our cause
must
perish, if all
abandon it, as I have done. No, I will mount and
ride, tomorrow, through all the neighbourhood, and
never rest, till I have stirred up some of our
substantial
men---for they are the most backward, after all---
they have nothing to gain, and much to lose---and they,
like me, have been lying by, to see the sun break out,
before they go abroad. No!---it shall not be so
another
day. I will go to them myself, and if that doesn't
work upon them, I will let the minister loose---ha!
Archy, what say you---silent?---well, well, I like your
contemplative spirit---so fond of study.
I heard something fall, and turning to where he
stood, saw that the book, which he had been holding, had
fallen from his hand, but he did not appear to observe
it.
No! continued my father, we must be ready
to begin the next campaign, with spirit, or the devil
will be to payone bold, manly effort, and we shall
down with our invader to the dusttomorrow, I
will throw open my barn, and stable, and corn houses,
and let the first foraging party, that will, empty them
alland set fire to the ruins. I will never complain
more!what say you Archy?will that do!come,
come, cheer upyou shall stay by your old father and
mother, and comfort them, while Jonathan is cutting
and slashing at the enemyso, hourra for
independence
!
Hourra! hourra! shouted Arthur, swinging the
old rifle round his headhourra for independence!
My voice followed his, but so faintly, that it
sounded
like an echo, onlywhile Archibald merely locked
his hands, and uplifted them, to heavenmuch to the
delight of the old gentleman, who winked at us, and
smiled, as if it were some timely revelation from above
---yes! yes!---said he---he was made for a minister.
CHAP. III.
What steed to the desert flies fast and afar!
* * * * * *
no rider is there;
And the bridle is red with the sign of despair.
Never
, in all my life, did I pass such a night as that,
which followed the conversation that I have just
related
.
I know not whether I was born with a more
timorous heart than other men; but I have been ready
to believe, when I have seen their indifference to matters
of life and death, where we have stood together, ankle
deep in bloodtheir cold, phlegmatick, habitual
disregard
of what made my heart feel, sometimes, as if it
were turning to stone within me, and my flesh crawl
that they were fashioned originally, and by
constitution
,
of sterner material than myselfand yet, I have
seen Archibald too, pale as death, in the awful
stillness
that preceded the first shot, while they went on,
immoveable and solid as a phalanx of machinery,
with no sweat upon their foreheads, no prayer upon
their lips, no knocking at their ribs.What then should
I think?
His
courage was indisputableyet he was
abundantly more agitated than myself.However, not
to anticipate, there were a thousand apprehensions,
natural to an inexperienced country lad, like myself,
about to abandon the roof of his father, mingled and
dashed too, with some pleasant and adventurous feeling,
common, I dare say, to the high in blood, whatever
may be their courage;but there were some perils
some
, that the terrour of, would not let me sleep. The
small pox was in the American army, and its ravages
were tremendous, as we were told, and believed:add
to this, that Cornwallis had just moved upon our
frontiers
,
with the design of effecting a junction between
his army and that of Sir Henry Clinton, then in
possession
of New York.Their forces, exceeding fifty
five thousand men, were well known to be
admirably
appointed, and altogether superior to ours.
Arnold had been beatenand we had just lost the
command of the lakesand Fort Pitt, too, had fallen.
several perilous changes had been made in the Staff
General Schuyler and Gates were at loggerheads
Washington himself, was losing a part of his
popularity
and
they were intriguing to set him aside, not
by a dismissal, but by passing a vote of censure upon
him, which they knew the great man would not brook
the army had dwindled to nothing, by the folly and
madness of short enlistments, and literally, nothing at
all had been done, on our part, during the campaign
nothing experienced, but a series of defeat and
humiliation
,
which no human being could have held up against,
except George Washington.
Such was the state of affairs at this time;
and if you add to these
facts
, which were painful and
disheartening enough, to intimidate and bow the
bravest
,
the ten thousand rumours and exaggerations
perpetually
afloatthe
fact
that we were safer under the
protection of the enemy than of our own countrymen
the different appearance of our tatterdemalions, half
naked, half armed, and half starved, from their
invaders
,
a gallant, and dazzling army with banners
and trumpets,and the offer of pardon and mercy,
just made by Sir William Howe, at the head of thirty
thousand veterans, offers which were not only made
to, but were accepted far and near, by the dastardly
gentry (for the poor held outin their nakedness and
poverty, to their last breath)and the threat,
constantly
reiterated, that all the prisoners of war would
be hung for rebels and traitors, and never exchanged
you will not wonder that my heart was heavy at the
thought of what I was about to encounter.
However, the night wore away, at last, and never
did the morning light break in upon me with such
influences; my blood danced in my body, and before I
had been out in the wind an hour---a fine, frosty air,
with a few stars, yet visible, and the bluest sky that I
ever saw, above me, I do believe that I could have
gone into battle, with less terrour than I had heard the
proposal to go, ten or twelve hours before. Such is
the steadying effect of contemplation; such is it, to be
preparedand such the strengthening of God's breath,
when it blows down from the mountain upon us, before
sun rise. It would revive a dead manI have
sometimes
thought, when I was galloping away before it,
for life and death, almost:---but Arthur appeared the
same frank, cordial, carcless fellow, in the morning,
that I had always found him. He was one of them,
that take whatever happens, in this world of commotion
and trial, as a sort of thing, not to be troubled about.
Well, John, said he, clapping me on the shoulder,
retreating about forty yards, and levelling his rifle at
my head, let me see if you can stand fire?
I started, in good earnest, for it went off, and the
ball whistled, through my head, I thought, for a
moment---but
it certainly passed very near me.
Better than you, cousin, I am sure! said I,
forgetting
my consternation, in looking at the sudden
change, and frightful expression of his face.
Gad a mercy! he criedwhew!stopping a
moment to see if I would fall, and then running up to
me, and feeling all about my head, like a delirious
creature, for a minute or twobless my heart and
soul!whew!well how do you feel?dn that
rifleit goes off, without touching the triggerit only
jarred in my hand.
Yes! said I, rising forty fold in my own
estimation
,
to find that I was so little discomposed by an
accident
,
that had well nigh settled the campaign with
me, forever and everand shaken poor Arthur's
courage
into dust
yes
but if you do not aim better
than that, when you get among the Virginia riflemen
Morgan's menthey'll
Don't talk to me---don't talk, cried Arthur,
choking
with joy and terrourwhile his black eyes actually
ran over, and he trembled, from head to foot.
Well said Archibald, joining us with a prouder
step than common, you are harnessing, for the war,
I see, my brave brother; and you too, cousin Arthur
have you made up your minds, never to returnnever
to lay down your arms
never! never!
tillha!
what's all thisby heaven, it cannot be(catching
Arthur by the arm, and turning him partly round, for
he was stooping, as if to tighten the girth of his horse,
but had remained there rather too long a time for the
impatient temper of Archibald)---
tears!
---tears upon
the face of Arthur Rodman!
Yes cried Arthur---and tears had well nigh
been upon your face too, my lad.
Archibald shook his head, and smiled.
O, you may smile---any body can smile---but if you
had seen your brother shot through the head, I am
inclined to think that
What were you firing at? said my father,
leaping
over the fence, near where we stood, and standing,
all at once, by our side.
Arthur, though I attempted to avoid it, immediately
told him; and as he did, I could perceive the under
lip of Archibald, violently compressed, and his brow
knitting with emotionbut my father did not change
countenance.
And how did he bear it? said helike a lion!
cried Arthur, striking his hands togetherhe only
turned upon me, and chided me for my bad shot.
Not so bad a shot, neither, said Archibald,
putting
his hand to my facean inch or two more, and
the hall would have done your businessyou will have
to get a lock shorn, on the other side of your head.
It was very truemy hair was loose and flying in
the wind, and the ball, diverted from its aim, by the
jar of the piece, as it fell into Arthur's hand, had cut
away one of the heaviest locks, as if it had been shorn
with a razor. My blood thrilledand I felt sick at
the heart, for a momentand if I had been alone, I
should have fainted, I dare say, while I thought of my
narrow escape; but eventually, it was a happy thing
for me, perhaps, one of the happiest, for it gave
others
a great opinion of my self-command, and finally,
produced a like opinion in myself. Nay, to this very
incident, in a great measure, I believe, may be
attributed
,
the reputation, that I subsequently obtained, of
being one of the most intrepid fellows in our regiment
for I have always observed, that, when a report has
once gone abroad, people rarely think of enquiring
into the origin, or authority of it; so that it would
be no difficult matter, I believe, for any man to put
his own character, in what form he pleases, out into
the world; and, after a time, they that were
vociferous
in defence of his virtues, would forget that he,
himself, was the author and origin of all that related
to them. Say that you are not afraid of the devil,
said Arthur, to our sergeant, one day, and by and
by, it will become your general reputationevery
body will swear, that you are not afraid of the devil,
and forget who told him sonay, fight to prove it
for such is man's nature; enlist him to report a doubt
ful affair, and it is ten to one, that he exaggerates in
proportion as he is distrusted, until at last, he is
willing to spill his blood in proof of it!another good
effect is, that the man himself, at last, begins to
believe
that other people know him better than he knows
himself---and he really becomes, what
they
say he is---
not afraid of the devil!
At last, we breakfasted altogether, my dear mother
at my right hand,a mournful, but manly and noble
sorrow was in the countenance of my fathera more
tender and passionate one, in the light hazle eyes of
my mother,and, in all the rest, that kind of
unwillingness
to be either silent or talkative, which
characterises young hearts, when they are among them
that mournwithout being able to understand or
comfort
them.We swallowed our milk (for coffee was
unknown
to us then)but left the food untastedand
then, with an occasional word or two, that sounded
abruptly upon the ear, as if spoken in a wrong place,
unpreparedly, as in a sick chamber, or house of
prayerwe mounted our horses.
You will beat up for recruits, said my father,
during the day, and return to us at nighttomorrow
we shall try to set you both off in good earnest.
Archibald came to me, and took the bridle in his
hand for a moment, as I was turning awayand then
let it go again, reluctantly, as if he had intended to
bid me a farewell,but his heart had failed him
But Archyhow is this? said my father, Do
you not go with them?
No Sirsaid Archibald, throwing down his eyes,
my horse might run away with me
, you know.
My father laughedno, my boy, you are the
better horseman of the threeif not the best of the
county, and I would trust you to break a colt, that
I would not trust many a rider to cross, after you had
subdued him.I did not mean to mortify youI only
desired to make you feel that you were comparatively
helpless.
I did
feel
it father; said Archibaldwalking
away.
Well, well,never mind it son. The stud is your
own. Take your choice, and follow them, if you will,
or go with me to the musteror take your own way,
and, if you think you
can
succeed, go among the lads
of the neighbourhood, and see how many you can
bring in.
His eyes flashed fire, I remember, as we set off at
full gallop, for the high road; and, in less than twenty
minutes, we saw him, stretching like a hunter over a
distant elevation; after whichfor he only took off
his hat, stood up in the stirrups, for a moment, and
waved it without stoppingafter which, we saw no
more of him, till about nine that evening, when he
came suddenly upon us, with nearly twenty well
mounted
VOL. I. 4
young fellows, upon the best horses in the country
rattling at his heels, like so many mad devilsthey
almost rode us down,for, with all our efforts, we had
been able to muster but five.
`How he sits!' cried Arthur, pointing to him, as
he rode leisurely about, while we were all trying
to form.The moon shone gallantly upon us, and
really, had there been a trumpet there, and an enemy,
we should have given a good account of him,
notwithstanding
our inexperience, and wretched
equipment
.Indeed,
there is a natural feeling of the heart,
a proud pulse, about men always, who ride well, and
are well mounted, though they are alone, in the
daylight
;but
when there are thirty more of them,
thundering
along at full gallop, under a broad blue sky,
and a clear star lightthough they were day
labourers
on foot, there would be a swelling of the heart,
warlike and hazardous I am sure, like banditti at
least, if not like well trained cavalry.
I am thinking, said Archibald, leaping his horse
at full speed, over a ditch, where all the others halted
and boggledand joining usI am thinking that,
if we ride over to the plain, yonder,the
musterground
that we may spend an hour or two,
profitably, in manuvring against tomorrow
Arthur smiled, but, in that spirit of fellowship, which
all men have, under excitement, we rode on, renewing
our acquaintance with some of the horsemen about us,
and making it with such as were strangersthey
were fine fellows indeed, and when we were afterward
counted off into fours, and sixes, and the order was
given to gallop,I thought that I had never seen so
handsome a troop of yeomanry.
Archibald had ridden hard, I am sure, that day, for
the mettlesome creature that he rode, kept throwing
down her head, and snorting continually, when she
stopped, as if hurt in her wind.
My friends, said Archibaldthe moon shone full
upon his white forehead, as he uncovered it, and wiped
away the sweat,it is now time to separate. Let us
meet tomorrow, at twelve on this spot, each prepared,
to return no moreor to return victoriousI said
us
I do not mean it. It is not in my power to be with
you, except perhaps, as I have already told you, to
bid you God speed. But before we part, if you are
willing to spend half an hour, and your horses are not
fatigued, I will show you what little I know of the
cavalry exercise; so that you will be enabled, at least,
to enter the camp, with an air of respectability.
The proposition was agreed to, and he threw us
into line; counted us off into sections; wheeled in and
out, gallopped, and charged. I was truly astonished at
the result. Before we parted, our horses would rein
as steadily into line, and wheel, with as much precision,
almost of themselves, as if they took a pride in it
and subsequent experience has proved to me that they
do; for many a wild one have I seen broken to the line,
in a single drilling.
We then separated, all to our different homes, for
the night;When Arthur, who had been riding at our
side, in silence, for about half an hour, suddenly
wheeled from the road, with a laugh, leaped a low
stone wall, and dashed away to our left
At twelve
precisely, said I calling after him
aye! aye.At twelve!he answered,
flourishing
his sword in the star light.
Archibald reined up for a moment, and looked after
him, in surprisenot the way to his uncles?
said he
No, I replied, well knowing where he had gone.
I believe not
Archibald looked at me for a moment, as if about
to speakbut he did not, and then put a head for
some time.
What say you, said he, abruptlyshall we ride
over to Arnauld's.
By all means, I cried, leaping forward and
abreast of him, it is only a mile or twoand I
should
like to see Lucia, before I go.
Lucia!
Yes, said Archibald, stooping over the
neck of his horse and feeling the curbit would be
well, you are a favorite there brother; and it would
be rather unfriendly to go away for so long a
brother
your stirrups are too longshorten themyou
can never sit firmly in that waythrow your feet
home.
Pho, phohow should you know better than I.
I
do
know better than you, brother; and it matters
not how I know itif you do not ride with short
stirrups
,
and your feet home, you are perpetually in danger
of losing your seat, and your stirrup.
But suppose I should be thrown?
You cannot be thrown. You must not look to
such an event as possible. I was never thrown.
I beg your pardon.said I
Never!
he replied, warmly,once or twice
the horse fell
with
me.
And suppose that your feet had been home then,
what would have become of you?
They were. I grant brother, if you
are
thrown,
that it is more dangerous; but then you are not the
hundreth
part so likely to
be
thrown asah! musick!
We were now passing the windows; a long row of
which, with the curtains up, were all illuminated.
Archibald put his hand gently upon mine, for a minute,
and sat listening.
By heaven! said Ithere never was such a
voice upon earth.
But he said nothinghe only drew a long breath,
and turned aside his face
There was Lucia, lolling upon the sofa, and singing
away, with all her heart and soul, as if her very breath
were melodyso sweet and natural was the modulation
of the tone.
How very beautiful! said Idazzled by her
brightness, as the fire light shone upon her eloquent
countenance, and gave to the whole of it, the hue of,
like a lighted transparency.
Archibald made no reply, but threw himself from
the saddle, and struck the gate with his whip handle.
The sound immediately ceased, and some tokens of
alarm were given, for hands were busy in letting
down the curtains of the room, all round; and it was
some minutes before we were admittedbut thenO!
our welcome, was that of the heart.
Oh, my dear,
dear
friend, cried Lucia, running
to Archibald, and putting her hands into hishow
glad I am that
you
are here.
Why so?said he, colouring a little.
Oshe answeredOher pleasant, dark,
hazle eyes, with lashes, black as death, were shaded,
for a moment, with embarrassmentwe have been
terrified, this afternoon, with some stories about a
troop of horse, in the neighbourhood.
But you seem to have forgotten Mr. Oadley,
said her elder sister Clara, a remarkably pale, tall
girl, with a serious cast of countenance, with very
bright eyes, incessantly in motion.
Lucia, coloured to the temples, and stepping
forward
,
her superb person just losing its girlishness,
for the graver beauty of womanhoodI pray Mr.
Oadley, to pardon me, she said; I have always
been more intimate with his brother, as he knows well,
and when I see him, there are so many feelings of the
old school-fellow, at my heart, that I am half inclined
to forget both our ages in a game of romps!
Her sister smiled, a little scornfully, I thought;
and her mother, one of the most truly beautiful women
of the age, immediately set all matters right, by
shaking
her finger at Luciaand welcoming, with her
accustomed gracefulness and easeher
caro amico!
I am really glad that you have comeseparate from
the pleasure that your company always gives to us,
on account of this report, and the absence of my
husband
.
Absent? said Ibut before I could say
more, a look from Archibald cut me short.
There was a momentary embarrassment in all our
facesfor I dreaded to mention, that I had seen him
within an hour or two; and still less, would I have
told her,
where
for there was something, rather
mysterious
and,
VOL. I. 4*
as my father thought, dangerous in the
movements, and authority of Mr. Arnauldbut it soon
wore off, and we joined, pleasantly, in conversation.
I heard your voice, I believe, said Archibald,
looking at Lucia, as we approached.
Mine!she answered, with surprisea
laughing, I suppose?
Nosingingyour favourite air.
O, nothat was Clara's.
Archibald and I exchanged a look with each other,
and smiled. Here had been one of those delusions, at
which men may laugh, if they will, but which are
strangely mortifying to them, after all. We had
united, heretofore, in our condemnation of Clara's
voice, chiefly, I dare say, because we had not often
heard it, and when we had, only by stealth or
accident
;
yet, to night, in the depth of our feeling, we had
mistaken it for that of her sister, which was, undeniably,
the richest, sweetest, and most passionate of all the
country
we!
no, how do I know that
he
was
deceived
?
One song, said my brother, Miss Lucia, and
we will then leave you.
A strong temptation! she said, softly, to me,
looking through her abundant, dark hairshall I?
O, certainly! I answered, I have come on
purpose
to hear one more of
Why, what is all this? said her mother, glancing
at Archibaldyour countenance, is more than
commonly
serious. Has any thing happened?
My brother, said Archibald, will join the
army
,
to-morrow.
The army!gracious heaven!said Clara, and
then checked herself, while the blood darkened her
whole forehead.
And
your
brothersaid a faint voice to meI
looked up, and saw the face of Lucia, near mine,
exceedingly paleand her white hand, raisedwill
he go with you?
I shook my head, and her hand fellthe next
moment
,
I saw her sitting back, as far as she could, with
her eyes upon a book; but occasionally, they turned
timidly aside, to the face of my brother, who sat, in
his usual mood, studying the fire, with his under lip
working, and shadows flitting, now and then, over his
intensely white forehead, as if the thoughts of his heart
took wing, one after the other.
His revery was profound, and undisturbed, till the
clock struck, and he started upon his feetand began
buttoning up his coat, to depart.
You will not leave us to-night? said the mother.
Clara, walked up to me, as pallid as everand the
book fell from Lucia's hand.
Madam, answered my brother, if you have
any apprehension remaining, we certainly shall not
one of us (Lucia, moved near to
him
, and Clara, to
me, as he continued) one of us will remain.
She shook her head.
Well then, both of us will remain, said
Archibald
,
drawing up his chair to the corner, and entering
into conversation, as if his thought were any where in
this world, but in that room.
But why do not
you
join the army? said Mrs.
Arnauld to him.
Archibald turned slowly round, and smiled rather
bitterly, I thought; and Lucia sat more erect, for
awhileand then leaned forward, as if to catch every
word, and tone, and look.
For two or three reasons, said Archibald, firmly
In the first place, I am not twenty-onenot my
own manin the next place, I am to be a parson
a parson!
and, finally, I am so weakly a creature,
that I might be run away with, by my horseor
trampled
to death, by the footexcellent reasons, Madam;
are they not?
I could perceive, that Mrs. Arnauld looked
astonished
,
and Lucia terrified; and I---I confess, that I
should have been equally so, had I not seen the late
developement of his character, before my father; for
his irony was a naked blade---it went to the heart.
Here Lucia's hair fell---and she consumed ten
minutes
,
at least, in adjusting it, all the time keeping her
beautiful eyes turned in the direction where he sat,
with his fingers playing, involuntarily, upon the next
chair, without moving a limb, or uttering a sound.
On the whole, it was a melancholy evening; such as
I should not desire to pass again, under any
circumstances
.
It was saddening to my heart; oppressive to
my spirits; and, when I thought of the possibility;
nay, of the
probability
, that we might never all meet
again, in the same room, it was with difficulty that I
could refrain from expressing a sorrow, and
apprehension
,
that would have been unmanly.
At last we parted---Farewell, Madam, said I
I shall not see you in the morning.
Heaven bless you! she replied, cordially
pressing
my hand. May God be with you, in battle and
in sleepnight and day
bien bon soir
.
Amen! said some one faintly, at my side;it
was ClaraI turned to offer her my hand, but some
unaccountable timiditytook sudden possession of me,
and I could notI gave it to Luciawho burst into
tears.
I was astonishedwhat was there to affect
her
so
deeply, more than her sister? why at all?might it not
be that her heart was full before, to running over,
and that she was glad of any pretence to discharge the
fountain of tears.
Farewell, said I againfarewell!
Clara put her hand upon my armas I passed her
but instantly withdrew it, and when I looked, she had
turned away her face, so that I could not tell if it were
designedly done or not:but I lay awake, I know,
many a long hour, sleepy as I was, that night,
endeavouring
to reconcile such an accident, with her habitual
reserve, and lofty, severe rectitude of deportment.It
could not benoClara Arnauld was not a woman to
feel at the heartand least of allfor such a man as
Iuninformedinexperienced and
We were in our saddles by early day light, the next
morning, and trotted slowly, past the windows of the
chamber, where we knew that the young ladies slept
a white hand stirred the curtainnothing moreI
could have sworn that it was Clara'sbut on looking
into Archibald's eyesI was sure that he thought it
Lucia's.
Alas! it was the hand of neitherit was that of a
mana man!what!said I, half audibly, in the bed
chamber ofthe next moment, I saw that it was Mr.
Arnauld himself, evidently wishing to see us, without
being seen himself, for he hastily disappeared, and the
next minute, the curtain of another window fell,
suddenly
,
as if some one had just left itafter all then,
my heart was rightit
was
she!---
What a charming creature she is! said I, half
unwilling to interrupt the solemn stillness of our
ride.
Yes, said my brother---full blooded---but
reining his beautiful mare about, so as to see her
blood red nostrils, through which her breath
issued
,
like a bright vapour, for a whole yard, upon
the cold airbut she was sadly put to it yesterday,
and I feared for her windnot blown I hope, but
O, I understand you, now, I replied, completely
puzzled for a moment, you are always thinking of
your mare.
Aye brother!what else have I to think of?
she
knows mesee!
As he spoke, he loosened the rein for a moment:
the fire flashed from her wild eyes, and she shot by me
like an arrow.
The road was a very dangerous one, encumbered
with trees and rocks, roots, stumps, and broken
all up, with the feet of heavy cattle; so that I held my
breath for a moment, till I saw him rein her short, as
if upon a pivot, without stopping.
By heaven, Archibald, how did you teach her
that?---said I, coming up with him.
He laughed, but there was a mournfulness in the
sound; as there was, even in the warm flush upon his
pallid front, and the arrowy brightness of his
intensely
blue eyes---they were not the symptoms of
health or happiness.
I'll tell you brother---I was reading some time
since about the Arabian horses; and, when we get to
a better place, I will shew you that there is no such
mighty matter, in stopping at full speed, or mounting
and dismounting, at a gallop.But what were
you speaking of---brother? Of the most charming
creature in the world, said I, feeling every word that
I uttered---
Yes, yes, brother---responded
Archibald---stooping
on the off side of his mare, and turning the stirrup,
for his foot; yes---but I cannot well bear to talk of
her now---
But, I replied, unwilling to let the conversation die
away so soon---we were just approaching the highest
ground in the neighbourhood, from which we could
have a view of twenty miles all about us---I do not
like her coquetry.
What!
---said Archibald, abruptly---no, I
continued---
nor
that womanish pedantry and
affectation
.
Affectation!---said he, rivetting his eyes upon me,
in astonishment---what the devil do you mean?
John?
O---I do not hope to convince
you
of it, such a
favourite as you are---(He coloured to the eyes)---and
that vile habit of sprinkling all she says, with poetry,
and French and Italian---a smattering of---
I'll tell you what, brother, said he, riding up to
me---I can't put up with this. I told you once before,
that I did not like to talk upon the subject---and I tell
you once more---and once, for all---that I won't put up
with it---
I was amazed---we stopped our horses, and faced
each other, for a moment, upon the very summit of the
elevation---are you mad? said I---one would think
that you were in love with her---(the fire streamed
from his eyes)---take care what you are about-- that
husband is not the gentlest of men, or the most
forgiving
;---nor
will he be the more likely to treat you
gently for your passionate adoration of his wife, because
he is the greatest profligate of the country.---
Husband! wife!---said Archibald---impatiently,
and stooping from the saddle---what are you talking
about?---
Of Mrs. Arnauld, I replied.
He drew a long breath, and reached me his hand,
with a smile that went to my heart---I am a little
absent, I believe,---said he---you know that I am
apt to be thoughtful, and just now---(he appeared to
forget himself, for a moment, in another revery---but
started again, at the sound of two or three shot, that
appeared
to be fired in the valley below:---when the mare
plunged suddenly, and had well nigh dislodged him
on the spot.
She had well nigh broken your neck then,
brother
,
said Ilooking about for the sportsmen, who, I
supposed, were out after game; but I could see nothing;
not even the smoke of their piecesyet they sounded
very near to us.
I deserved it, said he, reining her up firmly, and
adjusting himself to the seattame as she is, I ought
never to forget what she has beena horseman will
always mind saddle, rein and stirrup, (no matter what
he is upon) as if he expected to be run away with, every
momentHa!another, that!the game must
be well up this morning.
That was a pistol shot said IO yes, I
dare say it was, he answered;our troop are
amusing themselves at a mark. But you were
speaking
of her affectation;I am sorry for it on some
accounts; she is so truly charming in every other
respectand then, it cannot have escaped you, that our
good mother is a little sore of late in her rivalship,
for I have caught her more than once, throwing in,
with a laughable unluckyness, some of the wretched
French that she has picked up at Madam Arnauld's.
You are severe upon Mrs. Arnauld, said Itoo
severe; I only complain that she will not consent to
talk her mother tonguenot that her French and
Italian are wretched.
But they are, said my brother.
Oh! no; she has been familiar with them both
and
Pho!Not a word of either did she ever
pronounce
properly in her life.
But how do you know? He coloured againI
never saw any body blush so readily as he could, about
that time. Every emotion of his heart sent the blood
all over his face, as if he had been a bashful young
girl, on horseback, in male attire.Not of my own
knowledge, to be sure, said hebut I have seen
Lucia hold down her face, a hundred times, when her
mother threw in a word or two of some other language
and though I know nothing of either, yet I am
persuaded
that all the mother knows of French or Italian,
has been gathered from the daughters. Beside, how
different their manner and pronunciationthey never
introduce a word of either language, unnecessarily;
and you might live with them for a whole year,
without
suspecting that they knew a word of any but their
own, were they not led into it by some stratagem of
their mother, when strangers from the city are there
or by the accomplished elegance of their father
the profligate!or by actual necessity: and their
pronunciation too, is so firm and neat, as if they
were not conscious of speaking in any but their
mother tongue.Beside, I have not forgotten the look
of approbation thatthatMiss Lucia bestowed on
me once, when I said that he who
had
any thought,
could always express it; that the use of foreign
phrases was a proof of poverty, rather than opulence;
of ignorance rather than superiority:
Her mother was not there, I hope, said I
O, nogracious God! brother, what is that?is
not that our house?
I turned in the direction where he pointedand
beheld a black smoke rising, as from the ruins of
some farm house, given to massacre and pillage by the
damnable Hessians.
No, brother, that is
not
our housebutlet us
ride onwho knows what may have happened?
We started at full speed, and were just on the top of
a second hill, where we could see a clear road before
uswhen we heard shot after shot fired, behind usand
the next moment, a horseman dashed headlong over the
side of a distant hill, pursued at their topmost speed, by
at least a dozen men in the royal uniform.Follow
me, brother! cried Archibald, striking the rowels
into his mare, and galloping directly to the spot
Madman! I shoutedcome back! rein up, rein
up!where are your arms?
He heeded me not, his hat flew off, and it was in
vain for me ever to think of overtaking him. What could
I do?there were noises and shouting all about me,
it appearedand I could see, every now and then,
somebody dashing out of the far wood, or down a hill,
as if the whole country were in alarm
Yet I prest on, at the top of my speed, to the brow
of the hilljust in season, to see the horseman that was
ahead, wheel short upon his first pursuerand
exchange
a shot with him, when, it appeared to me, that
their pistols almost touched: the latter kept on, sitting
bolt uprightand the former drew out his sword and
came immediately upon St. George, without looking
behind himand thenfinding that he was not
pursued-gave
a cut in the rear, and wheeledand looked at his
enemywho passed on a hundred yards, at leastafter
receiving the shot, and then fell, dead, from the saddle.
Down came his comrades then, with a loud outcry
VOL. I. 5
upon the conqueror; but, with a presence of mind that
dismayed me, he wheeled upon them, a full dozen as
they were, and leaped a broad ditch, exchanging cut
after cut, as he passed, and giving point, with a
precision
that I never saw equalled at the ring; it was
then that I saw his object---two only of the squadron
could follow him---and there was Archibald, on the
other side, shouting with all his might, as if succour
were at hand---come on, boys! come on!---The
troopers reined up, and loaded their pistols---and I,
desperate with apprehension, rode round to join my
brother, designing to pass by the dead man and make
prize of his sword---and his pistols too, if possible,
for about a hundred yards from where he lay, his horse
had tumbled, and was yet struggling in his furniture:
but I had not gone half way to the place---though the
flanks of my poor horse ran down with blood, and I
thought that I never should get to it---when there was
another shout, a clashing of swords, and a rapid
discharge
of pistolsand the same moment, Archibald's
mare darted by methe bridle broken, and stirrups
ringingO!I never shall forget that pang
`poor Archibald!' I cried, and the next moment,
I heard the trampling of hoofs at my side.
It was Arthur!pale as deathbloodyand covered
with sweat
`Your father!!' said he`your father!'
`What of him!' I cried, blinded and thunderstruck,
with a new fear.
`
Ride
, for life and death,
ride
!'he answered, in a
voice so changed that I scarcely knew it,but I could
not obey him.I could notI threw myself from the
saddleplucked the sword from the dead hand of the
horsemanand rode to the spot where I had seen
Archibald
last.
He was safethank heaven, he was safehis
forehead
was cut a littleand the blood was running down
his naked armsthis is all that I rememberfor a bugle
sounded, in our rearthe fellows halted in chase, one
after the other, like a line of videttesand seeing
horsemen
mustering in all directions, obeyed the call, and
abandoned the chase.
`There!' said Ithrowing a sword to Archibald,
as he stood over the stranger, wrapping up his wounds,
with the shirt that he had torn off from his own body
`there!follow, to the farm! follow for life and
death!'
I then set off, with a feeling of horrour and
darkness
,
that I cannot pretend to describe. I set off for
my father'sI arrived. It was a ruin! I fell from the
saddle. The place that I had left, but the morning
beforethe housethe houseit was one pile of ashes
and fire.Nothing but the chimney, and one of the
roughcast ends were left standingthe very barns
and out houses were a heap of smoking cindersthe
hay and grain, at every blast of wind, sending up a
rush of sparkles, with a sudden blaze, like powder.
I was bewildered for some momentsunable to feel
or to understand the nature of the calamity that had
befallen ustill, on looking about, I saw the skeleton,
of two or three half consumed bodies in the fire. I
know not what gave me the strength for such a
desperate
attempt, but I leaped into the burning ashes, up to
my knees, and dragged outmerciful powers!what I
feared were the last remains of my own father and
motherbut nothat horrour was spared to methey
were Hessiansthey were covered with leatherand I
fell down upon my knees and thanked heaven for it! but
still I persisted in the search, till my boots and clothes
were literally burnt from me, and I was choked and
blinded by the loathsome smoke of the bodies.
CHAP. IV.
Aye! down to the dust with them! slaves as they are!
My
father was alivethank heaven! my father was
alive!my poor mother tooO, my children, would
that you could understand me, without the use of
language
!
`This comes,' said my father, sternly, to Archibald,
who stood before him, holding Arthur by the hand
`of your disobedience. Had you returned last night
as you promised'
`How many were they?' said Archibald`twenty
when they broke in'said my fatherbaring his
brawny arm to the shoulderit was gashed to the bone
in a dozen or more places`twenty!but they left us
with less than half able to sit their horsestwo
more of youand we would have made mince-meat of
the rascalsdn them.'
I looked at him, awestruck at the preternatural
expression
of his wrathand wondered at the melancholy,
dreadful aspect of my mother
`MaryMarysaid Archibaldgasping for breath;
did she comewas she thereah!'
My father put him asidemy mother shook from
head to foot, and Arthur dropped Archibald's hand,
and stoodOh! how altered, since the las night
immoveable as a dead man.
Archibald was the first to speak`she is dead then,
II
hope
,' said he.
`Ayedead
dead
, in her
innocence
blessed one!'
said my father, as if his heart were breaking. `Then
thank God! thank God!' said Archibaldwhile Arthur
locked his hands, and lifted them, devoutly, to the skies;
and my mother, as if touched by some horrid thought all
at oncethrew herself into my father's arms, and buried
her face in his bosomhe repulsed her, and
shuddered
and
then, as if wondering at himself, embraced
her, for a whole minute, in silenceand then led her
awaywhile she covered her face with her handsand
moved like a woman, that God hath more than
widowed
her
very attitude was that of desperation and
horrour.
Archibald took out his watch, with a calmness that
awed mebent the sword upon which he leant, so that
the hilt almost touched the floor---exchanged a look,
the import of which I did not suspect, till his absence
had began to alarm us---with Arthur---and stepped out
of the room.
We were at Mr. Arnauld's---I had forgotten to tell
you how it was brought about---but there it was---and
there was the wounded officer too---the handsomest
fellow
that I ever saw in my life---lying in the same
apartment.
`My excellent neighbour,' said Mr. Arnauld, entering,
booted and spurred---followed by his beautiful wife,---
`there is my hand---this outrage is not to be borne---
henceforward, I am an American---heart, blood and
pulse---there is the royal protection! (tearing a paper in
pieces, and throwing it into the fire, indignantly, as
he spoke)---there let it be!---no peace with the tyrants---
no quarter! I have been a friend of the royal cause---
a friend of Sir Henry Clinton---and that paper,
signed by himself, and Sir William Howe---whose
gallant
brother died in my arms, when I was a fellow
soldier with him, years and years ago---that paper
contained
the royal word, the plighted honour of these
scoundrel commissioners, that, not only my household
should be spared from pillage, but yours---nay, do not
frown, my friend---I knew your sturdy and inflexible
nature too well, to attempt compounding with it---I hope
that you will forgive me---your name does not appear
but no matterthere lies the protection, it was a trap,
VOL. I. 5*
a mere trap to lull us into securitythe Hessians
cannot read it---and henceforward'locking his hands,
`I will depend upon no other but that of God, and my
own right arm--I---' (his eye fell upon Arthur, whom he
had not seen before.)
He falteredand I was not a little startled at the
manner of Arthur, who stood, looking at him awhile,
with his arms folded, lips compressed, and an appalling
fixedness of eye; and then left the room.
Mr. Arnauld, took the hand of his wife`Louisa,'
said he, `make my peace with that young man'he
has saved the life of your husbandI will not say how
but his life, and something, dearer to him than his
life, Arthur Rodman, spared to himsaved to him.'
`How, Robert?' said Mrs. Arnauld.
`I cannot well bear to relate it,' said her husband
`but you know my temperIenough, for the
present
,
that he saved me from a crimethe young and
innocent, from deathand, when deeply, unalterably
wronged, and I was helpless at his feet, shook me from
him, to the dust.'
His wife, understood him, but too well; and her eyes
ran over, as she turned away her face.
`Arnauld!' said my father, in a terrible voice, `are
you the man?'
`
I am
'was the reply, as he stood fearlessly before
him.
`God forgive you!' said my father, `poor Mary!'
`Mary!' said Mrs. Arnauld, glancing at her
husband
`not
Mary Austin?what mean you?'`
Oadley
,'
said Arnauld, going up to him, with a look of
deep terrour, `I dread to hear your replyyou are not
a man to be lightly disturbedwhat has happened to
the poor innocent?'
There was a silence of half a minute; during which,
we all stood, looking at each other.
`
She is dead
,' said my father.
`
Dead!
God forbidhow!how in Heaven's
name?tell me
tell
me, Oadley!'
`She had discovered, before you saw her, last night,
that you were a married manshe had determined to
meet you once more; upbraid you for your perfidy,
and throw herself at the feet of Arthur Rodmanpoor
Arthur.
That
led to the encounter between you
that brought her to my house, last nightthat'
Arnauld staggered away from us, as my father
continued
,
and his wife sunk into a chair, and buried
her face in her hands.
`Last night, Sirsheshe was destroyed.'
`May they be accursed, forever and ever! may the
hottest lightnings of Heaventhe'
`Rash man!'cried my father, sternly, `how
dare you kneel down, before your own wife, and call
the lightnings of God upon men---soldiers---untrained
and undisciplined ruffians, who would but have done,
what you meditated---
you
, Arnauld---a father and a
husband---
you!
who should have been the first, having
daughters of your own, to spill your blood, for the
protection of sorrow, and innocence, and helplessness
---
you!
---the destruction of the loveliest creature, that
was ever infatuated with a villain.'
Arnauld, arose; and but for me, would have struck
my father.
`
That
, in my own house!' cried he, black in the
face with passion, and frothing at the mouth.
`Aye! in your own house, or any where---strike
me if you will!---broken hearted, as I am---my
habitation
given to the flames---my wife---(I thought that
he would never finish the sentence)my own wife,
the mother of my boys---the
only
companion of my
heart and soul, Arnauld---for I have been faithful to
her, and she to me; and we were hoping to have gone
down to our graves, at last, in our old age, untouched
by shame or dishonourII Aye! any where
turn us, if you will, naked and homeless, upon the
cold worldshut your door against us, and see us
perish, as the wild beast should not perish, if her
young were with herand still. I will repeat to you,
thatlet it ring in your ears, at the day of judgment;
that Mary Austin died!and, blessed be God, that she
did die!more innocent, even in the locked arms of a
storming madman, than'
`Tell metell me!you know what I would say,
Oadleytell me but
thatthat
, Oadley, and I will
lay down my life at your biddingforgive youand'
The tears gushed out of his eyes, and he sobbed like
a child, and stood with locked hand, waiting the reply.
`Yes, Arnauld,' said my father, I
do
understand
youthere is a feeling of humanity about you, yet.
Repent and be forgiven!repent, and there is my
hand: Forever and ever, will I stand by you, and
your's
Mary Austin, died unprofaned
.'
Arnauld fell upon his knees, buried his face in the
lap of his wife; shook all over, as with an ague;
pressed her hands, again and again, to his forehead,
and lips, and eyes, while her tears fell like rain upon
his face, through her dishevelled hair. O, it was a
sight for angels to dwell upon, with beating hearts,
and trembling lips. There was not a dry eye, among
usthe wounded stranger, himself, who seemed hardly
enough alive, to lift his noble face from the pillow,
lay there, with his eyes shut, and the tears trickling,
slowly, through their lashes.
`Let this never be mentioned,' said my father, in a
milder tone, turning to me; with a look of such
solemnity
,
that I felt it as a dying injunction.
Our attention was called off, by a distant shouting;
and soon after, a troop of horsemen came by the
window
,
in full gallop. Some of them, I recognized,
immediately
,
for the men that were to assemble at twelve
---It was near two, I found, and then, for the first
time, the cause of my brother's disappearance flashed
into my mind. My blood curdledI knew his rash
spirit, and ran out to meet them. All my fears were
realizedhe had met themled them in person, after
the marauders, and, finally succeeded, in capturing a
party of the very rascals, that had burnt down our
house, the night before.
My father knew them immediately, and after
embracing Archibald, who was so weak, from one or
two flesh wounds, and his natural delicacy, that he
could hardly sit on his horse, began to move his arms,
as if he were about to take a terrible vengeance upon
some one.
`Are here all?
all?
' said he impatiently; the
blood gushing from his nostrils.
`All that we met,' said one of the party, `except
the tallest, and one or two others, that we left upon the
ground.'
`And the scoundrel that Archibald shot, said a
second, because he happened to have a handkerchief
about his neck, that he thought was his mother's.'
`Had he a red collar?' said my father, catching
him by both armsa red collar?red?---red as blood?
---hey?'
`Yes, Sir,' was the reply, `Archibald's got the
handkerchief now.'
Archibald pulled it out of his bosomit was wet
through and through, soaking in crimsonhe turned
away, sick as death from it; it dropped from his
fingersand he shuddered.
`That handkerchief! yesyes, my brave boyyes!
that was thy mother'sGod bless thee for it!God
forever
bless thee!thou little knowest what thou hast
done. Was it youArchibald
was
it you! did you
shoot him dead
dead
, Archibald?
My brother shook his headlooked at his red
fingers
and
staggered to the wall.
`O thou!' cried my father, locking his old hands,
`thou the avenger of blood!--
thou
the judge of all the
earth..... blessed be thy name, that the son hath been
permitted to deal out thy retribution upon the man
thatO, my child!my child! ask of me what
thou wilt!lo, I am ready to do thy bidding.
Archibald arosefell upon his neckand uttered
some low sounds.
`Yes my boymy brave boy!whenever you
please---and I will go with youlead you, with my own
hands, into the presence of Washingtonbuckle a sword
upon my own thigh, and stand by you, as your soldier
and follower, to the last drop of my blood!'
Archibald could support it no longer---he fainted
away upon the spot.
`But where is Arthur!look to him, John---the
must not be left
alone
'---said my father.
`Hearty as a buck,' said one of the horsemen---`dang
it! how he cut and slashed among 'em.'
`Did'nt he strike home?' cried a second catching his
hand.
`
Home!
' cried a stout yankee, who had just come
among us---`
home?
yes! that he did! the first blow set
that fellow's skull-cap a spinning, like a pewter plate--
and the next, brought him from his horse.'
`Fleshed to the hilt!' cried another, of a younger,
and better educated class. Would there had been more
of them!'
`But
is
he safe?' said my father---`Not a hair of his
head is hurt,' said the speaker---`he and Archy were
the first that came up with the chaps, taking their fire,
foolishly enough, as he said, himself, afterward, all
along, from right to left, as they passed:---and they
were clattering away, at a devil of a rate, before we
could get up---your d---d blood horses, farmer Oadley,
are too many guns for us.'
`In attack?' said his companion---chucking him
under the ribs---`well enough in
retreat
, hey?'
`Bob'---said one of the others---`did you see them
get a single blow at Rodman;'
`No---d-n'd a one dared to strike at him, after they
saw his face!'
`No wonder they were frightened!'said the other
`my bits chattered, when he passed us, at the heels of
that devilish mare of Oadley's;he looked like a dead
man, broke loose in day light---and breaking his neck
to get back again.'
`He was in a fair way to get back again, dead or
alive, when I saw him last,' said the little fellow`but
let us look him up.'
`Aye, do my brave lads,' said my father, `do, and
by tomorrow's sun I will be with you, and we'll raise
a regiment of such fellows, and see if that won't fix
'em.'
The motion of a hand, from the bed where lay the
wounded man, turned our attention.
I went to him,he was very faint`let them do
nothing rashly,' said he---`wait a few dayswe shall
know by that time whether I am to live or die. If I live,
I'll carry you in myselfin style my ladsin
style!
if notwhyah, that was an ugly cut, faithI'll
tell you how to do it, for yourselfDon't go yet
Washington
won't hear a word of youhe is tired and sick
of your volunteeringyour rabble gentrycoming and
going when they pleasethere's the damned
Connecticut
light horsemen--they have just gone home, in a
bodythe scampering rascals!because he put them
on duty at nightpretty fellows!I may thank them,
and their lubberly Colonelwhew!for this cursed
jobI went to pick up my videttesanddamn it, one
half of 'em were your sabbath-day troopers from
Connecticut
gentlemen!
gentlemen! every one of them.
Got tired, and went homethey be damned!'
I could hardly keep from laughing, at the drollery of
his eyes, and tonethe strange mixture of levity and
seriousness about this strangerhe was certainly the
handsomest man that I ever sawtallwell made
square shoulderedfull chestand trod, after he was
well enough to walk, with such an air of authority,
that I felt like a boy in his presence.
But while I was listening to himmy father gave me
a sign, and left the room. I followed him, and he led
the way to a vacant lot, in the rear of the house. His
manner was solemn, beyond all that I had ever seen.
`Hearken to me!' said he,--`do not interrupt me,
my son. I have determined to go into the army. This
night's work was a judgment upon me. I shall return
no more to my homeit is dishonoured. I shall build
no othernone!I could not well bear to sit round
the hearth of another. I shall leave your mother here
she is prepared for it all. Go in, and comfort her
the poor widowed creaturethe broken hearted,
desolate woman! Before I sleep, I shall buckle a
sword upon my thighone that has been fleshed already,
to the hiltto the hilt, JonathanAnd never will I
let go of it, till my heart is shatteredmy Country
freemy wife avenged. That done, it matters little
what may become of me--I can come to her thenthe
aged mourner--and lay my gray head down in her lap
and die.'
`Father!' said I, catching at his hand, `speak to me
what has happened?'
`Silence,' said he, `silence!forget itharmless
yourself, for the sacrifice. Ask no questions. Go and
comfort your mother.'
`But, Marymay I ask what became of
her?
'
`She is dead,' he replied.
`I know that, fatherbut how?'
`How!would youunnatural boywould you
(he appeared to be choking)II'
`But what time did they come, father; and how
came Arthur there?'
`Sit down, and listen to me.' There was a large
tree, uptorn, near us, and I obeyedthe roots were
before us, shooting about, and loaded with such a
quantity of soil, that nothing less than an earthquake,
one would have thought, had been able to disturb it.
I observed, that my father's eyes were fixed upon it,
and as he sat down, his lips moved.
`Even so!' said he, inwardly`even soeven so!
uptorn and prostrate in its old age!it's head
in the dust... struck with barrenness... even so!
the whirlwind, and the firethey will have way;
and the sword too!that shall have way!the
widowed one, and the orphanthe broken hearted,
and the dyingthe avenger of blood, hath his hand
upon the hiltwo to them!wo to them!the grey
hair of the dishonoured matronthe tears of the
motherthe wailing, and shriek of the virginthey
are in the windin the wind!O, Lord God of
Israel
!the
prayer of an afflicted peopleLo! the old
men are taking the field, and the aged, and abused
women are buckling their harness, with lamentation
and shame, upon their old fathers, and husbands!'
His voice died away, thrilling my blood like an
imprecation
.
I could see it working along in the wind,
like a cloud of pestilence. I was awestruckthe
tremendous
repose of his countenancethe slow heaving
of his broad chestand the idea of a man, already
approaching
the age of sixty, about to abandon every thing
on earth, even to his wife,and go out against the
enemies
of Americaall united to solemnize and confound
my feelings.
A silence of some minutes followed, after which, he
proceeded to relate what had happened, charging me at
the same time, with a look that I shall never forget, not
to speak of the subject to my mother, nor to any body
else, not even to Arthur.
`About ten last night, or perhaps eleven, for we had
not been in bed long, I heared Arthur's voice at the door
and arose to let him inthere was a large fire burning
in the room, and I observed that he was so agitated,
that he could hardly speak. As he passed me, he put
something behind the door,I went to see what it was,
while he continued walking, to and fro, in the room,
like a distracted man`it was a sword.'
`Ah,' said I, recollecting his errand`how did you
succeed? How many recruits?'
He did not appear to understand me. I repeated the
question, but he seemed to have forgotten all that had
passed.
`Who came home with you?' said I. He stopped
shortpassed his hand over his forehead`I do not
know, uncle,' said he, `upon my word, what you have
been sayingpray repeat it.'
`I heard your voice, long before you knocked,' said
I`in earnest conversation with somebody.'
He coloured.
`At first, I thought that people were whispering near
methere were two voices, certainlyand then your
aunt, who had been listening too, observed that it was
VOL. I. 6
the voice of people at a distancecoming up the wood,
`Soon after this you knocked. You look disturbed.'
`I am,' said he. `There is danger abroad. I came
to apprise you of it. I saw two or three horsemen in
the wood, about an hour since, with one stationed at a
distance, as if waiting for a reinforcement.'
`Some foraging party, I suppose'
`No, I should think notthey are not well enough
covered for that--Ha!'
We saw a bright flame arise then, all of a sudden,
in the direction of Mr. Ulster'sand the sparks rushed
up, into the very sky it seemed, like a whirlwind of
fire.
`Let us bar the windows, and door,' said Arthur
`and be prepared for the worst,it is the Hessians.'
`Yes,' I replied,--`and the boys, will be at hand soon
I expect them every moment.'
He shook his head--`we cannot depend upon them,'
said he. `They have business elsewhere.'
We went about securing, as well as we could, the
windows and doors--and preparing our two men
servants--placing
the women in the cellarmy wife,
Mary, and the three girls--and then sat down, to
await the result.
`What is the matter with Mary!' said I, `I thought
her a girl of more heart. How pale she is! she is
safer here than at home--and yet, I should be sorry to
have any ill befall her, under my roof. How is this,
Rodman?--you are strangely affected,' said I, seeing
him turn away his face--`look at me. What has
happened
to you?'
`By heaven,' he answered, `I can bear it no longer
dear,
dear
Mary!uncle, you know, how long I
have loved herhow trulyand, how her affectionate
heart used to doat upon meand'
`
Used
to, Arthurthere is no change, I hope.'
`No change!' said he, `when Mary Austin goes
out of her bed, at night, to meet a man, in a lone wood
away from mortal helpa married man!'
I caught him by the arm`Arthur Rodmanare
you mad?' said I,`who has put this notion into your
head? It is a wretched, pitiful falsehood.'
`I saw it, uncleI
saw
itthank God, in timeI
heard her voiceI knew itfor I was riding ten miles
out of my way, just to hear Mary Austin's voice, once
more, before I went into battle; though, it were only
to say, as she used to, `heaven bless you, Arthur!
good night, Arthur!' I was in high spiritsmy blood,
bounded through my arteriesI had just left a troop of
young fellows; stout of heart, and true of hand; and
was happyO, how happy! I heard a shriekloud
piercingly loudit was a shriek, that could not be
mistaken. I happened to be armed, and I galloped in
a direct line, through the woodby heaven, I thought
that I never should get to it, in this world; but, at
last, I did. There she was, yet struggling with the
villain, and, nearly overcome. I struck him to the
earth, and she fainted; but just as I was about driving
my sword through his accursed bodysheO that
women will forgive such thingsthings that shame men
to think ofshe threw herself before me, clasped my
knees, and stayed the uplifted weapon.'
`I knew not what lulled mewhether it was the
broad moonlight; her utter helplessness; her abashed
eyes; and pale, speechless lips, or what; but, the
sword dropped from my hand, and the villain walked
off.'
`She still clung to me, not, I am sure, in tenderness
to
me
, but lest I should pursue
him
.'
`Who was he?' said I, to Arthur.
`I shall never utter his name, uncle,' said he; `I
have promised that, and, the secret shall die with me.'
`But, how came you here?' said I, to Mary.
She hid her face, and burst into tears. `Because,'
said she, at length`but O, let us leave this place
Arthur---let us go awayhome, homeif you will not
abandon me!' I was unable to replyand she told
me, what must have been true, that she had met him,
with the most innocent intentionthat she had no
idea of the distance, to which he had beguiled her, or
the lateness of the hourthat she had consented to this,
as a farewell meetingthat she loved himbut, that
she had found he was a married man; and, she could
not bear to break his heart, as he had told her a
thousand
times, it would, if she left him, till she had
reasoned
awhile, with him. In short, unclethe poor
creature, in the simplicity, and purity, and nakedness
of her own heart, had thrown herself, entirely into his
power; and, nothing saved her, but my happening to
hear that she would visit you to day; and, by coming
at the hour that I did---for'
`Here there was a sound, as if a body of horsemen
were silently, surrounding the house,' said my father
`a few minutes after, there was a loud knocking. I
looked out, and was accosted in a language, that I
could not understandthey were Hessians, I supposed;
and my blood ran cold, for they appeared to be
numerous
;
and their merciless nature was well known
to usthey were of the beleaguering rabble, that
formed the outposts, of the enemy, in their stupid
ignorance
of our naturetaught to believe, that we are
savages; and, that if they were taken alive, they would
be roasted, and eaten.'
I could discover, from their gestures, that they
were determined to force an entranceand, one of
them, a large, handsome man, levelled his pistol, two
or three times, at my headand at last, irritated by
the delay, fired; but, the ball went wide of its mark.
The next moment, he fellArthur had put a bullet
through him. This was the signal for a general
assault. Some dismountedsome ran to the barn; the
leader, forbidding them to set fire to it, yet, lest the
neighbourhood should be alarmedor, such, at least,
I took to be the meaning; for, one or two, who had
lighted matches in their hands, trampled them out.
They began to fire into the windows, with their
pistols
,
but with so little effect, man after man, falling
from their saddles, that they all dismounted, at last,
and made an attempt upon the door. Every moment,
I expected it to give waythe house rocked to its
foundation; but, we were ready to receive them, with
one heavy blunderbuss, three muskets, full of balls,
and half a dozen cutlasses---when Mary rushed in,
her hair all in disorder, shrieking, that she had seen
a face, at the back window; and, that they were
forcing their way, through the wood cellar, into the
part, where the women were.
`Go back this moment,' said I, `to the cellarif
they break in, utter no cry, and make no noise.' I had
previously ordered all the fire to be extinguished.
`Farewell Arthurdear Arthur,' cried the distracted
girlthrowing her arms round his neck.
`O leave me, leave me, Mary,' he cried, `not till
you forgive menever, never!
`The noise at the door redoubledI was indignant
at the folly of the girl. Begone!' said I.
Her head dropped upon his shoulderpale as death;
but I saw him press his lips to her forehead, and heard
him whisper somethingat which she recovered
carried
his hand to her lipsand left the room, with a firm,
noble step, saying, `do your duty uncledo your duty
Arthurwe will do
ours
.'
The words had scarcely passed her lips when I heard
a tremendous crash, the door gave way, and Arthur
crieddash out the lights!
The order was instantly obeyed, and, for five minutes,
there was an awful and bloody struggle among us. To
this I attribute our safetyfor they were afraid to deal
a blow at last, and were receiving ours, continually
many of them died by the hands of each other, and by
the light of every pistol flash, a man was seen to fall
before Arthur or myself. I had no notion that a sword
was a weapon of such power, in the hand of an
inexperienced
farmerbut I can assure you, my son, that
every man, struck by me, was disabled.
In the middle of this combat, we heard a stifled
shriekand immediately after, we found the floor giving
way under our feetit fellthe smoke and flames
roared like a furnace through the roof:the shrieks
VOL. I. 6*
continuedthe cries of the women were heard on every
sidea guard stood over usbut we cut our way
throughand the first object that caught my view was
the dead body of a man, cut from the head down, just
falling with a woman in his armsIt was Mary!her
heart had brokeshe was nearly suffocated in the
smoke, but, obedient to her resolve, had determined to
perish there, rather than bring her destroyer upon her,
or alarm us.But they had found her, and one was
bearing her off when the sword of Arthur cleft his head
open.
There were other cries`show no mercy,' said I
none!hew them in pieces, men and women too!and
he followed meevery thing gave way before usone
of the women was suffocated, we have reason to believe,
with poor Maryone we savedtogether with---O!
there was one ruffian, with a red collar, whom I had
pursued for ten minutes over burning rafters, through a
whirl wind of fire, and clouds of smoke and darkness---
but could never reach him---but---a bullet
did---Archibald
dealt a blow for his mother,IIyour
mother had fled---and I found her utterly powerless and
insensibleI'
`I can tell you no more---something alarmed the
sentinel---for
after firing his pistol, which was unheeded by
the troop, he rode in with a loud outcry, and the whole
band were in their saddles directly.Let us return.'
He arose abruptly as he ended this, and walked
before
me, into the house---talking all the way to himself,
as if unconscious of my presence.
CHAPTER V.
And always careless, alwayseven in fight.
Two whole weeks had passed away, and, such had
been the effect, of their zealous co-operation, that our
aged patriots had mustered one hundred and
twenty-three
well mounted horsemen, and nearly two hundred
infantry, who, by the way, were wretchedly equipped.
The whole country had taken the alarmthe
tremendous
,
and unsparing violence of the Germans,
who, most inconsiderately, in the royal commander,
had been put forward in his extreme advance, forming
a chain of posts, utterly unable to communicate with,
or understand, or, to soothe the inhabitants; and,
too weak, by farfully beset with the notion, that we
were a people of rebel savages, and, accustomed to
put our prisoners to death, if not of cannibals; the
falsehood of which belief, they only learnt, by being
taken prisoners; after it had quickened their
natnatural
ferocity, and made them the scourge of all the
country roundthe futility of the royal protections,
which were often thrust through with a bayonet, or
scattered to the winds by these foraging banditti, under
pretence, that they were unable to read them; or of
utter disbelief, in their authoritythese things, with
the indiscriminate pillage, and butchery of friend and
foeand worst of all, the uninterrupted, and brutal
profanation of our mothers, wives, and daughters,
before our facesby the living God, it is true!a
committee were employed in our little neighbourhood,
to report upon the subject to congress, and the result
was solemnly announced, that twenty-three women
there, had been violatedtwenty-three!where the
desire of concealment, in woman, herself, is hardly
greater than it is in her brothers, fathers, sons
what a multitude must have been sacrificed, for so
many to have been discovered, by accident!---for, by
nothing but accident, could it have been discovered---
a secret, so terrible---a violence, so horrible to her
nature. Men of America!---will ye ever forget it?---
if ye do, may your beautiful daughters and wives
no---that were too awful a malediction-- may ye and
they, perish, strangled in each other's arms, suffocated
in each other's blood!---these things, at last, drove
us mad. We arose, as one people---a nation, about
to offer up its enemies in sacrifice; and, had our
disposition been rightly understood, the deep feeling
of religion, which began to work, like leaven, within
us, been rightly distributed, before the commencement
of the spring campaign, there would not have been a
man left alive, of our whole enemy---from Georgia to
Maine---nor a hostile foot, able to leave its mark upon
our land.
We found our guest one of the strangest creatures
in the world, altogether agreeable, and full of careless,
self possession; and, though he chose to call himself
Clinton, we had good reason to believe that his name
was not Clinton; and, that he was an aid of the
commander in chief; for, at the end of about two
weeks, after several attempts to write, which, were
successively made and abandoned, he called Archibald,
who had become a great favourite with him, to his
side, where he sat, lolling, with his sleeve ripped up,
and looped all the way, to his shoulder, and his right
arm in a sling; and, the following conversation ensued,
between them. I have, already, spoken of his beauty
---it was generally of a frank, careless, aspect; but,
at times, for a single moment, there was a lordly
shadow upon his brow, and his dark eyes loured
imperiously
,
like one accustomed to have his way, in
spite of all the world, and impatient of contradiction,
let it come from whence it would.
He had been talking about the affair of the lakes;
the gallantry, of Arnold (the traitor); the repeated
attempts upon the shipping, up the North river; the
ill advised defence of Fort Washington, the loss of
which, he attributed to the advice of General Greene;
though, he admitted that Greene manuvred in a
masterly manner, to save the military stores at Fort
Leeand finally, of the battle upon Long Island
and, Mr. Arnauld, of whom it is time that I should
give you some clearer notion, than you have, sat
listening to him, with ardent admiration and pleasure.
Mr. Arnauld, was a small man, with a remarkably
spirited face; handsome eyes, full of a melting softness;
a rich, deep voice, and lips of a blood redthe most
perfect gentleman, that I ever sawdoing, whatever
he did, with that consummate self-possession, as if,
no matter how sudden the emergency, or
unpremeditated
the thought, as if that alone had been the subject
of all his preparation. At first, such was his readiness,
that you could hardly persuade yourself out of a
notion, that he had forseen, or contrived the event,
or the remark, that brought out the peculiarity, of
which I speak; but, in a little time, that suspicion
would gave way, to the delightful certainty, that,
happen what would, there was never such a thing in
Arnauld's mind, as unpreparedness. His appearance,
was not striking, nor his countenance handsome, till
he became animated; but then, if the women were to
be believed, he was the most dangerous man living.
For my own part, I must confess, that, old as he was,
when I knew himand, then he was nearly old
enough to have been my father, his manners were the
most fascinating; the play of his countenance, the
most eloquent; the carriage of his person, the most
dignified and intellectual, if I can make myself
intelligible
,
by such a word(what I mean by it is, that
there was more of the soul, in it)than that of any
other man, that I ever saw. He was not a learned
man, I think, yet there was no theme, upon which, his
passionate, and beautiful mind did not dilate with a
force and brilliancy, at times, which took away my
breath. He, it was, that gave me a taste for elevated,
and fiery meditation. He was a profligatea
voluptuary---a
sensualist, perhaps; for he fed his mind
upon loveliness, and banquetted, all the day long, upon
colour, and sound, and perfume, with celestial
creatures
.
His very children, were a sort of spiritualities;
and, though I loathed, and abhorred, the earthiness
of his passion for women, yet he had the art of so
sublimating, and colouring, whatever he chose to touch
with his enchantment, that it was perilous as death,
to listen to him, when set upon conquering your
reason
.
I believe, that he had a good heart, and a brave
one---that he loved his wife, to adoration, and would
have torn away, his own heartstrings---split his own
arteries, to make his children happier, for a single
day, in any material thing. But let me return to
Major Clinton, or Colonel, as we ought to call him.
`Hither, Dapper,' said he, to Archibald, carelessly,
`I want your assistance.'
Archibald, lifted his eyes, slowly, to his face---
as if, I believed at first, that they meant to smile at
the man's impudence; but, then a deeper hue came
to them, as if it were well to put a stop to it, before
it should be too late.
He lifted his eyes, slowly, and fixed them upon
Clinton's face, with a serious impression; not so much
of displeasure, as of enquiry; and then, as slowly,
dropped them again.
`
Dapper
, I say!' said his persecutor, again,
throwing
a wicked glance at the girls, who sat nearly
opposite---
`come,
come, I want to borrow your fingers.'
`Colonel Clinton,' said Archibald, calmly, raising
his eyes to the Colonel's face, `my name is Archibald
Oadley.'
Clinton laughed, and flinging his handsome leg out,
as if a sudden pain, had just taken his breath away---
`will---you---then---Ar-chi-bald
Oad-ley'---carricaturing
the measured enunciation of my brother, so
happily
,
that he smiled, in spite of himself, and Lucia
coloured to the eyes, and gave a peevish sleat of the
hand, as she threw by her work, that I saw did not
escape the notice of Clinton, (for he glanced, rapidly,
to and fro, three or four times, from one to the other,
before he finished the sentence, like one reconnoitering)
`will
youthendomethefavourtowrite
pray, do you always talk with that solemn
emphasis
?but,
no matter, nowwill you write a line for
me?'
`With all my heart,' said Archibald, seating
himself
,
immediately, at the table; while Lucia hurried,
with a petulant activity, to get the writing materials
before him; occasionally glancing at the noble
countenance
of Clinton, and then, at the richly, delicate,
but singularly intelligent one, of Archibaldin pity,
I thoughtand perhaps, for I did not like the
compassionate
trembling of her lipsnor the colour,
that came, and went, so rapidly, about her temples
it was too like the expression of disappointment, and
even shame.
`All ready?' said Clinton.
Archibald, boweddropped his pen again, into the
ink.
`Well, then
Dear General
have you got that?'
Archibald, nodded. A profound silence, followed.
`Damn it,' said Clinton, after wriggling
backward
and forward, in his seat, for a whole minute
`it is like drawing your teeth,'
`Not
mine
, if you please,' said Archibald, lifting
his pleasant eyes, again to his face.
`Well
mine
, then. I'll tell you what it isyou'd
better write it yourselfcome, will you?there's a
good fellow!no matter, what you say, so that he
can't read it.'
Archibald shook his head; and, Clinton continued
`for he was never able to read one of my letters,
yet---stop---there's the date---put that down---whew!'
there was another dead halt, of a minute or two, while
every compassionate soul, in the room, was afraid to
look up, lest it should add to his confusion---poor
creature! he never suspected it!---`I'll tell you what,
Dapper---I beg your pardon, Ar-chi-bald Oad-ley---
I'd rather winter a whole campaign, upon White Plains,
than write a letter, any day---the first sentence, is so
unspeakably difficult. That is the tenth time, that I
have undertaken, to communicate the fact, that I am
alive, hearty, and ready to return to duty, as soon as
he pleases; but, hang me, if---stay---stay---make a
full stop.'
`O, that I did, half an hour ago,' said Archibald.
`Well, then---now sign my name to it---George R.
Clinton, A. D. C.---is it done?'
`Yes,' said my brother, without changing
countenance
,
but to whom shall I direct it?'
`To His Excellency, George Washington.' The
pen fell from my brother's hand, and we all looked up
in amazement.
`Why, what ails the boy?' said Clinton, `don't
you mean to finish the letter?'
Archibald took up the pen, again, with a trembling
hand, and wrote the direction, biting his lip, as he
did so---there was a strange variety of emotion in his
face.
`Is it done?'
`Yes sir,' said Archibald, reaching it to him.
`Please to read it for me.'
Archibald read as follows:
` New Jersey, 14th November, 1776..... Dear
general..... George R. Clinton.... A. D. C....
To his Excellency, George Washington.'
Clinton stared him in the face, for half a minute, and
then threw himself back into the chair, and laughed till
the house shook againand before he had ended, we
were all laughing with him;
all
, I should say, except
my father and mother, who sat a little apart from the
rest, holding each others hands, and looking as if
neither would ever smile againand Arthur, poor
fellow
,
he had left us, to go alone, where he would be
welcome
among
the armed children of America.
`Well, well!'continued Clinton, after this
obstreperous
peal had ended`after all, I don't see but that
will be a most acceptable letterit will show that I am
alivein my sensesand he will know, at the first
glance, that it is no counterfeitthat I
must
have
dictated
itI say, I hope you have written with the wrong
end of the quillif you have, it may go down for
something
under my own handstop before you seal it
take up your pen again, dot it a little, here and there
and now just draw two or three crooked lines athwart
the paper, and I will defy the devil himself to detect
the counterfeit.Therenow seal it.'
Archibald followed his directionsfolded, sealed and
directed it.
`You will be good enough, Mr. Arnauld, to have
that conveyed, as soon as practicable to the out post at
the Four Corners.'
`Is it possible!' cried Archibald, seeing that the
thoughtless creature was in downright earnest`would
you really presume to send such a letter as that to
George Washington?'
`Presume! why not?'
`But such a barren affairit will be an insult.'
`Phophoit is the longest letter that he ever read
from me in his life. Sometimes, when I have been in
some hot scrape or other, for he is sure to send me,
where more speed and horsemanship than brains are
wanted, I have just scrawled the initials of my name
and sent themstop! that letter must not go in that
fashionjust put down the initialsI am
incog
for a
while, and he won't know me by the name of
Clinton
.'
`Will you allow me,' said Mr. Arnauld, `to write
a note for you?'
`O certainly,' was the reply, `but I see no necessity
for another.... Mr. Oadley can just draw his pen over
the name, and write G. R. C. under themhe will
understand
by that same letter three things, which are all
that I could tell him, if you should write a whole day
for I told him, when he took me into his family, that
curse me, if I could either write letters, or copy them
but that I could carry them, through fire and smoke
into Sir Henry Clinton's quarters, if he pleased.'
VOL. I. 7
`Three things,' said Archibald`what are they?'
`The date, name and addressI suppose,' said Mr.
Arnauld, pleasantly.
`Pho,' you're all out.
First
(making a flourish with
his left hand) he will understand that I am
alive
else
I should not be able to dictate that letter. Secondly,
he will understand that I am
not able to write
else I
should not have employed another. And thirdly, he
will understand
where I am
, and send a wagon for me
directly.Now, what more could I tell him, if I
blacked a quire of paper all over?nothingI hate
your long letters.I never read themI have a trunk
full at home, that I have just opened, far enough to
count the pagesand put them by fora rainy day
or a cold oneit matters not much which. Do you use
any letters? you may have themyou're welcome to them
all. I cannot deny that I have been brought into two
or three unpleasant scrapes about thembut then, I
can't read them, I
can't
, and what's the use of talking
about it. If people will quarrelwhy, that's another
affairI'm not fonder of it than most men, but I'd
rather quarrel, with any body, than read a long letter.'
`You have seen Washington, then,' said I, timidly.
He looked at me a moment, from head to foot, as if
indeavouring
to understand whether I was in jest or
earnest
and
then answered `
yes
, almost every day, for
the last six years.'
My father arose, and came forwardas if anxious to
evince his respect for so favoured a mortaland Lucia,
it appeared to me, began to look about her, with a more
distrustful eye, as if endeavouring to recollect all that
she had been saying, in the festivity of her heart,
before
one, who had really seen George Washington, face
to faceand II cannot deny that I felt a strange
commotion
within me, next, I believe, to what I should have
felt in seeing the great man himselfnay, more than I
did feel afterwards, when I actually saw him.
`Well,' said Archibald, shrugging his shoulders
`even this is better than hearing of himit is
seeing
him at second handseeing one that has seen him
what kind of a man is he?'
`About the height of your father,' said Clinton,
measuring the august old man, as he continued`and
not a little like him, in his carriageabout twenty-five
years younger, howeverwith a broader foreheada
more awful meaning upon itnot so large, but boney
and in shorta man, before whom other men feel, and
look, and actlike childrenaye, sir, the wisest and
bravest.Haven't I seen the stoutest heart among
ushang his head, like a lubberly school boy, when the
General but turned his face upon him for a minute,
without uttering a word'(There was a prodigious
expression
of sorenessor something else, in the
movement
of his haughty lip, as he said this.)
`Do you love him?' said Archibald.
`An odd question, faith,' said Clinton`to ask one
of his own family!however, I won't baulk you, my
lad.NoI do
not
love himI
cannot
he makes me
feel my inferiority too sensibly, for thatbut I would
die for him, three times a day, for the rest of eternity;
isn't that better than love?'
`Not better than
love
,' said Arnauld. `Oh, of
women
you mean,'answered Clinton, glancing at Lucia,
who turned away her face with some little agitation,
looking sideways at Archibald, as she did so. `O, that
is another affair.Whether I could love a woman or
not would be hard to tell. All that I know of the
matter is, that I have tried to, more than once, with all
my heart and soul, and I could never get farther into
her heartand affectionsthan to be made a fool of
laughed at, first by her, and then by all the world
and thenhoweverI should love to be wrought
upon
once more, if it were only to keep me alive till the
next campaign opens. Cannot you tell me, Archibald,
of some blessed creature,' (his tone grew deeperand
the father glanced at him with a look of alarm, as if he
would read his very soul),`that could love a soldier
all the day longwatch with him all the night long
live with himdie with himand never write him a
long letter.'Clara laughed outright at the ludicrous
association of deep feeling and levity, apparent, not
less in the time of the stranger, than in his words
`why, you might as well inhibit the use of speechat
once,' said she.
`No, no,' he repliedthrusting his whole hand, into
his dark luxuriant hair, that shone in its abundance and
disorder, as if it had never been touched with aught but
the wind and rain`there would be several objections
to
that
gallantrythe love of contradictionthe
impossibility
of the thingwhat woman would ever
surrender
upon such termsno, no, Miss Clara, an
honourable capitulation is safer for both partiesif we
give no quarter, we cannot expect anybeside there
are
some women, who wouldn't think my objection
at all unreasonable, to long letters.'
`Why not marry a deaf and dumb lady?' said Mr.
Arnauld.
`Why, to tell you the truth,' replied Clinton,
carelessly
throwing his left arm over the chair in which
Lucia sat, so that his finely turned hand hung down
by her shoulderand touched it, I believe, in some
subsequent movement, for she changed her position, and
I saw his eyes flash, with a deeper expression of
meaning
,
than I had ever seen beforeand Archibald saw it
too, I thoughtfor he held his face lower, and began
a second time, at the top of the page, over which he
was poring:`to tell you the truth, that would be a
needless preliminaryit would be well enough to be
sure, to have her deaf and dumb at
first
.'
`It might be a blessing to
her
,' said Lucia pettishly,
in a whispering tone, meant for Archibald's ear, but he
would not appear to have heard it.
`Pretty well!'continued Clinton, `pretty well!'
for a beginner:yes, it might be a blessing to
her
and it certainly would be one to her husband, if her
voice were not so fullofofhang me, if I
could ever pay a compliment in my life, when I wanted
to.'
Lucia turned entirely away from him, now,
notwithstanding
a gentle reproof of her mother, who moved
her feet upon the fender, in the accent of admonition,
and hemmed once or twicewhile his nether lip worked,
and the light shot through his long lashes, as if not an
emotion or thought, of a single heart in the company,
could escape himand even Mr. Arnauld, when their
eyes met, for a moment, and flashed a quick interchange
of meaning, like electricity, ten thousand times more
powerful and expeditious than your vulgar language of
sound and syllableappeared to be thoroughly
understood
by him. Heart answered to heart between them,
for a moment, as if each had a telegraph in his own.
`So then,' said Mrs. Arnauld, `you are for a deaf
and dumb woman
vita mia!
'
`O nonot at
first
not till I was disposed to be a
windower.I should like a wife at
first
, with a head on.
In a little time, I would answer for her being deaf and
dumb too. My voice would make her deafmy talking
dumb.'
`You would break her heart perhaps,' said Archibald,
without raising his eyes.
Clinton yawned`probably,' said he`
probably
and after all, she might as well be deaf and dumb at
first
if dumb the better for medeaf, the better for
her.Yawawaw!'
`And I dare say,' continued Mrs. Arnauld, laying
her hand upon his wounded arm, very gently, as she
passed`that it
would
soon amount to the same thing,
if you rattled away, as you do sometimeyou would
make her forget her own language.'
`Or ashamed of it,' said he, putting his hand upon
hers, with the consummate assurance of one long
familiar
with women. (The blood rushed over the
temples
of her husband, as he saw it, and darkened his
eyes with a terrible shadow and lustre.) She caught
his look, or rather felt itfor she withdrew her hand,
and went to the window in silenceand stood there,
for several minutes.
VOL. I. 7*
`Pray, Colonel,' said my father, addressing him with
a gravity which if any thing in this world
could
have
awed the licentious festivity of his nature, would have
done it, `have you ever seen General Lee?'
`Charles or Harry?'said Clinton.
`I do not know his first name, Colonel.'
`Pray, old gentlemen.'(Archibald threw down his
book, and sat uprightbut my father's eye fell, with a
serious rebuke upon him, before he had time to
interfere
,
and he gradually sunk into the same position
again.) `I must tell youand all of you, now that I
think of it, to call me plain
Mr.
Clintonsome of the
scoundrel enemy have penetrated thus farand it might
hurry us all into trouble, if they knew there was a
colonel
here. A sharp game has been playing of lateone
of retaliationthey have sent Ethan Allen to England,
in chains, and we have just taken Prescott.'
We all assented to the proposition, and he continued,
`I should like to stay with you a few weeks longer
till I am well enough to sit my horse, at least, for I
like this hospital, I confess, rather better than ours in
campthat letter.'
`Do you really mean to send that letter? then,' said
Mr. Arnauld.
`Yesnoperhaps it would be as welldamn it
I beg your pardon ladies, a thought strikes me. I'll
send for Jasper, and have the lads drilled and taught
the broadswordand then gallop into camp, as from
the recruiting service, with a squadron of horse at my
heelsand a broken arm. Yes Mr. Ar-chi-bald
please to add, that I am recruitinga little injured in
my right armand that, if he will order sergeant
Jasper
into this quarter, with four of my old troop, we will
be ready, at a moment's warning, to cover any of his
foraging parties, or cut up any of the enemy's, till there
is an opportunity for more serious operationsjust as
he pleasesfor pastime till'
Archibald wrote the very words down, and read
them, to him.
`Nowwhy the devildamn this practice of
swearing
.
Ladies, I beg your pardonI have been too
long in camp, not to offend, sometimes, where I would
wish to avoid itI am only astonished, that, when I
wanted to say that, in black and white, just now, it was
a matter so difficult.'
`Would it not be well,' said my father `to give the
commander in chief, some account of your capture?'
`Report myself?O, nodead or disabled, he
knows well, that I
must
be, to be absent for a whole
dayyet, you may as well say, Archibald, that I have
heard of the enemy, and were afraid of their cutting off
my videttes, in detailput it in your own language
and, that I was taken prisonerand'
`Taken prisoner!' said Mr Arnauld.
`By
us
, you mean,' said Clara, smiling.
He nodded. `
No
, by the enemy; and, but for that
young coxcomb, who fell upon themIha!'
Archibald shook his head, and Clinton continued
`say that I was taken prisoner, and rescued, by'
Archibald, threw down his pen, angrily, and Lucia
turned about, her beautiful face all in a glow, with her
passionate enthusiasm; while my father leaned half
out of his chair, dropping the hand of my poor mother
and there was a breathless silence`bybyI am
not permitted to tell whom, or how. There!will
that do?and, add, if you please, Tinder-box, that,
if his excellency pleases, I will stay here, till I am
wantedor, willto protect the neighbourhood'
Archibald finished the letter; sealed it, and
received
a hearty shake of the hand, from Clinton, who
lifted his dark, expostulating eyes, to him, and said
something, in a low voice.
`No,' said Archibald, firmly`
no
, Colonel,
remember
your wordI shall hold you to it.'
`Pray, Colonel,' said Mr. Arnauld
`Colonel!
Colonel!
againMister, if you please.'
`Well, then, Mister Clintonyou spoke, a few
moments
since, of General Leeis he popular?'
`Exceedingly, with them that do not know him.'
`A great soldier?' said my brother.
`Yesbut, not the man for our cause.'
`They mention his generalship, at the South,' said
Mr. Arnauld.
`I know it,' was the replythe thing is wholly
misunderstood. Fort Moultrie would have been given
upSullivan's Island abandoned, if the advice of
Lee, had been followed. He swore, that Sir Peter
Parker would blow it into the air, with half a dozen
broadsides. Nothat affair is Moultrie's alonehe
ought to have the whole credit of it, and he shall. For
ten whole hours, he, and his raw malitia, and
palmetto
wood, held out, against the whole British fleet,
in one uninterrupted roll of thunder and fire.'
`But Lee has had a great deal of experience,
abroad; and is a man of extraordinary talent, is he
not?' said Mr Arnauld.
Clinton turned pale upon him, and answered, more
seriously, than I had ever heard him, before. `Yes,
Sir; it is all truebut Lee is a tyrantan aristocrat
and, if they that wish to see him, in the place of
Washington, will put him there. I will answer for his
being King Charles the First, before three campaigns
are over. No, Sirneither henor granny Gates, is
the man to lead our armies. They are fighting for
themselvesWashington for
us
. He risks nothing
for popularity; takes all the peril upon himself, with
the rabble of the army, and puts the strength and flower
of it under the command of the very men, that would
supplant himbut'standing erect, his noble
countenance
,
and haughty lip, all eloquent with deep and
unutterable reverence, `God is with George
Washington
!'
Claranay, even Luciamy fathermotherall
allevery living soulstood up, and
unconsciously
followed his movementand, when the ceiling of
the large room, resounded to the manly voice of
Clinton, `
God is with George Washington!
' it seemed
as if every voice had united in the acclamation; while
Archibald, poor Archibald, stood looking, with his
high soul sitting in his forehead, on Lucia and
Clinton; as ifheaven only knows, if the thought be a
true one; but, so it appeared to meas if that burst
of enthusiasm, in Clinton, had wrecked
his
happiness,
foreverfor, he went up to him; took his hand, and
bowed his head upon it; and sat down, in silence, as
if willing to give upall
all
, that was dearest to
him, in the wide world, for the loud, and gallant
testimony
,
that he had just borne to Washington.
Lucia saw the action; and a strange, tumultuous
light flashed over her white forehead; stirring her
very hair, with the rush of her blood; while her eyes
filled, and she came nearer to Archibald, as if she
would have comforted him, if she
could
but, he
carefully
avoided her eyes, and she was unable to speak.
`But what think you of this system of
retaliation
?'
said my father.
`The best thing, in all the world, to bring the
arrogant followers of his majesty, to their senses. After
that dd affair at the cedars, I wish you could have
seen Washington's face. It was tremendousand,
when he wrote his last letter, by heaven, my blood
ran cold. I could see, as plainly as I now see you, a
hundred or two, of fine looking fellows, with epauletts
upon their shoulders, swinging in the windI'
`Would he have done it?' said Arnauld, shuddering.
`
Would
hewould George Washington do what he
has once threatened?yesthough the sun turned to
blood, while he did it; and the sky fell in fragments
at his feetayethough it rained fire upon him!'
`But, how would that be possible?' said my father.
`How could Washington stand by, and see men
butchered, mangled, scalped, and roasted, as they were
at the cedars?'
`O, that was the wisdom of congress,' said Clinton.
`Washington never promised
such
retaliationhe
foresaw
that, unless he wished to make his brave fellows
as bad as the enemy, he could not enforce an
exact
, and
scrupulous retaliation.'
`Yet, it was
threatened
; and, it is not wise or
dignified
,
for a nation to
threaten
, only.'
`So I say; right or wrong, after you have uttered
a threat, fulfil it. Bite; don't barkbut, if you must
bark, bite afterwardright or wrong.'
`That affair at Long Island, seemed to have lost
Washington a part of his popularity,' said Mr.
Arnauld
.
`Was it not rather too hazardous, to throw all
his forces upon our island, accessible on all sides, to
the enemy; where, if defeated, inevitable ruin must
have followed.'
`I'll tell you what it is, Mr. Arnauld; there is a
dangerous, discontented spirit, among us: we seem
to be weary already, of the good cause; anxious to
down with our natural born men of America; our
old fashioned republicans, and put any body---no
matter whom---if he has been educated abroad, in their
places. I use no disguise. Lee is a favourite with
our patricians here, because he is a haughty, over
bearing aristocrat; has been trained in Europe,
among their princes and nobility; and, becausedamn
his impudencenothing that we do, pleases him. He
must have his finger in the pie, or all that is thought
of, or done, is laughed to scorn. He goes about,
among our women, with half a dozen puppies, of one
kind and another, at his heels; growling and cursing,
at every step; and we are fools enough to think it all
an evidence of generalship. No, Mr. Arnauld, if
Charles Lee had been our commander in chief, we
should not have had a battalion in arms, at this
moment
;
except his own body guards. I hold him to be
the most dangerous man in Americaand I know
him welland, between you and me; if they make
him general of the American armies, I will make him
a head shorter, with my own hand, on that day, before
he sleeps.'
We looked at him---the flashing of his eyes; the
lordly swelling of his chest; and not one of us,
questioned, for a moment, I will venture my life upon
it, that he would have been as good as his word. The
girls were in consultations, and had withdrawn to
a deep sofa, in the opposite corner, where, with their
arms intertwined, they had thrown themselves back,
so that nothing could be seen, in the deep shadow
where they sat, but an occasional glitter of the eye;
or flourish of a white hand; or a languid flutter of
drapery, as they changed their caressing attitude.
The mother's countenance lighted up, to great beauty
and expression, as she saw them---for there was more of
her own spirit of coquetry, endearment, and
self-possession
,
probably, in all this, than she had been
accustomed
to.
`But,' continued Clinton, `the affair upon Long
Island, was not so despcrate as you imagine. We
were
defeated, you know, yet we were
not
destroyed
---so there is
fact
, in answer to one of your
speculations
.
But, what would have become of General
Howe, had we whipped
him?
---we should have cut him
to pieces. Something was to be done. Our men fought
well, in their entrenchments, as Bunker Hill had shown
---it was proper to try them in fair field fighting. We
could'nt give up New York, without a blow---the eyes
of the whole country were upon us---a victory would
decide the cause at once---a battle, if we were not
beaten, would be a victory for us, because it would
retard the operations of the enemy, accustom our
troops to stand fire---and startle the country---and
even a flogging, would be better than a dastardly
retreat, without striking a blow---and, still better
than being enclosed upon the island, or shut up in the
city. These were the reasons of Washington---I know
all his thoughts---I know that his great heart bled in
the trial---that he was moved, even to tears, when he
saw his poor fellows, rode down, in the marshes, and
bayonetted rank after rank---but he had forseen it
all, and prepared for it. You are mistaken, in another
thing---his retreat was secured. We were in
possession
of a battery, that commanded all the East river
---we had left a force, in the city, to cover us; and
the enemy had not a ship, nor a gun to bear upon us.
God!---if he had only attempted to storm us, we
should have played Bunker-Hill over again. Just
before we embarked Washington rode up to us'
`
You
were there, then,' said Mr. Arnauld.
`Yes,' said Clinton, colouring; but, without any
change of voice, he continued to relate the alarming
incidents that followed, and accompanied the
embarkation
;
and, never intimated that he had had any
personal concern in it, though we found, afterward,
that he had been especially distinguished; and was
engaged, for several hours, by the side of Colonel
Smallwood, and his highblooded Mary
landers---shouting
,
and cursing, all the while, like a fiend, and
dealing death about him, through the smoke, and
blaze, and thunder of the battle, as if that alone, were
his element. Nor did he appear to avoid it, with
any especial care---it was, really, I have no doubt, a
matter of perfect indifference to him; for, when put to
it, he spoke with the most natural expression of
careless
concern, about what he, himself, had done---just as
if, chopping off the head of men had been about as
serious a matter, as cutting the throats of so many
cattle
;
or, cropping so many puppies.
`But how providential,' said my father; locking his
hands
`The fog, you mean,' replied Clinton`why, as to
that matter, every thing that happens, is providential.
But, I see no especial manifestation of providence,
there. We committedor, rather, some of our officers
committed, some damnable blunders, at the
embarkation
;
and, we might have suffered, if the enemy had
known itand the fog was certainly a lucky affair;
but, while I feel as thankful to God for it, as any body,
I believe, for I was in the last boat that came off
and, the water was all in a foam about it, with their
shot, when the fog was blown awayand, they opened
upon usyet, I am never in the habit of believing, in
any especial manifestation of God's favourwhere,
if we believe in
that
, we must believe that he has led
us into a scrape, just that he might bring us out of it.
Why let us be whipped, and cut up, as we were, if
but you look too serious, for melet us drop the
subject
I
am not a religious man; but I respect one
that isseeing death, as often as I do, I am afraid,
has not made his countenance more welcome to me;
and, it would be comfortable to me, to believe as other
men dobut, I cannotthat is plainI cannot. I
venerate
my MakerI would die at his biddingbut
dam'me, if I can bring myself to believe, that he is so
ready to blow hot and cold, upon the same cause
sunshine
and fogorI beg your pardonI see that I
have offended you all; so, let us say no more about it.
God prosper the right!'
VOL. I. 8
CHAP. VI.
Prepare to guard!now guard!assault!
Now forward! forward! to the slaughter place!
Archibald
and Clinton were perpetually together
now.Jasper had arrived, and while the troop was
forming upon the broad, well trodden ground, in front
of the house, Clinton would sit at the window, give the
order, and direct them, in going through the divisions,
while Jasper faced toward him, his back to the troop,
and went slowly over the whole; and such was their zeal
that, before another week had passed, my brother, who
spent the whole of his time in the saddle with Jasper,
or in conversation with Clinton, was able to go through
the attack and defence, with the swiftness and
precision
of an experienced swordsman. Jasper declared
that he had never seen any thing like it`I shall be no
match for him,' said he, `with that light blade of his,
in another weekhe parries, cuts, and gives point, all
at the same moment.' And so it appeared to mefor
when they met, and wheeled, there was often one
incessant
clatter, and blaze and sparkle, for two or three
minutes at a time, as they went round the enclosure,
with all eyes upon them.
`Admirable!' said Clinton, catching Lucia's hand,
and then dropping it in dismay, as he saw the alteration
in her face`admirable!'
`What was that?' said I, as I sat upon my horse,
near enough to the open window to hear and see all
that passed within the room, while my horse reared at
the flash of Archibald's sword.`What was it? I saw
the light, but my eye could not follow the motion.'
`Sword arm protectbridle arm protectSt. George
cut in the rear,'answered Clinton, leaning half out
of the window in his eagerness`damn this arm of
mineI am impatient to try that fellow's mettle
myself
he
is quicker than lightninghe and his mare
seem to be animated by the same soul.'
As he spoke, the mare leapedthe line broke, and
she dashed among them, like a mad creature
Archibald's
weapon swinging at his wrist, by the sword knot,
and wounding her at every plunge. Lucia turned pale
as death, and caught Clinton by the arm, but he
appeared
unconscious of it, for he leaped headlong from
the window, just as she uttered a shriek, reeled away,
and covered her face with her hands. I now saw the
reasonArchibald had lost the stirrup, and was almost
upon the neck of the mare, who ran straight across the
field, turning neither to the right nor leftfor hedge
nor ditch, nor tree. There was a mortal silencethe
horses were all reined up, with a convulsive motionand
Clinton stood with his arms outstretchedThere was
a large tree in frontan oakthe branches lowand
the mare driving directly under them.Gracious God!
at the very moment when we expected to see Archibald
struck from the saddlehis brains dashed out, we saw
the sword fly from his wristthe mare turn a little
aside, and Archibald spring to the groundbring her
about, in a broad sweep, and leap upon her back again,
like a circus rider.There was a general shout of
admiration
`a
winged mercury indeed!' said Mr.
Arnauld
.
`Yes,' groaned Clinton, contracting his
forehead
,
with pain, as he restored his shattered arm to the
sling`but damn such freaks, I say. I would no
more have that fellow in our riding school, than a
lighted rocket in a powder magazinehe and his mare
would play the devil with our sober Connecticut
jockeysthe whole camp would be a place of ground
and lofty tumbling, if they were once among the
Virginia
lads. But what the devil set him a going Jasper?
didn't he parry your point?I could have sworn that
his
touched your side, twenty times, before you parried
itha!'
Jasper held up his sword in replyit was broken
about six inches from the hilt.
`How happened it? did he parry?'
`Parrydamn the fellowyesand before I could
come to offside protect, he gave me a cut, that shattered
my swordand made my arm numb to the elbow
(shaking his fingers as he spoke)zounds! I believe
the bone is splinteredbut here he comes.'
Archibald rode upflushed with heat, and terrour
and the mare covered with blood. The point of the
broken sword had wounded her, it appeared, in the
flank. Archibald could have borne any thing better
`poor Hettywoa! woa! poor creature,' said he
(staunching the wound, while the flesh of the animal
shivered, at every touchand the blood flew in his face
like rain)`I'd rather be wounded myselfbut
woa! woa! I knew that something must have happened,
and it's well for her,' he added, turning to ushis
white forehead all spattered over with her bloodthat
she has a good excuse for such deviltryor.'
`What would you have done?' said I.
`Cut her throat upon the spot,' he answered, in the
same tone.
`His very nature has changed,' said Lucia, as she
stood leaning upon her sister, pale as death, her black
hair shadowing half her face.
To which Clara seemed to assent, while she put out
her dazzling hand to adjust itfor their eyes
encountered
,
and the quick, incessant sparkle of Clara's,
stopped for a moment, with a dash of mournfulness---
and her red lips were slightly compressed---perhaps in
sympathy with some inward contraction---perhaps with
the effort that she made, just then, to thrust the long
comb, into the collected mass of hair, which she had
just parted upon her sister's forehead, and carried back,
and curled up, in the true spirit of a painter.
`But how in the name of heaven, did you get into the
saddle again?---are you accustomed to such evolutions?'
Archibald continued patting the neck of his mare,
while her blood-shot eyesswelling nostrilsagitated
breathand quivering limbsshowed that she was not
wholly subdued.`Woa! woa! Hetty, woa!
no, it was altogether an accidentthe impetus of our
motion carried me back to the saddlewoa!woa!
will youthe sword knot gave wayrun Simmons,
and find the swordthere by the tree, somewhere
you will see by the track of the mare.I shouldn't
have managed her elsenever was I so near a
sommerset
in my life, and to this moment I don't know how
woa!woa!how I got into the saddle againmy
head is giddy with the effort.I remember throwing
myself off, as soon as I was able to disengage my wrist,
from the sword knotand I lost the stirrup by it
but how I got back again, I know not; it appeared to
me that I kept onjust struck the ground in a
semicircle
brought
the mare round, by holding on the rein,
involuntarilywhen she took me up again, by
completing
the circle.'
`And so it appeared to me,' said Clinton, `it was a
dd dangerous affair thougha pretty diagram
might be made of it.'
`Handsome, Bill, wasn't it?' said Jasper to one
of his own men`we must try it over in the riding
school.'`You'd better take that tree with you then,'
said Bill`aye, and the mare tooand the
rider
---or
you won't be able to carry it through, my lads,' said
Clinton.`But look to the mare Jasper---you are
somewhat of a farrier, or used to be, when I
commanded
you.'
Jasper touched his hat---and then apologised for such
an unmilitary saluteby bringing up the hilt of his
broken sword, square to his face, the flat of his hand
in frontwith that air of military precision, and
briskness
,
which is peculiar to the drill sergeant and
fugleman
.
`Keep your men in their saddles, five hours a day.
We shall be wanted soon. Be ready at a moment's
warning.I will be your commander till a better one
VOL. I. 8*
can be had---in the meantime, there is Archibald---what
say you? shall he be your captain?' said Clinton.
`Aye, aye!' cried the whole troop---`Oadley
forever
!---Oadley!
hourra for Oadley?'
Archibald looked upall the blood of his heart rushed
to his face---and then retreated, as suddenly---leaving
him white as a drowned man---and his eyes filled. Not
a human being had expected it---not one---and from
none had the thought been further, I am sure, than from
him. He went to my father, looked him in the face---
and then round to all the troop, man by man, without
uttering a word---they all understood him---and some
turned away their faces---some passed the back of their
right hand over their eyes---and filed off, one after the
other, as if they had not the heart to interrupt such a
silence.
`Clinton---Clinton---I---I' he tried to add
something
else, but he could not---his lips moved---and he
carried Clinton's hand to his heart.
`I understand you, my fine fellow, say no more
about it---you are their captain.---I will answer for your
confirmation.Work them hard this week, and
Monday
morning next, rain or shine, we will gallop into
camp. Ah---look yonder---what are they?---red
coats, by God!Mount, mount your, horses!'
`To horse! to horse!' cried Jasper.
`Into your saddle Oadley, (to me) and stand by your
brother.---Order out my sorrel---put the holsters on---
see that the pistols are in order. I can still aim a
ball!away with these infernal trappings ' As
he said this, he tore asunder the sling; but as he did so,
and attempted to straighten his arm, streaks of red
shot up to his temples---and the sweat started out upon
his lipshe could not abide it---he staggered to the
sofa.
In a few minutes after, a fine looking young fellow
rode up, threw himself from his horse, and stood,
abruptly
before Clinton, without asking any questions.
`How dare you!' said Clinton, scarcely able to
utter
an audible sound, while Lucia stood aside, looking
at him, with her hands locked upon her bosom
`there are women here.'
The young fellow blushedbowedtook off his
high cap, with a gay, rioting air,and presented a
letter.
`Read it, Clayton,' said the Colonel.He read
as follows. `Muster your men, if you can sit in the
saddle. The General was alarmed about you. I was
very sadand, to my notion, you will be dealt plainly
with. The New Englanders, will not be appeased else
they and the Pennsylvanians are ready to go to
loggerheads
.
I saw himthe Generalwhen your
note camehis hand shook on opening itbut he
smiled, or rather looked a little less serious than usual;
when he had done, and handed it to Mercerwho
answered
,
as he returned it. `You'll never make
anything
of him, I am afraid.'
`I am afraid not,' said his excellency, `so
Grafton
',
`Hush! hush!' said Clintonread no names, if you
pleasewhat else does it say.'
`Something is in agitation, I am suremake haste
inall may, go well yet. Yours forever and
ever.'
`Well Sir,' said Clinton,`where is the main body
now?'
`At Newark.'
`How many are you?'
`Three thousand five hundred, at the last muster
on the 22nd.'
`What the devil do you mean, Clayton?How many
in
all?
'
`
All
upon my honour.I made the return, with my
own handthe whole American army under
Washington
now, are only three thousand five hundred men.'
`Gracious God!'exclaimed Clinton, dropping his
arms, lifelessly, over the sofa`then shall we
have
to go, as he told me himself, back of the Alleghanies.
Wellgo
where
he will
when
he will, I will go with
him.Did you see any of the enemy, in the wood?'
`Nothe farmers are mustering though, all about
us.'
`I thought,were there no red coats on the left,
upon the hill, yonder?'
`I saw none,' was the reply.
`Any men with you?'
`We are about twenty or sothey halt in the wood
there, we are part of a covering partyand have taken
some prisoners.'
`Mount every man of you, this momentput
yourself
under the command of that young fellow, that you
see there (pointing to Archibald, who was leaning
forward
,
and adjusting the curb of his mare)`there
are
red coats in the wayfollow close upon thembut
hazard nothing:on your lives, do not bring them to
battle, unless you are two to one.To horse, Clayton!
to horse Jasper!and see if we cannot take in some
prisoners to our commanderkeep out upon their
flankwatch themand cut off any stragglers.To
horse!'
`I wish to heaven, Colonel, that you could go with
us,' said Clayton, hesitating`I.
Clinton shook his head`no, no, it is impossible
I tell you!don't drive me madbegone to your duty,
Sir.'
In ten minutes more, we were all upon the way
nearly one hundred and fifty strong, our whole family,
Arthur and all; for I caught a glimpse of him, just
before we came in sight of the enemyour horses full
of blood, snorting and neighingand the very earth,
it did appear to me, shaking under them. Even
Arnauld
,
and my old father, breathing hard, like old
war horses straining upon the bridle, rode side by side
with meshaming the youthful, brief ardour of all
the young men, with their awful solemnity of forehead
and eyes.
I rode near Clayton, and I observed that he kept his
eye, with an uneasy, doubtful expression upon my
brother; and at last, as if impatient to put his heart at
rest, spurred up abreast of Jasper, and asked him
some questions, to which Jasper returned a reply, with
a loud oathand then there was a contemptuous
movement
of Clayton's lip, that made my blood boil, as he
renewed his observation of Archibald.
`You shall see! if we come off well, there. You
shall see, Clayton,' said Jasper, training his heels, and
heaving up his chest, with a look of the greatest
exultation`wait a little, my boy, and you shall see
what stuff he's made off.'
Clayton returned to the ranks, with an angry,
dissatisfied
look thatthere was a wrathful movement of
my heart, for a moment; but I kept it down, and we
rode on peaceably enough, for a whole hour. But our
course was soon interrupteda man on horseback,
dashed athwart our way, about two hundred rods
ahead, in the uniform that my father knewfor he
was after him, like a bloodhound, without waiting for
the word, over hedge and ditch. Jasper followed
ArthurClaytonand my brother was preparing,
when he saw some appearance on the edge of the wood,
about half a mile off, that arrested his eye; and the
next moment, a boy came up to us, all in a foam, with
a note, which forbad him to advance a stepsaying,
that the enemy were out on the right and the left; his
camp broken up; and the country overrun with his
light horse and dragoons.
`
Trumpet!
' cried my brother.
`The trumpet sounded. A martial quick
reverbration
followed, too far off, and too distinctly for an
echo. Our stragglers wheeled, with their prisoner,
whom my father, it appeared, had brought to the
ground, horse and all, with one of his outlandish cuts.
And the next moment, a body of horse, in beautiful
style, came out from the wood at full gallop, as if
reconnoitring us; wheeled, in a circuit of nearly
half a mile, and then trotted, and then haltedthough
much less numerous than ourselvesas if in defiance
nay, some of the rascals, after waiting awhile, had
the impudence to dismount in our faces, as if to turn
their horses loose.
`What say you, brother?' said I, `shall we down
upon them?'
`Not yet,' he replied, keeping his eye upon them,
`we are not
double
their numbermy orders are
strictwe are now in actual serviceI have too
much at stakethere is some stratagem there`
fellow
!
(to the prisoner) how many are there?'
He smiled sullenly, and threw a ferocious glance at
my father, whoheaven bless the old man---sat upon
his horse, precisely as he used to, of a Sunday, when
going to church; with the same substantial, deep
gravitya little more sorrow and sternness, perhaps;
but with no appearance of emotion.
Archihald soon learnt the truth. Cornwallis, was
out---Washington had struck his tents, and was
retreating
before him, bag and baggage. Every moment
was invaluable. `Ha!---I thought so!' said my
brother
,
`
Form!---form!
Father!---brother! cousin
Arthur!---Mr. Arnauld!---hither!---hither!---
we
must
ride abreast!'
The enemy appeared to be preparing for a charge,
and one after another, came galloping from the wood,
until their number appeared rather larger than our
own. I looked at Jasper, and Clayton, and the
regular
troopers---their lips were all compressed---their
eyes rivetted upon the enemy---their horses reined up
---and swords resting, with the hilt, just in the hollow
of their thighs. I looked at our men---there was no
difference---there seemed to be the same promptitude,
coolness, and precision in one as the other. Even
our old father brought his heavy broadsword to a
carry
, as if he had done nothing else all his life, than
carry sword.
`Prepare to guard!' said my brother.
The swords flashed, all at once; and every man sat,
at the same moment, with his bridle hand, and sword
hand, in front of his breast. It made my very heart
leap to see it.
`Look to your pistols,' said my brother, `but never
use them. Take their fire; but don't return it till
your swords fail you.'
The horses became strangely impatient---snorting,
stamping, and straining upon the bits---the enemy,
too, as if disconcerted by our coolness, or suspecting
ambush, or waiting a reinforcement, held back. Their
appearance was beautiful---the ground was all covered
with snow, far and near---their dazzling uniform, and
large showy horses, full of mettle, and impatient to
snuff the wind and smoke of battle:---altogether, it
was a sight well fitted to thrill the blood, and give
that deep, delirious feeling of terrour and passion to the
the young heart, which rouses it, like fire thrown into
the den of a wild animal.
One of the enemy, stationed upon a hill in their
rear, now gave some signal, that changed their course,
for they reined short about; and trotted slowly along
the side of the hill, while he kept upon its verge, as if
watching the movement of some other body, below, in
the opposite plain.
`This will never do,' said Archibald; `they may be
leading us into ambush---we must take higher ground,
and always be prepared to come to battle, or not, as
we please. Carry swords!---right wheel!---trot!'
`Right wheel!---trot!---' echoed behind us---rank
after rank---as they wheeled, from the line, where we
stood, six deep---and trotted gallantly round, to a more
commanding elevation.
`What think you, now?' said Jasper, falling a
little out of place, to exchange a word with Clayton.
`
Think
!damn itI think that you have been
humming
me
he
a raw recruit!noI knew better, the
first time that I saw him in the saddle. He has seen
service!'
`So they say,' was the reply; and Jasper spurred
to his place again.
I could not but look behind for a momentwhere I
saw Jasper's red face shining, with the honest
exultation
of his hearthis little eyes twinkling, as if
Archibald
had been his own son: and there was Clayton,
nowI began to like himkeeping his horse's head in
line; and whenever he could get an opportunity,
trying
to adjust himself to the saddle, and sit like
Archibald
.
For myself, I can hardly tell what my feelings were.
First, there was a rush of fierce, terrible delightand
then, a brief alarum in my heart; followed by a sort
of religious fervour, exceeding wrath and indignation,
tranquilized and subdued, as if God and his angels
were fighting with us. Nay, at the very onset; when
the word had been given to
charge!
and all the hills
round, rung with the melody of trumpetsthe neighing
of horses, and the shouting of their riderswhen we
had joined battle, and I heard nothing but the shriek
of womensaw nothing but the pale, wasted face of
my poor motherand the dead body of Mary, under
the hoof of trampling horsesthere was no feeling of
terrour, in all thisnone!but there was a sublimity,
that distended my whole heart, as with fire, and flood,
and tempestand when, in the thick of the battle, our
ranks were broken, and each was wrestling, man to
man, with his adversary, on foot, or on horseback
the face of my father and brother, and that of the death
struck Arthur, went by me, in one rank, as I thought
and all fled before them! After all this, I know not
what happened, until my horse stumbled among the
dead bodies, and threw me into a mass of human blood
and trodden snow. God! how the field looked. But
stay!I am anticipating. Is it not wonderful. I had
stood, and gazed upon my brother, not a minute before,
after the blood of one man was upon himand listened
to his composed voice, and fancied that there was
something
preternatural in itbut now, I was dripping with
it, from head to footand I felt no other emotion than a
little loathing and sickness. Is it not wonderful! that
timid and peaceful men, who had never seen the red
blood run trickling from the bright blade of a butcher
knife, without a quick trepidation of the heart
youthful
,
too, like Archibald, and Arthur, and myself, in the
very spring tide of our gentleness and compassion
or grown old, like my father and Arnauld, in the
beautiful hushed tranquillity of a farmer's home, that
had never seen the gleam of a broad-sword, nor heard
the bugle callnor the neigh of cavalry, nor the loud,
quaking reverberation of heaven and earth, beneath the
tread of horses and horsemen, rushing to battlethat
such men should sit as we sat, breathing hard, and
straining, like blood hounds in the slipall our veins
swelling with impatience for the outcry of death!.
O, is it not past all belief that such changes should be
wrought with such instantaneous suddenness! Yet so it
wasthe grey hair of my mother whistled about my
face, and I felt as if the shadow of Mary rode at my
side, with one incessant moaning cry of violation.
What Arthur felt, I know notbut there was the settled
aspect of death upon
his
forehead, wherever I met him;
and wherever he appeared, the very horses made way
for himfor his riding was that of one commissioned
of Godno sound, no cry, escaped himBut
drugged to the very lips, saturated to the very skin
with blood---he still smote his way onward, and
wrestled and dealt giving no quarter, showing no
mercy
.
And my father too---I saw him only for a
moment---after
the enemy broke through our little
squadron---riding
,
with all his might, breast to breast with
Archibald, andO, there are passions and
passionate
thoughts in the human heart---veins and vessels,
innumerable and delicate---unseen and
hidden---unknown
and unsuspected---till a preparation of blood
and fire hath been poured into it. Then, like the
morbid
anatomy of deaththe secret and mysterious
winding
of every channel---with all its subtle and exquisite
ramifications---becomes slowly articulate and vivid,
with the rush of the infusion.
But let me have done with this, my children, and
return
to the preparation in hand. We were coming
along, in a slow trot, as I have told you, upon the brow
of a hill---apprehending no danger, and sure of our
power to retreat at pleasure---when, all at once, the
man on the hill gave a signal, which we had reason to
VOL. I. 9
believe, conveyed some unexpected intelligence to the
enemy, for he immediately set up a shout, wheeled at
full gallop, and approached us, in a most gallant style.
`Masterly! by God!'cried Jasper`rein up! rein
up!'
`Gallop!' said my brother`Gallop!'He was
instantly
obeyed and we came round where we could only
be assailed in fronta high bank sheltering us in the
reara broad ditch, and several heavy broken stone
walls covering our right, and the left entirely open to
us, if we chose to escape.The enemy grew stronger
and stronger, as he approachedI saw Jasper throw a
troubled look at Archibaldand the next moment,
Arnauld
spurred up to him at a headlong speed, pointing
to another party, that were just dashing athwart the
creek one after the otherabout a mile off.
`It is too late now,' said my brother`we have
nothing left but to do our duty,'then, in a loud voice,
he proclaimed his intention`to conquer or die.'
The words were scarcely out of his mouth before the
front rank of the enemy fired their pistols almost in our
faces, wheeled, and were followed by a second, and a
third without drawing a blade.
Several of our men fell; two or three of the horses
broke out of line, or ran back upon their fellows
and Archibald, who had never been apprised of this
mode of attack, appeared confounded for a moment
when, just at that time, a covered wall, in our front,
which we had not seen till then, and against which the
snow had drifted, brought up the front rank of the
enemy
,
as they were preparing to wheel upon us and to
follow
up the charge with their swordsand a universal
confusion and embarrassment prevailed.
`Now is the time!' cried Archibald`now is the
time!down upon them my brave fellows!remember
Mary Austin!
'
At the sound of that cry, out leaped a horseman,
from the middle of the front rank, and the whole troop
rushed headlong upon the enemy, shouting `
Mary
Austin
!Mary
Austin
!Down with the Hessians!'
We were instantly among themdisordered, it is
true, and utterly broken up, by our own impetuosity,
and the nature of the ground; but the enemy were more
sotheir horses were weakerand less accustomed to
the snow; they stumbled at every stepfell, and rolled
over us, and about us in every direction. Not a shot
was fired nowevery man joined battle, sword in hand,
with whoever was nearest to him; and such was our
tremendous desperation that twice, before I could
suspend
the blow, or see my man, I exchanged a cut with
one of our own troop. In the middle of thisthe
whole field, as far as I could see covered with horse
and horsemenbattling in their saddleson footor
rolling over on the ground, like so many gladiators
I saw one rank, the only unbroken one, rush by us
and I had just time to see all the faces in it that were
dearest to mewhen Archibald's voice was heard again
shouting`form! form!trumpet!'
`They are rallying!' cried Jasper`in upon them
now!the day is our own!hourra, my boys?hourra
my fine fellows!'And then, by heaven, there was a
sound afar off, martial and wildit was the sweetest
melody that I ever heard in my lifeit seemed as if a
rank of bugles had been blown all at once, above our
heads. There was a general pause of astonishment and
deliriumbut the pause was only for a breath; a party
of the enemy appeared rapidly forming anew, and all
at once, there came, thundering round the hill, another
body`Virginia forever! Virginia!hourra for
Virginia!' cried somebody at the left.
`By heaven and earth!' cried Clayton, and another
named Crawford, both of whom were wounded and one
unhorsed`now, my boys you shall see some fun!'
I reined upand twenty others did the same, while the
enemy endeavoured to rally in two or three placesbut
the Virginians gave them no time, for they actually
rode down the first party, without exchanging a shot,
and then divided and scoured the field. It was then that
my heart failed memy head swam. I could no longer
distinguish friend from foemy horse tumbled, and
when I came to my recollection, I was smeared all over
with the blood and brains of a poor fellow, upon whom
I had fallen. I arose and attempted to standthere
were at least thirty or forty human beings about me,
dead and dyingthe snow all stained and trodden---
here a wounded horse snorting and pawingand
sweeping
his blood red mane over the snow, and shuddering
so, as to throw the blood from it like spattering rain, all
about him,there a rider trying, again and again, to
disentangle himself from a struggling animalA
loud groana suffocated neigha deep harrowing
execration
a
word or two of prayer---and now and then
a shriek that went through and through me, I could
hear.----I arose upon my feetastonished to find
life enough left for itI was frightened too, to find it
so latethe stars were already beginning to appear
merciful heaven!could it be that we had been so
utterly
defeated!I stood and listenedbut there was no
sound of pursuit. Then it was that I would have lain
down and diedstiffened and cold as I wasfor I
began to feel that I had been stunnedand that our
party must have been cut to pieces, or we should not
have been left to perish in the snow. I was not then
aware how late it was in the afternoon when, we met
but my disordered memory made me feel as if I had
been left a whole day to die. My blood grew
warmer
and
I saw another man, and another moving, as if
they would soon be able to arise. One of them
succeeded
I
know not what he feltbut all my hostility was
deadI could as readily have struck a knife into the
heart of my own brother, in the presence of God
himself
as
to strike hands in wrath, under a sky so cold
and bluein the awful stillness of eveningafter such
a day of peril and wrath. We advancedhe
hesitated
it
was one of the enemy!poor fellowhe was
as little disposed as I, for another mortal encounter
for though, while he put one hand to his forehead, and
staggered, like one giddy and blind with painthe other
fall to his left hip, by a sort of mechanical motionyet
it was almost as instantly withdrawn, and extended.
After a pause, I gave him mine. God bless the poor
fellow! We were so weak, both of us, that we leaned,
for a moment, upon each other's bosomsand then,
he sank upon the snow, reaching his hand to me again
and uttered, in a broken, inarticulate voice, `
um
Gottes Willen!
' I had taken him by the arm, with a
feeling of brotherhood; for that never deserted me
yet, blessed be Godbut a groan, that I knew, thrilled
my blood, and wrought, like returning animation, to
a frozen manten thousand inconceivable pains.
I dropped the poor fellow's handit fell like that of a
corpse---and followed, as well as I could, in the
sudden
darkness and terrour of my mind, the melancholy
sound that I had heard.
It was my father's voiceit
was!
he was just able
to show that he knew meto put out his hands to me,
as if with a blessing, when the bugle rang again, and
down came a body of horsementwo hundred, at least
friends or foes, I cared notI never left my father
nor lifted my eyesnor dislodged his venerable head
from my arms, till I heard the voice of Archibald, in a
tone of distraction, crying to `dismount!dismount!
and collect the dead.'
`O, my father!my father!my brother!' he cried
running hither and thither, about the field`O!'
He heard my voiceit was very feeble, but he heard
itand we were instantly weeping in each other's
arms.
`Unhurt? my dear,
dear
brother?' said I.
`O, I know not,' he replied`nor careJasper!
Jasper!here!'
We soon found, to our unspeakable joy, that our
father was not mortally wounded, as we had reason to
believe, but was rather faint from the loss of blood;
and, perhaps, a dislocated shoulderand we were
soon on our way. I was unable to ride. We soon
understood the cause of the delay. Our party had
been victorious, and while our division pursued the
enemy, taking a number of prisoners, and marking
their route, by dead bodiesanother had ridden about
VOL. I. 9*
the neighbourhood, for carts and carriages to convey
the wounded. I was put into one tumbrelwith my
father; on each side of us, rode a horsemanone
of whom I knew, but the other was a stranger. `
Archibald
!'
said I; to the first, `where is Arthur?'
`Arthur?'
`There!' was the reply; pointing to the horseman
on our right.
`Not in the cloak?'
`Yesthat cloak he took, with his own hands, from
an officer, and hurled him, headlong to the earth, at
the same moment.'
The horseman fell back, as if just recollecting where
he was---threw off his cloakrode past us, in silence,
and flung it into the carriage.
`Poor Arthur!' said he, `his heart is untouched yet.
How has he escaped?'
`Wrap it round his body,' said Archibald, coming
up, as I began to envelope my father with it. `He
escaped miraculously; but his roan was killed, and
himself a prisoner, once.'
`And you'
`I know notthe pistol bullets troubled the mare for
awhileI felt sorry for herthe smell of gunpowder,
is
rather unpleasant, when burnt near enough to singe
her eyelidspoor Hetty!woawoa.'
I turned about, willing to make him feel that such
levity was horrible, at such a time, in one so young
but there was such a mortal lividness in his face, that,
struck with terrour at the thought of his being
deranged
,
I had well nigh shrieked aloud; but he rode on
the cold moonshine coming down upon our cavalcade,
with every variety of light and shadow, as we wound
our way over the dazzling snowthe steel scabbards of
the horsemen, ringing and glittering at every step
the solemn trampling of the horsestheir blowing
the crushing snowthe heavy lumbering of the loaded
wagons, loaded with the dead and dying, friend and
foethe hourthe awful stillness aboutand, in truth,
I can well say, that I have never felt, from that
moment
to this, such an overpowering sense of mortality.
The household were already apprised of our
approach
;
yet, who can describe the meeting. Daughters
and fathershusbands and wives!
Arnauld was wounded too, and very seriouslyfor
he had fought, with a desperation that appalled the
stoutest of the young menperhaps, from the terrour
of falling alive into the hands of them, to whose prince
he had probably sworn allegiance, as he had taken his
protection. His daughters ran to himbut their
grief, bitter and cruel as it was, had nothing of the
unutterable sorrow of the wife. Lucia fell upon her
knees, held his pale hand to her lipswiped away the
frozen blood from his temples, (for he had fallen near
my father, and lain there, motionless and stiff, till the
dead carts came by,) with her own hair, and wept upon
his forehead and eyes. Clara sat down by him, and
pressed her delicate hands, with all her might, upon
her heartholding her breath, as if the first sound
would be a shriek. The motherthe wifethe
beautiful
and passionateO, who shall tell the sorrow of
her spirit? She tore open the bosom of her lord,
called distractedly upon the surgeon!Clinton!
Oadley
!---and
her children! Then, while the tears gushed
out of her beautiful eyes, till they blinded and choaked
her, she would yield to the gentle violence of Clinton,
who sat by her, and held her hands in his, until Lucia,
herself, leant upon his bosom, and
not
as upon the
bosom of a brother. Archibald's tread sounded
behind
mehe had already been with our blessed
mother
and
II had not. I rushed by him, but the hue
of his face, frightened mehe stood, with his eyes upon
Lucia, unable to speak, or move. I ran in to my
mother
I
found her calm, patient, awfully collected,
sitting by the bed, upon which my father lay; and
stayed no longer, than to hear our surgeon pronounce
him in no dangerand to see herwho had been so
collected and immovable, till thenat the sound of
that judgment, throw herself upon his neck, stranger
as he was, and sob there aloud, as if he had been her
own sonnay, her only sonand then, sink down
upon her knees, with an expression of the deepest
thankfulness, and bury her agitated, altered face, in
her hands, tillI was fain to fall upon my knees
beside her, and kiss her wasted foreheadand then
leave herforit may as well be told, the natural
yearning of my heart, in a measure appeased by this
duty to my mother, I had othersanotherthe whole
force of which, I knew not till that moment. Poor
Clarapoor, dear Clarathou! the haughtiest of
womenthou, whom I had sworn, in my own heart,
five years before, when I was an awkward clown,
to humble to the dustO, now I saw thy proud
spirit, brought down with consternation and sorrow
tenderness andand
love?
yes, it was loveit
could be no longer concealed. She hid her face in
my bosom, and I felt her warm tears, trickling into
my very hearther trembling hands giving way, at
last, to the convulsive expression of long smothered
feelingher heart beating vehemently against mine,
and her warm cheek, unconsciously resting against
mine---the same blood circulating, I almost believed,
through both of our frames, at the same moment. I
wept too---I will not deny it---wept the more, for
having
,
like herself, so studiously concealed my passion,
for whole years---and yet, sorrowing as I did, that
one I loved, should sorrow as she did---rejoicing,
nevertheless, to see one, prouder than Lucifer---colder,
it was thought, than the unsunned snow---reposing,
with the helpless and enchanting confidence, of tried
love, upon my bosom---
mine!
---where I had never
hoped to feel the forehead of any woman, reposing;
and last of all, a woman, whose very hand I had not
dared to touch; whose very name, I never could bring
myself to pronounce, but with an affection of dislike
---or at least, of qualified friendship.
`But where is Archibald?' said Clinton, putting
his lips to the forehead of Lucia---by heaven, it is
true!---and I told Archibald of it, and that the colour
did not even rush to it, as if to reprove the unlicensed
touch. But he only shook his head, patiently, and
smiled---poor fellow---so that it brought the tears into
my eyes.
`He was here, a few moments since,' said the
surgeon, and the next moment, as if the sound of his
name brought him into sight, he stepped forward---
advanced, as if to offer some assistance; dropped his
eyes, as if unwilling to meet the eyes of Lucia; who,
just becoming sensible of her situation---so young---
so beautiful---her black hair all dishevelled---and
dashed eyes, swimming in light and tearfulness---and
cheeks burning with shame; was endeavouring to
draw her shawl over her partially exposed bosom,
with an agitated hand---a
`Archibald!' said she faintly, `
you
are not
wounded
,
I hope?' without daring to look up. Her hands
were just at that moment, employed in parting her
hair upon her forehead, to keep it out of her eyes.
`Not
mortally
, Lucia,' said Archibald, with a tone
that went to my heart, (her hands fell into her lap,
motionless as death), `but
deeply, irretrievably
.'
I know not if Archibald meant it---or observed
what I did; but Lucia's head dropped, and I saw the
tears fall, drop after drop, upon the dark dress of her
mother, upon whose bosom she leant.
He went to her; took her hand---it lay passively, in
his---and fell not, even when he opened his own, as if
to relinquish it. `Lucia, hea---heaven bless you---
farewell!
' said he; carried it to his lips, and left the
room.
CHAPTER VII.
And there were sudden partings, such as press
The life from out young hearts.
Not
one of the household slept that night; but we had
the comfort to know, long before morning, that Mr.
Arnauld, whose leg had been bruised, arm dislocated,
and head cut in two or three places, had little to
apprehend
;
while our sturdy old father, we were assured,
would be well enough to mount his horse, in a few
days, at furthest, having escaped with a few flesh
wounds, and the loss of about half his blood. I
wanted to see Arthur, for I had not seen him, to speak
with him, since he was the happiest fellow of all the
world; his loud, clear voice, resounding in the cold
air, like a trumpet, as he parted from us the night
ofofthe night of blood and ruin. I found that
he occupied a room, in one of the wings, which, after
some rambling, I found. There was somebody
stirring
within---some one breathing, as if his very heart
would break. I knocked.
No answer was returned; but the tread of naked
feet, approached the door.
It opened, and a woman stood before me. She put
out her hands, kindly, and then started back, and
covered her face with themuttering a cry of horrour.
`Merciful heaven!' I cried. `Lucia,
dear
Lucia, do
not be alarmed---it is I. Where is Mr. Rodman's
chamber? Forgive me, my dear friend, and compose
yourself. You have not been in bed?' I turned to
go; but she came to me, and put one hand to her
forehead, and stood in the moonlight, like some
disembodied
creature, scared in its quiet elementlooking at
me, as if to ascertain if I had spoken the truth
`And this was really your object
really?
' putting her
hand affectionately, upon my arm.
`Surely, dear Lucia, you cannot doubt it.'
`O, no,' she added, `dropping her hand upon my
shoulderI cannot.' There was a distant step in the
same galleryshe shook from head to footand, I
terrified to death at the thought of being seen there,
stepped back, gently, and on tiptoe to my roombut
startled, all the way, and particularly at one corner,
by a sound, like the suppressed breathing of some one
concealed. For a moment I stopped, with the
resolation
to see if it were a creature of flesh and blood, or
only some delusion of my troubled brain, but
recollecting
immediately that, if it should be the former, my
duty to Lucia rendered it a sacred matter that I should
pass away, undetected, even in my innocencefor the
most innocent action is capable of evil interpretation
I went on at the end of the gallery. I paused againfor
a distant door opened and shut with a slow cautious
motionand a figure that, at first, from its muffled
appearance
,
I took for my own shadow, (and only
discovered
it not to be soby standing still for a
moment
)passed
athwart the white wall.
Ashamed of my own feelingsfor they were all in an
uproar for a momentwithI dare not utter the
thoughtthe disordered dreaming of my brainthe
late terrible eventsthe death like stillness of the
dwelling where I wasthe holy and awful moonlight
above methe figure of the personI could not be
mistaken,but whither had it gone?
As I stood, another door openedand Arthur
Rodman
walked past me. I spoke to himand he turned,
with a slow, reluctant motion towards meand then
gave me his hand in silence. We went down into the
court, and walked together, in a dead silence, for half
an hour at least---his tread was measured, like that of
men in a funeral march, and his breath labouring, deep,
and drawn at long intervals. Occasionally, when we
turned so that he was opposite the moonand my
countenance
shadowed and hidden, I would lift my eyes to
his. O, my children! far be from you and your's that
sorrow and desolation, for which there is no comfort
that bereavement, that!O righteous heaven, which
leaves the smitten heart sore, to the centre, and
bleeding
,
with no sweet memory to balm it!no tears to fall
upon it!nothing but the substantial pressure of
calamity
.
Poor Arthurbut a few days, and his step
was a boundhis voice the filled hornhis heart the
abiding place of gentle and high thoughtfestivity
and love. A few days, and God had written, in
lividness
and shadow, the death of his loved onethe
destruction
of all his hope, upon his broad forehead. His
hair blew about it, nowas if that too, had been
touched with deathand his sunken eyes had a
solemnity and blackness in them, that alarmed, and
awed metheir motion was not unsettledbut there
was a strong, rigid lustre in them, as if the fountain
that fed them was nearly dry.Poor Arthur!' said
I, pressing his hand`farewell.'
His hand made no reply.
`O my brother!' I cried, looking him in the face
`My cousindear Arthuryou terrify mespeak to
me---no; do not speak to methe sound of your voice is
terriblebut show me, by some sign, that you know
me.He stoppedhis lips trembledhe locked my hand
in both of his, and turned to gobut, overpowered by
the deluge within himwhich had gathered, till it
would have wayhe fell upon my neckand I believe
weptfor my dress was wet about the breast afterward,
but whether with
his
tears or Lucia's, I know notbut
I felt his heart heave like a surge under mine.
Once more he shook my handlong, and with all his
strength, lifted his head in silence, and returned to his
room, while I pursued my way to my own.I found
Clinton there, in low conversation with Archibald, and
though, from some words that struck my ear, I thought
that they were talking confidentially, and therefore,
endeavoured
to apprise them of my approach, by walking
heavily; yet, so deeply were they engaged, that I was
already at my own bed side, before they observed me.
Clinton then gathered up his cloak about him. I
started at the appearance of his muffled shadowI
felt my blood boil, but I dared not utter a sound.
`Your brother has returned,' said Clinton, to him.
`I am glad of it,' was the reply, `come to the bed,
brother, I have something for your ear.'
I approached, and he sat up in the bedthe collar of
his shirt opened, and the fine fashion of his white
shoulder
and chest, all exposedwith a beauty and
delicacy
almost feminine, in their whiteness and smoothness.
`Sit down brother; don't interrupt me. You have
known something of my thought and doing, toward
Lucia Arnauld. I have had some pleasantsome
sorrowful dreaming(his voice trembled)and there
have been times, when I thought of doing some noble
and uncommon deed, for the love that I bore her.
God only knows, brother, how I have loved herso
secretly, that I have not dared to tell it to my own
heartso passionatelyso devoutly, that, with an
opportunity for years tototo take advantage of her
warm hearted, generous sensibilityI'
Clinton trembled, and turned away his face. `I
have never dared to touch her hand, unless she put it
into mine, until this night; and that was to bid her
farewell, forever.
Brother!
it
is
hard to give her up
to tell the tale of our own disappointmentto have
loved as I have, from my first breath, with an awful
feeling of tenderness and venerationit
is
hardbut
to give her up so suddenly, to one that has known her
so short a time
that
is bitterbitter!but, young
as I am, and beautiful as she isit must be done. We
are apart forever! Give me your hand, brother
your's Clinton. Another, a braver, and older mana
taller, and handsomer manloves hernot as I have
loved her
that
is impossible. Would I stand in the
way of her prosperity? NoI would rather, had I
ten thousand hearts, throw them down, for her to walk
over, to the arms of him that could make her happier.
VOL. I. 10
I am young, and sickly, and weakof an unsocial
makea blunt, cold mannerand a haughty, and
forbidding
countenance. I have never told my love
never talked about itI could notbut there is that
within me
that
which will not bow nor bend. God
hath put it there, and God only shall put it out. Woman
never shall. How long I may live, I know not, and I
care as littlebut while I do live, and when I die, it
shall be worthilywithout complaint, or repining.
He loves her, I know. Do not shake your headI
know
it. He has dealt fairlyoffered to renounce
herplayed the game of a soldier with me. What
should I do? Fight him! No, that would not put
my heart at rest, nor quiet her's: permit him to
renounce
hertake advantage of his noble nature? You
are troubled, Clintonagitated! Do not let me
distress
you. Now mark meand you, brother, bear
witness for me. I am not fond of quarrellingor
bloodam rather young, to be sure. But I
can
quarrel
,
Clintonand
can
fight, as I have lately learnt.
I am a man of few wordsyou are welcome to Lucia
take her, and be happy with her. Do that, and I
will love you as a brotherher, as a sisterbut
buttrifle with herbaffle her young heart---and,
boy as I am, Clinton, I will never sleep, till I have put
my sword through your heart. No remonstrance---I
have done with her now. Happen what will, our
hearts will never unite again. We are not fitted for
each other---my nature is too stubborn and haughty---
too selfish, it may be. A wife of mine, shall be
my
wife, and mine alone.There, brother---good
night!---Clinton (shaking his hand) good night.'
Clinton turned to depart, and had reached the
door, when my brother arrested him, by asking when
they should march.
`Tomorrow, if possible,' was the reply, in an
agitated
voice, `but next day, at furthest.'
`Why so,' said I.
`Because,' he replied, `Washington is hotly pressed.
Cornwallis, with the
elite
of the whole British army,
is at his heels---our soldiers are dropping off, by
companies
,
upon the march---the cursed effect of short
enlistment. By the time that the rascals know one
end of a musquet, from the other, they are cut adrift,
and are sure to run off with the publick arms.
`Tomorrow then, be it,' said my brother, `this is
no time for delay.'
`No!---for if Cornwallis follow him as closely
to the Delaware, as he has through New Ark, we shall
lose our baggage, if not our army, as sure as there is a
God in heaven.'
`Good night.'
`Good night! good night!' repeated Clinton,
formally
,
going back and shaking my brother's hand
again, for nearly a minute, before he departed.
I had half a mind to mention my suspicions---but
a little reflection convinced me of the impolicy of it.
What could I say?---that he was abused?---shame
on my heart, for conceiving such a thought!
Yet, I could not sleep---and, with the first dawn,
I was in my father's room. He was abundantly better
---and when he found that we were set upon moving
off, directly, he appeared doubly impatient to go with
us. But Mr. Arnauld was not so well---the
symptoms
began to assume, if not an alarming, at least, a
more serious aspect---and the bungling rascals from the
army, were so wretchedly supplied with the
instruments
of their profession, that it was little better than
certain death, to be pulled and hauled about by them,
or lacerated, and sawed into, and cut, as the case
might be. By reference to a report in congress, about
this time, you will find that the medical infirmary,
and surgical, and hospital staff, cannot be exaggerated.
In the whole army, there were not three complete sets
of surgical instruments. I have occasion to remember
it well. It had well nigh cost me my life, at a later
period, instead of the leg that I lost.
`What shall be done?' said I, `some of our men
ought to be left to protect the family. What say you,
Clinton?'
`Certainly,' he replied, `six or eight stout fellows---
and'
`What!' said Arnauld, raising his bandaged head,
and firing with the passion of his heart, `
what!
leave
six or eight of such fellows, to idleness, when every
bone and sinew in America, should be in action! No,
Clinton, no!---much as I love my wife and children---
dear as my household and home are to me, by heaven,
I had rather see them given to the flames, than'
`And to ruffians,' said Clinton.
`No, no, Clinton, a father's heart could not well
bear that; but, away with you, away!to horse! to
horse! Oadley. You will protect my family best, by
helping to drive back these hell hounds, that are
over-running
our blessed country. To horse! There are five
men of us here, two of whom, Oadley and myself, can
do garrison duty---or rather, hospital duty, (smiling)
yet---and I expect a reinforcement every moment.
Sampson, with his crooked boy, will be here this
morning
a
tough old blade; and a very devil, the young
oneand if Nell come with them, as I expect, we
shall have enough to keep us all in heart, and laugh,
whatever happen. So, to horse!---to horse! man and
boy! and leave us to take care of ourselves.'
`Right,' said Clinton, `he is right, Mr. Oadleyif
every man stays at home, to defend his own dwelling,
who shall defend his country? We must take
our
chance, (with peculiar significance, as if he understood
where my thoughts were, at the moment)
our
chance,
Oadley, with the rest. To camp, to camp!and we
shall sooner clear the land of these devils, than if we
huddle about our own hearths. They will always out
number us at home. Ha!the bugle call!'
He ran to the window. `Fine fellows!glorious
fellows!' he cried`the men are all in the saddle.
Farewell, Mr. Arnauldfarewell!keep a stout
heart.'
`Farewell, Colonelfarewell, Oadleythere, take
my handrememberremember!if any thing
happen
you
understand memy family have few friends
my daughters, (he was scarcely articulate),
none
.
They are proud girls, Clinton: high bloodgenerous
hearts, Oadley. I don't reproach you. You have
not done entirely rightbut you could not deceive
me; and there is a comfort here ininal Young
men, it is no pleasant matter, upon a bed like this;
the sweat and blood starting from every pore of your
skin, to have the thought ofofrifled innocence
beautybroken heartedspoiled lovelinessand
O, God! have mercy upon mebutno
matter, nowit is too lateif I die(more firmly)
if
I die, I say, and you are the menthatI believe,
my family will never miss memy daughters, I mean.
My wifeO, my dear wife'
He could say no moreall his firmness abandoned
him. The tears ran down his cheeks, drop after drop,
as if wrung from his very heartand when we
embraced
him again, the bed shook under him. The thought
of his wifethe beautiful and pure of heart
that
had
left him powerless, and we dared notno, we dared
not utter a sound, to disturb the sacred stillness that
followedand we left the room; but his sobs were
distinctly audible upon the landing, where I had stood
the night before. We were passing the very spot,
where I had heard the low suffered breathingit was
a recess, and still in shadow. I could not forbear
lifting my eyes to Clinton's forehead, as we passed it;
and it might be fancy, but it appeared to me, that there
was a faint paleness, like that of one taken suddenly
sick at the heart, upon his ample forehead, and that
his arm contracted a little, within mine, as he met my
look; yet he walked firmlysteadilyand there was
a haughty, self possession, not very becoming at
such a time of sorrow and tenderness, nor called for by
the occasionand rather, I hoped that I did not wrong
him, rather like that of preparation, where one dares
not abate one jot of his utmost stateliness, lest it may
invite a freedom of observation, that
might
disturb it.
We came to the landing. `I shall meet you, in the
yard,' said he, taking out his watch.
VOL. I. 10*
I bowed, and hurried to the apartment of my father.
Archibald, I found locked, in my mother's armsmy
father sitting by, with the same unaltered, unalterable
countenanceand shewretched woman---weeping
like some widowed onenay, like some dishonoured
widowI
They were the first tears that I had seen her shed,
openly; and when she came to me, I felt the inward
lamentation of a mother, the inaudible, deep feeling of
a woman, unable to utter a sound, against my bosom,
like the rush of waters. `My son,' said she, `O my
son!' pressing her cold lips to my forehead and eyes,
which were all wet with her tears, `do not thou
abandon
me.'
`Abandon thee, mother!no, though the heaven
should pass away. Come what will, I never will
abandon
thee!'
`God bless thee! my child.'
My father arose, and stood up; and laid one hand
upon the shoulder of my mother, and one upon mine
they were the hands of a giant, and a prophet. `O,
God! father of all mercies! have compassion upon
us! We are old and sorrowfuland about, it may
be, Oh, our father, to be childless. The parting that
we now take, may be for life. Do thou sustain us.
Pour into the mother's heart, a ten fold consolation
stiffen the sinews of the father, and the
husband
, and
make his children strong and terrible, that they may
avenge their mother, though we perish. Farewell!
my boys!farewell! The voice of your country is
wailing for you!the shriek of a dishonoured people
the cry of freedom!the broken heart of your
mother
,
about to give you upthat of your father, about to
follow you. O, my wifemy wife! (my mother had
fallen into his arms, speechless and death struck, as if
that
were all that was left to herthe presence of her
aged husband.) Boys! embrace your mother, once
moreyou will probably never see her again. Do it
with a stout heartbear up against it, like men. Do
not wake her---it may be better for her---much better---
if she never open her eyes again.'
We did as we were commanded---we knelt before her,
and carried her lifeless hand to our eyes, and lips, and
heart---unable to speak---unable to weep---took the
blessing of our father, and were hurrying through the
house, blinded and stunned by the rush of darkness and
emotion---our arteries all distended to aching, with a
strange, awful sorrow, like that of men going,
voluntarily
,
to martyrdom---and sacrifice.
There was a carriage in the yard, out of which
leaped in succession, a young boy, a savage looking
distracted creature, as I ever saw in my life, with a
spring like a panther; and stood, licking his hand and
lip, with a tongue like a calf; then a finished romp, for
she bounded, with her hair all flying in the wind, out
of the carriage, without waiting for assistance, and
ran, laughing and skipping, into the houseand then, a
rigid, cholerick looking, little old gentleman, in a claret
coloured coat, lame of one leggrowling at every step
he took, in a low voice. At any other time, I should
have smiled at the strangeness of the association, and
their wild unnatural aspectbut this was no time for
smiling. The men were all ready, and I turned to
look for Archibaldbut he was goneand I, willing
to find some companionship, followed in the direction
that I supposed he had taken. I entered the house with
a hurried stepand saw my father and Arthur parting
the young man still bearing the same implacable
steadiness
and solemnity of aspecthis dress and manner
utterly unlike what it had beenthoughtful, yet careless,
like that of a premature old man, suddenly put into
possession of some fearful secret, the secret of his own
hidden strength.Voices were near me, and I
stopped
,
as I was passing the window of the very room
where a few weeks before, Archibald and I had seen
the two sisters.Lucia was leaning upon the
shoulder of Clinton, pale, pale as deathbut with a
vehemence of passionate, bashful endearment that sent
my blood backwith a start to my heart. I thought
of Clara, and half distracted with the thought of never
seeing her moreby any possibilityI went through
room after roomheedless of every body, till at last,
I found her, with her mother. She arose, as I entered,
came to me, and put her two hands into mine:her
her mother looked at her with amazementher lips
movedand she would have expressed her
astonishment
,
even in her sorrowbut Clara turned to her, her
bright eyes shedding not only lightbut sound, it
appeared
to me like the indian gem, that give out beauty
and brightness and low musick forever.
`Mother!' said she, `the secret has been well kept,
thanks to your admonition. I have done rightly. When
you know all, you will approve of my conduct. At
present, I am above all disguiseMr. Oadley and I are
about to part, perhaps, foreverI cannot bear to
conceal it longer
I love him!
'
`Gracious heaven!' cried her mother, `are you
distracted
Clara!at such a time as this!a proud girl
toto' (she covered her face with her hands, and
burst into an hysterical sobbing).
`Leave me, Mr. Oadleyfarewell!heaven bless
you! You know something of my temper. What I do,
I do openly. You must not presume from what has
happened here. My mother may blame mebut my
own heart shall not. Alone, away from my mother, who
is weeping at my indelicacy, I should have parted with
you less tenderlynow farewell!'
I would have put my lips to her foreheadbut she
coloured`What!' she exclaimed, `have I to tell you
again, Oadley, that there is no mystery in my
nature
There is my motherwhile her face is covered,
there shall be nothing done that is capable of an evil
interpretation.'
Her mother arose, and her hands fell at her side
powerlessbut her beautiful eyes were full of
tenderness
and surprise.
`Clara,' said she`it is my own fault. But I
believed
this affair at an end. The secret
has
been well
kept. I love your noble natureI respect itthe thing
is sudden now, but he is an honest man.God
forever
bless you!'(putting our hands together, and
kissing
us as she did so).
I lifted my eyes to Clara's faceher red lips
trembled
,
but there was no reproofno affectationand
though I would have given the world to touch her sweet
mouthyet I dared not, and contented myself with
kissing her white forehead.
The next moment Archibald's tread was heardhe
looked in, and beckoned to me.
`Come in, come in, my dear Archibald!' said the
motherthrowing her arms about his neck.`O my
poor boymy heart would break, did I not knowbut
bear up, bear up, my brave fellowthere are few
women
worthy of such a man.'
Archibald gently released himself from her arms,
wiped off the tears from his templesand cheektears
which had fallen from
her
eyes, in the embrace.
`How pale you look! oh Archibald, Archibald, your
own mother cannot love you more than I do
farewell
!
farewell!I feel that I shall never see you
againremember however, happen what may, that I
am your friendthatwill you not see Clara?' (Clara
was standing at the window).
`Yes,' said Archibald, bowing his head`with all
my heartClara,' (she gave him both her handsthere
was a rush of blood to her templesand her voice,
always
mellow, smooth and rich, like her father'sfor a
moment, was touched with the unsteady and passionate
modulation of Lucia's)`
dear
ClaraI have said and
done many things, my dear friend, very many, to pain
and distress you. Believe me, dear Clara, they were
never unkindly
meant
, and I should have told you long
before, that I was sorry and ashamed of thembut you
know my temper (her eyes gushed out with beauty and
brightnessthe tears ran down her pale cheeks, as if
her heart were breaking, and yet she stood upright,
without concealment or shameher red lips pressed
together
,
with an expression of fervent and deep delight,
homage, pride and admiration, as he continued)
`I never loved talkingand had we never parted, in
this way, but lived all our lives hereafter, as we have
hitherto lived, I never should have
told
youin words
how inestimably dear you are to me. Actions,
actions
,
Clarathey would have shown it, in time; but
farewell. My actions henceforth are afar off, and not
among womenyou may never hear of themI
therefore
tell
you, with my lipswhat there is no other
mode left of telling you; that there is onenay
two
come forward, my brother, who know your great value,
your constant nature, and the deep sincerity of
Why, how is this?Do you understand each other?
you doheaven be thanked!Brother take
herbe to her, what she deserves, the best and truest
of men. Clarathat brotheryou do not know him
well yethe does not know himselfhe was not born for
a sluggardit is for you to say, whether he shall die
one. I have studied himI know him well---better, I
believe, than any other person. He will always rise
with the occasion. You may make of him, just what
you please.'
I was thunderstruckabashedand Clara stood, with
a proud smile upon her mouth. I had no leisure to
hear or see more, for the sweet voiced Lucia was heard
as in deep conversation, near the door.---Archibald
colouredand so did Clarabut a mortal paleness
followed
in
his
face.
`
Can
you not see her?
can
you notfor one
moment
,
Archibald?' said Clara, in a tone of
expostulation
.
`No' he replied, and then, as if a new thought had
struck him, he added`yesI
can
I
will
it were a
pity to part unkindly, for the last time.' `How, for
the last time?' said the mother. `You speak as if you
were resolved.'
`I
am
:you will hear no more of me, after I leave
the houseexcept in one event.'
`And what is that dear Archibald?' said Clara. He
shook his headbut would not explainbut I had
reason to believe that he alluded to a change of
name---perhaps
her marriageor death---for after he had left
the house, he announced his determination of entering
the service by an assumed name.
He continued(while the bugle rang in the court
yard, the horses neighed, and the voice of preparation
sounded through all the apartmentslike an army
broken up in the house of prayer---so awfully hushed
had it been, an hour before). `I am going to battle,
Clara---not for fame---not altogether for vengeance, or
hatred; nor for ambition, except it be the ambition of
my own heart, for the deeds that I do, shall die with
mewhatever they be: no---but I shall go into the
thickest
and hottest of it---I am sure, with a composure
very uncommon in one so young and inexperienced.---
I shall do my duty Lucia, wherever I may be put
weak and boyish as I ammy thought will be steady
my hand firm, my eye true, in the commotion of
battle
for
that Lucia
that
pressing her hands upon his
heart---will be nothing to the commotion here.'
`O, Archibald, I do pity---' said Clara.
`Not me, I hope'(interrupting her.)
`Nobut I pity
her
.'
`So do I,' said Archibald, `from my soul I pity
herthe dear enthusiast.'
`My heart misgives me, Archibaldthere have been
too much hurry, rashness, precipitation herea brave
man, an honourable one, I do believeyet it is not wise
or temperate.What think you?'
`ClaraI cannot say
that
here, which I would not
say to her face and his face.'---(A tear ran down under
his shut eyelids---and he turned away).
`Well Archibald---
you
, I know; my father knows
you---my mother--Lucia---and whatever you may
think
,
depend upon it, we shall always love and revere you.
In distress we shall turn to you---in sorrow and in trial
---shall we turn to you, in vain?---ask you in vain?'
`There was a convulsive heaving of his chest, as the
mother came to him, and stood, side by side with Clara,
watching the troubled beauty of his eyes, and the
frightful
lividness of his lips.`You are young,
Archibald
,
younger than your brother there; but when all
other men fail us----all----all!we shall turn to
you
, youthful as you are, sure of
your
power and
strength.'
Why was I not hurt at this?---was it that I felt the
truth of it?---or that the amazing honesty and openness
of Clara---and the certainty that I possessed her whole
heart, reconciled me to all other manifestations of love?
The mother bowed upon his neck---and he lifted his
deep blue eyes to heaven---locked their hands in his,
while, almost for the first time in all his life, the bright
tears trickled down from his open eyes, with an
expression
of heroick joy.
`Archibald,' said the mother, `I am afraid that you
are not blameless in this matter---but it is too late now
---she is a proud girl, a proud impatient spirit---watch
over her---be a brother too her---she may want a
brother---Look
to her.'
`Wretched, mistaken woman!' said Clara---`How
she has trifled with---'
`Hush! hush!' said Archibald with unalterable
solemnity
.
`I will never hear a movement of her heart
condemned, in her absence. I may have my thoughts
too-----thoughts that I may tell her----or keep here,
here
till it kill me---but I have that love for her and all
that she loves, that inward unresistingness to whatever
wears the blessed and pure countenance of love, that I
cannot bear to hear it spoken lightly of.'
`Well then farewell, farewell!' said the mother and
daughter, `you
must
see her.'
`
But keep your eye on Clinton
,' said Clara. `I
will
,
night and day;' he replied, seizing my arm and
hurrying
me along, till I found that we were now
approaching
the same sound, of voices in earnest broken
conversation
.
He tapped at a door, which was immediately opened
by Clinton, who had risen from the sofa where Lucia
sat, with a disordered, strange aspect; the apartment
was exactly under that in which we had been, a fact
which accounts for the sound of their voices appearing
so near to us, in every interval of conversation.
Clinton
appeared a good dealed disturbed---and poor Lucia
there passed over her white forehead, white as the driven
snow, a hurried emotion, but barely visible in the dim
light of the apartment, every window of which was yet
darkened---and objects could only be seen, after we were
within, for a minute or two, by a pale crimson
illumination
,
thrown by the blood red curtains, through which
the day poured in, with a beautiful way wardness---a sort
of voluptuous light, rather like that of a summer
sunset
,
than a bleak wintry morning.
`All ready?' said Clinton, hooking up his long sabre,
that rattled at every motion of his body.
`Yes, Sir,' said Archibald, `in ten minutesah! they
are impatient'---(the bugle sounded again) `we are to
be in the saddle. But before I go, I have taken my
brother here, to bear witness for me---your patience.'
He then went up to Lucia, who put her hand timidly,
but haughtily too, into his, and attempted to rise.
`No Lucia,' (standing before her, and holding it,) `do
not rise. I ask for no such evidence of respect. I know
that when I am gone, you will remember me in spite of
yourself---the time may come, when you will find--(come
hither Clinton---come nearer brother)---that you have
been rash---it
may
come, I say---not that it
will
. God
knows how fervently I pray for your happiness, and you
will know it too, Lucia, when you are older and wiser.
Notno, it is impossible that you should ever know the
full value of the heart thatnay Clinton, do not
interrupt
me, I deal plainly with her, I deal fairly. Surely,
it is no unreasonable indulgence, for one consummately
blessed, as you are, to permit onesoI will not say
so wretched or so humbledbut so disappointed
Clinton
,
by God!I will not be interrupted (striking the
hilt of his sword) and if you interfere again, man as you
aretall as you are, I will bring your forehead to the
dust.'
Clinton retreated a pace or two, tapped the hilt of
his sabre, with his fingersand smileddamn him, I
could hardly keep my own sword in its sheathbut
VOL. I. 11
Archibald heeded him notand continued, though Lucia
sat like one terrour struck.
`What I say now, is the last that I shall saywhat
I do, shall be done openly. I do not come to you, Lucia,
lamenting
that I have not been less cold, and cautious and
rationalfor I sought a woman for a
wife
and no wife
of mine shall ever be made speedily. I do not come to
prejudice you against Clinton secretlyfor I will do
nothing that either he or you may misinterpretor
think unkindly of me, for, when I am gone. My
honesty
to both of you, at this moment, will be the best
guarantee
that I shall never profit of any advantage that
may hereafter fall in my way, to poison either of your
hearts against the otherNo Lucia, no! But I came
to say, with all my heart and soul,
God
bless you both!
There Clinton, take her handand I
do
say, God bless
you both! If you ever want a brothera friendan
avenger Lucia, remember me. If you never doif you
are happyblessing and blessedforget meyou will
be none the happier for remembering me. You have
been imprudentvery imprudentthere is something in
Clinton that I cannot bring myself to likehe is too
easy
and confidenthas too much of that fascination
seductiveness
,
and self possession, with the young and
beautifultoo much of that profligate manner, which has
made your own father the destroyer offorgive me, Lucia
I have spoken plainlytoo plainly, if it were to be
repeated
but
I would say to you,
beware;
and I would
leave a lesson upon your heart that should sink into it,
deeper and deeper, to the last moment of its heaving.
Be prudentI anticipate no evilI predict noneI
pray for noneI appeal to my God, for the truth of what
I sayand however you may both doubt me now, you
shall see that I have spoken the truth, when all our
hearts are uncovered before the judgment seat
farewell!'
She arose, parted her black hair with both hands, and
stood looking at him, for a moment, as if struck with
sudden blindnessthencarried his hand passionately
to her lipsflung it away, and threw herself into the
arms of Clinton.
My brother could not stand that, with all his noble
preparation. He staggered like a drunken, man to the
doorrushed into the yardand, ere twenty minutes
had passed, Clinton and all of us were in full trot for
the camp of Washington.
CHAP. VIII.
The trumpet's dread hourra!
The
stirring minstrelsy of the camp, the martial
aspect of the mounted Virginians, whose brown, manly
faces, athletick frames, and weather beaten furniture,
showed plainly that they were men to be depended
upon, and had been, ere then, put to the proof: the
trampling of the horses; the pressure that I still felt
about my bosom, whereon Clara had leantthe
affectionate
,
strange Clara!All these things, and the
deep tumult within me, could not so utterly employ
my senses, but that I would sometimes start, like a
man waked from a dream, by the challenge of some
distant sentrythe sudden pistol shotthe wordthe
rattling of cimetars and chainsor the quick trumpet
blastand almost wonder, for a moment, to find
myself
on horsebackand then, my mother!father!
But while I was pursuing this train of reflection, in
a dead silence, like that of our last trooping, though
the sun shone hotly upon us now, I heard the noise of
horse's feet, pressing behind me; and the next
moment
,
Clinton's voiceaddressing some one, with a
sort of sarcastick mockery.
I turned, and saw him, just abreast of my brother,
who slackened his trot, and fell behind, with him. I
was alarmed for a moment, by hearing (for we had
actually forgotten his situation, till then) him say,
`
You forgot that I was disabled in the sword arm
.'
`In truth, I did,' said Archibald, in a louder voice,
rather of surprise---`but---you look angry, Clinton.
Are you disposed to quarrel?'
`Yes.'
`Wait till your arm is well.'
`Never mind the arm,' said Clinton, turning his
horse aside. `We can ride into you wood, there. I
am a tolerable shot, with my left hand.'
My brother followed him, and I, indignant at such
wickedness, struck the rowels into my beast, and was
at their side in a moment.
`What is the meaning of this?' said Clinton,
imperiously
.
`Back to your place, Sir.'
`This is my place,' I replied.
He reined short about---looked me in the face a
moment; and, then said, `Young man, I have half a
mind to order a brace of Virginians down upon you.
`What! do you menace me. Jasper! hollo!
Jasper
!'
(Flourishing his sword with his left hand)
The troop instantly halted, and down came a rank of
horsemen---full gallop.
`What do you mean to do?' said Archibald, eyeing
him haughtily.
`Order him to be bound, hand and foot, to one of
the trees, there,' was the reply, `or hewed, limb from
limb, where he sits.'
`There will be two swords to that bargain, Clinton,'
said Archibald, taking out his pistols, cooly. `
Remember
!
we are not in service, yet. Brother, look
to your pistols.'
`Would you shoot a wounded man?' said Clinton,
reining his horse. `Woa, Rocket, woa! Fire, if you
dare!'
`No---
you
are safe; but look ye, (taking a silver
whistle from his pocket), `my men know the sound of
this---we are too many for you. The first sword that
is drawn, Clinton, in wrath, will bring every man
down upon your Virginians. A pretty figure you would
cut, then, would'nt you? before the commander in
chief.'
Clinton bit his lip; waved his sword for them to go
back---they obeyed; and we followed slowly, after
them.
VOL. I. 11*
`Archibald,' said he, `this is a damned foolish
affair
.
Will you forgive me?---there is my hand.
These cursed women are eternally in my porridge.
I'
I reined up, expecting to hear the report of a
pistol
;
but Archibald went by me, showing no sign of
agitation, except a vigorous swelling of the nostrils,
and a little more steadiness of eye.
`I never was out on a foraging party, in my life---
curse it Rocket, stand still! can't you? Have
you
been among the idiots, too---hey!'
Rocket leaped out, almost from under him; and
Archibald I saw, with his hand---riding abreast of
Clinton, nearly at a gallopupon Rocket's mane.
Their ill blood was not quite down, I saw, and
therefore
,
I took the liberty to dash along side, too.
`Hold in a moment,' said Archibald, through his
shut teeth---`let the troop pass out of sight. Brother,
leave us awhile.'
`I will not,' said I.
Archibald looked astonished; but, seeing that I
was determined, he waited in a dead silence, till the
last man had turned the road in our front, throwing
his head round, as he did so.
Archibald then wheeled short, and came up to
Clinton
,
so that their horse's heads touched. `Well,
gun-power
,
what's the matter now?' said Clinton, with
a laugh, `you seem quite as ready for a shot, just at
this moment, as I was ten minutes ago.'
It was a minute before my brother could speak;
and twice, before he uttered a sound, his hand was upon
the holsterand twice, as if the wounded arm of
Clinton
had not been thought of, till he was ready to bring
him from his horse, was it withdrawn. `Clinton!'
said he, at last, `do not make me shoot youupon the
spothate youcurse you, and despise youdo not!'
`Why what the devil is all this about!a drivelling
girl! Dam'me! when you have been in the army as
long as I have, you will laugh at such Quixotism---
pho---pho. I love the wench---that's the truth
on't---but
,
damn it, you are not in earnest, Oadley! Mr.
Oadley! don't let him murder me!'
I had just time to lay my hand upon Archibald's
arm; when, struck himself at the peril of his own
temper, he turned pale as death---took out his
pistols
,
and discharged them at a tree. The bark flew
at each shot, and Clinton changed colour---and well
he might, for there was'nt such a marksman in the
state.
`Clinton,' said my brother, in a low voice, `I am
unwilling to believe that you are a fool, or a
scoundrel
.
I am trying hard, to persuade myself that
this is all a sham. Tell me, Clinton, if you would'nt
break my heart---tell me that you do love her.'
`
Love
her!' cried Clinton, touched by his manner,
till his feet shook in the stirrups`Yes! I
do
love her,
Archibald, more than all the women upon earthmore
than I ever thought that I was capable of loving any
woman on earthany thing.'
`Thank you,' said Archibald, `but'
`Any thing but
Rocket
, I mean,' said the incorrigible
Clinton.
I was obliged to speak. `This levity, Colonel,'
said I, `to say the least of it, considering my brother's
situation and mine, in regard to that family, is neither
thoughtful nor generous(his eye kindled)but I have
no disposition to quarrel with you. I am principled
against duelling, and prefer spilling my blood, and
seeing your's spilt, for our common country, and'
`Mighty fine, Mr. Oadley; but I shall find a
time'
`When you please!' said my brother, striking his
hand upon his thigh, and looking up in his face.
`Country or no country
when
you please!
where
you please!
how
you please. Across a tableleft
handed.'
Clinton stopped a moment for the troop, it appeared;
had halted again upon a rising ground, where they
could see our movement, and their's seemed to
indicate
that they had discovered some signs of hostility
in our countenance, or deportment; for they separated,
while we were looking upon them, man after man,
until they occupied two different and distinct pieces of
groundour men on one, and the Virginians on the
other, facingpartially inclined to the direction where
we wereas if, but a word, and they would have
galloped
,
sword in hand, upon usor upon each other.
`Not now,' said Clinton, `not nowblood will be
spilt, if we waste any more time. Give me your hand,
Archibaldyour's Oadley. Mark meI hold you
both answerable to meand myself, to bothbut let us
do our duty,
first
, to Washington.'
The proposal was accepted, and on we rode, in a
sullen, terrible silence; until at last, my horse reared
with the sound of Clinton's loud voice, and unaffected
laughter. `Come, come, Archibald,' said Clinton,
`no more of thiswe have carried the matter far
enough.'
Archibald contracted his forehead, and replied,
nearly in these very words; for they made a strange
impression on me, being delivered with a cool,
deliberate
expression of sagacity, as if his whole opinion of
Clinton had changedand could never be changed
back again:
`Colonel Clinton, I can bear to lose herbear to
see her wrested from me, after a three weeks
acquaintance
,
by a
stranger
; but I cannot bear to hear her
affectionate, noble nature, treated irreverently. No
man that ever knew her worthno man that was ever
worthy of her, could do it. Pshawdo not menace
me, Clinton. There is not that man alive; there
never
was
whom I would permit to speak lightly of
Lucia Arnauld.'
`You are certainly under some mysterious obligation
to her, Sir. I'
`Your sneering, Clinton, does'nt disturb meif it
be true, as you think it is, that I have loved her, even
unto death, and been put aside for you, that does not,
and shall not give you a title to make one profligate
allusion to her. I am no longer her lover. Ride
slower, if you wish to hear me throughit is the last
time that I shall name her name to you. I shall never
be her husband; but I am a brotherand
as
her brother,
Sir, whatever she may wish or say, I shall hold you
answerable for every word and deed, said or done, in
relation to her. You are amazed, to hear a boy talk
in this way. Sir, men have grown old in a single day
grey headed, in a single nightvery wise, in a
single hour. Attribute all that you see strange in me,
to what has passed within the last forty-eight hours.
In that time, I have lived an age of agony and horrour
passion and disappointmentsorrow and
humiliation
.
She
that I loved, has abandoned me
he
that
I would have died for, speaks of a woman, whose very
name, if he knew her, with all her frailty and
infirmity
,
he could not pronounce aloud, for his life
speaks of her, as if she were the bireling wanton of a
campsome polluted creaturethe abused strumpet
of a whole army. I do not ask if this were
pleasantry
for
if it were, it would make me tremble and
weep for her. Men that love truly, can no more
trifle in that way, with the sacred and beautiful, and
tender relationship of love, than they could stand and
assist in dishonouring their own mother. But it is not
true, Clinton. It was
not
pleasantryit was no
premeditated
contrivanceit was the expression of
habitual
profligacya constitutional and settled
irreverence
for womenan utter incapability of loving
except
as a sensualist, or voluptuary. So, no more of
thathere let us part. I shall take care, with my
own hands, to inform Lucia of this conversation
she may then judge for herself. You appear
disturbed
I
am glad of it. I would fain see you moved,
Clinton, to tears
that
might be some expiation for
the outrage that you have donenot to
me
not to
Luciabut to the sequestered, timid, and holy image
of Lucia that I bear in my heart. You were never
worthy of her, Clintonyou never will be. I have
been deceived in youI have assisted in deceiving her.
But, as I am a living man, it shall not be my fault if
she be not undeceived! You need'nt smile!
Archibald
Oadley
yet
has a place in her heart, to which
your image will never penetrate
never!
It is the
best, and the least visited spot thereand when she
dies, my name will be found there. I could have told
her thisbut I feared, mistaken boy that I was, to
thwart her pleasant dreaming with you. Farewell,
Clinton. With my consent, we shall never meet again.
I shall do my dutynay, I understand youbut I have
thought better of it. Whatever you may think of my
courage, I will never meet you, for any thing that has
yet taken place between us, until your arm is well
and our country has no further need of us. Not then,
Clintonnot even
then
whatever you may do to
provoke
meif you should be the husband of Lucia
thethefather of her childthat smile! O God,
Clinton! is not the very thought of being the father of
children, borne by Lucia, enough to purify your whole
nature?if notheaven have mercy upon you!'
His voice was inarticulate with emotionand
whatever
Clinton may have thought, I am sure that he felt awe
struck, in the presence of the intreped boy. Soon
after, we joined the troop; and, about an hour before
sunset, fell in with the advance of Washington's army.
Signals and salutes were exchanged; and a general
hourra was uttered, at the sight of Clinton, (yet the
name that they hailed him by, was not
Clinton
though
I shall continue to call him so.) and his noble horse
pranced, and stamped about, as if impatient to rush
anew into the battle.
`Halt!' cried Clinton, putting his horse at speed.
`To your place, Captain Oadleythat is the baggage,
coming ahead. We shall meet the commander in chief,
in half an hour.'
`Yes Sir,' said an officer, facing about, `he is with
the rear guard; and Cornwallis' advance is constantly
engaged with it(and off he set at full speed.) `We
must cross the Delaware, to night, orall is lost!'
`Masterly! by heaven,' said Clinton, his noble
face blazing outright, at the noise of the distant
musquetry and drumsJasper, he has kept him at bay
for ten days.'
Our horses grew impatient; but we were soon
relieved
,
for a young fellow rode up, his horse all covered
with foam and sweat, made his salute without stopping,
said a single word to Clinton, who gave the word to
gallop, and then set off, toward the sound.
We followed; but as our course was on the side of the
road, for the whole centre was taken up with wagons,
artillery, baggage, and the hospital stores(including
sick and wounded) we could not go beyond a slow trot.
`Hourra! for Washington!' cried Clayton, rising in
his stirrup, `that's his trumpet!I should know it among
a thousand.'
My blood thrilled at the soundmy brother fell back,
inconceivably agitated, to where I wasand Arthur, his
horse keeping time proudly, to the cheerful roundelay of
the trumpetcame upon my left, so that we occupied,
precisely, our old relation to each other.
A trampling of horse was now hearda solemn
stillness
followedand at the end of about five minutes,
Washington appeared, a little in advance of several
young officers, superbly mountedupon a magnificent
white charger, whose hoofs rang, when they struck the
frozen ground, like the blow of a battle axe. I heard
Archibald catch his breathand saw his head droop as
Washington approached, with Clinton at his side, in
earnest conversation. They rode directly up to my
brotherwho, whatever might be his thought, for I
looked for something terriblehad the presence of mind
to sit suddenly erect in his saddle, fasten his keen eye
upon the eye of Washingtonand make his salutein
a manner that made the whole line of horses start back.
It was beautifullygracefullydone; and Clinton,
I could perceive, was proud of it.
`Captain Oadley,' said Washington, to me, in a voice
that made my heart sink within meI attempted to
stammer out some replybut I could not.
`No, your Excellency,' said Clinton, spurring to his
side, `
that
is Captain Oadley, pointing to Archibald.
`
Indeed!
' was the only reply, after a pause in which
you might have counted twentywhile the commander
in chief, with that sublime stately serenity, which is to be
seen even now in the picture of Stuart, although taken
at a much later periodturned his large steady eyes
upon my brother, till I thought that he would have fallen
from his horseabashed and overpowered with
veneration
.
`So very young! Colonel Clinton,
you
will put them
upon duty to nightwe have no time for refreshment
and tomorrow, bring Captain Oadley to me' Saying
this, he put his handsome horse into a slow gallop, and
passed on.
`Captain Oadley,' said Clinton, dropping behind, and
assuming all at once, the air of command, best fitted to his
countenance, the occasion, and the placehe sat his horse
royally indeedand the superb uniform which he wore
laced athwart the breast, gave all the properties of his
full chest, and broad square shoulders to the eye`you
will keep your men upon the wing younder,' pointing
to the right`take what prisoners you can, without
hazard; cut down every straggler and deserter
without
mercy, and give notice of all that drop from
fatigue
.'
Captain Oadley made the salute, as if he had never
seen his face before, gave his orders, and immediately
took his position, scouring the plain ground, far and near,
till past eleven o'clock that nighthaving been nearly
twelve hours in the saddle.
Our army was now in full retreat to Princeton,
having
left Newark, and Brunswick, before Cornwallis
with a light body of picked men, amounting to more than
double the number of ours; and so hotly pressed was
Washington by the unexpected vigour of the enemy,
just at the time when he was supposed to have gone into
winter quartersand the term of enlistment was
expiring
with our troops, that the van of the enemy
sucessively
entered New Ark, Brunswick, Princeton and
Trenton, while the rear of our army was leaving each
place. But at last, blessed be God! we left the banks
of the Delaware, at twelve o'clock at night, just as his
van appeared upon them.
My children! I must pause. I would have you
realize
the tremendous peril in which your father and
uncle
all
his family and friendsnay! all the hopes of
America were placed at this hour. Cornwallis was
dashing after us, with all his strength and zeal, at the
head of six thousand men: and every man that we could
count made only twenty-two hundred, on the day that
we crossed the Delaware! Nay, in a few days after,
we were reduced to about fourteen hundred and fifty!
Think of thisa broad river in our frontscarcely men
and horses enough to drag our military storesno
possibility
of resistance, or retreatthe whole country
struck with terrour, and silence. What would have
become
of us, had we been overtaken, but a single hour,
before we embarked? God only knowsbut it is my
belief that we should have been, at this moment, with
the gallant men of Ireland, the vassals of England, the
hewers of wood and the drawers of water, to a patrician
rabble, and a profligate king. But why was not
Washington
pursued further? The shores of the Delaware
were encumbered with materials for the construction of
rafts and platformsand he, himself, in a letter to
Congress
,
declared that nothing but the infatuation of the
enemy saved him. Some have pretended to say, that
Sir William Howe was not seriously disposed to
destroy
Washingtonbut the truth probably is, that he was
a cautious commander, knew not the strength of our
armyor rather its weakness, and was unwilling to
cross a broad and rapid river, with a division that could
could not be readily supported, if Washington should
turn upon it, supported by a general rising of the
country
.
Sir William Howe has been blamed for his
circumspection
Burgoyne
for his impetuosity
Cornwallis
,
for one can hardly tell whatany thing in short that
would exhonerate his country from the disgrace of
being
beaten, by men, who wanted only to be
slaves
, to be
the best troops upon the earth.
VOL. I. 12
Yet, after all, there was something inexplicable, not
only in the movements of General Howe, and Lord
Cornwallis, but in those of Washington at this time:
for the former, but for the destruction of a little bridge
over the Raritan, would certainly have taken our
baggage
and
when the latter did not move from Princeton
until Cornwallis was within three miles of it. yet,
Cornwallis consumed seventeen hours there!actually
sleeping on the waybefore he advanced upon Trenton,
which is only twelve miles distant. There is only one
way of accounting for this. Cornwallis must have had
positive orders, and Washington must have known it
or, becoming careless and desperate of the result, which
is possible even in Washington, he loitered upon the
roadand the enemy, taking it for a stratagem, were
intimidated into extreme precaution.
Soon after this, General Lee was capturedand
Congress
abandoned Philadelphia. It was a general
season
of darkness and dismay, butlet me not anticipate.
Place yourselves with us in the boats, my children;
imagine that you see Archibald and myself holding our
horses by the head, with one foot upon the gunwale,
looking into the black deep waterthe enemy just
coming
in sightflash after flashshot after shot, sent
after
uswith a loud word or tooin laugh and scorn
from the enemy; and now and then a horseman dashing,
at full speed, along the bank, before the torches.It
was a magnificent night, but very darkexcept in a part
of the heavens which were all on fire with a storm just
rising.The opposite bank, we found in possession of
a small body that had been thrown over in advance, but
such was our timidity for a while, that, when some
fellow
shouted`
the enemy!
'we were all thrown
into
disorder for a moment, without reflecting on the
impossibility
of such a thing. There was a strange, cold
hurry of my blood, when the water, and foam of the
horses at windward, as they fretted upon their bits, and
shook their wet manes in the wind, blew in my face.
And when I landed, wet through,and chilled and
stiffened
in all my limbs, I cannot deny that somewhat of
the generous enthusiasm for liberty, which I
had
felt,
appeared extinct within me. Ours was the third or
fourth boatand I recognized Washington
immediately
and
he, my brother; for he rode down, directing
him to form upon the right, saying as he did so`I
have heard of your good conduct, young man. You
have joined a sinking, but not a desperate cause; and
I am sure that the brave men with you will live to
experience
the effect of their example. Remember me to
every individual, at your leisure, and give me a list of
their names. Where so many are leaving me, the
country
ought to know who are coming in.'
`By all the stars of heaven!' cried my brother,
flourishing
his light weapon in the wind, as Washington
rode off`How a few words, from such a man as
that
,
can agitate a human heart!brother! I am no longer
a boyno longer weakWashington has spoken with
me, face to face!and hereafter, mark me, I give way
to no man upon this earth!'
I was carried away with his enthusiasm; and, now,
being safe from pursuit, we were thrown off, into a
separate
covering party, while the Virginians, saluting us
as they passed, with something more than a military
feeling
for
had'nt we been in battle together?filed off in
a contrary direction to join their companions.
The next morning, at an early hour, Clinton joined
us, still with the air of a superiour in command, and
addressing
my brother, who was smoothing the mane of
his beautiful mare, said to him
`The Commander in Chief has confirmed your
appointment
,
Sir; and permitted you to select one
hundred
men for a while;hereafter, they will be reduced
--at present, they are too numerous for your command--
you have the liberty of naming your own officers.'
`My men shall choose for themselves,' said
Archibald
.
`No Sir, that will not be permitted---the service has
been too long the sport of that shameful practice. It
leads to indulgence, carelessness, and neglect of duty---
whom would you name?'
`Arthur Rodman,' said my brother, bowing, `and
Jonathan Oadley,and whom you please for the rest.'
`Your recommendation will be attended to,' said
Clinton, facing his horse`but I would have you know,
gentlemen, that the eye of the general is upon you. He
expects the greatest vigilance and severest discipline.
You are now in service, and subject to martial law.'
There was something sarcastick in the tone, with
which this was said, as if meant to irritate; but my
brother
took no notice of itobserving onlyafter he had
gone
`His manners mend apace brotherbut that arm of
his seems wonderfully improved in camp'(I had
observed that it was no longer in the sling)`Do you
know the surgeon that attends him?' `No,' I replied,
`he came very opportunely to the houseand I believe
had been in service.'
`Did you ever see the arm?were you ever by, at a
dressing?'--`Nobut I remember hearing Mr. Arnauld
say to him, that his movements were wonderfully easy,
for a broken limb.
`I do not believe that it was broken' said
Archibald`It was bruised, and perhaps dislocated
for I know that the wrist was terribly swollenbut
my notion is that it will be soon well.'
`So be it,' said I`the sooner the better.' We
understood
each other, and shook hands upon it.
In this manner with some little alterations of
incident
,
and command, several days had passed, during
which short time, our spirited little troop, out early and
late, upon hazardous and fatiguing, if not dangerous
service, began to attract the admiration of the General's
Staff:La Fayette, in particular, then in the prime and
beauty of manhood, full six feet high, riding a dark bay
horse, of superb carriage, frequently passed by us at
our exercise, and threw in a word or two of incitement
to my brother, which fired his very heart.
`I told you,' said I, when he had left us one day,
after
addressing him, with that princely air, which yet
characterises
the ancient nobility of France`I told you
that you would never be able to pass off under an
assumed
name.'
`No,' he replied`I had not reflected upon it thena
little timely precaution before we met the Virginians,
might
have done itbut, it was a vain thought after all:
a secret cannot be well kept by one hundred. I have
abandoned it. Let our old father have the comfort of
it.'
`It is said to have been a masterly retreat,' added
my brother`this, of our commander through the
Jerseys
.
I just heard that rough, honest, weather beaten
man (pointing to General Knox) and that tall one there
---with the fiery grey eyes, (pointing to General
Cadwallader
)---in
conversation, as they halted at the left of
our troop, say that it beat Xenophon's retreat, all
hollow---and
that nineteen days had been consumed on it.'
`Wonderful!' said I---hardly knowing why
so---except
that other men called it wonderful, whose
judgement
and truth were authority with me.
`The country have taken the alarm too,' said my
brother, `they came pouring in, on all sides---and the
talk is of a speedy battle, if we can get enough about
us to make a stand. Let us be preparedArthur I
find, is melancholy as everdoes he sleep at all?'
`Very little,' I answered---`wake when I will, he is
always lying in the same position, with his eyes half
shut---in the saddle too, night and day.'
`So much the better,' said my brother---`Jasper says
that my troop are better horsemen, in all but running
at the ring, than any troop of cavalry in the service---
and I---'
`Do you improve?'
`
Yes
---I am more than a match for
him
nowhe
confesses it himself. A French gentleman here---that
thin, sprightly fellow that you saw talking awhile ago
with the Marquis'
`La Fayette:'
`Yes---he has promised to teach me small sword: he
says that Clinton is the best man in the army at that.--
But---patience---patience brother---a small sword is a
VOL. I. 12*
safer weapon than a pistol;---worth accomplishing
myself
in; and I am determined to be
first
, or nothing.
I have played three or four hours a day, and my master
predicts wonders.'
The British troops were thrown into cantonments,
extending all along from Brunswick to the Delaware,
and presenting a front toward Philadelphia.
This began to agitate our Commander, till he could
neither eat nor sleep. We could perceive that his
manner
was more solemn and thoughtful than ever; and
one day, when I was detailed upon duty, and paraded
in front of his quarters, I remember that, as he came
out, there was a handsome, florid looking young man,
named Wilkinson (since then General, then Major)
with him, on whom the eyes of Washington were turned,
with an expression of mournful, but intensely deep
resolution
.
Wilkinson appeared a good deal affected, and
as he passed me, walking with his swordhe had the
air of one, who was willing to have it known that he
had been dining with the General in Chief. His eyes
were full to overflowing.
`Now then to clip their wings! while they are so
extended
,'
said Washington, to the poor boy who brought
an account of the enemy's situation and numbers, Jemmy
Rice, the ideot, as he was calledand soon after, a
blow was struck that startled all America from her
sleeplike the trumpet of resurrection.
It was about this time that a damp had fallen upon
the very heart of our people, by the capture of Lee. He
had been an universal favouritehis talents
abundantly
overatedhis achievements at the south, magnified
beyond all beliefand all his faultshis domineering,
arrogant pretensions, forgotten or forgivenand, some
how or other, the people took it into their wise heads
that he had
suffered
himself to be surprised, as the
handsomest
way of abandoning a desperate cause. They
were mistakenLee
was
surprised; and had no good
reason to wish himself out of our hands, or in the hands
of the British, for, he and Lord Stirling, were, for a
long time, kept in confinement as rebelsand traitors,
rather than prisoners of war. But more than that, his
capture was providential, in the extreme. Look at his
position, upon the map. See where he was taken
entirely out of his line of march. Noif the truth
must be told, it is thisCharles Lee was willing to
sacrifice Washington to
his
popularity. He loitered
upon the road, and went aside from it, under the idlest
pretence, at the time when Washington was
vehemently
pressing him for succourwith no other object, or
at least, it is difficult to imagine any other, than to
strike out some such brilliant
coup de main
, upon the
extended out posts of the enemy, as Washington then
meditated, and afterwards performed upon Trenton.
And had he succeeded!merciful heaven!my
blood curdles at the thoughthe would have been in the
place of George Washington, commander in chief of
our armiesand the Csar of America.
But, let me return. Just before the battle of
Trenton
,
of a most beautiful evening, while we were
walking
in front of our troop, that had been out on a
fatigue
party through our cantonments, along the
Delaware
,
there was a fine, martial looking young man,
halted near us; accompanied by another, of a stouter,
more substantial, and farmer-like aspect; one of whom
we found to be Colonel Reid, and the other, old Put,
or General Putnam. `Well primed!' said Put, `well
primed!' (returning a large rusty horse pistol to the
holsters.) `Reid, we are in troubled timesI would'nt
sleep without a cocked pistol in my hand. Dark times,
dark times, Reid.'
`The darkest time of night,' said Reid, `is just
before
day, general.'
`Ha!by heaven and earth,' cried my brother,
dropping my arm, `there goes our father!'
He was rightthe old man had come at laststout
and terrible as ever, passing, with the indifference of
a veteran, through all the paraphernalia of warwith
fifty nine horsemen, and nearly two hundred foot, at
his heels. Washington mounted, and rode down to
receive himand gave the old man his hand, before all
the soldiers.
There was our reward!there it was!who
would'nt have spilt blood for his country, to see the
hand of his old father so taken, at the head of a whole
army!
The old man bowed his grey head upon the general's
hand, and I could see that his knees trembledand his
eyes were nearly shut, and quenched, when he lifted
them. A word or two passed between them, when the
general pointed to Archibald, who stood patiently
waiting
the issueand then rode off.
Our father got leisurely from his horseembraced
us affectionatelytold us that all were well
all
spoke of Clinton, and
Lucia
. I was amazed at my
brother's self possession. He showed no weakness
no emotion, at the name. My father bore a letter for
Clinton, which was sent to his quarters, but not an
hour had passed, before a messenger came with orders
for Captain Oadley.
I arose to accompany him.
`At your peril,' said the messenger. `I am ordered
to keep my eyes upon
you
. He must go alone.'
`Tell your master, Sir, that I shall
not
go alone.
If Colonel Clinton would see me, he must come to my
quarters; or wait till I am under his command.'
`That's my noble boy,' said my father, `buthey?
how's this?you look pale, Archy. Can't you
forgive him yet?pho, phonever mind the girl
she'
`Hush, father. I can bear any thing, but
that!
'
They then walked away, till the canvas was rudely
thrust aside, and Clinton stood before ushis eyes
sparkling with ragehis lips bloody.
`Is that your work, Sir?' said he, to Archibald,
throwing down a letter.
My brother smiled darkly, but took it up, without
any sign of trepidation. keeping his eye upon him for
a while, and then running it over the page.
`Yes Sir, it is,' said he.
`And how dared you?'
`
Dared!
O, it was no such daring matter. I told
you that I
should
do it, and I always do what I
promise
.'
`Foolmad man!'
`Colonel Clinton, these are my quarters. I should
be loath to strike you, my superiour officerbut'
Here Clinton's eyes fell upon my fatherand his
manner instantly changed, to the same careless,
unthinking
levity, that he wore when we first knew him
captivating all hearts, yet confounding them at the
same time, by the violence and suddenness of its
transitions
.
Archibald went a step nearer, as if distrusting his
own eyes.
`Damn it, Oadley,' dashing the back of his hand
over his eyes, I don't half like this affair. I have
been very like a villainandwill you give me your
hand, and forget what has past.'
`No,' said my brother`
no
. When Colonel
Clinton
has explained two or three little matters
reformed
in two or three, not very important particulars
repented, deeply and truly, of two or three matters
of no momentif he want a friend, here stands one
that will be his friendhis friend indeed. Till then,
never
.'
Clinton looked disturbed; but finally, the natural
wild levity of his character, prevailed. `Done!--I
subscribe to your termsI will be what you desire,
my little chaplain. I'
Archibald looked, and I felt, deeply offended. He
felt that he was no longer a boy, and he would not be
treated as a boy.
CHAPTER IX.
By torch and trumpet fast arrayed,
Each horseman drew his battle blade;
And furious, every charger neighed,
To join the dreadful revelry!
`
We
shall keep our Christmas in a serious way,
father,' said I, in answer to some remark of his, the
evening of his arrival, respecting the preparation in our
neighbourhood.
`No more so, than
they
will,' answered the old
man, passing his hand athwart his eyes. `This will
be the first one for, twenty-six years, that your mother
and I, have passed away from each other; or abroad
from our own roof. God help the aged, who, in the
dead of winter, are driven asunder, as we are!The
winter of the
year
plays bitterly upon them that are
exposed, in the winter of the
heart
, for the first time,
under such a miserable contrivance as this'(The
snow was blowing through the rent canvass, at the
moment, and sprinkling the table, upon which my
brother lay, with his arm stretched out, and his face
lying upon them, as if spent and overpowered with
fatigue)for the first time in their old age. It is no
merry Christmas to them.'
`Nor will it be to the enemy, I'm a thinking, father,'
said Archibald, lifting his head for a moment. The
traces of weeping were yet upon his eyesand a quick
confusion passed over his face, as he saw our eyes
glancing, where the moisture and breath of his wet lips
had frozen upon the table; and the tears had fallen like
rain, and dashed his arm athwart the whole,
exclaiming
,
`if we are to remain here much longer, we shall
be weather proof indeed.'
`What mean you, Archibald?' said my father to
him. `Your countenance was fuller of expression than
commonare the enemy in any peril?'
`Hush, fatherwe are not permitted to talk aloud
of such things. All that I can tell you is, that a double
portion of rum has been issued to the soldiersseveral
days provision ordered to be kept constantly cooked
all the surgeons kept busy, in preparing their
instruments
and bandagesand that, something, I know
not whator if I did, I would not breathe it, is
in agitation. Let us be prepared thenat a moment's
warning. I have not taken off my clothes, for these
six nights; and the saddle has almost grown to Hetty's
back. And besidesI can tell you further, that
Washington has not shut his eyes, for the last
forty-eight
hours. I saw him, at three o'clock yesterday
morning, pacing the hard ground, in the rear of his
quarters, for an hour together. Council after council
has been called, at which only two or three of his
most intimate and confidential officers have been
admitted
.
So let us be prepared. Whatever it is, I
feel assured, from the bearing of our commander, that
it is a desperate matter. Let us be on the alert
silent as death, and prompt as the angels of death.'
`Amen!' said the old man, putting his hand upon
Archibald's head. `Verily, verily, thou art the child
of my old age!'
I was startled at the sudden reply of Archibald.
There was a peevishness and impatience in itand he
talked with that hurried earnestness, which is common
with them, that talk to drown their own thought. I
wondered at it. I had wondered too, at the strange
communicativeness that he had just manifested, and
began to study him with more attention, to discover,
if possible, what it was, that so wrought upon him.
`You are disturbed,' said I, at last. `What has
happened to you?'
He lifted his deep, beautiful, intelligent eyes, upon
meattempted to speakdropped the lids, two or
three times, and opened and shut his lips, with that
dry, peevish expression, which shews the unquiet
nature
of the spirit within, more forcibly than any words
and then, as if ashamed of his own weakness,
stooped
to the floor, or rather to the trodden earth, for we
had no other floor, and picked up a letter, which he
pushed toward me, and then turning suddenly to my
father, while I began to read it, asked him how Mr.
Arnauld was.
`Bad enough, poor gentleman.'
`Not dangerous, I hope.'
`Nowe hope not; but his hurts have been followed
by a fever and derangement, during which he raved
incessantly of Mary Austin. Don't frown, Archibald;
the hand of God hath fallen heavily upon himbut
his proud spirit is humbled to the earth. If ever
mortal
man was truly and deeply penitent, sorrowing,
ashamed and submissive, Robert Arnauld is soand
when I left him, sick and sore as he wasbereaved and
darkened as they all were, I have good reason to trust
that they were all happier with him, and prouder of
him than ever.'
`And my mother?' said Archibald choking
`There is no consolation for her, boyearthly
consolation
I mean. She is going to her grave; and I am
prepared
to go with her. May it be God's will that we
shall sleep together, in the same grave!our bridal,
and marriage, and death should be the same.I could
pray to die first, and away from herbut that would be
unnaturalselfish. I am better able still than she, to
withstand the wintry desolation of survivorship. Her
heart is sick and sore yeteven unto death.'
`Let it not be agitated then,' said Archibald,`for
that would be a death to it now, perhaps, which at
another
day, it would resist for ever' (pressing his own
hand upon his own heart, with all his strength)`well
brother, you have finished, I seewhat think you of it.'
I shook my head
`Mistaken girl!' said Archibald, `how little she
knows her own heart.'
`Read that,' said Igiving him a letter that my
proud Clara had written me. It was as follows.
`We had hoped, dear Oadley, to see you for a few
hours, at Christmas; and, sad as the prospect is, we
shall not give up the hope, until the night has passed.
We feel, it is true, when we hear of your movements,
for in one way and another, while you are near us, we
seem to hear of every thing that is done by our little
army
we
feel strangely, as the thought comes over us,
that near as you are, you cannot be with ussick or
well, living or dead, without the permission of others
that never heard of, or care for us. I have no time to
write more; your father goes sooner, by three days, than
he had meditatedin consequence, though he will not
own it, of a dream that a little mad cap here had,
respecting
himand his reinforcement. My dear father,
blessed
be heaven, is in the way of restorationbutyou
cannot well imagine my delight and gratitudehis
heart is not the heart that he fell sick with. Our
Heavenly
Father hath touched and purified it.Your
mother
has consented to sit with the family, now, and we
hope to make her feel more comfortable after a while.'
`Ellen Sampson, who arrived just as you were
setting
out, and caught a glimpse of Rodman and your
brother, is strangely infatuated about him. She is the
life of the whole family, and vows that, solemn and
strange as he isand wild and frolicksome as she is
he shall be her true knight, and bids you tell him so,
sending a lock of her bright hair for an amulet.' `Here
it is brother,' (offering it to him.)
`Pho, pho!read on,' said Archibald, without
looking
at it`read on, what says she ofof
I lifted my eyes to shew him that I understood of whom
he would inquire, and glancing at my father, whose
loud breathing announced that he had fallen asleep
while Archibald threw off his watch cloak, covered him
with it, and sat by his side so as to support his head
upon his bosomI read as follows
VOL. I. 13
`Remember me to Mr. Rodman, who, we are told, as
well as yourself (bad English, but I cannot help it, in
the hurry of my feeling) is an officerand tell him that
the stout hearted never despairthat it is unmanly
to be stricken to the heart, by any sorrow, any
calamity
,
any humiliationtell him that a woman says so
and bid him awake, stand up, bare his forehead to the
sky, and shake off the fetters that encumber him.
His Maker will not hold him guiltless of his own blood,
if he rashly, presumptuously, or with a feeling of
despondency
,
let it out, no matter in what cause.'
`And now, as for you, dear Johnallow me to
address
you soit is an endearing appellationand may
be a comfort to you, if any thing should hereafter
happen
to sunder us'
`To what,' said Archibaldstarting
`To sunder us!
`She writes very composedly' said he, in reply,
with a sort of bitter pleasantry`as if such an event
were in her contemplation, but proceed'
`I never used it to mortal man except to
you
I
have reserved it to this moment. I have been thinking
much of you since you left us, and I have come to the
conclusion, impelled to the enquiry perhaps by what
Archibald said, when we parted, that we have all
misunderstood
your true characterthat, sedate and quiet
as you areyou have a slumbering earthquake in your
breast.Beware of it, in time. Things lightly done,
with such a tempermay convulse and shatter the
whole constitution of your happiness. I may be
mistaken
,
but my belief is, that, once put to ityour temper
will be most terrible, more implacable and tempestuous:
your wrath, fiercer than that of any creature about
us-Beware
of it. No fitting occasion has yet happened for
the developement of your powerI almost pray that
one never may happenfor I tremble, when I think
what else may start up with it.And nowlet me
tell you, that when we meet again, I have something,
for your private eara matter of little importance, I
endeavour to persuade myselfbut
possibly
, of sufficient
tono, I will not frighten myself with such
anticipations
.
I allude to it now, that, if your own heart smite
you, you may be prepared against our next meeting;
and that you may not attribute the kindness of my
manner
in this letter, to
ignorance
but rather to an
unshaken
principle of my nature, which leads me never to
withdraw my confidence, in any degree, from the heart
where it has once been placed, without proof
proof
like holy writ. Whatever it be therefore, dear,
dear
Johnlet not your heart be disturbed, unless you are
deliberately guilty.
Then
it may bewe might as
well never meet again. But if innocent altogetheror
in a degreeor only surprised into that, which manhood
and delicacy made you conceal from meyou may be
sure of my forgiveness, blessing, and
perhaps
, of my
unalterable
affection. Meantime, you may be assured that
there will be no change in my deportment toward you,
till I see you confronted, face to face, with your accuser,
and iffor O, my friendin the peril of war and the
vicissitude of chance and lifesuch a thing may well
beand it is our duty to be prepared for itif it be, that
we are never to meet again
never!
let this
consolation
abide with you, that I shall hold you innocent,
and love you, venerate you, as so, until you are proved
to be guilty
face to face!
'
`Christmas is at hand: we have agreed to leave a
vacant
seat, for each of youyetO! merciful heaven!
my heart hurries and stops at the thoughtmy
assumed
calmness all deserts meapprehension and darkness
rush in upon me, and my tears will fall, in spite of all
my strength and preparationYetwho can tell but
that seat may never be filled again!You or your
father
,
or Archibald, or Arthur, or Clinton no, no it
is not only possible, but probable, that we shall never
all
assemble again, about the bright hearth and
bountiful
table of the season. But faint notnor sleep.
Remember
us
me
and do your duty. If you can be with
usif you
can
, without
any
sacrifice of dutyI shall be
the happiest woman upon earthbut if notremember,
on Christmas next, if you are out on duty, where you
can see the sky, and feel the windthat others are
watching
and praying for you, all night long; for that will
certainly happen. Our mother's love to you, and
Archibald
,
whose name agitates her to tears, whenever it
is mentioned; and Mr. Rodmanour father's too. We
expect great things of you all.FarewellYour
country firstClara last.'
`What! not one word' said Archibald, dropping
his hands, with a sick and despairing helplessness, upon
the table.
`Yes' I replied, reading on:
`Poor Lucia does nothing but weep all day and all
nightshe is so altered, that you would scarcely know
her. Why she suffers more cruelly than I, is naturally
to be accounted for:she is younger, and her swain is
pestering her continually with letters that would make
any heart bleednever more than a line or tooand
writtenas if he were on horsebackwhile the pen is
never out of her hand. Poor dear Lucia.I like not
the commencement of this affairbut her happiness is
in the keeping of heavenof an honourable man,
though an imprudent oneand of your brother
Archibald
tell
him this.'
`God bless her,'said Archibald, covering his face,
and bowing his head, religiouslytill it touched the
gray locks of our father.
`Tell him also that he is properly appreciatedhis
honesty, I mean, and good intention, in his note to poor
Lucia.It appeared to jar her a good deal at first,
but she pronounced his name, with a benediction, when
she had read itand then turned deadly sickbut, as
she did not offer to let me see it, I have never
importuned
her about it, feeling assured that I may trust the
dear creature to Archibald now, as I would, if he were
her twin brother.'
The tears trickled through his fingers, and fell, drop
by drop, past the light, so that I could count them,
where I sat, though little did he think that they could
be seen.
`What did you write to her?' said I`is it a secret?'
`No,' he repliedtaking a paper out of his pocket.
`That is the very note. She returned it to Clinton
but finish the letter.'
`I have finished it,' I replied.
`Nothere is some writing atwhart the outer page.'
I turned the letter, and found the following words
written
,
as ifafter the letter had been folded`What is
Clinton's real name? Lucia knows itbut father does
notand he is a little angry and sore about it. Tell
the colonelif he
be
a colonelto tell his name quickly
if he have anyor' (the rest was illegible).
`But why did she return your note?' said I, opening
it`and to
you?
'
`She did not. I wish that she had kept it, and sent
Clinton
a copypshaw!what drivelling tenderness is this!
Why should I wed the wife of another manhis
wife
(his voice died away, into a low muttering sound, as he
continued)ayelet me believe itlet me accustom
myself to think of itLuciaLucia Clintonah
well, well'
The note
`Clinton has spoken disrespectfully of you. You best
know whether you have merited it. My notion of the
man is, that he is a dissolute, unthinking fellowa
tyrant
in temperchangeable as the windand utterly
unworthy of your love. I have told him so. I have
told him that I would inform you of it. But I did not
tell himas I do you, that there are noble qualities in
his naturethat, much of his profligacy is, of manner,
rather than heart; that I believe he may be, in time,
worthy of the unutterable happiness thatno matter,
LuciaI only pray that you will be firm; such men
are only to be taught wisdom by their suffering. Make
him sufferbe
firm
they value nothing, but in
proportion
to the difficulty of attainment.Would you
win him?Beware how you let him see his power over
you. Would you keep him?Set a guard upon your
very pulsethoughtand eyes. Would you charm
away the licentious spirit of his nature?banish the
evil one that abides in his heart, and settle him down
VOL. I. 13*
into a hero?for that he may be, if you deal aright with
himI would not hurt your innocent heart, Lucia, you
know that I would notbe wary
unyielding---prepared
and
let him having nothing to boast of, in any event
something to hope forwhatever may happen. You
understand meI know your noble, unthinking, pure
and lofty confidencebut he is not the man for such
confidencenot
yet
, I mean;what he may be, must
depend
upon you.'
`ARCHIBALD OADLEY.'
Having copied this, for your eyes, my dear children,
from the original, which is yet in my possession; I
will now endeavour to give you the substance, and
indeed
much of the very language (for, I had
that
, till the
house was burnt) of her's to Clinton, which enclosed
Archibald's to her.
`Dear Clinton,
`Am I never to see you again?Where are you?
We hear the noise of artilleryand, night after night,
the sky is reddened with the blaze of some farm house.
Heaven only knows what will become of usI am
very
wretched,
very
need I tell you whyO! Clinton,
there is a yearning here, an unsatisfied, dreadfulI
know not what to call itit is, as if my heart had been
exhausted in a receiverit is very terrible. And
sometimes
,
when I catch a glimpse of my haggard face in
the furniturefor I dare not look in a glassII
cannot
but weep. Do come to mewe are not safeI am
sure that we are not. There is no body but my poor
sick father, and four or five men, chiefly servants, to
defend us in case of another midnightgracious God,
Clinton, can
you
bear to think of such an event!
But why need I ask youwhat have you at hazard?
what have I
now?
Ask your own heartmine
cannot answer. It would dieto meet your faceI
know not how I have been able to write thus much
there is a rush of shame, and horrour, and indignation
through my whole frame. Clintonis that true?read
that note. Have you dared tonot to outrage my name
I hopeere the print of your lips had left my forehead
but have you dared to speak of me lightly?dis
yes, that is the wordbut I cannot write itread the
note for yourself: read itis it true? If it behear
me Clintonhear meYou little know mebut you
know something of what I may be able to do, by what
I have already doenyou little know me, if you believe
me tame or spiritless. Ask Archibaldthat stout
hearted
boyArchibald, whom IO, do not flatter yourself
Clinton, it was not all loveso suddenmeasureless
appallingO, noit was notbut I sacrificed him to
youandI rave strangely Clinton, and cannot for
the life of me, retain, even in conversation, the ordinary
coherency of life. Perhaps I am disorderedI could
almost pray that I may bebut let me see you first
once more, only once. Yet what do I sayhe is honest,
so honest that I cannot doubt himso fearless that, I
am mad to put his godlike spirit in such periland
therefore I must believe him. Hear me! My thought
is steadier for a moment. Hear me!what I say,
that
will I do. Much as I have loved youdo love you
if you have spoken
disrespectfully
of me(yes! that is
the very wordI have written it, at last)--farewell, for
ever!
farewell! farewell!
There is no hope for
you---
none!
Depend upon nothing that has passed
---place no confidence in my weakness---nor in the
recollection
of it---you understand me----the heat that
thawed in your breath, will have been frozen to adamant
---never to melt again---
never
---
never!
---if it be true.---
I know what your hope will be---but you will be
disappointed---sorrow
stricken. Young as I am--beautiful as
they say that I am---passionate and tender, as you know
me to be---that---even
that
---will have no weight with
me. Shame, I can endure---death,
death
, Clinton---but
not INDIGNITY!'
I heard my brother gasping for breath, but I dared
not look up---and continued to read
`I believe that Archibald tells the truth--I believe
therefore
that this is a
final adieu
---and I think that I can see
you smile---but my early hope, and you can estimate its
lightness, when I tell you that I myself, I; a woman
in love to distractionbelieve it to be a desperate one
---for I have known Archibald for many years---you
but for a few weeks---I think that I can see you smile,
haughtily and confidently, while you read the threat---
as if assured, in your own heart, that one word or
look of your's, will bring the love sick girl---now that
she is so utterly in your powerupon your bosom
again. You are mistaken. If it be true---farewell for
ever! But beware of my father---of John---of Arthur
---and most of all, of Archibaldyour blood Clinton,
I would not have it spilt for mebut, I cannot
prevent
it. I foresee that, if Archibald tell the truthif
---do I say
if
---O! God that
that
should be my only
hope---falsehood in Archibald Oadley.! Do not
believe
that I doubt him, because I enclose his letter to
you---No---it is because I would show my confidence
in you.  If you are innocent---put your sword
---not through his heart---not---no, no---let him alone
---let him perish in his own way:---if guilty---God
forever
bless you Clinton---but I have done with you.'
My tears, in spite of all my efforts to the contrary,
now ran, with a feeling of insupportable heat and
soreness
,
down my cheeks. I folded the letter, and reached
it to my brother without lifting my eyesbut having
held it for a momentand not observing any motion to
take it, I spoke.
`The letter brother  '
He returned no answerand in turning roundfor he
was a little at my left side, I found him, with his head
and arms hanging lifelessly over the body of my father, as
if his noble heart had stopped forever. For twenty
minutes
,
that I employed myself in chafing his temples,
our father standing over him, like a dead man, helpless
and horrour struck, he gave no sign of life. But, at
last,O! it was the happiest moment of mine,he
opened his eyesmoved them about, faintly, for a
moment
or two, rested them upon our father, and then
put out his hand, with a slow, reverent motion. `Do not
weep father
do
notnor you, brotherHelp me out
into the air awhile, and I shall be well.'
`It snows violently, dear brotherand you are all in
a sweat' said I, putting out my hand through the
canvass
`It matters, notlead me out,' he replied`I can
bear the snowbut not the heated atmosphere of this
apartmentit chokes me.'
`Poor fellow' our breath was congealed upon our
cloaks, within that heated atmosphere.
We led him out, thereforeand the wind whistled, and
the fine snow was driven, through and through, his
beautiful
hair, and into his bosomyet it melted, as soon
as it struck his foreheadand his patient eyes shone
out, so brightly, that we were terrified
At last he stood upknit his browsbrushed away
the snow from his coat, and turning to ussaid that
he was `ashamed of himself'but, while he spoke,
evidently, with the desire of proving that he was
altogether
restored,he fainted away again, and would
have fallen into the drifted snow, but for my father.
We were justly alarmed now, and sent for the physician
of the corps.
He came, and ordered Archibald to be brought
immediately
to his own quarters, which were rather
better furnished, than the others,and fitted up as a
sort of hospital.All the next day he never opened his
lipsnor the next night, except to ask the time, and
order the horse to be out, at the exercise, an hour
earlier
than usualintending to be with them, but he could
notand it was not till almost noon, when the stirring
about him, as we struck our tents, awoke him, that he
seemed to recollect himself, for he immediately arose,
and with a little assistance, dressed himself, in spite of
the remonstrance of the physician.
`You do not understand my malady, dear doctor,'
he said, buckling his cimetar upon his side. `It is
inactivitythoughtha! Clintonwhat are they
doing
?'
`First let me ask you' (giving him his two hands,
with the utmost cordiality and frankness)`are you
able to undergo another night's duty, before sleep.'
`Yesbut I hope that it will be the
last
.'
`Nay, do not flatter yourselfweary so soon?ha!
what do you mean, Oadleyare you desponding?'
`No, nowhat's to be done?tell me,' said my brother,
repeatedlysetting his foot upon the table, which shook
with the unsteady pressureand belting his spurs, with
a faint trembling hand, and a sick aspect.
`You are very weak, dear Archibald,' said Clinton,
taking the strap from his handbut, if you
can
sit your
horse, you must. `Washington has spoken of you, in
Council, not an hour since; and you are to be entrusted
with serious duty. I knew that you were illbut I
kept it a secret, till I had seen you. Can you keep your
saddle.'
`YesFor awhile. What is to be done?'
`About an hour before dark,' said Clinton, all on fire
with the thought of battle`you will put your men in
motion, secretly, and come in, by a circuit at
McKonkey's
Ferry, there to cover an embarkation, which will
take place, at dark. You will be particularly wanted
Sullivan and Greene have no horse thereand my
notion is, that, after taking your party, we shall have
to dismount all the troops, and take their horses, for
our light artillerybut that is not yet determined upon.
Don't interfere with Knox's menthey are jealous as
the devil of the southerners. Keep clear of them
and consider yourself under Washington's command
alone, and move only for yourself, when he is away.'
`But whither are we to march?' said my father
`I feel rather awkward.'
`New levies always do,' said Clinton, laughing.
`But we shall soon put you in training; not a man
knows the design yet. First, we are to cross the
Delaware
that
is all that we know yet. Cadwallader has
moved off, in beautiful stylenot a man knows for
whatand Irwing I saw, a few hours ago, putting his
men in motion. My thought isGod bless
Washington
,
for keeping the good old fashion!that we are to
give the enemy a Christmas
ball
and
dance
`Christmas!' said I, involuntarilyglancing at
Archibald
`By heaven!' he replied, walking to the door of the
tent, `so it is;who knows what may have happened,
at the appointed hour. Brother, brotherthe chairs
may be emptyof our bodiesbutwhich of our
spirits
may not be among them, at the hour of their fullest
revelry.'
I was inconceivably affectedhis manner was so
solemn, settledand the tone of his voice so inward and
prophetick. But we had no time to exchange either
congratulation or encouragement, for every moment was
precious. Our men were paradedin the light of the
setting sunthe whole camp under armstents struck,
and a general, but beautiful celerity, full of strictness
and precision, gave evidence that something momentous
was in agitation.Washington came out, just ahead
of us, and mounted his great white horse, with that air
of absolute authority, which began to distinguish all his
movement about this timefor congress had made
him little less than a dictator at lastand
Archibald
,
when once upon the back of his spirited little
mare, seemed to forget, in the presence of his
Commander
in Chief, all sense of infirmity, if not of mortality;
for when Clinton raised his sword, while he rode by
the side of Washington,as a signal to my brother to
set off, it was done in such a gallant, soldier like style,
that Washington pressed his white charger forward at
least twenty yards abreast of my brother, utterly
regardless
of the young cavalcade about himas if
carried
away, for a moment, with enthusiasmand well
he might have been, for my brother's eyes shone intensely
brightand his pale, boyish face was illuminated with
a strange settled sternness, well calculated to startle the
boldest.  For my own part, I forgot his age,
and moved after him as if I had been the juniorbut
so it has been through my life; that boy, after the first
twenty years of his course, during which I had passed by
him, regardless of his eye or attitude, took his position,
all at once, and was never afterwards driven from it.
I tried, again and againto recover my ancient sway
that was in vainmy equality nextthat was equally
sotill at last, wearied out with a perpetual warfare
against a spirit that always would keep in advance,
though all his arteries, heart and veins had been
ruptured
and burst in the effort, I silently abandoned
myself to his steady dominion:acknowledged his
supremacy, and slept quietly ever afterward.
The night was intensely cold, and we were delayed
many hours longer than had been anticipated, by an
accumulation of ice in the river. And here, if you
would get a good notion of the countenance of
Washington
at this timethe most eventful and trying
moment of his life, I would recommend that you study
a picture just painted by a Mr. Sully of Philadelphia,
upon this subject. He has been singularly happy---
and when I recollect the face of Washington, as he
reined up, for half an hour, within pistol shot of me, it
appears to me that some man must have painted it, who
was with us at the time. Before we came down to the
Ferrythere was an awful solemnity, darkness and
repose in it. But
there
, when in sight of the troops, as
they were severally embarking, every man of whom, so
long as the face of their Commander could be seen,
even after the boats had put off, kept his eyes upon it,
was full of a loftier, more animated, youthful and
heroick
expression, of encouragement and confidence.
You have heard of general Knox, then Colonel---and
of his stentorian voice. I assure you that no justice
can be done to him or it; my ears rang, for a fortnight
after, at the same hour of the night; and do yet, when
I remember how he galloped about, cursing and
swearing
,
dismounting every five minutes, and lifting at his
own artillery, like a giant. He was a gallant fellow---
full of bloodwith all the blunt, strong New England
hardihood. And Greene too--he was there---the only
man of all our armies, capable, I believe, in case of any
disaster, to take the place of Washington, there
he
sat,
full of deep religious composure,---his broad forehead
fronting the fires, that were kindled near the place of
embarkation.
At last, though not until three o'clock in the
morning
,
we were fairly landed upon the Jersey shore, and,
by five, had taken up our line of march. Clinton was
every whereriding through the horsemen, along by
the infantry and artillery, carrying orders, cheering
the men, and infusing, wherever he moved, the very
spirit of chivalry. But my brotherpoor fellow,
and my father toowere silent as deathI saw them,
while the division was forming, meetshake hands
and partbut I, alas! I had no opportunity to
embrace the old man, before we were upon the march;
but he saw me, and, holding out his sword, shook it
manfully, as if to encourage me.I answered the signal.
I saw no more of him till the affair was all over.
`It was very remarkable,' said my brother, in a low
voice`Rodman take the command awhile(Rodman
leaped forward, and as he passed me, I heard his loud
breathing, as if now, he was about to be happy indeed)
`it is very remarkable, my dear brother, that they
should be, at this moment, sitting about a table, with
three or four empty chairs at itfor three or four
living
mena father, two sons---and a cousinis it
not awful to think what
may
happen?'
`It is impossible,' said I---`you forget the hour---it
must be near morning.'
`There,' said he---as if awaking all of a sudden---
`and it is not till to-morrow night, Christmas night,
that the chairs will be set for us---dead or alive. I had
forgot. I had half persuaded myself that, at this
moment
,
their eyes were fixed on a screne blue sky, it may
be, in prayer for us---little dreaming that the snow,
and rain, and darkness are driving in our faces, and
that'
`Hush brother,' said I---`we are overheard.'`I
care not, though it be by Washington himself,'
continued
my brother---`Nay, do not trouble yourself to look
behind. Whoever it be, he shall see that I am not the
VOL. I. 14
worse fitted for death, for having prepared myself for
it.
`
Death!
' said I---and would have added some words
of reproof, had not a tall majestick figure, on a horse,
that, even in a rank of white horses, appeared unusually
white, rode slowly athwart our rearfollowed by
ten or twelve other horsemen.
`By heaven---brother!---You will have lost his
favour
.
It was Washington himself',---said I---
`I care not,' he replied, `George Washington
himself
,
if he be the good and great man that I think him,
has a heavier heart than I, at this momentis as sorry
at the thought of the blood, that he is about to spill
and altogether better prepared for death.'
`Brother,' said I, after a moment's pause, `we are
strangely disturbed by our disorderly watching and
sleeplast night was Christmas eve after allthis
morningI feel it at my heart
yes, I am sure of it!
eyes that we knowlips that we lovehearts that we
would die for, are all in prayer for usat this blessed
moment. As I live, the thought rushes in upon me,
distending my own heart, till it aches, with fullness.'
`And so it is, as I hope for mercy! Well, heaven be
praised--farewell brotherlet us do our duty--and
commit ourselves to GodI see the light breaking
in there, and a movement--hush--hush! farewell!'
`Farewell!' said I `brother'and just then, our
whole army passed softly, and silently, by two or three
officers, one of whom I knew to be Clinton, posted
upon the road side, continually waving their swords,
with a motion, as if to enjoin the most deathlike
stillness
;
and deathlike it was, for nothing could be heard,
but the blowing of the horses, a jolting sound, now and
then in the wet snow, where the Artillery wagons and
gun-carriages cut through into the groundand
a general rush, as of deep heavy water.
A few moments after, a troop of Virginians, under
Captain Washington, (afterward so distinguished at
the south) paraded, in beautiful style, through the heavy
snow, and brought us intelligence which tended to
accelerate our march. Before his arrival, we had
hoped (as I afterward found) to surprise the enemy, at
Trenton, while yet overpowered by the festivities of
the preceding nightand make his morning sleep,
the sleep of death;but now that hope was
abandoned
,
for Captain Washington had encountered his
picket, exchanged a few shot, and left him prepared
for, what, it is remarkable that he had already heard
a vague rumour ofour intended attack. Yet this very
affair, which, at first, threatened to be so disastrous,
the frolick of Captain Washington, was probably the
chief reason why we succeeded in surprising the enemy,
at last; for, as that was not followed up, he retired to
quarters, after waiting a reasonable time, as we
afterward
found, thinking the whole a Virginia
row
.
Our troops were now thrown into two divisions.
We were separated from our fatherwho was detailed
under Sullivan and St. Clair to take the river road
while we, under Washington himself, Greene, Morris,
and Stevens, pushed onward through what is called
the Pennington road:
A few moments afterwardjust while I thought my
heart had lost its motion entirelyfor I felt, in looking
about me, and seeing the dark array of substantial, but
noiseless creatures, horses and wagonsas if the whole
army were an apparitiona cavalcade of dead men
marching from one place of burial to another:--I heard
a shot, so near me that my horse leaped out of the rank.
This was followed by a loud crytwo or three words
---a volleyand then, shot after shot, as if a line of
sentinels, sleeping upon their post, had suddenly
started
up, one after the other, fired off their pieces, and
run in.
Our advance were well furnished with bayonets---
and they immediately charged upon the picket, and,
we dashed after them, trampling them to death, with our
horses, riding over them like a whirlwind, without
speaking a word, or firing a shot. This was scarcely
done, when we heard the firing of the other division, at
the opposite quarter---so admirably timed had been the
arrangementand we immediately galloped into the
centre of the town, horse and foot, determined to ride
the enemy down, or bayonet them, before they had time
to form. Washington was dreadfully exposed. The
first picket, thinking this a second attack of the same
little skirmishing party, that had fired into them before,
neglected to give the alarm:---an dthe outposts, though
they fought most gallantly, retreating, step by step,
behind
the houses, disputing every inch, and presenting
their bright bayonets, without a flash of powder,
where-ever
we rode in upon them---so that we could not, with
all our cutting and spurring, force our horses upon
themand then, the moment that we faced about,
blazing
away upon us, and running to the next housewere
driven in.
At last we had an opportunity for fair play; the
Hessians were formed and forming, with the whole
front glittering with bayonets. A tremendous struggle
was going on at our right, under the very eye of
Washington
,
with the enemy's artillery, which was taken,
when, with a troop of horse, in which I fancied that I could
see my father, nay, I am almost certain that it was
he, by the disorderly movement of his horse, for he broke
out of the ranks, and was twenty yards ahead of the
other menArchibald rode down, his cap off,
his sword flashing, like a fire brand, in the light and
smoke of the musquetry`charge! charge!' they
cried
`charge!
my brave fellows! and provoke them to
fire'Another troop! Another! and another!
thundered
down, from the right and left, but with no effect
at all, upon the invincible Germans--their front rank
kneeled all round--while the rest were forming, and
presented their bayonets, without firing a shot.
`By heaven!' said Archibald, shouting as if his heart
would break, to Captain Washington`I will try
them again!' And, as he said so, he rode at full speed,
so near that it appeared to me that he could have struck
the enemy with his sword---and fired his pistol into
their faces. Our front rank followed the example---and
the next moment, all the Hessians brought their pieces
up to their cheeks, and poured a tremendous volley in
upon us---I saw my father fall---Arthur reel in his
stirrups---but
Archibald, as if prepared for this very thing
---shouted, `
wheel and charge!
'
`Wheel and charge!' repeated a hundred voices in
our rear`
wheel and charge!
'
We obeyedand the snow flewand the swords
flashed
and
the next moment, a hundred of the enemythe
whole of his front rank were trampled to death before
us, and twenty human heads rolled upon the ground,
among the feet of our horses.
The infantry under Greene poured in, volley after
volley, at the same time; and Knox, having brought
round his light field pieces to bear, as if they had been
blunderbusses, played in upon them, with an
uninterrupted
roll of thunder and smoke.
It was impossible to stand itno human being could
have endured the hurricane of fire and bullets longer.
They threw down their armsabout one thousand men
in alland then was it
then
when it was necessary
to move about the quieter operations of strife, that we
began to feel the intense coldness of the nightthe keen
air cutting into our new wounds, like rough broken glass.
Several were frozen to death, and two of our own men.
But my agony was for my father: heedless of the
reiterated
command of Arthur, and Clinton, and
Washington
himself, who was impatient to be awaywith
his prisoners, before a rescue---I continued riding over
the field, and examining the bodies. At last I found him
---the good old man---flat upon his back---his great
heart heavy with the bullets that had been poured into
it. I wondered at my own calmness---when I first
discovered
the body---at my own unspeakable collectedness.
At first there was a darkness and dizziness about my
eyes---and then I began to doubt if I were in my right
senses---but Archibald and Arthur rode up to me, the
latter with his white pantaloons covered all over with
blood and dirt---and we alighted---and tearing open his
bosom, discovered that there was no life in him---that
VOL. I. 14*
his aged breast was literally blown to pieces; and the
trumpet blowing---we took the dead hand in ours,
sucsessively
,
without looking at each other---cut off,
hurriedly
a lock of his grey hair---saturated and stiff with
frozen blood---mounted and left himwith an
inconceivable
calmnessforit was not till our wounds
were dressed, that we thought of our motherour
poor, dear mother.
`
One
of the chairs,' said my brother passing me, and
pointing to a litter in which I could distinguish a
wounded
officer`was
not
vacantalthough it might not
have been given to mortal eye to see, with whom it was
filledand another had well nigh been at the feast of
the dead.'
`God be thanked, brother,' said I, `that it is neither
you nor Arthur. But whom do you mean?'
`God's will be done!'was the reply`I spoke
of Clintonhe had two horses shot under him---and
was brought down, at last, by the same volley, with
captain
Washington. I saw him, when he fellhe
waved
his sword to me and if ever man's face spoke,
without sound, his saidArchibald I repentGod
bless the woman of my heart! I hope that he is not
mortally
wounded. He was a brave fellow---andand---I
have been very hard upon him---I could not have borne
so much, I feara generous fellow, for'
`Are you not grateful, brother, for the protection of
heaven?'
`Grateful! brother!'he repliedsmiting his
breast`that were a poor word to express the
unutterable
thankfulness of my heart. Washington is safe
you
are safe---
Arthur
is safe---our country is
safe
and
II have not been cut off in the bossom of my pride.'
CHAPTER X.
Thou, land of the free!
Thou hope of the nations! what trance is in
thee!
Thou parent of heroes!the bravest and best,
That ere smote the plumage from Tyranny's crest.
`
Brother
,' said I, as we stood side by side, again,
holding our horses by the bit and throat lash, to steady
them, under the movement of the boat`this is the
third time that we have been upon the waters of the
Delaware
,
in darkness, with horsemen and horses about us.
What fearful vicissitudes for men like us, to have
experienced
within so short a time.'
`Truetrue brother,' he replied, `the water here,
that ripples along our boat side, shining like broken
silverdrifting against it, may run blood yet, under
the burden that is now upon it. We are growing
old apace. If years are to be numbered by events and
trial, we are already aged men!'He stoppedand a
long breath showed how deeply he had been employed.
`They fought gallantly,' said I.
`They did indeed brother; and Wilkinsonyou
remember
Wilkinson, he was close at my side during a
part of the hottest fire, cheering us on, in the finest
style (it was the present General Wilkinson, my
children
)and
Washingtonthe Captainhis voice and
sword were every where.'
`But who was that young man, that I saw rushing
forward, his face blackened with the smoke of the
enemy's
cannonjust under your horses hoofs, as you
charged on the left?some young officer; was he not?'
`You probably mean Lieutenant Monroeonce, I
was so struck by the solemn, undisturbed earnestness
of his countenance, that I reined up, in the middle of a
charge, to look at him.'
That same Lieutenant Monroe, is now the President
of the United States.
`Have you learnt the enemy's loss? It must have
been very considerable, for our fire was like one
continual
clap of thunder' said I.
About forty, I heard General Greene say, as I
passed
him, to Archibaldand among them, their gallant
leader, Colonel RahlGod have mercy upon him! It
is a fearful thing to die, so suddenly, in a foreign land
where we have gone to let out our blood, for money
or for glory. Every man has his pricethe soldier is
little better than the bravo, if he be paid in the same coin
among strangerspoor fellow! and yetwho would
wish to survive a blow like this?'
`I should not'said Archibald.
`His officers, I am told, complain that he would not
permit them to entrench.'
`Nonsense, brotherhis officers, like all other men
will not take more than their own share of
humiliation
and shame, you may depend on it. The truth is,
that they did not expect usscorned usand
Cornwallis
himself, so it was said yesterday at Washington's
table, had once gone back to New York, intending to
embark for Englandregarding the war as all over
our power extinct. But, it may be, that his lordship
was very discreet--
very
--in postponing such a
communication
.
Washington, it is said, dark and desperate
as it was, on all sides, listened to the story, and
repeated
it, with a pleasant countenance--as the harmless
vanity
of a young man, who knew not the spirit with
which he was contendinga spirit that iron could
not bind--nor fire consume--nor darkness, wind nor
rain extinguish.'
`I saw poor Rahl.'
We were now in the deepest part of the river, where
the new ice had rushed together, and piled itself up, like
a snow drift upon the black water---yielding
nevertheless
to the pressure of our boat, as, by some unskilful
management, she was brought against it, in the eddy,
and merging all under the water, as if it had been a
frozen spray, light as the very vapour. We were jarred,
horse and man, by the contact, for a moment, as if our
boat had suddenly foundered---but after a brief, violent
struggle, our horses recovered their foot hold, braced
themselves, anew, with their instinctive sagacity, against
the ridges, purposely provided in the bottom of the boat,
and my brother continued.
`I saw him---poor fellow---while his officers were
gather
round him---his nostrils swimming in blood---his
dark eyes hardly yet extinct---and his shoulder
absolutely
shot away. There was a calm, terrible darkness
in the aspect of death then---so suddenly---hot with the
festivity of the night, dreaming, but one blessed
moment
before, of his babes and his dear one. Brother!
say what you will, this trade of war, demands a
tremendous
preparednessa heart of stonean eye of
firea hand of iron. A trade thatO, we may
yet livetill the rush of our blood is donethe
eddy
of our heart frozen---the foam and froth of our
arteries
hushed, in a repose, more awful than death---when,
for the very deeds, that we have done this day, tears
from the eye, and blood from the heart---may be no
expiation
.
Brother I tremble.'
`It is the night wind Archibald.'
`No brother,
not
the night wind; that could not
penetrate
to my vitals, or make me feel so coldly; so like
death, just here.'
Our boat struck just then, and so unexpectedly, as
to make our horses stumble upon us. We were in some
danger, but Archibald's presence of mind, and my
bodily strength prevented any disaster. He leaped
out of the boat, to avoid the hoofs of the mareand
she plunged, headlong, after him, followed by half a
dozen other horses, that had been first thrown upon
their knees by the sudden jar, and kept there by the
boat swiming round. It was not deep, and Archibald
had the self recollection, to abandon the bridle, and
dive under our boat,while I, leaping into the rotten
ice, and half frozen waterkept off the horses from
the shore till he had secured his foot hold. We had
then little difficulty in bringing out all of them but
one, and he, poor fellow, was of such prodigious
strength, and temper, that we feared to approach him.
Several times he swam up to us, and stretched out his
head, as if to bring the bridle within our reach, but
we were too far from him. He then attempted to
mount the ice, and plunged, at least fifty times, into the
deepest part of the river, blowing and snorting the
while, so that we could hear him all along the shore.
And, now and then, through the sleet and darkness,
we could see the noble creature throw himself half
out of the riverplace his fore feet upon the
newly
formed icemake a desperable effortthe ice
would give waywe would hear the rush and
plungehe would go underand rise. Our boats were
such great unmanageable things, we were utterly
unable
to assist himat last he grew desperatethe
rattling
of his nostrils became incessanthis blows upon
the iceone uninterrupted struggle, thenpoor creature,
a long, loud, half suffocated neigha few more
struggles
,
and he passed under the ice, as we supposed, for
we heard a sound as if it came from the bottom, long
afterwardafar offand dying away in the distance
and darkness. I declare, strange as it may seem, that
men who had been in battleand seen their own
father
dead without shedding a tearshould be so
overcome
by the death of a bruteyet I declare to you
that our hearts were heavyeven to tears; and either
of us would have risked his own life, I have no doubt,
for the safety of the noble animalwhen we heard
his last loud, convulsive sobbing, and saw the amazing
strength of his blows, as he broke through the ice at
every leap.
We were instantly formed, and all the prisoners, to
prevent the possibility of recapture, from a desperate
enemy, stung to madness at the nature of the blow,
that he had receivedwere marched off to
Philadelphia
,
under a strong escort;composed of all our
horse, and the chief part of our light infantryso
called
not
because we had any heavily armed infantry
but because they were in a measure provided with
guns and bayonets. This step was a wise one, for the
enemy had a force along the Delaware, far superior to
ours; and, at Princeton, a battalion of infantry.
This was the first time that I had ever been in
Philadelphia
and
I rode along, street after street, of
noble buildings, side by side with my brother, who
seemedI know not for what reason, except that his
face was remarkably pale, and full of a noble,
uncommon
expression for one so youthfulto attract
universal
attention. The streets were thronged, but whether
in congratulation or not, it would have been difficult to
say. The women certainly looked pleased, and some
were beautiful indeed,so beautiful, that many a stout
heart rode unsteadily by them; and so I remember
particularly, as we wheeled from Sixth into
Market-street
,
a throng of girlsamong whom was onewho
laughed as we passedand one that uttered a cryI
heard the voice, but did not see herby Heaven, I
thought that Arthur would have fallen from his horse.
I dared not look at himtill the animal, surprised by
the loose rein, dashed over the pavement, as if he had
been shot through the heart, the length of two or three
squares, before Arthur could bring him to his place again.
And now and then too, as I passed along, I could see
a broad brimmed hat, a pretty little bashful face, with
the hair parted smoothly upon the forehead, a
something
in a drab coloured dressconscientiously
scrupulous
against being seen to look upon military parade,
in the open streethere and there, peeping with
scandalous
if not impious eagerness, through the half open
curtains, or shutters of a high windowor door
standing just upon the jar.
For several days after the battle, we were kept in
continual motionscarcely eating or sleeping
marching
and countermarching in all directions; first, after
collecting a body of Pensylvania militia, under
General
Mercer, as brave a fellow as ever stood fire, and
leaving our prisoners at Philadelphia, we immediately
returned to the Delaware, and recrossed it again,
making
the fourth time, that Archibald and I had gone
from one shore to the other, with swelling hearts and
mournful thoughtsalike in thatyet how unlike in all
that shakes the sinew, or shortens the breath of men!
At first, we were adventurersuntried in battle, going
to camp, and flying, in consternation, before a scornful
army that lined the opposite bank, and kept squibbing
at us, in derision; the second time, upon a matter of
such peril, that, if we failedand that we did not, was
miraculous, as two out of three of the divisions did
fail, (I speak of those under Cadwallader and Irwing,)
the pulse of all America would have stoppedperhaps
forever:desperate men, going in darkness and storm,
upon the sleeping and dreaming, like the angels of
death; the third time
conquerors
, high in heart
covered
with blood and glorywith all the sleepers and
dreamers in our powerthe fourth which was the
present time, with a complicated feeling of
apprehension
and thrilling delight.
We marched to Trenton, and took possession of it,
with an army of only eighteen hundred men. This
was on the twenty ninth of Decemberand, of this
number, twelve hundred were to be discharged on the
first of January!Tremble my childrenread the
history
of these days, and tremble!God fought with us, or
we had perished, again and again, in our blindness and
infatuation:bounties were offeredenormous for the
timetwo dollars a headthey were taken, pocketed
and carried off; but at last, the Pennsylvania militia
came in, electrified by the shock at Trenton, which
had caused the enemy's heart to contract, and his
extremities
to be drawn inand our force was augmented
to about five thousand men.
One day, while we were in this situation, my
brother
came to me, with the traces of, what always
astonished
me, when I saw them upon
his
face,
tears
upon
his countenance. `I have just left ClintonI have
wept with himI shall love him, I fear, better than
ever.'
`
Fear
why so?'
`Because if I once love himmy hand will tremble,
I am afraid, when the time of judgment is at hand
I.'
`What mean you brother?---There is that in your
eyes which I would fain see dissipatedyou are not the
man I hope,---I believe, Archibald, to spill the blood
of a human creature, for any lighter cause than the
salvation
of your country. You shake your head.
---Archibald---my
brother!---have I not heard you
denounce
the duellist, duelling!---You do not deny it
then why'
He interrupted me impatiently---`let us talk no
more about it, nowI shall do nothing rashly. Be
assured
of thatbut we are exceedingly earnest to get
Clinton away. I think thatwhat say you to it?
if he could be nursed tenderly; very tenderly by
byI cannot well utter my thought, brother; but
what need of words? You understand mewill you
escort him to Mr. Arnauld's?I see that you are
surprised
but
if you will not, I will, and deliver him,
with my own hands into the arms of Lucia, and help
him to make his peace with her.'
`That is my noble Archibald!' I cried, embracing
him`
that
is what I looked for. YesI will go
or youor'
`No---brotherI prefer that you should go. I
shall never enter the door again, if I can help it.
But you may'
`You have forgiven him thenrelented?'
`No---but Lucia may, if she please. I have no
concern
with her. I have done my duty, and I leave it to
her, to do hers. My opinion is, that there is only one
course for her to pursuebut thatO, it is only
one star in a midnight firmament of total blackness.'
I looked at him for sometime, without opening my
lips. A strange thought darted, like a startled eaglet,
from the high place of her abiding, athwart my mind
VOL. I. 15
but, ere I could look to her place in the sky, or her
shadow
on the earth, she was gone, unseen and unheard---
and all was hushed and beautiful, as the pale blue air
of a warm day. I dared not lure it back---I dared not
mention it---it was a flash of unutterable brightness, and
I dropped my eyes, when it passed, as if blinded by it.
I don't know that you will understand me, my children,
but I have been endeavoring to be very fineafter
the fashion of the day.
`You will go then?' said he, laying his hand upon
my shoulder, and looking me, affectionately, in the face
---`you
will
go---and you will seeher---her whom
you loveand you will be happy. Forgive my
perturbation
,
brother; it is not envyno!but it is
a far deadlier feeling, to a heart like mineit is
hopelessness
God
bless you, and herand (hesitating
her
too!'
`Are we to have another battle?' said I`thert
are mysterious movements in campand midnight
councils.'
`I believe that we may begin to look for one,' was the
reply. `Washington cannot retreat---all the eyes of
America are upon himhe is supposed to be five times
as strong as he is; and if he should retreat, with his
augmented force, the people would fall back into their
old despondency. The enemy are cruelly exasperated,
and bent upon retaliation. Cornwallis, I know, has
abandoned his design of carrying out the news of our
destructionfor a few days longer,joined his men
in the Jerseys, concentrated his whole powerleft a
body at Princeton, and is now moving upon us, at
this place. The firing that we heard just now, was
the advance of his army, encountering that of our's
under Greene.'
While we were yet speaking, several horsemen came
in, at full gallop; and it was soon known, for we were
in our saddles, before the noise of
their
hoofs, had
ceased ringing in our ears, that Greene, who had been
sent out to reinforce a small advance, placed about a
mile in fronthad met them in a disorderly retreat
and was himself thrown into confusion, by their
rascally
impetuosity, to get away from the enemy.
There was only one way to arrest them. Knox and
Greene advanced four capital field pieces, to the bank
of a little stream before us, called the Suspinck creek,
and played upon them, with such a blaze, and tempest,
that they fell back, and left us at leisure to arrange
nearly forty pieces, some of which were ready to open
upon them, at their first approach. It was a beautiful
night
`Would that I might communicate with Lucia, for
a single moment!' said Archibald, as we drew out our
whole cavalry, to the left of the line of cannon, from
which an uninterrupted roll of thunder, smoke and
brightness, was kept up, while we were conversing
`butmy heart is heavy brother, not, I believe
with apprehension, or doubt, but withdo not smile
upon mewith a foreboding. I may not see Lucia
again.I have treated her harshlyWe are on
the eve of another battlethat little creek is
fordable
the
whole force of the enemy is assembled on
the opposite bankour's upon this.Cornwallis
look! by heaven, the whole sky is in a blaze!'
I turned about, and saw the heights at the
westward
of the town, all alive with bustle and light
Cornwallis displaying, and extending his columns,
with narrow intervals(whence the artillery.
thundered
upon us, incessantly,)as if to gain our rear
outflank us, and put us to the sword without mercy.
Yet it was beautiful, magnificent. The very earth
shook under the roar of the cannonand the air
was loud with a perpetual reverberationthe sky
black with smoke.Add to this, that we were not
one thousand yards apart.
`A battle is inevitable.' continued my brother
`It may be fatal to one of us, and if these feelings may
be trusted, it
will
they are not those of fear, or
despondency, but rather of a solemn religious belief,
that I am not to survive it.If I fall'(drawing his
bright weapon, and severing a lock of hair from his
temples,) `give that to Lucia; tell her thatthat
I loved her to my last breathand bid her love another
if she
can!
'
His manner was awful, really awfulmy blood ran
cold at the sound of his voiceand his lips, it
appeared
to me, were motionless, emitting sound, in some
inward
,
preternatural way.
`I accept the hair,' said I, `but I am ashamed of
my brotherashamed of him, for the first time in my
life'
He smiled mournfullytook my handand
holding
it, for a moment, to his breast, said`I do not
blame you. You have no such feelings. Heaven doth
not vouchsafe them to youto any but the weary
and wastedto them that pray
not
to live.
Ashamed of me! are you?By to-morrow night,
John,when the red sun hath gone downyour
feeling
will be more of sorrow than shameperhaps for
these words;if it should berememberremember
that Archibald forgave you, and blessed you!'
He fell upon my neck, and kissed me, while his soft
hair was blown into my eyes,and over my lips.
`Butif I survive
if
why then brother, you
shall be welcome to feel ashamed of me, and of what
I have saidthe weather is very moist and warm
I am sweltering under this cloak.'
`But keep it on, nevertheless,' said I`we have
sudden changes along here; and before morning you
may want more cloaks than one.'
An officer here rode up to my brother, and ordered
him to trot his horses loudly about the rearwhile the
baggage, and three pieces of ordnance moved off to
Burlington
`They are in Council,' said the officer`and we
know not what will be doneit is getting very cold'
`Yes'said Archibald,`the most sudden change
that I ever felt. It is not five minutes since I was
complaining of the strange closeness and warmth
of the air!'
`I felt the same, half an hour agoHa! what means
that! some stratagem I suppose.'
I looked, and found that our troops were doubling
their fires the whole length of their line
`It will be intensely cold, I am sure,' said I`the
iron tread of the troop, rings famously already upon
the grounda single hour since, it was a soft,
noiseless
blow.They will want all those fires before
morninglook. The north wind has got among the
smoke, and the dark blue sky can be seen, in patches
all over usanother hour, and I will answer for it,
that we have a bright, unclouded starlight over
head.'`And a wind, that you could sharpen razors
against'said the officer`these norwesters are
mighty keen and wholesometo people (lowering his
voice) in a well built housebefore a roaring fire.'
`Shall we fight,' said Archibald
The officer shrugged his shouldersand replied
`yesor retreat, by the Jersey side, and cross
at Philadelphiaeither of which isspeaking after
the manner of mendamned hazardous.'
Archibald turned away, in displeasure. He would,
sometimes, when violently heated, suffer an oath or
profane word to escape him, but never, of late, in a
serious moment, and never at all, without deep
penitence
and shame
At length, however, we were directed to gallop along,
as silently as we could. And the whole army, upon a
road like the solid pavement, now filed off toward
Princetoncrossing the creek in a death like silence
behind our double fires, without disturbing the enemy,
who deserved to be broken, man and horse, for
permitting
it,and arrived at Princeton, a little before
day break.
This, as you will perceive, in the event, was a
masterly
manuvre, and is said to have been proposed by
St. Clair, a lion hearted fellowwhen all were looking
in each other's faces, dreading to speak.`Right!'
answered Washington, after a moment's consideration,
`That must be the blow. Cornwallis, it is probable,
VOL. I. 15*
impatient to retrieve the disaster of Trenton, has
pushed upon us with his main bodyand left, it is
also probable, a weak rear guard at Princeton.'
For eighteen hours had we been under armsand,
for two whole days, constantly employed, in marching,
countermarching, and fighting, without an hour's
interruption
:
except at the creek.
No sooner said than done!Our army was in
motion; we crossed the creek, as I told you, in a
silence like the wind of midnight, and arrived at
Princeton, almost without having spoken a loud word,
just before day break. The weather was intensely
cold, but the whole sky was luminous and beautiful
not a bird could have hurried over it, like the scared
swallow, or the drifting eagle, asleep upon the high
windwithout being seen. We were already about
to join battleyetwonderful as it may seem, I felt
little or no emotion, certainly none of terrour, but
rather, a profound repose in all my faculties, as if
they had been overwrought, and slept, as men will
sometimes sleep upon a rocking precipice, loosened by
the turbulent ocean.General Mercer was a little
in advance, when Major Wilkinson, who first
discovered
the enemy, (three regiments) about a quarter
of a mile distant, on the march for Trenton, dashed
athwart the advance, and communicated the
intelligence
.At
the same moment, an order was given, and
Archibald wheeled off to the left, leaving us to follow,
and as I approached, giving me his hand for a moment
`farewell! brother, farewell!'said he, stretching
his bright weapon at the full length of his arm, and
heaving out his chest, in the star light
`Farewell,' said I, striking the rowels homeand
leaping past himI could not bear it. Colonel
Mawhood on account of the ground, saw us, but partially;
and taking us for a light party, sent out to harass him,
gave himself no trouble about us; neither halted nor
formed, but came down upon our infantry, with a
steady
countenance and quick tread, till the very bayonets
clashedthen poured in a volley upon us, and charged.
Our men had scarcely a hundred bayonets with them.
Most of their pieces were rifles, and they instantly broke,
fell back, in disorder. It was a moment of the
extremest
perilWashington saw it, and leaped into the space,
between the two parties, while our men were forming,
reined his magnificent white charger, like a madman,
I confess, shot upon the enemyand received,
successively
,
the whole fire of the two parties without losing
a hair of his head. At the same moment, Mawhood,
sword in hand, mounted upon a superb animal, with
two little spaniel dogs barking and yelping at his
heels, wheeled, and galloped, hither and thither, among
our men, and finally, cut his way through them, and
escaped, over fields and fences, with a few, a very few
of his men toward Pennington. At the moment
when this charge was made by our troops, in
consequence
of the desperate hardihood of Washingtonthe
result of which was that sixty of the enemy were
bayonetted
upon the spot, our little troop darted in upon
them, in one uninterrupted blaze and thunder. Never
did I hear such a trampling of horses and clashing of
swords. We broke our way, literally through the
disordered
rabble. A party of them escaped to the Colleges,
but we pursued them, at full gallop, hewing them down
at every plunge, and entered with them, some of us on
horseback,and others, at the head of whom was
Arthur
,
on foot------and soon dislodged them. Greene,
we found afterwards, had a slight brush with
Cornwallis
,
who, alarmed at what he took at first to be thunder,
in the direction of Princeton, had pushed forward, with
desperate eagerness, to the protection of Brunswick,
where lay his whole baggage, and where General Lee
was held prisoner. We wouldbut human nature
could not hold out longerwe would have set fire to the
one, and released the other, before his lordship had
recovered from his consternationbut, it was
impossible
.
Our men actually dropped from their horses upon
the road; and at every step, some poor fellow threw
himself down, praying permission to sleepwhat must
have been, in the heat, and delusion, and exhaustion
of the moment, the sleep of death, undisturbedupon
the drifted snow. Our horses too, during the
remainder
of our pilgrimage, dragged their very limbs after
them so feebly that, while their flanks ran with blood,
and their flesh quivered at the touch of the spur, they
were unable to keep in a trot for more than fifty
yards at a timeand, finally, we were obliged to
dismount
and lead them, some dropping off by the way,
and our men employing themselves all the while in
destroying the bridges and breaking up the road, until
we arrived, on the sixth, at Morristown, with our
prisoners, nearly three hundred in number.
Two of the British regiments escaped, the fifty-fifth,
by the way of Hillsborough, to Brunswick; and the
fortieth, after a little scuffling, to the same place. But
the enemy were panick struck. They fell back,
shaking
in every jointconcentrating at every step, and
successively abandoning, in their trepidation, without
firing a shot, every foot of ground that they had gained
south of New York, except Brunswick and Amboy;
while the American Militia awoke all at once, overran
the whole country with whatever implements of
warfare
they could lay their hands on, cutting the enemy
up, whenever he dared to shew his face in small
parties, till, at last, he was obliged to forage with his
main body.
Within thirty days, my children, this mighty
deliverance
had been wrought. Within thirty days, the
whole of New Jersey, lying between New Brunswick
and the Delaware, had been lost and won, and lost
and won againwon first, by a gallant and well
appointed army from a shattered and flying rabble
and retaken from the conquerorwrested from him
in a clap of thunder, by the ghost of an annihilated
militiawho had suddenly leaped out of the ground,
as it were, at the noise of the cannon at Trenton, as
if the trumpet of God had been blown over the buried
nations, and the battle fieldand each that slept, as
he leaped into his saddle again, while the skies were
passing awaythe stars fallingthe sun going down
in a rain of blood and firehad sought his enemy anew,
as he was emerging with the dark population,and
thundered upon his crest, as he arose.
There, my dear ChildrenI have been willing to
forget the battle, and the subject for awhile, and amuse
you, for I know your taste and that of our people, with
a few rockets,andbut let me return
`Where, in the name of heaven, is Archibald?'
cried
Arthur, galloping by me; about four hours after
the battleit was the first time that I had heard his
voice for weeks`I have ransacked the whole fieldI
have asked every human beingI'
For a momentI felt as if I were shot through the
heartI remembered Archibald's farewellI
remembered
too, seeing him, a little before, dashing among
the enemy when they stove into the College, and`God
of heaven,' I exclaimeddropping the reins of my horse,
and reflecting back the terrified paleness of Arthur
upon his own foreheadas I recollected where I had
seen him`that must have been he.'
`Where! where!' said Arthur, his voice ringing
through and through me, like a strong trumpet
`O, it
was
he! it
was
he!'I repeated`no other
living man could have done ithis horse reared as
they faced upon him, and fired a volley into his bosom.'
`Gracious God,' said Arthur`did he fall?'`I
know not,' said I`I did not think of my brother, then
but I remember reining up, and holding my breath,
as the smoke rushed out of the College doors and
windows
and
a man, on horseback, appeared leaping amid
a perpetual blaze of powder, and whistling of bullets'
`That was
in
the Collegewas it not?' `Yes'I,'
answered, catching at the eager light of his wonderful
eyes`yes!what hope is there?'
`He escaped!he escaped!I saw him leap down
the high steps, firm in the saddle, giving a cut in the
rear as he went; and our party broke in upon the
enemy just as a whole platoon was levelled at him
nay, I am sure that not a ball struck him thenbut
I know nothing moreI have not seen him since.The
piece that was brought up, was so well served, that
the enemy surrendered after three or four shots, and
I saw no more of your brother'
`He is safe! he is safe!' said one of the troop, riding
up, with my sword, which I had dropped, without
knowing it, startled at the cry of Arthur, I suppose, as
if a dead man had broken silence, while I was standing
over himfor he was on foot
`Who is safe!' I criedstriking my spurs into the
lacerated flanks of my poor horse, and determining to
return to the battle ground, at all peril, and continued
the search
`The Captainthe Captain!' he criedand true
it wasfor the next moment, Archibald himself
appeared
,
coming in with five of his men at his heels,
driving ten or twelve prisoners before them. His
action was menacing, and his look frightful.I should
hardly have known himhis whole uniform was
saturated
with blood, as if he had been bearing wounded
men to the hospital.Upon his white forehead were
spattering drops, and his beautiful hair itself, stood
out, stiff and frozen, under the pressure of his iron
bound cap, as if that too were full of blood. I
shuddered
as he passed meI could not speakI tried, and
my lips movedbut I could utter no soundI felt as
if a spirit had gone by methe hair of my flesh rose,
and my flesh itself crawled. Nay, but for me, I verily
believe that he would have cloven the skulls of two or
three of the prisoners, as they drove them along like
wild beasts before them, pricking them at every step
with their swordsand flourishing their sabres round
their headsheads that disdained to duck, in the whistle
and blaze of the sabres, but looked with a steady eye
upon them. Archibald, in particular, seemed as if he
could hardly keep his hands off.
`For shame,' said I, `brotherO, for shame!'
leaping forward, and catching at his arm,I had half
a mind to strike it down with my sword, such was my
wrath and horrour,`warring upon the prisoned, and
the helpless!'
`Brother!' he replied, wiping the blood from his
forehead, and looking at me sternly`brother, you
know not what you do. Were I prone to bloodshed,
this foolish interference had cost every man of them,
their lives, and you, perhapsnay, I do not say it
jestinglyI am in no humour for trifling nowit
might have cost you,
yours
.Brotherthese eleven
men are murderersthey have just put all their
bayonets
,
again and again, through the bravest heart that
ever beat
`Whose! I cried'my blood running coldat the
look of his terrible eyes`whose?'
`Mercer's!'
`What, have they slain himhow? tell meI never
shall forget him. I saw him but once or twice, but
I shall never forget his carriage or voice!'
`He had leaped to the ground, and was leading on
his men to the charge, when, by some mistake in the
evolution, he found himself a prisonersurrendered,
by the living God, I saw it! I saw him surrender!
I saw him throw down his swordI had just escaped,
with about twenty of my troop, from the cottageyet
before I could get to the spot, thirteen bayonets were
in his noble heart!
He suddenly stopped`why how is this? said he
`Arthur!dear Arthur!I have never seen that smile
upon your broad forehead sincedear Arthur speak to
meare you wounded?do you feel that it is mortal!'
Arthur shook his headand a shadow went over his
face
`What! so cheerful Arthurand yet, unharmedafar
from the place of sleepand quietand deep, deep
loveliness and innocence.'
`Are
you
wounded, brother?' said Iseeing the
blood bubble over the top of his tight boots, as he rose
in the stirrups, or pressed upon them, with the
movement
of his mare
`
Yes
,' he replied, smiling`yes, and if it were not
to be a tedious affair, I should not be sorry ifif it
should be seriouslyor evenpardon me brother, but
I cannot forbear the trutheven mortally'
`It is impious,' said I`impious, Archibald:
whatever
is, is right.'
`True,' he replied, locking his handsand reeling
a little, in the saddle, `true brotherand God be
praised
,
that, in the heat of battleI remembered that, and
thought of HimHim the Everlastingand felt that
inexpressible awe and devotedness thatI cannot well
express itit was, in a measure, as if, to some one
of his Angels, I had heard him give Washington in
charge.
CHAP. X.
I never loved a tree nor flower,
But 'twas the first to fade away.
`But I am strangely altered now
`I love no more the bugle's voice
`The rushing wavethe plunging prow
`The mountain's tempest-clouded brow
`The daringthe exulting flow
`Of all that made me once rejoice!'
We
had now been at Morristown four daysthe
enemy had fallen back, fold upon fold, coil upon coil,
like some vast serpent, whose development had been
suddenly checked by a furance.My brother sent for
meand desired me to write a letter for him, which, he
added, `you are to take, to-morrow, to its destination.
The General has consented that you, with twenty
picked
men, shall convey Clinton to Mr. Arnauld's, and
stay there for two weeks.'
`But will
you
not go?
can
you not?'said I,
embracing
him.
`NoI cannot, nor would I, if I could, except to
see my mother. You will say to her, all that I could,
and I shall give you a line or two.'
`And Arthurwhat shall be done with him?You
are too ill to keep up his spirits.'
`You are mistaken: upon a sick bedor the bed of
death, men are apt to become very companionable.
I am better company for Arthur than you. You are
too happytwo blessedand, of too steady and
serene a heart for one that sorrows like Arthur
Rodman
.But
let us say no more of himHe will not
leave mehe cannot. When will you set out?'
VOL. I. 16
My heart beat hurriedlystoppedbeat again, with
a sort of whirring motion, like a partridge rising. He
smiled; but, after a moment's pause, added affectionately,
`You are a stout hearted fellow, Johnblood does not
appal you, quiet-eyed as you arethe flash of
musketry
,
the ring of bayonet and bullet, cannot disturb you
yet, manthere is what'
`Will eat the heart of valour through.'
`You smile to hear me quote poetry at such a moment,
but, so it is. Beware how you put yourself in the power
of womanno matter who she isno matter how long
you have known herloved heror been beloved, no
matter how passionatelynever put yourself in her
power. But if you shouldas you value your
immortal
happinessyour own, your dearest feeling, the
concealed and puredo not let her
know
it. The first
is nearly deaththe latter, worse than any death. It
is dying of a trodden and scorned hearta bruised
and bleeding lipa cancer of the soul.'
I was unable to reply; for though, at another time,
I should have rallied him upon such a display of
peevishness
and eloquence, because
his
heart had been
roughly visited by the ungentle windyet my faculties
had begun to fall down abashed before him, of late,
whenever he opened his lips, and I was silent.
`Give that to our mother,' said hehanding me a
letter. I opened it and read as follows
`I do not pretend, my beloved motherto pour any
consolation into the widowed heartnay, nor do I dare
to attempt it. There is one Being, and only one, fitted for
that officethe Father of the fatherlessthe Husband
of the widow.
`But there is comfort for us. Our father died, foot to
foot, face to face, with the enemyred with the blood
of men, shed in sacrifice.
`His hairI cut from his temples with my own
handthe smell of the powder is yet upon itit was
scorched in the blaze, and washed with the heart-blood
of the enemy. Remember that.
`I do not pray the widow to be comfortedthe wife
to weep no more:the mother, to forget the desolation,
that is about herbutO, my mother, let us turn our
eyes upwardand lay our forehead in the dustfor
whom the Lord loveth, he chasteneth.
`My father died, preparedly, in the loud thunder of
battle. May his Children die like him!
`Farewell!
`My own dear,
dear
mother, farewell!
`ARCHIBALD.'
`The other,' said he, as I finished, handing me that
which is subjoined, `you are welcome to read.'
`I fear, Lucia, that you have attributed too much
importance to the language, of which I spoke, and to
the word that I used, with no very scrupulous regard
to the consequences. That Clinton spoke lightly,
irreverently, disrespectfully of you, is truebut so
would every man, that should speak of you, in my
estimation
I mean, unless he spoke of you, as something
not lawful to be mentioned at all. I do not mean to
flatter or deceive you. You know well what my
feelings
have been. They are changed. I love you now,
as a sister;and, as a brother would, parting with his
sister, do I now address you. Clinton is dangerously
ill; the army have gone into winter quarters, and
here, where there are so few comforts, and none of that
attention
that
, which none but women, and women
too that love, devotedly, tenderly, can bestow, if he
remain, we may as well bid him farewell forever, at
once. He is deeply troubled about youaltered, I
do believe, essentially, in his habit of thinking. Have
I any influence with you?then let me entreat of you,
my
dear sister
, to forget all that has pastall but your
love to him, I mean; and be to him, his nurse and
beloved
one.
Can
you?will you? No matter what
he has been. You love him. No matter what he
has
done. You love him. All men have their faults; and,
generally, in proportion to their virtues. Remember
that
, and, whatever of evil you may discover, or imagine,
in his nature, be assured that there is a heroick
quality
at bottom to counterbalance it. What say you?
you are not vindictivenor are you light of heart, or
irresolute. I have warned him not to look for easy
terms. He thinks that he knows you better than I.
He does not. He is mistaken. In some points, it is
possible that he may; but, for your character, your
character Lucia, there is no human being, not even
your own father, that knows it so well as I. Nay, for
I would disguise nothing from you; rash and
precipitate
as you areI have prayed him to be
prepared
for the worst. He smilesbut his fine eyes fill, at
the same time, when I tell him, that a reconciliation is
by no means
certain
that, an everlasting separation
is, by no means, impossible.He does not believe me.
He cannotfor he knows not of what women, that
love, are capableand
you
, of all women. Lucia, had
you been my wifeat the bidding of my hand, I know
that you would have thrown yourself under the hoofs
of a whole squadronleaped from a precipiceinto a
furnaceinto the sea. I know ityou may not believe
it
he
cannot, but I do. Yet, I know too, that were
your nature roused to all its preternatural display,
you would have done the same things, contrary to my
biddingprayers, and tears, and cries.
`Forgive him Luciaforgive him, for my sake, and
be happy. For
my
sake. Am I presumptuous?
perhaps
you may
say
so, to him, Lucia, while he is sitting
by you, his strong arm about your slender waist, your
soft voice murmuring upon his eye lids
no, noI am wrongyou do not permit such things.
He
dare
not, by heaven, he dare not embrace your
waist, tillheaven hath bestowed you upon him forever.
Dare he?tell me Luciaif he dare, you are lost.
Yet what right have I to ask youI?who never
dare to put my lips to your handI! who, when you
opened your mouth, felt my heart stop, and the room
grow dark with the rush of blood to my temples?
`Am I presumptuous? tell meas a brother, have I
offended you? Tell meI'
`FarewellI would write foreverif it might be;
but no!you are another's already, in the sight of
heavenand I!Well, well, may you be happy,
very
happy, sister.
`Your friend and brother,
`ARCHIBALD.'
`P. S.Clinton is the favorite of the campand
astonished all eyes at the last affair but one. The
whole army are loud in praise of his conduct, and
intrepidity; it is said that, in the very heat and
whirlwind
of the fight, he was full of the same pleasantry
that we have seenNay, I cannot,
cannot
, continue
in this strain. It will break my heart. ButSister
forgive himforgive Clinton, and bless him?'
`And would you send that?' said I `Are you
aware of the consequences? Clinton will certainly
cut your throat, whether he marry her not.
He smiled, and shook his head, with a mournful,
gentle sweetness of manner, that was new to me
`that,' said he, `will depend, in some measure, upon
myselfand I have no particular inclination that
way:'
Our horses were now at the doorClinton in the
litter; and, despatching five of my men in advance, to
prepare the family for our reception, we set forward,
and at the end of the second day, near sun set
while the western heaven was running together, like
rough gold, and thin, drifting, blood-coloured vapour
we had just come in sight of the house, and were
descending a steep hillwhen, on lifting up his head
for a moment, and throwing his eyes about, he
appeared
to recollect the place, for he motioned with his hand
to stopand beckoning to me, I came up to him.
`It was
there
,' said he, `
there
, exactly where that
horse is passing now, that they first fired upon me. I
set off at speed up that hill, but, finding nine of the
party there, I determined to dash over that elevation
in frontI attempted it, but, shot after shot, was fired
after me, until I preferred making one desperate
attempt
,
VOL. I. 16*
sword in hand, to being shot down, like a fat
goose, upon a broken gallop. I wheeled, made a dead
set, at the son-of-a-bitch in my rear, unhorsed him, and
actually broke through the line. It was then that I first
saw Archibald, and but for him but no, I am not
permitted to tell thatI have promised not to tell,
that he saved my life, and brought down a fellow, at
twenty yards, with a pistol ball, at full speedand
I am very scrupulous,
very
, about my word!so, if
you should ever hear of any such thing, you will do
me the justice, to remember that I refused to tell you.'
I smiled, and would have replied; but, just then, a
loud bark at my feet, made me look down, and there
was poor Fidele, a favourite dog of Lucia's, tumbling
about in the light snow, and yelping like a devil. We
had been descried, long before we approachedand
found all the family,
all
that were able to meet us, for
the first time, ready with glistening eyes, to meet us
at the portico.
`Where is'I would have uttered the name of
Clara, but I could not. My heart sank in my bosom,
and my poor mother threw herself, sobbing
violently
,
into my arms. She had heard the tale.Her
manner was enough to convince me of that; and, when
I kissed off the tears from her shut eyes, and felt her
strong heart beating against mineI could have
fallen upon my face before her, and wept aloud
`My deardear John!' said a sweet voiceand
Mrs. Arnauld, flushed with beauty and emotion,
embraced
mestillstill, there was one absentI rushed
past them allencountered a man in the passagejust
took his hand in passing,and felt that I was welcome
indeedit was Arnauld himselfand ran to where my
heart told me, Clara was to be found. I enteredshe
attempted to arise from the window; but she could not
she staggered and fell. I put my lipsI didand
they thrilled, as if they had touched a coal of fire
to her blessed mouthbefore she had sufficiently
recovered
to reprove me. A haughty flash went over her
browher eyelids fella colour, deeper than any
crimson
,
it was a transparent flame, followedand then
after looking me in the face for half a minute, she
sank gradually upon her kneesand remained there
for a minute, in unutterable humility and
thankfulness
.She
arose thenand when I sat down,
overpowered
by the deep tumult in my own heart, the proud
Clara stood by me, and suffered my armby heaven
she didto encircle her waist, and press her bosom to
my forehead, as I satwithout any other reproof, than
that of laying her hand gently upon my headand
murmuring `
I am satisfied!
'
For the first time, I turned pale; for the first time, I
remembered her letter. `What could she have meant?
I asked her; but she smiled, and her glistening eyes,
swam anew`
I am satisfied!
' she repeated. `You are
returned to me. And you have dared to put your lips
to mineyou are innocent
she
is innocent.'
`
She!
who!who is innocent?'
`
Lucia
.'
`Lucia!' I echoed, colouring to the temples, I am
sure, and trembling under the touch of her soft hand
Her beautiful eyes stopped all at onceher lip
quivered
a moment, and, as ifin spite of all her
confidence
in me and Luciathe emotion that I
betrayed
,
had been a natural confirmation of all that she
feared, her hand, gradually, and without design, slid
powerless from my forehead, and rested upon my
shoulder.
I put mine upon itit was cold as death, yet I felt
it beat unsteadily.`Lucia,' said I, `
dear
Clara,'
recovering my self-possession, and drawing her more
closely to my breast`speak to me, dearestwhat
have I done?'
It was a long time, a long breathless time, before
she could utter a sound, and when she didfor a
moment, all the hushed sorrow of her heart, came out
with it, and she sobbed aloud upon my bosom.
And thenas if
that
were the last, last weakness, of
which she was ever to be guiltyshe released
herself
,
with a firm hand, from my armsretreated a pace
or twofixed her eye steadily upon mineand, when
she saw them sink, as they did, abashed before hers,
would have left me,probably foreverhad I not
detained her by violence.
`What would you?' said she, severely: `Have you
any defence?any?
I was fully sensible now thatno time was to be
lostbut how could I speak of what I had seenhow
account for the fact, that Lucia had opened the door,
at the first taphowshame on me, I was so
disordered by the beautiful apparition before meso
full of tumult and delight, notwithstanding her fearful
wildnessthat I forebore to urge any defence,
willing
,
heaven forgive meto prolong the enjoyment
awhileand a little provoked too, (though fluttered by
her jealousy) at the imperious severity of her bearing.
Would you believe itthis artificial embarrassment
of mine continued so long, that I could not open my lips
at last, and stood before her, like a guilty creature---
nay---when she moved away from me---I had neither
the power to arrest, nor detain her, with hand or voice,
or supplication.
Nayshe was goneabsolutely
gone
, before I was
sufficiently master of myself, to be sensible of what
had happened; and when I was, it was with a feeling
of pettishness, as if I had been ill treatedand there
mingled with it, immediately, the ancient leaven of
my nature, and I struck my hands together, and swore
as I had ten years beforeto bring down her proud
spirit to the dust.
How long I stood so---I know not---but I know well,
that I had matured my plan, before I stirred, or
breathed; and felt sure that, as my innocence was in
my own keeping, the proof of it, always at hand, and
that, as I could restore myself whenever I pleased, to
the place that I might appear to have lost, in her
affection
,by
a single word IHow long I might
have continued in the deep revery that followed, I
know nothad I not heard a soft foot passing over the
apartment on tip toein the further end of it, where
it was so dim, with the twilight lustre of evening, that
a body would have appeared like a spirit.
I knew the step---every pause---every foot fall---every
accent---and was already planning a triumphant
expression
of my countenance, for the haughty girl---
when she stopped---and I could hear her breathe, as if
her heart were full.I stood more erect, without
turning about or appearing to heed her approach
Gracious Heaven! how readily the heart may be
deceived.
The apparitiona beautiful little creaturewith hair,
the colour of raw silk---very light blue eyes, dancing
in tearswas not Lucia Arnauld!O, no
I caught my breath, and sheovercome with
confusion
,
and trembling nevertheless, addressed me after
the following fashion
`I pray you, Mr. RodmanI---bless me! don't
look at me so---you terrify meI pray youI---
pshaw! I never could make a set speech in all my life,
except to the giddy creatures about me---I have
something
to tell you---I know you---knew you before I
came here---have wept for you---dont let that flatter
you---I've wept for many men---before---and blushed
for hundreds---and laughed at thousands, soas I
was a saying---I've---yes! I've wept
about
you, not
for
you---did I say
for
you---Lord! how you stare at a
fellow!
In truth I did stare at herher roguish little face
---parted lips, and spirited eyes---her very attitude, was
so full of comical expression---the very manner, in
which her pretty little foot, with a broad paste buckle,
rested in advance, as she leant toward me, was full
of coquetry, frolick and expression
`There's my hand,' said she---`take it, if you dare.
You are very wicked, I see you are---any body might
know it by your facenow tell me---are you an honest
man?'
In spite of myself, I fell into her humour---`upon
my honour I am!' said I---and took her hand, and
would have carried it to my lips, but she caught it
away, with a look of angry surprise, and measured me
from top to toe, like an insulted princess.
`Well---well---(shrugging her shoulders) O! the
taste of some people---and---then!---the impudence of
othersa melancholy desolate creatureha!ha! ha!
ha!'
She would have left me, but I detained herand she
stood wiping her hand where I had touched it, as if
a snake had crawled over ither red lip agitated like
a transparent rose leaf, with an insect under it`Sir,
you are not the man that I expected to find youyou
never deserved such a blessed creature; it would be a
sin and a shame to tell youbut my heart will burst,
and you know itI see it plainly, by your saucy eyes
if I don't tell youIIare you sure that you are
the same Arthur that'
I grew serious, immediately, aware of some
unaccountable
mistake
`O yes!that now
that
will do!Look so, till
I have told you all about it; and, if your wicked heart
dont leap out of your body, you areI wont say what
I haven't mentioned your name, since I've been
here,I was afraid toasked no questionswaited
till I could see youbut how came she to fancy you
you
a melancholy creature!---pho, pho,---you are
ready to laugh in my face, at this moment---arn't you?'
`
Yes
'I replied---nodding
`How long do you remain here?'said she. `Two
or three days, perhaps.`But stop---for whom do
you take me?'
`For whom do I take you?a pretty questionfor
Arthur Rodman
, the talk of the whole country---the
lover of'
`I cannot hear you another moment,' I replied---I
am not Arthur Rodman'
`
Not
Arthur Rodman!---she cried, turning deadly
pale`pray, (recovering herself, and curtseying)
who the devil are you?'
`Jonathan Oadleyotherwise John'---she started
back three paces, and dropped another profound
curtsey
`And who the devil are
you
?' said I---
`Ellen Sampsonotherwise
Nell
'---she replied
I gazed at her, with a strange feeling of
astonishment
,
delight and terrour---might she not be mad?
The troubled beauty of her pale blue eyes---their
delirious brightness---the intensely vivid red of her
lips---just parting playfully, her white teeth, glittering
within them, like---like---by heaven there never was
any thing so white, as they appeared to me, for a
moment, contrasted with the gushing crimson of her
swollen lips---the etherial, eager delicacy of her
attitude
.
Really she stood like some creature of the
bright element, just emerging for a moment, upon the
tranced eyes of some one, that had been gazing, till he
was blinded, upon the setting sun.
`Ellen'said I`I'
`Upon my word! you don't breathe often, I imagine;
hush, hush, not another step. I am glad to find that you
are
not
Arthur Rodman, because I could not, giddy as I
am, bear to see'(swinging her arms, and clapping her
little hands, before and behind her, while her tongue ran
as fast as she could speak, and her bright hair danced
like a quivering halo about her head, at every swing
and the tears ran out of her eyes full gallopat the
same moment)`bear to seea creature like him,
after such a deplorable a a O hang it, I can't
talk about itbut if Arthur Rodman had kissed my
hand, he never should have heard another syllable of
the matter'
`I suppose not,' said I; laughingattempting to
catch her arm
`Hands off, PompeyArthur Rodman, I saidnot
Jonathan Oadley; what a name!-----Lord, I should,
die a------haven't you some other name?what do
they call you, when they are
not
laughing at you, nor
angry, nor
`John'
`Well then, John. Do you love Arthur?'
`Of a truth,' said I
`I believe you,' she criedskipping about, and
looking
at her delicate feet, all the time, as if they belonged
to any body but herself`let me see you cut a pigeon
wingpho, pho! in this way, I meantake carewhy,
Johnthat's your name, you knowyou dance like a
man a-skaiting.'
All this while, she was practising her steps, before
me, just as if we had been brought up together, all our
lives; but she suddenly stopped, tripped up to me
stood a moment on tip toe, about a foot from my face
staring me in the eyes
`I know what you are thinking now, just as well
as well as if I were in your own heart---mind!---you
think I'm a fool, I am
not
, (laying it down with her
little fore finger, very emphatically)I am
not
. You
think me crazy. You are mistaken. What did they
bring me here for?---to mope in the corner---kill
spiders---pinch the girls---and cry my eyes out?------
Stop---come here------there is somebody listening---now
mind me---'
My heart fluttered again---I remembered, all at once,
how Clara had left me------and I could have wept with
shame and vexation------
`I have something to tell you about Arthurnobody
knows it but myself, you shall know it, if you'll be good
sowhen shall I see you againas you live, don't
disappoint me---hush---hush.'
`To-morrow evening, at the same hour---in the same
place,' said I, hardly knowing what I had said------
`Bye now,' she replied---`bye! John'---shaking
her hand, with affected awkwardness, like a fat infant,
`
day-day!
'
She had been gone ten minutes, before I recovered
my senses; and, when I did, there was a strange
sensation
at my heart that I had never experienced before---
a restless, dissatisfied, aching spirit. I determined to
pursue Clara; but it was already so dark, that I could
not, and I descended------Merciful heaven! I had
forgotten
my own mother. Oh! shame on the profligate
heart of her son, a gray haired mother---widowed
and broken of heart, had been forgotten, by her first
born. I ran to her. I found her, troubled with my arrival,
and expecting me, in a remote apartment, hovering over
a dim fire, like something unearthly, her withered
hands pressed upon her temples, and her eyes looking
through her disturbed hair, as if they had been turned
to stone. `Mother, dear mother!' I cried, throwing
myself upon her neck.
She suffered my embrace, without any apparent
emotion
,
and then put me aside, and stood, her stately form,
once eminent for beauty and stature, unbowed, unbent,
with the pressure of all her woes---and rivetted her old
eyes upon the dark entry, which could be seen through
the door that I left open, as if she expected some other,
what other, I know notto follow me.
I was afraid to interrupt her---and, after a moment,
in which she stood, like a priestess, about to receive
some preternatural augmentation of power---she shook
her head mournfully, turned to me, bared my forehead
with both hands, looked into my eyes for a moment,
and then, gradually, gradually, her face wrought up to
such unutterable horrour, the blood flashing over her
forehead, and the light streaming from her eyes---that
I could not endure itI covered my face with my
hands and shook from head to foot.
`Aye, shake, shake!' she cried--`the tree was uptorn,
the old man shattered---and, and, O! my dear
dear
, boy'
---(falling upon my bosom and sobbing like a child)
where have you been? I did not know you for awhile,
where is
father?
some how or other, my son, I have
not remembered of late that---ha! Archibald?
I started, as if Archibald himself had stood before
me. It was Lucia---but O, how altered!
I went to her, and took her hand. God bless her!
God forever bless her! she was a ministering angel to
my poor old mother, kind to her all the day long,
watching by her, and nursing her, while her own heart
VOL. I. 17
was breaking, till her beauty had waned, and her
wonderful
eyes were dim with the death dew.
I was unable to speakand she then bore the
silver cup to my mother, holding upon my hand, as
upon that of her last friend.
`Poor dear Lucia,' said my mother, putting her old
arms about her white glittering neck`he will never
return.'
Lucia shuddered; but IIimmediately exclaimed;
`do not believe her, Lucia, he will returnhe
has
returned
,
he is here at this moment.' I thought only of
Clinton.
Madman that I was!my mother' sarms dropped
and she stood for a moment, as if the spectre of my
father had started up, all at once, before her.
And LuciaO, she shut her eyes, and pressed her
two hands upon her heart, as if it were burstingjust
whispering, so audibly that I could barely hear the
words.
`Heaven forbidO, heaven forbid!
here
,
Archibald
!
O, heaven forbid.'
It was some minutes, before I could command myself
sufficiently to prepare her for the arrival of Clinton,
after having undeceived her,but she cut me short at
once, with a sweet mournful smileher breast heaving
at the same moment piteously, and, as if the swell would
never, never subside`I saw your brother,' said she,
firmly.
I stood, holding her hands, but, struck by the strange
solemnity of her manner, as she said this, I dropped
them`what do you mean, Lucia?' I said, leading
her to a seat.
She sat down, my mother on the one side of her
watching every emotion of her pale, beautiful faceas
if for life and deathwhile I sat listening like one
disturbed in his own senses.
`I always lock my roomof
late
' said she, (
faltering
and averting her eyes)`I locked it last evening.
About this timeor about an hour beforeI returned,
and found it lockedyet the shape of a man was sitting
at the further window, with his face leaning upon his
hand. I could not be mistaken; it was ArchibaldI
know not what followedI attempted to stagger to
him, but a sudden sickness of the heart, giddiness and
blindness followed, Iahthat's Ellen's voice
another time, my friendI am very sad, very heavy
at the heart, another timedear mother, what can I
do for you?'
I was yet unwilling to leave to another, a duty so
perilous as minethat of announcing the arrival of
Clinton, wounded, and perhaps mortally, under the
same roof of this passionate girl; and had revolved,
again and again, a hundred methods of doing it,
without
startling her too abruptly, asking myself how they
had kept it a secret from her alone? and waiting to
hear her mention his name. But we were interrupted.
`Colonel Clinton will not lie downhe swears he
will not, child, till you run to him'said Ellen
Sampson
,
skipping in
Lucia arose calmly, and said`then will I go to
him. Miss Sampson, Mr. Oadley.'
I was amazed, and struck at her tone. Where was
that inward depth, that impassioned musick, that, to
have heard once would set your heart thrillingthe
very vibration of which, upon the ear, convinced you,
with a speed like electricity, that she who spoke,
loved
,
and loved desperatelywhere was it now?My
eyes filled, before I knew it, and when she put back her
raven tresses, and departed, with the air of something
regal, in sorrowand, I may as well speak it, for so
it appeared to me, in humiliationI did involuntary
homage to her, by bowing my body, and almost
touching
my forehead to the floor.
They departedand my dear mother's eyes were
already heavy. She kissed me, affectionatelyand
putting
her head upon the pillow, slept, as she sat, leaning
against the bed, while I stood over her.
The supper bell rangand in following the sound, I
encountered, successively, a little lame old mana
savage
looking boyMr. Arnaulda stranger, who was
afterwards a source of great comfort to meMrs.
Arnauld, and,
all
but Clara.
`She will not appear,' said I, to myself, `she would
lose her self-possession; she knows it, and dare not
trust herself.' How little I knew her. Before we
were seated, she entered the room, with a firm step
a little paler, I thought, than usualbut very firm, as
if nothing had happened.
I observed that all eyes were upon us, and I faltered
out her name, bowing. She returned it.
`Why! how is this?' said her mother, colouring
`I' `We have already met,' said Clara,
endeavouring
to smile, but carefully avoiding to meet my eyes.
It soon came to my sharebut why tell such things?
our supper was comfortless, and II was wretched
yet stung to the quick, angry with myself and provoked
at the composure of Clara.
My Childrenthese were trifles onlybut beware of
trifles. A light blow, the lightest, may render a priceless
jewel, of less value than the dust beneath your feet.
To them that love, little matters are important
important
ones, little. Hearts that could bear to be torn
assunder by deathsmitten with palsy, when they had
grown togetherbruised and trodden onwithout
bleedingwill madden at the petty exasperations of
life; a little neglect, a little unkindness will be death
because, they reason wiselya little unkindness is the
failure of only a little kindnessand who can
pardon
the omission to do, what may be done with so little
trouble? It is these
little
things which show most
directly, the alienationhabitual alienation, and
antipathy
of the heart. Remember my words. And
remember my story. 'Tis the last drop, that runs over;
the last breath that starts the shipthe last word that
breaks the heart.
After supper, we collected, allwith my dear mother,
around a blazing fire. Even Clinton was trundled out,
perilous as it would seem, and sat as near, as might be,
to Lucia.
Her lashes were wet, and he would have held her
hand, as he leaned his noble face upon the high cushion
at his sidepale as that of a dead man, but with a
beautiful timidity, as
he
thought, for I could see his
fine eyes sparkle through the half shut lashesthough
I thought it another, and more awful feeling. She
withdrew
her hand, twice from his, without looking him in
the face; and, each time, there was a dark convulsion
passed over the lower part of her face, like a spasm
perhaps a contraction of the heart.
The ideot boy, for so he appeared to me, sat, on a
low stool in the very corner; his wolfish eyes, blood
shot and wandering, incessantly glancing about, like
those of some wild animal at the sight of fire. He sat
bent nearly doublelicking his knuckles continually
with his enormous tongue; and his sprawling hands, and
red wrist, which in consequence of his shirt sleeves, and
the position in which he sat, at times, holding upon his
knees, and rocking two and fro all the whileappeared
more like the claws of some monster, than the hands of
a boy. His teeth were very large, and of a dazzling
whiteness, so that, when he smiledwhich was very
rarely, or spoke, which was still more rare, there was
something very frightful in his appearance. Had such
a creature started out, suddenly, upon me, in a lone
wood, I should have shot him dead upon the spot,
without
asking any question, I am sure; and even now,
when I saw him, pouting his dark lips, and licking
them, as he looked at Clara and Lucia by turns, I could
not forbear shuddering, and, with a curdling horrour
and heat of my blood, recalling the story of baboons
and ourang outangs, who had carried off the planters
womeneven to the top of inaccessable rocks and
trees. Nay, though my nature is
not
blood thirsty
and the sight of human blood, at any time, will give
me; to this day, a convulsive start, and sickness like
deathyet, I really felt uneasy in the presence of this
obscene and abominable shape; and wanted to strangle
him.
VOL. I. 17*
His sister saw me watching him, and probably read
the expression of my countenance, for she coloured
rivetted her pretty eyes upon me, and shook her head,
saying audibly`
you are mistaken
.'
I startedcoloured, I suppose, and fell into
another
revery
Near her, with his lame leg swathed in red flannel,
and lying on a cushion before him, sat her father, Mr.
Amos, David, Sampsonhis sharp, pimpled face
looking
as if the blood were about to start through ithis
little gooseberry eyes shining sideways, through lashes
like a wisp of hay, at every speaker in succession;
and his lips moving, all the while, as if he were gnawing
the inside of thema snappish, disagreeable old
gentleman
as one could desire to meet withso I thought.
`You are mistaken,' said the same voiceagain. And
when I lifted my eyes, in some confusion, I confess, for
it had not occurred to me that, as I sat, with my hand
over my face, under pretence of shading it from the
great lamp just over my head, studying all the faces
about me, that another eye was studying mine, if not
my heart also, at the same momentwith unsparing
accuracy too.
I was in the middle of the circle, leaning upon a
heavy round mahogany table, which ereaked aloud at
every movement.
Near me, bolt upright, in a suit of thunder and
lightning, as it was called, a material of domestick
manufacture, of different colours, and woven clouded,
then much in use; with a long red waistcoat, and a
cocked hat, too small for his head, which, it was said
he had worn night and day for half a centurysat a
tall, thin gentleman, all legs and arms, it appeared to me
who, as I afterwards observed, had the pleasantest
way in the world of tacking his thoughts together, and
recompounding all the disordered fragments that others
happened to throw awaywith an infinite variety, like
a kaleidescopewithout ever turning his head
smiling
,
or winking. His eyes were rivetted upon a picture
that hung over the fire place, which, I was told, he had
been in the habit of studying, with precisely the same
expression, for a week at a time (his visit never lasting
more than a week) during nearly sixteen years. He
was an ancient friend of the familyand had been so
long accustomed to eating, what he called, his
Christmas
dinner, at Mr. Arnauld's, that he began to
regard it as a sort of annuity, to be paid when wanted;
and it was therefore no uncommon thing for him to
stalk into the room, in the middle of the dog days,
without stirring a muscle, and announce his
intention
of eating his Christmas dinner with them, which
meantboarding with them for a week or ten days. I
had been prepared for his mannerbut no preparation
could have prevented me from feeling surprise. He
talked all the while, like a man in his sleepor one
conversing with spirits, always in the same tone,
without
emphasis, accent or modulation; and to the last
hour of his visit, he could not have told the subject of
that very picture, upon which he had gazed so long
nay, when it was turned once, with the backside out,
(in consequence of a death in the family,) he never
appeared to observe the changeyet, while studying
it, his eyes would wander from one side to the other,
and involuntarily adopt the expression of them that
were painted, so that a stranger would take him to
be the profoundest of connoisseurs.
`You are mistaken!' said the same voice. I almost
started from my seat. How could I be mistaken? was
it not evident that she was mad, her brother a fool,
and a beastevil as evil could be; her father a most
cholerick, wicked old fellow, and Dr. Hastings a
earned, pedantick, disordered simpleton? such were
my convictions. But, I will try to give you as well as
I can remember it, a part of our conversation on that
evening, which I shall never forget, and leave you to
judge for yourselves. To save the constant repetition
of
said he
, and
said she
I shall give the names at first,
of each speaker, as in a dialogue.
Arnauld(turning slowly about, so as to front my
face, and occasionally watch the change in that of
Clinton)`well young man'you have seen powder
burnt seriously again? what will be the effect, think
you?'
Mr Sampson. `Of what? seeing powder burnt?
make the young dogs too saucyno living with t'em,
the rascalsmake my house too hot for them:'
Young Nick showed his teeth, and rubbed his hands,
when his father said this.
Mrs. Arnauld. `O, my dear Mr. Sampson,
caro amico
---too severe, too severe indeedthese young men ought
to be admired, welcomed every whereit is they that
protect our daughters, and'
Mr. Sampson. `
Humph
.'
Mrs. Arnauld. `In short, Mr. Sampson, but for them
O, you are much too severe,
beaucoup, beaucoup
'
(pronouncing the final consonant---) while the husband
bit his lips, Lucia dropped her eye lids, and saw my
mother's lips move, as if she were trying to repeat the
word to herself.
`The battle of Trenton, battle of Princeton
ancora
una volta
, only think; while all the young men of the
country were flying away from their deliverer,
Washington
,
the great
le grand
(pronouncing it
lee grand
)
as we call him abroad; and you are all about your fire
side,
bonvivyans
our young men, sword in hand
nay, our old men, fell upon the enemyGod bless me!
I beg ten thousand pardons,' (running to my mother, who
had fallen back in the chair, without motion.)
Nell`This would be well enough, Auntmighty
well, but, now and then, some worsted Colonel' (her
brother's teeth chattered, and he peered through his
black hair at the Colonel, and chuckled, good
naturedly
I confess)but, curse his teeth, they made my blood
run cold (I could think of nothing but a young Cannibal,
tearing human flesh,) `a teasing lieutenant, comes down
upon us peaceable creatures, and carries all before him.'
Mrs. Arnauld. `By a
koop dee mane----cappo di
disperazzione
.'
Mr. Arnauld. `
Coup de main
, my dear, if wholesome
English won't do', (shifting his position)--`
disperatsione
.'
Nell. `Aunt---did you ever learn French?----or
Italian?'
Lucia. `Cousin!'
Clara. (Turning her eyes full upon her, in silence.)
`My mother, Ellen, is---pray dear Ellen, what think
you of a sleigh ride? to-morrow afternoon.'
Ellen. `
Afternoon!
what time?'
Lucia. `Toward evening.'
Ellen. `O, yes'---clapping her hands---`O, yes! of
all things in
this
world---a sleigh ride---O,
no---no--no, bless me, I can't, I can'tI'm engaged.'
Mr. Sampson. `The devil you are! to whom.'
Young Nick. `To that chap,' (nodding at me.)
Mr. Arnauld turned, and looked at the boy, and then
at me, and then at Ellen, who coloured all over.
Here Doctor Hastings began to mutter to himself,
gradually raising his voice at intervals, until it
became
sufficiently audible for us to distinguish---the
words, `odd fish---battle like that! poor creature!
Caro
amico;
wounded--very goodno, no, could'nt bear it,
engaged! bless me---so young, very bloody,
very
.
Arnauld. `Gentlemen,' his deep mellow voice
coming
,
as it were, from the most inward place of his whole
heart---while it fell, drop after drop, like molten iron
upon my own---and, if I might judge by the compressed
lips of Clinton, whose face was in shadowinto
his
also, while, it was evident that Mr. Arnauld did not
wish to be understood by others.
`Gentlementhe man who goes out to fight the
battles of his country, loaded down with prayer and
benedictionhe, who goes out to bare his bosom to the
bayonet and bullet, should have a clear heart as well
as a stout one. Wo to him, wo to him! if the wail
of innocence be ringing in his ears; if the curse of the
widow hath fallen upon his heartand wo to him, ten
thousand times over, if the hand of a brother or a
father be ever placed upon the hilt. There are men
not many, it is to be hopedbeautiful as Apollo, their
hearts breaking out, as it would seem, at every word
that they uttermen that, trespassing rudely upon the
innocent and lovelythe generous and noble, would
dareoh, there have been such men! and there may be
more of themwhose word is deathwhose approach
is dishonourmen, that would dare, in the wanton
revelry of their spirit, to tread upon naked hearts,
yesdrive their very horses over the torn bosoms and
trodden beauty of womanthat they might have it to
tell of, when they had escaped the wrath of the abused
fatheror'
I dared not look upthere was a mortal silence
but somebody, I felt sure, was dying near me; and when
I turned, I saw the face of Lucia buried in Clara's
lapone hand held in Clinton's, as if to assure
him
,
that he had no share in thishis eyes flashing fire
and himself trying, in vain, to arise and walk out of
the room, as if to order his horse. Poor Mrs.
Arnauld
,
there, sat like one struck with thunder, at the
moment of song and danceentreating him, almost on
her knees, not to movethe ideot boy's eyes,
glistening
with tears, and his lip writhinghis father
quivering
all over like a stud horse reined in, too long,
while the trumpet was blowingClara sitting
upright
,
pale as death
The silence that followed, was unbrokentill, in a
soft distant voiceas if to change the conversation,
Ellen demanded, if any of the company had ever heard
of a man in the neighbourhood, by the name of
Frederick
Crawford
The answer was general and immediatebut the
change of expression, in the face of Arnauld was
instantaneous
and terrible. He turned his searching eyes
upon Ellen; but, either she had no meaning in the
question
,
or she had a wonderful self command, for
her countenance did not change in the leastbut
his!
heaven and earth! the sweat burst out upon his
forehead
his
dark luminous eyes, were suddenly quenched,
as if in bloodand several times, he attempted to put
his hands to his throat, while gasping for breath, but
they fell, several times, powerless, into his lapwith
every symptom of a fit.
His wife was inconceivably terrifiedand a general
bustle took place, till he quelled it, sternly, by asking
Ellen, if she knew `aught of
Crawford?
'
`Yes'she replied, innocently`yes uncle, I know
that he is a scoundrel.'
Arnauld's face became lividbut he added`Do you
know him,who he is,or what?'
`Who he is!' answered Ellen, her face changing, all
at once to horrour, as she caught his eyesand her lips
turning whitewhile she came near him, and said
`
yes
uncle, I do know him,
now
.'
Clara, I observed, was writingand the next moment,
with a sweet, noble composure, she handed a slip of
paper to me, on which was written as follows
`Treat me as usual. My father knows nothing
but he is all awake. Do not stay long.Farewell!
I have given you an opportunity. I shall never give
you another. You could not deny it. I respect your
honesty
.'
I looked at her, but it was impossible to catch her
eyeand Clinton, just then, put his hand into mine,
giving it a fervent pressure`Let us go,' said he
`Yes,' I replied, `with all my heart.The sooner
the better.'
`What means this, young men?' said Arnauld
`Beware how you trifle with an old man. Do not be
rash. Things done in a breath, a whole life has been
too little to atone for.
`Clinton!' said Luciarising, with a beautiful
undauntedness
,
and standing before him. `I see by your
eyes, what you meditate. You are wrong. If you
have any regard for usfor
me
for
me
I entreat
you to stay.' The mother joined in the persuasion,
and Clara and Ellen.
`And you'said Clara, to me---`
you
have been
very dear to us'---
`
Have been
,' said I---in a low voice---`since when
Clara?'---She trembled in replying---
`You, will not surely return, till you are wanted in
camp!
There was an accent of kindness---affectionate
entreaty
in her voice, that almost brought tears into my
eyes; but a temper, a new temper, had uprisen in my
heart, stubborn as death, implacable as hellone that
I never had dreamt ofand I replied
`I shall go to-morrow at day break.'
`At day break!'said Ellenrunning up to me---
`you are a pretty fellow?---is this the way you keep
your promise?---I '
spose
you'll come back, again by
sunset.---'
Clara, before she knew it, glanced at me, and then
at Ellen, as if doubting the evidence of her own
senses---but she disdained to speak, and I was far too
haughty to explain.
I turned to go---but Mr. Arnauld interfered---`My
friends,' said he, with great solemnity, `what the
meaning of all this affair is, I cannot pretend to imagine.
But I am jealous of appearances. Sleep this night,
quietly under my roof, and go away to-morrow, with
God's blessing upon your head. Whatever happen---
I will never pursue, nor molest, nor thwart you---He
hath taught me humility, and forbearance. But go to
night---to night, Clinton---to night, Oadley---and at
the risk even of
his
displeasure---I will pursue you---
till I am at the bottom of the whole---yea, to the
furthermost
extremities of the earth---and then---if there
be aught that a father could not bear to see, or hear---
that father's blood, you shall be wet with---or he shall
wash his hands in that of your hearts.'
`
Let us go
,' said Clinton, composedly. `No mercy,
Clinton, no
mercy!
' cried the distracted Lucia, falling
upon her knees before him`O, do not go.'
`Is there any hope?' said Clinton, tenderlyputting
his hand upon her shoulder, while her father stood, as
if irresolute whether to trample her down, upon the spot,
and complete her degradation, or to uplift
her
, and curse
him
to his heart.
`Any, for the man that you
have loved?' `None
---'
said Lucia, recovering herself, and standing up, while
her sweet voice came, like an echo issuing from her
heart. `Before you came to me, you
knew
it. You
pretended to know meno, Clinton, no! there is
no
hopeI cannot deceive you. I have loved youI love
you no longer, but I cannot hate youI cannot hate
the man
that
Clinton! look me in the face,
do not deceive yourself
there is no hope for you
not
even that which now thrills at the bottom of your heart.
Rememberremember! nothing that
can
happen will
bring me back to love   Are you a man?
Forget
me. Are you a man? Do not leave this house in
anger. I appeal to your heart. You have done that
that
, for which there is no reparationheaven forgive
you
I do forgive you!
(putting her hand in his) From my
soul, I forgive you, and pity you. You have done that
do not leave us in anger. Remember our love.'
`Mr. Arnauld,' said ClintonSending away the
cloth from his bosom, his eyes gushing out for the
first time, in all his life, with unutterable love, and tears
and tenderness, while he leaned, against the high chair.
`Strike! drive your sword through my heart---up to
the hilt---I desire itI'
`
Clinton!
' said Lucia, dropping her arms
He saw her eyes, bowed, turned away his face, and
buried it in his hands.
`I cannot go to nightOadley, I
cannot
Clara'
I looked at her, and half extended my hand, but there
was no correspondent motion in herand my
countenance
darkened, particularly when I heard her say to
her sister`Lucia will not want for consolation; where
hearts are readily won, or
lost
'it was bitterly said,
and alluded, I knew, to the unhappy errour in which
she was, respecting the night interview.
`Before you go,' said Ellenlooking strangely
serious for awhile`I would say a word to youfather
shall I go into the dark entry with him.'
`Certainly Nellhe will be more hurt, by a
dozen, than youcoxcomb!'
VOL. I. 18
She led me out, and requested me (giving me a card)
when I went to Philadelphia, to inquire at a house in
Sixth-street, for a person, where I would hear of
something to my advantage.
`Can I trust to you,' said I`your countenance is
full of mischief.'
`To
me
,' said she, facing to the light, when I found
it all in tears.
`I will trust to
that
,' I exclaimed, `farewell!'
`You shall first go in, and bid farewell, and sit an
hour with them, it is early.'
I consentedand, though our first conversation was
very embarrassing, and the latter part restrained and
startling, yet it was full of patience, passion, and deep
feelingevery word told.
The chattering of the boy awoke me from a revery,
and I found him listening, with evident delight, and a
good humoured expression, to Dr. Hastings, in which
delight even his father appeared to participate, with a
pleasantry of eye, that led me to distrust the suddenness
of my first judgment.
The Doctor preserved, precisely, the same attitude,
now, that he first sat down in; his long legs sprawled out
at their utmost length, nearly divided that part of the
room from the rest, and though each of us had stumbled
over them in turn, yet, the Doctor appeared as
insensible
of all that had happened, as if they were none of his,
and he had been sleeping in a mill---for he woke not,
till the noise stopped, and then, for a moment he would
start, look a little askew, as if all were not rightand
then, as if, right or wrong, it was no matter of his,
would relapse again, into the same audible revery
in somewhat after this fashion.
`Odds fish! up to the hiltpoor creature, poor
creature, if men could only content themselves with
(here his voice died entirely away, and he pursued
the question, and finished the sentence in his own mind)
---`odds fish! women will have them---odds fish---not
go to night---forbearance! good! hand grenade,
lighted
in a powder magazine---setodds fish! what a
talking---always said, that drift woodvery cold, very
cold indeed. Christmas. Pho, nonsense. Not so---
not so---Sir, that marble! (the chimney piece was a
beautiful marblethe colours rushing together), fire,
metals
all in fusion, see it, hear it. I can assure you that,
having prepared the precipitate andLord! lord!
what a profligate---worsted Colonels! excellent, that
horse, nopoh, poh, no--split in the off shoulder, split?
split peas, split wood, split heads, split! split, same
word, good night, bless me! all alone!'
As he concluded this soliloquy, he turned his head
to the left, where the room was all vacant and desolate;
and he supposed, it is probable, that he had been left
alone, nor would he have soon discovered the mistake,
had not the boy turned his chair round, while he kept
on with his soliloquy---so that he could see such of us
as were yet left.
But enough of this. I was mistaken in all their
characters. The boy was neither a beast nor a devil,
but a singularly active, shrewd young dog, the father, an
old fellow of singular pleasantry, and Dr. Hasting's,
with no more learning or pedantry than my boot jack
---so much for rash judgments, and Ellen; but of her
hereafter.
Clinton and I slept together, in the same room. His
manly nature could support him no longer---he loved
truly and devoutly now; and, with the true feeling of
all men, the more truly and devoutly, in proportion as
the object of his love seemed more, and more, implacable
and distant.
He wept aloud---feigning, whenever he could no
longer suppress his sobbing, to cough---the
consequence
of which was, that, in the morning, when I was
ready to mount my horse, poor Clinton was delirious.
What could I do?
I
was not deliriousand I left
the house, as I said I wouldat break of day--O
heaven! with what different emotions, from those, with
which I entered it the last night, or left it before.
Clinton
was
delirious, and I left him: committing
him to the family, and leaving one servant with him
almost desiring, in the bitterness of my spirit, that
he might die, under their inhospitable roof, and II!
that I might never meet, hear of, nor see Clara again
Clara!
for whom I would have laid down my life at
that moment!
CHAPTER XI.
`Go then! if e'er we meet again, perhaps,
`I may be worthier of youandif not,
`Remember that my faults, though not atoned for,
`Are
ended
.'
Sardanapalus
.
The
day was just breaking, when I mounted my
horse. The whole eastern sky was of a blood red,
through which an intermittent flashing of pale flame
thin and beautifully faint, was kept up;while all the
broad circumference of heaven, was rolling, like a dark
ocean, except just where the red sun, like a great
furnace
,
gave out an awful, troubled brightness, with a
white rolling vapourthat mounted up, just over the hill
tops, and then rushed away toward the western horizon,
as if driven there before a high wind.
I rode onward, hardly willing to look into my own
heart for the motive which made me avoid the road that
kept longest in sight of the house; and only pausing
once to look at itas it came, by a sudden turn in the
way almost in front of me. I rested then, and,
perhaps
the keen wind had done itI felt my eyes
smarting
;
my heart too, (perhaps it was the mountain air,
and the deep snow,) labouring as in travail, with one
continual, uninterrupted throe. It was not to be borne
I had outridden my men, already; but here,
regardless
of the steep perilous roads, (which, I assure you,
was far more so, than that by which Putnam once
escaped
I
have seen them both sinceand I assure you, that
I would not ride down this, a second time, as I did the
first, for all this worldand that I would ride down
that, where Putnam did, at any time, for a mere trifle
VOL. I. 18*
That was a foolish, but not a perilous feat of hisbut
mine was that of a madman, as well as a fool,I struck
spurs into my horse, and went down, with such terrible
speed, that I lost my breathand should infallibly
have been dashed to pieces, had not the snow been soft,
as well as deepso that, at every plunge, my horse
went into it breast high. And, as I liveI touched the
crupper with my back, all the way downand my
feet were on each side of his head.
This could not last long, and I was recalled to a
sense of my inhumanity and rashness, by seeing the
white snow tinged all along my route, with the blood
that had gushed out, hot and smoking from the
lacerated
flanks of my horse---and my men almost in the
clouds, as it appeared to me, in the momentary glimpse
that I had of them, reining their horsesas if they
were near the brow of a precipice; and leaning forward
over their necks, to see by what miracle I should
escape.
I was fain to dismount; and it was a full hour before
I got into the level country againa part of which
time, my mind was meditating, with a profound
melancholy
sorrow and haughtiness, on all that had occurred
norfor, it is no light object with me, my dear
children
,
to make you familiar with all the working of
my heartnor can I deny that there was a brief
warring, for a moment or twowhen the golden haired
Ellenand the pale, princely Clara came into
competition
.
I had heard much of the doctrine of election
in theology, I had found it to meansomething that
was intelligible to them, to whom nothing else was
intelligiblein law, the right of harassing a poor devil
more ways than one; in love, much the same thing.
But here was a case of no ordinary difficulty.
Had it been one of the black vapours of theology
I should have peopled it, immediately with beautiful
shapesa question of lawfor I was unfortunate
enough to have an uncle for a lawyer, of whom, I will
here take an occasion to relate an anecdoteI should
have been quieted at once:He was a surly, strong
minded man, educated in the courts of Westminster
Hall; and used to say`JohnClients are gamblers.
The spirit of litigation is the spirit of gambling. Once
provoke it, and the devil can't lay it. Once get a man
into Court; and, no matter how he is usedhe will go
there againif he lose, to retrieve his lossif he win,
to win again. A man wrote me a letter once, to this
effecthe was worth a hundred pounds a year to me
and about half that to his familythey starvedhis
creditors starvedbut his lawyers were sure to be paid.
`SirI gave my brother Dick leave to go upon
my meadow and shoot muskratsHe went. Do ye
think the damned rascal didn't gig 'em?I want you
to bring as many actions against him, as it will bear.'
yours &c. `Never study the law, John, it will be
sure to make you a scoundrelyou have some talents
that way, now,' (meaning the law, I suppose.)
`Pray,' said my mother, I remember,`pray, do
you not, you lawyers, class ideots, lunaticks, children
and women altogether?'
`Yes sisterwhen
married
and why not?said
my uncle. I never could bear the law after that; and
and now that the doctrine of election, rushed in upon
me, like a dark wind, I feltI cannot well describe
how I feltbut as if I could go to the end of all the world
throw off the profession of arms, and set down to
some less destructive occupation. My thoughts were
all in an uproarNew passions arosea new ambition
new powersI thought of being eloquentthe bar
the pulpitthepho, phowhy should I relate
to you all the disordered wandering of my mind
why?that you may know the heart of your father
the heart of man, without the peril of encountering
itdiseased and festering as it iswith the
nakedness
of your own.BoysI have wrestled with
angelstill the sun went downwith devils, till the day
brokeand I would have you learn all the wisdom,
without any of the sorrow, that I learnt.Follow
me thenI will lead you, for I can do it, as distinctly
as if it were but yesterday, through all the
vicissitude
of my thought, as I walked my horse, leisurely,
along the untrodden road.
`To the churchno!There is no field for
ambition
the
climate is too changeablethe fashion of our
worship too formal and staidno, I will never go into
a place, under pretence of ministering with angels
unless I have angels to minister untonever, till I
have been chastened, even unto death. Clara said
right. I have not known myself. These thoughts are
new to methe war once over, I must be something,
less helpless and contemptible than a shattered veteran.
The church!where, as my uncle, the lawyer, used to
saythe people go, for every thing but what they
pretend
to go forwhere, if a man want to know who
has any new clothes, he has only to go on a cold
sunday
every
new coat, bonnet and shawl will be
there:
After this, I know not well, where I rambled for
awhile; but at last, I came to the family againwith
a sort of start
That rascally French and ItalianI could hear any
thing better. Why not talk English?The French!
O, I could not love a woman, who had one atom of
the French nature in her heartthere was madame
GShe was telling me a story one day, and, having
omitted some word, upon which the whole joke
depended
and
a villanous joke it wasshe referred me to
her husband, who sat at my elbow, for itwith leave
to tell me, when she had left he room. He began, and
when he came to the parthe forgot itand bowing to
me, ran into the next room, the door of which stood
open, where I heard him ask his wife what it was.
She told himand he returned, laughing all the way,
and told it to me!It was a shameful, black guard
story, founded on a mistake.That was French
sentiment!I watched it ever afterward.I would
as soon love a woman, that should send me an indecent
picture, while I could hear her voice giving the
direction
to a servantunder pretence that she could not
put it into my hands, herselfas her who could do,
this.YetMrs. Arnauld often speaks of their
beautiful proprietysaying that a French girl never
ventures to say of a man, that he is well made, a fine
person, or any such thingnor, as we do in
Philadelphia
,
go to see naked pictures, and naked statuary,
by
ourselves
. Noin France, ladies would be ashamed
to go to such places, except in the company of men
not merely for protection, but lest it should be
imagined
that they went in secret, to indulge a vicious
appetite
.Nay
moreshe even justifies the toilette
regulations
of French womenthe etiquette of the
boudoir
O
shame!I remember when Miss  was
languishing upon a sofa, near me oncea fat, unwieldly,
turbulent maiden of fifty, that, Mrs. Arnauldthe
mother ofpshawI
will
forget her!She opened
her deep exquisite eyes upon me, with that
irresistible
wickedness of meaning, so common to herand
reminded me of a French author that we had been
reading together (I read the language, but could not
speak it)where he speaks of a pretty woman
languishing
in bedand putting out a white hand to you,
familiarly, when you enter the roomnow and then too,
as if by accident, half revealing the prettiest foot in
the world`all very well,' said she, `very well indeed,
in the lovely and youthfulbut an old woman!law!'
`You may kick and sprawl,' said I to myself`all
over the room, if you will
but it wont do
'Yes!
the mother ofofout with it, heart
Clara!
she
has put that into my thought. So much for France,
and French women, and French sentiment!
By Heaven, but I did love herO, (Clara I meant)
OI knew her approach, I could feel itwith my
eyes shut, and ears sealedthe sweet influences!the
atmosphereher fine heartfrom my very boyhood
and yetyet!I am already an outcast. Well
I thank her, that I am not humbled.
EllenNellyNellwhat beautiful hairwhat a
faint, bashful, luminous eyeand that dimpleO, the
little creature stood, like something transparent, before
meI thought that I could see her young heart
beating
,
and bobbing about, as if it were encased in
chrystal
.Why,
did she speak to me?---why?---why do
women ever interfere?---why---as they always do in
love affairs?---why! the moment that they suspect a
partiality in either party do they report an
engagement
?O,
it is easily told---the startled fawn is not
more timid and distant---nor more easily turned aside
from the gushing water---than a young heart in its
first love.Every match that a woman breaks off,
no matter how, by her meddling impertinence---folly---
lying or coquetry, augments her own chance---because
it keeps undiminished the number of unmarried men.
Nell Sampsonbeware!there is more evil within this
heart than thou art thinking ofmore than I, myself,
ever dreamt of.If it be not explained, that, which
gave a troubled lustre to the impatient eye of Clara---
ere we meet again, wo to
thee!
Winter may pass
awaySummer may comebut the scent will lie
forever---and
you may as well hope to turn the staunch
blood hound from her chace---while the spattered silver
is upon the green hills---as my heart aside from its
purpose
.
I knew it not, till this moment---I knew not that
I had aught of this spirit within me. But now---
now
I feel, as if I were newly born, indeed, for all that
Clara has foretold---born for mischiefas if I could
stand up, before the assembled world---herself---my
face undisturbed---my forehead unmoved till the vessels
of my brain were all ruptured---ruptured by my
thought---charged with extravasated blood---the
furnace
of my heart burning to the last sob.'I started
---my own breathing was terrible, as these forbidden
speeches came out, from the darkness where they had
slept so long---breathing!---no, it was snorting---it was
like the fierce gasping of a tired panther
Ellen---how beautifully she danced too!---the motion
of her limbs made musick. But Clara---she never
dances. She is too stately for the dance---too awfully
chaste, for the profligate revelry of the dance---and yet
I loved her---
loved
her! Aye, till the very pulse of my
life stood still, at her bidding.This, they call
un
bending
, when a tall, princely creature is fool enough
to jump about a large roomto the sound of musick
---fools!---it is
bending
, rather---bending to the earth.
I cannot bear to see a lofty mind employed, so like the
babies of this world---I
Clara!---I would never have parted with thee, had
I known the full extent of what I have already suffered
---and now---now, dear Clarait is far less in sorrow,
than in anger---that I---I---by the bright sun of heaven!
I do fear that we have trampled down, all the beautiful
vegetation of the heart---shut our eyes to the loveliest
apparition of all our experience---sealed up our senses
to the odour that issues from all that is touched by the
hot, beating hand of genuine passion---forever and ever!
O, Clara
Thy
heart, dear!---O give me the unvisited,
untouched one---thou wilt never be happy---and I---O,
why have I left thee?---Then, why not return?---(I half
wheeled my horse)no---no---sooner would I die ten
thousand times over!'
There, my children---there! You have now a fair
chart of the rambling incoherent journeying of my
thought for some hours---when, happening to put my
hand into the breast pocket of my military surtout, I
was startled at the rustling of papers. I pulled them
out---and, instantly---as if my brother had stood before
me, and called me with a pistol shot, from a troubled
dream, I started broad awake. They were his letters,
to my mother and Lucia. How strangely I had
forgotten
them.But what was to be done? my men
were no where within sight or halloo---(I confess
moreover
,
that I was not
very
solicitous that they should be
---for, to say nothing of my soliloquy, which I now felt,
as I came to my senses, had occasionally been, far from
inaudibleI was not very sorry for an opportunity to
return---proudlyfor a moment.) They will believe,
said I, when they see me riding up, that I have come
to sue for mercy. I will not undeceive them---I will
enter the house, present them with my own hands,
and return, do what they may, to my saddle.
I did so---I rode back---no living creature saw me,
or announced my approach, until I stood before them---
just about the hour of dinner. Clara fell back upon
the sofa. I bowedand gave the letters to Lucia
who was preparing some herb tea, I thought, in a little
silver can. Her hand shook, when she saw the hand
writing.
`Here is another,' said I, `which you will be so kind
as to deliver, after I have gone' (giving her that to
my mother.)
She tore open her's, read itas if it were her death
warrant, covered her face, and left the room, forbidding
me with her hand to follow.
Again I was upon my waybenighted, and, but
why need I relate the paltry adventures of the day?
The next evening, I was in the arms of my brother,
determined never to leave him again.
`How fares it brother?' said he`you are not the
man that you were. What has happened?'
`Fellowship!'---I exclaimed, giving one hand to him,
and another to Arthur, who sat by---`
Fellowship!
---
`By heaven,' he cried, rising in his bed, and rivetting his
steady eyes upon me--`O, by heaven, it has fallen at last!
---all women are alike!---are they not?'
`
They are
,' said I; and then we embraced. `Well,
well---so much the better,' said Archibald. `for
Washington
.
No man can serve two masters. Woman and
war, woman and manhood, woman and God are fire
and water; they cannot live together for a moment.'
`Cousin,' said Arthur---I started to hear the sound
of his voice---I could not reconcile myself to it---it was
the voice of a stranger---`the reapers are ready---the
harvest nodding; we must go down to it, speedily.'
`How,' said I--`shall we do any thing;
can
we, before
the spring opens?'
`I hope so,' said Archibald---`or we shall starve and
rot where we are. `See there!' he cried---pointing to
a foot soldier that was hobbling by at the moment---
`that poor fellow has gone, literally barefooted, day
after dayamong the ice and snow; one third of our
men are in the same situation---not one in five has a
blanket---and we have been two whole days without
provision---the wretched parsimony of these farmers
about here, and the villainous new management of the
Philadelphians, have brought our little army to death's
door.'
`Philadelphia!' said I, recollecting my engagement,
and inconceivably agitated, with the crowding thoughts
that rushed in upon my braindilating all the veins,
till they ached. `Arthurwhat say you for a ride
there? Brother, can you spare him?'
`I!Certainly I can. I shall be out in a week;
andbut you must seek higher authority than mine, for
leave of any absence now.'
`Not for myself'I answered`I have a furlough.'
`Trueand I will answer for Arthurwhat say
you Arthur?'
Arthur agreed to it, immediately, as if, like myself,
he was ready for any change of scene,any, in the
world, rather than such cold, wintry inaction. And
I proceeded to relate the meeting with my mother.
Archibald shut his eyes, and pressed his hands,
locked
and trembling, upon his breast; but, uttered no
sound, more, either of surprise or sorrow. The blow
was too deep for thatthe bleeding was inwardly.
I then led him to my interview with Clarahe
smiled
shookstarted
upbut when I came to the trial
and forbore, as I was obliged to, all explanation of the
cause which led to the misunderstanding, he caught
my hands, wildly.
`Brother Johnbrother!you are a madman---you
have thrown away, like a child, a jewel beyond all
pricethe heart of a proud womanO, how I pity
you. You are a madman; brother, think of it, down
upon your knees and think of itif it be not too late,
too late, beyond all that I can imagine. I know not
what you have done, or said, or thoughtI care not.
She has loved you, and she! Clara Arnauld is not a
woman to forget her love. She has loved you, and she
will
love you, forever and ever. To horse then, to
horse! before you sleep, ride for your life---if it be not
VOL. I. 19
indeed, too late---
too late
---and throw yourself into her
arms. O, brother, brother! that men should be so
wasteful of that happiness,
that!
---the rapture and
passion of a devout woman---as to kill it, so
unworthily
!  O, if such a creaturesuch a creature!
any that wore the shape of a woman, were but to move
her sweet lips at me, as I have seen the proud Clara,
moving them at thee---O, I would lie down upon my
face, and set her foot upon my neck---rend my own
heart from its socket---and give it to the wolf or the
vulture before her eyes.'
I was deeply affected with his manner---I cannot
deny it. But I was ashamed to follow his advice---
ashamed to tell the truthfor that would be, or might
be to breathe upon the spotless bright mirrour, where
his soul had grown blind in gazingand ashamed too,
to confess, before his lordly forehead, that I had been
capable, first of trifling, innocently, with such a heart,
as Clara's; and next, of meditating its reduction, like a
famished garrison, by cutting off its nourishment, light
and airas if a heart so wastedso thinned away,
were to be coveted. But I dared not trust myself to any
longer contemplation of the subjectchiefly, I believe,
because there was something pleasant in this new
companionship
with Arthur and Archibaldas if
my
desolation could compare with their's!O, shame!
the paltry caprice of a heart, drunk with enjoyment, full
to repletion, and bursting with triumph and deep rapture
to be compared with the darkness and fire, of a spurned
and trodden oneover the embers of which, the wind
of passion blew, againand again, till they blazed
with a brightness too terrible for the eye of meditation:
or that appalling, substantial shadow, which lay,
like a malediction upon the spirit of Arthur, pressing
his broad forehead to the dustpinioning his faculties,
and darkening his thought foreverO, no!but I
heard one rail so eloquently at womanand the other
look so majestically down, upon all the plebian
sorrowing
of men, in consequence, it seemed, of his trial
that I almost prayed for a reason as terrible!that
I might join in denouncing them too!
I then spoke of Clinton(my brother held his breath)
---told all that I had seen(his eyes flashed fire his
lips quivered, his teeth rattledand when I had done,
he wiped off the sweat from his faceas if the rain had
fallen thereshook his head, and replied,---faintly,
but audibly---nevertheless---) `Enough, I can see her,
hear her very wordssee every movement of her eyes,
hands. She is right. You are right. He cannot
prevail; there is no hope for him. My letter has done
its office.'
`Your letter,' said Iunwilling to deceive him. `You
are mistaken. When all this happened, I had not
delivered
the letter.'
`What,do I understand you rightly?Then
(thoughtfully, while his white brow clouded, as if
overrun by a dark blood, all at once)
then
, there is a
mystery at the bottom of this, which I
will
drag forth.
When will Clinton be out?'
I told him all that I knewand we spent the
greater part of the night talking about the family, and
their several characters.
`Brother,' said I, seeing that Arthur was asleep
`Brother, I believe that Lucia loves you.'
`
You do
,' said he, calmly. `You are right. I have
no doubt of it,more than she ever dreamt of. The
time will come when she shall love me moreten
thousand
times more than ever. I know her nature now,
every thought of her heart.'
`Thenlet me return your advicewhy waste the
priceless jewel?'
`John! John Oadley,' he replied, rising like a
spectre, and stretching out his wasted arms to me
while the fitful lamp-light flashed strangely over his
features, in shadow and brightness`You do not
well know me yet. But the time is coming, when you
will. You know how I have loved Luciathat I have
loved her, as never man loved womanwould have
died at her bidding, and yet
yet!
by all the Angels of
heaven! I would see her dead and buriedbefore
I would take her to my heart, after Clinton had
put his lips upon her face.' The blood spouted from
his nostrils as he spoke, and sprinkled the coarse linen
of the bed.
His look was frightful, his voice solemn, beyond
expression
,
convulsed, and broken; and when he had
done, he shed tears.
The next day, I took particular pains to look into
the state of the troop, enquire the true situation of
Archibald, who, I found, was in no dangerobtain
permission to go to Philadelphia, with Arthur for a
companion; and the third day after my return, just
when they began to light the market, we entered the
city, at a handsome trot, our sabres ringing, and the
iron hoofs of our well shod chargers, rattling, like a
whole troop of cavalry along the pavement.
`That is the number,' said I, at laststopping under
a lamp, and reading the card`Take the reins a
moment Arthur, while I knock.'
There was neither knocker nor bell, though the
house was large, and rather imposingand I struck
the door with my loaded whip, till the whole
neighbourhood
rang again. Several windows were thrown open;
but when they saw that we were Continentals
mounted
they
were instantly shut againfor they dreaded
our visitation, as little better than a robbery, or at least
a
requisition
for every blanket and shoe in the family.
A stout, handsome black fellow soon appeared, and,
as if he had been prepared to expect us, threw open
the door, and descended to take our horses. `Is Mrs.
Eustace within?' said I
`Yesmassa, massa he find her in the parlour'
(pointing up a broad stair case, beyond which, we saw
a large door standing open)a room brightly
illuminated
,
as if, with a large fireand several persons,
women, I thought, moving hurriedly about itlike
shadows upon a bright wall. We entered, and Arthur,
at the sound of two or three voices apparently
ascending
the stairs over my head, caught suddenly at my
arm, as if he were falling. I turned, a little surprised,
and beheld a change in his countenance surpassing all
that I had ever seenit was stoneabsolute stone.
His lips were parted, and while he held my arm till the
very bone ached, he stood, like one struck dead, while
listening to musick, coming out of the grassin the
low wind.
We entered the room; and, before I had time to make
my salutation, a pair of soft, delicately soft hands were
put into mineand a voice, that I could not be
mistaken
in, said to me(the lights were all goneand
the red blaze of the fire had diminished, so that I could
not well see her countenanceand the whole room
smelt of burnt camphor, as if that had been thrown
upon the fire to dazzle and blind us, as we came up the
stairs.)
`And is that Mr. Rodman?'`Yes,' I replied,
`but
when?
in the name of heaven, and
how
came
you
here?'
`HushYou have a deep part to playa tragedy,
it may be. You have been expected for two days. I
had almost given up the hope of seeing you. I came
away after dinner the same day that you didthe
house had got too hot to hold meClara!ha!
then there
is
something in it! Clara Arnauld is---
Have you heard nothing?Not a word, since?'
`No,' I replied`how should I?'----
`Then Mr. Oadley, I pity youyou have broken a
proud woman's heart.'
My own was in my throat, as she spoke, and I was
fain to sit down.
`HaArthur, what ails you, what are you looking at?'
He never movedbut, in a far corner of the room,
in a sort of recess, like a library, or venition window
with dark curtains, sat a female figurelooking up at
the moon, that just then, stood still in the blue heaven,
as if held there by the incantation of beauty.
The figure moved, sighed; and Arthur, rising slowly,
and involuntarily, upon his feet, gradually stretching
out his arms, as ifgracious God! The low
mournful
VOL. I. 19*
warbling of a sweet voice came to my ears, like
something that I had heard, I know not whenI know
not where, beforeand Arthur fell flat upon his face.
I saw him fall, but I was unable to stir hand or
footI stood hushed as deathtrancedwith a deep,
deep terrour and torment at my heartas if I had
broken in upon some haunted placesomebody caught
my arm`Awake!' said a voice`awake!speak
to it! it is
Mary!
'
I staggered to the windowI fell upon my knees,
not daring to breathe, or lift up my eyesthe shadow
arose, turned, with a mournful slow motion, so that
the moon shone full upon her face.
It
was
Mary! it was! I had only life enough left,
to put my hands, like a dreamer fearing to awake,
upon her fleshand see her, the blessed martyr,
stooping
over me, with her troubled melancholy lipsit was
not to be mistakenO, no!no, no! the
unearthly
paleness of her forehead, the preternatural darkness
of her eyes, their slow, incessant motion.
`
Mary!
' I cried`O, Mary, speak to me,' I said,
attempting to rise, but her whole weight was upon me.
At the sound of my voice, she startedher eyes flashed
her lips movedshe put her hands upon my forehead
pushed aside my thick hairstooped down, pressed
her wet lips to my eye lids and whispered`O,
Arthur
,
Arthurhow could you leave me?'
Her tears ran down her cheeks like rainand
when I looked up, I saw Ellen struggling with all her
might, her hair dishevelled, her pale eyes streaming
with tears and lightagainst Arthur, who stood
stooping
toward heras if he had been struck blind.
Mary had not seen him; I arose, her soft hand
beating in mine, her young heart fluttering against
mineher pale neck, against which I had wept
glittering with the tears that I had shed, and put her
into the arms of Arthur.
The moment that his face touched her'sthe very
moment, she uttered a loud cry, leaped into his bosom,
shivering like a drowned creature, and skrieking and
wailing, so piteously, that II
could
neither hear nor
see, till I felt some one dragging at my armit was
Ellenour.
`Come, come,' said she`come! every thing
depends
upon this shock; let us leave them togetherO,
merciful heaven! let us be gone.'
I suffered myself to be led away, and we stood at the
window of the next room, in the darkness. I know not
how it was, except that sorrow, and sympathy are apt
to be companionable, and they that have wept together,
are many years in advance of them that have only
laughed together. I could hear them sobbing yetand
then a sweet gentle murmuring, that I knew to be her's
and then a passionate shriek, and the name of
Arthur
pronounced, again and again, as in delirium. I would
have returned, but EllenMiss Sampson, I should say,
forbad me.
`O, no!' said she, laughing and crying at the same
moment---`do not go, do not go, I entreat you---the
prettiest catastrophe in the world,' releasing herself
from my arms, and skipping to one side of the room,
where she could see them.
`O, O! come here, come here! this minute there
is love for youthat's your true lovea dead woman,
burnt to ashes, coming to her senses, in the arms of her
lover. O, O, O, (rubbing her hands, while the dark
shadow of Arthur was on her, as he stood, with one
knee resting upon a deep sofa in the corner, leaning
over, with an air of the deepest and most affectionate
tenderness, the beautiful frail creature that lay upon it,
half supported by one of his arms; her magnificent
tresses
floating brightly over the back of the sofa, in the
strong current of air that swept up the chimney; and
her wild eyes glittering in their humidity, like a young
leopard's, in the red fire light; her face upturned to his,
and mouth parted like statuary, at the very moment
when it is about to be turned into flesh, and the heart
is ready to gush out with love and musick at the lips.)
`O, look, look!' repeated the eager, delighted girl
at my side, catching my hand passionately, and
flinging
it away again, alternately, with a pettish
carelessness
,
as she was carried away by her enthusiastick heart,
at some sudden emotion of Mary, or sufficiently
mistress
of herself, to discover that she was almost
caressing
mea man, a stranger, in the unbridled
extravagance
of her sympathy.
`But how in the name of heaven,' said I, `how is
this? That
is
Mary Austin, I'll swear to it!'
`Don't ask me, dont ask me,' she answered`see,
see! she knows him, the dear creature! hear, hear,
hear her! dear, dear Arthur! O let us go, let them be
alone, and happy for a while;' saying this, she shut the
door softly, and coming up to me, past her white hand
over her eyes, and then putting it into my hand. `It
was dripping wet,' said  while I smiled at her
simplicity, lively, and deep feeling, so innocent, yet so
disordered. Remember that there was no fire in this
room, no light, none but that which the moon threw in,
doubtfully, through a long row of curtained windows
`come! now I'll tell you all about it. You thought
me crazy; I am not that poor creaturebless me, why
don't you keep the step, (we were walking, to and fro,
in the room.)
`Let us sit down,' said I, leading her, a step or two,
toward the window seat.
`No, no, aunt is belowand brotherthey must
hear us walking, or we shall be interrupted. What
the deuce are you laughing at! till that poor creature:
O, if you had seen her, when we first found hershe
would not open her mouth; she did nothing but cry all
day long, and stare at usjust so! why, what's the
matter? were you never stared at before?'
`Found her!' said I, `what do you mean?'
`Lord! that's just like youyou wont let a body say a
word; I wish you'd hold your tongue a moment. Brother,
you know brother? yes you do, you need not shake your
head, I saw you watching him, poor fellow; and let
me tell you, Mr. Oadley, as handsome as you be, and
as big as you be, and as proud as you be, brother Nick
has got as big a heart, and as brave a heart, and as
good a heart, as your own. He was the one that saved
herhe shot the wicked man, that had her on his horse
behind him, and was carrying her off; but then the
horse ran away, and when he fell off, she was lashed to
him, by a great ugly leather belthow you breathe,
what's the matter?'
We were now standing still; and, I confess, that, in
the deep intoxication of my heart, I had forgotten
Clara
,
Arthur, Mary, and all the world, for a moment, in
looking down upon this innocent little creature, whose
delicate lips, were muttering music below me, just even
with my breast; every word fell into my heart; I could
feel itI led her slowly, step by step, to the window,
and gradually, without knowing my own design, or
having
any design in reality, had drawn her, as I would
have drawn a small child, to sit upon my knee; she was
surely unconscious of it, for she never changed her tone,
or faltered, or shifted her soft eyes, but continued thus.
`We couldn't find out her name; and all the enquiry
that we could make, was of no use, for my father
said, that she looked like a French girl, and was
probably
the wife of the trooper, that brother shot; and then
there were several farm houses burned that same night;
and the horse ran a mile before the rider fell; and when
brother, who can run very fast, faster than a horse,
through the woods, came up to the poor girl, she was
deaddead as, aswhat's the deadest thing in the
world? and then he took her up in his arms, and
carried
her to maj. Winchester's; and when father came, he
sent off an advertisement to the paper in the city,
describing
her, but nobody came to ask how she did; poor
creature! and so we slept together, and she never spoke;
yet she wasn't mad, not very mad, for she sung
sweetly
,
and was afraid as death of menand one day, when
she was in the street, for she was very quiet, quiet as a
lamb; but I was away then, I was at Mr. Arnauld's,
and aunt wrote me all about itshe was out there at
the next corner, and the prisoners were brought in
them that Washington took up at Trenton, and by and
by, when the horses were galloping through the street,
she shrieked out, all at once, and fell dead again; and
a man that was there on horseback, his horse ran away
with him; and all the neighborhood began to talk about
it, and make inquiries about him, but he was goneso
my aunt told me, and she said, that the poor thing's
name was Mary, and that she was constantly talking
about Arthur, Arthur, and Rodman, and Frederick, and
Crawfordso my aunt wrote me all about it. It was
just a day or two before you cameO, I forgot to tell
you, that we found out her name was Mary, for she
started and trembled at that namewell, just before I
saw you'
`Where,' said I, `do, dear Ellenor, do tell me, so
that I can understand youyour eagerness carries you
away, I'
`O Lord! was there ever such a wretchyou won't
let me say a wordyou take my breath awayha! she
is singingbless her dear heartthere!
there!
did
you ever hear such singing as that?'
Somebody opened the door a little, just then, and
retreated, leaving it ajar, so that the red light from the
next room, flashed along the floor, like a stream of
crimson lustre, coming to a point, just at our feet.
`Beautiful! is it not?' she cried, putting her little
foot on it---do you sing? Come let me hear you. `O,
happen what may, love!' Do you know that? Stay, I'll
sing that to you, bye and bye---O---I was telling you
about poor Mary---So, I was down to Mr. Arnauld's,
and just when you were setting off, with that troop of
horse, I heard somebody,---one of the girls, pointing
to
you
, as I thought, saysomebody asked who you
were, she said that you were Arthur Rodman---and
then, when you had gone---but now I remember that
Arthur was near you, but I don't mind him much, nor
that white faced little fellow there, that they called
Archy---Archibald, or some such nameI could see
nobody but you, and when I heard from aunt, two or
three days after, and that the strange sick girl was
talking about Arthur Rodman, I began to enquire all
about him, thinking all the while it was
you
---at last,
I could not ask any moreI felt melancholy, and I
never mentioned your name, but romped and laughed
all the day long, while Clara and Lucia, were moping
in a corner. But, at last, when I saw you, and saw
you meet Clara, in the bed room, I was provoked at
you, and her; and so I determined to know who this
girl was, that had gone crazy for you; but it never
entered
my head, that you were Mr. Oadley, or that the
poor mad creature, was Mary Austin, till that very
evening, when I found out, that uncle Arnauld was
Frederick Crawford. O, the villain! then it came to
me all at onceand then, I had made up my mind
before
,
to bring about a meeting between Mr. Rodman
and Mary; but mind I don't know who she was, and
never knew, till I came to put the whole story together
here, the night when brother found her, and the time
that your house was burnt, when it came to me all at
once, like a blaze of light, and thenLord, how like a
fool you look!'
Indeed, I did look like a foolthe whole family
were standing at another door, and looking at us! How
long they had been there, I know not; it was in the
dark side of the room, and it was only at that moment,
that my eyes had fallen upon what appeared to move,
a mass of shadowy creatures and human faces.
They all came forward now, and threw open the
broad door, which shewed the whole room to us, where
Arthur and Mary sat.
I trembled from head to foot; but shewas she a
fool? or a maniac? she sat as still and careless upon
my knee, turning up her lovely hair, band after band,
like a mass of drawn gossamer, over her white
forehead
.
`Well Nick! what are you grinning at?' said she.
Nick shrugged his shoulders, lolled out his great
tongue, and jogged his father, who only asked her, what
the devil she was in my lap for.
`His lap! gracious! so I am'the colour rushed to
her temples, her hands fell, her hair veiling her whole
face; and when she parted it again, her lashes, and lips,
and cheek were all wet with tears and shame. Sweet
innocent! as I am a living man, I do believe that she
knew it not, till she was told, that she was sitting in
my lap. Her enthusiasm, so passionate, fervid; her
rapid articulation, her incessant volatility, the electrick
operation of her mind, her whole frame, quivering at
every shock of her heart, as if her veins ran quicksilver
all this had made her utterly forgetful of propriety;
and I, I was the villain, in the deepest tumult of my
heart; yea, when it was tormented with a feeling, as if
it were naked, and soft female lips and eye-lids, were
incessantly
touching it all about, I had still sufficient
self-command
to count the throbbings of her delicate pulse,
and drink, to delirium, the passion that her blue eyes
shed into my bosomwas it love? no; but I felt that
she loved me, loved me, unwittingly, to death; and
that set my heart heaving, as if a sudden tide of high
wine were beating within it.
I arose and apologized; but whether it was that this
family were all mad, or all unlike the rest of human
creatures, no further notice was taken of it, than a
heavy
curse or two from the old gentleman on my
modesty
,
and a good natured warning from the
aunt
, for
young ladies, in dark moonlighted apartments, to keep
walking if they can, as long as they can.
Ellen kicked up her heels, and was skipping off to
the room in front, when she suddenly stopped, shook
her finger at us, and leaned forward, like a spirit
worshipping
at the altar of true love, for the first time.
They appeared not to heed our approach; they sat
upon
the same sofa, holding on each other's handsand
just thenMary, who had been looking in the face of
Arthur, as if she feared that it would lade away, if she
took off her eyes for a moment; the tears running
continually
down her pale cheeks, drop after drop; gushed
out, all at once, into a passionate burst of sorrow, and
articulated his name. Arthur, poor fellow! as if he too
thought it all an apparition, caught up her hands to
his mouth, and covered them with kisses, while his
eyes ran over, open as they were, and rivetted upon
hers.
The trial was becoming too terrible for usand we
rushed in to separate thembut they clung to each
other, like two phantoms. Mary shrieked, and Arthur
grasping her with one arm, drew forth his bright sabre,
and flourished it over his head,with a perpetual
motionas if he feared to be torn from her again. At
length, however, he became more rational, sheathed
his sword, laughed, wept, dancedand embraced us
all, one after the other, in spite of the cries that Nick
uttered, as if all his joints were crushed, or the
awkwardness
of the aunt, whom he held up, two feet from
the floor, while she covered her face with her hands,
and squalled with downright vexation.
`Fire and fury! cried old Mr. Sampson`give me
a sword! give me a sword, Nick! are you all mad?
Bedlam---Bedlam broke loose!'
What might have happened, I know not, had the old
man succeeded in drawing Arthur's sword from the
sheath, while he was dancing about, with Ellen in his
arms, like a madman, had not young Nick caught his
hand, when it was about half out of the sheath, and
made him, by main force, relinquish his design, by
holding his arms behind him, while he stamped and
swore.
`Fire and fury, sir, put her down! what the devil,
Nell, are you mad? this comes of your plot and
catastrophies
andput her down? damn you, put her down!
let go my hands Nick.'
`Let go my hair!' fatheryelled the boy`let go
my hair!' while the father suddenly released himself,
(just as Ellen fell out of Arthur's arms, exhausted, upon
the sofa,) and stood in the middle of the room, with both
hands full of hair.
As soon as Ellen could get her breath, she burst
into a loud laugh, in which Nick soon joined, with a
noise like the yelping of twenty water spaniels; then
the father, then the aunt, and finally, all but Arthur,
who began to recover, and poor Mary, who sat, staring
at us, through her white fingers, as if every moment
she expected to see us all vanish, in a flash of sulphur.
VOL. I. 20
But enough of thisMary was not mad, not
actually
deranged, the blood of her heart had only stagnated
for awhile; and, before we parted, she was able to
relate
,
by starts,with some interruptions of passionate
sorrow, and a few slight aberrations of reason, what
she recollected of that terrible night. She saw Arthur's
face in the blaze; and, the next moment, saw him fall,
as she believed, and fled; was pursued; and all that she
recollected afterward was, that there was a great
outcry
,
and an explosion behind her, the sky all red with
the flame of the dwelling, and a man on horseback,
after herhe overtook her, but, hearing a trumpet,
appeared
to hesitate for a moment, and then, as if he had
no design to join his comrades, set off, with her at a full
gallop in a contrary direction, through the wood; several
shots were fired, and once, she thought, by men in a
military dress, at a considerable distanceand then
she heard them cry, a deserter, a deserter! a Hessian!
and a few moments after, they fell together, and he
he, to whom she was lashed, was a dead man;in the
distraction of her mind, she strove to unloose the belt
that bound her; but she could notand, then the thought
of dying in the lonely wilderness, bound to a dead
body, with no power, none, for she was helpless as if
bound up in a winding sheet, to scare away the wild
beast, or wipe off the blood that she felt soaking to
her very heart, and trickling over her forehead and
eyelids, down her cheek. And that was all. What
happened
afterward she knew not, till somebody called her
Mary---
Mary!
The darkness drifted away thenbut
there were fire and smoke rolling and rushing all about
her---and then, thena horseman went by her---
where
she knew not where! It was in a strange place,
and many beautiful women were about her---large
horses, and a great crowd of armed and unarmed men
with downcast faces---and then, she grew gradually,
more sensible of the past; but, afraid to speak of Arthur
whom she had seen fall, she determined,---for the
people
about her were very gentleto live and die among
them, without telling her story. But, some how or other
her brain grew strangely dark, and she did tell it
and`O! Arthur!' she cried, throwing herself into
his arms`I remember it all now
all!
will you
forgive me
can
you?'
`As I hope for mercy!' Mary, he cried, raising his
large, noble eyes to heavenand then bowing his head
upon her hands, and kissing her white neck. `As I
hope for mercy, Mary! this miraculous restoration of
what I most loved, upon all the earthso surpasses all
that my disordered dreaming has ever pourtrayed to
methat, if I were the wickedest of mortal men, the
most implacableI could not but become religious,
and humble, and forgivingO, Mary! Mary!I
cannot bear to let go your handeven yet, I cannot
fully persuade myself that you are a living woman
it is too like the dreams that I have had, night after
night, till my blood has been dried away, and my heart
exhausted by them!'
`Therethere! that will do,
dear
Mr. Rodman,
dear Marynow what do you think of me, Mr. John?
am I a
fool?
am I
crazy
. Show me a
woman
that has
done as much good as the giddy Nell hasthere,
do
go now, will you?'
CHAPTER XII.
`I've felt my heart grow strangely cold,
`And sink, as though its pulses slept,
When, underneath thy shadowy fold,
`I've felt thine unrelenting hold,
`As midnight, and have waked and wept:
`I've liv'd to see thy damp dispell'd;
`Thy wet, cold shadow pass away;
`And that despotick phantom quelled,
`That, o'er my blood dominion held,
`Like night snow o'er the flower of day.'
`
Well
, Arthur,' said I, when we had, at last, found
a tavern, to put our heads into, `I am glad to hear the
sound of your voice once again; what do you think
of all this matter?'
`Think!' said he, looking alarmed`think! why, it
is all real, is it not?'
`Certainly,' I replied, troubled a little at the
wildness
of his eyes, and the terrour that his face expressed.
`Let us go back this moment!' he cried `there is
no knowing what
may
happencome cousin.'
`Why,' said I, `you are not afraid that the house
will vanish before morning, are you? How shall we
find the street?'
`Ah, cousin, if you felt as I do, so fullfullO,
heavenly
father! you could not smile at any thing; come,
I cannot sleep;
will
you go with me?'
`No, I am tired to death; I haven't slept quietly for
a week.'
`Then I will go alone,' said he, firmly, `I will not
lose her again; I will sleep upon the steps.'
`And be taken up by the patrole!' said I.
`Shall I! (striking his sabre hilt,) they'll have their
hands full.'
`Arthur Rodman,' said I, seriously, `this is
childish
;
I looked for better things in you, after such a
tremendous
trial. Have you no command of yourself?
where is your manhood?'
His cimetar rattled upon the floor; he turned, and
faced me, for a moment, like an enemy; but that
bearing
soon passed away, and he gave me both his hands,
saying, in the well remembered voice of a generous
heart, solemnized by trial and sufferingthe voice that
he uttered before the loss of his loved onebefore his
noble face had turned to stonepetrified in the
continued
dropping of his heart from his eyelids. `
Jonathan
OadleycousinI forgive you; I forgive you,
with all my heart and soul. Pity me; who knows what
may
happen; fire and sword
may
reach her again; do
you wonder that I should haunt the place of her
habitation
,
after all that I have suffered? O cousin! if there
were but
one
possibility, in millions and millions, that
the spoiler
might
approach her again, or the fire break
out, while she was sleeping, and I asleep upon my
postwhat would become of me, John! I have been
near, very near, nearer than you would believe, to
self-destruction
more
than once; but God hath palsied
my arm, turned aside the bayonet, and melted the
bullets
into rain; but let this happen again, and God
himself
would be weary of interposition. O, you know
not what I have suffered; look there! (taking a paper
out of his bosom,) see you that dust!
that is her
heart!
in that paper, have I persuaded myself, are
the ashes of her blessed heart! I went among the
live embers at midnight; I leaped into the flames,
sought with my naked arms, among fire and smoke, and
crumbling skeletons, where I had seen her and the man
that I slew, fall. I found them, buried in ashes; blind
and desperate with horrour, I tore them asunder,
plucked
away the white bones, yet reeking with blood and
transparent with heat, dislocated every limb, and saw
her pure and blessed heart, naked, within its
habitation
;
I put my hand upon it, and it crumbled to ashes
VOL. I. 20*
there are the ashes!Do not look so terribly upon
me, John; I am neither mad, nor wandering, nor have
I been; this was done in secrecy, and, to my last
breath, it had never been knownnever, never! but
for this miraculous discovery. O, my cousin! this
will explain it all; my silence, fixedness,
sleeplessness
.
Why should I be heard? why should my voice be
uttered? Had I not, perpetually burning against my
heart, this terrible relick; all that there was on this side
of the blue heaven, to comfort me; why should I
murmur
?
why complain? was there not a perpetual warmth
and consolation here? why turn aside from death?
when death itself, was perpetually at my heart, for
here I wore it
here!
the place is red you see, even
now, with the preternatural vitality that the ashes
retained
.
Why should I sleep? could sleep give me any
consolationany dreaming, so wonderful and
comforting
,
and composing, so like death, as the stupifying
pressure and warmth of these ashes? O, nono cousin;
look at me. I appear stout and strong; my tread
sounds like the tramp of a war horse; my voice is
like the voice of a strong man; my eyes full of
brightness
yet,
had not the battle speedily borne me down,
nor the pestilence, nor the sword, I should have died
infallibly, of a broken heart, ere another summer had
shone upon me. There! I have done with that now,
(scattering the ashes to the wind,) I give it to the
winds! Spirit of woman, whoever thou wast, I bless
thee! from the deepest place of all my heart, for the
consolation that I have felt in the deceitto the winds
with thee! and may God gather thy dust into his
bosom
,
as I have gathered it into mine!'
No John, I know that it is childish; I feel that it
is; yet, there is a
possibility
; and that is enough for
one, that has been going out in his own darkness so
long; there is a
possibility
, that my watchfulness may
be of usegood night! I do not ask you to accompany
me; I cannot sleepyou can. Sleep then, and may
your dreams be as sweet as mine, though it rain ice
upon meaye, or fire, while I am lying before her
door. Smile if you willlaugh at my extravagance;
I had rather be laughed at, than weep tears of blood, or
carry the ashes of a human heart in my naked bosom,
till they have consumed me.'
`Well,' said I, `go, if you will; a few weeks will
sober you down. I do not blame youI
cannot
I only wish to heaven, that I had some one, to watch
over, in the same way, and you should have a fair pull
for the mastery, though the north pole thundered upon
us in broken ice, and the stars dropped upon our heads.'
`Oadley, you are laughing at megood night.'
`Good nightyou remember the street?'
`Remember it! aye, blindfolded, I could go to it
by the alarum
here? that
would lead me
aright
.'
He left me, and I sat down to ruminate on the
events of the day. Clara was still uppermost in my
thought, and a hot, scorching sensation of shame
flashed, like the heat of a furnace, over my face, as I
thought of her now. Had I done right? Would I have
set patiently to see her
her
in the lap of another
man!
The thought was madness; I struck the table with
such force, that my arm pained me to the shoulder, for
a whole hourI started upon my feet.
`Yet what have I to hopeproud, invindible woman!'
I cried, `what have you left to me! nothing, nothing
but abject humiliation. Can I go to you? and kneel,
and supplicate to be heard? weep for a new trial? and
pray you to forgive me, thatcurse on the spirit, that
drove us asunder. But ten thousand curses on that,
which would put a man at the feet of a woman, whose
lord, he would be. No! no! Clara, thou shalt never
have to reproach the husband of thy heartthe father
of thy children
thy
children!
dear
Clara, I, Imy
tears fall like rain, now
never
for having forgotten
the manhood of his nature. No, Clara, no! I can die
for theedie many deaths; but as I have never sought
thee, for a mistress; but, for a companion in trial, a
partner in love, a relation for all the heroick
sympathies
of our nature, a
wife
I cannot, will not, sue to
thee.'
`What then; is Ellen Sampson the woman to
supplant
thee,
thee?
O, believe it not. Thou art a
woman
,
Clara;
she
, a child;
thou
, lofty and commanding;
she
, timid and fearful, yet rash and passionate,
imprudent
and perverse, so thatmay I not teach her,
by some cruel lessonsparing her, in the hour of her
extremest self-abandonmentmay I not teach her what
nothing else can. I may? But have I the power?
Does she love me? so ardent, so sudden, so impetuous,
so innocent, so changeable, so volatile, yet so sensible.
May I not, without destroying this
flower
, breathe so
hotly
upon it, that the white leaves will shrivel, for a
moment
,
and protect the dew at the heart. I will; but my
own strength, am I sure of that? Clara, be thou with
me; I invoke thy chaste spirit! I do not tremble.
Thou shalt be by me, and, if I falter, let thy tears drop
upon me, though I see thee not! let thy farewell sound
in the low wind! though thou art invisible! and I
shall know thee, and forbear. I shall, I know it, I
feel it.'
I slept after this, and was wakened by the tread of
somebody entering my room, softly. I arose, and put
my hand upon my pistols, which were always at my
head, and often in my hand, while I dreamt, I dare
say, of late, since I had been taught to lie upon my
arms in camp.
It was Arthur.
`It is, as you saidthe Philistines have been upon
me,' said he.
`What o'clock is it?' said I, startled at the cold
sternness of his voice.
`Near day break,' he replied, `the stars begin to
look dim, and the east is growing fiery.'
`What has happened? sit down, and tell me; you
will disturb the whole house;' (he kept walking about.)
`You know,' said he, `that I am not quarrelsome,
but rather patient.'
I could not see his countenance; but there was a
movement in the mass of black shadow before me, as
he sat upon the bed, that shook the whole room.
`Yes,' said I, `you have always been remarkable for
your forbearance; what has happened? I have seen
you put up with many a thing, that, had you been a
little
man, or not half so strong as you are, (he had the
strength of a lion,) you would have died to avenge.
But the powerful are always magnanimous; it is only
the weak, that are irritable and waspish; they
dare
not forgive; for it would be attributed to
pusillanimity
but
what has happened?'
`I'll tell you,' he replied, `I have been closely
engaged
hotlywith
a troop of scoundrels, watchmen,
I dare sayand was finally obliged to cut my way
through them.'
`Did you leave any in the field?' said I, forgetful of
the difference between cutting an enemy down in
Philadelphia
and Trenton.
`No, but I disabled one fellow, who thurst a pole
into my face.'
`O, if that be all, come to bed.'
`
To bed!
no, I thank youI am going on another
errand.'
`Not to the same place, I hopeare you mad?'
`NoI shall only go near enough, to see the top of
the house, in case of fire, you know.'
I laughed outright. `In case of fire!' said I, `come,
come, a little sleep will fit you the better for duty, by
and by.'
`I cannot sleep,' said he, `I must walk about, I am
too happy to sleepso happy, that, as I am a living
man, Oadley, I should have made some of the rascals
a head shorter, but for Mary.'
`How! did she see you?'
`Not that I know of,' he replied, `but at the thought
of her
her
, Oadleymy heart was at peace with the
whole world, upon my soul; I could have shaken hands
with the devil himself, or a Hessian, had I met him.'
`Suppose you send them all, to acknowledge the
favour
at the feet of Mary,' said I, `you are but
little
,
less mad, than Don Quixotte himself.' Stop, I'll
go with you, I dare not trust you out again, alone.
Let us tackle our nags, and take a view of the city, till
after breakfastwhen we'll call on Mary, and .'
`And blue-eyeshey, Cousin?' said he, laughing
for the first time, as he used to, months before.
I could have wept for joy. I told him so, and we
were soon upon our proud horses, rattling with their
iron hoofs toward the Schuylkill. Our ride was
pleasant
;
but our blood was in such a tumult, that, it was
impossible to see or hear any thingArthur's face, O,
it was religious and composing to look upon it!
About noon, for we had been compelled to observe an
uncommon etiquette for the age, in consequence of our
shabby wardrobe, which required no little coaxing and
furbishing to make it tolerable, we made our
appearance
before the ladies.
`Lord! what a coxcomb you are!' cried Ellen, the
moment that we entered; and Arthur met Mary, whom
he led off`look at your hair, now!powdered and
frizzled like a wig of soap sudsHere, here! come
and sit down by me; there! turn your head, brother,
pack offNancy, bring me a broomthere! whew!
there---whew! whew!'
In a twinkling, all the powder that the scoundrel at
the barber's shop had covered my brown hair with,
was in the wind, a cloud of dust`there!' she cried,
jumping upon the sofa, `there! now look in the glass,
Nancy, bring father's shaving glass.'
I caught one look, it was quite enough, I coloured to
the eyesthe romping girl had put my hair, which, I
cannot deny itwas remarkably beautiful, into the
strangest disorder in the world, by brushing out the
powder with a corn broom.
`Lord, you are angry nowha! ha! ha!(dancing
round me, and shaming me with her fingers) I can see
it in your eyes!'
I attempted to catch hold of her, for the room was
emptybut she drew up, and pronounced with an
expression
,
particularly comick, a famous maxim of the
day.
`
Too much freedery breeds despise
.'
`Come hither, child,' said I`come.'
`
Child
,' she repeated, pouting and colouring`I am
no child, I assure you.'
`Well, wellcome to me, a momentEllenour, dear
Ellenourand listen to me, as you would to your own
brother.'
She stoppedlooked more serious than I had ever seen
her, glanced at the door, and repeated the word
brother
,
with a marked, but delicate emphasis.
`Are we safe from interruption?' said I, `for a few
minutes?'
`All the morning
all
,' she replied. `They have
all gone to dine at Mr. Fillows, all but brother Nick,
little Nancy there, and I.' Saying this, she tripped up
to the door and locked itand then came back, a little
agitated I thought, to the sofa, as if restrained by some
new feeling, from her customary display of festivity and
girlishness.
`Come hither,' said Itaking her hand gently,
and drawing her to me, so that my face was just
opposite
her bosom.
I looked up, with a strange hurry in my blood, and
put my hand, my left hand, while my arm encircled
her waist, upon her shoulder. Her eye lids drooped;
and a rush of scarlet passed over her neck, warming
my very hand, where it lay, upon her beautifully
moulded
shoulder.
My deliberate intention, when I held this thoughtless,
innocent creature so near to my heart, that every throb
of her's, I could feel, like a little bird fluttering to get
loose, was to give her a gentle admonition, that, she
should never forget,but a new, strange, yet
delightfully
intense feeling shot through my veins; and, when
I looked upon her, so young, so utterly within my
powerI could have wept upon her neck`Ellenour,'
said I, after several vain attempts, to articulate
`Ellenour.'
She put her soft hand upon my forehead, as if she
meant to assuage the throbbing that she saw there; I
dared not look up again---but at the touch of her hand,
drew down her face to mine, and impressed a kiss upon
her sweet mouth.
She started, as if a serpent had stung her---turned
deadly pale, and burst into tears.
`Ellen,' said I---dear, `
dear
Ellen, forgive me---I
---I---knew not what I did' (a lie by the way)---she was
speedily soothed---but I---accursed spirit that it was---I
felt still, an invincible desire to try the sincerity of her
heart yet further---and, while her pale cheek was yet
wet---and pressed against mine---her voice murmuring
faintly in my ear---`don't---O, don't'---I pressed her
again to my heart, and imprinted, kiss after kiss, upon
her forehead, lips and eyes, in a transport of passion---
but then my heart smote me---the spirit of Clara, the
awful Clara passed before me---and I turned to the
sweet flower upon my bosom, blasted, like some blossom,
by a storm of hot ashes, she gave no sign of life---her
beautiful hair was all over my shoulders, her pale lips
just parted, so that her bright teeth were visible within,
her arms falling lifelessly over my shoulder. I was
terrified
to death---she had been utterly in my power---
utterlyno human help was near, no arm to save,
no eye to pity---yet, God be merciful to me for it! I
was merciful to her.
At last she stirred, opened her soft eyes, attempted
to stand up, but when she saw me again---the thought
of what had happened, and what might have happened,
pure and blessed as she was, rushed darkly over her
face again, and she gasped for breath---and fell again
upon my bosom---and sobbed for ten minutes, as if her
dear heart would break into ten thousand flaws.I
did not attempt to sooth herI would not, I was
willing
that she should feel as bitterly as woman can, the
peril of such confidence---the humiliation and horrour,
of such an escape. And then, while she trembled from
head to foot---shuddered---and turned away---O, with
such a look of thankfulness and supplication! II
threw open the door, and proposed a walk; she
understood
me, and aware of the necessity that there was to
appear unmoved, she hurried in preparation, and we
went out together. The air blew coldly; yet the shaking
of her arm, as it was locked in mine, was not the palsy
of cold. It was that of the heart. At last, I had an
opportunity
prepared of speaking to her---face to face.
`Ellen,' said I`hear me. You do not well know
me, yet. I am not a villain. Do not weep, dear, do
not. I shall be gone to day; (her hand trembled and
beat violently in mine) the chances of battle, you know
a thousand things(I wanted to mention the name of
Clara, but I dared notI felt as if it were profanation
and crueltywanton cruelty)may prevent you from
ever hearing what I have now to say to you. Beware
of your own heart You are too unsuspicious, too
frank. Men areI will not say what they arebut
I believe this, and I would have you remember itthat
there is not another man living, who would have spared
you, as I have. Nay, hear me out, terrible as it is to
you. What
could
have saved you? what, but my own
forbearance
?
You were powerless, in a trance. No
mortal man, Ellen could have torn you from my arms,
yetyetI would have you remember ityou were
permitted to leave them unprofaned. Can I give you
any greater proof
is
there any under heaventhat I
have unconquerable principle at the bottomand that
I love you her hand fell from my arm, and her tears
ran down (her cheeks like rain) too tenderly, too
purely, to wrong you. No EllenI pity youI
compassionate
you. It is a bitter and terrible lesson for
youbut it will save you, with your delirious
sensibility
,
from one, more bitter and terrible. Luckily for
you, you fell, inexperienced as you are, into the hands
of an honest and honourable man. And now, what have
you for your consolation? You are humbled to the
dustI know itI see it. But hear me. I know your
sex, ten thousand times better than you do. There
never lived that woman, who might not be brought into
the same peril. I never met with oneno not one
whom, I could not have destroyed, if I wouldwith the
same opportunity that I have had with you.I do not
mean as to timebut, if I once had a place in her heart
and one hour of hallowed surety from interruption.
You tremble. Let this comfort you. You may believe
me: for I cannot tell a falsehood; and the more that
you know of me, or of woman, the more you will be
convinced of the truth of this.'
VOL. I. 21
`Your patience for a momentI see Arthur and
Mary yonder; we will join them. But let me assure
you, dear Ellenour, of thisI know that it will comfort
youmy tenderness for you is quickened, unutterably,
by this event; it has made me acquainted with your
whole heart, all its confidence, all its indiscretionand
my respectyes, tremble if you will, you have been
upon a precipice, one of shame and deathreproach
and dishonour,
tremble!
let it be a warning to you, my
dear girlbut remember this, I cannot deceive you
my
respect
for you, I know what I say, my
respect
for
you is greater than ever. You have heart, sensibility,
courage. You are no longer a giddy child, you are a
woman
now, in experience. Remember this. I love you
more and respect you more than ever.'
Poor girlshe tried in vain to dry her eyes---and
when we met Mary, neither could look into the others
face---they joined hands, and blessed each other, and
we continued our walk in silence : and, finally,
returned to the house, in season to partake of a cold
dinner, after which we spent the day with Mary
and Ellen---so happily, and so innocently, though
scarce a word was spoken, that I have often gone back
to it in thought, as to one of the happiest, upon the record
of my whole life.
Our party, toward the hour of separation, was
augmented
by a dashing girl, and one or two young, riotous,
ill-bred men, who, we were told, were Quakers. The
girl was not---but she was a celebrated toast---and
really confounded us with her volubility and affectation
Her dexterity was infinite, her blunders incessant, and
not unfrequently, I had occasion to admire the delicacy
of reproof,or the wit of Ellen.
`I can't bear her for my life,' said Miss Fitzwilliams
(the lady I have just mentioned)a fat, vulgar creature,
with all the fellows at her heels.'
`Ha! ha! ha!haw! haw! haw' laughed the
brace of Quakers, sprawling their legs about, and
leaning back in their chairs, with their hands in their
breeches.
`Plenty o' stuff,' cried one`haw! haw! haw!'
`Ha! ha!hee, hee!' cried the other.
`O, yes,' cried Miss Fitzwilliams, `rich as Keezus
or the
dog
of
Venus
.'
`Or the
Dolphin
of France, or
Clam
of Tartary,'
said Nell, cutting in, with her eyes dancing in their
sockets.
Mary smiledand Arthur was fain to stoop down
for something near the fire, while Miss Fitzwilliams,
asked, with great eagerness, which of 'em all was the
richest?
`
Keezus
,' I imagine, said Nellwithout stirring a
muscle.
`YesI thought soI've read again and again,
about them other fellers,butwell, Lord, I wonder
how a woman can sleep, when she knows that the men
are only running after her, for her money's sake?
`And why not?' said Ellenourwith a sudden
change of countenance, that startled mecould it be
possiblewas all her vivacity artificial! I really began
to believe so, so gracefully, so beautifully, sat the sweet
dignity of seriousness upon her delicate features. `And
why not, for a woman's money! as well as for her
beauty! or her family! or her voice! or her fashion!
or her dancing? Woman cannot expect to be loved
for herself alone. And she who would be unhappy at
the thought that a man had married her for her money,
alone, and not for herself, would be cruelly apt to
believe
,
if she were beautiful, that he had married her,
not for
herself
, but for her
beauty
.'
`La! how you talkwell, did you ever?' said
Miss Fitzwilliams, rising, and wrapping her fine tipped
about her beautiful josephutterly unable to reply,
while I, astonished at the manner of Ellenour, went up
to herand gave her my hand, with a look of
veneration
and deep sincerity that I know she felt, for she
coloured to the temples, and her eyes filled instantly
`heaven bless you!' said I. `You have raised yourself
wonderfullywonderfully in my estimation.
Persevere
!
and never forgetnight nor day, what I have
told you. If you ever want a friend, a counsellor, a
brother
, remember me.'
`Farewell Mary, farewell!' said ArthurI had
descended the stairs and saw him bow his head upon
her neck. `Remain here. You are not yet, entirely
recovered. Remain here. Write to me; and I will to
you. It
is
hard to part; but, it must befarewell.'
We walked on, in silence, to our lodgings, entered
the room, which was encumbered with baggage, pedlars
pack, trunks, and men lying about the floor, in all
directions.
`To bed,' said I, taking the light.
`Just as you say,' he repliedlingering. `I should
prefer setting off directly; the moon is very bright, and
I am impatient for action.'
`To camp!' said I, `Are you madwhen do you
expect to find time to sleep there, if you can't here?'
`Well, well, Johnto bed here, then. But; for
myself
,
I had rather ride, all night long, under that cold
moon light.'
`With the northern blast, blowing a hurricane of
snow into your eyes, I suppose,' said I.
`Yesthan to lie down on the softest bed, in the
city'he continued.
Be that as it may, we slept quietly, awoke betimes,
paid our reckoning, contrary to the custom of the day,
and were soon upon our return.
CHAPTER XIII.
`Among my hopes, too early blown,
`But one is leftits hermit glow
`In solitude is lovelier though,
`And warmer, like the flowers I've known,
`O'er cold, dark earth neglected thrown,
`Retired and blooming, though alone,
`A violet hope beneath the snow.'
For
two whole hours, not a word had been spoken.
`John!' said Arthur, turning about, and looking me
steadily in the face, `are we in our right senses, do
you believe?'
`We! I cannot be positive for more than one,' said
I, laughing`but'
`I am serious,' he said, interrupting me, `I am
deeply troubled here, (laying his hand upon his heart,)
and I do fear, that, I am not sufficiently grateful to our
Father above, for this to prove a reality.'
I was struck by the expression of his faceit was
cloudy.
`My dear Arthur,' I replied, riding up abreast, and
taking his hand, `I do not wonder at your feeling.
Few such mercies as these, are ever vouchsafed to man
and at this period of our lives, while the hot blood is
racing through our veins, with every thought and
impulse
,
we are apt to be especially neglectful of our
duty to God. Let us be wiser. The battle is forever
at hand now. Let us not be found asleep upon our
post.'
`Right, cousin,' said he, recovering, and with a
solemn
movement of the arm, confirming every word that
VOL. I. 21*
I uttered, as if it had been a vow, about to be
registered
above; `I have thought much of it, during the
darkness
and terrour that have been about me; but never
so intensely, so emphatically, as since the hour that
Mary,
dear
Mary, stood up before me, like one
touched
by the hand of a prophet, and brought anew into life,
that I might be a better man. YesI have thought
much of it, and have came to this resolutionto be
prepared for death, at any moment; not, as I
have
been, by desperate hardihood, indifference, or a desire
of quieting the dark tumult in my mind; but as a man,
a Christian. Let us be prepared; not by burnishing
our arms, or sleeping upon them; but by a prayerful
and uninterrupted reference to our Maker, in every
moment of our life. O, John! our lives have been a
reproach to us. Say what we will, of His mercy;
comfort ourselves as we may, with the thought, that
we have no heavy sins to our charge, yet, yet, cousin,
considering our temptations, we have transgressed
heavily. I feel itI know it.'
The tears ran down his manly face, but he did not
appear to be sensible of it, for he kept on, in a slow
walk, side by side, with me, stopping now and then, and
putting his hand upon mine, as if to enforce what he
said.
`I have rushed into battle, headlong, like a wild
beastcareless of my destiny, and drunk with passion.
So have you; we have never stopped our horses, in the
smoke and flame, for a single instant, to bless God, that
we were yet on the saddlenay, nor when it was over,
have we ever fallen upon our faces, among the dead and
dying, to thank our Almighty Father, that we were not
of the number. O, cousin!
these
are sins,
unpardonable
sins, when creatures like us, so untutored in the
way of blood, can spur our horses over whole ranks
and layers of the dead: behold the lacerated bosom of
a human creature gushing out, under the blow of our
iron hoofs; stumbling over human faces, gashed lips
and ghaslty eyes;
we
, who have been so peacefully and
quietly brought up, without emotion, after a few weeks
of desperate familiarity with blood; what will become
of us, if the war should last for many years? will our
hearts be human then? will there be one atom of our
earlier nature left? one atom, that has not been
baptized
in blood, and hardened in fire? No cousin! this
is my resolutionto
say
little of my duty henceforth,
but to
do
it, night and daynever to
talk
of religion,
but to nurse it, in the holiest place of all my heartto
fight the battles of my country, though there be no
end to them, till she be the conquerorbefore I dream
of any other duty.'
`What! Arthur, you would not give up Mary, the
new found Mary?'
`Nonever, but with life. But love shall not sway
me, as it does other men; it shall not make me
forgetful
of my country, or my God. No! He has given her
to me again, from the fire and smoke of the midnight
ravisheruntaintedunprofaned; and He can
preserve
her for me, till the night of darkness hath gone
over my country.'
`You will marry her tho'?'
`Marry her! while the question of slavery is
unsettled
while
America is loosened to her foundation
marry her! and make a coward of myselfin the
battle
a
traitor to the great causedouble and treble the
stake that I am now playing forher widowhood and
the orphanage of our childrenslavery!'
`Children!' said I, smiling.
`Aye, cousinchildren! I do not tremble in
pronouncing
the word; I do not, and will not, affect an
impious insensibility on that subject; if I marry, I look
to have children, or I never would marry,
never!
and
would I, think you, hazard the begetting slaveswhat!
leave the children of Mary Austin and Arthur
Rodman
,
the dark heritage of slavery! nolet us die, if it
must betoiling and wrestling for freedom; but till
we
are freelet us not put in hazard the freedom of our
posterity. No! let the nation be extinguishedthe
whole nationrather! But '
Our horses plunged together, as he spoke, and set off
at full speed; we rode breast to breast, for half a mile,
before we could fairly subdue them.
`A good omen,' said I, `we must ride together,
Rodman,
together!
whatever happen.'
`Agreed,' he replied, striking my horse upon the
swell of his chest`agreed! the heart of that beast,
John, is beating with the contagionhark! how it
rattles
in his chest. Think you, that men have less
ardour
,
less emulationno! blood horses will split their
arteries in the race; and shall men, like ourselves, faint
and fall away, at a less hazard?'
Thus you see, my children, somewhat more of this
man's character. I had never known him, nor
myself
;
nor indeed, had we known each other, till the
war broke out, and we had ridden man and horse, over
man and horse, elbow to elbow, in the red battle.
Whether it be, that trial and calamity, war, and the
perilous vicissitude thereof, do really create a new
character, or only develope the sooner that which is,
that which might never have been known, under a more
quiet sky, and less troubled temperature; whether it be,
that all men have certain hidden capabilities, or
hidden
faculties and talents, that are only to be revealed,
improved in the storm and convulsion, I know not; but
this I know, that out of four or five men, whom I had
known all my life, before we went into battle together,
there was not one, who did not, ere the war had
ended
,
manifest a grandeur of thought, a sublimity and
energy
of expression, and a steadiness in action,
infinitely
transcending all that I could have conceived of him,
before the war.
Look at the men of our revolution; where do you
find such faces now? Why are not their children's
written
over, and sculptured as deeply? Why! because
the impress of relationshipthe hand of nature, never
yet operated upon the countenance of man, and never
will, with aught of that terrible distinctness, with
which political convulsion chissels out the head and the
face of her chosen ones. Look at the men of our
revolution
their
very countenances are the history of the
time.
You may believe me, my dear boys, that this abrupt
disclosure of Arthur had an amazing effect upon me.
It set me meditating upon my own imprudence
upon
Claraand ere we arrived at the tent of Archibald,
for we took a wide circuit in reaching Morristown
I had made up my mind, to be a better man, and a
truer one, to heaven and to her.
`Brother,' said Archibald, who was sitting up
when we entered, `I have been impatient for your
return
.
We must not leave our lone mother in a strange
house.'
`Why not,' said I, `Lucia ministers to her like a
daughter; and where shall she go?'
Arthur could contain his feelings no longer; he
threw himself into a chair, and sobbed aloud
continually
repeating the name of Mary,
Mary
.'
`Poor fellow,' said Archibald, turning towards him,
and leaning upon his shoulder; `what has happened to
him?'
I was fain to tell the whole; for some minutes,
Archibald
stood upright, looking at me, with a stern, pallid
countenance, as if doubting whether I was not in sport;
his eyes then began to movetears ran round the balls,
and he put his hand upon my temples, and shook his
head, as if, perhaps, he thought that I was disordered;
but be that as it may, he soon knew the whole truth,
and of the whole three,
he
was the happiest! Never did
I see his heart so full; his religious, devout rapture, so
eminently expressive, as now, in his mute blue eyes;
shaking hands, and convulsed lips.
`Let us separate,' said he, `I cannot talk now
leave me awhile.'
We arose at his bidding, and went out, traversing
the camp, and maturing our thought for the future; but
almost in silence, for the stillness was only broken, now
and then, by some contraction of the hand, and a deep
breathing for a moment, as we turned, alternately, in
our march, and caught each other's armunable to
speak, yet too happy, far too happy for silence.
And here my children, you will allow me to pause
awhile, remarking, that no matter of importance took
place for several weeks in our little camp, till
Archibald
was restored, and Clinton, rejoined usfor
the purpose of carrying your thought abroad, to the
more distant operations of our country, in the field
and council.
Congress was now sitting in Baltimore; and one of
their first movements was to declare George
Washington
,
supreme and independent, as the commander of
our armies, and manager of the warnay, to declare
him little else than a military dictator.
They were wrong. They deserved to be tumbled
from their seats for it. At first, they were so
niggardly
and dastardly in their grantsso bountiful in their
limitations, and restrictions, and qualifications, and
conditions, that he was little else, than a nominal
commander
,
incapable of exercising any discretion, but at
the peril of a court martial. And now they put into
his handsthe swordand the purseand the law
at one, and the same moment. They betrayed their
trust. They behaved unwiselyand though it gave to
George Washington's virtue, the last trialthe trial
of fireyet the men that put him to the proof,
deserved
to be trampled to the earthbound hand and foot,
and driven over by the iron chariot of despotism. It
was no virtue of theirsno want of power, or
opportunity
in Washingtonnothing but his own sublime and
heroick disdain of crowns and sceptres, and all the
paltry baubles, that other menand the greatest too
have covetednothing but thatwhich prevented him,
from being a king in the landbacked by the whole
power of Great Britain. He was left to appoint, and
displace his officers at pleasure, establish their pay
call for any number of men, that he pleased, from the
several States, and compel the publick to receive the
continental paper at paras if any human power
could do that!
The enemy began to threaten Lee, too, with the
punishment of a deserter; and Congress immediately
authorised Washington to retaliate, blow for blow, in
dignity for indignity, upon Colonel Campbell, and five
Hessian field officers. This led to an alarming
agitation
in the publick mind; and then there had been a
serious disagreement brewing at the North, which
finally
led to a reproof, of General Schuyler, one of the
most indefatigable men, that ever livedand one of
the truest hearts, that ever beat for America, by
Congress
and
the appointment of General Gates, to the
command of the Northern armyGramy Gates, as
he was calleda talkative, pleasant old gentleman
who is remembered now, rather for his good fortune,
than his generalship.
General Arnold, the traitor, had also begun, about
this time, to make a noise in our campseveral
desperate
affairs on land and sea, had made him a subject of
universal attentionand, had he been a better
principled
mana religious onenot a pretenderhe would
have ranked with the foremost of our heroes. His
courage, however, sometimes degenerated into
rashness
and
his singular good conduct, to downwright
madness.
But still, our little army encreased so slowly, that
the month of June, was about to open upon us,
without
our having the power to strike a blow. And often
since, in reflecting on this season, I have thought it
past all explanation, that Sir William Howe should
have been ignorant of our weakness; and I have
wondered
why he did not make a dash into our very
encampment
,
months before he manifested any
disposition
of the kind. But so it waswe slept upon
our
oars, from necessityhe upon his, from choice; and
while we drifted down the current, about the same
distance
and relationship were preserved, for months and
months, when a few stout pulls on his part, would have
brought him along side. During this state of indolent
suspense, two or three slight affairs took place in our
parties, just sufficient to keep us awake, and talking,
within our entrenchments, but nothing of any note
except
at Sag-Harboura smart decided thing. So
let us return to our story.
I shall take it up, at the time that I first saw Clinton,
face to face, which was about six weeks after his return to
campand nearly three months from the time of his
wouldperhaps nearly four. He was an altered man;
and the intercourse that had once subsisted between
him and Archibald, who had now become one of the
heartiest and strongest, as well as most active young
fellows in the armyseemed to be entirely forgotten.
There was no sign of recognition between them, not a
word nor a lookbut, in the deep blue eyes of
Archibald
,
and the dark flashing balls of Clinton, there was
a mute expression of mortal antipathy, or at least, so
I thought, whenever they passed each other. Clinton,
I observed, was perpetually practising with the small
sword; and Archibald, it was thought, had no equal
now in the army. Every leisure moment was spent in
the exerciseand I was constantly on the watch
together
with Rodman, to prevent the deadly contention
that seemed about to place. But I never spoke of it to
Archibald; or rather, he would never permit me to
approach
the subject, though I tried, repeatedly, to sound
him. Nor could Arthur, whose intrepid, heroick
calmness
,
led him directly to the point, when he bore down
like a tempest upon the doctrine of false honournor
could he provoke my brother to utter one word in their
defence.
Clinton too, though an altered manwas fuller of
levity than ever; but it was a bitter and sarcastick
levity, and such as, I should think, would escape from
the heart of a high blooded profligate, mortified and
cut to the soul, by some unknown, unforeseen
disappointment
:but
his voice was louder than everhis
carriage, more imperious than everhis jovial,
frelicksome
manner, more delightful than everto them with
whom he associatedand the leisure of the camp,
his high stature, his acknowledged personal
pre-eminence
,
and his perpetual absence, round the
neighbourhood
,
were alarming indications of his nature
intrigue
after intrigue, came to our earsand one or two
serious encountersand often, have I seen him
at a distance, reining his beautiful horse, like a
centaur
as
if the animal were a part of himselfall eyes
upon him, every mouth repeating his name, as he rode,
proudly and confidently, through his evolutionswhen
there would be a sudden change in his careerhis arm
would drop, he would heave his body back in the saddle,
and sit for a moment, as if his thoughts were not upon the
display, in which he was employed; and then,
erecting
himself suddenly again, as if ashamed of his
absence
,
and impatient for actionhe would strike his
rowels, inch deep, into his horse, and shoot, like an
arrow
,
along the whole line of tents: and often too, when
I have heard the laugh and song in some officer's
marquee
,
with the voice of Clinton ringing like a
trumpet
in the middle, it has suddenly died away; and if I
could, by any meansand Arthur had observed the
same thingobtain a glimpse of his person in fullI
was sure to find him dark and mournfulhis attitude,
like that of a man sick at heart, and absent in mind
scorning the noisy revel, in which he had been goaded
by his proud, reluctant, tyrannical spirit, to participate;
and scorning himself that he had participated
indeed
,
whenever I saw him, his face was thoughtful
not solemnnot sternbut thoughtfuluntil
he saw himself observed, when his spirit would
brighten outright, and the boisterous merriment of a
soldierrioting in his unquestioned dominionwould
ring, with a startling loudness, upon the ear.
But these things could not last long. The French
gentleman
,
of whom I have before spoken, Monsieur du
Coudray had become exceedingly fond of my brother,
and swore impetuously, wherever he went, that there
was'nt his match in America, at the small sword.
Clinton
heard of it, and one evening, as we all sat together,
playing cards, Archibald, in a remarkable good
humour
;
and Arthur, altogether the man that he had been
for months before, his heart running over at the lips,
VOL. I. 22
every worda gentleman entered, and presented a note
to my brother.
He took itread itlayed down a cigar that was in
his mouthfaced the cards before himwithout
looking
at the bearerand wrote, with a pencil, upon the
face `
accepted
.'
The stranger retiredand Archibald played out his
hand.
Du Coudray, a creature brimful of chivalry, threw
himself back in the seat; and, pretending to arrange the
cards, sat for several minutes, studying the
countenance
of Archibaldand at lasttapping, first my
brother's heart and then his own, said`Monsieurah,
ha! Monsieur!Je suis  vous!ne m'oubliez pas!'
`No,' said my brotheras if he understood him,
`nothere is my hand on it. He says
fencing
, not
fighting
, sir.'
The frenchman smiledlifted his eyesmade a
motion
with his hand, as if to lunge to the very hilt
shruggedand returned to his cards.
`Brother,' said I`it is time to be serious; what is
the meaning of this? I cannot remain silentI cannot
pretend to misunderstand you.'
`Well then,' he replied, smiling`Clinton is
disposed
to
fence
a little with mehave you any objection?'
`With foils?brotheror blades?'
`
Foils
, I suppose,' was the reply, `for he speaks of
doing it to-morrow, before some of his companions
and he could hardly think of that, if there were any
thing very serious in his thought.'
`I am not so sure of that,' said Arthur, `and, happen
what will, I shall go with you.'
`And I, brother.'
`For,' continued Arthur`I don't like all this
preparation
there
is some trick in it. We know the
rules of the campand while Washington commands,
we cannot fight.'
`Very well, thencome brother, 'tis your deal
you shall go with usHa! Rodmandon't look at
your cardsface the trump, manwhat the deu
ails you?well, Coudray(sorting his cards)I
hope you have somethingyou lead, you know
come.'
One trick was takenin silence;when the next
came, Archibald jumped up from his chair, crying
`why! what a blunderhead! the game was oursah,
poor Coudray, you will never learn the vile game
how many times, I have told you not to lead from a
king and knaveor ace, queen
there!
just what I
expected
.'
I looked up, and was satisfied. Could a man feign
so well? no, it was impossible, the passionate eagerness,
that he felt in the game was
natural
my heart was
easy from that moment. I felt that he could not have
any deadly intention in
his
.
Du Coudray too, threw down his cards, with a smile,
and began a conversation about the movements of
Congress
,
who had adjourned to Philadelphia. It
appeared
that he had joined our cause, as a volunteer; and
that his influence had been so great in France, as to
induce
several fine spirited young fellows, of high rank,
to stake their fortune with him. He had been made
inspector-general of ordnance in our staff, with the
rank of major general; but some jealousies having
arisen, the noble fellow, had just written a letter to
Congress, offering to accept the rank of captain for
himself; and that of ensigns and lieutenants, for the
few of his friends, who had thrown up their rank at
home, to accompany him in this perilous adventure.
The intelligent countenance, and dark eyes of the
young Frenchman were full of the deepest expression,
while he was engaged on this subject; but it vanished,
instantly, when he aroseas if giving place to some
thought yet deeperand he shook my brother's hand
more seriously, I thought, than the occasion seemed to
demand.
I took Archibald's arm, soon after, and led him out in
front of the tent, where we could talk together, awhile,
without the risk of interruption.
`How has Clinton succeeded?' said I`you
never-speak
of the family of late; yet something must have
happenedI am sure of itfor you have heard from
them, and yet have never told me what. Nay, if I
pain youI will forbearI do not ask you how Clara
isor Lucia, or.'
`Lucia and Clara are both well,' said he, firmly,
`Why do you never speak of
her
, then?'
`Of Lucia you mean?' said he.
`YesI am sure that she loves you.'
`So am I,' said he.
`And that she has cut Clinton adrift, on account of
her love for you.'
`I have no doubt of it,' he answered, in the same
tone.
`And what do you mean to do Archibald?'
`
Nothing
,' he replied.
`But surely,' I continued, willing to probe his
heart, no matter how deeply, so that I could touch the
place, where all his hatred of Clinton lay, `surely, you
cannot have forgotten her?'
`Forgotten her? brother' said he, facing upon
meputting both of his hands upon my shoulders, and
looking me steadily in the eyes`You have some
design
in that question; you never could ask it else; it
never came from your heart; what is it?'
`I would know, dear Archibald,' said I`if you have
forgiven Clinton.'
`Then why not say so, Johnwhy not say so at once?
I should not wince; or prevaricate. NoI have
not
forgiven him. I cannot forgive him. He broke in
upon the only heritage that I hadand spoiled it, with
fire and sword. He took the only dear onethe only
unspeakably dear one, of all this world, from methe
heart ofofLucia. She loved meand he knew it.
Yet he took advantage of her proud temper, a peevish
moment, such as they, that love truest,
will
have, now
and then. Andpoor Lucia! she believed that he
had supplanted me. I knew betterI knew her well.
I
expected
to see the earth give way under their feet; yet,
in my hushed agony, I prayed so long, and so
devoutly
,
that it might not befor her sakethat at last
I had persuaded myself that it would not be; and that
she, whom I most loved, of all created thingsshe,
whom he had taken out of my heart, almost without
desiring itcertainly, without knowing aught of her
value, and, assuredly, judging of her as a wantonthat
she
might yet he happy in his arms. I ought not to
have prayed it. I ought not to have believed it. I
ought to have known better. I ought to have known
that the woman who has once loved Archibald Oadley,
can never love another man. John, JohnI cannot
forgive
him. Yet, for her sake, I would not lift my hand
against him. Nay, not so fast. I deserve no thanks.
I shall not provoke him; not throw myself in his way;
but mark me, I do not promise, that, if he put himself,
wilfully, in mineI shall not, as I once threatened, to
do my best, to bring his proud forehead to the dust.
You tremble. I know your sentiments on duelling
and those of Arthurand you know mine. You are
disturbed. I do not wonder. You are the only living
creature that knows my real thought. NoI cannot
forgive him. For myselffor all that I have suffered,
though it
is
bitter, to be supplanted in a few hoursno
matter by what hellish stratagemno matter by what
accidentafter a few hours, by a strangerYet
I could forgive
that
as I am a living man, I could, I
call God to witness it, brotherI
could
but I
cannot
,
I will not forgive his profligacyhisI
cannot
proceedI have spilt my blood for that family, and
I am willing to spill it againDishonour.'
`Your eyes are frightfully brilliant, brotherwhat
have you to complain of? The dishonour is hisnot
her's. She has stood up, when he lay prostrate at her
feet, and refused himhim! that never sued to woman
before in vain.'
`I know it! and I bless her for it,' cried Archibald,
wringing my hand`I know it! I know it! I love her
for it, more than ever! Nay, she did moreshe tended
him through his illnesswept over him, prayed with
him, watched with him, gave him every opportunity that
a lover could wishand yetO, righteous heaven!
VOL. I. 22*
what a magnificent heart, had that man once within his
reach, had he only known its value!yet, she refused
him again and again. Nay, when he was in health
backed by all his beauty, and pride, and sorrow, and
penitencethe solicitation of all her friends, the
sincerest
love, tears from a man that never shed tears before,
at the foot of womanthe remembrance of past
tenderness
,
and the belief that she should never see him
morenor
me
yet, she stood upright, before all her
family, and calmly put aside the naked heart, that he
offered tooupon his knees. God bless her for it!'
`Bitterly, bitterly hath she repented of her rashness.'
said I, `Yetyetthere is something more than
humiliation
required, to bring back the proud heart of
Archibald, I fear. He has no compassion for frailty
no forgiveness for a sin like hersno mercyO my
brother!' I fell upon his neck, awestruck, at the
solemnity of his eyes; they were severe and terrible
unrelenting as death.
`Do you utterly abandon her?' said I.
`You have no right to ask that question,' he replied,
`no man living, not even her own father, has the right
to  yet, I will answer it; I do not mean to
abandon
herwhat more? Ask me no questions. I shall
answer no more. Henceforth, I go alone, to
accomplish
the thought of my heart. She has sufferedshe
must suffer more; how much, I cannot pretend to say
but enough to make her a reasonable creature.'
`Yet, Clinton has no hope,' said I.
`NoneI could have told him so, before he asked
her
none!
'
`And you love her?'
`Yesas never man loved woman.'
`And she loves you, with all her heart and soul
without hope?'
`Yesso I believe.'
`Brotherbrother!'
The sentinel here levelled at us, and would have
fired
,
but for my timely recollection. He had challenged
already, it seems, but we had not heard him.
CHAPTER XIV.
`_____
`_____
`_____
`_____
`_____.'
Homer
.
*
*
I should have written this in Greek; but the translation that I
have given, though not altogether so fashionable or learned, as some
that have been made, and are used on like occasions, will be now
intelligible
to
every body
. If it should be thought so, I shall be amply
rewarded for all my trouble, in making myself entirely acquainted
with the original. It is altogether truer than Pope's.
`
There
!' said Du Coudray, stooping as he
entered
our log hut, `there, monsieur! ce sont charmants,
les fleurets, voila!' laying two pair of glittering foils
upon the table`
ce sont excellents!
'
Archibald took up one; and, putting his finger upon
the button, asked, why he brought two pair?
`O, mon dieu?
peuttre, il vous faut plus que deux
.'
`Very wellcome monsieur, lead on; come brother
come Arthur; all ready, monsieur.'
`Oui, tout, il est pari,' said the Frenchman,
leading
us to the northern breastwork, and parapet. `
Stirling
!'
cried he, facing the sentinelwho stopped,
brought his fire-lock, smartly, to a present, and then
continued his walk.
We soon came to a place that had evidently been
prepared for the occasion; the snow was levelled, and
covered with saw dust, all aboutand, in the centre,
trodden as smooth and level, as the platform, over which
we had passed; Clinton's friends were already on the
ground, with countenances that looked very little like
play.
`I don't much like that man,' said Arthur; `look
to your arms.'
I turned in the direction of his eyes, and saw a thin
spare man, with very black eyes, scowling at us; his
cocked hat pushed on one side, as if in defiance, so as
to reveal two very deep scars upon his forehead; and
his hand resting upon the hilt of a horseman's sword,
almost as tall as Archibald.
Monsieur Du Coudray seemed, by a sort of tacit
acquiescence
,
or rather invitation, to be invested with the
rank of marshal for the occasion; and, no light
honour did he appear to esteem it; for he gave his
orders
with the peremptory air of a field marshal;
arranged
the masks, crossed the foils, and posted the
spectators, like one, experienced in all matters of
ceremony
.
Clinton's eyes were insufferably haughty; and I
could not, for my soul, dispossess myself of a belief,
that he had come prepared for something serious; yet
there was a bitter pleasantry in some of his jibes, and
a sarcastick, keen irony of tone, that betokened the
most perfect self-possesion, all the while: but
harken
to the sequel.
Archibald took his position; both had taken off their
boots and coats, and were standing in their slippers;
when Clinton, casting his eyes on the tall, black eyed
man, of whom I had just spoken, seemed to request his
interference.
He stepped forward, insolently enough, in front of
Archibald; and, with a sneer, which caused Archibald's
forehead to contract, and his lip to writhe; asked him
if he had any disposition to take the `
mure
' first.
Du Coudray smiled, while his dark eyes flashed fire
at the interference; and he remarked, with a shrug,
that, in France,
that
was the
last
ceremony: `apres
qu'on a tirabsolument la dernier.'
The stranger seemed exceedingly disposed to
quarrel
;
and I was just on the point of tapping him on the
shoulder, when Arthur walked up to him, and looking
him full in the face, begged to know, what business he
had to interfere.
The other stepped back, and struck the hilt of his
sabre.
Arthur smiled, folded his arms, and measured him
from head to foot. `Sir,' said he, `I see that you are
disposed to quarrel. There shall be no quarrelling
here, till
that
affair is settled; after that, if you are
troublesomeaye, or any of you, I shall take you in
hand.'
The other coolly unsheathed his hanger, and made a
motion for Arthur to follow him.
But ere the motion was complete, Archibald, Du
Coudray, myself, Clinton, and two others, stood, sword
in hand, and almost foot to foot.
`Stop,' said Archibald, `stop! if you have a notion
of fighting, we are ready to indulge you. If
broad-sword
,
let us mount our horses, and do the thing
handsomely
;
if small sword, one at a time will be the
pleasantest
;
and II will fight the whole of you, one after
the other, with pleasure.'
Clinton interfered, however, at onceresolutely, and,
with an air of command that soon brought these
mettlesome
gentry to their senses; and the foils were soon
after
resumedthe salute gone through with, and they
began to play.
Not a breath could be heard; the Frenchman stood,
like some one contemplating a game for his own life
his eager eyes streaming with fire.
`Ah, a
hit!
' said the tall stranger. Du Coudray
shrugged his shoulders`oui,
touche!
'
`Another, another!' said the stranger; `
no!
said
Archibald, calmly, `no, the first was a fair hit; the
second, only a touch in the sword armand the third,
no hit at all, though a very hazardous experiment.'
`How hazardous?' said Clinton, sharply; `so
hazardous
,'
answered Archibald, in a low, deliberate
voice, `that I could parry and hit you, every time, that
you should do it.'
`Damn  a ' said Clinton, getting warm, yet
ashamed to own it; `let us try again.'
`No, pardon methat would not be a fair game for
you;
but I give you leave to do it, whenever you
please, without notice.'
They began to play again.
`
There!
that I suppose was no hit?' said Clinton,
peevishly.
`It certainly was
not
,' said Archibald. `Black the
foils,' said Clinton, flinging his, to one of the officers,
with an angry expression of contempt.
I looked at Archibald; his attitude was singularly
composed and gracefulthe muscles of his arm, the
sleeve of which, was rolled up, showing spiritedly, as
he continued pressing upon his foil: I never saw such
an arm, it was a limb of knotted serpents.
But Du Coudray could not restrain his impatience
he looked vexed, mortified, beyond all expression.
The foils were blacked; and, I observed that the feet
of Clinton and Archibald, as they came upon guard,
sounded with a more than common emphasis; their
eyes, too, were fiercer, than when they began.
Clinton pressed him hotly, and the play was
beautiful
,
for more than a minute; when suddenly, Clinton's
foil flew out of his hand, and Archibald, was bent,
nearly
double, against his breast.
`Foul play!' said the stranger, interfering.
`No, Sir,' said Du Coudray, fronting him, fiercely;
`no foul play
pardon!
he may disarm,
and
strike too
pardon, monsieur.'
Clinton was red with shame and vexation; but
Archibald
remarked, with a tone of much kindness, that he
did not intend to disarm him.
`To be sure,' said Clinton, laughing, but very
bitterly
;
`no man that breathes, could disarm me. You
smile Sirwhat do you mean by it?'
`Do you insist on knowing?'
`Yes, Sir.'
`Why, Sir, I can disarm you as fast as you can pick
up your foil, if you will only lunge at meunless you
have a bridle in your glove.'
(This was said with marked emphasis;and Clinton
turned pale, but did not reply.)
`Or wrap a pocket hankerchief about the guard'
Du Coudray came to merubbing his hands; and
telling me, as well as he could, that
now
, he understood
it all; that Clinton could not have held his sword a
moment, unless he had a bridle in his palm, and that
now we should see some sport.'
Another round followed, with great spirit, and
Archibald was hitacknowledged it, by putting his hand
upon his left side; but, before I could wink, he had
returned
it. And so it continued for several minutes,
until the sweat streamed from both their faces
Archibald
uniformly returning the hit, instantly, after
receiving it, while Du Coudray could not stand still,
for his life.
`Two and two,' said Du Coudray.
`No.' said the stranger`three to two.'
Archibald smiled; stepped back, and as Clinton
followed, lunged and hit him.
Du Coudray clapped his hands`
tree
to
tree
, now
sair! I suppose?' said he.
I wondered at Archibald's coolness and self
possession
:
It seemed impossible that he could look so, unless
sure of his superiority, and yetwhere was it?
`You smile,' said Clinton`my attitude does'nt
please you?'
`No,' Archibald replied. `You are a little careless.
You don't come upon guard, after lunging.'
`And what else?' said Clinton, with a sneer.
`Several things Sir' said Archibald, beginning to
pull off his gloves, and look about for his coat.
`Stop Sir,' said the imperious Colonel`stop! I
have not done with you yet. I cannot let you escape
thus.'
`
La plus belle
!' said Du Coudray, handing
Archibald
the foil.
`Colonel Clinton' said Archibald. `You are
mistaken. You cannot beat me. I am more than a
match for you.'
The Colonel stamped with vexation and yet, there was,
at the same time, a pleasant expression in his
countenance
,
as he turned toward the tall man, and wiped
the dust from his foil.
`But you were pleased to tell me'said Clinton
ironically`of some faults that I had fallen into---I
should be proud of any further information, from a
master
.'
Archibald, with the most innocent face in the world,
just as if he took it all in downright earnest---replied---
`Colonel Clinton has been out of play too long. You
hold your arm too high. I could give you the
quatre
bas
whenever I pleased. When you
coupiz
too,
quatre
and
tierce
, you are too low; you never press on my
sword first---and do it so widely, that I should be sure
to hit you, if I lunged straight forward. You hold your
hand too low for the
circle
---and
double
,--and you
degage
like a school boy.'
`Hell and the devil!' cried Clinton---`what do you
take me for?'
`A fifth rate player,' said Archihald, patiently.---
Clinton struck at him---and, as Archibald caught the
blow---came upon guard, and then lunged furiously,
several times.
`The button is off!' cried Arthur---`stop! stop.'
`The button is off!'
`Never mind,' said Archibalddisarming Clinton
again, while Du Coudray picked up the foil.
`It is broken,' said Arthur.
`Never mind; it is all the same to me,' said Archibald,
in a tone of stinging sarcasm`and if I mistake not,
much the same to Colonel Clinton.'
Clinton could bear it no longerhe foamed at the
mouthhis forehead turned red as blood, and he was
hoarse with passion.
`You think that you can hit me?' said hefiercely.
`Yosa hundred times running' was the reply.
`Break the button off
your
foil, if you dare, then.'
`Are you serious?'
`Perfectly,' said Clinton, aiming a blow at him, (not
with the point) that Archibald caught, like lightning.
`With all my heart then' said he, stepping back
`brother, stand backArthur stand backDu
Coudray
take your stand with themhand to hilt; let no
man interfere; for, by the living God! (snapping off
the button, as he spoke)I'll not spare my own brother,
if he cross me now. You know how I have forborne,
till human patience could forbear no longer.'
We ranged ourselves immediately, with flashing
eyes, opposite the three strangers; Arthur, I observed,
as he drew his sword, planting himself, face to face,
with the black-eyed oneI expected to see blood
spiltother blood than Archibald'sa single word
would have sent us to the encounter.
Clinton and Archibald stood eyeing each other, and
feeling their points.
The stranger took out a couple of files from his
pocket
,
and offered to sharpen them.
Du Coudray glanced at my brother, significantly,
who immediately threw his foil to the wretch, for the
purposeand observed, taking up the buttons, and
seeing, how near to the point they had been broken
off`that there had been some delicate management
thereI observed a little of itdid you
file
them Du
Coudray?'
`No,' he repliedtaking one of them. On
examining
,
we found that the point had been filed down, so
that they could not but break. He looked about us for
explanation; but my brother smiled darkly, and bade
him beware, hereafter, how he lent his foils. The truth
now broke upon us. It was a preconcerted plan. The
gallant Frenchman had been made the instrument
of a deadly preparation;----the foils had been borrowed
by some of Clinton's friends, and filed, so that a duel
might be fought, in the heat of fencing, under pretence
of accident. The whole mystery was now explained
VOL. I. 23
and when the mortal combatants came upon guard, for
the last time, I felt my blood run cold.
They crossed their swordsand then, as if each had
a word or two to say in kindness, to the other, the
memory of past timesthe same lovethe same
battles
thebefore
they drove at each others hearts
they both spoke.
`Archibald!'
`Clinton!'
`I owe you no hatred,' said Clinton`but it is too
late. Are you prepared?'
`Fullybut stop a moment. If you play as badly
now, as you did before we broke the buttons off---I
foresee that it will be fatal to you. I do not want to
run you through---but I shall do it. Nay, do not be
impatient---suppose you wrap a handkerchief round
your guard.'
Clinton's nostrils dilated with scorn.
`Come on!' said he, `come on!' advancing with an
incessant motion. Away went his sword---but as
Archibald did not follow him up, he recovered it again,
and came upon guard, in a masterly styleso masterly,
that Archibald's eyes sparkled with pleasure. They
renewed the combat, and Clinton's sword entered
Archibald's
neck, when, it appeared to me that, if he had
straightened his arm, he would have run Clinton
through the body.
`That was awkwardly done,' said Archibald,
dropping
the point, and stepping back----after Clinton
withdrew his; and the blood spouted out, as if an artery
had been wounded. `You were entirely at my mercy---
I---you had better stop.'
Whether it was the sight of his own blood, or the
sense of his danger that did it, I know not, but his
voice and look were terrible, as he uttered the words, in
a low murmuring voice---`
you had better stop
.'
`Stop,' cried Clinton---with a scornful bitterness---
as if Archibald had been crying for mercy. `Mistaken
man.' He pressed upon him again, but Archibald
continued for several minutes, as it appeared to me, to
parry his thrusts with consummate dexterity---returning
none---and not even making a
repose
, in which Du
Coudray had often said that he was unrivalled for his
quickness and brilliancy---until both dropped their foils
againand stood panting, as if their veins would burst,
the sweat running from their foreheads, and their hair
wringing wet, though it was an exceedingly cold day.
`Now then!' said Clinton---approaching Archibald
again, with a mortal paleness about the lips---`now
then for the
last
round?'
`The
last!
' said Archibald, retreating---with a fixed
eye---while Du Coudray could not forbear watching
every movement of his arm---Clinton rushed upon him,
and played his weapon with an incessant flash---and
then there was a word or two passed between them---a
pause---and the name of Lucia Arnauld was
pronounced
by Clinton, I believe, with some other word, I know
not what---but Archibald leaped from the ground, as if
wounded---saying, in a voice, that went through and
through me.
`
Your blood be upon your own head!
'
It was but a word and a blow---a death blow---for
Archibald sprang from the ground---their blades
flashed
fire, and rung---the guards struck---Clinton's flew
twenty feet high in the airbreaking into several pieces,
and Archibald's hilt sounded upon his breast. Clinton
threw up his arms, the sword snapped in his body, and
he fell dead upon the spot.
For a moment, there was a silence like that of the
grave. Not a motion nor a breath was heard. We
stood appalled and thunder-struck, at the suddenness of
the catastrophebut, the next moment, a loud, deep sob
came from the bodyit shudderedrolled over, with
its mouth full of blood and saw dustthe face upward
and never stirred again.
Archibald stood over itas if struck blindthe
broken foil in his hand, bright as silver, though it had
just been withdrawn from the vitals of a human being
thenlooking about upon uslike a murderer
he stood, as if---as if frightened at the sound of his
own tread in the snow---afraid to trust his own voice
glanced at the broken weaponwhich dropped
from his handas if it were death-struckcovered his
face, and walked out into the open airfollowed by
Du Coudray, Arthur and myself.
We had not gone twenty yards, when we heard the
word of command, and, on looking up, found ourselves
surrounded by a file of men.
`Stand,' said the corporal of the guard. All obeyed
but Archibald.
`Your swords!' said he, advancing. Each of us
obeyed, without a moments hesitation.
But Archibald either did not understand himor
disdained to reply, for he passed on.
`Make ready! present!' said the corporal. But
Archibald never turned his headand but for Du
Coudray
,
who stepped before the men, with violent
gesticulation, we should have had bloody work of it yet;
for they were on the very point of throwing their
bullets into Archibaldand Arthur was ready to second
me in any retaliation, however desperate.
But the corporal had compassion on him, and went
up to him politely, and begged his sword.
`My sword!' said Archibald, staring at him`are
you mad?'
`You are under arrest,' said the corporal. `All the
gentlemen have given up their swordsand you must
give up yours.'
`
Must
I!' said Archibald, drawing it from the
scabbard
.
`By God! I'll cleave the first man to the
navel that puts himself in my way.
Who sent you?
'
`The Commander in Chief,' said the corporal,
stepping adroitly beyond his reach, and beckoning to
the guards.
`Lead me to
him
,' said Archibald`and mark
meat your peril give sign or signal to the rascals
there. Do it! and I'll make
you
a head shorter
whatever
become of
me
before mortal man can help
you.'
The corporal led onwith a martial step, and we
followedtill we were in sight of Washington's
quarters
,
when the corporal signified that my only brother
and I were to enter, for the present.
END OF VOLUME ONE.