ADRIAN, THE NEOPHYTE.
BY GEORGE LIPPARD, ESQ., AUTHOR OF HERBERT TRACY, ETC.
There was a Poet whose untimely tomb
No human hands with pious reverence rear'd.
No mourning maiden deck'd
With weeping flowers or votive cypress wreath,
The lone couch of his everlasting sleep;
Gentle, and brave and generous, no lorn bard
Breath'd over his dark fate one melodious sigh;
He lived, he died
(
The Nameless One
.)
In the gallery of the monastery of St. Benedict, in the City of Florence the Fair, the eye of the
traveller
is fixed in mute interest and wonder, upon the strange contrast presented by four ancient
paintings. They are embodied in a legend of wild and startling mystery, for it is said
(
Adventures in Italy
.)
THE FIRST PICTURE.
A Youth is standing amid the warm sunlight of a
Cathedral
aisle. Images of Religion and sacred pomp are
around hima calm light plays upon his unwrinkled
brow, and you behold
the Enthusiast of Religion
.
THE LIGHT OF THE PICTURE.
It was in the ancient time, when Religion
dwelt in the shadows of the solemn temple, and
the lofty fane, and made her home amid the
recesses of age-worn altars, the time of glorious
deeds and magnificent superstitions, when
Romance
came forth from the minds of men, and
walked abroad, a thing of visible life, the age of
war and love and song, on the afternoon of a
bright summer's day, that a young Student paced
the aisles of a gorgeous cathedral, with slow and
measured steps, while the melancholy echoes
sprang from pillar to pillar, and leaped from
gloomy arch to shadowy niche.
Advancing from the shadow of a massive
column
,
the student paused for a moment, where the
warm sunbeams, streaming thro' a lofty window,
gaudy with rare emblazonings, fell with all their
golden light, over a simple altar, tinting the
opened missal with a ruddy glow, and
flinging
a halo around the cross, which rose above
the altar like a thing of sacred hopes and
hallowed
affections.
As the student paused in his walk, and standing
in front of the altar, clasped his hands upon his
priestly robe, in reverence of the holy symbol, the
sunbeams fell warmly upon the outline of his
youthful figure, and his face, with its darkened
hue, the forehead broad and high, and pale with
thought, relieved by clustering masses of lustrous
brown hair, sweeping in ringlets to his shoulders,
the marked eyebrows curving with the frown of
meditation, the dark grey eyes, brilliant with
fancy
,
the bold nose, the expressive mouth, and the
rounded chin, all were shown in the warm glow
of the golden light; and the head and features of the
Neophyte stood out from the background of gloom
and shadow, like a picture, wrought by the hand
of an inspired master.
He bowed his head, low on his breast, and
raising his clasped hands in the sunlight, in a low
and deep-toned voice, he spoke
A solemn place and a hallowed hourhe
murmured in that rich, melodious voice, with
which the full heart ever whispers its mysteries
to the silent air.A solemn place, and a
hallowed
hour. Let others chose the glittering scenes
of the courtly hall, the music of the war-trump, or
the glare of the gay and flitting world. For me
Ah, thanks to the Ever-Living, whose emblem
is the Holy CrossFor me, my home is made
amid the solitude of these quiet aisles and solemn
arches. The music of the organ, lofty and
sublime
,
fills my soul with vague and dreamy
emotions
more
solemn, more grand, because most
vague and dreamy. And the scenes of the
far-extending
procession where golden crosses
glitter, and sacred banners wavethe High Mass
when the Host is elevated, while the million bow
their heads in speechless adorationthe still
melancholy
of the vesper hour, when the dying day
with its thousand sounds, re-echoes the twilight
calls to prayerah, these scenes to me are far
more dear, far more hallowed than all the pomp,
the show, and the glitter of the world.
And raising his full grey eyes solemnly
upward
,
while his youthful face, warming with all
the inspiration that lightens the soul whose
thoughts are in the far-world of the unreal, glowed
and brightened in the light of the mellow
sunbeams
,
in a voice made holy by intense and
absorbing
feeling, the Neophyte exclaimed
Thanks be unto God, the Ever-Living
thanks be unto the Saviour, called the Blessed
and unto the Holy Mary, the Pure Woman and
the Sublime Divinity; the thanks of the heart, and
the adoration of the soul be rendered; now and
forevermore.
Benedicite!
said a calm and solemn voice
Benedicite
, my son!
The youth turned and beheld an aged man
clad in robes of undimmed white, with the mitre
of an Abbot, surmounting his high and
thoughtful
brow. His blue eyes gleamed with the calm
light of a soul that knows no thoughts save
those that are of the Awful Unseen, while
floating
along his wrinkled cheeks and over his
shoulders
,
the locks of snow white hair, gave
grandeur
and dignity to the appearance of the holy
man.
Holy Father, thy son returns thee thanks and
blessing! said the youth in a solemn tone as he
bowed low before the venerable Abbot.
Adrian my son, said the Abbot, in the mild,
soft voice of a father, speaking to a beloved child,
like the sweet sound of far-off music, melting away
among twilight hills comes the voice of youthful
enthusiasm over my heart. Adrian, my boy, thy
voice is now deep-toned, and thy heart throbs with
the warm feeling of youthhow oft have I heard
the voice of youth, deep-toned as thine, change to
the shrill and piercing laugh of reckless despair
how oft have I noted hearts throbbing with youth
and hope like thine, wither and die, beneath the
cold death-chill of the first heart-break. But with
thee Adrian this may never be.
THE GLORY.
Never, father, thanks be to Him above, never!
said the Neophyte solemnly raising his eyes to the
vaulted roofHere amid the holy cloisters have
I grown from infancy to youthhere when
thought and memory first awoke within me, did I
wander silently beneath the shadow of the Holy
Cross, and here afar from the world, afar from
the strife of men, afar from the woe, the wrong,
the passion, the despair that attends Life in her
pilgrimage without these hallowed walls, here
will I die! Here, while the sound of the swelling
organ, and the melody of the vesper hymn break
on my freezing earthe last of earthly sounds
here, where my last look shall be met by the
vision of the solemn cross, made more glorious by
the beams of the setting sun, here will the orphan
give back to God, the spirit which he gave,
without
a sigh, without a pang. Father, mother,
brother, sister, have I nonebut
God
is thy
FatherChrist
the Blessed thy
Brother
the
Virgin
thy
Mother
!
And as the grey-haired Abbot passed his thin
and withered hands along the brow of the
Neophyte
with the gesture of benediction, a tear
dimmed
the eye of the youth, but it was a tear of holy
joy, of sublime enthusiasm, a tear of hope and
heaven-born loveand as that tear sparkled
between
the eyelids of the youthful face, it shone
like a star, trembling along the pathway of the
skies.
Adrian, my son the Abbot continued, as
they paced toward the emblazoned window
Thy life has been a strange mystery. Since the
daythe cold winter's day, when the friendless
foundling first entered these wallswell do I
remember it! 'Tis now more than nineteen years
gone,on the return of the next Mass of Christ
'twill be twenty yearssince that dark and
desolate
day, thou hast not passed beyond the cloisters
of this our monastery of St. Benedict, in the good
city of Florence the Fair. The world with its
good and evil is all unknown to thee, save from
the rare knowledge gained from the tomes of the
sacred library. And yet thou hast made passing
wondrous advancement in the holy mystery of
music. Who in this good city may wake such
sounds of melody from the chords of the harp, as
swell along the air when the strings are touched
by thy fingers? Nay, blush not, my son'tis no
mock-praise I offer thee. Who in all our House
of St. Benedict, may illuminate the holy missal
of devotion, with such rare emblazonings as warm
the parchment when touched by thy pencil? Thou
art a strangely gifted youth, my brothernay, my
sonand thy life has been a wondrous mystery.
Still when I look on that young brow of thine,
methinks there must be, within thy heart a
lurking
desire, to mingle with the world without the
convent walls? What sayst Adrian?
The Neophyte turned to the Abbot, and as he
turned the warm glow of the setting sun, fell in a
veil of light over his features. As he stood there
on the tesselated pavement, with every lineament
of his countenance brightening with enthusiasm,
the grey eyes sparkling with the light of inward
soul, the lips parted with sudden rapture, the
cheek flushed, and the brow unclouded, as thus he
stood with his hands upraised and his youthful
form elevated with a feeling of heaven-born
dignity
,
the holy father looked upon him, and started
as he thought, how much the youth seemed like
the pictures of the Saint John, which were hung
along the gallery of the convent.
Mingle with the world without, reverend
father! exclaimed the NeophyteA wish ever
cross my heart to mingle with its scenes of
earthly
triumph, and earthly toil? Look around, holy
father, and gaze upon this sacred place! Above,
the fretted roof wrapped in gloom and shadow
beneath, the tesselated pavement, with soft gleams
of sunlight breaking the misty veil that is thrown
around the lofty pillarsyonder the high altar,
with its crossSee! how the light of the setting
sun gleams over the face of the Blessed One!
Look around, father, and mark this solemn place,
with its light and its gloomits pillars rich with
age-worn sculpturingsits rare paintings, where
Genius waits at Devotion's shrineits altar and
its crossits sublime roofand then father as
you mark the solemn silence that rests upon this
hour, think, here has been my home since
infancy
!
Here have I wandered while visions of
God lifted my soul to that Brighter Worldat
the foot of yonder cross have I knelt prostrate
while the glories of the Unreal have been bared
to the eye of Faith! Look, holy father, look,
and then think how poor, how vile the soul, that
would prefer the scenes of the world without to
the holy hours of this awful temple!
THE SHADOW.
And yet, my son, thou must endure the trial!
Well thou knowest the rule of our order which
declares, that once in a hundred years, a brother
shall be selected from among the brotherhood, to
take a vow, yet more solemn, more awful than the
vow uttered by a simple monk. It is the vow of
eternal separation from the world, and from sight
of the faces of men. Hidden in his solitary cell,
the One Set-apart, shall pass his days, his nights,
in one unending solitude, save that once in every
year, it is enjoined upon him, to appear unto the
sight of the world, for one hour, while from the
pulpit of the Grand Chapel of the Cathedral, he
shall speak to the multitude of the wonderful
revelations made to his soul in the passing year.
From thy childhood, Adrian, thou hast been
selected as the one set-apart. One month hence
thou wilt take this solemn vow of eternal
separation
.
Yet staythere is another condition to be
complied with first. It is the rule of our Order
that the month previous to the taking of the vow,
shall be spent, by the Neophyte, amid the glare
and glitter of the world. When the end of that
period arrives, should the One Set-apart still desire
to take the solemn vow, 'tis well. But should
his heart fail him, after his eye has feasted upon
the vanities of lifethen it is also well. He may
recede; he may refuse to take the vow, and God
will still be honored, for He asks of his children,
none other than a willing service. To-morrow
Adrian, the Carnival begins, here in Florence.
And to-morrow, Adrian, thou wilt commence the
TRIAL.
The Neophyte bowed low, and folded his hands
upon his priestly robe.
Come hither, Adrian, to this emblazoned
window
.
The sun has set, in the west, and the new
moon gleams through the azure. When that
moon has attained her full orbed glory, here in
this solemn cathedralthy month of trial passed
on the last day of the Carnival, when the folly
and mirth of that mad time shall have swelled to
universal riot and revel, then, if thou art still firm,
in this temple shalt thou take the solemn vow
the oath of oathsand all Florence shall hail thee
as the sacredas the One Set-apart!
So may it be, my holy father! said the
Neophyte
with a voice of prayer.
Adrian I have thought of this, thy solemn trial
with much pain. A dim and shadowy fear has
crossed my mind, that thou wert not strong
enough for the ordeal. Yet methinks, I have
discovered a way which hedged in as it is by the
fires of the ordeal, may still guide thee through
the trial unscathed. Hast ever heard of the fair
Countess Rose, Heiress of the Palaces and Lands
of Ellarini?
Father, replied the youth, in the still
solitudes
of these walls, but little of the gossip of the
world without breaks upon the student's ear.
Still it were hard to wait at the altar, where the
gay cavaliers of Florence throng to worship,
without
hearing the name of the Lady Rose, which is
whispered by every gay tongue, and repeated by
every gallant voice. The fame of her beauty has
been echoed even within the shadows of these
walls.
One month hence, my son, the Countess Di
Ellarini will succeed to the broad lands of her
deceased father. On the last day of the Carnival,
the Holy Church will celebrate the sacrament of
matrimony between this fair lady, and the gallant
Lord Urban Di CapelloHast heard his name!
All Florence repeat the praises of the rich
lordand report speaks him young and
handsome
.
Well, my sonthus runs my story. It is the
desire of the fair lady, to procure from our
convent
a brother skilled in the mystery of music. I
know none more gifted than thou. Haste thee
away to the Palace Di Ellarini. Thy name will
gain thee audience with the fair ladycommence
thy instructions this very night. Thy harp
shall be sent after thee as well as thy missals of
devotion, by the hands of a lay brother. Thou
art to remain in the palace, until the last day of
the Carnival, save that one hour each night, thou
art to spend in thy cell in this convent. And
now my son awayyet, hold, I will open this
postern door.
THE GLOOM.
And a small door, curiously fixed amid the
intricate
panelling, along the side of the lofty
casement
,
flew suddenly open, and the beams of the
rising moon flung a line of silvery light through
the aperture over the pavement of the cathedral.
The Neophyte advanced. One foot rested upon
the threshold.
Beyond was the world. Mountains sleeping
in the moonlightshadowy valliesstreams of
silver. The azure sky and the silvery moon.
The distant horizon where the outline of the
heavens was broken by uprising columns of
ruined
templesthe foreground of the view, where
the foliage of a massive forest, floated with
undulations
,
like those of the ocean wave.
His foot was upon the threshold.
His face to the world, his back to the cathedral,
with its far-extending pavement its roof supported
by giant columns, its gleams of light, and its
masses of shadow.
Farewell, place of glooms, scene of glories.
Home of my heartfarewell. Bless me, father!
And as he looked over his shoulders backward,
into the gloom of the cathedral, the hands of the
Abbot were laid upon his dark brown locks, while
his eyes were raised to heaven in prayer.
Thou goest forth pure, my son, come thou back
unscathed! The God in Heaven grant it!
A loud, wild laugh, broke on the air, directly
over the heads of the abbot and the neophyte.
It awoke the solemn echoes, and rang along the
cathedral arches, like a sound from the Spirit.
Land.
Ha! my son, what unreal mockery is that?
Hark! how it echoes along the cathedral aisles!
My father, that unearthly laugh thrills through
me, as though my blood were turned to ice. In
old legends I have read, that the echoes of this
solemn cathedral are aroused by laughter wild and
dread as this, but once in an hundred years. It
is a sound of fearful omen
the laugh of Despair,
bidding Hope farewell!
And as the beams of the rising moon, floating
through the opened doorway, shone over the aged
form of the Abbot, robed in white, and for a
moment
touched the deep black tunic of the neophyte
with gleams of silver, that wild, dread laugh
echoed along the cathedral aisles again and yet
again; the youth cast one look back into the
cloister, and then sprung over the threshold;
while behind was heard the sound of the closing
door, and around, startling the still air of night,
with its fearful discord, broke that sound of unreal
laughter, commingling with a hollow whisper that
had its origin in no mortal voice.
Forth thou goest YouthHigh in Heart
Bold in Thought! Thou comest backand a
crushed heart and a withered soul are thineHa
HaHa!
THE SECOND PICTURE.
A lonely cell, lighted by a dim taper. The figure of the
first picture is sitting silent and alone; his head drooped
low, and his arms folded on his breasta mingled light
and gloom is upon his brow. You have before your eyes
the Enthusiust of Love
EARTH DARKENS HEAVEN.
The student sat in his lonely cell. The hour
was silent as the grave, and a faint cresset, hung
from the side of a massive pillar, rough with age
and worn by time, flung its faint and scanty beams
over the face of the Neophyte, while the farther
recesses of the solitary home were wrapt in gloom
and shadow.
Adrian sat upon a bench of stone, projecting from
the dark grey wall, with his head drooped low
upon
his breast, his right hand lay clenched upon
his knee, and the left drooping heavily by his side,
while the fingers of the hand carelessly entwined
a beaded rosary, which fell to the earth, with the
holy cross resting neglected upon the floor of
stone.
The dark grey eyes of the student glared
fixedly
from beneath the eyebrows set together in a
frown, the thin lips tightly compressed, quivered
and trembled with a wild nervous movement,
while over his youthful face and open brow, a
deathly paleness rested like a veil, and the
lamp-beams
tinted with a ruddy light the folds of his
dark robe, heaved upwards by the throbbings of
thought, that awoke the demon within his breast.
I have seen her!
were the words that broke
murmuringly from his half closed lipsbut oh,
how changed and hollow was his voice, since you
heard it last in the Cathedral aisleI have seen
the Beauty of FlorenceThe Rose of Ellarini!
I have seen her, beautiful and peerless as a vision
I have sat by her side, have drank the glance
of her full dark eye, and looked upon the glow
of her cheek! These fingers have trembled with
hers, as they ran, all alive with music, along the
chords of the breathing harp! I have seen her
and in my heart is hell, and in my brain is
fire!
He paused, and his hands were clasped wildly
across his breast, while the strained sinews
seemed
bursting from the skin with the wild effort.
And then gazing upward with a look full of utter
abandonment of soul, and in a voice made
thrilling
by the despair of a soul, that sinks to night,
within the sight of Heaven, in a voice hollow and
ghastly, yet broken ever and anon, by tones of
pathos, that would have thrilled a heart of stone
to hear, he exclaimed, raising his hands on high
Oh, Godno longer minewhere now is my
Religion? My beautiful religion of dreams and
shadows? My faith of light? My belief of holy
love and hallowed hope? Where are they now?
Where the calm soul, and the heart that erewhile
knew no care? Where is now my hopemy
heavenmy life? Gonegoneall gone!
THE DREAM OF EARTH.
And on the throne of my soul, sits a fair
image
but
not of Christ or God! An image of
beauty with shadowy eyesfull, liquid and black
as nighteyes that dart passion; and lips, ruby
with health, parting like severed rose buds, and
murmuring tones of music, that madden my very
brain!
And oh, along each cheek, flushing with
life, are floating tresses of midnight hairdark
night mingling with the first warming flush of
rose-hued dayand a single tress, dark, waving,
and glossy, falls twining round her neck of
alabaster
,
and rests in all its beauty upon the bosom
with its globes of snow. 'Twas thus when I saw
her lastbut an hour since! That tress rises
with the throb of thoughtit sinks with the
ebbing
sigh. 'Tis the dark buoy of her soul, floating
o'er passion's wave, floating above the depths,
where passion's hopes lie anchored!
And she
never can be mine!
He started to his feet and paced the floor. The
rosary fell from his hand, and the cross rang with
a clanging sound upon the tesselated stone.
Holy crosshe cried, starting round and
gazing wildly upon the fallen emblemTo me
thou hast been full of high hope and hallowed
joy. Father nor mother, brother nor sister hath
the orphan, but I have looked upon thee, and He
on Calvary stood before me, the Virgin was by
my side, the Presence of God was around me.
These were father, mother, sister and brother, to
meand I was happy.
Now
! Oh, God! she never
can be mine!
Again and again he paced the floor of stone,
again were his hands clasped wildly across his
breast, and his voice once more startled the air
with its sounds of mockery and despair.
Lord Urban Di Capellohe murmured
Rich, young, fair-tongued, and gallant in bearing!
The pride of Florencethe boast of her chivalry!
And can he love her? As I love, can he love?
Would he give his soul, his heaven, his allin
life or deathwould he give his
God
for
her
?
He loves as the gay gallant can lovebut all this
madness of passionthis phantasy of affection
this despair of heartthese can never wake a
thought within his bosom! Urban of Capello
Rose of Ellarini! May the God of Heaven pity
mebut my soul is lost!
And sinking on the marble floor, in the solemn
voice of the olden time, the student sent up his
soul to Heaven in prayer, and as the memories of
Religion, the sanctities of enthusiasm, and the
imaginings of hallowed hope, fell wild and
trembling
from his lips, the warm and gushing tears
came streaming from his eyes, andAdrian the
Neophyte was with the olden time again.
I will forget her! he exclaimed, bounding on
his feetI will see her again and again, and as
I look upon her, I
will
conquer this madness of
soul! The struggle is hardthe reward is grand!
Adrain, the Neophyte, will come forth from the
ordeal of fire, unscathed and unharmed! And now
I will away to the mountain solitudes! No sleep
for me this nightbut the clear sky and the free
air! I am ready for the ordeal!
And as he sprang with a bounding step, thro'
the narrow door of his cell, his full grey eye
flashed with the light of hope, and his cheek
with the ruddy glow of youth, but
The hollow laugh of supernatural omen broke
over the silence of the cell.
THE THIRD PICTURE.
A princely howerarabesque columns, wreathed with
flowering vines. A youth and maiden are the figures of
the picture. He clasps her hand, and a strange gloom is
upon his brow. The enthusiasm of Religion and Love
are pastthis may be the enthusiasm of Despair.
Sir monk, methinks thy harp is wondrously out
of tune! By my fay, thy fingers tremble like leaves
of the aspen treethy visage is the semblance of
gravity itself. Ah! me
how
grave thou art! Nay
nay, doff that solemn look, and, with thy priestly
face wreathed in smiles, sing me a merry song of
love, of chivalry, or war, as it shall please thee.
Mother Mary, but thy harp is wondrously out of
tune!
Blame not the harp fair Ladyemy thoughts
were far away, and
Beshrew me, that was a peach-like blush, sir
monk! Hahaha!
And as the light-hearted laugh of the maiden
rang through the bower-hall, the student, attired in
robes of priestly black, kneeling beside the harp,
along whose chords his fingers ran tremblingly,
raised his head from his task, and looking over his
shoulder, glanced at the face and form of Rose, the
Flower of Ellarini.
Seated upon a sofa of costly velvet, in an attitude
of careless ease, the Ladye Rose turned her face of
laughing beauty toward the Neophyte. There were
the full, dark eyes, beaming with liquid light, the
locks of raven blackness, falling along one dimpling
check, with the relief of a snow-white lily gleaming
from its shadow, while from the other check,
warming
with life, the midnight tresses were swept back
and gathered within the confines of a circlet of gold,
mingling with drops of pearl, that encircled her
head, shining like stars from the midnight of her
hair. The folds of a loosened robe, gemmed with
carelessly-strung jewels, floated around the outline
of her young form, sweeping gracefully over the
fullness of the youthful bosom, and drooping in
slight folds along the slender waist, while down to
her delicate feet the garment fell in many a circle
of grace and fold of beauty, giving witchery and
fascination to the slightest movement or faintest
gesture of the proud and peerless Ladye Rose.
A round the maiden were images of luxury and
splendor.
The warm light of the declining day, streaming
between the fantastic pillars which separated the
bower from the open portico without, fell mild and
golden around the Mosaic pavement, and flung its
mellow beams amid the shadows of the fragrant
vine, creeping along each arabesque column, and
hanging from the carved and painted ceiling in
many a gay wreath and light festoon.
The breath of roses and the perfume of lilies
were upon the air, and the hushed breeze lay
sleeping
in the tendrils of the vine, or the cup of the
flower, while afar, gleaming beyond the open
balcony
,
was the gorgeous landscape, with its woods
and its streams, its mountains and its vallies, all
glowing warm and golden in the flush of the
setting
sun.
Adrian looked up and gazed upon the face of
nature, with her thousand beauties, her flowers of
graceful shape and rainbow hues, her shadowy
woods, her streams of silver, her golden sunlight,
and her azure sky.
These all, he murmured, are mine, the
wild delight of forest and flower, sky and stream,
all are mine!
Adrian glanced upon the maiden. She breathes
to mine eye, he murmured, a fair combination
of the beautiful in nature, a magnificent reality of
the dream of thought. The sunlight's smile is on
her ruby lip, the morning's glow on her check of
youth, the grandeur of the star of night flashes from
her eye. Beautiful she is, fair and graceful, a thin;
of light and love.
But she never can be mine!
Sir stndent, you are absent, exclaimed the
light-ringing voice of the Countess Rose. By my
troth, 'tis well thy life is destined for the solitude of
the convent walls. A gallant thou wert never
made. What! still silent? Thrice have I craved
a song of thee, sir monk
Pardon me, fair lady, exclaimed Adrian,
passing
his fingers along the harp-chords. The
humble
student hath not at all times the entire control
of his thoughts. The will of the Lady Rose is the
pleasure of the monk Adrian. I will sing you a
song of free-hearted joy and careless mirth.
And seating himself beside the harp, the
Neophyte
passed his fingers lightly along the chords,
and a strain of gay and bounding melody floated
around the vine-clad pillars of the bower hall.
His face glowed with an expression of careless
glee, as, in a voice full of manly music, he gave the
words of an ancient melody to the air.
Sing me a song of the summer day,
When mirth springs forth in her sunlit way,
And the woods resound with the voice of glee,
And the breeze blows soft, and the stream rolls free.
The summer day, with its halcyon hours
Its hours of calm;
Its fragrant dews and its rainbow flowers
Its flow'rs of balm.
Earth, and air, and sky, are gay,
All in the soft midsummer day.
[1]
[1]
In this song, and the ensuing Death Chaunt
of the Soul, the author neither pretends to
peculiar
originality of thought, melody of rhyme, or
beauty of structure. It was his object to imitate
some of the rude rhymes of the feudal ages, with
all their abruptness of thought and diction.
The words were plain and simple, but the full
and manly voice of the Neophyte floating along
the hall, commingling with the strains of the harp,
gave them force and volume; and the Lady Rose
leaned forward with interest, while an expression
of quiet attention and delight came over her
beautiful
countenance.
Thy song is a merry one, sir student,
whispered
the maiden; and the melody is one of
gladsome
music.
The Neophyte lowered his head for a moment,
and when he raised it again the light of the sun
fell warmly on the face of the enthusiast, and his
dark grey eyes brightened and glowed with a
strange and shadowy expression, as the wild strains
of his harp gave life and animation to the words
of a monkish chaunt, which the student had
gleaned
from some ancient missal of the monastery of
St. Benedict.
THE DEATH-CHAUNT OF THE SOUL.
I.
In dreams, one winter night,
Methought a solemn bell did toll
A death-knell, wild and dark
The corse a soula LIFELESS SOUL.
II.
A soul that in its coffin lay,
Made of the wondrous Tree of Life;
Fruits and flowers were o'er it strown
The flowers of love, and fruits of strife.
III.
Methought the corse arose,
And, with its shadowy face,
Smiled on a phantom band,
Who thronged the ghastly place.
IV.
Images of Love were clust'ring there,
Phantoms of Hope and wither'd Care;
And' brooding o'er the coffin's-head,
With leaden look, sate wan Despair.
V.
And then the corse sent up a wail
A wail to Him unknown;
And cursed the light that gave it birth,
With gibbering laugh and moan.
VI.
And then methought the unseen bell
Did sad and mournful toll;
While the phantoms gathered round
Mourners o'er the lifeless soul.
Sir monk, thy chaunt is a strange and dark one.
My blood runs cold, as I listen to thy harp strains,
floating wildly and sadly along the silence of this
hall. Beshrew me, but thou art passing melancholy
in thy taste, this summer even.
Fair lady, in good troth, my chaunt was
somewhat
solemn and wild, but solemnity and thought
are ever wedded to the calmness of the twilight
hour.
A shade of thought came over the features of the
fair girl, and she regarded the bronzed face and
dark grey eyes of the Neophyte with a look of
strange and mysterious interest.
And thou art doomed to pass thy days, which
should be given to youth and hope, within the
shadows
of the convent walls?
Doomed!
fair lady? Adrian repeated, echoing
her words.
Doomed
, indeed! he murmured to
himself, in a tone of thrilling emphasis.
And canst thou, young sir, resign the pleasures
of youth, of hope, without a sigh?
Without a sigh?
murmured Adrian, turning
his face from the glow of the sun, and drooping his
head low on his breast to conceal the agitation that
worked like a spasm along his countenance.
Sir monk, thou art moved? exclaimed the
Ladye Rose, with a winning smile, that gave faint
glimpses of her ivory teeth. Would that I knew
his thoughts! she whispered to herself. Can the
passions or the feelings of youth find a
lurking-place
under that solemn countenance? Can
another
glance than that of devotion flash from the
clear grey eye? I will try him!
And as the thought flashed over her mind, she
arose from the couch of velvet, with a graceful
motion, and with one light tripping footstep
attained
the side of the Neophyte.
Sir monk, thou art moved with some strange
emotion? she said, in a kind and winning voice.
The student trembled with a feeling of strange and
new delight, but still raised not his head.
Thou art my spiritual father, in troth, she
continued with a light-hearted laugh; yet thy
face is not a shade older than mine. 'Twere but a
merry jest to call thee father, therefore I will
address
thee by thine own name. Nay, good sir, turn
not thy head away. Adrian, Rose of Ellarini asks
what is't that moves thee?
And with her fair, white hand, she parted the
brown locks over the student's brow.
She speaks mine own name! he murmured.
Her hand is on my browher large black eyes
are
fixed
on mine! O, God!I shall fall to the
earth. Have mercy, Heaven, or the dream will
drive me mad!
Adrian, you answer me with silence!
Nay, lady'twas but a memory of some
far-gone
dream of my early youth that awoke this
sudden feeling within me.
Adrian, 'tis now the last week of the carnival.
Thou hast been a wondrous faithful teacher, though
I, mayhap, have not been as dutiful a pupil. Many
songs of melody have I learned of thee, and thine
art of waking sweet sounds from the harp chords,
has in some measure become mine. 'Tis not of
this I would speak to ye now. Ye monks, cut off
as ye are from the pleasures of the world, are wont
to revive them in the pages of the illuminated
romance
.
Hast thou amused thyself thus, Adrian?
In the book-room of St. Benedict, is there no
parchment-leaved
volume, gandy with rare emblazoning
that owes its creation to thy fancy?
Lady, thou hast judged aright.
Adrian, I would thou hadst some merry tale of
love and war with thee now. The sun is dipping
behind the mountains, and a story of the olden
time would well become the twilight hour.
Lady, 'tis true I have no pictured volume with
me, but there is an old legend which now rests
upon my memory, which it might pleasure thee to
hear.
Well said, my monkish romancer! laughed
the Countess, as she yet stood in front of the
Neophyte
.
This night shall be a night of joy with
methe Lord Urban Di Capello holds high festival
on the waters of the Arno, by moonlight. This
thou knowest, is our bridal eve. Thy merry story,
be it of love, of chivalry, or war, will fit my mind
for the gaiety of the carnival night. Adrian, draw
thy seat near this couch, and I will listen to thy
legend.
I dream! whispered Adrian, as he drew his
seat near the velvet couch, on which half seated and
half reclined the Countess. 'Tis a mockery of
fancy which some wanton fiend has conjured up,
to cheat my soul with a vision of bliss that may
never know reality.
There was a pause of a moment, and then
mastering
the strange tumult that was gathering round
his heart and brain, the Neophyte began his legend.
THE STORY OF THE NEOPHYTE.
Ladye Rose, 'twas on a night soft and balmy
as the night we now behold, that the rising moon,
gleaming over the mountains and the streams of a
landscape fair and lovely as the view that opens
before
our vision, shone light and silvery through the
columns of a palace hall, where sat a youth and a
maiden, awed by the silence of the twilight hour.
'Twas a lovely place, that palace bowerwith
its curiously carved columns, its pictured ceiling,
its flowers of balm hanging in festoons along the
balcony on which it opened; it was a lovely place,
and the silent air, and the rising moon, made it a
scene for thought, a home for melancholy musing.
The maiden was fair, and young, and
beautiful
.
O, how beautiful! A thing of joy, with a full,
dark eye, that flashed with the eloquent thoughts
that hope and youth alone can speaka voice
whose whisper was music, whose laugh was
harmony
a
smile that came thrilling to the heart, like
the smile of an angel face seen in a midsummer
dream.
Oh! she was beautiful! with her form of
maidenly
proportions clad in the vestments of rank and
power, her neck swan-like in form, with its
alabaster
whiteness flushed by the warm blood of youth,
and around her face of beauty hung drooping
tresses
of midnight hair, through which the moonbeams
played, while her countenance was half averted in
dreaming thought, and her bosom throbbing with
the pulsations of a strange emotion.
And there she sat, gazing silently upon the
moonlit landscape, while he who sat by her side
had but one look, one voice, one souland all were
hers!
The voice of the Neophyte was warm and
impassioned
.
The Lady Rose leaned forward with
interest
and attention. For a moment the distinction
between the proud ladye and the nameless student
seemed cast aside, if not forgotten.
And
he
who sat beside the maiden, whispered
the Lady Rose, who was he, and how looked he?
Was he young, gallant, and handsome?
Young he was, fair Ladye Rose, but neither
gallant nor handsome. There was a ban upon his
soul, and a curse upon his fate. The joys of others
were not his joystheir fears not his fearstheir
hopes were unknown to him. His way of life
had lain along a desert strown with ashes, the
embers
of his blasted hopes, and the sky above him was
dark, and the earth beneath him lay dead, yielding
nor flower of joy, nor leaf of consolation, nor fruit
of gallant purpose or high-wrought ambition.
And as he sat in that silent hall, his soul was
possessed by one thought, and for that thought he
had denied his God, bartered his soul, and taken to
his heart an agony that gnawed like the eternal fire
and that thought he dared not breathe to the
maiden's ear. That thought was
his love for
her!
Fool that he was! absently murmured the
Ladye
Rose, as she gazed on the bronzed face and the
flashing eyes of the Neophyte. Dared not tell
her of his love? Coward in heartknew he not
that 'tis the bold heart ever wins the fair face? Why
seized he not her hand? Why knelt he not at her
feet? Why to her own ear did he not speak the
words of his love?
The legend of the Neophyte had aroused the
better
feelings of the maiden's heart, her bosom
throbbed
,
and her eye flashed, her voice was deep-toned
with sympathy; and, with glowing cheek and
parted
lip, she awaited the answer of the student.
Ladye Rosein one word thou hast my
answer
.
He was poor and namelessshe rich and
proud! Life opened to her eye a path winding in
sunlight. He was cut off from his kind by an
irrevocable
ban. Life to him wasdespair. Death
alone was hope!
Poornameless? An irrevocable ban? Thou
speakest mysteries! Was he poor? What
knoweth
Love of poverty or wealth? A ban upon his
fate? Dark must be the curse, dark the ban, that
Love may not break and dispel. How name ye
this lover and his love? Said'st thou he was a
warrior?
Ladye! shrieked the Neophyte, starting to his
feet, he was no warrior! He wasa monk!
His name was Adrian, and, he sank kneeling at
her feet, and he loved Rose, the Flower of
Ellarini
!
He seized her handhe pressed it to his lips!
His eyes gleamed passion, and his breath came fast
and hurried in convulsive gasps.
There was a death-like pause of a single instant
a pause of speechless astonishment on the part
the Ladye Roseof speechless passion on the part
of the monk Adrian.
Hahaha! laughed the maiden, starting
to her feet, hahahaha! This is a passing
merry jest! 'Twill do to tell to my Lord Urban
Di Capello, at the festival to night! `How the
monk loved the maiden!' Hahaha! What!
ave I aroused a passion in the bosom of young
anctity? Hahaha! By my fay, a passing
merry jest! I'd even tell it to my lord, were't not
for the thought that thy priestly robes would prove
a sorry defence against the thrust of his sword!
`How the monk loved the maiden!' Hahaha!
Adrian arose slowly upon his feet. He leaned
against a vine-garlanded column. He covered his
face in the folds of his dark robe.
The maiden sprang between the columns of the
bower-hall, along to the balcony, and her voice,
with its musical laughter, again broke upon the
air.
By my fay, a gallant sight! Seesee! the
carnival procession winds around the brow of yon
hill on the farther side of the silvery Arno! A
gallant sight!there are maskers and mimes
quaintly
attiredstrains of festival music come floating
along the silent air, and all Florence is alive for
the river-feast to-night! How gallantly the
warriors
guide their prancing steeds along the hill!
Plumes gleam in the moonlight, and banners wave!
A gallant sight! And there is my Lord Urban Di
Capelloyoung and boldon his dark black steed!
His robes glitter with jewelsthe plume is on his
brow, and the sword is by his side! I hear his
manly laugh and his bold voice! A gallant
cavalier
as ever rode to battle, or danced with fair
ladye
!
Hahaha! I must e'en tell him the
merry legend, `How the monk loved the maiden!'
Hahaha!
And leaning over the balcony, her robes flung
back, and her dark hair swept aside from her brow,
the fair Ladye Rose, the Flower of Ellarini, clapped
her delicate hands with joy and delight.
Adrian, the Neophyte, threw back the folds of
his robe, and the moonbeams fell upon a face from
which all color of life had fled.
Would I might weep! he murmured. Would
I could weep! There is fire in my brain, and
mine eye-balls are turned to things of living flame!
The fiend hath frozen the blood around my heart!
Oh, that I might weep a single tear! Ahha! I
see it all! I am in the regions of the losttears
are unknown heretears are foes to despair
'twere not well for the Lost to weep, else might
they regain their native heaven!
And I am lost, then! Once I had a dream of
love and beautyand ere that, a dream of a God
and a heaven crossed my soul! But all are gone,
now! Shapes of terror are around me, and forms
of death gibber and laugh in my face! They think
to fright
me!
They wot not that I love them now,
forfor, his voice sank to a whisper, like the
voice of a skeleton, could it speak, for I am an
evil spirit, nowand I love these forms of horror
I woo them! Hahaha! I am a demon,
now!
No hollow laugh of supernatural omen broke
the silence of the air, but a low moaning sound
was heard directly over the head of the Neophyte.
It was the spirit that ruled the destiny of Adrian,
the Neophyte, groaning as he looked upon the ruin
he had wrought.
Despair had bidden farewell to Hopeand the
end drew nigh.
THE FOURTH PICTURE.
A solitary figure, in a lonely cathedral aisle. The blaze
of sunbeams is around him, and his brow is calm with
Religion? Love? I trow not. The light upon his brow
is the enthusiasm of Death.
THE JOY OF THE SUNSHINE.
'Tis the sweet hour of morning
man voice, save mine, disturbs the siience of the
cathedral, yet 'tis all alive with life and joy!
The light of the sunbeams streaming through
the stained panes of the lofty windows, and flinging
images of garish splendor along the aisles, and over
the altars of this solemn templethe joy of the
sunshine dancing amid the sculptured flowers of
the lofty columns, and gleaming gaily and merrily
from the Mosaic pavement to the fretted roof, while
the massive shadows of altar and column, flung
heavily along the tessellated stone, served only to
render the glow of the morning sun more bright
and glaring.
Silence rests upon the place and houryet
how soon will the place and hour be noisy with
the hum of human voices! 'Tis the last day of the
carnival, and while mirth and riot mingle their
voices in the streets without, a solemn scene shall
render even yet more holy the hallowed silence of
God's own temple.
One month since, by yonder postern door, I
gave my son Adrian his first view of the world
he went forth on his strange pilgrimage. Last
night he returned from his scene of trial. No word,
save the word of blessing, passed from me ere he
sought his cell, yet methought trouble was written
upon his young brow. May the Holy One nerve
him for his hour of trial!
And devoutly crossing himself, the aged Abbot
glanced around the silent aisles of the cathedral.
He stood in the centre of the chapel, with the light
from the dome far above gilding his grey hairs, and
brightening the glow of the cross reposing amid
the folds of his sacerdotal robes.
In the full blaze of the morning sun, in the
eastern
nave of the cathedral, in front of the high altar
of the temple, arose a stage, covered with folds of
snow-white velvet, gay with flowers of gold, and
drooping in sweeping circles down to the marble
floor. From the centre of this stage arose an altar
of silver, gaudy with mouldings and ornaments,
bearing a cross of gold on its surface, intermingled
with a simple wreath of flowersthe rose entwined
with the laurel. The flower of Ellarini mingling
its perfume with the unfading glory of Capello.
At the farther end of the cathedral, in the centre
of its western nave, in front of a high altar
surmounted
by a grisly skeleton, side by side with a
massive cross, arose another stage, covered with
folds of solemn black. An altar of iron arose from
the darkness of this stage, with a death's-head
grinning
beside a rugged cross, formed of like metal
with the altar.
It arose like a shadow of gloom, that altar of
black, confronting the altar of white, at the farther
end of the church, with its solid and massive form
of dread, like death frowning in the face of life,
and the altar of white, with its flowers of gold,
seemed laughing to scorn the face of death.
A merry chime of bells came floating along the
silent air.
The merry marriage bells! exclaimed the
Abbot. They hail the union of the laurel of
Capello
with the rose of Ellarini!
The solemn toll of the death-bell burst like a
thunder-clap over the cathedral.
Tolltolltoll! 'Tis the knell which consigns
the youth Adrian to the solitude of the
living-death
!
LIFE AND DEATH.
And as the chime of life and the knell of death
mingled their strange and contrasted sounds, the
wide doors of the northern part of the cathedral
were flung suddenly open, and a band of
rosy-cheeked
children came thronging into the temple,
walking
two by two, and scattering rose-buds and leaves
of laurel by the way.
And then came a fair maiden, clad in robes of
snow-white, side by side with a gallant cavalier, all
gorgeous in the blaze of golden attire, with a sword
by his side, and a snow-white plume drooping over
his youthful brow.
As the eye of the Abbot rested upon the youthful
pair slowly approaching the centre of the temple,
where he stood, he also beheld, winding through
the opened door, the gay throng of beauteous
maidens
and gallant cavaliers, each lip with its smile,
and each eye with its flash of joy, while the air
echoed with the music of the marriage lay.
As the merry strain came pealing gaily along the
cathedral, the massive doors opening to the south,
were opened wide, and a hymn for the dead,
chaunted
by manly voices, rose solemnly upon the air,
and mingled with the marriage song.
Winding from the shadow of the southern door,
and walking two by two, a band of dark-robed
monks raised the death song, and as they sung,
they slowly approached the centre of the cathedral,
where the Abbot stood gazing at this singular scene
of life and death.
Amid the band of monks, attired in a tunic of
white, over which, sweeping to the floor, descended
the folds of a robe of black velvet, there walked,
with slow and measured step, a youth in the flush
of early manhood, yet with a face pale as death,
shaded by long locks of rich brown hair, that fell
along his shoulders in massive curls. His hands
were folded fixedly upon his breast, and his dark
grey eyes gleamed forward in one unvarying,
unchanging
glance. No smile was on his lip, no
frown was on his brow. All calm, all composed,
all silent and still.
How calm, and yet how pale he looks!
murmured
the Abbot, as the two processions, with their
songs of life and death intermingling, approached
the column. Onward he stalks, slow and solemn
in pace. His face is calmhis eye is clear and
steady in its glance, and yet there is something o
omen in that even gait, that unalterable look, that
freezing eye!
As he spoke, the procession of life and the
procession
of death, on the point of turning toward
their separate altars, met beneath the light of the
magnificent dome, and the eye of the Abbot rested
upon the forms of beauteous maidens, brilliant with
jewels, and gallant cavaliers, with their plumes of
white waving in the air with each motion of the
figure, or floating aside with each bend of the head.
And in their midst, side by side with his bride,
Lord Urban Di Capello tripped gaily onward, the
smile on his passionless lip, the vacant glance in
his eye, and the ready compliment, or
skilfully-prepared
flattery, ever on his tongue.
The Lady Rose of Ellarini!
How queenly was her air, how magnificent her
step, how proud the inclination of her swan-like
neck, as, moving onward in her robes of white, she
glanced around with a flashing eye and a peerless
look, while she surveyed the scene, where every
eye, and glance, and tone, and voice, had but one
object of attention, and that object her own fair faee
and lovely form.
Adrian the Neophyte stood in the full light of the
dome; and as the sunbeams fell brightly over his
erect form, his folded arms, his mingled robes of
white and black, the gallants and damozels of the
marriage procession started back with a sudden
thrill of fear, and each gazer noted, that there was
a strange expression resting upon his massive brow,
a strange compression of his lips, and a strange and
unknown steadiness in the glance of his eye.
The fair bride looked upon him, but his glance
met not the glance of her eye, and for a moment
the proud and peerless Lady Rose, the Flower of
Ellarini, with all her fame and beauty, with her
bridal robes, and her future of hope, envied the
poor and nameless monk with his robes of sacrifice
and his doom of eternal solitude.
Why should she envy himthe nameless
Neophyte
?
She knew not; Yet a thought flashed over her
proud heart that she might have acted a nobler
part, than by toying and trifling with the soul of
the Enthusiast as though it were a thing of no
value.
Yet she was a gay thing and a fair, and her heart
was the heart of a woman of the world.
Urban Di CapelloRose of Ellarini! the voice
of the Abbot was heard above the song of life and
the hymn of death. The blessing of heaven be
upon ye, as ye pass onward through the gates of
Youth into the future of Happiness and Hope!
And as he spoke the bridal procession wound on
its way to the altar of white.
Adrian, my son and brother! God be with thee
in thy solitude, and thy soul will have room for
never a care of earth, never a pang of her woes,
her wrongs, and her sorrows! The blessing of
Heaven be upon thee, as thou passeth through the
gate of Eternal Solitude into the presence of
God!
And the procession of dark robed monks wended
heir way toward the altar of black, and the hymn
of life and the hymn of death, broke louder and yet
louder upon the air, while high over all the
marriage
chime and the death-knell mingled their
notes of bliss and woe, with a combination of
discord
and harmony, that seemed like a mockery of
the petty joys and petty sorrows that make up the
sum of human life.
Adrian the Neophyte stood upon the Altar of
Black.
THE LIVING DEATH.
On either side, and around the foot of the altar,
were grouped circling bands of dark-robed priests;
beyond were the temple aisles, thronged by
laughing
groups of carnival revellers, in their fantastic
costumes, and garish attire, and at the further nave
of the church, the morning sunlight fell warmly
and brightly over the altar of white with the
marriage
procession winding up its flower-strewn steps,
in bright and magnificent array, their jewelled
attire
glittering in the light, and their happy faces
glowing with the smiles of vacant joy.
It is pastthy month of trial! said the
venerable
Abbot, laying his withered hands upon the
brown locks of the neophyte. And now take one
long and earnest gaze around thee, at the gay world
which thou art about to leave forever! Disease
has not weakened thy young limbs, nor sorrow
dimmed thine eye, and yet in the full glow of
youth and health, thou passeth from this gay scene,
to the shadows of Eternal Solitude! Canst thou
resign the world without a sigh?
I can!
The Neophyte turned his face to the Altar of
Black, with its iron cross and its grinning skull.
And dost thou here in the presence of the gay
and glittering world, in the name of God, in the
name of his blessed Son, in the name of the Awful
Spirit, before the Virgin ever worthy of adoration
and in presence of the Saints, vow a solemn vow
by the safety of thine eternal soul, to set thyself
apart from the world, apart from the faces of men,
apart from human hope and human consolation,
now and forevermore! Dost thou take this solemn
and irrevocable vow?
I do!
The Neophyte placed his hand upon the cross and
the skull.
Adrian, Sacred and Set-apart, turn thee and
look upon the world for the last time!
Adrian turned and looked. His glance was fixed
and unwavering, and yet he beheld not the throng
of dark robed monks clustering around the altar,
he saw not the sea of upturned faces, he heard not
their voices, he knew not of their presence in the
cathedral aisles.
THE DOOM OF THE STUDENT AND THE LADYE.
He looked far, far beyond, and there, gleaming
in the sunlight, he beheld the altar of white, the
bridegroom and the bride.
One long glance he cast over the sea of faces, and
then a shout of alarm, a mingled shout and yell
ran along the cathedral, and the altar of black was
vacant, while through the affrighted multitude with,
steps that knew no obstacle or hinderance, rushed
a figure in mingled robes of white and black, his
eye fixed upon the distant altar, his arms outspread
and a long and slender dagger gleaming in his
clenched right hand.
Onward, still onward, ere the venerable Abbot
had time to glance around him, ere the dark robed
monks knew that the Altar of Black was vacant,
onward and onward, fearlessly breaking his way
through the bands of maskers and revellers,
onward
toward the bridal altar, with the speed of wind
rushed Adrian the Neophyte.
A pause of a moment!
Another yell of horror shrieks along the aisles of
the cathedral!
The dark figure has reached the bridal altarone
bound and he springs upward, and stands erect
upon the velvet carpeting of the stage, the
gleaming
knife raised on high, the arm nerved and the
death certain, while the astonished priests, the
thunder-striken bridegroom, and the bridal guests
recoil with the utter helplessness of a fearful
surprise
.
He stands upon the altar, his eyes glaring, and
the knife raised!
One blow, and the Rose of Ellarini will fall a
bleeding corse upon the snow white velvet of the
bridal altarno human arm may save her now
the madman may call one single moment his own
that moment is small, yet to him, to Adrian the
neophyte 'tis worth an ageit will serve for the
accomplishment
of his purpose!
Nay, start not, fair maiden, nor turn pale!
These were the words that fell shrieking from his
lips. Recoil not with horror, nor avert thine eyes
with fear! Fair thou art and beautiful, thy full
dark eyes were but made to speak passion, thy ruby
lips to murmur tones of love! And for thee have
I denied my God, for thee have I bartered my soul,
for thee have I kindled the flames of the eternal
fire within this bosom, that knew no care till mine
eyes looked upon thy face of beauty and thy form
of grace!
And these are the last words of Adrian the
Neophyte
to the proud and peerless beautyRose of
Ellarini!
If ever thou knowest a joy, dear unto thee, as
hath been the thought of God to me, then may that
joy be torn from thee as thou hast torn the thought
of God from my soul!
Mayst thou taste the cup of human bliss, nor
taste alone, but drain to the dregsmayst thou
revel in hollow pleasure and souless gaiety, until it
becometh a part of thy nature, and then when the
faces thou lovest to look upon wither, when the
friends of thy heart are faithless, when the lips thou
wert wont to kiss stale on thy taste, then when
life has wasted all her pleasures at thy feet, mayst
thou then know, not Despair, nor Woe, nor
Deathbut
Life
! And then as the curse of curses
the curse of SATIETY is gathering over thy
heart, then remember that for thee, Adrian the
Neophyte denied his God and bartered his soul!
With eye flashing, with hair thrown back from
his brow, in a tone of fear and horror, the Neophyte
uttered the words, which thrilled the spectators
with helpless terror, while the dagger gleamed in
his clenched hand.
He advanced toward the maidenhe gazed upon
her fair face for a momenthe flung the dagger to
the floor.
The curse of Satiety
! he murmured,
looking
her fully in the face, and then folding his arms
across his breast, he stepped backward, and cast a
look to heaven!
In a moment a heavy body fell to the floor, and
the bystanders gazed upon the shapeless corse of
Adrian the Neophyte, the arms outstretched, the
limbs contorted, and a thin stream of blood flowing
from the compressed lips.
He lieth low, a wreck of all that is noble or
good! exclaimed the venerable Abbot, as bursting
through the affrighted throng he surveyed the corse.
He lieth low, a shapeless corse, and yet fair maiden
'tis for thee that we should weepnot for him!
He hath said the curse, and it is upon theethe
curse of a broken heart! Behold how his blood
streams along the white robes of the altar!
And there, while the bystanders recoiled with
horror at this strange and spectral scene, while the
Lord Urban Di Capello hid his face in his robe, and
the maiden Rose of Ellarini stood gazing vacantly
at the corse, while the head of the Abbot was
drooped on his breast, and from aisle to aisle of the
cathedral ran the shriek and the cry and the groan,
there, above shout and cry and groan, was heard the
sound of unreal laughter, far above in the air, and
a voice unseen and unknown whispered the
words
Youthand Hopeand Love! Brave things
are they all! HaHaHaBehold
Adrian the Neophyte
!