MR. AND MRS. WOODBRIDGE.
B
PART I.
The morning subsequent to their arrival in
Philadelphia, Harvey Woodbridge proposed to
his bride, (a New York beauty, to whom he had
recently been united, after a very short
acquaintance
,)
that she should accompany him to look
at the new house he had taken previous to their
marriage, and which he had delayed furnishing
till the taste of his beloved Charlotte could be
consulted as well as his own. Meanwhile they
were staying at one of the principal
boarding-houses
of his native city.
Ten o'clock was the time finally appointed by
the lady for this visit to their future residence:
and her husband, after taking a melancholy leave
(they had been married but seven days) departed
to pass an hour at his place of business.
When he returned, Mr. Woodbridge sprang up
stairs three steps at a time, (we have just said he
had been married only a week,) and on entering
their apartment he was saluted by his wife as she
held out her watch to him, with  So after all,
you are ten minutes beyond the hour!
I acknowledge it, my dear love  replied the
husband  but I was detained by a western
customer
to whom I have just made a very profitable
sale.
Still  persisted the bride, half pouting
people should always be punctual, and keep
their appointments to the very minute.
And yet, my dearest Charlotte,  observed
Woodbridge, somewhat hesitatingly  I do not
find you
quite
ready to go out with me.
Oh! that is another thing,  replied the
lady  one may be kept waiting without being
ready.
That is strange logic, my love,  said
Woodbridge
,
smiling.
I don't know what you call logicanswered
the beautiful Charlotte. I learnt all my logic at
Mrs. Fooltrap's boarding-school, where we said a
logic lesson twice a week. But I am sure 'tis
much easier for a man to hurry with his
bargaining
than for a lady to hurry with her dressing;
that is if she pays any regard to her appearance.
I have been pondering for an hour about what I
shall put on to go out this morning. I am sadly
puzzled among all my new walking-dresses.
There are my chaly, and my gros des Indes, and
my peau-de-soie, and my foulard
If you will tell me which is which
interrupted
Woodbridge  I will endeavor to assist
you in your choice. But from its name (foulard,
as you call it,) I do not imagine that last thing can
be a very nice article.
What fools men are!  exclaimed the lovely
Charlotte  Now that is the very prettiest of all
my walking-dresses, let the name be what it will.
I always did like foulard from the moment I first
saw it at Stewart's. I absolutely doat upon
foulard
.
So that is the very thing I will wear, upon
my first appearance in Chesnut street as Mrs.
Harvey
Woodbridge.
Don't,  said her husband, surveying the
dress as she held it up  it looks like calico
Say don't to me,  exclaimed the bride`
threateningly;Calico, indeed!  when it is a
French silk at twelve shillings a yard  a dollar
and a half as you foolishly say in Philadelphia.
Well, well,  replied Woodbridge,
pacifyingly
wear what ever you please  it is of no
consequence.
So then, you think it of no consequence how
I am drest! I dare say you would not grieve in
the least, if I were really to go out in a calico
gown  I
did
suppose that perhaps you took some
little interest in me.
I do indeed,  anwered Woodbridge.
You confess then that it is but
little
.
No  a very great interest, certainly  and
you know that I do. But as to your dress, you, of
course, must be the best judge. And to me you
always look beautifully.
To you but not to others  I suppose that is
what you mean.
To every one  replied the husband  I
observed this morning the glance of admiration
that ran round the breakfast table as soon as you
had taken your seat. That little cap with the
yellow ribbon is remarkably becoming to you.
So then, it was the cap and not myself that
was admired!said the wife.I am sure I am
much obliged to the cap.
Yellow
ribbon, too!
To call it yellow when it is the most delicate
primrose. As if
I
would wear a yellow ribbon.
Indeed, my love  answered Woodbridge
you must forgive me if I am not
au-fait
to all
the technicalities of a lady's toilet. I
acknowledge
my ignorance with due humility.
You well may  I was absolutely ashamed of
you one evening at our house in New York, when
B2
Mrs. Rouleau and the two Miss Quillings and
Miss Biasfold were present, and we were all
enjoying ourselves and discussing the last fashions.
And thinking you ought to say something by way
of joining in the conversation, you called my deep
flounce a long tuck.
I'll never do so again  said Woodbridge,
imitating the tone of a delinquent school boy.
The foulard silk was energetically put on; the
fair Charlotte pertinaciously insisting on hooking
it up the back entirely herself: a herculean task
which, in his heart of hearts, her husband was
rather glad to be spared. And not knowing that
spite gives strength, he stood amazed at the vigour
and dexterity with which his lovely bride put her
hands behind her and accomplished the feat.
When it was done, she took a long survey of
herself in the glass, and then turned round to her
husband and made a low curtesy, saying There
now  you see me in my calico gown.
Woodbridge uttered no reply: but he thought
in his own mind  What a pity it is that
beauties
are so apt to be spoiled!  He might have
added  What a pity it is that men are so apt
to spoil them.
At length, after much fixing and unfixing, and
putting on and taking off the finishing articles of
her attire (particularly half-a-dozen pair of tight
fitting new kid gloves, none of which were quite
tight enough) her ignoramus of a husband again
offending by calling her pelerine a cape and her
scarf a neckcloth, and mistaking the flowers in
her bonnet for roses when he ought to have known
they were almond blossoms, Mrs. Harvey
Woodbridge
sullenly acknowledged herself ready to go
out.
During their walk to the new house, our hero
endeavored to restore the good-humour of his
bride by talking to her of the delightful life he
anticipated when settled in a pleasant mansion of
their own. But his glowing picture of domestic
happiness elicited no reply; her attention being
all the time engaged by the superior attractions
of numerous ribbons, laces, scarfs, shawls, trinkets,
&c., displayed in the shop-windows, and of which
though she could now take only a passing glance,
she mentally promised herself the enjoyment of
making large purchases at her leisure.
They arrived at their future residence, a genteel
and well-finished house of moderate size, where
all was so bright and clean, that it was impossible
for the bride not to be pleased with its aspect, as
her husband unlocked the doors and threw open
the shutters of room after room. Mrs. Woodbridge
rejoiced particularly on observing that the ceilings
of the parlors had centre circles for chandeliers,
and she began to consider whether the chandeliers
should be bronzed or gilt. She also began to talk
of various splendid articles of furniture that would
be necessary for the principal rooms. Mamma
charged me  said she  to have silk damask
lounges and chair-cushions, and above all things
not to be sparing in mirrors. She said she should
hate to enter my parlors if the pier-glasses were
not tall enough to reach from the floor to the
ceiling; and that she would never forgive me if
my mantel-glasses did not cover the whole space
of the wall above the chimney-pieces. She
declared
she would never speak to me again if my
centre-table were not supplied with all sorts of
elegant things, in silver, and china and coloured
glass. And her last words were to remind me of
getting a silver card basket, very wide at the top
that the cards of the best visiters might be spread
out to advantage. The pretty things on Mrs.
Overbuy's enamelled centre-table are said to have
cost not less than five hundred dollars. Was
it not
her
husband that failed last week for the
fourth time?  asked Woodbridge. I believe
he didreplied Charlottebut that is nothing.
Almost every body's husband fails now. Mrs.
Overbuy says it is quite fashionable.  In that
respect, as in many others, I hope to continue
unfashionable all my life  remarked
Woodbridge
.
That is so like pa'  observed
Charlotte
.
He has the strangest dread of failing;
though ma' often tells him that most people seem
to live much the better for it, and make a greater
show than everat least after the first few weeks.
And then pa' begins to explain to her about failing,
and breaking, and stopping payment, and debtors
and creditors, and all that sort of thing. But she
cuts him short, and says she hates business talk.
And so do I, for I am exactly like her.
At this information Woodbridge felt as if he
was going to sigh; but he looked at his bride,
and, consoled himself with the reflection that he
had certainly married one of the most beautiful
girls in America; and therefore his sigh turned
to a smile.
They had now descended to the lower story of
the house. Ah! exclaimed Charlottethe
basement, back and front, is entirely filled up with
cellars. How very ridiculous!  It does not
seem so to me  replied Woodbridge  this
mode of building is very customary in
Philadelphia
.
So much the worse  answered the
lady.  Now in New York nothing is more
usual than to have a nice sitting room down in
the basement story, just in front of the kitchen.
A sort of servants' parlor, I suppose said her
husband. It is certainly very considerate to
allot to the domestics, when not at work, a
comfortable
place of retirement, removed from the
heat, and slop and all the
desegremens
of a
kitchen.
How foolishly you always talk  exclaimed
Mrs. Woodbridge. As if you would give the
basement-room to the servants! No we use it
ourselves. In ma's family, as in hundreds of
others all over New York, it is the place where
we sit when we have no company, and where we
always eat.
What!  half under ground  exclaimed
Woodbridge  Really I should feel all the time
as if I was living in a kitchen.
It is very wrong in you to say so, replied
the lady  and very unkind to say it to
me
,
when we had a basement-room in our house in
New York, and used it constantly. To be sure
I've heard ma' say she had some trouble in
breaking
pa' into it  but he had to give up. Men
have such foolish notions about almost every
thing, that it is well when they have somebody
to put their nonsense out of their heads.
I never saw you in that basement-room
observed Woodbridge.
To be sure you did not. I do not say that it
is the fashion for young ladies to receive their
beaux in the basement-room. But beaux and
husbands are different things.
You are right  murmured Woodbridge.
If always admitted behind the scenes, perhaps
fewer beaux would be willing to take the character
of husbands.
They now descended the lower staircase, and
went to inspect the kitchen, which formed a part
of what in Philadelphia is called the back building.
Woodbridge pointed out to his wife its numerous
conveniences; upon which she told him that she
was sorry to find he knew so much about kitchens.
They then took a survey of the chambers; and
on afterwards descending the stairs they came to
a few steps branching off from the lower
landing-place
,
and entered a door which admitted them
into a narrow room in the back-building, directly
over the kitchen. This room had short windows,
a low ceiling, a small coal-grate, and was in every
respect very plainly finished.
This  said Woodbridge  is the room I
intend for my library.
I did not know I had married a literary man
said Charlotte looking highly discomposed.
I am not what is termed a literary man
replied her husband  I do not write, but I take
much pleasure in reading. And it is my intention
to have this room fitted up with book-shelves, and
furnished with a library-table, a stuffed leather
fauteuil
, a reading-lamp, and whatever else is
necessary to make it comfortable.
Where then is to be our sitting-room?
We can seat ourselves very well in either the
back parlor or the front one. We will have a
rocking-chair a-piece, besides ottomans or sofas.
But where are we to eat our meals?
In the back parlor, I think  unless you
prefer the front.
I prefer neither. We never ate in a parlour
at ma's in spite of all pa' could say. Down in the
basement story we were so snug, and so out of the
way.
I have always been accustomed to eating quite
above ground  said Woodbridge  I am quite
as much opposed to the burrowing system as you
say your good father was.
Oh! but he had to give up  replied
Charlotte
.
Which is more than I shall do  answered
her husband  looking very resolute. On this
point my firmness is not to be shaken.
Nobody asks you to eat in the basement
story  said Charlotte  because there is none.
But this little room in the back-building is the
very thing for our common sitting-place  and
also to use as a dining-room.
We can dine far more agreeably in one of the
parlors.
The parlors, indeed!  suppose somebody
should chance to come in and catch us at table,
would not you be very much mortified?
By no means  I hope I shall never have
cause to be ashamed of my dinner.
You don't know what may happen. After a
trial of the expenses of housekeeping, we may
find it necessary to economize. And whether or
not, I can assure you I am not going to keep an
extravagant table. Ma' never did in spite of pa's
murmurings.
Then we will economize in finery rather than
in comfort  said Woodbridge. I do not wish
for an extravagant table, and I am not a
gourmand;
but there is no man that does not feel somewhat
meanly when obliged, in his own house, to partake
of a paltry or scanty dinner; particularly when
he knows that he can afford to have a good one.
That was just the way pa' used to talk to
ma'. He said that as the head of the house earned
all the market-money  (only think of his calling
himself the head of the house,) and gave out a
liberal allowance of it, he had a right to expect,
for himself and family, a well-supplied and
inviting
table. He had some old saying that he who
was the bread-winner ought to have his bread as
he liked it.
And in this opinion I think most husbands
C
will coincide with Mr. Stapleford  said the
old gentleman's son-in-law.
There will be no use in that, unless their
wives coincide also  remarked the old
gentleman's
daughter. However, to cut the matter
short, whatever sort of table we may keep, this
apartment must certainly be arranged for an eating
room.
But we really do not require it for that
purpose
replied her husband, with strange
pertinacity
and I must positively have it for a
library.
The truth is, dear Harvey  said Charlotte,
coaxingly  I am afraid if I allow you a regular
library, I should lose too much of your society
think how lonely I shall be when you are away
from me at your books. Even were I always to
sit with you in the library, (as Mrs. Deadweight
does with her husband,) it would be very hard for
me to keep silent the whole time, according
to
her
custom. And if, like Mrs. Le Bore, I were
to talk to you all the while you were reading,
perhaps you might think it an interruption. Mrs.
Duncely, who has had four husbands (two lawyers,
one doctor, and a clergyman,) all of whom spent
as little time with her as they could, frequently
told us that libraries were of no use but to part
man and wife. Dear Harvey, it would break my
heart to suppose that you could prefer any thing
in the world to the company of your own
Charlotte
Augusta. So let us have this nice little
place for our dining-room, and let us sit in it
almost always. It will save the parlors so much.
Indeed my dear Charlotte, I do not intend to
get any furniture for the parlors of so costly a
description that we shall be afraid to use it.
What!  are we not to have Saxony carpets,
and silk curtains, and silk-covered lounges, and
large glasses, and chandeliers, and beautiful
mantel-lamps
;
and above all, a'n't we to have elegant
things for the centre-table?
My design  answered Woodbridge  is
to furnish the house throughout, as genteelly, and
in as good taste as my circumstances will allow:
but always with regard to convenience rather
than to show.
Then I know not how I can look ma' in
the face!
You may throw all the blame on me, my
love.
Pray, Mr. Harvey Woodbridge (if I may
venture
to ask) how will these plain, convenient,
comfortable parlors look when we have a party?
I do not furnish my house for the occasional
reception of a crowd of people, but for the every
day use of you and myself, with a few chosen
friends in whose frequent visits we can take
pleasure.
If you mean frequent tea-visits, I can assure
you, sir, I shall take no pleasure in any such
trouble and extravagance  with your few chosen
friends, indeed! when it is so much cheaper to
have a large party once a year (as we always had
at ma's:) asking every presentable person we
knew, and every body to whom we owed an
invitation; and making one expense serve for all.
Though our yearly party was always an absolute
squeeze, you cannot think how much we saved by
it. Pa' called it saying grace over the whole
barrel  some foolish idea that he got from Dr.
Franklin.
For my partremarked WoodbridgeI
hope I shall never be brought to regard social
intercourse
as a mere calculation of dollars and cents. I
would rather, if necessary, save in something
else than make economy the chief consideration
in regulating the mode of entertaining my friends
and acquaintances.
Then why do you object to saving our
parlors
by using them as little as possible?
When our furniture wears out, or ceases to
look
comme it faut
, I hope I shall be able to
replace
it with new articles, quite as good, and
perhaps
betterparticularly if we do not begin too
extravagatly at first.
I suppose then
your
plan is to fit up these
parlors
with ingrain carpets, maple-chairs, and black
hair-cloth sofas, and instead of curtains, nothing
but venitian blinds.
Not exactly  though young people, on
commencing
married life in moderate circumstances,
have been very happy with such furniture.
More fools they! For my part, I should be
ashamed to show my face to a morning visitor in
such paltry parlors. That sort of furniture is
scarcely better than what I intend for this little
up-stairs sitting room.
If this little room is devoted to the purpose
you talk of, we must there show our faces to each
other.
Nonsense, Mr. Woodbridge!  How can it
possibly signify what faces married people show
to each other?
It sigifies much  very much indeed.
To put an end to this foolery resumed the
bride  I tell you once for all, Harvey
Woodbridge
,
that I must and will have this very
apartment
for an eating-room, or a dining-room or a
sitting-room or whatever you please to call it  to
take our meals in without danger of being caught
at them, and to stay in when I am not drest and
do not wish to be seen.
The hiding room I think would be the best
name for it  murmered Woodbridge.
C2
Only let us try it awhilepersisted the fair
Charlotte, softening her tone, and looking fondly
at her leige-lordthink how happy we shall be
in this sweet little retreat, where I will always
keep a few flower-potsyou know I doat on
flowers
imagine
your dear Charlotte Augusta in a
comfortable wrapper, seated on a nice calico sofa,
and doing beautiful worsted work: and yourself in
a round jacket, lolling in a good wooden rocking
chair either cane-colored or green, with slippers
on your feet, and a newspaper in your hand.
We can have a shelf or two for a few select books.
And of an evening, when I do not happen to be
sleepy you can read to me in the Summer at
Brighton, or the Winter in London, or Almacks,
or Santo Sebastiano. I have them all. Brother
Jem bought them cheap at auction. But I never
had time to get to the second volume of any of
them. So we have all that pleasure to come.
And I shall be delighted to have those sweet
books read aloud to me by you. You will like
them far better than those Scotch novels that
people
are always talking about.
Woodbridge looked dubious. Finally, being
tired of the controversy, he thought best to end it
by saying  Well, well  we'll let this subject
rest for the present.  But he resolved in his
own mind to hold out for ever against it.
At their boarding-house dinner-table, Mrs.
Woodbridge informed a lady who sat opposite,
that she was delighted with her new house; and
that it was a love of a place; particularly a snug
little apartment in the back building which Mr.
Woodbridge had promised her for a sitting-room,
to save the parlors, as they were to be furnished
in very handsome style. Woodbridge reddened
at her pertinacity, and to divert the attention of
those around him from a very voluble expose of
what she called her plans, he began to talk to a
gentleman on the other side of the table about the
latest news from Europe.
From this day our heroine spoke of the little
sitting-room as a thing course, without noticing
any of the deprecatory lookings and sayings of her
husband. And she succeeded in teazing him into
allowing her to choose all the furniture of the
house without his assistance: guided only by the
taste of one of the female boarders, Mrs.
Squanderfield
,
a lady who had been married about a
twelvemonth, and after commencing
house-keeping
in magnificent style, her husband (whose
affairs had been involved at the time of their
marriage,) was obliged at the close of the winter,
to make an assignment for the benefit of his
creditors
;
and the tradesmen who had supplied it took
back the unpaid furniture.
After her parlors had been fitted up in a very
showy and expensive manner, (not forgetting the
centre-table and its multitude of costly baubles,)
Mrs. Woodbridge found that these two rooms had
already absorbed so large a portion of the sum
allotted by her husband for furnishing the whole
house that it was necessary to economize greatly
in all the other apartments; and to leave two
chambers in the third story with nothing but the
bare walls. This discrepancy was much regretted
by Mr. Woodbridge, even after his wife had
reminded
him that these chambers could only have
been used as spare bed-rooms, which in all
probability
would never be wanted as they did not
intend keeping a hotel; and that as to encouraging
people to come and stay at her house, (even her
own relations) she should do no such expensive
thing. You may depend upon it, my dear,
said she  on the day that they installed
themselves
in their new abode, I shall make you a
very economical wife.
And so she did, as far as comforts were
concerned
,
aided and abetted by the advice of her
friend Mrs. Squanderfield, who consulted her in
what to spend money; and in what to save it she
was guided by the precepts of Mrs. Pinchington, an
other inmate of the same boarding-house, a widow
of moderate income, whose
forte
was the closest
parsimony, and who had broken up her own
establishment and gone to boarding ostensibly
because she was lonely, but in reality because she
could get no servant to live with her. The advice
of these two counsellors never clashed, for Mrs.
Squanderfield took cognizance of the dress and
the parlor arrangements of the pupil, while Mrs.
Pinchington directed the housewifery: and both
of them found in our heroine an apt scholar.
We need not tell our readers that the fair bride
carried her point with regard to the little
apartment
at the head of the stairs, which she concluded
to designate as the dining-room, though they ate
all
their meals in it; and it became in fact their
regular abiding place, her husband finding all
opposition fruitless, and finally yielding for the
sake of peace.
It took Mrs. Woodbridge a fortnight to recover
from the fatigue of moving into their new house:
and during this time she was denied to all visitors,
and spent the day in a wrapper on the dining-room
sofa, sometimes sleeping, and sometimes sitting
up at a frame and working in worsted a
square-faced
lap-dog, with paws and tail also as square
as cross-stitch could make them; this remarkable
animal most miraculously keeping his seat upon
the perpendicular side of an upright green bank,
with three red flowers growing on his right and
three blue ones on the left. During the progress
of this useful and ornamental piece of needle-work,
the lady kept a resolute silence, rarely opening
her lips except to check her husband for speaking
to her, as it put her out in counting the threads.
And if he attempted to read aloud, (even in Santo
Sebastiano,) she shortly desired to him to desist,
as it puzzled her head and caused her to confuse
the proper number of stitches alloted to each of
the various worsted shades. If he tried to interest
her by a really amusing book of his own choice,
she always went fast asleep, and on raising his
eyes from the page he found himself reading to
nothing. If, on the other hand, he wished to
entertain himself by reading in silence, he was
generally interrupted by something like this,
precluded
by a deep sigh  Harvey you are not
thinking now of your poor Charlotte Augusta
you never took up a book and read during the
week you were courting me. Times are sadly
altered now; but I suppose all wives must make
up their minds to be forgotten and neglected after
the first fortnight. Don't look so disagreeable;
but if you really care any thing about me, come
and wind this gold-colored worsted  I want it
for my dog's collar.
The fortnight of rest being over, Mrs.
Woodbridge
concluded to receive morning visitors and
display to them her handsome parlors; which for
two weeks were opened every day for that purpose
during the usual hours for making calls. Also
she availed herself of the opportunity of wearing
in turn twelve new and beautiful dresses, and
twelve pelerines and collars equally new and
beautiful
.
Various parties were made for his bride by the
families that knew Harvey Woodbridge, who was
much liked throughout the circle in which he had
visited; and for every party the bride found that
she wanted some new and expensive articles of
decoration, notwithstanding her very recent outfit;
she and her ma' having taken care that the
trousseau
should in the number and costliness of its
items be the admiration of all New York, that is
of the set of people among which the Staplefords
were accustomed to revolve.
When the bridal parties were over, Woodbridge
was very earnest that his wife should give one
herself in return for the civilities she had received
from his friends; for though he had no fondness
for parties he thought they should be reciprocated
by those who went to them themselves, and who
had the appliances and means of entertaining
company in a house of their own and in a
customary
manner. To this proposal our heroine
pertinaciously
objected, upon the ground that she was
tired and worn out with parties, and saw no reason
for incurring the expense and trouble of giving
one herself.
But  said her husband  have you not
often told me of your mother's annual parties.
Did she not give at least one every season?
She never did any such thing  replied
Charlotte  till after
I
was old enough to come
out. And she had as many invitations herself,
before
she began to give parties as she had
afterwards
.
It makes no sort of difference. Ladies
that dress well and look well, and therefore help
to adorn the rooms are under no necessity of
making a return (as you call it) even if they go to
parties every night in the season. Then, if,
besides
being elegantly drest, they are belles and
beauties (here she fixed her eyes on the glass)
their presence gives an
eclat
which is a sufficient
compensation to their hostess.
But if they are
not
belles and beauties
observed
Woodbridge, a little mischievously.
I don't know what you are talking about!
replied the lady with a look of surprise.
Well, well  resumed the husband
argue
as you will on this subject, you never can
convince me that it is right first to lay ourselves
under obligations, and then to hold back from
returning them, when we have it amply in our
power to do so.
I am glad to hear you are so rich a man. It
was but last week you told me you could not
afford to get me that case of emeralds I set my
mind upon at Thibaut's.
Neither I can. And excuse me for saying
that I think you have already as many articles of
jewelry as the wife of a Market-street merchant
ought to possess.
Are the things you gave me on our
wedding-day
to last my life-time? Fashion changes in
jewelry as well as in every thing else.
It cannot have changed much already, as but
a few weeks have elapsed since that
giorno felice
.
However, let us say no more about jewels.
Oh! yes  I know it is an irksome topic to
husbands and fathers and all that sort of thing.
Pa' was always disagreeable whenever Marquand's
bill was sent in.
To return to our former subject  resumed
Woodbridge  I positively cannot be satisfied,
if after accepting in every instance the civilties
of our friends, we should meanly pass over our
obligation of offering the usual return. I
acknowledge
that I do not like parties; but having in
compliance with your wishes accompanied you to
so many, we really
must
make the exertion of
giving one ourselves.
If you disapprove of parties you ought not to
D
have a party. I thought you were a man that
always professed to act up to your principles.
I endeavor to do so. And one of my principles
is to accept no favors without making a return as
far as lies in my power. I disapprove of
prodigality
,
but I hate meanness.
It is wicked to hate any thing. But married
men get into such a violent way of talking.
When pa'
did
break out, he was awful. And
then, instead of arguing the point, ma' and I
always quitted the room, and left him to himself.
He soon cooled down when he found there was
nobody to listen to him: and the next day he was
glad enough to make his peace and give up.
Woodbridge could endure no more, but hastily
left the room himself: and Charlotte walked to
the glass and arranged her curls, and altered the
tie of her neck-ribbon; and then sat down and
worked at the everlasting dog.
PART II.
Finding it utterly impossible to prevail on his
wife to consent to a large party, Woodbridge next
endeavored to persuade her to invite a few families
at a time (sociably, as the ladies call it,) till they
had thus gone round all their acquaintances.
Why this is worse than the other way
exclaimed Charlotte  really, Mr. Woodbridge,
I am surprised at you. Did I not tell you, when
we were first married, that ma' never had any
evening company whatever, except when she gave
a squeeze once in the season. The expense of
having a few people at a time is endless, and there
is no
eclat
in it either, as there is with a large
general party; so it is an absolute throwing away
of money.
Then let us have a large general party.
Harvey you really make me sick. Will you
never cease harping on the same subject. Is it an
affair of life and death, our paying back again what
we owe to the people who saw proper to invite
us. Shall we lose our characters if we do not?
Yes.
Was there ever such nonsense.
Our characters will so far suffer that we shall
be justly considered mean, sordid, and
inhospitable
.
Will any one ask us why we do not invite
company. How can they kuow what reasons we
may have? And then again how business-like to
regard the thing as an affair of debtor and
creditor
!
But men will be men.
Charlotte  said Harvey Woodbridge  I
am tired of this foolish contention  and I insist,
(yes  I positively insist) on a few of our friends
being invited to take tea with us to-morrow
evening
.
Next week we will have a few more, and
so on, till we shall have entertained at our own
house, the whole circle of our acquaintances.
But when these people paid me their bridal
visits  said Charlotte,  I carried my
politeness
so far as to hint to every one of them a
general
invitation to come and see us of an evening
without ceremony, as soon as they chose.
D2
No matter  returned her husband why
should they hasten to avail themselves of a mere
general invitation, when there is no reason for
their not receiving a special one. Among women
I know very well that volunteer visits are only
made where there is a very familiar intimacy; and
never when the parties are but newly or slightly
acquainted. Again  supposing that any of these
ladies or gentlemen were to take you at your
word  are we ever prepared for unexpected
guests?  Could we receive them in this vile room
that you insist on living in; or in the cold dark
parlors, with the fire out, and no lamp lighted.
Mrs. Woodbridge began to conclude that, for
this time, she had best give up to her husband;
and therefore, with a very ill grace, she finally
consented to his desire; and he felt so happy at
having carried his point, that he apologized for
the epithet he had bestowed on the sitting-room;
and conceded that, used in moderation, there was
some convenience in having such places.
Accordingly, invitations were given to three
married couples, one widow, two young ladies
and three young gentlemen; all of them being
among those of our hero's friends, who stood
highest
in his esteem, from whom his wife had received
the utmost civility, and in whose eyes she was
most anxious that she and her domestic
arrangements
should appear to the greatest advantage. In
the interim, he took particular care to be as amiable
to her as possible: only once giving her occasion
to say that all men were fools.
Harvey Woodbridge came home from his store
in excellent spirits, anticipating the most splendid
evening he had yet enjoyed in his own house.
Anxious
to keep his wife in good humor, he had
fore-borne
during the day to offer any suggestion as to
the preparations for the evening; merely hinting
his hope that every thing would be arranged in a
liberal and convenient manner.
Why should you doubt it?  replied
Charlotte
But I am not going to tell you a word
beforehand. Perhaps I shall surprise you.
So much the better  said Woodbridge
gaily  and he resolved to trust entirely to his
wife, and to ask no questions; calculating greatly
on this surprise that was in store for him, and
feeling persuaded that, on this, their first reception
of evening company, she would take care that all
should be
sclon les regles
.
But, a change came o'er the spirit of his dreams
when he found that at seven o'clock the parlors
were not lighted; Mrs. Woodbridge, who had
not yet began to dress, averring that people never
arrived till at least one hour after the time
specified
,
and that she would encourage no useless
waste of oil. About ten minutes past seven the
door-bell rang, our heroine flew to her toilet, and
Mr. Woodbridge had the mortification of seeing
the first detachment of visitors make their entrance
by the light of a dim and newly-kindled fire; the
ladies leaving their cloaks and hoods in the entry;
Charlotte having given orders that nobody should
be shown up stairs. The servant man now hurried
to light the lamps which stood on the centre-tables
in each parlor, omitting those on the mantel-piece,
because he knew that they were unfurnished with
oil, as they had never yet been prepared for use.
In a very short time all the guests had arrived,
and Woodbridge was obliged for nearly an hour
to entertain them entirely himself; his consort
not being ready to made her appearance. Finally,
the beautiful Charlotte came down elegantly and
elaborately drest: and smiled, and looked sweet,
and expressed to the company her regret at not
being aware of their intention of coming so early,
and her delight at their having done so, as by that
means she should have the pleasure of enjoying a
larger proportion of their society.
Then she took her seat, changing it occasionally
so as to afford each of the guests a share of her
talk. They were all intelligent people, with
cultivated minds and polished manners, and
Woodbridge, who was well able himself, to sustain
apart in rational and amusing conversation, thought
his wife had never talked with less tact and more
folly. She discoursed with untiring volubility on
new style bonnets, new style shawls, and
remembered
with surprising accuracy the exact figures
of certain new style mouselines de laines,
embroidered
chalys, and brocaded satins. And she varied
her declamations by describing divers patterns for
worsted work, particularly the new style dog that
she was doing for the cover of a tabouret, and to
which she was going to give a companion in the
shape of a basket of fruit, to be taken in hand for
another tabouret as soon as the present occupant
was out of the frame.
After a while, the attention of the visiters began
to flag; all seemed to grow dull and tired, and
our hero felt that he was becoming dull and tired
himself, and in fact quite out of spirits. The
truth was, he wanted his tea, and thought that all
the company did the same; and his only hope
was now in the exiliarating influence of the cups
that cheer but not inebriate. The time-piece
showed the hour of nine, and still there was no
sign of tea. He wondered it did not appear, and
was at a loss to conjecture what had retarded it.
At last, the conversation subsided into silence,
and after a dead pause, Mrs. Woodbridge proposed
music. For herself she had never been able to
acquire any proficiency in the art, and therefore
did not profess to play. But she had insisted on the
purchase of a highly ornamented instrument as
an elegant piece of furniture for the back parlour,
and because, as she  No decent house is
without a piano.
She sat two young ladies down to the overture
to La Cenerentola played as a duet, aud which
she said was ma's favorite. During the move
which generally takes place when music is about
to commence, Woodbridge found an opportunity
of saying in a low voice to his wife  I wish
the music had been deferred till after tea. We
have already waited too long, and want something
to brighten us.
People must be badly off when their brightness
depends upon tea  replied Charlotte, also
soto
voce
is that the only excuse you can make for
being so stupid this evening  you and your select
friends. But sensible people are always stupid
at least
I
find them so.  Then turning amay
from her husband, she walked into the other
parlor, and taking her seat beside a lady who was
looking over the splendid annuals that lay on the
table, our heroine remarked that a figure in one of
the plates reminded her of a celebrated actress
then performing at the Chesnut street theatre;
and from thence she ran into a minute description
of the costume of that actress in every character
in which she had seen her. The truth was that
our fair Charlotte never observed or remembered
any thing concerning a play, except the
habiliments
of the performers; her eyes being chiefly
engaged in wandering round the boxes, and taking
cognizance of the caps, turbans, feathers, flowers,
and other head ornaments there displayed.
The overture to La Cenerentola was played
mechanically well, the musicians (like the
hearers
)
being tired before they began. When it was
over, the young ladies rose from the instrument,
and returned with the rest of the company to the
other room; and it was well they did so, for in a
few minutes the back-parlour lamp died out,
self-extinguished
for want of sufficient oil.
At length, Mrs. Woodbridge desired her
husband
to touch the bell, and he obeyed with alacrity,
thinking to himself  Now we shall have tea, to
a certainty.
The servant man made his entrance: and (to
the utter dismay of our hero) he handed round a
waiter set out with diminutive glasses of weak sour
lemonade, and a silver basket half filled up with
a large thickly folded damask napin, upholding
some very small thin slices of stale tasteless sponge
cake.
Is this the surprise she promised me
thought Woodbridge  almost betrayed into an
audible exclamation. But he checked himself,
and with heightened color proceeded to do the
honors of the banquet, imagining (and it was not
altogether fancy's sketch) that he perceived a
look of disappointment in the countenances of the
whole company, none of whom had taken tea at
home, having all understood that Mrs.
Woodbridge's
invitation included that refreshment. His
wife, however, smiled on; and assured the ladies
that they would not find the lemonade too strong,
and that if any cake could be considered
wholesome
,
it was sponge-cake eaten in moderation.
The remainder of the evening dragged on still
more heavily than the former; Woodbridge being
too much annoyed either to talk himself or to be
the cause of talking in others; and also watching
anxiously, but vainly, for the appearance of
something
else in the way of refreshments. It was
scarcely ten o'clock when one of the married ladies
signified to Mrs. Woodbridge that she must go
home on account of her baby. All the other
guests seemed eager to avail themselves of the
first system of breaking up, and hastened to take
their leaves; their hostess assuring them that it
was quite early: that she had not enjoyed one
half enough of their company: that she hoped
they had spent as pleasant an evening as she had
done: and that she trusted it would not be long
before they repeated their visit, and that they
might rely on being always treated in the same
unceremonious manner. You had better not put
that in  thought her husband, as he glanced
at her with ill-concealed disapprobation.
When all the company had departed, and the
husband and wife were left to themselves, our
hero (making an effort to throw as much mildness
into his tone as possible) inquired why there had
been no tea for the visitors.
Because I did not choose to go to any
unnecessary
trouble and expense  was the reply:
You went round yourself,  said
Woodbridge
and gave the invitations verbally. Of
course you asked them to come to tea.
There is no `of course' in the case. I do
not remember saying any thing to them about tea.
Perhaps I did, and perhaps I did not. None of
ma's friends ever gave tea, whether the company
was large or small. And Mrs. Pinchington told
me herself that when
she
kept house she always
expressly asked her friends to come
after
tea. I
wish
I
had done so, and then these people would
not have expected any.
But why should they not expect any? At
their own houses they on all occasions have tea.
Is tea and its appendages so enormously expensive
that we cannot afford to give them to our friends?
I am always at a loss to know what you can
afford, and what you cannot. When after a great
E
deal of trouble I had made you understand what
blond was, did you not object to my giving eight
dollars a yard for seven yards of blond trimming
to go round the skirt of that gros d'Afrique I had
made for Mrs. Hillingdon's ball. To be sure I
did
get the blond notwithstanding; and it was
not my fault if it caught in the flowers of Miss
Wireblossoms skirt and was half torn to pieces
that very evening. Then when I fell in love
with that superb gold card-case at Thibault's did
you not meanly refuse to let me have it, merely
because you had given me a silver one already.
And now when I try as much as I can to
economise
in things that are of no consequence you are
displeased at my not giving tea to these people,
as if they could not just as well have all drank
their tea at home.
Undoubtedly they would have done so, had it
been possible for them to foresee that they would
get none at our house. Did you not invite them
to come at an early hour?
Yes but I did not suppose they would be so
simple as to take me at my word. And I asked
them to come
socially
, just to meet half a dozen
friends. Therefore they need not have expected
any thing.
Socially!  Yes, we were all very social
indeed
.
The truth is that persons accustomed to
the refreshment of tea, feel the want of it in the
evening after the fatigues of the day are over.
And if they chance to go without it, they always
miss its exhilirating effects. I wonder you did
not want it yourself.
Oh! I am not such a fool as to let my vivacity
depend on a cup of tea. Besides, I had some made
for myself, and I drank it in the sitting room
before
I came down. When I had done, the pot
was filled up with water, and left by the fire  I
dare say it is there yet, and if you are in distress
for tea, you can get some of that. For my part
I am very sleepy, and very tired of all this
nonsense
,
and I will not hear another word on the
subject. But I can assure you this is the last
time you shall ever prevail on me to invite
evening visitors. If
my
society is not good
enough for you, I shall not assist in bringing
other
people here to entertain you.
So saying, she flounced up stairs, and her
husband
sighed, and went out to a restaurant in quest
of something by way of refreshment: experience
having taught him that nothing was to be had in
the house. The lovely Charlotte did not speak
to him all next day, and gave no token of her
knowledge that he was in existence, except that
she contrived for dinner something that she knew
he particularly disliked. Finally, he was fain to
bribe her into good humor by the gift of a
turquoise
ring.
Time passed on, and Harvey Woodbridge
became
sadly apprehensive that for him the bonds
of married life would never be golden chains
inlaid with down. As his mental vision cleared,
the beautiful Charlotte Augusta seemed every day
to grow less and less beautiful. And too often his
recollection dwelt on some favorite adages of
his grandmother, such as  Handsome is that
handsome does  and Marry in haste and
repent
at leisure.
No home could be more cheerless than that of
our hero; notwithstanding that his wife piqued
herself greatly on her domestic qualifications,
after
the pattern of her ma'. But her housewifery
consisted only in the perpetual practice of a mean,
sordid, and annoying parsimony, carried into the
most minute details of every thing connected
with comfort. While at the same time there were
no limits to her extravagance in all that related
to the adornment of her own person. And her
passion for dress, increasing by indulgence, soon
superceded even her love for fine parlor furniture;
taking care only to preserve what they had
already
by using it as little as possible. Till they
learn by experience, men have a very faint idea
of the sums that can be expended on the external
decorations of a woman who is resolved on being
the first to adopt every new fashion, and the first
to throw it aside for another, and who takes a silly
pride not only in the costliness but in the number
of her dresses. As Mrs. Woodbridge never gave
any thing away, a spare room (or rather a room
which could not be spared, and ought to have
been appropriated to a better use) was filled with
receptacles for her discarded finery: discarded in
many instances after having been worn but two
or three times.
With the usual selfishness and folly of women
whose ruling passion is a love of dress, our heroine
seemed to think that almost every cent expended
for any other purpose was taken wrongfully from
the fund which ought to be devoted exclusively to
the adornment of her own person. Now that her
parlors were furnished, she appeared to consider
all expenditure for the comfort or convenience of
the establishment as an encroachment on her
selfassumed
right to be indulged in every new and
costly vanity that fashion and ostentation was
continually introducing into female attire. Yet
though her milliner and mantua-maker were the
most modish, and therefore the most extravagant
in their charges that Philadelphia could support,
if she wanted any other sort of work to be executed
she would walk to the most distant suburbs of the
city in all the torture of tight shoes, to make a
hard bargain with a cheap seamstress; or she
would absurdly hire a carriage for the purpose of
conveying her to cheap (or rather low-priced)
E2
stores in remote places: where, by Mrs.
Pinchington's
account, she could buy articles of
household
necessity at a cent or two less than in the
best part of the town.
In charity Mrs. Woodbridge gave nothing.
When her feelings sometimes prompted her to
afford relief in a case of severe distress that chanced
to fall in her way, her hand was stayed by some
such reflection as that a quarter of a dollar would
buy her a yard of ribbon, or a half dollar the same
quantity of narrow edging: that seventy-five cents
would pay for a pair of white kid gloves, and that
a dollar would purchase a flower sprig.
Therefore
the money remained in her purse to be
expended
in some article of similar utility to the above.
A book was one of the last things she would
have thought of purchasing for herself; and she
even looked displeased whenever her husband
bought a new one for his own reading; and
wondered
what people that had the Athenum to go
to, and also a share in the City Library, could
possibly want with any more books.
As is usually the case in families where the
practice is ultra economy our heroine was always
in difficulties about servants, some of whom left
her or were dismissed by her in two or three days:
and few that were worth having remained more
than a week, for good servants can easily obtain
good places. She usually began her daily routine
by keeping her husband waiting an hour or more
beyond the appointed breakfast time, for it was
always a difficult task to her to get up in the
morning, and it was deferred and delayed as if it
could be dispensed with altogether. On this
subject
no remonstrance on the part of her husband
ever made the slightest impression; her pretence
being that early rising was injurious to her health.
And if he resorted to the desperate measure of
eating his breakfast without her, he was punished
by her not speaking to him for the remainder of
the day. When breakfast was over, Mrs.
Woodbridge
devoted an hour to scolding the servants,
and five minutes to arranging her scheme of
parsimony
for that day. This she called
superintending
her household affairs. Then, having
taken off her wrapper, and spent two hours in
making a very
recherche
toilette, she issued forth
in a superb dress-bonnet, with every thing to
match, and passed the remainder of the morning
in costly visits to the fashionable shops, and to
the fashionable milliners and mantua-makers; and
in leaving cards at the doors of such of her
acquaintances
as lived in handsome houses, and dressed
expensively. The only persons with whom, on
making her calls, she desired an interview, were
her cronies Mesdames Squanderfield and
Pinchington
.
Friends she had none.
About three o'clock Mrs. Woodbridge went
home and undressed for dinner, which in her
house was always a paltry and uninviting repast:
such as her husband would have been really
ashamed of if seen, and which it was certainly
politic to serve up in the privacy of the little
dining-room
.
As it was, he thought that at his own
table he never felt exactly like a gentlemen; and
his genteel feelings were brought still lower at
times when for a day or two he found his house
without a single domestic: a condition to which
a
menage
of this description is not unfrequently
reduced. Indeed, their servants very often left
them on account of the scanty supply of kitchen
utensils, averring that they were not allowed
things to do their work with.
Of afternoons, the fair Charlotte, continuing
in her dishabille, and establishing herself
permanently
up stairs for the remainder of the day,
pursued
her worsted work for a while, and then took
a nap till tea-time, and another after tea, while
her husband went to the Exchange to read the
news by the eastern mail. During the remainder
of the evening, by the glare of a small, low,
shadeless
lamp, she made herself an occupation with a
bit of trifling and useless sewing, interrupting him
every few minutes with some querulous remark
if he was reading to himself, and falling into a
doze if he was reading aloud. About nine o'clock,
(and sometimes before) she always began to be
very fidgety on the subject of having the lights
and fires extinguished, the house shut up, and
preparations made by all within it to go to bed
with the utmost dispatch: implying that she saw
no use in wasting fuel and oil any longer; and
always
worrying without ceasing till she had
carried
her point of a general retirement at an
unseasonably
early hour.
If a gentleman called in the evening to see Mr.
Woodbridge, the parlor fire had gone out, no lamp
had been lighted there, and all below was gloomy
and cheerless. It was a formidable undertaking to
clear out the grate and rekindle the fire, and to
make an astral lamp burn which was not in order
for want of being in nightly use; and our aggrieved
hero soon found that of the two evils, the least
was to entertain his friends in the ever obnoxious
dining-room: Mrs Woodbridge, to avoid being
caught in dishabille, always taking flight to her
own chamber before the guest could find his way
up stairs. Under these circumstances, it was not
surprising that their house was soon relieved from
the inconvenience of visiters, and that the husband
and wife were left to the full enjoyment of each
other's society; except when he occasionally
indulged himself by going to the Athenum for
an evening of quiet reading in a well-warmed and
well-lighted room: even though sure to incur the
penalty of finding his lady speechless all the next
day.
Mrs. Stapleford had several times volunteered to
quit for a while the delights of her beloved New
York, and make a visit to her daughter even in
Philadelphia; but was always put off with some
trifling excuse from our heroine. Mrs. Woodbridge
was well aware that notwithstanding the close
parsimony that prevailed in the paternal (or rather
maternal) mansion, her mother, when a guest at
the house of another person, was greatly displeased
if all things were not conducted on the most
liberal scale.
Finally, however, Mrs. Stapleford was allowed
to come. She disappointed her daughter by not
admiring sufficiently the handsome parlor furniture
which (on inquiring the prices of all the articles)
she took much pains to prove could have been
purchased far better and infinitely lower in New
York. In return, Mrs. Woodbridge resolved to
make no alteration in her domestic arrangements
during the visit of her mother; saying when any
thing was unusually mean or comfortless  You
see, ma', I keep house exactly on
your
plan.
And indeed she rather outdid her pattern.
Mrs. Stapleford sometimes hinted a desire that
this strict adherence to
her
plan might be dispensed
with, but her dutiful daughter would make no
improvement, and endeavored to persuade her
mother that, in Philadelphia, servants and all other
things were far worse, and more difficult to procure
than in New York. Woodbridge was annoyed,
ashamed, and angry nearly the whole time. The
visit was by no means a satisfactory one to any of
the parties: and Mrs. Stapleford, instead of
remaining
a month (as she had at first intended)
stayed but a week; alledging that she was obliged
to hurry back to New York that she might not
lose Mrs. Legion's grand annual ball, for which
there were never less than six hundred invitations
sent out.
Each of the two brothers of our heroine came
at different times on business to Philadelphia, but
wisely stayed at a hotel. Both were invited to
take a family dinner at their sister's house: she
assuring them that they need not expect any thing
more than she would have had for her husband
and herselfAs you know said shethat
one never stands on ceremony with one's
brothers
.
This entire absence of ceremony was
indeed so very apparent that the young Staplefords
concluded for the future, not to forego an excellent
dinner at an excellent hotel for the scanty and
unpalatable repast provided by their sister.
On the first of these occasions, our hero bore
his vexation in silence; on the second he
expostulated
with his wife when they were alone in the
evening. But she replied that the dinner was
quite as good as any they ever had in ma's house,
and just such as her brothers were used to at home;
adding  Harvey Woodbridge, I wonder you
are not tired of continually trying to make me
change my plans. What reason have you to
suppose
me one of those trifling, weak-minded persons
that can be persuaded to any thing? No  from
my earliest childhood I was always distinguished
for firmness of character. I remember when only
five years old, because pa' bought me a doll for a
Christmas gift, when he knew I wanted a pearl
ring, I held out for a whole week; and all that
time I would neither play with the doll or even
look at it, nor kiss pa' at bidding good night. So
that on New Year's day he was glad to get the
pearl ring for me, as ma' had been advising him
all the while. No  no  have you yet to learn
that firmness is my forte?
That obstinacy is, I have learnt most
thoroughly
replied her husband and
that
united
with your other fortes is fast wearing away the
peace of my life. You really seem to be trying
your utmost to make my home irksome to me.
Then you will have the more excuse for
spending your evenings at your beloved
Athen
um.
You had better go there now.
I will take you at your word  replied
Woodbridge, rising to depart.
Harvey  said his wife, as he was about to
leave the room  as you have to pass Mustin's
in your way, you may as well take this bit of
brown worsted and try and match it for me  I
can't go on with my work to-morrow, till I get
some more of it.
Confound the worsted!  exclaimed her
husband, turning angrily away from her.
And as he hastily shut the door and precipitately
ran down stairs, she struck up melodiously the
refrain
of Sweet  sweet home.
F
PART III.
During a slight access of graciousness (
purchased
by the gift of a diamond ring) Harvey
Woodbridge prevailed on his consort to engage a
cook that had lived a long time in his father's
family; and also to take a waiter that had been
for many years a servant to the brother of our
hero, a gentleman residing in Baltimore. Both
these domestics were excellent in their way, and
(as far as permitted by what Mrs. Woodbridge
called her plans) they performed their duties well.
Her husband now thought that he would avail
himself of the convenience of having a very good
cook and a very good waiter, and invite some
gentlemen to dine with him: trusting that the
displeasure he had evinced on the occasion of
the evening visiters, &c., would operate as a
warning
to his wife and induce her to make a proper
provision for the dinner party.
But the dinner party, as soon as he ventured
to propose it, met a decided disapproval from the
lady, who said she did not see the use of a parcel
of men dining together, and that if money
must
be spent, there were better ways of spending it:
and that she fully expected she should have to
live all her life without an India shawl. Her
husband being very anxious to carry his point,
reminded
her that they had not yet had an
opportunity
of displaying their fine French china
dinner
set and other elegances appertaining. And
then he called her Charlotte Augusta, and assured
her that a pretty woman always looked peculiary
well presiding at her own table, and doing the
honors to a company of gentlemen.
At length, after much assenting and dissenting,
and agreeing with a bad grace and disagreeing
with no grace at all, the dinner was finally
undertaken
,
and fixed for the following Thursday.
Interviews
between Mrs. Woodbridge and Mrs.
Pinchington commenced forthwith.
In the mean time, as the appointed day drew
near, our hero had frequent and increasing
misgivings
,
and at last ventured to question his wife:
concerning her preparations.
You need not be afraid to leave every thing
to me  replied Charlotte  pa' often had
gentlemen
to dine with him (much as it annoyed
ma') so I know very well what arrangements to
make. And I have very good advices, besides
my natural judgment. Even if I were incapable
of preparing for dinner company, men have no
business to be cot-betties.
What is a cot-betty? asked her husband.
I wish you were as ignorant of the character
as you are of the name  replied the lady
sharply. A cot-betty is what ma' used to call
pa.' A man that meddles with house affairs, and
undertakes to advise his wife about her domestic
concerns; instead of sticking to his store or his
office (or whatever place he goes to) and giving
his whole attention to providing the money for
his family expenses, as all men ought.
Harvey Woodbridge did not like to be classed
among the cot-betties; though, as young ladies
are
now
brought up, a capable cot-betty may prove
a very valuable husband. Therefore, he, after
this, held his peace with respect to the
dinner-party
:
which forbearance he was only enabled
to exercise by closing his eyes, ears, and
understanding
against much that he saw, heard, and
suspected.
At length the eventful afternoon arrived, and
Mr. Woodbridge left his store at an early hour,
and repaired to his dwelling-house to be ready for
the reception of his guests. To his surprise he
found that no table had been set in the back-parlor.
This was a thing he could not on this occasion
have anticipated: and hastily running up stairs,
he found it laid in the more-than-ever obnoxious
little dining-room, which looked even smaller and
meaner than usual. His vexation was intense,
and hastening to the apartment of his wife, whom
he found at her toilette. How is this  said
he  I had not the most distant idea of the
dinner-table
being set to-day in any other place than
the back-parlor. That vile little room will not
do at all. It is too small, too narrow, and the
ceiling is too low.
I did not expect we were to dine on the
ceiling
replied Mrs. Woodbridge. But this attempt
at a witticism did not succeed; and her husband
plainly expressed his displeasure at finding that
his friends were to be entertained in what he
called in his anger that abominable hole.
It is neither a hole nor abominable
answered
the lady  but a nice comfortable
apartment
.
And you pay me a great compliment by
talking of it in that outrageous manner, when you
know it is my pet place, where you have spent so
many happy hours in my society.
Fudge!  exclaimed Woodbridge, turning
away from her, completely out of patience.
F2
If domestic happiness is fudge  resumed
his wife  I shall be sorry enough for having
quitted ma', and left my own city to go away to a
new place and live with a strange man.
It is true  said her husband, with a sort of
sigh  we
were
almost strangers to each other
when we married.
And all this fuss  pursued Charlotte  is
about dining in a dining-room, as if it was not
always the most proper place. Do not we
continually
read of dining-rooms in the English
fashionable
novels. The very lords and ladies do
not dine in their parlors or drawing-rooms even
when they have company.
The dining-rooms of the English gentry
replied Woodbridge  are very different
apartments
from that paltry little place of ours. I have
no objection to a dining-room, provided that it is
commodious and pleasant, and that it has an air
of gentility as well as convenience. But I cannot
endure the idea of making my guests eat their
dinner in the worst apartment of my house, though
I have yielded to the infliction myself.
And I  said Mrs. Woodbridge  cannot
endure the idea of having our parlor furniture
greased or stained or injured in any way, even by
one single dinner. Never supposing such a thing
would be wanted, I did not get a parlor
crumbcloth
,
and the one we have up stairs is too small
to save any other carpet than that of the
dining-room
.
And is this the reason you have set so small
a table. Worse than all, my friends will not
have elbow-room.
I never saw a man yetreplied Charlotte
who would not somehow or other manage to
convey his dinner to his mouth. When a large
table is set, there must be a great deal to cover it:
and it is not my way to provide more than is
necessary
.
I know very well how ma' managed
when pa'
would
have dinner company. And
besides
I have consulted Mrs. Pinchington. She
was so kind as to accompany me to market
yesterday
.
Surely on
this
occasion  said Woodbridge,
with a look of alarm  you are not going to
mortify me before my friends with the sight of a
mean and scanty dinner.
There will be dinner enough  replied his
wife coolly  and even if there should not, (as
I heard a man say in a play,) nobody calls for
more at another persons table. The fact is, I so
hate extravagance that, as I have often told you
it is really a pleasure to me to save in every little
thing as much as I can.
And she finished adjusting before a glass, a new
laced pelerine that she had bought the day before
and which Mrs. Squanderfield assured her was
cheap at forty dollars.
You Philadelphians  she added  think
there can never be too much on the table, and I
am told that the further south the worse.
Two of my guests are southern gentlemen
said Woodbridge  and I am convinced that
all who dine with me to-day have been
accustomed
to `sit at good men's feasts.'
Harvey  said his wife  do not make me
uncomfortable, or I won't come to table. I feel
very much like hysterics already. I have been
annoyed enough with Phillis this morning.
Phillis, who was brought up by my mother
exclaimed Woodbridge  there cannot be a
more excellent cook.
Rather too excellent for me  replied
Charlotte
,
I have been thinking for some time of
parting
with her. Mrs. Pinchington tells me (and I
have found it so myself,) that it is cheapest to
keep cooks that are not considered very good.
And as to particularity about food, it is a thing I
am not going to encourage. Ma' never did.
Phillis
is the last professed cook I shall ever be
troubled
with. This morning she was so vexed at my
not having things as extravagant as she thought
proper, that she said something that made me
angry
,
and I packed her out of the house. So then
I had to coax Mary to get the dinner.
What, Mary  the raw Irish girl  the
chamber-maid
.
Surely she knows nothing about
cooking
.
It would have been better at once to have
sent out and hired a professed cook for the day.
So Csar had the assurance to tell me, and
he did prevail on me to let him go for an aunt of
his, who goes out cooking at what she calls a low
price, a dollar a day. But, as Phillis had already
made a begining, I was determined not to give
more than sixty-two cents, so we could not agree;
though at the last I
did
offer her seventy-five.
As for my giving a dollar for cooking one dinner,
it was quite out of the question: so there was
nothing to be done but to set Mary about it.
I would rather have given ten dollars! Mary
is little better than an idiot.
How
can
you say so, when she came from
New York, where she had lived a whole month
with ma'. And even if she
is
rather stupid, there
is the less danger of her objecting to any thing I
tell her to do. Ma' could never get along with
smart servants. But I wish you would go down
stairs. Your friends will be arriving presently.
Csar, of course, has obeyed the orders I
gave him about the wine  said Woodbridge.
He wanted to do so  replied the wife
but between you and him I found there was
wine enough got out for twenty people instead of
eight. So I made him put back the half of it.
He began to look gruff, and then
Charlotte! Charlotte!  exclaimed the
alarmed
husband  if you have turned Csar out of
doors  Csar who had lived ten years with my
brother, and is so useful and so faithful
Do not be frightened  replied Charlotte
Csar would not go. He had the insolence to
say he should wait till Mr. Woodbridge came
home.
He is a good fellow  said Woodbridge
and I am obliged to him for not deserting me
this day.
Don't talk of his goodness. When I
threatened
to tell Mrs. Pinchington of him, he held
down his head to keep from laughing in my face.
A ring at the door-bell now announced that the
guests were beginning to come, and Woodbridge
smoothed the discomposure of his countenance,
and hastened down stairs to receive them. His
lady did not appear till the gentlemen had all
assembled, and she then made her entrance
through the folding-doors of the back-parlor, and
proceeded gracefully to the front; elegantly drest,
and looking as sweet and innocent as if incapable
of uttering one unamiable word, or conceiving
one unamiable thought. Just so she had looked
when Woodbridge was first introduced to her at
a party in New York.
All the gentlemen having arrived, Woodbridge
took an opportunity of asking his wife, in a low
voice, if it was not time that dinner was
announced
.
Upon which she whispered to him that she
was waiting for Mrs. Pinchington, who had kindly
volunteered to come and support her on this her
first appearance as hostess at a gentlemen's party.
In about half an hour Mrs. Pinchington came,
excusing herself for being detained by an
unexpected
visiter; but in reality having prudently
stayed to secure a good dinner at her
boarding-house
.
Mr. Woodbridge, though she had become
his besetting antipathy, was obliged to offer Mrs.
Pinchington his arm; and his face flushed with
shame as Charlotte, all smiles and sweetness,
accompanied by his principal guest (a gentleman
from Virginia) led the way up stairs into the paltry
dining-room: and he bit his lips at the first glance
at the table, though it was profusely ornamented
with flowers.
The festive board was so short, that the guests
could scarcely squeeze into their places, and the
dining room was so narrow that the said table had
to be set over to one side, that Csar might have
space to pass on the other. When all were with
some difficulty seated, Mrs. Woodbridge with
great
sang froid
began to send around some thin
greasy ash-colored broth, being a decoction of
cold veal with a few shreds of vermicelli floating
in it, and highly-flavored with smoke: Mary
having forgotten to cover it while it was
simmering
over an ill-made fire. This potation, Mrs.
Pinchington, after swallowing a spoonful or two,
announced to be a delicious white soup. The
unfortunate man whose duty it was to perform
the part of host, proceeded to help a piece of
boiled halibut served up without draining, but it
looked so sanguinary that no one chose to try it;
for even the lovers of what is called
rare
beef
seldom have a fancy for rare fish. For the second
course, the soup was replaced by a small tough
round of
par-baked
beef, black on the outside, and
raw within, and denominated
buf-a-la-mode:
the a-la-moding being a few cloves stuck over the
top which had been previously rubbed with
powdered allspice; this beef Mrs. Pinchington
declined tasting lest it should prove too rich for
her. The bottom dish was a meagre roast pig,
(called delicate by Mrs. Pinchington)
accompanied
by a tureen of watery panada termed, on
this occasion, bread-sauce. After the company
had pretended to eat these things, Csar was
desired to bring on the third course. The third
course was mutton chops, which were to have
been
cotellettes a la Maintenon
, but which Irish
Mary had produced
au naturel:
and also a dish
of something begun as
croquettes
, but ended as
mere minced veal, washy and tasteless.
Afterwards
was introduced as a
bonne-bouch
, two pair
of split birds sprawling on greasy slices of ill-made
toast, and called game by the ladies but known
to be pigeons by Csar and the gentlemen. All
the vegetables prepared for this dinner were few
in number, small in quantity, half-boiled,
half-drained
,
and mixed with that disgrace to a lady's
house,
cooking
butter, its disagreeable taste
predominating
through all disguise, and rendering
every thing unpalatable. The fourth course was
at the top a superb glass bowl
half
full of a pale
lilac liquid, consisting of faintly sweetened milk
that had been skimmed till blue, and was then
tinged with something pinkish. This was
dignified
by the name of floating island; the island
being a spoonful of cream taken from the said
milk and beaten up with sufficient white of egg to
give it a local habitation and a name, by
forming a small heap in the centre of the bowl.
At the bottom sat a dish containing a few cones
of boiled rice that had been moulded in
wineglasses
,
the summit of each cone decorated with
a red spot made by sticking on a mashed
cranberry
.
This part of the dessert was highly
recommended
to the company by Mrs. Pinchington,
who assured them that rice was a delicious thing
G
and so pure. The centre confection was a flat
leathery pancake denominated
omelette soufflee
,
the very sight of which would have made Fossard
tear his hair. This strange affair had been
manufactured
under the immediate superintendence
of Mrs. Woodbridge herself, who did it exactly
ma's way. The side-dishes held a few very
small stale tartlets about the size of a half dollar
procured at a low-priced cake-shop, each
containing
a half tea-spoonful of mysterious marmelade,
made of some indescribable fruit mounted in
marvellous
heavy paste. These tartlets Mrs.
Pinchington
called little loves.
We need not attempt to depict the sufferings of
our excitable hero during the progress of this
dinner
,
or to tell how continually his resolutions to
bear it manfully were on the point of giving way.
In vain did he try to repress the outward and
visible
signs of vexations, mortifications, indignation
and all the other
ations
that in spite of his efforts
to conceal them were flushing his cheek, knitting
his brow, compressing his lips, and trembling in
his voice. Once he found his hand rambling
through his hair, and once he found his teeth
gritting against each other; but on both these
occasions
he recollected himself in time to smile an
unnatural smile, and to talk some ransom talk.
But Mr. Woodbridge's disgust and anger did
not quite rise to its climax till he tasted the
madeira
which, when he purchased it, he knew to
be of the first quality, and which he now found
had been greatly diluted with water after being
decanted; evidently to make it go further. On
glancing at his wife he met her eye watching his,
and he saw by her guilty look to whom he must
attribute the adulteration. Had she been able to
draw the corks, it is most probable that the hock
and champaigne would not have escaped a
similar
allongement
.
Poor Csar well understood and deeply
sympathized
in the numerous annoyances that
assailed
Mr. Woodbridge at this unhappy dinner: to
say nothing of the griefs that were more
particularly
his own. He prided himself greatly on his
skill and alertness in the art of waiting on
company
,
on his
savior faire
in arranging, on his
dexterity in executing, and in the harmonious but
unquestionable authority with which he could
give a tone to the movements of the apt and
well-tutored
coloured gentlemen, that on similar
occasions had always been employed to assist
him. Mrs. Woodbridge having persisted in not
hiring a single additional waiter, Csar had so
much to do that he had no chance of doing any
thing well, or of displaying his usual tact in
seeing
without seeming to see, and anticipating the
wishes of the guests. To-day he felt his laurels
withering on his brow, but his crowning horror
was the sight of Irish Mary, when he had to
receive
from her the dishes at the door of a little
back staircase that led down to the kitchen.
Having
put on her worst costume to cook in, she
presented
herself in full view, slip-shod, and
bareheeled
,
in an old dirty gown its sleeves dipped in
grease, a ragged and filthy apron, her handkerchief
pinned awry over one shoulder and leaving the
other exposed, and her elf-locks hanging about
her ears. On handing in each dish she took an
opportunity of standing awhile with her stupid
whitish eyes and her large heavy mouth wide
open, to stare at the company, till Csar shut the
door in her face; upon which affront her murmurs
and threats were audable all the way down stairs.
This dinner appeared endless to all concerned
in it, except to Mary, who taking no note of time,
and being unprovided with the organ of
clock-knowledge
,
had nothing ready when wanted, or
indeed for a long while after. The dusk of
evening
had darkened the table, and the guests were
feeling about among the spotted oranges and
worm-eaten apples, the
cooking
raisins and the
stony-shelled almonds that had been set on
subsequent
to the removal of the cloth. Mr.
Woodbridge
after waiting in vain for his wife to order
lights till it became so dark that he could scarcely
discern her, gave several hints to that effect: but
she continued hint-proof. He then audibly
desired
Csar to bring them. Csar on passing
near Mrs. Woodbridge was detained a few
moments
by a low talk from her, and the result was
two candles only. Immediately after their
introduction
,
she made a signal to Mrs. Pinchington,
and both ladies left the table; Mrs. Woodbridge
taking an opportunity of telling Csar that it was
not worth while to light the entry-lamp as the
gentlemen would soon go. Having reached her
own apartment Mrs. Woodbridge changed her
dress and threw herself on the bed, exclaiming
that she was dead with fatigue: and Mrs.
Pinchington
prepaired to go home, escorted by Csar,
who was rung up for the purpose. She took an
affectionate leave of her hostess, assuring her that
she should report every where how delightfully
the dinner had gone off, and expressing her hope
to be at many more exactly like it. Oh!
Jupiter
!
exclaimed Csar, for a moment forgetting
where he was. Mrs. Woodbridge frowned, and
Mrs. Pinchington stooped down to tie her
walking-shoes
.
In consequence of having to walk behind this
lady to her lodgings, Csar to his vexation was
unable to superintend the making of the coffee,
and when he got home he found that Mrs.
Woodbridge
,
in her impatience to hurry the departure
of the gentlemen, had ordered Irish Mary to
prepare
and carry it in herself; and the weak, cold
G2
and muddy beverage was left in every cup,
almost
untasted by the company.
The guests departed: and Csar cleared away
the table sighing heavily over the disgraces of the
day: and confirmed in his resolution of seeking
another place when he found his Hibernian
colleague
lying intoxicated on the kitchen floor.
Harvey Woodbridge passed the remainder of
the evening extended on one of the parlor sofas,
and endeavoring to devise some plan for
expanding
the mind and heart of his wife, improving
her disposition, and rendering her ideas and
practices
less mean and less selfish. Knowing,
however
,
that she could not have been blind to all
the inconveniences and vexations which, on this
occasion particularly, had arisen from her
ill-judged
parsimony and her wilful perseverance in it,
he imagined her touched for once with
compunction
,
and perhaps sincerely disposed to try and do
better for the future. This after all  thought
he  may prove a salutary lesson to her. She
cannot be always incorrigible. I will spare her
feelings to-night, and refrain from all
expostulation
till to-morrow; and then I will reason with
her as calmly and mildly as I can.
He rose early next morning and took a walk to
Schuylkill, willing to defer a little longer his
intended
remonstrance. On his return, breakfast
was not ready, and Charlotte had not come down.
He tried in vain to read the newspaper: but threw
it aside, and traversed the room till she made her
appearance; and Csar at the same time brought
in the tray.
As soon as the repast was over and the
breakfast
apparatus removed, our hero commenced his
expostulation, making a strong effort to control
his feelings and to speak with calmness.
Without
referring to former subjects of similar
annoyance
,
he tried to confine himself entirely to the
dinner-party: setting forth with all the eloquence
of truth the shame and mortification she had
caused
him by her unhappy notions of ultra-economy,
so absurdly and annoyingly put in practice on
that much-to-be-regretted occasion; lessening
both her and himself in the eyes of his guests, all
whom, as he said, had a just right to consider
themselves treated with disrespect at being set
down in a gentlemen's house to so paltry an
entertainment
,
and in so paltry a room.
If you talk in this way, Harvey  said
Charlotte Woodbridge  I shall go off into
strong hysterics.
This threat, however, had lost its effect; for
though Harvey had often heard of hysterics he
had never seen them.
Charlotte  said he  this is no time for
folly. Beleieve me when I assure you that I am
seriously determined to insist on a general reform
in the whole tenor of your household
arrangements
.
I am completely disgusted with living in
this manner, and will submit to it no longer. My
patience is exhausted with the vain effort of
suppressing
my vexation, and in trying to endure in
silence the innumerable petty annoyances with
which you contrive to embitter every hour of my
life; and I am still more tired of ineffectual
remonstrances
,
and useless bickerings about trifles.
Why then do you bicker?
Nonsense!  Is not domestic misery
composed
chiefly of trifles: each a unit in itself, but the
whole when added togather making a large sum
total.
I despise business talk.
Charlotte  Charlotte!  I doubt if in reality
you are as silly as you would seem to be.
Yes, I am  and so you will always find me.
As I never had the least wish to be sensible, I did
not trouble myself to try. Ma' always said that
sensible girls got but few beaux, and did not go
off well. Her only care was that I should grow
up pretty, and be handsomely and fashionably
drest. So I always had plenty of beaux, and I
did go off  to be sure it was no great go. And,
now, though I am a married woman, I see no
reason
why I should not wish to look as well and
be admired just the same as before. As to the
management of the house and all that sort of
thing, I again assure you that I shall not make
the least change in my plans now or ever  do
you
attend to
your
business, and I will manage
mine.
Oh! Charlotte  exclaimed her husband,
having listened to this
tirade
as much in sorrow
as in anger, Can nothing make any impression
on you. Or rather, why are all your sayings and
doings so perverse and wilful, when there must
at the bottom of your heart be some latent touch
of tenderness for the man who loving you
sincerely
,
was willing to take you upon trust, without
any previous knowledge of your temper and
habits
;
and who so frankly and fondly entrusted his
happiness to your keeping.
`Nobody asked you, sir,' she said
was the reply of our wayward heroine, singing a
line from a well-known ballad, and making a low
curtesy; did you not fall in love the moment
you were introduced to me at Mrs. Vanvernigen's
party, where I wore my rose-colored rophine
with the satin corsage and the coquille trimming,
and carried in my hand a silver bouquetaire with
six dollars worth of hot-house flowers in it? And
did not you steal a sprig of heliotrope from my
bouquet, and put it to your lips instead of your
nose  I saw you do it! And did not you follow
me all about the room, and talk to nobody else,
and give me your arm to the supper-table, and go
without your own supper that you might
accompany
me back to the front drawing-room and get
a seat on an ottoman beside me? And did not you
wait at the door to put me into the carriage, tho'
my pa' and brothers were along? And then you
know very well how you came next morning the
clock struck eleven, (a full hour before any
reasonable
creature thinks of making a visit:) and
how you bespoke yourself to escort me to Miss
Semibreve's musical soiree; and whenever a song
finished and a piece began did not you look
delighted
,
because then you could talk to me all the
while, as nobody is bound to listen to pieces? Did
you not from that time visit me twice a day, and
go every where with me even to church, and
actually
come to a proposal on our way home, at the
corner of Broadway and Warren street. And did
not you detain me on the door-step till I
consented
,
scrambling hold of my hand and tearing my
white kid glove? And the very moment we were
engaged did not you bounce after me into the front
parlor and ask pa'?
I plead guilty to all this  replied
Woodbridge
Next time I will be less precipitate.
So will I  said Charlotte.
We are talking very absurdly  resumed
Woodbridge  after a short pause  I began
this conversation with an earnest desire to make
a serious impression on you, and to awaken your
good feelings; for I hope and trust you are not
entirely without them.
Feelings  replied our heroine  I do not
know why I should be suspected of want of
feeling. I am sure I always cry at the theatre
when I see other ladies with their handkerchiefs
to their eyes, for then I am certain there is
something
to be cried at. When I was a little girl I
actually sobbed one night at the play, when
Cinderella's sisters made her stay at home from the
ball. It is not a month ago that I looked very
serious when every one else was laughing at that
wicked Petruchio not allowing his wife to have
her new gown and cap. However, I suppose I
had best say nothing about Petruchio  as it may
not be quite safe for me to put him into your
head.
Charlotte  Charlotte  exclaimed her
husband
no more of this folly: but listen
attentively
to what I am going to say. In the first place
I insist on your giving up Mrs. Pinchington and
Mrs. Squanderfield.
What, my best friends!  my most intimate
friends!  the only true friends I have!
Your husband is your best and truest friend.
You really make me laugh  as if husbands
and friends were not totally different things!
Do you think I could ever talk to you, and consult
you on all occasions, as I do these two ladies.
Supposing then that that were impossible
have you not become acquainted with other ladies
far superior to these for all purposes of
conversation
and consultation.
How should you know  men are no judges
of women. I can assure you that of all the ladies
I have met with in Philadelphia, Mrs. Pinchington
and Mrs. Squanderfield are the most to my taste.
I am sorry to hear it.
I tell you again that I shall always regard
them as my best and dearest and only friends.
Both of them are so fond of me that they actually
grieve if they do not see me every day. They
have nothing so much at heart as me and my
good.
I wish they would let you and your good
alone!
That is not your writ, Mr. Woodbridge  I
heard a man say something like it in a play. No
the interest they feel in me is quite astonishing,
and they always give me proper advice, just such
as I like to take; and as they have nothing to do
but to go about and see people, they always have
a great deal to tell me of such things as I like to
hear. As to this dinner that has so much affronted
you,
I
have the most cause to be offended at your
finding fault with it after all the trouble it gave
me. So I assure you it is the last dinner party I
will ever preside over.
Would you wish me to invite my friends to
dine with me at a hotel, as if I had no means of
entertaining them at home.
No, indeed  when ma' was on here, she told
me that pa' had tried that experiment, and that
the expense was enormous; and besides, the
leavings were all lost, as they could not be had to
furnish family dinners afterwards. People can
live
, I suppose, without having dinner company,
or indeed any company at all. And much as you
despise yesterday's entertainment, the expense of
it actually frightened me. However, I can tell
you, for your comfort, that we dine to-day upon
the cold things that were left.
What cold things?
No matter what. When pa'
would
have
dinner
company, ma' never sent to market for a week
afterwards.
And was he contented to dine on scraps for a
week?
Contented or not, he had to do it for years
and years. To be sure at last he got into a very
II
provoking way of dining at a hotel whenever he
expected a scrap dinner (as you call it,) at his own
table.
I will follow your worthy father's example,
and dine to-day at a hotel.
Are you in earnest.
Yes, I am. If you will not listen to talking,
I will try what virtue there is in acting.
Why it will cost you a dollar or more.
I know it. But I shall at least obtain a
dollars
worth of comfort, and have a chance of
composing
my temper, and dining in peace.
I have no more time to waste with you
said his wife, seeing that he was determined on
accomplishing this new feat. I must go to
Madame Tourtelot's at eleven o'clock, to be fitted
for my pearl-colored figured satin and my
fawncolored
lustre-silk. But to think of your throwing
away a dollar upon a dinner for yourself. The
extravagance of men is awful.
She then repaired to her own apartment; and
her husband too much ruffled to pursue his
expostulation
with the temper he desired, prepared to
go out.
In the entry he was way-laid by Csar, who
informed
him that he wished Mr. Woodbridge to
suit himself with another waiter by the end of
the month, adding  Indeed, sir, I am sorry to
leave you, but I seem as if I could not stand
things no longer, 'specially Irish Mary. Her
head is so muddled from yesterday, that I found
her, when she was getting breakfast, haggling at
the loaf with the side of a fork instead of a knife,
and saying  Oh! but it's hard this bread is to
cut, then. And I catched her greasing the
griddle with the end of a candle, and when I
stopped
her short in her wickedness, she said  Ah!
and what would ye have then  grase is grase all
the world over. Indeed, sir, you don't know
how hard it is to live day in and day out with a
woman that's a born fool.
Yes, I do  thought Woodbridge  and he
almost sighed to think that he had not, like Csar,
the resource of changing his home. However, he
merely replied  Very well, Csar  you may
refer to me for a character  and with a heavy
heart he walked to his store.
That day, resolving to put his threat into
practice
,
our hero
did
dine at a hotel. His wife, after
finishing her dress-fitting, shopping, and
cardleaving
,
went to take her dinner, as the guest of
Mesdames Squanderfield and Pinchington, at their
boarding-house. She found that both these ladies
had gone together up the river; one on a visit to
an acquaintance at Burlington, the other to see a
relative living at Bristol. Nevertheless she
accepted
the slight invitation of her former hostess,
the mistress of the establishment, to stay and dine
with
ker
, as the dinner-bell was about to ring.
Towards evening, Mr. Woodbridge came home
in much better temper; and was disposed to enter
into a cheerful conversation with his wayward
Charlotte. But she kept a sullen silence; and at
the tea-table she steadily put aside every thing
he offered her, helping herself to it immediately
after. When their uncomfortable tea was over,
her husband again tried to reason with her on the
subject of that perverseness which was
undermining
his affection and destroying their peace. She
made not a word of answer, but lay motionless
and speechless, reclining on the sofa. After a
while, she turned to the wall and threw a
handkerchief
over her head. She is touched at
last  thought Woodbridge. To hide her
face and weep in silence is a good symptom. I
have hopes of her yet. He then softened his
tone, and made a tender and powerful appeal to
what he called her best feelings. In conclusion,
he rose from his chair, went to her in much
emotion
,
and taking her passive hand, addressed her
as his beloved Charlotte. Still, she replied not.
He gently withdrew the handkerchief from her
face. She was fast asleep.
Her husband sighed  replaced the
handkerchief
;
resumed his seat before the dull and ashy
fire; folded his arms: and gazed awhile on the
ceiling. Then he took up a book, but held it
unconsciously for half an hour, forgetting to open
it. At last he started up, and went out to revive
himself by a walk in the open air. Finally, on
passing one of the theatres he strolled in and
placed himself in the back of a box; but though
his eyes were fixed on the stage, he had no
perception
of any thing that he saw, and no
comprehension
of any thing he heard. He only knew
when the performance was over by finding that
the lights were extinguishing and the benches
vacated. He then went to his cheerless home,
and found that his wife had retired for the night
and was sleeping with her usual tranquility.
Next morning their breakfast passed exactly
like the tea of the preceding evening, and
Woodbridge
went to his house in silent despair. When
he again came home he found that though
yesterday
he had dined at a hotel to escape the
threatened
leavings of a vile dinner, his wife, with
malice prepense
, had kept these shadows of a
shade to set before him to-day, and as long as
they could be made to last.
H2
PART IV.
It chanced that just at that time Mr. Stapleford
the father of our heroine, had some commercial
business which made it necessary for him to visit
Philadelphia and Baltimore. He left New York
in the earliest morning line, and having reached
the Delaware and dined in the boat, his attention
as he sat reading on deck, was withdrawn from
the newspaper by the conversation of two ladies
who occupied seats just in front of him. One of
the dames proved to be Mrs. Squanderfield. She
had come on board at Bristol, and expressed great
delight at meeting her friend, Mrs. Pinchington,
who had been taken in at Burlington. Both ladies
talked in a very audible under-tone, and Mr.
Stapleford
thought of changing his place 'till he was
startled by hearing the name of his daughter.
Curiosity then triumphed over every other
consideration
,
and, keeping his eyes on the paper, he
sat still and listened.
A-propos
, my dear Mrs. Pinchington
proceeded
Mrs. Squanderfield  you have not yet
told me the particulars of the great Woodbridge
dinner. I was out when you came home from it
and yesterday morning, as we went up the
river, you know how I was beset by that
persevering
man, Mr. Bulkworthy, who monopolized
me the whole time; as, to say the truth, he always
does whenever we meet.
You seemed very well pleased to be thus
monopolized  replied Mrs. Pinchington, with
a Sardonic smile. If you had chosen to change
your seat, he could not have made much progress
in following you, with his immense size and
his gouty foot. However, my dear Mrs.
Squanderfield
,
let me advise you, as a friend, to take
care what you are about. Old fat men are not
always rich: though silly girls and dashing
widows
seem to think so. Neither is the gout always
caused by high living, and therefore a proof that
they have a great deal to live on. Besides, by
not paying their debts, they may get the gout at
other people's expense.
How you run on  answered Mrs.
Squanderfield
evidently desirous of changing the
subject. But do tell me how the Woodbridge
dinner-party went off. I suppose, as usual, Mrs.
W. was superbly drest. I know she got every
thing new for the occasion, for I was with her
when she bought all her paraphernalia. That
pearl-colored figured satin could not have cost
less than fifty-dollars by the time it was made up
and that laced pelerine was forty. What a
passion she has for laced pelerines. I know that
she has six others, all equally elegant and costly.
Then the blond cap and French flowers, that she
bought to wear on the back of her head, was
fifteen
.
When I am out shopping with Mrs.
Woodbridge
,
it almost makes my hair stand on end to
see how readily she agrees to buying the most
extravagant things, and things which she cannot
possibly want. I cannot imagine where she finds
room to stow away all her dead stock. Her
husband
will find that the dressing alone of his pretty
doll will add to his annual expenses, not merely
hundreds of dollars, but actually thousands. I
was telling my friends at Bristol all about the
Woodbridges; and they agree with me that the
poor man little knows what is before him. I have
asked several New Yorkers about her family, and
they say that old Stapleford's wife is a bye word,
even there, for her extravagance in dress.
Mr. Stapleford changed color, and looked off
from his paper, and could not suppress a deep
sigh  and then made an effort to appear more
intent on his reading than ever.
I have heard, also  continued Mrs.
Squanderfield
(and from persons who have been at
her house,) that in her domestic concerns there
never was a meaner skin-flint than that same Mrs.
Stapleford. One of my New York friends told me
she had a cook that had once lived at Stapleford's.
On some grand occasion, when they were to have
an apple-pie, Mrs. S. gave out six apples to pare
and quarter; and then she came into the kitchen
and counted the bits of apple, and because there
were only twenty-two pieces instead of
twenty-four
,
she scolded the cook violently, and ended
by calling her a thief. So the woman went right
out of the house, leaving the dinner at a stand.
Of course she told the apple story every where,
and in a day or two it was all over New York.
Mr. Stapleford's sigh was now audible  for he
remembered this cook, (the best they ever had,)
and he was well aware of the circumstances
attending
her departure. The ladies, however,
were sitting with their backs that way, and did
not observe him. After pausing a minute to take
breath, Mrs. Squanderfield proceeded
But about this dinner  it must have gone to
Mrs. Woodbridge's heart to get it up. I long to
know all the particulars.
It would take me till to-morrow morning to
tell the whole  replied Mrs. Pinchington
so at present, I can only give you a slight sketch.
Well  in the first place we were ushered into
that wretched hole that she calls the dining-room:
though it's their sole abiding-place, morning, noon,
and night. There was a little bit of a table set
cater-cornered to give more space;
notwithstanding
which we were all squeezed flat by the time
we had got wedged into our seats. The only
waiter was their man Csar, for she could not
open her heart so far as to hire an assistant even
on that extraordinary occasion, the first dinner
company they have ever had. The dishes were
handed in by a horrid Irish girl, all filth and rags,
who stood staring, open mouthed, the whole time
never having seen such great doings before.
But do tell me what they had by way of
eatables
cried Mrs. Squanderfield.
Why there was a soup which tasted exactly
like smoked dish-water. And a hard, tough, black
looking piece of beef  and a morsel of half-raw
fish. The chief dish seemed to be a pig, that
looked as if he had been killed just in time to
save him from dying, and which I know she got
at half-price, for I went to market with her
myself
.
Then, by way of game, were some pigeons,
with scarcely a mouthful of flesh on their bones,
split in half, and looking as flat as boards. The
butter was detestable, and would have spoiled
every thing, only that every thing was spoiled
before. The dessert was utter trash  milk
and rice  and froth  and a few miserable cheap
tarts, made of nothing: and a little decayed fruit,
turned with the best side uppermost. And as
dusk came on, we had to poke about among the
things all in the dark, for she would not allow us
candles to eat by. But the wine  the wine
above all  I forgot to tell you of the wine. It
had actually been watered to make it go further.
Think of gentlemen at a dining-party filling their
glasses with wine and water!
Wretched, indeed!  But how did the
sensitive
Mr. Harvey Woodbridge live through all
this?
Oh! poor miserable creature  replied Mrs.
Pinchington  he really moved my compassion
I absolutely felt for him. I wish you could
have beheld his face when his eye first glanced
over the dinner table: I could scarcely keep from
laughing all the time, to see how ashamed he was
of every thing, and how he labored to conceal his
mortification; the natural man peeping out in spite
of himself. It was really too good to see how he
tried to smile, not knowing that his smile was
only
a ghastly grin. And how he twinkled his eyes
and essayed to look pleasant, when he felt the
fire flashing from them; and how he twitched his
brows to smooth them, when he found they were
contracting into a frown; and how he
endeavored
to soften his voice and talk agreeably, lest he
should break out into an open fury.
And how did his wife take all this?
His wife  it was best of all to see how she
sat in her finery, with a coolness that really
amounted to impudence and looking as sweet and
amiable as if she was presiding at the best spread
table in the world, and enjoying the satisfaction
of the company. That woman has not an atom
of either sense or feeling. For my part, I was
glad to get away as soon as I possibly could, that
I might indemnify myself at my own tea-table for
the miserable dinner I had
pretended
to eat.
Young as she is, Mrs. Woodbridge is certainly
the meanest woman I ever yet met with  and I
have a good chance of knowing, for she consults
me about all her plans, as she calls them.
And she is also the most extravagant,
rejoined
Mrs. Squanderfield. I ought certainly to
know when I so often go shopping with her.
The fact is  rejoined Mrs. Pinchington
she will drive that husband of hers to
desperation
before long.
Mr. Stapleford could listen no more. He threw
down his newspaper, started up, and walked the
deck in unconcealed pertubation: forgetting where
he was, and regardless of all observers. In the
mean time, Mesdames Squanderfield and
Pinchington
continued to regale each other with
alternate
and exagerated anecdotes of the meanness
and extravagance of their friend Mrs. Woodbridge,
till the boat arrived at Chestnut-street wharf from
whence the two cronies proceeded to their
lodgings
,
arm in arm.
The unhappy father of our heroine had been
too much absorbed in his own irritated feelings to
be conscious of the progress of the boat. He
looked not at either shore  he recognized none
of the landmarks; and he only started from his
painful reverie when the boat touched the pier
and the roaring of the steam announced that its
work was over for that day. On landing, he
almost
unconsciously replied to the importunities
of a hack-driver, threw himself and his baggage
into a coach, and repaired to the dwelling of his
son-in-law.
On arriving at the house, the front door was
opened by Csar, (who yet lingered in the
establishment
)
and the old gentleman exclaimed
Where is that dining-room  I know she is
there. He then before Csar could show him
into the parlor, ran straight up stairs, and found
the place intuitively.
The young couple had just concluded their
slender dinner at which Woodbridge (to whom
nothing was more intolerable than silent anger,
and who already longed to conciliate his wife,
almost
I
on any terms) had been trying in vain to
force a conversation. But Charlotte held out,
and answered in sullen monosyllables  it being
her way when she knew she had done wrong to
behave always as if she was the person that had
most cause to be offended. They were both struck
with surprise at the unexpected appearance of
Mr. Stapleford. When they recovered, Harvey
shook hands with him, and Charlotte kissed her
pa', and asked him if he had dined.
Yes  he replied, struggling to keep down
his wrath  I dined in the boat  I have had
my dinner  Are you not glad? But I am hot and
thirsty, and I want some drink.
What will you have, pa'?  inquired
Charlotte
.
Here is some nice water.
I want some brandy also  Said Mr.
Stapleford
.
Water is weak  it does not drive
away care. Give me some brandy, too  I
must
have it.
Woodbridge rang the bell, and Csar was
desired
to bring some cool water; after which our
hero silently brought some brandy himself, and
placed it on the table, while Charlotte looked pale
and amazed.
Mr. Stapleford mixed a tumbler full of strong
brandy and water, and then said to his son-in-law
Shall I mix one for you?  I have become
quite clever at the business.
I never drink brandy  replied Woodbridge.
Then I hope to Heaven you never may
said the old man, fervently, and raising his eyes,
in which the tears seemed to glisten. But he
passed the back of his hand across them, paused a
moment, then snatched up the glass, and hastily
swallowed the half of its contents.
There  said he, throwing himself into a
chair  you see what I have come to, I, your
father-in-law
,
and
her
father. Have you not heard
it? Don't you know it? I am a drunkard now
I am  I am. It is a shameful, dreadful vice. It
came upon me by slow degrees; but it
has
come,
and every body knows it: you see it in my face,
don't you? Look at me, look, I bear about me the
unfailing signs, you know I do.
They looked at him: it was too true. There
was that redness in his face which never can be
mistaken for the honest glow of health.
Do you know what has made me a drunkard?
resumed Mr. Stapleford  A bad wife. A
wife may be bad, and yet she may neither play
cards nor tipple, nor betray the honor of her
husband
.
But she may destroy his peace, she may
undermine his happiness, she may wear out his
love by the everlasting rubbing of petty
annoyances
.
I have read  (for I once
did
read)  that
one of the severest tortures inflicted by the Romish
Inquisition, was a contrivance which caused water
to fall unceasingly, day after day, week after
week, month after month, in single drops, one at
a time, upon the head of the miserable captive. I
too, have had my drops, and I know what I have
suffered from them. And she that selfishly and
heartlessly inflicted that suffering was my wife,
your mother Charlotte, and I fear that you are
indeed her true daughter.
Dear pa'  said Charlotte  pray don't
talk so dreadfully, and, above all, before Harvey.
I will, I will  exclaimed her father, and
before Harvey, above all, will I do it. Let him
take warning, for I know that he needs the lesson.
Do not exchange glances at each other, I am not
intoxicated
yet
, I am quite sober still, and I know
exactly what I am saying. But while I can yet
do so, (for now I have begun with the poison I
must keep on) I will tell you what I heard in the
Delaware boat to-day. There were two women
taken on board, (ladies I suppose I must call them.)
I chanced to sit where I overheard their
conversation
,
and I could not help listening, when my
ear was struck with your name, and I found they
were talking about my daughter. Perhaps it was
dishonorable to sit and listen; but I am not an
honorable man now; I do things every day that
once I would have shuddered at. I found that
these women knew you well.
Mrs. Squanderfield and Mrs. Pinchington, I
suppose  said Woodbridge, turning to his wife.
Yes  continued Mr. Stapleford  those
were their names. One of them had been at a
dinner-party, here, in this little room; and she
detailed it all to her companion, broadly and
coarsely enough, but still I knew that, in the
main, her statement was true. She described
and ridiculed the paltry, contemptible dinner,
and its wretched arrangements; and Woodbridge's
ill-concealed effort to repress his shame and
mortification
.
Then as one of these women talked
about your meanness, the other discussed your
extravagance: and told of the money you were
continually throwing away in useless finery for
the decoration of your own person, while you
denied your husband the comforts which every
gentleman has a right in his own house to expect,
if he can furnish the means of procuring them.
I listened to their talk, and I understood it all, I
felt it all, for I knew by sad experience what it
was.
Is it possible, said Charlotte, with quivering
lips, that Mrs. Squanderfield and Mrs.
Pinchington
could have talked of me in that manner
and in a public steam-boat, too!
They were your friends, Charlotte  said
her husband, your dearest, best, your only
friends; your aiders and abettors in the practice
of your two besetting sins.
I2
The vile, false, wicked creatures
exclaimed
Mrs. Woodbridge  I will never speak
to them again.
I am delighted to hear it  said Woodbridge
and earnestly do I hope you will keep that
resolution.
Listen to me, Charlotte  said Mr.
Stapleford
,
trying to speak with more composure
Listen to me, also, Harvey Woodbridge, and
may both of you profit by the lesson. I married
Mary Holman when we were both very young.
I was then a clerk in a merchant's counting-house,
she was the daughter of a poor clergyman. Her
beauty first attracted me, and I thought she had
been well brought up. Necessity had obliged the
family to be notable and industrious, and to
economize
in superfluities. Her mother often told me
of Mary's talent of housewifery, and of her
ingenuity
with her needle, and how clever she was
in the art of making a genteel appearance at a
small expense. I thought I had drawn a prize in
the lottery of marriage, and I loved her with my
whole heart. We took possession of a small
plainly-furnished two story house in a remote
street, and I thought we might live respectably
and comfortably with my salary. I soon
discovered
my wife's innate passion for dress, which in
her father's house, she had been unable to indulge.
But now that she was a married woman, and
emancipated from the control of her parents, she
seemed resolved to run her course as she chose.
In a very short time, I found a great falling off in
every thing connected with household comforts,
and a corresponding increase in the finery of my
wife's attire. I saw her in silks, and laces, and
feathers, and flowers; all being such as were
worn by ladies whose husbands had five times my
income. But our servant woman (we could keep
but one) was dismissed for a half grown girl, at
half wages. These girls (we had a succession of
them) were changed at least every month, as most
of them were found to be worthless, idle, dirty, or
dishonest; and all were incapable of doing work.
If by chance we obtained a good one, she would
not stay above a week in a house where she had to
work hard and fare badly, for low wages. Often,
when at our late dining hour I came home tired
and hungry, I found no dinner  and when, after
waiting an hour or two, the repast was at last
produced
,
it was scanty, poor, and unpalatable. My
wife had been out nearly all day, visiting,
shopping
,
and going after mantua-makers. When our
dinners was unusually late, she said it would save
the trouble and expense of tea, so she went early
to bed, and obliged her girl to do the same by
way of saving fire and light in the kitchen; and
I passed the evening alone in our cheerless parlor,
laboriously engaged in extra book-keeping, or
some other such job, which I was glad to
undertake
for the purpose of obtaining a little addition
to our income, and which frequently occupied me
till midnight. I had hoped by this means to gain
some improvement in our way of living. But I
found it only encouraged my wife to run up bills
for finery, which she knew I would be obliged
eventually to pay for. Vain, selfish woman, at
what sacrifices was her trumpery obtained? For
the price of one or two of her expensive dresses
we could have kept a grown servant a whole year.
One French bonnet less, and we could have had
good
fires all winter, and the cost of one of her
embroidered muslin collars would have furnished
me every evening with a better light to toil by.
After a while I obtained another situation at
a higher salary. I then proposed allowing a
certain
sum weekly for the household expenses alone
and I made this allowance as ample as I could.
It was in vain  she pinched off so much of this
money for additional finery, that we lived as badly
as ever. At length, the death of my uncle James
put me in possession of sufficient property to
enable
me to emancipate myself from the drudgery
of clerkship, and to commence business on my
own account. I did so, and was soon considered
a prosperous man.
From the time that I went into business there
were no bounds to my wife's extravagance  that
is, in articles of show. But in all that regarded
comfort and convenience, her penurious habits
remained unchanged  and so they always will.
In a few years we had a handsome house, and she
furnished the parlors elegantly  but she made
us take all our meals in a little, low, cheerless
room in the basement story; and in fact, it became
our chief abiding place. How I despised it, and
how long I held out against it!
I wonder you submitted at all  said
Woodbridge
.
I submitted to that, and to all the other
proceedings
of my wife, because I found resistance
was in vain  as it always must be with a
heartless
,
selfish, obstinate woman. Often, after the
fatigues of the day, I was too tired to undertake
the trouble of altercation. Nothing then seemed
so desirable as peace and quiet, and, for the sake
of present peace, I let the evil grow till it
darkened
my whole life with its baleful shadow.
Naturally my disposition is cheerful, and as I
could not be quarrelling for ever, I sometimes
tried to laugh at the inconvenience and
mortifications
to which my wife continually subjected me.
But it would not do  the iron, notwithstanding,
had entered my soul and was fast corroding it.
My affection for my wife was at last worn out.
How could I love her, when I had daily proof
that she had no regard for me? It was still worse
when I was left alone with her  after Charlotte
was married and gone, and my son Frank went
to live in New Orleans. To James and myself
our home was more than ever uncomfortable, for
she allowed us no society; indeed, things were
so managed that we became ashamed to invite
any one to the house. Jem could endure it no
longer  so he took lodgings at a hotel, where he
is drinking wine every day, and going to
destruction
.
For myself, I became reckless  desperate.
I had long ceased to remonstrate with my wife
on the sums she expended in dress  but I had
grown very tired of the petty squabbling about
fires, and lights, and food, and servants, and all
other necessary expenses, which for
five-and-twenty
years had embittered my married life. I
hated my home  and I was driven to seek
elsewhere
for peace and comfort; such, at least, as I
could get in houses of public resort. I took my
meals at restaurants and hotels  I frequented
oyster-cellars  I joined a club. Gradually the
vice of intemperance came upon me  wine was
not enough, I took brandy also. I drank to raise
my spirits, and to drown the sense of degradation
that always oppressed me when I was sober. My
wife did not care  she dressed more than ever,
and went almost every night to a party  making
me come for her when I was not fit to be seen
and thus exposing me to her `dear five hundred
friends,' when it was she, herself, that made me
what I am. I shall grow worse  I shall be seen
reeling through the streets, with the boys hooting
after me  I shall be taken up out of the gutter,
and laid dead drunk on my own door step. I
know I shall  I see it all before me  yet, when
it comes to that, and my children hear of it, let
them remember it is the fault of their mother.
Look what she has made of me  and what my
wife's daughter is going to make of her husband
She
knows how wretchedly we lived  she
knows how all domestic happiness was worried
away from her father's house  and still she has
been walking fast in her mother's footsteps.
Charlotte  Charlotte  do you not tremble?
Charlotte did tremble  and pale and terrified
she threw herself into the arms of her husband,
hid her face on his shoulder, and burst into a flood
of tears. Woodbridge also was deeply affected.
But he saw at that moment a dawn of hope
and he hailed this first indication of feeling on the
part of his wayward wife as an omen of reform
and happiness.
I am glad to see you cry  said the old man
after a pause.  I have never seen
my
wife shed
a tear, except when a splendid dress has been
spoiled by the mantua-maker. I begin to hope
that the daughter may be better than the mother.
Dear sir, said Woodbridge, do not persist
in speaking so harsly of your wife.
I will  I will  exclaimed the old man
swallowing the remainder of the brandy and
water. Has she not embittered my life, and
turned to gall the love I once felt for her. What
has Mary Stapleford ever done to make me happy?
Has she ever cared for
me
why then should I
care for her? Has she ever regarded my tastes,
my wishes? Why then should I have any respect
for hers? And now I am a drunkard
disreputable
,
despised  looked at askance by respectable
men, (I was once a respectable man myself,)
obliged to associate now with those that have
degraded
themselves as I have done. And my wife
has caused it all. She has made me wretched,
and she has brought up her daughter to make
you
so too.
Mrs. Woodbridge now threw herself on the
sofa, buried her face in one of the cushions, and
sobbed aloud: and, on her husband
approaching
,
she motioned him to leave her to herself.
Woodbridge, after removing the brandy, prevailed
on his father-in-law, (who had sunk back in his
chair, and thrown his handkerchief over his face)
to go to the spare chamber, and lie down and
repose himself: and Charlotte in a faint voice
said,
she
would also retire to her room. As she
passed her husband she caught his hand and
pressed it fervently: but her eyes again
overflowed
,
and she was unable to speak.
Dear sir  said Woodbridge  do not
persist
in speaking so harshly of your wife.
Woodbridge having ascertained that the
sparechamber
was in order, conducted Mr. Stapleford
to its door, now thought it best to leave his wife
awhile to the retirement of her own apartment.
He then repaired to his store, where he recollected
his presence at this time was particularly
essential
;
and he endeavored, but in vain, to occupy
his mind with business during the short remainder
of the day.
When he came home in the evening, he found
that Mr. Stapleford, having requested that some
tea might be brought to him, had gone to bed for
the night, and was now asleep. Charlotte
remained
also in her room, and at her desire the
tea-table had been set for her husband alone.
After he had somewhat refreshed himself with a
cup of tea, he went up to see her. He found her
lying on the bed, and looking very pale and
dejected
.
Harvey  said she  don't talk to
me to-night  I shall feel better in the morning
I know all you would say. I have indeed made
you a very bad wife  I acknowledge and regret
it: my eyes are opened at last, and I will try to
do better in future. But I am so shocked at my
father, to see him as he is now, and to hear all he
thinks and feels, and all that he fears. Oh!
no  no  you shall never be brought to his
condition
J
by
me
. Indeed, indeed you never shall.
It is too dreadful. But leave me now, dear
Harvey
,
and when I deserve it, I will beg you to
forgive me all.
In compassion to the distress of her feelings,
Woodbridge quitted the room in silence. He
passed the evening alone, in perturbed meditation;
hope for the future and regret for the past,
alternately
casting their lights and shadows on his
mind. But, the sunbeam of hope rested there at
last.
Our heroine passed a restless night of bitter
retrospection
,
and silent tears. Towards morning,
she had wept herself into an uneasy slumber.
Woodbridge rose with the dawn, resolved to try
and compose himself by an early walk, his usual
remedy after an extraordinary excitement. On
descending the stairs, he overtook his
father-in-law
who had risen for the same purpose. They
walked together as far as the Schuylkill, and had
much conversation on the subject that was
upper-most
in both their minds.
When the two gentlemen returned, they were
met in the entry by Csar, who, while his face
shone with smiles, stopped them as they were
proceeding to the staircase, and with a flourish of
his hand as he threw open the door, said to Mr.
Woodbridge, We breakfast in the back parlor
sir.
They found the table nicely set out with a
better breakfast than either of the gentlemen had
ever seen in their own house: and Csar said,
with increasing smiles, Mrs. Woodbridge was
up early, sir. She came down soon after you went
out. And we have been to market already. And
after we came home, I got the breakfast myself,
and would not let Irish Mary put her paws to any
thing. Mrs. Woodbridge has given Mary a short
warning, and I am to get Phillis to come back, for
our everlasting cook. Please to excuse my saying
paws:
but that Paddy woman is enough to make
the genteelest colored gentleman forget himself.
People of the best polishment can't be decoromous
when they have to deal with Irish.
At these excellent signs of the times, our hero's
smile became almost as bright as Csar's. And
Mr. Stapleford said, in a low voice to Woodbridge,
I was just going to ask for my early dram, but
I believe I will not take any this morning.
I have made the coffee very good and strong
said Csar, Mrs. Woodbridge told me to do so.
And we bought the best butter that was to be had
in market; and we took cream this morning
instead of milk.
At this moment the lady of the house appeared.
Her father and her husband kissed her as they
bade her good morning. Her heart and eyes filled
and she held her handkerchief to her face, while
each the gentlemen turned to a window and
seemed
to look out. There were a few minutes of
silence: after which our heroine took a seat at
the table, and Woodbridge and Mr. Stapleford did
the same. Csar entered with a damask napkin
and a silver salver, and waited on the table
con
amore
. Woodbridge introduced a cheerful
conversation
,
and though he had to sustain it himself,
he was repaid by an occasional smile from
Charlotte
,
and a laugh from her father.
When breakfast was over, and Mrs. Woodbridge
had left the room, Mr. Stapleford said to his
son-in-law
,
She is touched at last. She is going to
set about a reform  I only hope she will stay
reformed. Ah! there is no touching her mother.
I have tried often to work on
her
feelings: but
she has none. Vanity, sordidness, and selfishness
have hardened her heart till it is like `the nether
millstone.' But Charlotte is not so bad; and I
trust she will do well yet. I must have a bottle
more than usual to-day at dinner, in celebration
of this joyful change.
Rather celebrate it, said Woodbridge, by
a day of entire temperance.
Ah! replied Stapleford, that is easier said
than done. I am ashamed to confess that a day
of temperance will be a day of suffering to me.
The habit of drinking once formed, the craving
once acquired, it is hard indeed to abstain. A
drunkard is not easily cured.
Let me beg of you, dear sir, said Woodbridge,
not to give yourself that detestable appellation.
Do I not deserve it? replied Stapleford.
Am I not really what I call myself? But
she
made me so. I know that many men who are
blest with excellent and affectionate wives have
become sots notwithstanding  to their eternal
shame be it spoken. But that was not
my
disposition
.
No man was more capable of enjoying
domestic happiness if it had been allowed me.
However, I cannot trust myself on this theme.
So let it drop for the present.
Mr. Stapleford and his son-in-law went out
together, but parted at the corner: each going his
own way to his respective business. That
morning
Mrs. Woodbridge did no shopping or visiting,
but busied herself at home in improving her
menage
. Irish Mary, being dismissed, was loud
in her vociferations at parting, asserting that she
had never seen a raal lady or gentleman since she
came to Philadelphia, and that she would never
more darken the doors of a Philadelphia house:
for she knew scores of places in New York where
they would jump out of their skins for joy to get
her back again, and where the silver would come
pouring into her lap. A week's wages extra,
however, somewhat quieted her wrath: but on
J2
leaving the presence of Mrs. Woodbridge, she
slammed the door, and exclaimed as soon as she
got into the entry, Bad luck to ye any how,
and I wish to the holy Patrick ye may never have
nobody but black nagurs to cook your bit of
victuals
for you.
That's a good wish instead of a bad one,
said Csar, who had just come in at the front-door,
triumphantly conducting Phillis.
That day an excellent dinner was served up in
the back-parlor: and as all were now in good
spirits it would have gone off pleasantly, only that
Mr. Stapleford filled his wine-glass too often.
But he said, as he poured out the last, I cannot
help it  indeed I cannot. It is a dreadful vice
easily contracted and hard to cure. Shame on
the woman that brought me to it. Well, well,
enough of that, I wish I could forget her always.
Come, I'll not drink any thing more to-day. Only
I
must
have my glass of hot whiskey punch at
bed-time.
As soon as the two gentlemen were alone,
Woodbridge told his father-in-law that having
now the most sanguine hopes of Charlotte's
improvement
,
he thought it best to make no further
reference to what had already passed; and that,
unless he saw unequivocal symptoms of a relapse,
he would gladly consign to oblivion every thing
that had hitherto embittered their married life.
I fear, said Mr. Stapleford, her goodness
will not last. However, even a little of it is better
than none at all. Her mother never had a single
fit of goodness  not, even for one day. Well,
well, I will not trust myself to talk of her.
Next day the old gentleman set out at an early
hour for Baltimore; and Woodbridge, (judging
from appearances) found that in future the table
was to be set always in the back parlor, and
supplied
in a liberal manner.
That morning Mesdames Squanderfield and
Pinchington made together a visit to Mrs.
Woodbridge
.
Her intention had been to send them
each a concise indicative of her desire that their
acquaintance should cease; and she had purposed
consulting her husband that very afternoon on the
best manner of wording these notes. But they
had seen her as they came past the window, and
the moment Csar opened the front door they
pushed by him, and with their usual familiarity
made their entrance into the room. At the first
sight of her two perfidous friends, our heroine
determined to meet them with calm and dignified
resentment; but this wise determination soon
gave way to the passion which she felt burning
in her cheeks and sparkling in her eyes.
Mrs. Squanderfield began Dear Mrs.
Woodbridge
,
it seems an age since I have seen you.
But I was busy the whole day yesterday, shopping
all through Chesnut street, with two ladies from
the far west (who with their husbands are staying
at our house) and taking them to milliners and
mantua-makers. They have travelled more than
a thousand miles, each bringing a young baby
along; and their sole business is to get fitted out
with the Philadelphia fashions. They take this
journey twice every year, and carry wagon loads
home with them.
For my part, said Mrs. Pinchington, I
was all day yesterday going about in search of a
cheap washerwoman. Mine has raised her price
to six dollars a quarter, and rather than give more
than five I will wash and iron my own things in
my own room. But as Mrs. Squanderfield says,
it seems an age since I have seen you. I really
believe we have not met since the day of your
delightful dinner-party.
Delightful was it, said Charlotte, unable
longer to restrain herself, you did not think so
in the boat coming down the river, when you were
telling Mrs. Squanderfield about it: and I am very
sure you made it out worse even than it really
was.
Mrs. Pinchington changed color, and looked
much embarrassed; but rallied in a few moments
and said, My dear Mrs. Woodbridge you must
be misinformed. Some vile mischief-maker, some
wicked slanderer has been trying to disturb our
friendship.
My informant, replied Charlotte, is neither
a mischief-maker nor a slanderer. It was my own
father, Mr. Stapleford. He happened to be seated
near you: and he heard every word. First, you
led me on by your own advice to do all sorts of
mean paltry things
I found you willing enough to be led,
interrupted
Mrs. Pinchington.
And now, continued Charlotte, you have
abused me for following your instructions. I
should not have been half so bad, had you left
me to myself. But my eyes are now opened, and
as I intend to act very differently for the future, I
shall have the better chance of keeping that
resolution
by declining all further intercourse with
Mrs. Pinchington.
With all my heart, said Mrs. Pinchington,
rising angrily, I have no occasion to force my
acquaintance on any one. And from what I have
heard of her, I am very sure your notions of
economy
came from your own mother far more than
from me. I wish you all possible success in your
new scheme of reform; which you will find a
tough job, take my word for it.
So saying, Mrs. Pinchington flounced out of the
room, and scuttled out of the house.
What a strange woman that is
remarked
Mrs. Squanderfield. I have thought
several
times of telling you how little she is, in reality,
your friend, and how shamefully she talks about
you wherever she goes. It is a great pity you
asked her to that unlucky dinner-party; the
account
she gives of it is awful. I own I was a
little hurt at your not inviting
me
. I should then
have had it in my power to contradict her
ill-natured
reports.
Perhaps not  said our heroine  for with
shame I acknowledge that there was too much
foundation for her statements, however
unfavorable
they might be. But the next time I prepare
for company, things will be found very different.
I have had a mortifying lesson.
I must say  pursued Mrs. Squanderfield
that I greatly approve of liberality. People in
genteel life should not mind expense. By
the bye, have you heard of the splendid new
style shawls that Lev y has just opened. I saw
them yesterday, and they are the most divine
things I ever beheld. Get ready, and come with
me, and secure one before all the best are gone.
To be plain with you Mrs. Squanderfield
said Charlotte  my intention is, in future, to
expend less money on dress, and more on things
of greater importance. And I know that both
my husband and myself will be happier for the
change.
Really  observed Mrs. Squanderfield  I
thought all men were happy to see their wives
handsomely drest.
I begin to think  said Charlotte  that a
woman may be drest handsomely without
spending
enormous sums, and getting five times as
many new things as she can possibly want. My
husband has not yet made his fortune: and in the
mean time, that our housekeeping may be on a
more liberal scale, I shall lessen my own
personal
expenses. But as I am going to reform both
ways, I think it best to relinquish my intimacy
with Mrs. Squanderfield as well as with Mrs.
Pinchington, for I wish not to be led farther into
temptation.
I declare you are very polite  exclaimed
Mrs. Squanderfield, starting up  I cannot think
what has got into you to-day. You don't seem
at all like yourself.
So much the better, perhaps  replied
Charlotte
;
but as my father could not have
overheard
Mrs. Pinchington, without also
overhearing
Mrs. Squanderfield, his report has convinced
me that
neither
of these ladies has any right to
call herself my friend.
Upon my word  said Mrs. Squanderfield,
forcing a laugh, it is really amusing to see how
new you are. I thought you were old enough to
know that in all circles, even in the highest,
every body talks of every body without the least
scruple. It is the way of the world: and I do
not pretend to be better than my neighbors.
However, as Mrs. Pinchington says, I have no
occasion to force my society on any one. I have
more friends already than I can possibly visit,
even if I were to do nothing else from noon till
midnight. I see we don't suit: but you will lose
more than I shall. However, let us part decently,
and be civil whenever we chance to meet. So
I wish you good morning, and success to your
plan of reforming both ways.
Good morning  said Charlotte, softening
her voice; for in truth, she felt rather better
disposed
toward Mrs. Squanderfield than to Mrs.
Pinchington, whose report of the dinner-party
seemed unforgivable. She accompanied her
visiter
to the door, and ere they parted, our heroine
found herself asking, who did you say had just
opened these elegant shawls, Levy or
Vanharlingen
?
Aha  replied Mrs. Squanderfield, with a
sneer; still hankering after new shawls, I saw
them at Levy's: and I fear the naughty child is
not going to get quite good all at once.
I wish it were more easy to do so  said
Charlotte, colorirg highly, and hastily returning
to the parlor, where she sat down awhile and
pondered. She then went up to her chamber,
and looked out some sewing. But her thread
knotted and her needle broke, and she found she
was not in the humor to sew. So she dressed
herself, and went out, and habit directed her steps
to Chestnut street. At least, thought she,
I may as well stop in at Levy's and
see
the
shawls. Tis certainly pleasant to look at things
that are new and elegant. But I am determined
that nothing shall tempt me to buy one.
She went into Levy's, saw the shawls, and
was
tempted to buy one. But she thought she
would not mention it to her husband for some
days at least; and, as a salvo, she resolved on
paying extra attention to his comforts and wishes.
My dear Harvey, said she, after helping
him at dinner to a second piece of pie, would
you not like to have a carpenter or a
cabinet-maker
or some such person, to fit up the
dining-room
with book-shelves or book-cases. You can
have it for a library if you wish, as in future we
shall use the parlors entirely.
The delighted husband started from his seat,
and replied by a kiss: and the same afternoon he
bespoke both shelves and cases; and went to a
bookseller's to begin his selection of books.
Next morning, shortly after breakfast, Harvey
Wooodbridge came home from his store with a
look of consternation which much alarmed his
K
wife; and as gently as he could, he broke to her
the appalling intelligence of her mother's sudden
death. A letter had just arrived from New York,
written by her brother James, who stated that on
the preceding day while a mantua-maker was
fitting
her for a new dress, Mrs. Stapleford had
fallen down and instantly expired. Great was
the horror of our heroine at this unexpected
termination
of her mother's mortal existence. And
she and her husband set out by the first
conveyance
for New York, leaving a letter for Mr.
Stapleford
,
who arrived that afternoon from
Baltimore
,
and followed them in the mail.
The old gentleman was excessively shocked at
his wife being so suddenly hurried to her last
account
,
unprepared as she was for the awful change
into eternity. He grieved exceedingly, and never
made any farther allusion to her faults. The day
after the funeral he took the temperance pledge.
The fate of her vain, selfish, and heartless
mother made a deep impression on our heroine,
and soon completed the work of reformation which
her father's representations had begun. The old
gentleman was prevailed on to return with his
daughter and his son-in-law, and to pass a few
weeks with them in Philadelphia. Though her
father was completely sobered, Charlotte soon
perceived that, after the first shock had subsided,
the husband of such a woman as Mrs. Stapleford,
could not be inconsolable for her loss: and that
(though he said nothing) he soon began to feel it
a relief. Ah!  thought she  I must make
Harvey happy while I live  or he too will
regard
my death as a deliverance from misery.
On Mr. Stapleford's return to New York, it
was arranged that his sister, an excellent woman
who had been left a widow with a small income,
should take charge of his house: and that his son
James should again reside beneath the roof of his
father. This change had a most salutary effect
on the habits of the young man, and he found it
easy to abandon the incipient vice which as yet
had not fixed itself upon him.
Mr. Stapleford found an affectionate and
intelligent
companion in his amiable and considerate
sister, (though she had always been his wife's
aversion) and now that he had a well-ordered and
happy home, he had no inclination to seek for
pleasure elsewhere. The entire abandonment of
liquor soon restored his good looks and his
self-respect
:
and his visits to Philadelphia were
always
anticipated with delight by his son-in-law
and daughter.
We will not say that our heroine had not for a
while occasional lapses from her good resolutions:
but these aberations gradually became slighter
and less frequent. Love for her husband once
awakened, she no longer took pleasure in
wilfully
annoying him, either by word or deed: and
when she showed any indication of her former
waywardness, a gentle remonstrance from Harvey
always brought her to reason. Also, having so
unceremoniously dismissed her two evil
counsellors
,
she felt the advantage of being released from
their blighting influence.
She now formed an intimacy with some of the
most valuable of her husband's female friends.
These ladies set her in every respect an excellent
example, particularly in improving her mind, and
cultivating a taste for books. Her heart and hand
also expanded to the relief of the unfortunate and
the indigent. Her reform at length became
complete
,
both with regard to extravagance in dress
and parsimony in house-keeping; and there is
not, at this day, in Philadelphia, a more happy or
a more popular couple than Mr. and Mrs.
Woodbridge
.
TO A WITHERED ROSE.
Nature's
warm spirit's! from thee fled,
As now thon hangst upon thy stem
All sapless, withered, wan and dead,
Yet fragrant still, sweet gem!
So is it with the pure in life;
When, from this earth, they pass away;
Their deeds, with virtue's sweets are rife,
They live beyond decay.
R. H.
A SISTER'S LOVE.
Bind
on your heart this jewel rare,
Oh, ye to whom this prize is given!
Nor let rude hands your treasure tear,
But hold it as the gift of heaven!
Till death its shining worth improve,
And angel's crown a sister's love.
K2
MY SISTER'S CHILD.
BY MRS. ANNAN, LATE MISS A. M. F. BUCHANAN.
It
had my sister's gentle eyes,
Her soft and shining hair;
Her cheek, in form and changeful dyes,
And placid brow are there.
My darling! when with merry laugh
I echo back thine own,
'Tis oft that I forget me, half,
What cares my way have strown;
The partner of my being's spring,
Herself, while seemest thou,
I scarce can feel the world-worn thing
That acts thy mother now.
Yet while by yonder turf-bank low
Thou hid'st in feigning sleep,
Thine eyes, a glance may hardly know
From violets, when they peep;
While o'er the runlet thou dost lean
And from its eddies dip
The foam, in cups of oak leaves green,
To wet thy smiling lip;
Though bounds my heart to meet thy play,
'Tis sometimes chilled with fear;
Thus rang
her
voice but yesterday
How long shall thine be here?
My sister's child!
how well that sound
Recalls the happy hour,
When, looking innocent and fond
As thou upon yon flower,
A mother's title sweet she heard
And on the accents hung,
While first thou marred the tender word
With thy unpractis'd tongue:
How proud I spoke! your beauty rare
To me was triumph high;
Ye formed a picture strangely fair,
Its owner rich was I!
My sister's child! my sister's child!'
With aching heart I said,
To watch her stroke thy ringlets wild,
Upon her dying bed.
She gave thee to my love, her trust
Most precious and the last,
To guard, when unto silent dust
Her worshipped form had passed;
I clasped thee from her thin white hand,
She faded as she smiled;
God helps me in her stead to stand
And bless her angel child!
TO ONE BELOVED.
BY PARK BENJAMIN.
Dost thou not turn,
Fairest and sweetest, from the flowery way,
On which thy feet are treading every day,
And seek to learn
Tidings, sometimes, of him who loved thee well
More than the pen can write or tongue can tell?
Gaze not thine eyes
(Oh, wild and lustrous eyes, ye were my fate!)
Upon the lines he fashioned, not of late,
But when the skies
Of joy were over him, and he was blessed
That he could sing of treasures he possessed?
Treasures more dear
Than gold in ingots or barbaric piles
Of pearls and diamondsthy most precious smiles!
Bring, bring me here,
Oh ruthless Time, some of those treasures now,
And print a hundred wrinkles on my brow.
Make me grow old
Before my years are manytake away
Health, youth, ambitionlet my strength decay,
My mind be sold
To be the slave of some strange, barren lore
Only those treasures to my heart restore!
Ah, I implore
A boon that cannot be, a blessing flown
Unto a realm so distant from my own
That, could I soar
On eagle's wings, it still would be afar
As if I strove by flight to reach a star!
The future vast
Before me lifts majestic steps on high,
Which I must stand upon before I die;
For, in the past
Love buried lies; and nothing lives but Fame
To speak unto the coming age, my race and name.
MARK MERIDEN.
BY MRS. H. E. B. STOWE.
Come
, Mark Meriden! don't settle down into
an old grandfather before your time  a pretty
wife's a pretty thing, Mark, and a pretty house is
a pretty thing  but hang it!  one must have a
little of life.
Mark Meriden stood at his desk, giving a last
look at his books, while Ben Sanford  the
roguish
the merry  the song singing  the Ben of all
Bens, was thus urging on him the claims of a
projected
frolic that evening. Now Ben was
precisely
the messenger for such an embassy  there was
fun in the twinkle of his blue eye, and a world of
waggery in the turn of his head, and in a pair of
broad roguish dimples that went merrily dodging
in and out of his cheeks every time he spoke, and
he had laid hold of Mark's arm to drag him away.
But Mark shook off his hand, and finished
summing
up a column of figures  put the blotting
paper into the book, and the book into the place,
wiped his pen  all with an air of great
thoughtfulness
,
and, at last, turning to Ben, said  I think
I won't go this time.
Now why not? said Ben, eagerly.
Because  because, said Mark, smiling;
because I have an odd fancy that I should like
Mrs. Meriden's company better this evening.
Hang Mrs. Meriden  beg pardon, Mark,
hang myself for saying so, but one don't like to
see a fine fellow buried alive! come, take a real
wake up with us.
Thank you, Ben, but I hav'n't been asleep
and don't need it. So I'll go home and see my
wife  and thereat Mark turned a resolute
footstep
homeward as a well-trained husband ought.
Now, says one of our readers, who was
Mark Meriden? You would not have asked,
good reader, if you had lived in the town of ,
when his name first appeared on the outside of
one of its most fashionable shops `Mark Meriden,'
surrounded by these waving insignia of grace and
fashion that young belles need to have their eyes
turned off from beholding. Every thing in the
tasteful establishment told of well arranged
business
,
and Mark himself, the mirror of fashion,
faultless in every article of costume, quick,
attentive
,
polite, was every day to be seen there
winning
golden opinions from all sorts of people.
Mark's store became the resort of high ton  the
fashionable exchange, the promenade of beauty
and wealth, who came there to be enlightened as
to the ways and means of disposing of their
surplus
revenue  to see and to be seen. So attentive,
polite, and considerate was Mark, so profound his
bows, so bright his eyes, so unexceptionable his
whiskers, that it might have proved a dangerous
resort for the ladies, had not a neat, tasteful house,
going up in the neighborhood, been currently
reported as the future residence of an already
elected Mrs. Meriden; and in a few months, the
house neatly finished, and tastefully furnished,
received a very pretty lady who called herself to
that effect. She was as truly refined and lovely
a woman as ever formed the centre flower in a
domestic bouquet, and Mark might justly be
pardoned
for having as good again an opinion of
himself for having been fortunate enough to secure
her.
Mark had an extensive circle of business and
pleasure acquaintances, for he had been one of
the social, companionable sort, whose money
generally found its way out of his pocket in very
fair proportion to the rate it came in. In short,
he was given to clubs, oyster suppers, and now
and then a wine party, and various other social
privileges for elevating one's spirits and depressing
one's cash, that abound among enlightened
communities
.
But nevertheless, at the bottom of Mark's head,
there was a very substantial stratum of a certain
quality called common sense, a trait, which though
it was never set down in any chart of phrenology,
may very justly be called a faculty, and one too
which makes a very striking difference among
people as the world goes. In consequence of
being thus constituted, Mark, when he found
himself in love with, and engaged to a very pretty
girl, began to reflect with more than ordinary
seriousness on his habits, ways, and manners of
life. He also took an accurate survey of his
business, formed an average estimate of his future
income on the soberest probabilities, and
determined
to live a little even within that. He also
provided himself with a small account book, with
which he intended to live in habits of very close
acquaintance, and in this book he designed to note
down all the savings consequent upon the
retrenching
of certain little extras, before alluded to, in
which he had been in the habit of pretty freely
indulging himself.
Upon the present occasion, it had cost him
something of an effort to say no, for Mark was
one of your easy clever fellows to whom the
enunciation of this little syllable causes as much
trouble as all the gutturals of the German.
However
,
when he came in sight of his parlor windows
through which a bright fire was shining  when
L
he entered and found a clean glowing hearth, the
easy chair drawn up in front, and a pair of
embroidered
slippers waiting for him quite at their
leisure, and above all, when he read the quick
glance of welcome in a pair of very bright eyes,
Mark forgot all about Ben Sanford, and all
bachelor
friends and allurements whatsoever, and
thought himself the happiest fellow on earth.
The evening passed off rapidly by the help of
music, and the little small talk of which newly
married people generally find a supply, and the
next morning saw Mark at early business hours
with as steady a hand and as cool a head as if
there had been no such things as bachelor frolicks
in existence.
Late in the forenoon, Ben Sanford lounged in
to ogle a few of the ladies, and above all, to rally
Mark on losing the glorious fun of the evening
before.
Upon my word, Mark, he began, we must
have you put up for Selectman, you are becoming
so extremely ancient and venerable in your ways
however, you are to be excused, he added,
circumstances considered; female influence!
ah! well! its a fine affair this marriage!
Better
try
it, Mr. Sanford, said a bright saucy
girl, who, with her laughing companions, was
standing by while Ben was speaking.
Ah, madam! the wherewithal! said Ben,
rolling up his eyes with a tragic expression. If
some clever old fellow would be so obliging as to
die now and leave me a few thousands, then,
ladies! you should see!
But speaking of
money
, said Mark, when he
saw the ladies busy over some laces he had just
thrown on to the counter, what did your `
glorious
fun' cost you?
Pooh! nothing! only a ten dollar bill
nothing
in
my
purse, you know!
Nothing in your purse! not an uncommon
incident after these occasions, said Mark,
laughing
.
Oh, hang it all! said Ben, too true! I can
get no remedy for this consumption of the purse,
as old Falstaff says; however, the world owes
me a living and so good morning!
Ben Sanford was just one of that class of young
men of whom common report goes, that they can
do any thing they please, and who consider this
point so well established, that they do not think
it necessary to illustrate it by doing any thing at
all. He was a lawyer of talents, and would have
had an extensive run of business, had he not been
one of the class of people never to be found when
wanted. His law books and law office saw far
less of him than certain fashionable places of resort,
where his handsome person and various social
accomplishments, always secured to him a
welcome
reception. Ben had some little property
left him by his father, just enough as he used
laughingly to quote, to keep him in gloves and
cologne water, and for the rest, he seemed vastly
contented with his old maxim, the world owes
me a living, forgetting that the world can
sometimes
prove as poor a paymaster as the most
fashionable
young gentleman going.
But to return to Mark. When he had settled
his accounts at night, he took from a pigeon-hole
in his desk, the little book aforenamed, and
entered
as follows: To one real wake up, $10,
which being done, he locked his desk, and
returned
once more to Mrs. Meriden.
Days flew on, and the shop of Mark became
increasingly popular, and still from time to time
he was assailed by the temptation we have
described
.
Now it was, Mark, my dear fellow, do
join us in a trip to G  's; and now, Come,
my old boy, let us have a spree at F  's; now
it was the club, now the oyster supper  but still
Mark was invincible and still as one or another
gaily recounted the history of the scene, he silently
committed the account of the expense to his little
book. Yet was not mark cynical or unsocial.
His refusals, though so firm, were invariably good
natured, and though he could not be drawn abroad,
yet he was unquestionably open handed and free
in his own home. No house had so warm a
welcome
no dinner table could be more bountiful
or more freely open for the behoof of all gentlemen
of the dining-out order  no tea-table presented
more unexceptionable toast, and no evening lounge
was more easy, home-like, and cheerful, than on
the warm sofas in the snug parlors of Mark
Meriden
.
They also gave evening parties, where all
was brilliant, tasteful, and well ordered; and, in
fine, notwithstanding his short comings, Mark
was set down as a fine open-handed fellow after
all.
At the end of the year, Mark cast up the account
in his little book, and was mightily astonished at
it, for with all his ideas of the power of numbers,
he had no idea that the twos, and fives, and tens,
and ones, which on greater or smaller occasions,
had found their way into its columns, would
mount up to a sum so considerable. Mark looked
about him  the world was going well  his
business
machinery moving in exact touch and time
his house  where was there a prettier one?
where a place more replete with every
home-drawing
comfort? Had he lost any thing
in pleasure
the year past? Mark thought not, and therefore
as he walked homeward, he stepped into a
bookseller's
and ordered some books of superb
engravings
for Mrs. Meriden, and spoke to a gardener
L2
to send some elegant flowering exotics for which
he had heard her express an admiration some
evenings before.
That same evening came in Ben Sanford, as he
expressed it,
in the very depths of indigo
, for
young gentlemen whose worldly matters
invariably
go on wrong end foremost, will sometimes be
found in this condition, however exuberant may
be their stock of animal spirits.
Pray Ben, what is the matter? said Mark
kindly, as the latter streched himself at length, in
an arm-chair, groaning audibly.
Oh, a
bilious
attack, Mark! shoemakers' bills!
tailors' bills! boarding house bills! all sent in for
new years' presents! hang 'em all!
Mark was silent for a few moments, and Ben
continued Confound it, Mark! what's the sense
of living, if a fellow is to be so cursedly poor!
Here you, Mark, born in the same town with me,
and younger than I by some two years  you have
a house, as snug, as cosy, and comfortable as man
need ask  a wife like an angel  peace and
plenty by the bushed, and all comes of having a
good run of luck in the money line  and Ben
kicked his slippers against the andiron most
energetically
.
What has become of Emily P ? asked
Mark, after a pause.
Poor soul! said Ben, there she is yet, with
all sweetness and patience, waiting till such a
luckless scapegrace as I can give her a home and
a husband, I wish to my soul, for her sake, I could
afford to be married, and have a home of my own;
besides, to tell the truth, I am tired of this
rambling
,
scrambling, out-at-elbow, slip-shod life.
Why don't you get married? said Mark.
Why don't I? to be sure  use my tailors'
bills for fuel, and my board bill for house rent,
and my shoe bill for bread and butter  hey?
Would you recommend a poor girl to try me,
Mark  all things considered? said Ben, bitterly.
Mark reflected awhile in silence, and then drew
out his book  his little book, to which we have
before alluded.
Just look at this account, Ben, said he; I
know you hate figures, but just for once.
Ben glanced at it impatiently  laughed when
he read over the two or three first items, but his
face lengthened as he proceeded, and Mark
detected
a sort of whistle of astonishment as he read
the sum total.
Well, Mark! he exclaimed, what a very
old gentlemanly considerate trick is this of yours
to sit behind your curtain so coolly noting down
the `cost and come to' of all our little frolicks
really it is most edifying! How much you must
have enjoyed your superior discretion and
forethought
,
and Ben laughed, but not with his
usual glee.
Nay, you mistake, said Mark. I kept this
account merely to see what
I
had been in the habit
of spending myself, and as you and I have been
always hand and glove in every thing, it answers
equally for you. It was only yesterday that I
summed up the account, and I assure you the
result surprised myself; and now Ben, the sum
here set down, and as much more as you please,
is freely at your disposal, to clear off old scores
for the year, provided you will accept with it this
little book as a new year's gift, and use it one
twelve-month as I have done; and if at the end
of that time, you are not ready to introduce me to
Mrs. Sanford, I am much mistaken.
Ben grasped his friend's hand  but just then
the entrance of Mrs. Meriden prevented his reply
Mark however, saw with satisfaction that he
put the book carefully in his vest pocket, and
buttoned up his coat with the air of a man who is
buttoning up a new resolution.
When they parted for the night, Mark said with
a smile, In case of
bilious attacks
, you know
where to send for Medicine. Ben answered only
by a fervent grasp of the hand, for his throat felt
too full for him to answer.
Mark Meriden's book answered the purpose
admirably. In less than two years Ben Sanford
was the most popular lawyer in , and as steady
a householder as you might wish to see, and, in
conclusion, we will just ask our readers their
opinion on one point, and it is this:
If Mrs. Meriden had been a woman who
understood
what is called catching a beau, better
than securing a husband  if she had never curled
her hair except
for company
, and thought it a
degradation to know how to keep a house
comfortable
,
would all these things have happened?
THE COSSACK'S CHARGE.
BY F. A. DURIVAGE.
The following verses refer to the fate of a small detachment of the Imperial
army, on their retreat from Moscow.
I.
Night
on the boundless waste!
And the snow-flakes wildly driven,
A shroud on the face of earth,
And a frown on the face of heaven!
Is it the tempest's howl
That sweeps o'er moor and glen?
Or is it the deep drum that times
The march of martial men?
II.
Against the storm they move,
With manly port and tread,
And thy glorious engles, France,
Are waving overhead.
With features proud and stern
The serried warriors come,
While ever in their van is heard
The deep sepulchral drum.
III.
And some are there who fought
On Egypt's burning sand,
And met the savage Austrian
At Lodi, hand to hand,
Who saw their eagles fly
Above Marengo's plain,
And proudly marched to victory
O'er dying men and slain.
IV.
From Moscow's scorching flame,
From the Kremlin's fallen walls,
The remnant of her bravest brave,
A tearful nation calls.
Yet proudly come they back,
As if from victory won,
For the spell words breathed by each platoon,
Are France! Napoleon!
V.
The conscsipt dreams of home
A cottage by the Seine
The lips that smiled upon him once,
He seems to press again.
Once more he joins the dance,
With Julie hand in hand,
As the sailor in his fever-dreams,
Appears to tread the land.
VI.
Halt! Is't a cloud that flings
Its shadow o'er the snow
A shifting cloud, that moves as oft
As storm-gusts wildly blow?
But hark! a sound  a shout
Arises from afar;
It is no tempest-voice  it is
The Cossack's wild hurrah!
VII.
Through wreaths of blinding snow
They marked, those men of France,
The well-known Cossack steed,
The well-known Cossack lance.
Halt! at the chief's command,
The advancing steps are staid,
Promptly as in the Champ de Mars,
Of old, upon parade.
VIII.
Fix bayonets! At once
Is heard the crash of steel
They form the hollow square
At a word  the front ranks kneel
There, in the biting cold,
Equal to either fate,
The brave, devoted regiment,
The Cossack's charge await.
IX.
The Hetman waves his blade
On dash the Cossack horse
No volley from the hollow square
Arrests their headlong course.
No chieftain's rallying shout,
His troop to action calls
But heavily, without a groan,
The front rank slowly falls.
X.
The Hetman reins his steed
With a wild and troubled air
What need of Cossack's levelled lance?
The hand of death is there!
The valiant were no more
From the soil that foemen trod
From the tempest and the battle,
Sped their stormy souls to God.
M
TRANSLATIONS FROM THE GERMAN OF
RICHTER, (JEAN PAUL.)
BY MRS. F. M. BAKER.
Reflection of Mt. Vesuvius from the Sea
.
See
how the flames rise from below, under
the stern; red streams roll heavily around the
mountain of the deep and consume the beautiful
garden. But safe we glide over the cooling
flames, and our countenances smile from the
burning wave. Thus said the delighted
navigator
,
and then glanced fearfully towards the
thundering mountain. But, I said: behold,
thus presents the poet in the everlasting mirror,
the heavy calamities of the world, and the
unfortunate
glance carelessly on, but the sorrow even
gladdens them.
Beyond the sun, in the farthest blue, rest other
suns, their strange beams flying for thousands of
years upon the road to this small earth, have
come not yet near. O, thou softer, nearer God,
scarcely can'st injure the weak spirit of man, so
mildly thou beamest into his young eye. O, Sun
of Suns and Spirits.
In the day spoke the full Sunflower: Apollo
sends forth his rays and I spread myself out; he
travels round the earth and I follow after him.
In the night said the Violet: Lowly stand I and
concealed  and bloom in brief night: sometimes
Venus' mild sister glistens upon me, then I am
discovered and gathered and die in the bosom.
As the beautiful but pale and tender Flowers
of May fell off and perished, thus said the leaves:
What infirmity and uselessness! scarcely born,
they sink in all their loveliness; but we, how
we stand firmly and outlast the summer heat,
always large, brilliant and strong, till we finally
reach a good age, when we produce and give the
earth the richest fruits, and under a cannonade of
storms remain with fine variegated colors at rest.
But the early fallen Flowers said: Willing
were we to fall; yet before had we produced the
fruit. You silent unobserved men in your homes,
or in the counting room; you with little parade
and display of learning; you noble benefactors
unnamed in history; and you unknown mothers,
never disheartened, never affected by the glitter
in public greatness, in wealth, in that glory which
rises over victims slain in battle,you are the
flowers!
Where think you is the likeness of that female
mind, which endures much but continually looks
up to God, which always appears joyous before
the world, while secretly she weeps and suffers,
and which the storms of life neither disturb nor
obscure? Near the Heavens: where stands
the rainbow; the clouds and winds that fly near
him move him not, but he shines forth before his
sun and his drops become colors, and he lies upon
the Heavens like brilliant morning dew in a clear
day.
Who is greatest? the philosopher, who raises
himself above the tumults of time and only
contemplates
without engaging in them, or the one,
that from the heights of repose can throw himself
amid the bustle and confusion of the world? It
is noble, when the eagle soars upward through
the tempest, to the screne sky; but it is more
noble when floating in the blue vault above the
storms, he precipitates himself through them,
upon the rocky eyrie, where lay his unfledged
and trembling brood.
ON THE DEATH OF A CHILD.
Of such is the kingdom of Heaven.
Withdrawn
in love from earthly pain,
And every evil passion's power;
Borne from the world ere sin could stain
Or sorrow blight the opening flower:
How sweet to think the cherub fair,
That so on earth absorbed our love,
Transplanted by an angel's care,
Blooms in the Paradise above!
And shall we meet
him
in the sky,
So loved and so lamented here?
And shall we greet again on high
The face and form on earth so dear?
Then let us calmly wait the day,
The glorious day of Heavenly bliss;
Joy cannot speed nor sorrow stay
The hour that brings a boon like this!
B.
M2
THE PORTRAIT OF TWO SISTERS.
BY MRS. LYDIA H. SIGOURNEY.
Sweet
sisters  blest the art that keeps
The form of grace, the brow of snow,
From Time's dark wing, that coldly sweeps
To blight those beauties while they glow;
But that which gives each charm its power,
The heart sincere  the thought refin'd
The love that soothes affliction's hour
The calm and holy light of mind
These ask no limner's magic skill,
Nor shrink at adverse fortune's moan;
Through fading years they flourish still
Sweet sisters, guard them as your own.
The above lines were suggested on seeing the portrait
of two beautiful sisters, the daughters of Robert Walsh,
Esq. of Philadelphia, at the studio of Mr. Healy, in Paris.
THE MOTHER'S OFFERING.
BY MISS A. D. WOODBRIDGE.
I
Hannah
, to Shiloh, brought her child,
The beautiful, the pure;
The weary way he had beguil'd
With many an artless lure,
Yet now she nerv'd herself to part
Ah! woman's strength is in her heart.
II
Once and again she fondly press'd
Her own, her cherish'd one;
With tearful eye, the babe she bless'd,
And then she felt 'twas done!
He was the Lord's! an off'ring fair,
The mother joy'd to leave him there.
GENTILITY.
BY T. S. ARTHUR.
Didn't
I see you walking up the street with
a young lady yesterday, William? said Anna
Enfield to her brother, who had but a few days
before returned from New York, after an absence
of some months.
Perhaps you did; I was in company with a
young lady in the afternoon, replied the brother.
Well, who was she? I did not see you until
after you had passed the store I was in, and then
I could not see her face.
It was Caroline Murry; you know her, I
suppose
.
Caroline Murry! Why, brother! what were
you doing in her company? and Anna's face
expressed unfeigned astonishment.
Why, really, you surprise me, sister! I hope
there is no blemish on her character. But what
is the matter? I feel concerned to know.
There's nothing much the matter, brother;
but, then, Caroline Murry is not genteel. We
don't think of keeping her company.
Indeed! and you don't associate with her
because
she is not genteel. Well, if I am any judge
of gentility, Anna, Caroline Murry is about as
genteel and lady-like as any girl I know, always
excepting, of course, my own dear sister.
Why, brother, how you talk! You don't
certainly
pretend to compare her with Ernestine
Eberly and Zepherine Fitzwilliams, whom you
have seen here several times?
No, I do not, replied the brother,
emphatically
.
Well, they're what I call genteel; and
Caroline
Murry wouldn't be tolerated in the society
where they visit.
And why not, sister?
Havn't I told you? Because she is not
considered
genteel; that is the reason.
But I don't understand what you consider
genteel, Anna. If I know what gentility means,
Caroline, as far as that is concerned, is in every
way superior to Ernestine Eberly and Zepherine
Fitzwilliams.
Now, William, that is too bad! If any other
man had said so to me, I would never have
spoken
to him again as long as I lived.
But seriously, Anna, what do you mean by
gentility? asked the brother.
That's a question more easily asked than
answered
;
but you know, as well as I do, what is
meant by gentility. Every body knows.
I know what I mean by it, Anna. But it
seems that we don't agree on the subject; for I
call Caroline Murry genteel, and you don't: so
you see that different things may be called by the
same name. Now, what I wish to know is, what
precise meaning you attach to the word? or, why
you do not think Caroline genteel?
Why, in the first place, she don't go into
genteel
company. People of the first rank won't
associate
with her.
Here ensued a pause, and the brother said
Well, why won't they associate with her,
Anna? I hope she has not been guilty of
improper
or immoral conduct.
O, no! nothing of that. I never heard the
slightest reflection on her character, replied the
sister. But, then, genteel young ladies don't
work in the kitchen, like hired servants; and she
does. And, besides this, call on her when you
will, and she is always doing something. Why,
I am told that she has even been seen at the
chamber windows, fronting on the public street,
with her head tied up, sweeping and making the
beds! And Clarrissa Spiggler says that she saw
her once, with the parlor windows open,
sweeping
and dusting like a servant! Nobody is going
to associate, or be seen in the street with any one
who hasn't the spirit to be above the condition of
a hireling. And, besides this, whenever she was
invited to balls or parties, she never would stay
later than ten or eleven o'clock, which every one
knows to be vulgar. Somebody had to go home
with her, of course; and the choicest beau in the
company was almost sure to have his good nature
and his politeness taxed for this purpose. Once
I heard her say, that she considered the theatre
an unfit place for any young lady; she offended
the whole company, and has never been invited
to a party among genteel people since.
And is that all? said William Enfield,
taking
a long breath.
Yes, and I should think that was enough, in
all conscience, replied the sister.
So should I, Anna, to make me respect her.
Why, William!
Why, Anna!
But seriously, William, you cannot be in
earnest?
And seriously, Anna, are you in earnest?
Of course I am.
Well, sister, I'm afraid my old fashioned
notions
,
for such I suppose you will call them, and
your new fangled notions, for such I must call
them, will not chime well together. All that I
have heard you allege against Caroline Murry,
raises, instead of lowering her in my estimation.
So far as a gentle, and truly lady-like deportment
is concerned, I think her greatly superior to the
two friends you have named as the pinks of
gentility
.
Anna looked into the face of her brother for
some moments, her countenance exhibiting a
mingled expression of surprise and disappointment.
But you are not going to walk with her in
the street any more, I hope, she at length said.
And why not, Anna?
Because, as I have said before, she is not
gen
Genteel, you were going to say. But that
allegation, you perceive, Anna, has no weight
with me; I do not consider it a true one.
Well, we won't talk any more about it just
now, for it would be no use, said the sister,
changing her voice and manner; and so I will
change the subject. I want you to make a call
or two with me this morning.
On whom?
On Miss Eberly and Miss Fitzwilliams.
It wouldn't be right for me to do so, would
it? You know I don't consider them genteel,
said the brother, with affected gravity.
O nonsense, brother? why will you trifle so?
But, seriously, Anna, I do not consider that
those young ladies have any very strong claims
to gentility; and, like you, I have no wish to
associate with those who are not genteel.
If you talk in that way, William, I shall get
angry with you, I cannot hear my most intimate
friends spoken of so lightly; and, at the same time
accused of a want of gentility. You must
remember
that you are reflecting upon your sister's
associates.
You must not, and I know you will not, get
angry with me, sister, for speaking plainly; and
you must do me the justice to believe that in
speaking as I do I am in earnest. And you must
also remember, that, in saying what you did of
Caroline Murry, you spoke of one with whom
your brother has associated, and with whom he
is still willing to associate.
Anna looked very serious at this, nor could she
frame in her own mind a reply that was
satisfactory
to her. At last she said
But, seriously, brother William, won't you
call on those young ladies with me?
Yes, on one condition.
N
Well, what is that?
Why, on condition that you will, afterwards,
call with me, and see Caroline Murry.
I cannot do that, William, she replied, in a
positive tone.
And why not, Anna?
I have already told you.
I cannot perceive the force of that reason,
Anna. But, if you will not go with me, I must
decline going with you. The society of Miss
Murry cannot be more repulsive to you, than is
that of the Misses Eberly and Fitzwilliams to me.
You don't know what you are talking about,
William.
That is my own impression about you. But
come, now, sister, let us both be rational to each
other. I am willing to go with you, if you will
go with me.
Yes, but, William, you don't reflect, that, in
doing as you desire me, I will be in danger of
losing my present position in society. Caroline
Murry is not esteemed genteel in the circle in
which I move, and if it should be known that I
visit her, I will be considered on a level with her.
I would do any thing to oblige you, but, indeed,
I would be risking too much here.
You would only be breaking loose, replied
the brother, from the slavery you are now in to
false notions of what is truly genteel. If any
one esteems you less for being kind, attentive,
and courteous, to one against whom suspicion has
never dared to breathe a word, and whose whole
life is a bright example of the pure and high-toned
principles that govern her, that one is unworthy
of your regard. True gentility does not exist, my
sister, merely in a studied and artificial elegance
of behavior, but in inward purity and taste, and a
true sense of what is right, all exhibiting
themselves
in their natural external expression. The
real lady judges of others from what they are,
and neglects none but the wilfully depraved.
True, there are distinctions in society, and there
are lines of social demarcation  and all this is
right. But we should be careful into what social
sphere we are drawn, and how we suffer ourselves
to be influenced by the false notions of real worth
which prevail in some circles that profess a high
degree of gentility. I hold that every one, no
matter what may be his or her condition in life,
fails to act a true part if not engaged in doing
something that is useful. Let me put it to your
natural good sense, which do you think the most
deserving of praise, Caroline Murry, who spends
her time in `doing something' useful to her whole
family; or your friends, the Misses Eberly and
Fitzwilliams, and those constituting their
particuler
circle, who expect service from others, but
never think of rendering any, and who carry their
prejudices so far as to despise those who work?
Anna did not reply, and her brother said
I am in earnest, sister, when I say, that you
cannot confer a greater favor upon your brother,
than to go with him to see Caroline Murry.
Cannot
I induce you to comply with my wishes?
I will go, she replied to this appeal, and then
hurried away, evidently no little disturbed in her
feelings.
In half an hour she was ready, and, taking her
brother's arm, was soon on the way to Miss
Ernestine Eberly's residence. That young lady
received them with all the graces and fashionable
airs she could assume, and entertained them with
the idle gossip of the day, interspersed with an
occasional spice of envious and ill-natured remark.
Knowing that her brother was a close
discriminator
,
and knowing that he was by no means
prepossessed
in her friends favor, Anna herself
observed her more narrowly, and, as it were, with
his eyes. It seemed to her that Miss Eberly never
was so uninteresting, or so mal-apropos in what
she said. The call on Zepherine Fitzwilliams
came next in turn. Scanning her also with other
eyes than her own, Anna was disappointed in her
very dear friend. She looked through her, and
was pained to see that there was a hollowness and
want of any thing like true strength or excellence
of character about her. Particularly was she
displeased
at a gratuitous sneer thrown out at the
expense of Caroline Murry.
And now, with a reluctance which she could
not overcome, Anna turned with her brother,
towards the residence of the young lady who had
caste, because she had good sense and was
industrious
.
I know my sister's lady-like character will
prompt her to right action, in our next call, said
the brother, looking into Anna's face with an
encouraging smile.
She did not reply, yet she felt somehow or
other pleased with the remark. A few minutes
walk brought them to the door, and they were
presently ushered into a neat parlor in which was
the young lady they were seeking. She sat near
a window, and was sewing. She was plainly
dressed in comparison with the young ladies just
called upon; but in neatness, and in all that
constitutes
the lady in air and appearance, in every
way their superior.
I believe you know my sister, said Enfield,
on presenting Anna.
We have met a few times, she replied with
a pleasant, unembarrassed smile, extending at the
same time her hand.
N2
Miss Enfield took the offered hand with less
reluctance than she had imagined she could, but
a few hours before. Somehow or other, Caroline
seemed to her to be very much changed for the
better in manner and appearance. And she could
not help, during all the visit, drawing contrasts
between her and the two very dear friends she
had just called upon; and the contrast was in no
way favorable to the latter. The conversation
was on topics of ordinary interest, but did not
once degenerate into frivolity or censoriousness.
Good sense manifested itself in almost every
sentence
that Caroline uttered, and this was so
apparent
to Anna, that she could not help frequently
noticing and involuntarily approving it. What
a pity, Anna once or twice remarked to herself,
that she will be so singular.
The call was but a brief one. Anna parted
with Caroline under a different impression of her
character than she had ever before entertained.
After her return with her brother, he asked her
this abrupt question.
Which of the young ladies, Anna, of the three
we called upon this morning, would you prefer to
call your sister?
Anna looked up, bewildered and surprised, into
the face of her brother, for a few moments, and
then said;
I don't understand you, brother William.
Why, I thought I asked a very plain question.
But I will make it plainer. Which one of the
three young ladies we called upon this morning,
would you advise me to marry?
Neither, replied Anna promptly.
That is only jumping the question, he said,
smiling. But, to corner you so that there can
be no escape, I will confess that I have made up
my mind to marry one of the three. Now tell
me which you would rather it would be.
Caroline Murry, said Anna, emphatically,
while her cheeks burned, and her eyes became
slightly suffused.
William Enfield did not reply to the hoped for,
though rather unexpected admission, but stooping
down, he kissed her glowing cheek, and whispered
in her ear,
Then she shall be your sister, and I know
you will love one another.
He said truly. In a few months he claimed
Caroline Murry as his bride, and her good sense,
and winning gentleness of character, influenced
Anna, and effectually counteracted the false
notions
which were beginning to corrupt a good
heart and to overshadow a sound judgment. It
was not long before she was fully sensible of the
real difference which there was between the
character
of her two friends, and that of her brother's
wife; and also between true and false gentility.
Although Caroline Murry had been proscribed by
a certain circle in which false pride, instead of
principle, was the governing motive, she had still
been esteemed among those who knew how to
look beyond the surface. As the wife of Enfield,
she at once took a position in circles where those
who had passed her by as unworthy would have
sought in vain for admission, and in those circles
she shone as a bright particular star.
THE SAILOR BOY'S LAMENT.
BY MRS. CAROLINE ORNE.
Alas
! why did I leave
My pleasant home
A wanderer o'er the waves,
Afar to roam?
Ah! why was I the first
To rend apart
Those household ties that long
Bound heart to heart,
'Tis night: the waves are round,
The sky above,
Whence the bright stars look down
On those I love;
On those whose fondest thoughts
Will still be given
To me, whene'er they lift
Their hearts to Heaven.
For this yon beaming stars
Seem friends to me,
But soon on distant seas
My course will be
Seas where a stranger host
Will meet my gaze,
That ne'er on those I love,
Poured their soft rays.
Then will there nought be left
Save mem'ry's chain,
To link my thoughts with those
Beyond the main;
But many a lovely flower,
Unheeded when
I mingled joys with them,
Will bloom again.
The sunny places where
The violet
Nestled amid the grass,
With dew still wet
The fount, the mossy rock,
The old oak tree,
Will, in my night-watch, oft
Come back to me.
Oh, for one hour with those
I left behind,
Whose voices in the night,
Borne on the wind,
Like the low wind-harp's notes
Oft seem to come,
Wafted from flowery fields,
Near by my home.
Why did I leave the fount,
The rock, the tree
The glades where wild-flowers bloomed,
And roved the bee?
Why did I leave my home,
And those I love,
O'er the wild, pathless sea,
Afar to rove?
THE SUMMER RAIN.
When parched and dewless is the ground,
And wither'd herb and flower,
New life is spread the earth around,
As falls the summer shower.
Each drooping flower new strength receives,
And brightly blooms again,
As gently falls upon its leaves
The cool refreshing rain.
Then, when the clouds has pass'd away,
How radiant all appears,
The rain drops glitter on each spray,
Like childhood's laughing tears!
EXPERIENCE OF A MECHANIC.
Two
young men, both of them mechanics,
were married about the same time, and entered
life with apparently equal prospectsexcept that
one was rather given to extravagance and fashion,
while the other was more prudent and frugal.
The wife of the latter, however, being of a
different
turn from her husband, became uneasy because
the former, without any superior advantages, made
more show than they did, and had many more
fine things
. She told her husband that
his
income
must be as much as the other's, and that she
knew they were able to appear as well as their
neighbor. I want to do as other folks do, was
her all conquering argument. Her husband
yielded
again and again to her entreaties, although
professing that he was not
able
.
At length his more showy neighbor
failed!
And seeing their
fine things
sold under the hammer
of the auctioneer, his wife, who was far from being
destitute of good feelings, began to mistrust
whether
by imitating them, and doing as other folks
do they might not meet with a similar fate. She
anxiously inquired of her husband how his affairs
stood. He told her that his expenses had exceeded
his income, but he hoped to get through and pay
what he owed.
Before long, however, he was
sued for debt
.
Then his wife was in
panics!
She knew that his
misfortune was chargeable to her folly; although he
never reproached her, nor cast any unkind
reflections
.
Disturbed with contending emotions she
tried to plan some way to get along in this terrible
difficulty! But finding all her endeavors fruitless,
she said to her husband, with unfeigned distress,
What
shall
we do? What
can
we do? Do?
he calmly replied, we must do
as other folks do
have our fine things sold under the hammer!
This was enough for her. She had seen the
beginning and ending of this common folly, and
she was satisfied. From that time he had no
trouble to persuade her to be frugal and prudent.
They were both agreed in pursuing the same
course. And it is almost useless to say, that their
prosperity was in proportion to their wisdom and
prudence.
O
WOMAN.
BY FRANCIS W. THOMAS,
Author of `Clinton Bradshaw,' Etc.
How
beautiful is woman's life,
When first her suppliant woos and kneels,
And she with young and warm hopes rife,
Believes he deeply feels.
Then day is gladness, and the night
Looks on her with its starry eyes,
As though it gave her all their might
Over men's destinies.
Wrapt watchers of the skicy gleam,
Then men are like astronomers
Who gaze and gladden at the beam
Of that bright eye of hers.
And if a frown obscure its light,
'Tis like a cloud to star-struck men,
Through the long watches of the night,
Oh! for that beam again!
How heart-struck that astrologer,
A gazer on the starry zone,
When first he looked in vain for her,
The lovely Pleiad gone.
But men watch not the stars always
And though the Pleiad may be lost,
Yet still there are a thousand rays
From the surrounding host.
And woman, long before the grave
Closes above her dreamless rest,
May be man's empress and his slave,
And his discarded jest.
Still may that Pleiad shine afar,
But pleasure-led o,er summer seas,
Who dwells upon a single star
Amid the Pleiades.
Man courts the constellations bright,
That beam upon his bounding bark,
Nor thinks upon the left lone light,
'Till all above is dark.
Then when he knows nor land nor main,
And darkly is his frail bark tossed,
He counts the separate stars in vain
And mourns the Pleiad lost.
THE SOFT ANSWER.
BY T. S. ARTHUR.
I'll
give him law to his heart's content, the
scoundrel! said Mr. Singleton, walking
backwards
and forwards, in a state of angry excitement.
Don't call harsh names, Mr. Singleton, said
Lawyer Trueman, looking up from the mass of
papers before him, and smiling, in a quiet,
benevolent
way, that was peculiar to him.
Every man should be known by his true name.
Williams is a scoundrel, and so he ought to be
called! responded the client, with increasing
warmth.
Did you ever do a reasonable thing in your
life, when you were angry? asked Mr. Trueman
whose age and respectability gave him the license
to speak thus freely to his young friend, for whom
he was endeavoring to arrange some business
difficulty with a former partner.
I can't say that I ever did, Mr. Trueman.
But now, I have good reason for being angry; and
the language I use in reference to Williams is but
the expression of a sober and rational conviction,
replied Singleton, a little more calmly.
Did you not pronounce him a scoundrel before
you received his reply to your last letter, asked
Mr. Trueman.
No, I did not. But that letter confirmed my
previously formed impression of his character.
But I cannot find in that letter any evidence
proving your late partner to be a dishonest man.
He will not agree to your proposed mode of
settlement
,
because he does not see it to be the most
proper way.
He won't agree to it, because it is an honest
and equitable method of settlement, that is all!
He wants to over-reach me, and is determined to
do so if he can! responded Mr. Singleton, still
excited.
There you are decidely wrong, said the
lawyer. You have both allowed yourselves to
become angry, and are both unreasonable, and, if
I must speak plainly, I think you the most
unreasonable
,
in the present case. Two angry men
can never settle any business properly. You have
very unnecessarily increased the difficulties in the
way of a speedy settlement, by writing Mr.
Williams
an angry letter which he has responded to
O2
in a like unhappy temper. Now, if I am to settle
this business for you, I must write all letters that
pass to Mr. Williams in future.
But how can you properly express my views
and feelings?
That I do not wish to do, if your views and
feelings are to remain as they now are, for any
thing like adjustment of the difficulties under
such circumstances, I should consider hopeless,
replied Mr. Trueman.
Well, let me answer this letter, and after
that, I promise that you shall have your own
way.
No, I shall consent to no such thing. It is
the reply to
that
letter which is to modify the
negotiation
for a settlement in such a way as to
bring success or failure; and I have no idea of
allowing
you, in the present state of your mind, to
write such a one as will most assuredly defeat an
amicable arrangement.
Singleton paused for some time, before making
a reply. He had been forming in his mind a most
cutting and bitter rejoinder to the letter just
alluded
to, and he was very desirous that Mr.
Williams
should have the benefit of knowing that he
thought him a tricky and deliberate scoundrel,
with other opinions of a similar character. He
found it, therefore, impossible to make up his
mind to let the unimpassioned Mr. Trueman
write this most important epistle.
Indeed I must write
this
letter, Mr.
Trueman
,
he said, There are some things that I
want to say to him, that I know you won't write.
You don't seem to consider the position in which
he has placed me by that letter, nor what is
obligatory
upon me as a man of honor. I never
allow
any man to reflect upon me, directly of
indirectly
,
without a prompt response.
There is, in the Bible, said Mr. Trueman,
a passage that is peculiarly applicable in the
present case. It is this
A soft answer turneth
away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger
.
I have found this precept, in a life that has
numbered
more than double your years, to be one
that may be safely and honorably adopted, in all
cases. You blame Mr. Williams for writing you
an angry letter, and are indignant at certain
expressions
contained therein. Now, is it any more
right for you to write an angry letter, with cutting
epithets, than it is for him?
But, Mr. Trueman
I do assure you, my young friend, said the
lawyer interrupting him, that I am acting in
this case for your benefit, and not for my own;
and, as your legal adviser, you must submit to my
judgment, or I cannot consent to go on.
If I will promise not to use any harsh language,
will you not consent to let me write the letter?
urged the client.
You and I, in the present state of your mind,
could not possibly come at the same conclusion in
reference to what is harsh and what is mild,
said Mr. Trueman, therefore I cannot consent
that you shall write one word of the proposed
reply
.
I
must
write it.
Well, I suppose, then I shall have to submit.
When will it be ready?
Come this afternoon, and I will give you the
draft, which you can copy and sign.
In the afternoon Mr. Singleton came and
received
the letter prepared by Mr. Trueman. It
ran thus, after the date and formal address.
I regret that my proposition did not meet your
approval. The mode of settlement which I
suggested
was the result of a careful consideration of
our mutual interests. Be kind enough to suggest
to Mr. Trueman, my lawyer, any plan which you
think will lead to an amicable adjustment of our
business. You may rely upon my consent to it,
if it meets his approbation.
Is it possible, Mr. Trueman, that you expect
me
to sign such a cringing letter as that? said
Mr. Singleton, throwing it down, and walking
backwards and forwards with great irritation of
manner.
Well, what is your objection to it, replied
Mr. Trueman, mildly, for he was prepared for just
such an exhibition of feelings.
Objection! How can you ask such a question?
Am I to go on my knees to him and beg him to
do me justice. No! I'll sacrifice every cent I've
got in the world first, the scoundrel!
You wish to have your business settled, do
you not? asked Mr. Trueman, looking him
steadily in the face.
Of course I do!
Honorably
settled!
Well, let me hear what you mean by an
honorable
settlement?
Why I mean
The young man hesitated a moment, and Mr.
Trueman said,
You mean a settlement in which your
interest
shall be equally considered with that of Mr.
Williams.
Yes, certainly. And that
And that, continued Mr. Trueman, Mr.
Williams, in the settlement, shall consider and
treat you as a gentleman.
Certainly I do. But that is more than he
has
done!
Well, never mind. Let what is past go for
as much as it worth. The principal point of
action
is in the present.
But I'll never send that mean, cringing letter,
though.
You mistake its whole tenor, I do assure you,
Mr. Singleton. You have allowed your angry
feelings to blind you. You, certainly, carefully
considered, before you adopted it, the proposed
basis of a settlement, did you not.
Of course I did.
So the letter which I have prepared for you,
states. Now as an honest and honorable man,
you are, I am sure, willing to grant to him the
same privilege which you asked for yourself, viz,
that of proposing a plan of settlement. Your pro
position does not seem to please him: now it is
but fair that he should be invited to state how he
wishes the settlement to be made. And in
giving
such an invitation, a gentleman should use
gentlemanly language.
But, he don't deserve to be treated like a
gentleman
.
In fact, he has no claim to the title,
the young man.
If he has none, as you say,
you
profess to
be
a
gentleman, and all gentlemen should prove by
their actions and their words that they are
gentle
men.
I can't say that I am convinced by what you
say, but, as you seem so bent on having it your
own way, why, here, let me copy the thing and
sign it, said the young man, suddenly changing
his manner.
There now! he added, passing across the
table the brief letter he had copied, I suppose
he'll think me a low spirited fellow, after he gets
that. But he's mistaken. After it's all over, I'll
take good care to tell him, that it didn't contain
my sentiments!
Mr. Trueman smiled, as he took the letter, and
went on to fold and direct it.
Come to-morrow afternoon, and I think we'll
have things in a pretty fair way, he said,
looking
up with his usual pleasant smile, as he
finished
the direction of the letter.
Good afternoon, Mr. Singleton, he said, as
that gentleman entered his office on the
succeeding
day.
Good afternoon, responded the young man.
Well, have you heard from that milk and
water
letter of yours? I can't call it mine.
Yes, here is the answer. Take a seat, and I
will read it to you, said the old gentleman.
Well, let's hear it.
Dear George
I have your kind, reasonable,
and gentlemanly note of yesterday, in reply to
my harsh, unreasonable, and ungentlemanly one
of the day before. We have both been playing
the fool; but you are ahead of me in becoming
sane. I have examined, since I got your
proposition
for a settlement, and it meet my views
precisely
.
My foolish anger kept me from seeing it
before. Let our mutual friend, Mr. Trueman,
arrange the matter, according to the plan
mentioned
,
and I shall most heartily acquiesce. Yours,
&c.
He never wrote that letter in the world!
exclaimed Singleton, starting to his feet.
You know his writing, I presume, said Mr.
Trueman, handing him the letter.
It's Thomas Williams' own hand, as I live!
ejaculated Singleton, on glancing at the letter.
My old friend, Thomas Williams, the best
natured
fellow in the world! he continued, his
feelings undergoing a sudden and entire
revolution
.
What a fool I have been!
And what a fool
I
have been! said Thomas
Williams, advancing from an adjoining room, at
the same time extending his hand towards
Singleton
.
God bless you, my old friend! exclaimed
Singleton, grasping his hand. Why what has
been the matter with us both?
My young friends, said old Mr. Trueman,
one of the kindest hearted men in the world,
rising
and advancing towards them. I have known
you long, and have always esteemed you both.
This pleasant meeting and reconciliation, you
perceive, is of my arrangement. Now let me give
you a precept that will both make friends, and
keep friends. It has been my motto through life;
and I don't
know that I have an enemy in the
world. It is
A soft answer turneth away wrath, but
grievous
words stir up anger
.