VOL. II. 1
CHAPTER I.
I, walking in the place where men's law-suits
Are heard and pleaded, not so much as dreaming
Of any such encounter; steps me forth
Their valiant foreman, with the words, `I 'rest you.'
I made no more ado, but laid these paws
Close on his shoulders, tumbling him to earth.
George Chapman
.
The
hour was late when the strong-minded
maiden, Rachel Morrison, reached her apartments.
The family, guests and all, had retired to their
several chambers for the night; and in the silent
review
which she made of the scene she had just
witnessed
,
a most annoying conviction rose in her
mind of the probable danger awaiting the young
traveller
,
Vernon, who, she knew, had appointed to
resume
his journey on the morrow. She recollected
the promise of one of the robbers (Saxon) to join
him on the road; and this promise she naturally
construed
into a resolution to assail him. To warn him
of his danger was her first impulse, but how was
this to be done? It was impossible that she should
seek him then; it was scarcely proper, indeed, that
she should seek him at any time, and to
communicate
her warning to Walter Rawlinsthe most easy
and natural modewas to prompt his inquiries into
other particulars of her knowledge, which she was
not yet prepared to unfold. She dreaded the prying
mind of her lover, and doubted her own strength to
refuse him that knowledge which was effectually to
blast and destroy the son of her protector. The
conflict
in her mind kept her wakeful, and at the dawn
of day she was dressed, and anxiously on the watch
for that stir in the household which might denote the
preparations of the traveller. To her great joy she
heard footsteps in the adjoining passage, which she
knew to be those of Rawlins. She went forth and
joined him.
Walter, she said, your friend Mr. Vernon
must be on his guard while he rides. There is
danger
awaiting himlet him see to his arms, and be
heedful of the company he meets.
Ha! Rachel,but is this all,know you nothing
more?
Nothing that is of any service to him, and
nothing
more of his danger. The robbers are near
us; they will be on the lookout for him. Counsel
him to be well prepared; perhaps you may counsel
him to defer his departure.
I have tried that already, but he is bent on a
push to-day. He's very restless to get off, though
his thigh's mighty stiff and sore. But tell me,
Rachel
,
how do you know all this?
Another time, not nowGideon is stirring.
Beware
of him.
Ha! Gideonsay, Rachel, what of Gideon?
The person named, at this moment appeared in
the passage-way, and the maiden was gone from
sight in the next. The woodman instantly returned
to the chamber of Vernon, and apprised him of what
he had heard. The latter listened to him without
emotion. He looked to his pistols, felt the charge,
renewed the priming, and this done, continued his
preparations for departure as coolly as before. An
early breakfast had been prepared, after which, and
the unusually long grace which preceded it, Vernon
bade adieu to his rigid, but hospitable host, and joined
by Rawlins, rode forth upon his way. The latter
escorted him to the river, and on their way to this
point, Vernon suggested to him all those plans and
precautions, by which the woodman was to conduct
the contemplated operations against the robbers.
The reasons for the exclusion of the old Methodist
and his son were necessarily increased by the
significant
warning of Rachel Morrison; and, counselled
as well as he might be under the existing
circumstances
,
Rawlins returned to Zion's Hill, leaving our
hero to pursue his farther journey alone. The
narrow
,
but deep and rapid stream was soon crossed,
and now let us also leave him, for a brief space,
while he struggles through the rank ooze, and
interminable
ponds and sluices that skirt, at frequent
intervals
,
and for continued miles on either bank, the
dead level borders and drowned lands of the
Loosa-Chitta
.
The sun was slowly ascending through the
branches of the towering cottonwood and pine-trees,
that seemed to throw themselves forward as barriers
in opposition to his progress, along the eastern
elevations
,
when a small party of men, three in number,
might have been seen in close consultation beneath
their concealing umbrage. One of these was no
other than our old acquaintance, Saxon. Their
horses were in hand, as if made ready for a journey;
and that air of quickness, keenness, and anxiety
which mingled in their manner, and contrasted
strongly with the low, suppressed tones of their
voices, plainly denoted some new expedition. The
robbers were evidently preparing for business.
Go you forward, said Saxon to his two
companions
as he leapt to the saddle, and let Nawls
get the papers in readiness. Meanwhile, I will take
the road from the Benton turn-out, as soon as I am
sure that our man has passed it. I know his course
now, and can readily overtake him. Remember
you are to act as law officers, and you must do your
duty with becoming gravity. None of your
swaggering
and swearing, Binks; and do you, Davis,
keep a dry throat. Be sure you cast no discredit
on the venerable authority you are supposed to
represent
.
It is an honour no less imposing than new,
that you should be made officers of the law you
have so often offended.
Not the less worthy officers for all that, said
one of the fellows. `Set a thief to catch a thief,' is
a maxim which will always give a thief
employment
.
Ay, but you are to catch an honest man as usual,
rascals; so that you are only pursuing an old trade.
But ride on; you have no time to waste. In
another
hour our man will be within reach, and you
shall meet us ere we get to Lucchesa. Nawls is
better at running a horse than filling out a warrant,
and you will need to spur him to the task. Let him
waste no minutes that you can saveyou, Binks, can
fill up the blank and the Judge can sign it. That
will shorten the business to his hand, and by all
calculations
,
you should be able to tap your prisoner
on his shoulder ere we gain sight of the village.
Away.
It is done, said Binks, putting spurs to his horse
and followed closely by his companion. Saxon,
meanwhile, crossing the main road, sank into the
1*
opposite forests, and put himself in watch for the
coming of his prey. He was not long in waiting.
His calculations, the result of long experience of
horse's speed and the road, were nearly correct.
Before the hour was ended, the trampling of a steed
was heard, and Vernon went by. Suffering some
moments to elapse, the better to deceive the traveller
as to his late proximity, Saxon at length followed
and joined him a few hundred yards above.
With the first sound of approaching footsteps,
Vernon prepared himself for an enemy, but the sight
of the stranger somewhat disarmed his
apprehensions
.
Saxon was seemingly without arms of any
kind, and there was that in the frank and manly
expression
of his face, in the free, hearty salutation
which he used, and the quiet and simple manner
of his address, that Vernon, as a mere physiognomist,
had he annexed any importance to this idle study,
would have been disposed rather to confide in the
new-comer, than to regard him with distrust. He
answered the salutation of the stranger with equal
frankness, and it was agreed, as they both aimed for
Lucchesa, that they should ride on their way
together
.
This is not a matter of difficult arrangement
in a country of such lonesome distances and long
miles as ours; and where the parties are young, and
where they have already had any experience in
travelling
,
there is a very general flexibility of temper,
which prompts them to great social compliances
when upon the road. But, with the present parties
a mutual policy would alone have brought them
together
;
and each aiming at concealment, the frank
game was the only one to be played by those who
had any occult objects in reserve. Something, too,
in the really excellent capacities and good
education
of the two, may have contributed to bring them
more readily together; and each perceiving in the
other a nearer approximation to those standards of
taste which were most agreeable to himself, and
which were something above those presented by the
ordinary intellects of forest life, the dialogue grew
lively after a brief space of time, and soon became
unflagging.
A few years more, sir, said Saxon, in reply to
a remark of Vernon, touching the sparse settlements
along the Yazoo; a few years more, and this
country must become exceedingly populous. Its
resources
must be found out, as they are so greatly
desirable to the poor settler every where. The
wildness
of the region will keep back the cold, the slow,
the timid, and the wealthy. They will shrink from
a too close neighbourhood with the Indians, and,
perhaps, be equally apprehensive of that wild class,
the squatters, who, rude, rash, violent and reckless
as they are, are yet the necessary men in all new
countries. These will continue to be wild, until they
have made some valuable acquisitions. It is the
possession
of something to lose, that makes your social
and best citizen, and the robber himself, when his
accumulations become valuable, will, I doubt not,
settle down into the sober citizen, and grow grave
and great among the first moralists of the land.
If a more sudden elevation does not anticipate
such slow results, said Vernon with a smile; but,
he continued, I have no faith in half the monstrous
robber-tales which are told of every new country.
When you reach the scene of the story, the terrible
and frequently bloody event is placed in a region yet
farther off. The border is always beyond you; the
country of the monstersthe anthropophagi
`Gorgons, and hydras, and chimeras dire'
is still the country of the unknown. You approach,
and the cloud disperses, and that which, `afar off
seen,' was terrible, not only becomes harmless when
at hand, but lovely and inviting, perhaps, beyond
all other prospects. A certain distance `lends
enchantment
to the view,' while an uncertain distance
clothes it with evil aspects, fills it with
`All prodigious things,
Abominable, inutterable and worse
Than fables yet have feigned, or fear conceived.'
In short, ignorance makes as many monsters as fear,
and mankind for ages have shrunk from the
possession
of the garden spots of earth, through dread of
those multiplied terrors which have been made to
guard them, simply through the ministry of their
own imaginations.
Saxon concurred with Vernon in his brief and
natural view of the subject, and the conversation
proceeded with a mutually increasing interest on both
sides. The former spoke with fluency, and a
considerable
knowledge of the plain, the positive and
practical. Like qualities of mind were observable
in his companion, but warmed and elevated by a
quick and vigorous imagination, which heightened
the colour of his fancy, gave life to his delineations,
and kindled his enthusiasm. This warmth suffered
a check, and he himself received a warning,
however
,
as he found the conversation, on the part of
Saxon, gradually rising into a strain of complimentary
remark, as the latter either felt, or affected to feel, the
eloquence and wisdom of his companion's sentiments.
The quick, sensitive mind of Vernon, which, like that
of most ambitious men, had an instinctive dread of
ridicule, was at once checked in its familiarity, and
sunk back upon its caution and self-esteem for
defence
and protection. A cold, merely respectful and
civil tone and form of expression, succeeded to the
glow and energy of his previous manner; and Saxon,
with that keen eye which belongs to the tactician,
beheld the change, and readily comprehended its
origin. His own manner was changed, his speech,
more qualified and cautious; and though he took care
that in what he said, the easy deference of his
opinions
should convey a no less flattering testimony to
his companion's merits, he yet forebore any of those
more open expressions of approval which he had
imprudently
administered
ad nauseam
. But the nice
sense of moral delicacy once startled, it was not so
easy for him to overcome the reluctance of Vernon
to engage in any new freedom of dialogue. Not
that the conversation flagged between them; the
frankness alone was gone; the playful indifference
of expression had passed away; and though speech
was no less ready than before, yet caution watched
the utterance, and truth was content to show herself
only at the staid and squared portals of opinion.
With some dexterity, Saxon contrived to re-open
the topic which had suggested itself to them at their
first meetingthat, namely, which arose naturally
from the wild and equivocal character of the country,
and its evil influence over the supposed physical
resources
of the soil. It was an easy transition, which
the outlaw did not feel at all scrupulous to make, to the
frequent robberies and misdemeanours in the
neighbourhood
.
He spoke of them, as all spoke of them, as
frequent and sometimes coupled with greater crimes;
but at the same time, seizing upon an expressed
opinion
of Vernon, he declared them to be infamously
exaggerated, and deplored the evils to the country
of such an unhappy notoriety as belonged to it.
It is, in fact, in the absence of citizens that these
things happen. Our population is guiltless, I am
sure, of any participation in them; and these crimes
are committed by those only who make our territory
a stage for their villanous performances. Had we
a community sufficiently dense to act with any thing
like unanimityindeed, had we any one or two men,
calculated by ability and energy to take a lead, and
bring our men together, nothing, I am sure, would
be more easy than to put a stop to these excesses.
We might soon, by lynching a few, keep the rest in
order, and in good time, the want of means and
money would compel labour, which is all that is
wanting
to good morals in any country.
This was all very fairly and frankly said; the
truth of the latter opinion could not well be denied;
but Vernon, though suppressing every thing like
apparent
suspicion, was yet suspicious; and once
startled
,
he was one of those keen, restless minds that
cannot be quieted, short of utter confirmation on
one side or the other. The mistimed complimentary
speeches of Saxon still occupied his thoughts, and
were productive in him of some such musings as
filled the mind of the Prince of Denmark under not
dissimilar circumstances. The theatrical reference
which his companion employed in one part of his
speech, reminded him at the same moment of his
quondam friend, Horsey, and the phlegmatic and
indecisive
Dane.Why should he flatter so poor a
man as Hamlet? Such applauses to one's beard
were not in ordinary use in that time and country;
and however grateful to such a man as Horsey, were
scarcely pleasing to him, unless it were that his
companion regarded him also as one of the players
just come hither. At all events, the effect upon
Vernon was to counsel him to more caution, but to
no reserve; and with this policy in view, he expressed
himself very freely in accordance with the opinions
of Saxon, which, indeed, happened to be precisely
such as he had uttered at the council-board of old
Badger,if that might be called a place of council
where the chairmanas very often happens to
venerable
chairmenwas pretty much resolved from the
beginning to have his own way. It occurred very
naturally that he should relate his recent adventures
on the other side of the riverso much, at least, as
related to the attack of the robbers, and his own
slight hurt in defence of the traveller.
I then, he concluded, in a conversation with
a very worthy and respectable old gentleman,a
Mr. Badger, with whom I remained a brief space,
in consequence of my hurt,came to this very
conclusion
,
though in direct opposition with himself. He
was for turning out the trainbands at once and
searching the swamp,a labour which, I fear, will
be utterly fruitless. The same scoundrels that
assailed
Mr. Wilson, are, I doubt not, full fifty miles off
before this time.
The keen eye of Saxon surveyed the speaker with
a glance which seemed intended to penetrate his
soul; but the calm, indifferent countenance of
Vernon
baffled the inquiry.
This fellow, thought the outlaw, is either a
most admirable tactician, or I have taken a very
unnecessary
labour. But, let the game be played out.
We are now, sir, speaking aloud, we are now
within sight of one of the prettiest little villages in
this country. They call it Lucchesaafter some
Italian city, I believe. We are all monstrous fond
of going to Europe for names which would be found
more appropriate, and quite as smooth and musical
at home. But call Lucchesa by what name you
will, you will admit when you see it that it is one of
the sweetest spots that could be found any where for
a village. It lies among gentle risings, which here
may be called hills; and which so completely
surround
,
as to leave it but a single opening for entrance,
and that seems only to be scooped out for the
purpose
,
and not natural. The woods, you see, are thick
the old forests are barely trimmed to let in the
daylight, as it were, and give room for the cottages.
These are better built and more neatly decorated
than is often the case in our country villages; washed
with lime, which answers the purpose of the best
white lead for a season or more; and, peeping through
the green openings here and there, they seem to be
the pleasantest little temples that were ever yet raised
by humility to happiness. I think I could spend my
days in this little village, without ever desiring to
look down on the outer side of the hills which
surround
it.
You live here then? was the natural question
of Vernon.
Yes, I may say so, was the somewhat evasive
answer; I live here when not elsewhere. But it
is not permitted us to choose our habitations any
more than to choose our graves. No man can say,
death shall seek me here, however much he might
pray for it.
Saxon was on the verge of Badgerism, as the two
entered the little and lovely, but scattered village of
Lucchesa. It seemed a settlement of some fifteen or
twenty familiesthe cottages gleaming in a broken
circle from among the trees, planted without much
reference to each other, but amply gaining in
picturesqueness
what they might have lacked in
regularity
.
Some of these were girdled and guarded by
little low white palings, that followed the hill slopes
on which they stood; some were fenced by hedges
of the wild rose or the box, and among the small
trees and bushes, and the bush myrtles, or spreading
cedars that filled up the space between, the
multiflora
and the perpetual rose leapt and twined itself
even around the topmost branches. A few pale
sycamores rose up majestically amid the dwarf
foliage
that filled the valley, and ran down the slopes,
giving a staid and solemn air to a scene that
otherwise
presented no other aspect than one of
unqualified
sweetness. But one object more than all
gratified
the eye of the observer, in the little stream that
came stealing and whispering out from the hollow
in which the village stood, by the only portal that
led into it, with the sly, smiling glance of the truant
boy, availing himself of the opportunity and open
door, to steal away from the guarded circuit, and
lose himself for awhile among the thick groves, that
had beguiled him from a distance so often and so
sweetly before.
While Vernon looked round admiringly upon a
scene that seemed strangely placed on the very
confines
of savage life, he suddenly found himself
confronted
by two persons, who, with the air of men
having a perfect right to his attention, demanded to
know his name.
My name, gentlemen!my name is Vernon;
but your demand is something singular. You will
oblige me with your reason.
Oh, yes; that's all fair enough; Harry, or Henry
Vernonthat's right, a'n't it, sir? said one of the
men, drawing forth a paper.
It is, sir, was the reply of Vernon with
increasing
surprise, and a slight increase of colour in the
cheek, and that dilation of the nostril which denotes
the swelling choler. Saxon, meanwhile, looked on
with well-affected astonishment.
Then, sir, if you're the man, we are commanded
to arrest you, in the name of the state, for murder.
Murder!
Yes, murder!the murder of one Thomas
Horsey
,
a young gentleman from below that you
travelled
with a few days past.
VOL. II. 2
Horsey dead! Can it be possible? This is the
strangest matter, sir, andbut show me your
warrant
.
Let us go into the tavern, Mr. Vernon, said
Saxon, sympathisingly, and you can there look
more calmly into this business. Upon this hint the
party went forward, Doe and Roe taking care to
environ our hero in such a manner, that escape,
were he disposed to try it, would have been
impossible
.
Here, with feelings of no enviable character,
Vernon examined the instrument which had been
issued for his taking. He found it to be a criminal
warrant, proper in its forms, and issued by one
William
Nawls, a regularly acting magistrate. Had
an enemy confronted our hero with intent to kill, the
absolute danger would have produced less disquiet
and annoyance in his mind than did the simple
instrument
which he perused and re-persued, absolutely
bewildered and confounded for the moment. That
Horsey should have been murdered, however sudden
and unexpected this event, was certainly far from
being improbable in a neighbourhood where he,
himself
,
but a few days before, had a foretaste of a
similar fate awaiting him. But that he should be
made liable for his fate, and arrested for his murder,
was one of those contingencies which, a moment
before, he would have regarded as too remote and
ridiculous a possibility to occasion any other feeling
than merriment in his mind.
Gentlemen, he said to the constables, I can
scarce recover from my surprise at this strange
accusation
.
Pray, on whose oath was this warrant
issued? What testimony furnished the grounds for
this charge?
Well, I read the oath, too, said one of the
officers
,
but if I was to be shot, I couldn't say if the
man's name was Walker or Wilkins. It was one
or t'other, I could safely swear, but which, there's
no telling. Hows'ever, I don't reckon it makes much
difference nowyou can see all about it when you
get before the judge.
True, trueJustice Nawls!turning to the
landlord, and showing the signature of the warrant
Is this name that of a gentleman acting as a
magistrate
here, sir?
Not here, sir, but a few miles off, on the
Georgeville
road, was the reply of the landlord.
A mighty good man is Judge Nawls, said one
of the bystanders. It was only last week he prayed
sarchingly at Green Brier meeting, and the sperit
worked in him so, that the sweat stood round his
eyes jist the same as he'd been a-ploughing.
'Twan't the sperit, Dill, 'twas only the flesh that
worked so mightily, said another of the bystanders.
'Twas because he had none of the sperit that the
flesh had to do so much, and I'm mighty sure Bill
Nawls never found harder work at the plough in all
his life, than he did at that ar' very sarmon.
Well, and worn't it a good one, John Richards?
A good one! Well, I can't say what you may
think it, but for myself I can say such a sermon will
never carry me very far along the narrow track.
There's no getting to heaven by a preaching where
there's no getting steam up; and it's a matter of
small wonder that so many take the other road, and
go down to the big pit, when it depends upon the
sweating of Bill Nawls's flesh to keep 'em from it.
But that's not to say, stranger, that Nawls aint a
good judge. He's a most onbecoming person, that'll
see all sides of your case, and do you justice enough
though, to be sure, he's mighty slow, and takes a
particular long time to get through any writing.
I've seen him take jist as long a time, now, to get
round the body of an `
o
,' or an `
e
,' as I would to
put on the tire of a great wagon wheel, drive the
nails, and swing it on the body.
The merits of Judge or Justice Nawls as a man
and preacher, thus made the subject of popular
disputation
around him, was very little edifying to our
hero; and just at this point of the dispute his eye
caught, on a sudden, the glimpse of an object which,
for the moment, almost caused an entire
forgetfulness
of the predicament in which he stood. This
was no other than the carriage of Wilsonotherwise
Maitlandwhich he beheld, denuded of its trunks
and the other paraphernalia of the travellers, yet
evidently occupied, as if for an evening ride, by its
proprietor and his family. A mere glimpse was
afforded
him of this vehicle, as it rapidly passed along
the common highway, and a feeling of exulting
satisfaction, which had its source in mingled
emotions
,
sprang up in his bosom. Once more the
object
of his pursuit seemed to be within his grasp;
he did not, it may be added, fail to perceive that the
daughter of Maitland was with him still, though it
never entered his thoughts, at this early stage of
their acquaintance, that she, too, had become an
object
of his pursuit. The desire to see the latter, had,
without his own consciousness, quite as much
influence
over him, as the feeling of duty which
prompted
him to secure the former; and with these desires
in his mind, uttering an exclamation, he was about
to rush to the entrance of the tavern, when his arm
was forcibly grappled by the officers.
Not so fast, my lark. That cock won't fight, I
can tell you, exclaimed one of the constables, while
a brutal burst of laughter from both, reminded him
of his predicament, which the sight of the carriage
of Maitland had moved him momentarily to forget.
Unhand me, fellows, for an instant. I would see
and speak to the gentleman in that carriage; and
he almost shook himself free as he spoke, while his
efforts were such as to render necessary all of theirs
to secure him.
Be quiet, man, before I put a spur into you,
cried one of the fellows, taking him at the same time
by the collar, and putting on a threatening and
insolent
look, that goaded Vernon to a degree of
forgetfulness
and fury, to which the sudden arrest of his
previous movement had already greatly moved him.
Dog! he exclaimed, striking down the arm that
grasped his collar, and driving his clenched fist into
the fellow's face in the instant with a force that sent
him to the floor, do you think I will suffer this?
Help! help! cried the second officer, an
escape! Citizens, I command you, help, help!
stop the murderer!
Cease howling, fool! exclaimed Vernon, I
seek not to escape. I would speak but a moment
with the owner of yon carriage.
His words were disregarded; the constable clung
to him with the tenacity of a bull-dog, that clings
still though it may not conquer, and Vernon had
already
dragged him almost to the entrance, when a
short, stout Irishman, who lay upon a bench in the
room, and who, to this moment, had looked on the
fray with the most placid indifference, now sprang
to his feet, and lifting a bludgeon that had lain
concealed
behind him, felled Vernon to the ground with
a single blow. He would have repeated the stroke,
when a stranger interposed,a young Alabamian
who had also just arrived in the villageand
catching
the lifted arm with a grasp that fixed it in its
position, exclaimed:
Stick down, my lad! There go two hands to
this bargain. What the devil sort of soul do you
think you have, dn you, to strike a man that is
speechless?
2*
Thunder and turf, my honey! do you mane to
make me your inimy? cried the Hibernian. Would
ye be after resaving a tap on yer own pate, my
honey?
Devil-may-care if I do, but you can't give it me,
nor any lad of your inches, cried the Alabamian,
who in the same moment lifted the astonished
Irishman
to his full height in the air, in defiance of all
his struggles, and then dropped him down with as
little reluctance as if he had been one of the most
insensible p'raties of his fatherland.
There, Patrick, what do you say to that, and be
dd to you?
A battle to the death was nearly the consequence
of this display of prowess on the part of the
Alabamian
,
who, no ways loth, prepared for it with the
utmost
sang froid
, and answered the threats of
Patrick
with a swaggering and cool defiance, which
denoted the most perfect confidence in himself. But
it was not the policy of Saxon, who recognised a
follower in Dennis O'Dougherty, to suffer it. He
interposed to keep the peace, and used all the usual
and effective arguments common to cases of such
urgent necessity. The bar supplied the means of
bringing about a pacification, quite as often as it
promotes
the strifes and vexations which lead to war,
and the Alabamian expressed himself as clearly of
opinion that the fun was quite as great to drink, as
to fight, with a stout fellow.
As for Patrick, here
Dennis, if you plaseDennis O'Dougherty, of
the O'Doughertys of Ballyshannon by the pit of
Ballanya family of the ouldestthere's no telling,
indade, when the O'Doughertys were not a family
of the ouldest.
That accounts for your loss of strength, Mr.
O'Dougherty, said the Alabamian; if you hadn't
come from so old a family, I should not have
tumbled
you so easily. Your great-grandfather must
have been rather a stout chap in his time, and it
might have given me more trouble to spring him to
the ceiling. But the blood gets mighty thin going
through three, or five, or seven generations, unless
the breed is crossed mighty often. Now, don't
you see the advantage of being of a new family? In
my state, all the men are of new families, and we've
got the strength in us. Perhaps, the time will come
that our children will grow weak and feeble like
you, Dennis, and some chap, away from the Red
River, or the Sabinesome new fellow from Texas
or thereaboutswill swing the grandson of Dick
Jamison just as easily as he can swing you, Dennis.
Asily, do you say, Misther Dick Jeemison!
exclaimed
Dennis; not so asy, my honey, if the thing
is to be thried agin. You had the back of me, Mr.
Dick Jeemison, an' that's a rason why you should
come to the front. But, shall it be for a quart, that
we shall take a friendly gripe at the ribs, or will it
be the shillelah, my honey?
Stick, fist, or hug, Dennis O'Dougherty, it's all
the same to Dick Jamison. You're of too old a
family
,
Dennis, to stand up with a young man from
Alabama; the stuff's not in you, my lad, and I
should swallow you at a mouthful and never ask
after the salt.
Now, don't ye be after desaving yerself, my
honey, replied the Irishman, somewhat astounded at
the cool impudence of the Alabamian, not merely in
disparaging his hitherto acknowledged powers, but in
the still more remarkable disparagement of the greater
merits of an old family, which, to the great horror
and surprise of Dennis, were now made to give way
to the claims of a young one. The almost
contemptuous
terms which the member of the new house
employed in determining the proper precedence of
the latter, uttered with so much complacency, tended
still more to embitter the idea. Now, don't ye be
after desaving yerself, Mr. Dick Jeemison, saing
it was behind my back that ye overkim Dennis
O'Dougherty; and don't ye be after thinking that
ye can overkim him again behind his back, when his
face is turned upon ye. There's a difference, my
honey, between a jontleman's face and his back, that
ye'll be after belaving when ye've sane them
together
as I will show ye mine, with a shillelah in aitch
hand, and a pistol in the other, and the spirit of
univarsal
liberty in the sowl which will make a
rivolution
in your ideas, Mr. Dick Jeemison, and tache you
a leetle abolition of doctrine, that ye may take back
with ye to Alabama.
Abolition! exclaimed one of the inmates of the
bar.
Abolition! echoed another and another, and a
dozen faces were peering into the face of the
Hibernian
at the inauspicious word.
Who's talking abolition here? said one.
What blasted emissary of Arthur Tappan is it?
It's his own self, I do think, said a third; and
the murmurs began to close with the ominous
inquiry
after that venerable border magistrate, Judge
Lynch.
Jontlemen! exclaimed the Hibernian, who
began to feel some misgivings that his position
might be made a very awkward one, if the
Alabamian
should happen to take the lead against him.
Jontlemen! said he, turning from one to the other,
with an air of mingled apology and defiance, don't
be after desaving yourselves, and misconsaving
Dennis O'Dougherty. I'm a jontleman by my
mother's
side,she was an O'Flaherty
To be sure; don't you suppose, Dennis, that we
know all that? said the Alabamian; look you,
friends and fellow-citizens, we all know what Dennis
means by abolition, but being an Irishman born, and
of an old family that's nearly worn out, how should
he be able to speak good English. He is a gentleman,
as he says, by the mother's sidehis mother being
an O'Flaherty; and a lady by his father's side, the
old gentleman being an O'Dougherty; and
therefore
he asks you all to join with him here in a sup
of whisky,regular Monongahela,that we may
have a revolution of ideas and an abolition of
distinctions
.
That's what Dennis means by abolition,
only the poor fellow hasn't been long enough in
America to speak good English. And, look you,
my friends, it's not a bad notion now, I tell you, for
a man whose family's almost worn out, to wish to
abolish distinctions where our families are only
just beginning. He'd be mighty willing to let that
matter drop, and so you see he's for giving us a drop
all round; so come, Kitty, fill your quart and set
out the sugar, and look you, friends, we'll drink to
the health of Mr. Dennis O'Dougherty, who is a
gentleman
by his mother's side, and a lady by his
father's
;
and may he soon recover his strength by
getting into a new family.
This speech was received with loud huzzas. The
explanation of the Alabamian, as it was only
understood
in part, was perfectly satisfactory to all parties;
the countrymen around were satisfied with it, as
its result was one easily swallowed and perfectly
habitual; and the Hibernian, though there was
much in the speech to confound his better
judgment
,
and stagger his conception of the English he
already knew, was also content to receive it without
scruple as explanatory of his own ideas, simply as he
found it so successful with all around, and as it
relieved
him from a predicament, which some recent
examples had already convinced him, might have
become an awkward, if not a dangerous one. A
more general diffusion of the peace principle was
evident soon after the quart flagon was placed upon
the counter of the publican, and the Alabamian, who
was something of a wag, and no little of a democrat,
was soon busy in labouring to convince Dennis that
there was no greater misfortune on earth than to be
the descendant of a very old family; as he proceeded
to show by every analogous case, drawn from the
history
of bird, beast and reptile, that the breed must
degenerate, with every successive advance, after the
fifth generation; and the only hope of an old nation
was to merge itself, as soon as possible after that
period
,
in the body and bosom of a new. The final
speech of Mr. Jamison, at the moment when we
propose
to leave the company, may be put on record as
containing a proposition of quite as much political
truth as theory.
It's in America here, Dennis, my boy, that we will
preserve the English, and the Irish, and the Scotch,
when, in your own country, you'll all be worked
down to a mere stump of what you were. It's here,
I tell you, that the English people will get a new
growth, a height and a depth, a breadth and a
bottom
,
when the old families wouldn't have one fellow
among 'em fit to carry guts to a bear. This is the
country, after all, to make men out of your sticks,
jist the same as taking a plant from one place
where it's been growing so long that it's come to
nothing, and putting it into a new field where
it never was before. See the difference! how it
shoots uphow it spreads, and what a fine crop you
get from it for the first five yearsmaybe seven,
but after that you must carry it farther off to some
new opening, and begin again. If I was to do any
thing for you, Dennis, I'd marry you off at once to
Polly Whitesides,you all know Polly Whitesides,
my boys?A general laugh attested the success
of the reference.I'd marry you off to Polly
Whitesides, of Beattie's Bluff, and make a new family
out of an old one.
It's a lady you spake of, Mr. Dick Jeemison?
Ay, to be sure, a ladywhat else? She's six
feet in her stockings, with cheeks red as a gobbler's
gills, and an arm, Dennis, that would put your thigh
out of countenance!
Js! and she's a lady, Mr. Jeemison?
And the very gal to make a new and rising
family
out of an old one on its last legs, was the reply.
Let us change the scene, and follow Vernon into
the apartment into which he was carried at the
moment
when the blow from the shillelah of Dennis
O'Dougherty had laid him senseless on the floor.
CHAPTER II.
Now we have argument
Of justice, and our very breath is law,
To speak thee dead at once.
Shirley
.
While
the uproarious controversy was in progress
between the Alabamian and his Irish opponent in the
tavern-hall, Vernon, through the considerateness and
care of Saxon, was conveyed to an inner apartment
in a state of insensibility. The outlaw had his
unexpressed
objects in this disposition of the youth, and
his connexion with the constables readily enabled him
to make such arrangements as left him in his sole
custody. A public assurance which he gave them
in the bar-room, that he would be answerable for the
forthcoming of the prisoner whenever they might
demand him, not only satisfied the worthy emissaries
of the law, but won golden opinions for the outlaw
from the unreflecting spectators. They did not, with
a single exception, remark the strangeness of such a
proceeding; nor wonder, as well they might, how it
was that a stranger's assurance, and one who
appeared
to have been the companion of the traveller,
should be taken as good security for the temporary
release of the same person charged with a crime so
heinous. The more acute Alabamian saw this
matter
in its true light, and was not the less curious
though he said nothing on the subject. As for the
constables, the reader, who knows already what they
are, will not be surprised at the ready complaisance
which they yielded to the will of the outlaw. They
were very well satisfied to exchange the tedious
watch over the prisoner for the livelier bustle of the
tavern-hall. There they soon joined the revellers,
and gave themselves up to that perfect recklessness
of good order and morality, which, in no little
degree
,
tended to confirm the growing suspicion in the
mind of the Alabamian that there was something
wrong in their proceedings. A sudden regard for
Vernon had been the fruit of the first moment of
their meeting; as he saw, or fancied he saw, even
through the reserve which is usually the
accompaniment
of superior endowments and education, a
frankness of manner and character in the youth,
which, while resembling, was grateful to his own.
These first loves, or favourable impressions, are
very common to a forest country such as ours,
where no long time is allowed for the formation of
intimacies, and where the instincts of blood are
always more active than the slow and cautious
approaches
of reason and philosophy. He assisted,
we may state, to carry the insensible form of the
youth into the chamber, and having ascertained that
Lucchesa was not without its physician, he
despatched
one of the urchins that lingered at the
tavern-door, to require his assistance; a task which
the boy readily undertook with the tempting reward
of a fip-penny-piece before him. This done, Jamison
returned to his controversy with the Irishman, which
he made subservient to the occult purposes of
inquiry
which lay at the bottom of his mind. He
plied the whisky flagon with an industry which
he took pains to make appear as the consequence of
his own love for the living beverage; and he soon
VOL. II. 3
had occasion to congratulate himself on the
discovery
of one or two facts, which, though
subordinate
in importance, were yet of a character to
confirm
him in his suspicions. He soon discovered, in
the first place, that his Irish adversary, in one or two
unwitting speeches, was an old acquaintance of the
constables; and, from the modes of speech and the
sort of anecdote in which the latter freely dealt, he
was easily led to infer that, however honest they
might be at this writing, they had certainly, at some
past period not so very remote, been very
exemplary
picaroons
. That their morals were not such
as should entitle them to the selection of a devout
magistrate such as Judge Nawls had been described
to be, was sufficiently clear from the facility with
which they threw aside that starched semblance of
decency which they had just before put on in the
assumption of a character, and in the performance
of duties, far other than those to which they had
been sworn. They soon forgot the commands of
their leader, who was too busy elsewhere to heed
their behaviour, and hear their riotous uproar; as,
in the person of Dennis O'Dougherty they recognised
a well known Jack Pudding of their gang; and the
renewal of sundry old jokes at his expense, did more
than any thing beside to convey to the mind of the
acute and unsuspected Alabamian, the extent and
sort of intimacy which had before subsisted between
them. Their presence brought no little increase of
merriment to the carousing party. The fun had
been about to decline till their appearance. A
renewal
of mirth was the necessary consequence of
the arrival of such old proficients, and the
replenishing
of the flagon furnished an equal supply of the
pabulum so necessary for the fervour of village wit,
and the otherwise costive humour of a country
population
.
Our friend Jamison, speaking from his soul,
cried, dn the expense, at every hearty summons
to the company to refilla summons not less
grateful
than imperative, and one never to be disputed
among men, no less social in character than docile
in obedience to the lawful authority. Leaving these
good companions for awhile, let us seek the
chamber
to which Vernon had been carried.
This was a little low shed-room containing two
beds, a single chair, a broken mirror, and a couple
of rude coloured pictures, such as good taste was
willing to take, without scruple, during the war of
1815, at the hands of patriotism. Never did native
genius effect a more rascally portraiture of humanity.
One of the pictures represented the battle of New
Orleans; the other a scalping-scene at the massacre
of Fort Mimms, on the Tensaw. In the former,
Packenham might have been seen going through the
air like one of his own congreves, as blazing red,
certainly, and describing pretty much the same sort
of curve when at the moment of declension. His
head nearly touched his heels, and the grapeshot
might have been seen just about to bury their hissing
hot bodies in the gaping wounds, from which the
blood was already streaming, in pretty much the
same volume as would issue from the sudden
opening
of a water-plug in the streets of Philadelphia.
A complete display of pyrotechnicsa shower of fire
encircled him, and formed the only light, lurid and
sulphurous still, which the artist permitted on the
British side of the business. In this he strove hard
to accomplish the
clair obscur
with the utmost
practical
nicety. The rest of the battle was a chaos of
heads, legs, and arms; horses kicking without bodies;
men running without feet, and wheeling cannon
just as busy advancing and receding, though never a
man was left standing at the drag-ropes. Here
imagination had done much towards the
achievement
of that desideratum in all her works, the vague,
twilight, picturesque, and imperfect dimness, which
denotes every thing that is not beheld, and makes
equivocal whatever is distinct. But the amor patri
was predominant in the display of the American lines
there all was clear, effulgent, and imposing. Still
and stern the Kentuckians and Tennesseeans, stood
upon the terraces. Never were attitudes more perfect.
Even those who knelt for the purpose of better aim,
were drawn with wonderful exactitude and majesty.
Here was truth. The eyes ranged the tube with a
mathematical exactness. Had you taken the
instruments
in hand, and separated the lines between the
eyes, the drop, and the British, you would have seen
in an instant how certain was their defeat. Every
muzzle covered its manevery bullet had its special
commission; and our artist had made it a matter
sufficiently clear, without reference to any dull
history
,
that the American victory arose from no other
cause than the excellent aim of the riflemen. The
whole story was told at a glance; and when you
recollect
that the artillery was managed with similar
nicety, you have no sort of difficulty in accounting
for all the havoc of that bloody field. But the whole
powers of the artist were concentrated around the
form of the hero of that day. General Jackson was
surrounded with a thousand natural glories. The
sun rose over his left shoulder, and his epaulet,
reflecting
his light upon surrounding objects, was
almost
as bright, and quite as large, as himself. Bombs
bursting in air surrounded him with halos of falling
stars that became tributary, in like manner, to the
awful distinctness of his face and figure. There he
stood,
Fierce as ten furies, terrible as hell.
His portrait was true, as all the portraits of very
great men must be true, even when most imperfect.
There were the same thin pale cheeks, the raised
cheek-bones, thin compressed lips, keen eyes, high
narrow forehead, and raised hairthe head, for the
greater perfection of the portrait, having been left
uncovered, in defiance of smoke and flame, bombs
and rockets, crackers and carcasses. But the
terrors
of expression in his face were the wonders of
the performance. Even had the riflemen been
utterly wanting to the battle, you would have seen
that these were enough for the victory. There was
not a wrinkle in the old warrior's brow that did
not look like a two-edged sword. His mouth was
pursed up to seem a
seam
the lines forming to a
common centre, the appearance of which led you to
expect a sudden expansion, no less great than the
undue contraction, from which triple hail and
thunder
was to issue. His beard, toofor the general,
if the artist may be considered good authority in a
particular so perfectly domestic, had not shaved for
seven dayshis very beard, too, like that of old
Giaffar, curled in ire, as he waved a sword twice
his own length, and pointing to Packenham's
whizzing
and whirling carcass, seemed disposed to thrust
itvery unnecessarily, it would seeminto the
aperture
made so voluminously large already by the
grapeshot aforesaid. Language fails to do justice
to this terrific picturego to Lucchesa, reader, and
see for yourself. We forbear that of the massacre
at Fort Mimms, in order that nothing may be
anticipated
.
Like that of the battle, it is a painting
sui generis
. Never were scalps taken from skulls
with more terrible felicity of execution than in this
picture. At Raymond court-house you will see
another, by the same artist, in which a muse more
moral than she of history has been invoked;
Justice
with her scales very properly presides over the
hall of justice. It is rather awkward, indeed, that
3*
one scale should be lower than the other, but this
difference simply suggests a play of the fancy, and
cannot subject the painter to the imputation of any
serious want of discrimination. Certainly, we shall
venture to incur no risk, in this brief passage, of
indulging in false and superficial analysis.
Strange to say, the merits of these pictures
entirely
escaped the notice of Saxon. Whether he
had seen them before, or, as is quite probable,
entertained
no taste for the fine artsa deficiency quite
too general in our country, and quite too
common
among all people whose habits are
wandering
to make it likely that any rebuke will be of
service for a hundred years to comeone thing is
certain, that he never gave so much as a glance to
the panels in which these gorgeous performances
had been set on high. His eye and thought was upon
the young man alone, who lay insensible upon the
couch; and, under the pretence of restoring him to
consciousness, the outlaw, so soon as all other
persons
had retired from the chamber, very coolly
proceeded
to unbutton the vest and bosom of his
patient
,
and explore the contents of a thin gause-like
handkerchief which encircled his waist, and which
he untied with the dexterity of an old proficient in
all such practices, without disturbing the position of,
or removing the handkerchief from, the body. A
few moments sufficed to enabled him to disengage
from the folds of the handkerchief a small packet
which lay on the right side of the youth. This
he transferred with all speed to his own bosom;
and, folding a newspaper in like bulk and form, he
deposited it in place of the papers appropriated,
retied
the handkerchief, rebuttoned the shirt and vest;
and all this without disturbing the wounded man
and before the arrival of the physician;an event,
however, which occurred the moment after.
Dr. Saunders was rather a clever young man, who
had received a license to practice but a few months
before, and was no less modest than well-informed.
He examined the hurt of Vernon with the assistance
of the Alabamian who, on the arrival of the
physician
,
left the company without, and with the anxiety
of an old friend awaited the result. Vernon had
over-tasked
himself. The wound in his thigh which had
bled so copiously was irritated by the hard riding
of the day. He had ridden rapidly in order to
overtake the carriage of Wilson, and had overcome
a distance of more than forty miles. The
excitement
following previous events, and the anticipation
of those before him, had also contributed to the
irritation
of his system; and, when arrested for so
heinous
an offence as that of murder, and the murder,
too, of his late companion, it is not improbable that
fever would have followed his mental suffering even
without the additional injury which he received
from the unmeasured blow of the Irishman. The
patient's consciousness returned while the
examination
of the physician was going on. He started,
and with an instinctive movement which betrayed
the deep interest which he had at stake, he threw off
the intrusive hands about him, and his own were
thrust into his bosom and not withdrawn until he
assured himself of the safety of the secret deposit
which he had bound around his body. With anxiety
and agitation heightened by fever, he turned to the
two attendants, and demanded what was meant by
their familiarities. The matter was soon explained,
the doctor announced himself, and coming slowly
to a recollection of what had taken place in the
tavern, Vernon quietly submitted himself to his hands.
Meanwhile, in the possession of his prize and
anxious for its examination, Saxon availed himself
of the coming of the physician to retire to another
apartment. There, in secret, he unfolded the packet,
the contents of which had the instant effect of
clouding
his brow with anger, and sending the blood into
his cheeks.
It is then true,it is as I thought and feared!
This is then only another Hurdisanother spy,
self-appointed
,
for our destruction. He has played his
game admirably, but not perfectly. Not well
enough for success, but so well as to make it
necessary
that we should silence him for ever. It is
needful for our own safety that we do thiswe can
spare no longerhis doom is written.
He conned the papers closely; one of which, a
blank commission with the signature of Governor
R, he tore into fragments and flung into the
fireplace. The others comprised a brief narration
of his own doings as Clem Foster in Alabama;
copies
of affidavits sworn to in that state, and a list
of names,a copy of which had been given to
Rawlins by Vernon the night before,of suspected
persons in Mississippi. These called for the more
serious attention of the outlaw.
These must fly, he muttered, as he looked over,
and pencilled off, a portion of the list,the
neighbourhood
is closely settled and will soon be too hot
to hold them; but they may stave off danger here
on the Big Black for a year or two more. Still it
will be as well to warn off some of the more black
and crookedfellows who cannot even look honest,
may well run in advance of the danger. But Cane
Castle will hide all their vices, and that is as far as
they need go for the present. This agent of his
Excellencywould he had come himselfonce
fairly salted, and we shall have no trouble for some
time to come. There are few in Mississippi
prepared
to take his place, and manage his cards so
cunningly as almost to blind so old a stager as
myself
.
His game's upand there's an end of it.
Nawls will send him to Vicksburg, and the `
beagles'
will take him by the way. Then follows his
execution,
in terrorem
, for the benefit of our own
doubtful and soft-hearted fellows in the swamp.
He will die by our lawshe has assumed the toils
of the spyhe incurs its dangers; and our own
require
that we should show no mercy. And now
for a little more hypocrisy. I would know why he
seeks this traveller, Wilson,and the hurry of
Wilson
to leave old Badger's, is no less curious. I must
sound him on these subjects.
With exemplary composure he proceeded to the
apartment of Vernon which was still occupied by
the physician and the Alabamian, and placing
himself
on one side of the patient, congratulated him
on his improved looks and restoration. The
compliment
was a very suspicious one, for, by this time,
our hero felt himself seriously illhe could not
mistake the heat of his frame; the bounding
quickness
of his pulse; the parching thirst which assailed
him; the soreness of his head, and the painful
throbbing
of his wounded thigh. These were evidences,
even if the physician had been absent, sufficient to
make him aware of his true condition.
I thank you, he said, but I am not better. I
feel illseriously ill; and this painful accusation,
this troublesome arrest! So strange, so sudden and
startling:I trust, gentlemenlooking round as
he spokeI trust that you believe me guiltless of
this crimenay, it must be so,the officers are
gone,they have been convinced of their mistake,
I suppose.
Mistake! said Saxon, with an incredulous
expression
what
mistake, Mr. Vernon?
Why, sir, mistake of facts or of person. Did
they not arrest me for murderthe murder of
Horsey, poor fellow?
Yes, sir, but if it be a mistake, it is one of those
mistakes that they continue obstinately to persist in.
They are in the adjoining hall. It was on my
pledge that you should be forthcoming that they
consented to leave you in privacy until you might
be recovered from your injuries.
I thank you, sir, again I thank you, replied
Vernonit is due to the kindness of your
interposition
,
and to the attention of these
gentlemen
,
that I should assure you, that I am wholly
guiltless of the crime which is charged against me,
that, so far from seeking to harm the unfortunate
young man, whose fate I have heard of for the first
time from this proceeding, I should feel myself
bound by every duty and feeling to succour and to
save him. He is a wild, hairbrained, but worthy
youth, whose family is good, and whose old father
has treated me with kindness. That I may be
suspected
is, perhaps, not so strange:we travelled
together
and separated suddenlyhe, taking the lower
road for Benton at the forks, and I, the upper,
which, with some delays and interruptions, has led
me here. That he may have fallen a victim to
some wanton assassin is, perhaps, little surprising
in a neighbourhood in which crime is said to be so
frequent; but that I should be seriously held to
answer
for his death is a matter too idle to annoy me
much or make me apprehensive of its consequences.
I have no sort of doubt, gentlemen, that an
examination
before the magistrate will result in my
immediate
discharge from arrest.
The company unanimously expressed their hopes
that such might be the result; and Jamison loudly
declared his conviction of it.
The truth's in your face, Mr. Vernon,I saw
it from the first, and that made me so willing to
give Paddy O'Rafferty or O'Dougherty, or
whatever
O' it may be, an ugly hoist, for the liberty he
took with you, bringing you soon to an
acquaintance
,
all on one side, between your head and his
shillelah. He'll not do it again, I'm thinking, not
while Dick Jamison is bystanding. I know well
enough you'll get out of this scrape, so cheer up,
Mr. Vernon. I'll see you out of the mire while I've
got any footing to stand on, and when I ha'n't, why
I'll walk the bog with you. De, but I like your
face, and there's no telling what I'll do and say for
a fellow I like. I'll run, ride, talk and fight for my
friend; and when he's a stranger like myself in a
new place, that's the very time that I can't desert him.
So count upon Dick Jamison while the breath's in
him.
The expressive eye of Vernon made an
acknowledgment
to the hearty volunteer, which his lips did
not articulate; and his hand freely returned the
pressure which the latter gave him as he concluded
his characteristic speech. The sympathies of the
stranger, however rudely expressed, were grateful to
the youth in the feeling of discontent and
depression
which was natural to his condition; and the
unstudied frankness of his utterance was only an
additional proof that his sentiments came from the
fellow's heart. The reflections of Vernon's mind
were no ways cheering at this moment. His course,
upon which he had entered with so much
confidence
and hope, had been attended with disasters
from the beginning, produced, not through his own
measures or management, but by influences entirely
foreign. Pursued by Horsey and annoyed by his
prying curiosityscarcely freed from him, before
suffering in an encounter into which he was forced
by a sense of duty which no honourable mind could
shrink from; and now, arrested and suffering for
the alleged murder of the man whose presence
was so perfectly unsought and so undesirable:these
continuous events seemed to hold forth auguries the
most inauspicious to that adventure which had been
undertaken with so much hope. The voice of
kindness
came to him, therefore, at the moment of his
despondency, with an influence to be remembered;
and he felt that he was not altogether desolate
while the sturdy Alabamian was beside his couch.
The truth, which was declared by his frank utterance,
and denoted in the manly and not-to-be mistaken
expression
of his features, won instant confidence from
our hero; and remembering one of his leading objects,
he thought to himself, here is another allyhere is
another to join with me in the strifes that may
follow
any pursuit of this banditti.
The wounds upon Vernon's thigh were re-dressed
the irritation of the part soothed by the
application
of external dressings; his head, which had
suffered
a severe contusion, was properly bandaged,
a nostrum given intended to lessen the fever, in
the attainment of which object, a vein was also
opened. This done, Doctor Saunders proceeded
to silence the worthy Alabamian, whose tongue was
one of those habitually restless ones, which,
suspended
in the roof of his mouth, rather than the
gap of his throat, are for ever wagging from side to
side in the fruitless hope of finding a place of rest.
We must leave our patient in quiet, gentlemen
his fever is highhis mind is not at ease, and the
necessity of the case must be my apology for
insisting
upon his being left to himself.
I will but say to the officers that I yield him to
their custody, said Saxon, leading the way to the
bar-room.
They cannot remove him, said the physician.
That is for them to determine, was the reply of
the outlaw.
It will be an unnecessary and wanton cruelty if
they do. The young man cannot escape if he
would. He is really too feeble. They may watch
him, and be at hand, but must not intrude upon him.
I'll be dd if they do! was the asseveration
of the Alabamian, glad of an opportunity to use
the instrument upon which the interdict of the
physician, while in the chamber of the patient, sat
with a very unpleasant weight. The keen eye of
Saxon surveyed him for an instant with no very
pleasant expression, but he said nothing; while the
other proceeded to declare that, law or no law, he
would see that none but himself should approach
the sick man's chamber, and as for taking him
out, he continued, until he's willing to go himself,
let me see any one try it, and if he don't bear a
hickory, his mother never bore a fool.
The arrival of another party suggested, however,
a new plan of arrangements. This was no other
than the traveller whom Vernon had pursued
certainly, with no sort of apprehension on the part
of the former, that such had been the case. Old
Wilson entered with timid, trembling footsteps
a cautious tread, as if walking upon eggsand a
furtive glance thrown from side to side as the
different
groups of the bar-room met his eyes, which
denoted either a very suspicious temper, or one
strangely unused to the devil-may-care freedoms of a
public tavern. As he advanced he encountered the
three persons who had just emerged from the
passageway
into the public hall, and whose more
respectable
appearance, in garb and manner, than that
of the persons generally by whom the tavern was
filled, naturally prompted the visiter to address his
inquiry to them.
Gentlemen, I would like to knowsorry to stop
VOL. II. 4
youbut is there not a young gentleman here by
the name of Vernon?
There is, answered Jamison, who already
assumed
the entire representation of his new friend.
Can I be suffered to see and speak with him?
inquired Wilson.
I am afraid not, replied the physician. Mr.
Vernon has suffered some serious hurts which have
brought on fever. Even the noise of this bar-room
is unfavourable to him in his present situation.
His mind is very much excited, and inclines to
wander
.
I would prefer that he should not be
disturbed
.
There was some eagerness in the expression of
Wilson's face, and in his manner, as he replied
I have heard of his hurts, sir, and as I partly
know him, and believe him to be a worthy young
man, I came to propose that he might be taken to
my house, while his illness lasted. It will be more
quiet than he can possibly find it here, and
You, perhaps, have not heard of the accusation
against him? was the remark of Saxon.
And what the dl has that to do with the
gentleman's
offer, I'd like to know? was the fierce
demand
of the Alabamian. I'm sure nobody who
knows Vernon would think him guilty of the thing
after his own lips had told 'em he hadn't done it.
Jamison spoke for his new friend as sturdily as if
they had been intimate a thousand years. His
manner
startled and somewhat aroused the outlaw. This
might be seen in the kindling and flashing of his eye,
and in the sudden glow that flushed his cheek; but
however much he might have been moved to resent
it, there were other considerations, much more
strong, that counselled forbearance; and the reply
of Mr. Wilson to his inquiry, interposed, as it were,
between himself and the man who had shown
himself
so susceptible of provocation.
I have heard of the charge to which you allude,
and which, I think with the gentleman here, must be
quite groundless. It was the rumour which reached
me of his arrest, and of his illness, but a little time
ago, by which I was informed that he was in my
neighbourhood; and the thought that he might be
removed with advantage to my dwelling
This is an offer not to be disregarded, said the
physician, interrupting him; and if the officers
would permit his removal
Permit itthey must, and be dd to them.
Look you, men, this here prisoner of yourshe's in
a dd bad way, and will be worse, unless you let
us carry him to the old gentleman's house. See
you, I'll be bail for his coming whenever he's able to
see the justice; or you can stay here, and keep on
the look-out for him, and for me too if you choose,
for I won't budge till the lad gets better. What do
you say, you man-catching rascals, to being civil for
awhileit'll be nothing out of your pockets, I can
tell you, while Dick Jamison has any thing in his.
The constables, at whose approach Mr. Wilson
might have been seen to shrink with some
trepidation
,
were not disposed to consent so readily. They
hemmed and hawed awhilemuttered together as if
in consultationspoke aloud of their duties and the
great risk and responsibility, and, from their delay
and reluctance, were rousing up the choler of the
irritable
Alabamian to a new outbreak of ferocious
friendship, when Saxon, to whom they looked
entirely
for their
cue
, quietly remarked
It appears to me that the officers cannot refuse
so reasonable an arrangement. They can keep as
close a watch over the prisoner at the house of Mr.
Wilson as at the tavern, and the doctor's opinion that
the young man cannot fly in his present situation,
and should be free from noise, ought to satisfy them
without any other security; though, if they need any
other, I'm ready to become bound in bail along with
this gentleman.
Will you? said Jamison; well, dme, you're
a better fellow than I thought you, after allso
give's a shake of your paw, and let there be peace
between us. Well, what do you say, you sharks in
fresh water, have you got your senses yet?
Faith, we must let the jontleman off the hook,
since ye all says it, began the Irishman, when
interrupted, no less by the stern expressive looks of
Saxon, than by the sudden burst of his former
opponent
.
Hillo! Dennis! and what the dl have you got
to do in the business, my lad? Shut up, you little
old fellowyou have no right to speak at all until
you are fairly married into a new family. Get you
gone to Polly Whitesides, and let her give you a
brush up before you dip your oar into another's
navigation
.
And, with these words, the now good-humoured
rowdy clapped his open hand as an effectual stopper
on the widely distended jaws of the only half-sober
son of St. Patrick, whose brain was just in that
condition
of fermentation when he could understand
that he had blundered, though in what respect, he
did not hope to divine, until he had taken an added
supply of the crather, or utterly freed himself from
the control of that which he had already swallowed.
CHAPTER III.
High-climbing rocklow sunless dale
Seadesertwhat do these avail?
Oh, take her anguish and her fears,
Into a deep recess of years.
Wordsworth
.
The
arrangement thus effected needed but the
consent of the principal party to its immediate
operation
;
and Mr. Wilson was ushered into Vernon's
chamber by the ready aid of Dick Jamison. Our
hero, though confused by his application as much
as by certain medicines which had been
administered
by Doctor Saunders, was yet not insensible
to the advantages in sundry respects which the
contemplated
removal might afford him. As an invalid,
with the possible prospect before him of a protracted
illness, it promised that repose and quiet which he
felt would be grateful, if not necessary to his
condition
;
and when he reflected on the probability of
his being able to secure the main object of his
journey, in a quiet pacific manner, and by degrees
which would neither startle nor offend, he could not
mistake the course which he should at once adopt.
But still he hesitated, nay refused;thanked the
old gentleman for his hospitality and consideration
made light of his own services previously
rendered
,
and, though in faltering accents, declared
4*
himself utterly unwilling to transfer the cares of a
sick bed, and that too of a stranger, to the
household
of his friendly visiter, and to the great
interruption
of its domestic privacy and quiet. The nice
and jealous sensibility of Harry Vernon was busy to
produce this determination; and feelings which he
did not then seek to analyzewhich he might not
at that moment have perceivedinfluenced his
declared
resolution when all the obvious reasons of
his mind fought against it. He remembered the
lovely daughter of the defaulter; and when he
reflected
that it might become necessary to expose the
crime of the father, he was unwilling to incur the
reproachesthe probable and perhaps
well-founded
hostilityof one whose favourable opinion already
grew in his mind the embodied standard of a
becoming
excellence. But the reluctance of our hero
warmed the manner of the old man to something
like persuasivenesshe urged many good reasons
why the patient should consentdenied the
inconvenience
and annoyancespoke of his own little
household comforts, and to sum up all in brief,
assured
him that his consent alone would make easy
the minds of himself and family, since the necessity
under which they laboured of attending to some
pressing interests had compelled them to leave their
preserver on a previous occasion, with a seeming
indifference to his condition which might well
expose
them to the charge of coldness and
ingratitude
.
The objections of Vernon gradually vanished
when he heard from the lips of the father that such
was the argument of his daughter by which he had
been moved to the offer; and it needed but the
reasseveration
of Dr. Saunders that the removal was
full of promised benefit and might promote his more
speedy restoration, to induce his full consent to the
arrangement. Behold our hero then fairly
admitted
as a guest in the dwelling of the man whom
he pursued as a fugitive.
Two days only had passed since Mr. Wilson and
his family had become occupants of the same
household
.
They had pursued their way to this secluded
and lovely spot, with direct steps, from the moment
when they left the hospitable dwelling of the rigid
Methodist. They had reached it late in the evening
of the same day, and the night was too far
advanced
to enable them to behold the beauties of the
locality. But the cottage, though small, was neat,
and furnished with a larger attention to those things
which are classed under the ordinary term
comforts
,
than was commonly the case in a region so
remote from the demands of fashionable society.
Virginia Wilson beheld on all sides those little
items, in the shape of carpet, chimney ornament,
piano and guitar, which, if they do not of themselves
secure the happiness of life, at least contribute
somewhat
to its good humour and content. But the
circumstance
which chiefly satisfied her on the night
of their arrival, was the improved temper and
cheerfulness of her father. While on the road he
had exhibited a degree of querulousness and
impatience
which she had never perceived in him before
the commencement of their present journey; and
this temper was coupled with an air of precipitance
and apprehensiona seeming distrust of all he met
a shrinking that looked like fear from all he
encountered
which
filled her own mind with
apprehension
,
and made her at moments doubtful whether
there was not something like mental alienation in
him,a suggestion of her fear which alone
seemed
sufficient to account for a course of conduct
and manner, such as he had never shown to her
before. These had worn away in great degree
from the first moment after they had set their feet
on their new threshold. The natural cheerfulness
of the father seemed restored. He spoke soothingly
and tenderly as if desirous to compensate his
children
for what they had been made to suffer in their
journey; and the fond, pliant hearts of both
responded
to his cares, and grew glad in the return of those
smiles of the parent which are the sweetest
sunshine
to the devoted and dutiful child.
Virginia, Louisa, my dear children, he
exclaimed
,
folding them in his arms as soon as the
first cares and excitements of their arrival were
over, and when they remained alone together in
their little parlourwe have reached our
resting-place
at lasthenceforth, my dear children, this is
to be your home. Lucchesa is one of the loveliest
spots in Mississippi, and I have chosen one of the
sweetest spots that surround Lucchesa. Here,
Virginia
,
your rambles will be unimpeded and always
beautiful; the woods are thick and various, and
filled with the sweetest flowers; and you may now
pursue your study of botany with more perfect
self-approbation
,
since you will find abundant varieties
of subjects to justify your love. And you, Louisa
what will you say to these little hills when you shall
see them? They will seem to your eyes, which
have never seen any but the dead flats of the low
country, to be little less than mountains. Your
feet will tire to ascend them at first, but after a little
while, you will grow wild as a kid in your rambles
there will be no keeping you in.
But, father, said the child, drawing closer to the
old manthe woods are so wild and strange
they frighten methere's a strange noise among
the big pines, and when I walk among them I hear
sounds that seem like the voices of spirits.
It is the wind, my child, that shakes the trees,
and murmurs when it presses against them as if
vexed at being arrested. You will grow used to
that, until you learn to like it, as I doubt not your
sister does already. What say you, Virginia?
A melancholy, spiritual smile, which passed over
the lips and lightened in the eyes of the elder maiden
for an instant, was his sufficient answer, and the
father proceeded.
Our cottage is not one of the best in Lucchesa,
but it was the best that I could buy. We will
improve
it as we can. You will see in the daylight
that it lies on the side of a little depression that we
low country people may almost call a valley. It is
so low that you can only see it from the top of the
hills; and the houses of Lucchesa can scarcely be
seen at all from the top of ours. We have a little
garden, Louisa, and you shall tend the flowers,
while I raise the squashes and the potatoes and the
cucumbers. Our gallery (piazza) runs round three
sides of the house, the north only excepted; and
though we lie in the valley, we have a sweet and
extended prospect of hill-slopes on every side. The
woods seem naturally to open into vistas, and these
I will improve, until the cottage shall be the centre,
from which an hundred avenues of sight shall
diverge
,
and into which they shall gather from every
point of the compass. But enough of plans for
to-night
.
Louisa, your eyes grow heavy in spite of all
I can tell you. Kiss me, my child, and then find
out your chamber.
The child, drowsy, but still striving to be attentive,
did as she was bidden. The elder sister was left
alone with her father, whose mood grew less
cheerful
with the absence of the child, and whose manner
became far less easy. For a few moments a silence
that was painful to both succeeded her departure.
Mr. Wilson rose from his seat and paced the room
with emotions that were evidently oppressive. Twice,
thrice, did his step falter and seem about to pause as
he passed before his daughter, who, with head
leaning
upon her palm, seemed oppressed with emotions
also, which, if not so exciting, were, perhaps,
scarcely less oppressive than his. At length, as if
overcoming a strong reluctance, the father stopped
beside her, drew a chair, and taking her hand in his,
addressed her as follows:
Virginia, my dear child, you have said nothing.
Father, what should I saywhat would you
have me say? replied the daughter, the cloudy
sadness
deepening on her lovely countenance.
That you repine notthat you are satisfied
that you are happy. See you not, my child, that
the same paternal love which has striven so much
to make you happy before, has spared nothing here
within the compass of the country's resources to
supply what you may have left behind?
But wherefore are they left behind, my father?
Wherefore have we left the home where the same
pleasures, if you call them such, were already ours?
Was there nothing in the old home to endear us to
itwas it not endeared to us by the happy life we
had lived in itwas it not endeared to us by the
very death of herthat beloved motherwho
made so much of the happiness we have lost
whose loss made so much dearer to us the little we
had left?
And was it not good reason that we should fly,
my daughter, from a dwelling where we had known
that loss?
Alas, my father, it could not have been for that
reason that you left our homeour home which
death itself had seemed to sanctify. Years have
passed since that cruel hour of parting, and the pang
had passed away in the bitter memory of joys felt
without a pang, and the assuring hope which was so
cheering to us all, that she who suffered was now
sainted beyond suffering. Oh, no! dearest father,
my heart will not hear this reasonmy mind cannot
receive it. There must be another cause, and that
cause, my father, is one which it doubly grieves me
to believe, has made whiter than ever the hair upon
your forehead.
Virginia, my child, why will you press me thus?
cried the father, striding hastily along the floor with
his hands clasped above his eyes, as if to shut from
sight the mournful and inquiring expression of her
countenance.
Because I am a child no longer, was her reply,
as, darting from her seat, she rushed towards him,
and, catching one of his hands in both of hers, sunk
upon her knees with a passionate manner which well
accompanied the earnest and emphatic language
which she employed, and which, while clinging to
him, she continued to pour forth. Because I am a
child no longerI am a woman grownI can both
think and feel. I can surely understand the sorrows
that I still must share, and if I understand, my father,
may I not help to relieve them? Were my dear
mother
living, I should look to her for the truth, when
sorrow troubled and danger followed your footsteps;
but in her absence I must take her place, and I
implore
nay,
I claim it as my right, my fatherto
know what grief, what threatening danger has driven
us to this wilderness, where the forests are yet
almost
as wild as at their birth; where we have no
society, and where we see no friends.
And can it be for the absence of societynay,
can it be even for the loss of friends, when her father
and her sister are still left herthat I hear these
questions
that
I witness this affliction of my daughter?
was the answeran answer, the burden of which
did not represent the real conviction in the father's
mind, but which enabled him to evade the more
searching inquiries which the first portion of her
speech had conveyed.
No! she exclaimed, rising to her feet, as
heaven is my help and hope, dear father, I answer
`No!' It is not the little circle which I have left,
nor the few friends for whom I had sympathy and
attachment, that gives me cause of sorrow, however
their loss may at moments occasion feelings of
regret
;
nor is the wilderness into which we have
wandered
so uncongenial to my tastes and habits as to
provoke inquietude and annoyance. I think not of
these in the conviction that you are unhappythat
a secret cause of dread and danger hangs about you
which makes you so often heedless of my love and
indifferent to my endearments. Nay, shake not your
head, my fatherthat smile does not deceive me.
You require me to be happy, to be at ease, and find
satisfaction and pleasure in the dwelling which you
have found in Lucchesa, and the comforts which
your customary care has gathered about us. I
answer
you that I will, so soon as I find that you derive
pleasure and content from the same sources. Let
me see you at ease, and you shall find me so; but
while your brow is cloudedwhile your air and
movements denote a secret apprehension of evil, I
cannot but share the cloud upon your brow, and my
apprehensions grow only the greater because I can
neither see nor guard against the coming of the
danger which you fear. Let me know all, my
father. Give me the knowledge of this mystery
for there is mysteryand rely upon me to soothe
your sorrows, though I may not avert their cause.
Rely upon me to share those griefs with
satisfaction
which now bring me nothing but terror and
despondency.
You know not what you ask, my child! cried
the father, hoarsely. What if I should answer?
What if, foolishly persuaded by your entreaties, I
should reveal the cause of my sorrownay, to
silence you at once, what if my revelations brought
you shame along with sorrow? Ha! do you shrink
do you tremble?Would you still hearVirginia,
would you still listen to a narration of guilt, which
would make your sorrow less endurable? Speak!
shall I now relate what you have been so curious to
hear?
Guilt! exclaimed the daughter, with feeble
accents
and a shrinking, sinking pain. No! no! It
cannot bethere is no guiltthere can be no shame.
These are cruel words, my father; do not again speak
them, I implore youforgive me, forgive mebut
you were so serious just now, when you spoke, that
I almost believed you. Tell me your afflictions,
but tell me not that there is guilt and shame, which,
indeed, I well know there cannot be.
Enough! Press me no further, Virginia,
continued
the father, recovering his calmness in some
degree, and, with some effort, smoothing the excited
expression of those features, which, almost convulsed
a moment before, had nearly convinced his daughter
of the truth of the general confession he had made.
I trust that you will never know that guilt or shame
could be coupled with your father's memory and
image
And yet, my father, this change of name. She
spoke with tremulous accents, and a renewal of that
look of shrinking apprehensiveness which denoted
the bewildered state of her judgment, warring with
her feelings and desires; unwilling to believe aught
that could degrade or lessen the worth of one whom
she was no less bound to venerate than willing to
love, and yet the mystery of whose conduct left her
VOL. II. 5
utterly doubtful in which direction to incline her
faith.
Policy, my daughter, need have no association
with either guilt or shame, replied the father,
evasively
,
and by a general remark, to which there
could be no exception as such. When I tell you,
he continued, that the assumption of another name
is necessary to my present interests, you are not to
imply any thing dishonourable or unworthy in the
change. There are motives which justifythere
are reasons which make it necessary.
Ah, my father, but there are no reasons which
should make you deny your confidence to your
daughter, was the prompt reply. She, at once,
seized upon the true and only point at issue between
them, which she urged with as great a degree of
earnestness as became the relationship between
them. I believe you that there are motives which
require you to do this; but, surely, my dear father,
you can neither deny my interest in a knowledge of
these motives, nor my prudence in reserving them
from exposure as carefully as yourself. Give to my
love, dear father, that reliance which it has evermore
given to you.
You ask too much, Virginia; you are yet but a
child to me. There are many things which are
neither becoming nor necessary for a woman to
knowwhich, indeed, she could not knowcould
not understand. It is enough that this is one of them
let me hear no more of this.
Father!
Nay, my child, I mean not to be sternI would
not be angrybut this is a point upon which you
are too earnesttoo much disposed to insistof
which you speak too frequently.
It is only because it is a constant thought, my
fathera painful thoughta doubta fear.
Let it be so no longer, my child. Do you not
see that I have grown cheerful since I have reached
Lucchesa? You do not see me apprehensive now
that we are in a place of safety.
Safety! was the natural exclamation. And was
the danger then so near us?
Nay, how can you ask, Virginia, when but three
days ago we all lay at the mercy of a gang of
robbers?
A deep sigh escaped from the lips of the serious
maiden, but she said nothing. She saw that her
father strove to deceive her, and she forbore any
farther
reference to a topic which he was so anxious to
exclude, even at the expense of truth. He saw her
conjecture and sickened as he did so; but he could
say little or nothing to remove it; and conscious of
his feebleness in this respect, and in the inadequacy
of any art or argument, short of a frank confession,
to do away with her apprehensions, he resorted to
the humbler policy of seeking to divert her mind
by reference to other objects. With a general
knowledge of the feminine nature, in certain minor
respects, such as their love for petty pleasures, he
strove to engage her mind in such matters as might
amuse rather than employ it. But in this, he soon
perceived, from the quiet indifference of her answers,
that he must fail; and, tired of his task, and
dissatisfied
with himself, he forebore all farther effort, and
the lateness of the hour soon furnished a sufficient
reason for their separation for the evening.
Virginia Wilson retired to her couch, but sleep
was slow to visit her that night. Her heart was too
much filled with the mysterious circumstances which
hung around her fatherher mind too much
troubled
with the apprehensions which had harassed
him for several preceding weeksto suffer the
velvet-footed deity to approach her without warning,
and to obtain facile possession, at an early hour, of
his accustomed dominion. The night waned slowly,
while a thousand thoughts and conjectures, chasing
each other with as much rapidity, if not with as
many startling transitions, as the images that flit
over the magic glass of the wizard, made her mind
a populous world, where all was commotion and
much was strife. She thought, with unspeakable
anguish, of the reserve of her father on those
circumstances
,
evidently momentous, which had
troubled
him, and still troubled him, though, under their
terrors, he had sought safety in a region still wild,
and still the abode of so much that was barbarous.
What were those circumstances?and had he indeed
found the safety which he admitted had been the
object of his aim? These were questions that did
not cease to afflict her, because she lacked all means
for their solution. She could only hope and pray
she could only resolve to assume a cheerfulness
which she could not feel, and to drive from her mind,
by the acquisition of an early interest in the strange
world to which she had been brought, that more
grateful region to which she had been accustomed.
This was, perhaps, the least of the mental
difficulties
in the way of Virginia Wilson. Hers was one
of those commanding intellects that depend little
upon the mere externals of society for their
comforts
and enjoymentsthat make place and fortune
subordinate considerations in an estimate of life's
resources and rewards; and require peace of mind
and confidence of heart in their own, and the purity
of those with whom their lot is cast, rather than the
praise of men or the plenty and profusion, which, to
so large a portion of mankind, constitute the be
all and the end all of existence. The wilderness
had no terrors, but many charms; and to one who has
seen quite as much of the superficial worthlessness
and empty vanity of society, as of its harmony and
grace, it was no difficult matter to find a charm in
solitude which more than atoned for the fleeting
pleasures she had lost. Under the care of such a
mind as hers, and surveyed through the medium of
such sweet affections as ministered around the altars
of her unselfish heart, the wilderness could soon be
made to blossom as the rose. But the dread of that
nameless danger which followed the footsteps of
her only living parent, haunted her thoughts with a
continual presence. She estimated the powers of
this danger from the terrors which had possessed
her father's mind, and the very failure of
conjecture
to answer the doubts of her constant inquiry,
was of itself a source of wo, which made her
misery the greater. Still, it had never possessed
her mind until the evening of her arrival in
Lucchesa
,
and until the occurrence of that conversation
with her father, a portion of which is briefly
reported
above, that there could be any shame or
disgrace
in connexion with the necessity which had
driven him from his home. It will be remembered
with what earnestness and pleading anguish she had
exclaimed against the brief and passing suggestion
of her father, that guilt and shame were coupled
with his sorrows. This hintthough afterwards
evaded and denied by Mr. Wilson, when he beheld
the effects upon his child, to whom he did not dare
communicate the truthyet took possession of her
mind, when the silence and secrecy of her
chamber
left her at liberty to re-examine the subject;
and when she recurred to the secret and
precautionary
measures which her father had taken
for his flight from Orleansthe indirectness of his
coursethe change of namethe constant
apprehensions
5*
which harassed him, making him as
imbecile
in resolution as they made him acute in
observation
her
fears, faint and shadowy at first,
grew into distinctness, and acquired new bulk and
body with every additional moment of reflection.
She could now, and for the first time, readily
conceive
the motive for flight and fear, for that startling
terror which at moments enfeebled his limbs and
covered him with tremorswhich made his voice
sound hollow in his throatwhich made his eye
shrink to encounter even the fond and affectionate
gaze of hers; and which, in the dialogue already
briefly given, had moved him to those few but
incoherent
expressions, convulsively uttered, which
could only have found their way to the lips of one
labouring under insanity or guilt. That he was not
insane she knew,that he was guilty, the fear was
rapidly growing into a faith within her mind. But
of what was he guilty? Strange to say, the
difficulty
became as great as ever when she reached
this stage of conjecture, or conviction; and, after a
vain effort, by a reconsideration of all the subjects
attending his movements from Orleans, to arrive at
such hypotheses of the particular crime for which
he fled, as would seem reasonable to her thought,
she gave up the effort in sheer exhaustion, not
without
a lurking dread that, in a moment of passion, he
might have stricken some enemy to the ground, and
forfeited his own life in atonement for that of his
fellow. Not for a single instant did she fancy that
he had been faithless to his public trustthat he had
incurred the scorn of all good men through a
miserable
appetite for gold. Still, though dismissing, as
well as she might, the distresses of her father's
situation from her thoughts, she found it difficult to
win the slumbers that she wooed. Her mind had
been too much excited by events and scenes which
were new to the even and unbroken currents of her
ordinary existence, to sink into quiet and leave her
to repose; and the new world in which she found
herself, and the circumstances, some of them
exciting
and startling enough, which had occurred
on their journey, called for brief review. Some of
these were like a dreamthe flitting shadow of a
disordered image, such as gathers before the eye
of a drowsy fancy, and fills the mind with
conflicting
impressions. Yet there was one image
that lay at the bottom of all otherswhich rose
last to her survey, and lingered long after all the
rest had departedwhich was neither indistinct
nor imperfectwhich stood proudly and nobly
before
the eye of her imagination, and on the pure
tablets of her memoryalone, unmixed with any
other form or fancya controlling, commanding,
imperial presence. This was the image of Vernon.
She saw him once more as, bounding from the
wood, he rushed forward without fear to the
rescue
of her father. She heard the clear, silvery
accents of his voice, sweet, though stern, as he
shouted to his companion to follow, and to the
robbers as he pursued. She beheld the grace of
all his movements, as, bending in the saddle, he
passed the carriage at full speed in chase of the
assailants, though already wounded; and a sudden
tremor was renewed at her heart, as she
remembered
his faint accents when he returned, and when,
sinking down before her in the road, he lay
unconscious
until they reached the dwelling of the
Methodist
,
a noble specimen of manly grace and
beauty. Not a single feature that her eye scanned
at that moment, but rose to her memory with the
distinctness of life; and, with a sentiment of
fluttering
pleasure at her heart, strangely mingled up
with that sadness which is ever the companion
of devoted love, she continued to muse upon the
events connected with his presence, until thought
subsided into sleep, and her dreams renewed, under
various aspects of pain and pleasure, the images
and events which she had been last reviewing.
CHAPTER IV.
More particulars must justify my knowledge.
Cymbeline
.
Virginia
rose the next morning with better spirits.
Her bosom's lord sat somewhat lightlier upon its
throne. Sleep had refreshed and strengthened her,
and those dreams, those sweet, vague, twilight
fancies
that came so commended to her heart by their
association with its own, as yet, unexpressed
desires
,
had given a warmer glow to her cheek than
it wore on the preceding evening. How soon youth
relieves itself from the pressure and weight of most
afflictionswith what elasticity it springs from the
earth, and shakes off the dew and the despondency,
and laughs aloud in the consciousness of a new
birth, as it prepares, like the swift arising sun, to set
forth on the glorious race of life. Sorrow to the
young is only one of those shadows that
momentarily
cloud its skies. Wait but the morrownay,
wait but a single hour,and the cloud has passed
away, the sun resumes his empire of light and
laughter and universal dominion; the stars sing out
a fresher song of rejoicing at the coming of the
moon-browed night; and the recollection of storm
passes away from the reviving spirit with the
succeeding
glories of every changing moment. True
though it be, that memory may preserve the pain
nay, the pain itself may still lurk within the heart,
and yet, it is as a memory onlythere is no
venom in the wound. The pure of heart sooner
than any other, relieve themselves from the heavier
pressure of their burdens. Like Christian in Bunyan,
every additional step, advancing up the hills of
virtue
,
diminishes the weight of that bundle which the
best of us are still compelled to carry.
The cheerfulness of the maiden was increased as
she found an improvement in her father's mood and
bearing. He had resumed the old smiles which he
was accustomed to wear in those more palmy days
of the heart to all parties, when fortune smiled upon
his household, and indiscretion had not as yet
prepared
the way for guilt. The gloomy humours,
which had made contact with him for the last few
weeks unpleasant, even to a daughter so dutiful as
Virginia, were seemingly all dissipated; and before
breakfast was well over, the resumption of old
aspects
in the little family, gradually had the effect of
softening what was strange, and providing what
was deficient, in their place of forest retreat. The
cares of the new householdthe work of order
occupied the morning, and employment is a choice
morality, as it promotes content. The furniture was
to be arranged; the pictures to be hung; the
curtains
raised; the carpets laid, and a thousand little
matters to be attended to, which employed all
parties
,
and prevented that brooding gnawing thought,
which is quite as frequently the growth of the body's
idleness as of the mind's activity. Then, there was
the little garden to be looked at, and plans were to
be hit upon for disposing of its solid squares, and
cutting into angles, crescents, stars and circles, its
dead and uniform levels. To survey the little farm
in its whole extent, was the business of an hour, and
dinner time approached with a rapidity which was
unaccountable to all. After dinner the carriage
was prepared for a drive about the environs of
Lucchesa
,
and in a better mood for appreciating the
beauty of rural objects than she had been for weeks
before, Virginia took her seat in the airy vehicle,
from which the travelling top had been removed,
and prepared, with the more easily delighted Louisa,
to see all the charms of scenery of which her
father's
taste and previous knowledge of the region,
made him a very able cicerone.
We have already afforded to the reader a brief
and passing glimpse of Lucchesa, on the approach
of Vernon to that lovely village. It will not surely
be supposed necessary that we should endeavour to
dilate upon this portion of our labours: since, with a
few small and partial exceptions, most country
villages
have the same general outlines. Yet, as we
have said before, Lucchesa was a village among a
thousand, and stood almost alone in many respects
among most of the little villages of Mississippi. The
general aspects of a social settlement in countries
purely agricultural, are seldom very pleasing. The
proprietors of the land are better pleased to centre
around themselves, on their own plantations, their
resources and attractions. These persons seldom
dwell in communities, and villages are, accordingly,
with few exceptions, given up to such only as ply
the arts of trade, and subserve, in some central spot,
the wants and wishes of a populous surrounding
country. As this surrounding country is thickly or
sparsely settled,as it is rich or poorwill be the
moral and social characteristics of the village which
looks to it for support. The occupants are usually
such as need has driven. They are not often natives
of the neighbourhood for which they toil; and until
very lately, but few tradesmen were known in the
southern country, who did not hail from New
England or New York. The exceptions to this
general
rule were, perhaps, the blacksmith or the
wheelwright. The Yankee adventurer is seldom a
labourer. He is a trader, a tavernkeeper, a tailor,
a pedlerhe will do any thing that will enable him
to avoid those heavier toils that call for great
muscular
activity and power. He is a jobber, a
contriver
,
a calculator, an inventorone of that
cunning
class, which, like the fox, takes good care
always to employ another's fingers to draw his nuts
out of the fire.
It demanded brief time for our party to see the
whole extent of the little settlement; and this done,
as the afternoon was only half spent, the ride was
prolonged by a short ramble in the neighbouring
country. They had but a little while returned from
this ride before they were apprised by a talkative
African, who was employed as a sort of gardener,
of the events which had taken place at the tavern
the arrest of Vernonhis supposed attempt to
escape, and the injuries which he received from the
officers in consequence. The tale did not lose in
the usual exaggerations, nor was it quite so briefly
narrated as it appears in this passage. It might be
easy for us to let Cudjo speak for himself, as it is
so favourite a custom with so many of our authors
to make the negro a conspicuous actor in their
scenes; and we see no good reason why a negro
who speaks better English, and wears breeches,
should not be quite as decent a personage in a
modern
novel, as a naked Highlander. Besides, Cudjo
was an actor, and his animated gestures and fitting
action might be a very good lesson to many of
more pretension and a less imposing colour, who
have greater rights and make more use of them to
the great annoyance of deliberative assemblies. He
commenced his story with a serious bluster;
something
like the manner of a northwester in its first
approaches. The restraints, self-imposed upon his
manner at first, were only intended to heighten the
Kean-like outbreaks toward the close. He was,
according to the prevailing rules among the
stagestricken
heroes, simply reserving his powers for the
fifth actand when he reached the part where he
proceeded to show the conflict between Vernon and
the officerswhen he described their joint rush upon
him and the descending blow of the Irishman's
shillelah
he
did it with such terrific truth, that
Virginia
screamed aloud, and Mr. Wilson, grasping the
arm of the negro, demanded to know if the youth
was killed. But to this question he could obtain no
satisfactory answer. Cudjo knew, indeed, well
enough, but like a prudent narrator, he drew the
curtain over the scene at that point when the doubt
was most oppressive. He knew no morehe would
tell no morebut confined himself, when more
particularly
examined, to simple reiterations of the part
into which he had studiously thrown his greatest
powers; and the renewal of which no persuasion
could move him to forego. He knew his strong
ground, and was resolved to make the most of it;
the more particularly when he found that he had
acquired, as well from the burden of his story as
from his manner of telling it, a fearful interest in the
eyes of his young mistress. The agitation and
alarm of Virginia Wilson were great, but natural
enough; and while her father stood looking with
equal surprise and indecision upon the reiterated
gestures of the slave which were made to supply
those breaks in his story where his language was
imperfect or incomprehensible, she clasped his arm,
motioned his dismissal of the negro, and proceeded,
though trembling with emotions of no ordinary
character
,
VOL. II. 6
to remind him of the duties which lay before
him.
You must seek this gentleman, my father. He
has saved us in a moment of great danger, at the
peril of his own life. You can only atone for the
seeming indifference with which you left him, sick
and wounded at Mr. Badger's, by attending to him
now.
How attending to him, Virginia? I am no
doctor.
Oh, sir!O, my father!
YesI don't see, Virginia, what we are to do.
Oh, sir, but you cannot help seeing. He is at
this tavernyou know not in what condition. If he
be seriously hurt you must provide the physician,
and bring him to your house.
What, here, my child?
Yes, sir, here. What can the sick man expect
of comfort in a public tavernin one where he can
have no attendance?
And what attendance can he have here, Virginia,
more than from a physician?
Your attendancemineLouisa'sthe
attendance
of a private family having more comforts at
command, and acknowledging a debt of gratitude to
this youth, whose weakness, and sickness, and
injuries
may all arise from the very part which he took
in our rescue. He is charged with murder, and
what murder can it be but that of the man whom he
killed in preserving us? It is your duty to preserve,
and to succour, and to defend him. Your evidence,
alone, may save him from the punishment of that
deed, for the justification of which no one can offer
better proof than yourself. Go to him, my father,
bring him to your own house, and see to his injuries.
Our utmost pains will scarcely acquit us of the deep
debt of gratitude we owe him, and for which we
could not even before bestow our thanks.
We have seen the result of this interview between
the reluctant father, and the resolute and well-minded
daughter. She gained her object, though not
without
finding considerable difficulty in the coldness and
the fears of the conscious criminal. The very name
of a sheriff's officer distressed himthe idea of
absolute
personal contact with them filled him with
apprehensions
,
and when Virginia suggested the
probable
importance of his testimony in the youth's
defence, the image of the keen-eyed magistrate
looking into his own secret soul, re-awakened the
terrors which beset him on his flight. But the
maiden's mind was too firmly impressed with the
conviction of what was due by her father for
himself
and his children to the daring stranger, and she
was too happy, even in spite of the youth's
sufferings
,
that the chance was afforded them to remove
the impression from his mind, that
they
perhaps, if
the truth were properly written, it would read
she
had been ungrateful, in so speedily flying from one
who had done them such good service, without
speaking their acknowledgmentsmay, without
ministering to those hurts which he had suffered in
their defence. And yet, when her father had
departed
on his mission of humanity, her heart began
to tremble with some new misgivings. Had she not
been too urgent in this businesshad she not
over-stepped
the nice boundaries of maidenly modesty in
pressing for the admission of this young man into
her father's dwelling? Might not the tavern be as
good as any other place for his recoveryas full of
aids and comforts? And, again, what if he were
not a gentleman? A man might be brave and
generous enough to risk his own life for the succour
of a stranger, yet lack all those more estimable
points of character, which would entitle him to the
freedom of a familyto an
entre
into its sacred
retreatsto a seat beside its hearthto the
ministering
cares of its daughters. But such was not the
case with Vernon. Her convictions fought earnestly
against this suggestion. Her arguments were such
as, naturally enough, rise uppermost in the mind of
the young, the beautiful, the amiable, and true. He
was himself young, and his face, distinguished by
the clear skin and features of a nice symmetry,
wore an expression too unequivocally noble and
manly, even while his eyes were closed in the
swooning fit which had overcome him during their
brief ride to the house of Badger, to suffer her to
suppose him wanting in those advantages of birth,
education, and a proper taste and character, with
which her hoping fancy had already endowed him.
He, too, must be true and amiable, and with this
satisfactory conclusion to her thoughts and doubts,
it was still surprising to herself why her heart should
so flutter and beat, when she listened to her father's
narrative after his return, and when she knew that
the youth was already an inmate of the house.
But the agitation of her heart passed away when
she was informed of his conditionwhen she learned
that his hurts rendered it necessary that he should be
kept in a state of the utmost quiet, lest the delirium
which had already shown itself partially in his words
and actions, should be increased to an extent which
might baffle the powers of medicine. It was then
that she became the womanthat she threw off the
enfeebling apprehensions and fancies of the girl, and
following her father to the chamber of the patient
prepared to assist in the labours of the nurse.
The position in which Virginia found herself was
an intoxicating one. The strong man whose
gallantry
had saved her father and herself, lay before
her, an unconscious dependent. To her feeble
strength and whispered will, he could oppose
neither strength nor will. She could look upon his
pale face and the subdued and silent features,
without
challenging a returning glance. She could hear
the feeble moan and incoherent sentence that fell from
his lips and without being startled by a single
consciousness
of the exquisite delicacy of her own
position
.
While he lay helpless and delirious, her
emotions
were all of that serene order which belong to
the undisturbed performance of a single duty. There
was nothing to alarm her sensibilitiesnothing to
make her look too narrowly into the propriety of
her position, or the seeming tenderness of that
regard
which she persuaded herself, was the due of
gratitudeof humanityany thing, in short, but the
ministrations of love. The affections of women are
usually unselfish. They love the more profoundly
the more they serve. Their love grows with their
labourswith their toil for the belovedand, the
idea of all injustice or oppression excluded, their
passion is proportionately increased by their cares.
To be allowed to serve, is with them to love the
object
of their devotion. It is for man to show himself
grateful for the service; this, perhaps, in the warmth
of their devoted homage, is the utmost that they ask.
Yet, even when this acknowledgment is withheld,
the greater number of them will still continue the
service. The service itself, to the dependent spirit,
is a joy; and they will ask little more than the vine
that only prays the privilege to be suffered to cling
around the tree. Perhaps the heart of the woman
who has once loved, will only cease to love when it
is denied to cling and to entwine itself. Even
when there is no returning caress, the sufferance of
love will still be a sweet privilege to the very
dependent
spirit. How many are there who enjoy no
6*
more than thishow many more are there who
merit, much more than man, that unceasing homage
which they are only suffered to bestow!
It might have been that Virginia Wilson would
have soon forgotten Vernon, had they not a second
time encountered. Love is not a thing of first sight,
though first impressions, confirmed by a subsequent
knowledge of the object, will very commonly ripen
into love. However favourable had been the
impressions
made upon Virginia by the appearance of
the handsome stranger, changing scenes, objects,
and circumstances, must soon have erased them, or
subdued the vivid colours in which they were first
made. But the cares of tendance upon the sick-bed
of the youththe deep and difficult respiration of
his breast, labouring under the fever which assailed
himhis languid but incoherent utterancethe
occasional
moan and whisper which escaped his lips, and
those broken words which had a meaning she would
have given worlds to understandthese were all
circumstances which, as they denoted his
dependance
upon her, increased her interest in him; and no
hours were more sweet during the time of his illness
than those in which she was suffered to watch
beside
his couch. But the crisis was soon overa
few days effected a favourable changethe
returning
consciousness of the patient, in freeing her from
her attendance, deprived her of the sweet privilege
which his situation had afforded; and the languid
eyes of Vernon looked round him vainly and
impatiently
for that lovely countenance of which he had
some sweet and partial glimpses in the intervals of
his disease. In place of these he encountered no
forms more interesting than those of Mr. Wilson, or
the little Louisa, or the sturdy Alabamian, or the
more wily Saxon, the outlawboth of these last
being necessarily admitted to visit at the house of
Wilson, as
friends
of the invalid. As Vernon grew
better, his anxieties at his situation were renewed
He felt the difficulties in crease of declaring his true
character, as the agent of justice, to his hospitable
entertainer; and the annoying character of this
feeling
was not a little heightened as he looked upon the
bewitching grace, and encountered the timid glances
of his lovely daughter. There was another
circumstance
that also afflicted him. He could not
mistake
the interest with which the keen eyes of Saxon
followed the movements of Virginia Wilson; nor
suppress the involuntary pang with which he listened
to the language of the outlaw, subdued, conciliatory,
yet free and graceful, which he held with her. Saxon,
too, sometimes enjoyed a privilege, which, in his
feeble state, was necessarily denied to him. He
could attend her in those afternoon walks, when the
sun, sinking behind the forests, left only a few
glimmering
tokens of his light to soften the scene, and
beguile the musing and melancholy spirit into groves,
which, shady, sweet, and solitary, seemed more than
all other scenes beside, to harmonize kindred spirits,
and bring them into a more near communion with
each other. Vernon, he knew not why himself,
felt uneasy at these rambles. Not that they were
frequent. Had he been a just as well as a close
observer
,
he would have discovered that, on those
evenings
when Saxon returned with the maiden from her
walk, she always came back at a much earlier hour,
and her reserve was no less obvious than the
obtrusive
attention of her companion. Could he have
been permitted a glance at them in their rambles, he
would have been as much struck with the cold
courtesy
of her tones in replying to her companion, and
the evident unwillingness which she displayed to
receive
those thousand little attentions which are so
apt, where the parties incline to each other, to
sweeten the dull ramble, and shorten the prolonged
paths of the forest. But Vernon already watched all
things with eyes readily disposed to see them
through a false medium, and a spirit that
conjectured
the worst of all things which it is not permitted
to see. His inability to share in the rambles of the
maiden necessarily increased his apprehensions of
the more fortunate person who happened to be her
companion; and his distrust of the outlaw, which
had been a sort of instinct, making him reluctant to
assimilate with that person from the first, was now
heightened to a feeling of positive dislike, as he
contemplated
the superior advantages which he
possessed
,
and dreaded the events which might spring
out of them. Assuming that the attentions of Saxon
were as grateful to Virginia as they seemed imposing
in his own eyes, he suffered his annoyance to show
itself, sometimes, in a cold glance and colder speech
to the maiden herself, at moments when the jealous
fit was particularly active in his bosom; and it was
only by a strong and resolute exercise of that manly
sense, which was the prevailing characteristic of his
mind, that he could see, and seek to repair by an
immediate change of deportment, the brutality of
which he felt himself guilty. On such occasions her
eyes would sink to the floorher voice, which had
urged its inquiry in a tremulous tone that might have
conveyed a grateful meaning to the heart of any
lover, not blinded and made obtuse by other and
perverse feelings, would become silent; and she
would seize an early opportunity to retire from the
eyes of all, and in the solitude of her chamber pore
over those mysterious emotions which oppressed
her, without remedy; and wonder at the excitement
in her heart, for which she felt unable to account.
Why had the words of Vernon such power over
her? Why did she shrink from his gentler glances
why did she suffer at his cold ones? Why was
it such a pleasure to hear that voice, the sounds of
which yet made her tremble? It was not long
before
circumstances provided her with a reply.
Meanwhile, Vernon improved hourly, and the
attendance of the physician ceased to be necessary.
The hour was approaching when the officers of the
law would claim their prisoner, though this
conviction
was productive of more disquietude in his mind
because of the pleasant communion which it was
destined to disturb, than because of any danger in
which his arrest promised to involve him. That he
should be seriously made to answer for the death of
Horsey, he did not suffer himself to think for an
instant
;
yet, he did not, because of his confidence in
himself, neglect those duties, the performance of
which arose out of his present situation. He
prepared
letters to his friend and patron, Carter, giving
a succinct detail of his wanderings and adventures,
up to the very moment of his writing, omitting no
event which might be held worthy of
communication
,
excepting such details as belonged to the
conferences
which he had had with Badger and
Rawlins
on the subject of the banded robbers of the
country. On this head he deemed it prudent to
forbear all remark in a letter which was to be
entrusted
to the ordinary post; particularly, indeed,
as Carter was not greatly interested in any such
matters. With respect to the fate of Horsey, he
related all that had reached him and all that he
knewdetailed the chief particulars of their
dialogues
where they threw any light upon the
purposes
or course of that erratic youth, described the
circumstances under which they parted, and, after
relating the affair of young Mabry, and the assault of
the latter upon himself, suggested a surmisewhich
he would yet have willingly forebornethat this
young man himself might have been the murderer;
for the probabilities strongly inclined to this opinion.
I know, he continuedI know, my dear sir, that
you will not need my solemn assurance,which I
yet makethat my hands are utterly guiltless of
this young man's death. I trust to make this
appear
in my examination before the justice, and I
am scarcely less anxious that you should do your
best to convince his worthy old parents to the same
effect. Next to the pain of this most humiliating
situation in which I find myself, is the deep sorrow
which I should ever feel at incurring, however
unjustly
,
the suspicions of the good people whose
kindness
to me was not the less grateful to my heart,
because
it was comparatively unimportant to my
interests
.
I must pray you then to spare no effort, by
an array of all the favourable facts which you
possess
,
and a careful display of those arguments which
you understand as well as myself, and which
conclusively
establish the folly and impolicy of such a
deed, to acquit me, in their eyes, of the cruel
imputation
.
I write, he continued, from the house of
William Maitland, himself, with whose family I
have been an inmate for the last five days. I am
in part indebted to his hospitable care for my
improved
health and recovery from my hurts. As yet
he knows nothing of me, of my connexion with you,
or of my objects. My developement of the latter, in
such a manner as to effect your generous intentions
towards his childrenboth of whom are females
and to escape the reproach of requiting good with
evil, shall be my study between this and the period,
when, in compliance with the demands of the
officers
of justice, I shall be compelled to leave him.
My position is one of considerable delicacy, and
my course, therefore, must be the result of a calm
and serious consideration.
Such was a portion of the elaborate letter which
Vernon prepared for the persual of his guardian.
Could it be imputed as insincerity, or an improper
suppression of necessary particulars, that the writer
said not a word more on the subject of those children
of Ellen Taylor, in whom Carter had such a
prevailing
interest and to whom he was disposed to exhibit
a degree of generosity no less novel than extreme?
Vernon's own conscience smote him for the
suppression
of particulars which he knew must interest
his patron to know; but he strove in vain to
overcome
a reluctance, the sources of which he was
unwilling
to examine.
He was yet writing, when he heard the fall of a
light footstep passing through the gallery. He knew
the stepand he hurried to the window with a
movement, which, in his feeble state, it required
some effort to make. His eyes followed the slowly
moving formthe form of perfect symmetrythe
movement of perfect grace. Her course lay through
the garden to the shrouding woods beyond it. This
was her accustomed walk. He forgot himself while
he gazedhis thoughts were steeped in the dews of
a most elysian fancyhis worship was oblivious of
all other objects than the one of its adoration. On
a sudden she looked behind hershe looked
upward
their
eyes encountered, and then she fled
fled even as the young fawn, that, wandering forth
from the forest for a single instant, and for the first
timein that single instant, encounters the glance
of the hunter.
CHAPTER V.
Well, perform it,
The law is satisfied: they can but die.
The Old Law
.
A new
spirit rose in his bosom as he beheld this
movement. Why should I not pursue? was the
involuntary self-inquiry of his mind. He grew
stronger as he proposed it. The stiffness of his
wounded limb seemed to lessen, and grasping the
staff with which he had been wont to hobble across
his chamber in the last two days, he moved forward
with a degree of rapidity that was scarcely justified
by prudence. Unseen, he passed through the gallery,
descended the steps, followed the lightly-beaten
footpath
which he had seen her take around the garden,
and was soon hidden in the same forests which yet
concealed her from his sight. A new thought
entered
his mind at this moment. A keen pang of
jealousy
thrilled through his heart. What if I intrude
upon a sacred privacy? Goes she not to meet this
smiling fellowthis Saxonthis pleasing
wordmonger
?
Walk they not together daily?
Wherefore
should I approach them? Had the question
been answered by his reason merely, he would most
probably have returned to the dwelling without
farther
search. But he remembered the backward
glance which she gave himher sudden flight, and
that memory, which answered nothing and told
nothing
,
had yet a signification of more effect upon his
heart than all the arguments of his mind to his
understanding
.
He went forward, and she had neither fled
so far nor so fast, but that he was able to overtake
her. She sat upon a fallen pineone that the
hurricane
had but lately wrested from its foundation, the
foliage yet green upon its branches. The long
leaves hung around, and half-shrouded her from his
sight. Him she saw not, but remained in her sitting
posture, unconscious of his approach, until he was
within a few paces of her. Then she started to her
feetthen he beheld that facethose eyes once
more turned upon him, and he fancied they had
been glistening with tears. But this might have
been a fancy onlywhat need had she to weep?
He saw no tears, and dismissed the suspicion from his
mind; but he could not doubt that her cheeks were
more pale than usual, and the languid brightness of
her eyestheir dewy softnesscould not be
mistaken
.
There were certainly some keen sensibilities
at work within her bosom. He was moved
instinctively
by this convictionhe felt that there were
some weaknesses in his own, but he strove to silence
and put down that ever ready consciousness which
is so apt, in every young man's bosom, to convert
into his special divinity the first passable damsel
whom he sees. Vernon was a youth of calm, good
sense, and he was determined to keep his emotions of
blood and fancy from having their own way. He
assumed a lightness and gayety of tone when he
addressed her, which called for an effort. He took
her hand, re-conducted her to her seat, and placed
himself beside her while he spoke.
Give me joy, Miss Wilson, that I am at last able
to find out your favourite walks. I caught a glimpse
VOL. II. 7
of you from the window, and grew strong to
pursue
,
as I beheld the ease of your flight. I have long
envied you these walks,let me make you my
acknowledgments
,
since it is, perhaps, owing to your
friendly cares that I am so soon able to enjoy them.
Not to minenot to mine, was her hasty
reply
.
I have done but little, Mr. VernonI am
very happy that any thing that we could do should
have been agreeable to one to whom we owe so
much. You
Ah! you would remind me of a happy moment
but you need not; I am too proud of having
served you, however slightly, to forget my own
good deeds. I may not boast of them, but I need
no help to persuade me to remember them; they will
always form a part of that pleasant chronicle, Miss
Wilson, which the heart makes of its fortunate
events. I shall set them all down together with the
five days enjoyed in your cottage.
Enjoyed, Mr. Vernon? was the smiling
question
.
Endured, you mean.
No, enjoyed, was the answer. The pain of
the illness is soon forgotten in the cares of the nurse;
and the kindness which has soothed is always a
pleasure to be remembered, even when the pain is
forgotten. Let me say, then, how sweet to me is
the obligation of gratitude which I feel to you and
yours, for the pleasant cares which have ministered
to my feebleness and need.
Do not speak of it, Mr. Vernon. My father
has only done his duty. But for you, we know not
what might have happened to us. You saved us at
the hazard of your life, and what we have done
called for no hazard.
But much troublemuch annoyance
No, no! Mr. Vernonit was a pleasure, sir
to
She pausedthe jealousy of a nice maiden
delicacy
became apprehensive that her gratitude might
express itself too warmly. Gratitude she knew was
justified, but
that
had its own language, and the
caution
was only a proper one, lest she might employ for
its expression the language of a warmer sentiment.
Perhaps Vernon detected something of this
consciousness
,
for he put his hand upon hers with a
gentle effort to detain it in his grasp, as he said,
hurriedly
Speak, Miss Wilsongo on.
She withdrew her handthe flush was renewed
upon her face, but she said nothing. A moment
followed
of awkward silence to them both, which was
only broken by a strong and decided effort on the
part of Vernon. His lively manner had utterly
departed
in the first few moments of their interview,
and it was with a gravity natural on many accounts
to his situation that he renewed the conversation.
Next, he said, to my acknowledgments for
your hospitality and kindness, Miss Wilson, is the
desire which I feel to place myself in a right point
of view before you. I would seek to assure and
convince you that your kindness has not been
bestowed
upon a criminal, though I have no proof
beyond
my own asseveration, by which to convince
you that I am utterly guiltless of this murder which
is laid to my charge.
Oh, think not, Mr. Vernon, that we believe
that we can believe this foolish chargeI am sure
I know that it is groundless.
On my honour, you do me only justice. The
shedding of bloodthe taking of lifeis an offence
against humanity from which my soul would shrink,
unless in a case of absolute necessity. The only
deed of the kind of which I have ever been guilty
is one that took place almost in your sight, and was
strictly justifiable from the circumstances
preceding
it.
Yesyes! faltered the maiden, with a shudder.
The young man for whose death I have been
summoned to answer, was one of whom I knew but
littlenothing unfavourablebut on the contrary,
much which commanded my indulgence and regard.
I had neither quarrel to maintain against him, nor
interest to pursue; and my own objects, Miss
Wilson
,
were of a nature which made me particularly
desirous to avoid all strife and difficulty with any
and every body. That I have not been able to
avoid them, is due rather to my evil fortune than my
desire. I know nothing of the grounds upon which
this charge has been made against me, or of the
parties
making it, but I trust soon, Miss Wilson, to
satisfy the judge of that innocence which you have
so kindly declared yourself willing to believe.
Oh, sir, we knowwe hope it will be so. I am
sure there can be no doubt of it. My father says
he is certain you will be released, and Mr. Jamison
told me but yesterday that you no more committed
the crime than he did, and he will soon enough
convince
the justice to that effect. He is very friendly
to you, sir, that Mr. Jamison.
A good fellowa strange fellow, whom I never
saw before the evening of my arrival at Lucchesa;
but, like the frank men of our western forests
generally
,
he carries his heart in one hand and his weapon
in the other, always and equally ready whether for
friend or foe. I hope he may not be too sanguine in
this matterI rely rather upon my own
consciousness
of innocence than upon any knowledge of the
facts with which I am acquainted. I know nothing
of the circumstances upon which the accusation is
based.
Nor does he, I imagine; at least, he could tell
father nothing, who was very anxious to know. His
convictions in your favour seemed to arise from his
prepossessions; you are fortunate, Mr. Vernon, in
finding friends so readilyperhaps that fact alone
may be considered a presumption in your defence.
I am afraid it would go but a little way to my
acquittal; but then it can be nothing but a
presumption
against me, and a presumption, unsupported
by strong circumstances, can do me little harm.
And yet, Miss Wilson, there is something in your
opinion which carries to my mind a hope scarce less
grateful than would be the assurance of my easy
escape from this cruel imputation.
What is that, sir? she asked, innocently. The
question would have been left unspoken had she
looked up in his face when she replied, and beheld
the increasing brightness and piercing regard,
contained
in his glance.
That you found nothing strange or wonderful
nothing unnatural or unexpectedin the supposed
facility with which I have secured the favouring
prepossessions of others. May I hope that he who
has won the friendship of the rude countryman, will
not be thought too presuming if he fancies that he
has also not vainly striven for that of the city
maiden
?
Your friendship, Miss Wilson, would be that
of beauty and youth, and educationtaste without
artificeopinion without rudeness, and intellectual
strength mingled with grace and sentiment. May
I hope for thesemay I dream, in the vanity of a
too sanguine spirit, that in finding these qualities in
you, and estimating them at their true value when
found, I have not prayed in vain for the acquisition
of your regards. Your friendship
He pausedthe sentence remained unfinished,
though its purport was no less clear to her mind
than it was in the mind of him who yet withheld its
7*
utterance. It may be added, that she felt how much
more grateful it was, left unspoken, than if it had
been concluded. Vernon himself felt that it could
not be concluded as it then stood. It was too cold
a projected termination to matter that was naturally
rising into warmth, and a manner already warm
and beginning to be impassioned. He wisely stopped
shortshort where he wasand she breathed less
freely under the pressure of a sentiment which was
strangely sweet, though almost suffocating. And
hethe glow upon his cheek made itself feltthe
tremors at his heart grew almost to a murmur like
the swift dropping of distant falling rain. Was it,
indeed, friendship that he solicited from the
favouring
estimate of Virginia Wilson? At that moment
neither of them thought of friendship,they thought
of any thing beside. The sympathy was of a
stronger sort which was stirring in the bosom of the
two, and it found its proper utterance at last.
But let us abridge the scene. Love passages are
rarely of interest to third parties; and either glide
into the bright fantastics, such as glow in the
ethereal
world and season of a Romeo, or become, in
the measured economy of the modern calculator, a
question of portion, pin-money and proper
establishment
.
In either case, the reader or speculator yawns
in weariness or disgust, and is satisfied with those
results which tend to a final dismissal of all the
parties
.
We might hopewe certainly should pray
for a better interest with these. Vernon was no
lovesick fantastic, though warmed by a
temperament
never subdued, not always measured, and
sometimes endowed with no limited tongue for
utterance
;
but his passions were perhaps more
governable
than those of most young men, and he had
gone through a long course of severe self-study, by
which they had not only been regulated to a certain
movement, but his reason had also been advanced
to a certain supremacy. This self-acquired power
kept his utterance within the bounds of good taste
and proprietyhis love was that of the man and
the gentlemanhis passions were those of
civilization
.
He had learned to know that
blood
frequently
presumes in the language of affection, and becomes
obtrusive because of a selfishness which it disguises
by another name,he also knew that the first lesson
which true love has ever taught, is one of humility
but that humility which is always allied to hope. Love
is the religion of the passions, and its zeal, though
warm and fiery, is still that of one officiating at high
altars, where the first sign of the advent of the god
is shown by the submission of the worshipper. By
gradual transitionsby the one mystic key-note
the look, the word, which, here and there, suggests
the stages by which two hearts, having the same
journey to take, are gradually brought togetheran
interest grew up in the breast of each, leading to a just
comprehension of the other; and ere the one spoke,
the other felt. Vernon, to his own surprise,
discovered
that he had won a heart long before he ever
dreamed of looking for one; and Virginia Wilson
certainly, until she met with our hero, she had never
thought it worth while to take any care of that, which
she now discovered it to be so seriously sweet a
business to surrender.
Though we have denied ourselves the pleasure of
beholding the love scene and hearkening to the love
dialogue between the parties, there was another
who, squat like a toad in the cover of the
neighbouring
foliage, had no such scruples as restrain us.
He heard and witnessed all. This was the outlaw
Saxon. He had followed their footsteps, and had
penetrated to a spot which would enable him to
arrive
at a knowledge as vexing to his spirit as was
the manner degrading by which it was obtained.
He heard, with ill-suppressed fury, the
whispered
word, half doubt, half tendernesshe saw the
smile which trembled in the eye it lightenedthe
gentle meeting of those mingling hands, which,
under Love's slightest pressure, become instincts
themselves and of the most sensitive character;
and no less new than bitter was the pang that went
through his own breast, as he beheld the happiness
he envied. He had only of late grown conscious
of a passion such as he had never felt before. He
had sought Virginia Wilson daily from the first
hour that her presence had shone upon his sight;
and under the pretence of an interest in his wounded
fellow-traveller, he had obtained access to her
dwelling
with the purpose of pressing those attentions by
which he hoped to secure an interest in her heart.
He had joined her in her daily walkswas not
without that easy dialogue and graceful manner
which are of all things most essential to success
with women; and had striven with his best powers
to commend himself to her regards. Yet she had
shrunk from his pursuit; had discouraged the
intimacy
at which he aimedhad responded coldly
to his conversation, and shown herself more than
commonly obtuse whenever he had striven to be
more than commonly intelligible. Yet, here was
one, who, almost without his own consciousness
certainly, without designhad succeeded in that
which had tasked his utmost ability under the
guidance
of a settled purpose and a deliberate scheme.
The mortification of his pride increased the pang of
his disappointment, and the vindictive determination
with which he had before regarded Vernon, now
assumed a deeper character in his mind.
It is well, was his thought, as he surveyed
the pairbut the hour of vengeance is at hand.
You would bind the outlaw, Harry Vernon! We
shall see. Artful, and strong, and sagacious, as you
think yourself, you are in the toils. Deceived by
one traitor, Clement Foster will scarcely suffer
himself
,
hand and foot, to be manacled by another.
Pliant once, he is now unyielding; and by all that
is sacred in the love of the saint and the fear of the
sinner, you shall pay the penalty of your
presumption
by your life. You would hunt the bear in his
native brake, beware of his embrace.
He left the place of his concealment with a stealthy
step, and without disturbing the lovers, who were
now but too much absorbed with one another to
have senses for the rustling branches, or the slight
motion of a gliding form among the leaves. He
proceeded to the tavern with all the impatience of
hate and summoned his confederates, who played
the part of the officers of justice. To them he
issued
his commands, and described the place in
which the lovers were still to be found.
Seek him there, said the vindictive outlaw;
and seize on him at once. Give him no indulgence
drag him away, though you find him in her arms.
Hear none of his promiseshearken to none of her
entreaties. The scoundrel is a spy upon usanother
Hurdis; and he deserves no mercy at our hands.
Away! you know the place.
He saw them depart in the same instant, and
waited with malicious impatience, the result of his
previous mandate. The lovers meanwhile had
prepared
to return to the cottage. They were already
on their waythe hand of the maiden in that of
Vernon's; her eyes cast upon the ground as she
listened to those accents so dear to the young heart
those idle words and whispers, which, though
they sound sillily enough in the ears of third persons,
seem to the initiate more precious than manna in
the wilderness. At this moment they were
encountered
by the ruffians who stood suddenly in the path
before them. Virginia shrunk back in alarm, while
a faint scream issued from her lips.
How now, fellows! What mean you?
demanded
Vernon, who did not at first recognise
them.
Fellows! indeed! said one. We'll see who's
the better fellow when Judge Nawls sets eyes upon
us. That's for being civil to you, I suppose, and
letting you off when we had you. But there's an
end to that. You must go along with us.
Along with you! Who are you?
Oh, you've no memory of us. I shouldn't be
surprised if you've forgot yourself too. You're not
Mr. Harry Vernon, that killed one Thomas Horsey,
and we aint the men that 'Squire Nawls sent to catch
you. Come, come, young 'un, that's not doing the
thing handsomelythat's not keeping to your
promise
.
You must go along with us at once, so drop the
young lady's arm, and here's our'n. It aint quite so
soft a one, it's true, but, by the hokey, it's better able
to help you, and then you know, need must when the
devil drivesso no grumbling.
The action of the ruffian corresponded with his
words. His hand was already extended toward the
collar of Vernon's coat, when, stepping back a pace,
the indignant youth lifted his staff with a promptness
and determination which drove the fellow back much
faster than he had advanced. In another instant,
however, a calmer mood filled the mind of Vernon.
This is all idle. I certainly do not mean to resist
these menI have no reason to fear the magistrate.
Such were his thoughts as he turned to Virginia.
Miss Wilson, forgive me. I am giving you a
needless alarm. These are the officers of justice,
and seeing me well enough to travel, they naturally
enough seek to perform their duty. Will you
proceed
to the house?I will follow you. I would speak
with them awhile.
He led her forward until they had passed the
officers
,
then left her to proceed alone while he returned
to them.
Gentlemen, I will be ready to go with you in an
hour;I will but return to the dwelling of Mr.
Wilson
,
and at the end of that time will meet you at
the tavern.
Twont do, my boy, was the answer, you're
too ready with your stick to be trusted. You must
go with us now. We can't trust you out of our
sight.
The youth would have expostulated, but while he
spoke one of the ruffians threw himself upon him,
bore him to the earth, and, in spite of all his
assurances
that he would quietly accompany them,
proceeded
to bind his arms with a cord which the
providence
of Saxon had procured for the purpose, and
which the assistance of his companion enabled him
to use in spite of the angry but feeble resistance of
the prisoner. When bound, they lifted him to his
feet, and placing themselves, one on each hand,
commanded
him to move forward in the direction of the
tavern. He did so with as much quietness of temper
as he could command under the reasonable anger
which naturally followed the provocation. He tried
to convince himself that they were doing nothing
more than their dutythat they had yielded him all
reasonable indulgence; and were bound, as soon as
they discovered his ability to travel, to secure his
person against the chances of escape. But the
sedative
effect of his own reasonings was very partial.
He still could not resist the wish that his arms were
once more free, and his staff once more in his hands.
My staff should make ye skip, thought he, in the
language of the Ancient Mariner. But he
overcame
a desire which he felt to be no less idle than
hopeless, and tried to obtain his remedy in another
way. A civil answer turneth away wrath, and
he had long known that a civil tongue will carry a
man unscotched through the whole western country.
Assuming the men beside him to be no other than
what they professed to be, he determined to reason
with them as persons who could have no motive for
refusing any indulgence to a prisoner which was not
inconsistent with the security of their trust.
You are unnecessarily hard with me, men, he
said quietly. You can have no reason for thinking
I would run away, since, if such had been my
desire
,
I could have been off at daylight, and none had
been the wiser. Why then would you make an
enemy
of a man who can be your friendwho is
willing
to reward you? Suffer me to go back to the
dwelling of Mr. Wilson for an hour only. You, in
the meantime, can watch the dwelling on all sides.
My horse is at the tavernyou can secure him, and
without a horse I cannot fly very far. I wish but to
make my acknowledgments to the family which has
treated me with so much kindness.
You ought t' have done all that before, my lark
there's no time for you now. So set forward. I
tell you there's no trusting you. You clipped me
over my noddle already, the first day I set hands on
you, and my jaw isn't quite smooth yet; and you
forget, just a bit ago, you'd have tried it again with
that stout hickory that helped you forward. Twice
warned is enough for meI don't risk a third scuffle
with any man if I can help it. So, look you, give
but a single flirt again, and here's into you.
The fellow showed a monstrous bowie-knife as
he spoke these words, and by his reckless
expression
of countenance, suited to his bold and unfeeling
language, Vernon readily believed that his better
policy was to obey quietly. He went forward, and
encountered the hardy Alabamian, Jamison, who
was just about setting out for Wilson's, on his
customary
afternoon visit to his friend. Saxon was
nowhere to be seen. Nothing could exceed the
rage of the Alabamian, as he witnessed the
degrading
situation in which his friend stood. He
was at once for fighting the officers, and nothing
but the most earnest appeals from Vernon kept him
from violence. One thing, however, he was
resolved
to do, and in this particular our hero was
satisfied he should have his own waythat was
to cut the cords which bound the arms of the
prisoner
.
He drew his knife for the purpose, and was
advancing, when the constables both opposed him
with like weapons. But he was not to be
intimidated
by this show of valour.
There's two of you, he said, but I count
myself
good for three, at least, such slender chaps as
you; so here goes at your kidneys, and one drive
of my six pounder will let more sins out of your
carcasses than all the saints could ever put in
virtues
.
With an earnestness which left nothing to
conjecture
,
the stout-hearted Alabamian, wielding his
knife in air,a huge, bright instrument, with a
back-bone like that of a butcher's cleaver, so heavy
that its own weight, if falling, must have made its
wounds deadlyprepared to rush forward upon
the constables. But these worthies were not
willing
to wait for such an encounter. Receding from
their posts, they clamoured to the bystanders for
protection, crying out a rescuea rescue.
Without heeding their clamour, or suffering any
thing to divert him from his purpose until it was
finished
,
Jamison cut the cords of the prisoner, and
seizing
VOL. II. 8
the moment when the officers were most noisy
and most remote, he whispered in his ear
Be off now, Harry Vernonthere's my own
horse hitched close beside you, and I'll keep off the
rascals while you're mounting. Show 'em clean
heels, and I'll be after you with your own nag, and
will join you at Buzzard Roost in two hours. They're
afraid of me, the niggers, and you see I aint afraid
of them. Dn 'em, I don't mind half-a-dozen of
them, fair front and no dodging. So go ahead, my
boy, and leave the scatteration to me. You're too
weak to fight now, so there's no reason or right to
expect it of you.
The Alabamian was astounded when Vernon
thanked him, but declared he had no purpose of the
kind.
I am innocent of the charge, Mr. Jamison, and
do not fear to meet it.
Oh, well! That's right enough; but guilty or
innocent, you see, Harry, when they're for putting
ropes on a freeman, that's a time to be off, or to fight
with tiger's tusk. I'm all grinders after that, and a
ridge saw that works along the middle.
Meanwhile the clamours of the constables were
gathering a crowd about them.
He has cut the prisoner loosethe man that
murdered Tom Horseyhelp!seize!catch the
murderer, &c.
Shut up, you yelping pugnose! cried the
indignant
Alabamian, and none of your dd lies about
a business you can't understand. Look you, men,
they had the gentleman corded up as if he had been
a panther of the wildernessroped his hands behind
him,and he just out of a sick bed, and making no
resistance, and telling them all the while he was
ready to go along with 'em. It's only they're sich
blasted cowards, afraid of a sick manafraid of
any man. Dang my buttons, I'm almost ashamed I
didn't borrow a pen-knife to do the business. This
bowie-blade is a'most too big for such etarnal small
souls as they've got.
You hear him confess he drew his knife upon
us? said one of the officers to the crowd.
Ay, said Jamison, and how it scared the
niggers
white when they saw it.
He rescued the prisoner from us.
A lie, niggerhe's at your servicehe says it
himselfso bring out his horse; and I'll tell you
another thingI'm at your service too. I'll ride along
with you and see fair play, and if you've got any
thing to say agin Dick Jamison, let it out as loud as
you please when you stand before the judge.
The scene ended with the quiet departure of
Vernon
,
accompanied by his friend Jamison, under the
enforced escort of the officers.
CHAPTER VI.
Caliban
.
Lo, how he mocks me! wilt thou let him, my lord?
Trinculo
.
Lord, quoth he!that a monster should be such a
natural!
The Tempest
.
Having
now fairly lodged Vernon for the murder
of Horsey, it is high time that we should retrace our
steps and look into the progress of the latter
important
personage. Though somewhat baffled in his
hope of having a companion, in a kindred spirit, to
the end of his journey, the stage-struck hero was not
without his consolation in the moment of the parting
from his friend. He was on his way to the scene
of actionanother day would bring him to the place
where the wandering tribe was to be found, for
whose communion he panted even as the hart
panteth
after the water brooks; and visions of theatric
glory began to gather on his eyes. With that
restlessness
of imagination which betrayed itself in
every thing which he said and did, he was already
fancying himself in the midst of such difficulties,
arising from bad management and the laboured
rivalry
of inferior persons, as were really grateful to
a man of his temperament. His cogitations, which
broke forth at moments into rabid soliloquy, were
most generally of this description. Now he laughed
at the idea of Jim Tilton and Hugh Peters, and the
ridiculous figures which they must cut as Brutus
and Julius Csar; at the next moment, he was
soliciting
their applause for some new reading with
which he contemplated to astound the natives and
improve Shakspeare. Anon he went back to the
cottage of Yarbers, and his visions, then, were of
Mary Stinson as the most perfect Juliet that ever
stimulated the best capacities of a Montague; and
as that fancy worked in his mind, his voice grew
more emphatic, and a spectator in the bushes might
have been no less surprised than amused to have
heard and seen him as he rode, declaiming at the
full pitch of his lungs to Juliet in the balcony, and
at moments, in the earnestness of his action, almost
flinging himself from the ungainly and venerable
steed of his sire, whose neck he sometimes embraced,
by a very natural error of his imagination which
confounded it with the form of Juliet, or Mary
Stinson
rather, who, in such moments, seemed brought
immediately within his reach. In this manner, with
a mind far away, in a province utterly foreign to
that through which his only half-conscious person
travelled, he went forward without interruption, and
was only brought back to the actual condition of
things around him when he reached the river, and
the grim Charon of that stygian stream, leading his
horse through bog and sluice, contrived, with some
difficulty and after no little delay, to place the two
fairly in his boat. Some time was consumed in
conveying him across, for the river swamp, in the
day of which we write, was one of the most
interminable
intricacies that ever distressed a good steed
or vexed an impatient traveller. But the delay did
not so much affect the actor. He soon made a
companion
of the boatmana simple, stupid fellow, who
scarcely comprehended five of all the words that
were said to him, and answered none. But Horsey
needed no answerhis only object was an auditor,
8*
and he was sufficiently satisfied, if suffered to talk
on without stint or limit, though the hearer made
no response to any of the questions which he asked.
These were neither few nor unimportant; but as the
actor did not wait for an answer, why should we?
He was soon, comparatively speaking, set across
the river; but the thousand hollows of the swamp,
filled with the waters of a recent freshet, were
around his path, leaving it at moments doubtful in
what direction he should pursue his way. But Tom
Horsey was not the man to suffer himself to be
bewildered
long. His mind soon ran off in the
direction
of his desires, and looking rather to the end of
his journey than to his course, he gave himself not
much concern about the way which led to it. After
a few moments of reluctant attention, in which it
seemed to his eyes that all his efforts only led his
hobbling horse from one sluice into another, he soon
forgot every thing but the one subject most at his
heart; and if his allegiance wavered for an instant,
it was, perhaps, in regard to an exception which
might be considered, indeed, only an auxiliar to the
othernamely, the person of Mary Stinson, and
she as Juliet. With a mind thus directed, he had
no attention to bestow upon the external world
around him, and did not seem to heed, or be
conscious
of the fact, that the day was approaching to
its closeand that so far from nearing the cottage
where he proposed to spend the night; he had, in
fact, utterly departed from every thing like a road,
his horse slowly toiling forward through Indian
footpaths
that deepened occasionally into the cart or
wagon width, but only at places where the presence
of bog or creek suggested the best of reasons why
they should do so, and not because they had ever
been employed by any such vehicles. But, utterly
absorbed in his own speculations, none of these signs
were perceptible to the actor, and night would have
come upon and caught him in the swamp before he
would have been conscious of his predicament; but
for the sudden appearance upon his path of one,
whose wild and uncouth exterior and abrupt
entree
,
were of too startling a character to pass without
regard
.
The stranger was a chunky little imp, not
more than four feet high; wearing a bunch upon his
shoulder, which at first glance, suggested to Horsey
the idea of a native born Richard. His arms were
long like those of an ape; his ears of corresponding
dimensions; his lips, pursed into a point like two
bits of shrivelled coonskin, were covered with a
thick furze, not unlike that of the hair upon the same
animal; and with a short pug-like nose, and little,
quick, staring gray eyes, that peeped out from under
a shaggy white pent house of hairhe presented
altogether
the most comical appearance that could be
imagined, and one that would have made the
fortune
of a cunning showman in any of the Atlantic
cities. His legs, though short, were strangely bowed
indeed, the extreme curve which they described
was one cause of their shortness. He might have
risen to five fair feet, could they have been smoothed
out symmetrically. As he went forward, which he
did with a readiness that occasioned surprise in the
spectator, the bow of the advanced leg would
completely
overlap the other, so that he would seem, to the
passing glance, in possession of one only. His garb
contributed something to his comical appearance.
He wore tights, as pantaloons, which showed to a
nicety the attenuated size of the crooked limbs on
which he depended for support. He seemed almost
entirely without flesh. The lower limbs were not
merely short and deformed, but slender to a degree
which made the spectator apprehensive that they
might snap as readily as pipe stems under the swollen
and dropsical bulk of body which they carried. But
this show was deceptive. The urchin had an
elasticity
of muscle, a capacity of stretch and endurance
in his sinews, and a share of positive strength in his
excessive breadth of shoulders, which made him
little inferior in conflict to most ordinary men; and
in speed he could have outwinded the best. A little
jacket of green bombasin, made on a plan quite as
narrow and contracted as the breeches, rendered
the hump singularly conspicuous upon his shoulders;
and by contracting these somewhat too closely,
served to throw the long and apish arms out from
the body in such a manner as greatly to increase
the similitude between the owner and the ungainly
animal to which we have likened him. A coonskin
cap, set rather jauntily on his cocoanut-shaped head,
and tied under his chin with a green riband,
completed
this parody on man, who, leaping suddenly
out of a green bush in the middle of a mud puddle,
that lay beside the path, proved a more startling
object of terror to the horse of the actor, than of
surprise to himself. The animal sunk back on his
haunches with a snort of terror; and, with a greater
show of muscle and spirit than he had deigned to
vouchsafe since he had begun the journey from
Raymond, he was for wheeling about in good
earnest
,
and making fleeter back tracks than he had
ever made before. But that Horsey was a born
rider, like every other western man, he had been
soused for a season in any one of the hundred miry
habitations of frog, hog and alligator, which so
thickly garnished the low territory around him.
Meanwhile the little urchin stood upright, or as
nearly upright as he could, in the narrow pathway,
never making the slightest movement to budge or
assist the rider, but grinning with a smile of
satisfaction
at every wheel and flirt of the still frightened
animal, which promised to fling his rider into the
ditch. The unassisted efforts of Horsey, however,
managed to evade these attempts, and at length,
finally succeeded in subduing the spiritno difficult
taskeven if he did not so soon quiet the terrors of
old dot-and-go-one. Shaking his finger at the
dwarf as he forced the horse forward, the actor
exclaimed
with a degree of good nature, which
probably
arose from the consciousness that his good
horsemanship had not been without a spectator,
and which, had he not been the conqueror in the
strife, would not have been so apparent
Ah, you comical little fellow! How you scared
my horse!
And you too, if the truth was known, Mr.,
was the unhesitating reply of the urchin. I'm a
man mighty apt to scare people that's not used to
me.
Gad! there's reason in what you say!
exclaimed
the actor. But look you, my pretty little
Jack of Clubs, suppose I had been a sour-tempered
fellow instead of what I am, what would I be doing
at this time, and what sort of speech would you be
making? Wouldn't I be using a hickory upon your
shoulders, my lad, for scaring my horse, and
His rider! The urchin finished the sentence
after his own fashion. Ha! ha! ha! The woods
rang with his yelling laughtera peal more
strange and unnatural than any thing in his shape.
Ha! ha! ha! Mr. Travellermore easy said
than done. If the thing were tried, it might be your
shoulders and my hickory; and if you think
otherwise
,
why, you can only begin the business as soon
as you please.
Say you so, you little apology for a manyou
little cock-a-doodle-dooI'm almost tempted to try
odds with you for the fun of it, for riding by one's
self makes one rather dull, and the fun that turns
up by the roadside is always apt to be the funniest.
Wait a bit, then, till I can cut a hickory.
And the actor made a show of dismounting as he
spoke.
Boo! boo! cried the little urchin with a yell,
as, leaping from the path, he ran along a fallen
tree, slippery with mire, that rose out of the ooze
of the swamp and stretched away into a canebrake,
in the midst of whose tops the dwarf squatted
himself
down, and grinned, and laughed, and pointed
with his finger at the assailant, confident that he
could not so easily be approached by an
unpractised
footman, and secure of a second means of
flight, in the branches of a tupola hanging above
him into which a customary leap would easily carry
him.
Ah! ha! exclaimed Horsey, there you are;
and you think yourself safe, do you, but what do
you think of that, my little mannikin, eh?
He pointed a pistol upward as he spoke, but the
derisive laugh of the dwarf mocked this exhibition,
as he in turn produced from his breast a like
weapon
,
the dimensions of which would have swallowed
up those of his assailant.
Ha! ha! and what do you think of that? said
the urchin. It's snout for snoutand the
advantage
is all o' my side as yet.
How do you make that out, you pretty little
deformity
?
demanded the actor, in good-natured
accents
,
amused rather than annoyed by the readiness
of the urchin.
Well, it's easy enough, and you might see for
yourself, replied the other; I'm rather the littlest
man of the two, but I have the biggest pistol
you're the biggest man with the littlest pistol. Aint
my chance the best to hit, you big fellowaint it
now? Suppose we trythat's the best way to come
at ityou may bang away first, for all the good it's
going to do you.
Come down, you small specimen of humanity
you youngest son of the little old gentleman in black,
said the actor, with a hearty good humour that
satisfied
the dwarf there was nothing more to fear. Come
down, you queer little coxcomb, and let's hear all
about you. You are certainly the strangest
sniggering
little scamp, that I've seen in all my travels.
You'd make a most superb fellow on the stagea
witch in Macbethno!'Gad, maybe you're one of
us already.
Maybe I am, maybe I'm not! said the dwarf
with a grin as he descended. Who are youcan
you bite?
Bite!
Yes, bitehave you got teeth to bite, or are you
nothing but a barking dog?
Teeth to bitebarking dog!why you talk as
queerly as you look, my little Richard.
Richard! Why, who told you my name?
What! your name is Richard then?
Yes, with a pair of scales to the end of ityou
couldn't guess that, I reckon?
No! I don't know what you mean.
I'll tell youmy name is Richard Stillyards, or
Dick Stillyardssometimes they call me Dick Still,
and sometimes Dick Yards, and then it's only when
I'm in the humour that I answer them. I always
answer gentlemen when they call me by my right
name.
This was said with a manner which filled Horsey
with merriment, and would have filled a wiser man
with sadness. The swagger, the solemn strut with
which it was accompanied, and the air of superiority
with which the narrow and protrusive chin was
perked forward, had in it so much of a rotund
self-conceit
,
that never was that foible of humanity so
completely be-mocked and be-devilled.
Why, what is there to laugh at, I wonder? said
the dwarf, in tones and with a manner of more real
dignity, though with an equally ludicrous effort.
Hark ye, Stillyards, my dear fellow, cried the
good-natured Horsey, let us shake hands. You're
a dd comical little fellow, Stillyards, and we must
jog on together. I'll make your fortune, Stillyards;
by the powers, you shall grow famousyou shall.
Don't you grin, my boy, I'm telling you nothing but
the truth. You shall grow famous and make your
fortune. You shall be one of usand I'll undertake
your tuition. By the ghost of David, Stillyards, I'll
find you a dozen characters in Shakspeare alone
which could not be done by any body half so well
as yourself. You have read Shakspeare, Stillyards,
have you not?
Read! said the dwarf, with something like a
sinking of his dignity. Well, stranger, to say the
truth, reading aint my business, though, I suppose,
I could larn just as soon as any body else. There's
a nigger of Joe Smith's, named Peterhis young
misses taught him to read in a short six months only,
and he can now read write-hand 'most as good as
print. I'm sure if I had any chance, I could larn as
quick as Peter.
Devil a doubt, Dicky, that you might, but who's
to learn you, unless you could persuade the same
young lady that taught Peter to give you a few
lessons?
Why, didn't you say you'd larn me? said
Richard Stillyards, with a grin of satisfaction that
caused a considerable encroachment of his mouth
upon the territory usually conceded to cheeks and
ears.
To speak and act, you terrapin, and not to read,
was the reply.
Look you, stranger, if it's the length of my
teeth you want to know, call me out of my name,
replied
the urchin, with a grave air of offended dignity.
You're not the first man that's lost flesh between
my jaws for making too free; so it's jist as well you
should know it beforehand. I know I'm a little
smaller than you, and maybe not quite so
good-looking
,
but that's neither here nor there, and I don't
mind the difference of size no more, when I feel
wolfish, no more than I'd mind a dog-bark in a
seedy night. I axed you a question jist now, and
didn't get an answer.
What was that, Mr. Richard Stillyards?
demanded
Horsey, with an air of respectful deference,
exceedingly delighted with the strange monster he
had encountered, and disposed, with a true actor's
fondness for fun, to humour the weakness which
betrayed
itself so ludicrously. What was it, Mr.
Richard?speak again, and don't imagine for an
instant
that I am at all desirous to fill your jaws with
my flesh, as I cannot say with certainty that I have
any to sparecertainly none to spare, unless you
are willing to take it just where I give you leave. I
could give you a bite in one place or in another, and
not miss it, perhaps, but it's likely you'd be choosing
for yourself. Eh?
The literal manner in which Horsey had chosen
to accept the coarse figurative language which the
urchin had employed was, in western parlance,
a huckleberry above his persimmon; and Mr.
Richard Stillyards began to regard his companion
as an animal no less strange to him than he appeared
to Horsey. After a brief space, which he devoted
in silence to a jealous survey of those features,
which, by this time, the actor had schooled into
inflexibility
,
VOL. II. 9
he replied, as if satisfied with his
examination
I was a-thinking at first, stranger, that you was
a-funning with me, but I believe it's only because you
don't know no better. I'm a country gentleman in
these parts, and have company camping out in the
woods, here away, down by the corner of Little
Bend in the Cane Prairieevery fellow's a man
among 'em, all barking dogsand so I axed you
about your teeth.
My teeth?
Yes, your teeth, replied the deformed curiosity;
aint you got teeth? Can't you bite?
The actor surveyed him with intentness, and the
result of his examination, as he beheld the
bona fide
earnestness in the fellow's face, was to convince him
that Richard Stillyards was an idiota conclusion
which, no doubt, has been already reached by the
reader. But let him not be mistaken. Dick was no
idiot, but a cunning owl that hoots with a greater
drawl of melancholy when most meditating mischief.
He had his purposes in the question that seemed so
excessively simple to his companion, and was
answered
satisfactorily when he received no answer.
Dick, my lad, you're a strange fellow. To ask
a man whose teeth have been opening upon you
every moment since we have met, if he has any!
Oh, no harm, misterI don't mean any harm
to be sure, I see you have got teeth, and I oughtn't
to ask, but it's a way I've got; but you're
a-travelling
only? and here the urchin gave a keen, quick
glance to the corpulent saddle-bags, filled to the brim
with knight, prince, warrior, and tyrant, which hung
from the saddle of the actor. In a second instant
his eye was averted, as he beheld that of the
traveller
fixed upon him.
Dick, my boy, said Horsey, you're a nut for
the devil to crack, for dme if I can. To be sure
I'm a traveller, just as certainly as I've got teeth;
and now that you remind me, I'd like to know where
I'm travelling, and how far I may be from a place
of lodging?
Why, don't you know?
Devil a bit.
What! you don't know where you're a-travelling?
I reckon you knew when you begun?
Why, yes! That I did, but look you, many a
man sets out for the horse and finds the halter. I
started for Benton.
Benton?
Yes, Benton. How far am I from the house of
one Jenks Glover?
Jenks Glover! Why, he's on the lower road
a matter of sixteen miles to the left of you. You've
got on the wrong track.
The devil you say!
No! I say the wrong track; it's you that said
`the devil,' three times, or maybe more, and it's no
wonder you lost the road. You must have lost it
after the first jump at the ferry.
And it's how far to Benton?
Mush! I can't tell youit's on the other road,
and a smart round about chance to get to it.
This news confounded our traveller. He shrugged
his shoulders, and looked round him upon the dismal,
dark, and seemingly impenetrable swamp, the pale
cypresses of which shot up sparingly, with the tupola
and the ash, to gigantic heights, interlaced between
with a complete wall of matted canes, briars, and
wild thorny vines, that promised to defy even the
rude pressure of the grisly bear, or his more
good-natured
sable brother. The prospect made the actor
shudder.
Dick, my boy, he said, whose is the nearest
house, and how far?
There aint no house on this road, that I knows
of, and nobody.
`If that thy speech be sooth!' the actor began,
after the nature within him; but the dogged stare of
the dwarf warned him that his companion suffered
nothing equivocal, and he resumed in plain English:
No house, Richardno house, my dear fellow?
Why, what am I to dowhere am I to sleep
to-night
?
A grin diffused itself from ear to ear upon the
fellow's
countenance, as he listened to the words and
beheld the visible consternation of the actor. He
seemed disposed to amuse himself at the expense of
the traveller.
I reckon you aint used to sleeping out of the
dry. You were born, maybe, in a nice house, with
a close roof to it?
Ay, to be sure, and in a devilish comfortable bed
too, I reckon; but what then, Dicky, my darling?
It's a bad chance you'll have for a dry house
here in Big Black Swamp; there's no better house
than Cane Castle, and it's so large you can't see the
walls, and it's so high you can't see the roof; and if
you aint used to the stars for candles, you'll have to
go to bed in the dark. There's no house near by,
and only one under ten miles, and that's 'Squire
Nawls'and he's a judge, and don't take in
travellers
.
But he lives on the Benton road.
No he don't. I reckon he's on the upper road,
a smart distance from it. As for roadyou're in no
road at all hereyou're in Big Black Swamp, and
if your nose was long enough, you could smell the
river at a short mile off, on your right. If you was
used to the smell, you could smell it here without
going much farther. I can, easy enough,snuffing,
while he spoke, with consummate complaisance
and a mighty sweet smell it has, too, just after the
sun's gone down.
You're an amateur, Mr. Richard.
No, dd if I am, and I tell you agin, stranger,
'twont do to call me by any nickname. I'm Mr.
Richard Stillyards, or Dick Stillyards, and I won't
go by any other, so I warn you before danger.
Well, Dick, my dear fellow, I'll be civilthe
fact is, I'm in no humour for making enemies. But
tell me where I am to sleep to-nightwhere shall I
get a bed?
I licked Ike Laidler only a month ago, 'cause
he called me a little circumstance, continued the
deformed.
And sufficient provocation too, said the actor;
but, Mr. Stillyards, the bedthe bedthe house
to sleep in.
Well, now, stranger, you're mighty pushing.
Ha'n't I told you there's no house under ten miles
Then you told a whopper, Dick Toady, cried
a third person, suddenly emerging from the bushes
on the left, and interrupting the dwarf without any
of that scrupulous consideration upon which he was
so much disposed to insist in his conversation with
Horsey. The stranger was a small man, with a
narrow
sunburnt face, a hook nose, and lively twinkling
gray eyes, that seemed to cover a world of cunning.
His voice was good-humoured, and at the first sound
of it the dwarf started with an air of dissatisfaction,
which did not seem to justify the free and familiar
manner with which the new-comer had addressed
him.
How should you tell the gentleman, Toady, that
there's no house nearer than Judge Nawls'?
Well, where's any?
9*
Why, here, you blue bottle, here in Cane Castle,
hard by, within a Choctaw's mile. When the
stranger asks for a house, what does he mean but a
place where he can take his snooze out without
danger
and disturbance. He don't mean wall of clay
and clapboardshe means nothing more than a
good supper and an easy sleep. Am I right,
stranger?
Horsey, somewhat relieved of the annoying
conviction
that he must sleep in a canebrake with the
soft ooze of a rank swamp in place of a mattress,
was yet not utterly satisfied that this description of
his desire was altogether a correct one. Still, there
seemed little choice, and the free buoyant manner of
the stranger was too much after his own heart not
to reconcile him to things even more disagreeable
than those he feared. He was consoled to find that
if he must sleep in the swamp, he was to have a
good bedfellowa conviction which had not soothed
him for an instant during his whole protracted
conversation
with Mr. Richard Stillyards. He expressed
his assent to the suggestion of the speaker, though
in a qualified measure, but this the other did not seem
to perceive. He proceeded in his speech in a
manner
still more agreeable to the traveller.
We are a few of us, stranger, almost playing
gipsy in the swamp to save expense. There's some
six or eight of us, Today here not being counted,
though he may be thrown in as a sort of
makeweight
.
We sleep pretty much in a huddle, under
pole and bush tents, and there's room for an odd one
when the river's foul and the swamp rises. We are
playersplay-actorsperhaps you don't quite know
what a player is?the people in these parts look on
us with as much wonder as pleasurewe play plays
speak speechesshow tricks, dance and sing, for
the public gratification and our own. We shall soon
set out for Benton, Lexington, Lucchesa, and other
villagessoon as the rest of the boys come inand
if you'll keep in the neighbourhood till then, you'll
see rare sport, I tell you.
The effect of this speech upon Horsey may
readily be conjectured. His ejaculations of
pleasure
interrupted the speaker a dozen times before he
had finished, and then he grasped his hand with a
hearty tug that threatened to shake his arm off.
He forgot his cares of bed and lodging and supper
all caresall doubtsall apprehensionsin the one
predominant pleasure that filled his soul; and a
hundred
questions and ejaculations followed each other
too rapidly for correction or reply, as he gave free
vent to those emotions which he had so long and so
unwillingly restrained.
And you belong to little Jim Tilton's company?
And where's Jim?I knew the little fellow in New
Orleans, when he wasa-hem! He was about to
say candle-snuffer, but a little prudence came to his
aid at the moment, and put an estopel on his tongue.
Jim Tilton, said the other, is no go. He's but
a poor drab, and the less we say of him the better.
He's not with us now, and I seriously doubt whether
he'll ever show his face among us. It'll be a dark
day for him when he does.
Ha! how so? how so?
Well, he's a roguethat's the long and short of
it. We played at Manchester to a good smart chance
of a house, and before the play was over, Jim was
missing, and the treasury with him. We heard of
him going down to the river to Vicksburg, and
that's the last. He won't come back, unless he
brings a double chance of picayunes to make up
hush-money.
The skunk! But it's like him, said Horsey.
He was a poor shote of a fellow at Orleans, a mere
candle-snuffer for Cwell, when I was playing
second-rates
at the American.
You playingyou! Why, who are you? said
the new-comer, with a very natural expression of
surprise.
My name is Horsey, replied our traveller, with
a modest dropping of the voice.
Horsey!Not the famous actor at Ludlow's in
Mobile? It can't be possible. Tell me, stranger?
The gusto with which this was spokenthe
voluminous
odour which it bore up into the mental
nostrils
of Horsey, was as good as a year's growtha
prize in the lotteryor a crowning benefit. His
blood tingled in his veins from head to foot, yet
never did mortal face struggle more hard to subdue
the exulting smileto assume and wear the pursed
up aspect of humility.
I was at Ludlow's, he replied, modestly, and
I don't know that there was any actor there but
myself
of my name; but I was not famousno, no! I
did some good thingsI think I didbut they passed
without notice. I do not think I got much
reputation
in Mobile.
My dear sir, you do the Mobilians injustice
great injustice. I have heard of you a thousand
times in Mobile, and from the best authorities. Ra
thought you a first-rate. Ra was an excellent judge
in theatricalsmy particular frienda noble fellow,
and there waswhat's his name?the editor of the
Commercialah! devil take it, I have such a
memory
.
But it matters not. I tell you, Horsey, never
did dramatic reputation stand higher in Mobile than
did yours. You were off for New Orleans when I
reached the city, but every body was asking after
you, and on one occasion it was reported you had
arrived but had no engagement, and then there was
a hue and cry after the manager. It was asked in
all the papers why you were not engaged, and he
was compelled to assure the audience, under the
terrors
of an uproar, that you should be engaged as
soon as your arrival was made known to him. I
was present at the time, and know the stir it made.
Is it possible? I wonder I never heard of it
before
.
I reckon you didn't read the newspapers. It was
all thereall put down as large as life. Nay, if you
were in Orleans, you must have heard of it.
No,indeed I didn't. I never read the
newspapers
.
I took a dislike to editors. I thought them
all humbugsthey spoke very disrespectfully of me
at my first beginning, and I was resolved never to
read their stuff. But I was wrong: I suspect
Wrong! Yes, that you were! You have shut
your ears against some pleasant truths. If they
treated you ill at first, they made you ample amends
afterwards, as I think I can show you. I have, I
think, some of the Mobile Patriot of that time that'll
open your eyes. Newspapers and editors, Mr.
Horsey
,
should not be looked down upon with too much
contempt. They are useful in their way. They
may be made so at least; and, between us, it's best
to treat the humblest profession with charity, since,
if our managers continue this trick of running away
with the strong box, there's no telling to what
condition
we may be reduced.
Very true! But what could be expected of such
a fellow as Tilton. I was astonished when I heard
that he had presumed to set up for a manager.
What! you heard of us then?
YesI heard of you down in Raymond, and
my purpose was to join you.
Join us! God bless you, Mr. Horsey. It'll be
the making of us, said the stranger, grasping
Horsey's
hand and flaming out with the opening in
Richard
`Now is the winter of our discontent
Made glorious summer by the son of York.'
That was well spoken, Mr.ah! pardon me,
but oblige me with your name.
Jones!a humble one, sir, utterly unknown to
fame! replied the other with a great show of
modesty
.
It may be, Mr. Jones, replied Horsey, warmly;
but those two lines which you have just now
spoken were really well saidvery prettily said
excellently well said. I shall look for good things
from you. Indeed, I shall. The flatteries of the
stranger had seduced the judgment of Horsey into
a corresponding flexibility, and in a few moments,
the apprehensions of the traveller were all forgotten
in the exultation and resuscitated hopes of the
actor
.
The anxieties natural to his situation, and
which, but a moment before, had grown almost
painful, were dismissed entirely from his mind, and
in a moment he had resumed all the characteristics
of manner and feeling, which he had shown to our
readers on his first introduction. He now spoke,
ad
libitum
, of plays and playing only. Every third
word was a quotation; and it was only when the
new-comer, who had kept up the ball with no little
show of practice and ability, found his
corresponding
store of quotation utterly exhausted, that he was
brought back to the more immediate necessities of
his situation. It was now the turn of Jones to
remind
him of his lodgings for the night. But it was
not so easy now to direct the attention of our actor,
who, once aroused on his favourite theme, would
wag a tongue in its honour so long as the member
itself had a single working hinge to depend upon.
But we forget, Mr. Horsey, said Jones, in
prosecuting
his often baffled purposewe actors, who
so love our profession, are very apt to forget other
matters. Here we are, wasting our readings upon
the desert air, when we should be thinking upon
other matters. Supper now and a place to sleep in
I must crave your pardon for keeping you from
these things so long.
Nay, these are small matters. The toast and
tankard can be got at any moment, but for the rest
what of my old Prince of Hickories? What of
Hugh Peters, and how are his timbers? He to
make a Julius Csar! Ha! ha! ha! The thing's
ridiculous, Jones; and he must be got rid of as well
as Tiltonbirds of a featherno gamefellows
that will disgrace us only. Crows, crows!
Very true, sirI agree with you fully, but
Oh, to be sure, I know there will be a difficulty
about it;it will be unkind to drive the fellow off
and hurt his feelings; though dn his impudence,
he deserves no better for presuming on such a
vocation
.
Why, Jones, I remember even now the
comical
figure the old fool used to cut in giving us
lessons in reading. Even then, when I was a mere
brat of a boy and knew little or nothing, I could
scarce keep my face to see him mouthing out the
golden verses of the great master. He'd get up on
a box for a stagehis bow legs at a straddle, as if a
ditch lay between 'em, for the better support of his
bag-of-cotton body; and then he'd turn his little
turnippy pugnose, fairly affronting the heavens, and
his lips sinking deep at every sentence that he spoke,
in the hollows where his teeth were knocked out
just in front,he got it done one dark night as he
fell over a wash tub, and composed himself among
the stumps of a new clearing. The hole was large
enough for my finger,and he to be an actor? Ha!
ha! ha! It's ridiculouswe must get rid of him;
though, to be sure, as you say, we must do it in
such a way as not to hurt the poor devil's feelings.
By the ghost of David, though I should remember
Little Bowlegs only by his hickories, yet I'm for
doing
it tenderly. We must smooth the track for him
so that he may walk off freely. But go he must if
we hope to do any thing. He'd be only in the way
he can do nothing.
Yes, to be sureyou're perfectly right, Mr.
Horsey, and the management might very well be
put into your hands. I'm sure we might make our
monster Dick here do every thing that Peters might
do; but, as I was saying
What, Stillyards! exclaimed Horsey, turning
upon the attentive dwarf, who stood, all the while
the dialogue proceeded, wondering, with owlet eyes
and broad distended mouth, swallowing the
incomprehensible
stuff that he never could digest. Look
you, Jones, that fellow's a host himself. I wouldn't
give my friend Dick here for all the Peters under
the sun. He's the most comical fellow! What a
Caliban he'd makea natural born Caliban. Egad!
we had a scene between us just before you came
upa scene for a melo-drameit was worth a
picayune
to see it. He ran up that tree like an
ourangoutang
;
drew out his barker, squatted on his
haunches, with the felicity and grace of a black
bear at a honey gum, and challenged me to a
regular
exchange of shots. The comical fellowhe's
worth a company himself; and in New Yorklook
ye, Jones, after all, New York's the placeon the
Bowery, that fellow as Caliban would be a sure card,
and we must play him when we play ourselves.
We must talk of this to-morrow, exclaimed
Jones, desperately,and seizing upon the only
pause which Horsey had made for an
inconceivably
long time. I will send Dick forward to get
things in readiness for ussupper and a bed. Ho!
Dick! let the boys know that the great actor, Mr.
Horsey, is coming with me. Away, by the gulleys,
while we ride round. We'll be with them in a
half hour.
The urchin prepared to obey.
But why not go along with Caliban?
demanded
Horsey.
For the best of reasons. He can go where our
horses cannot. On a line we are but a poor
quarter
of a mile from our camp ground, it will be a
good half hour's ride to reach it the way we must
travel, and night will swallow up the track before
we are done. We must ride, therefore, to make up
lost time. I was so pleasantly occupied, Mr.
Horsey
,
in listening for the last half hour, that I never
saw that the sun had left us. You must give our
boys some lessons to-night as soon as supper's
over.
Ah, Jones, you flatter, said our friend,
modestly
;
I am no such man as you think me. You
can do the thing quite as well as myself.
No, no! replied the other, with something of
a mournful tone, as he rode forwardNo, no!
that is not to be hoped for. Would to heaven it
were!
Horsey followed with a new feeling of delight
within his bosom. The tone of the cunning Jones,
the words he employed, not to speak of the
prospects
and promises of ultimate and unqualified
triumph
before him, were all so much heavenly
manna
to the still hungering vanity of his heart; and
never before, in all his career, when the possession
of money, lavishly squandered, secured him the
VOL. II. 10
clamouring applauses of the profligate associates
who misled him, had he received a more grateful
tribute to his ruling desire than that afforded by an
adroit outlaw of the Mississippi border. He
followed
his guide without suspicion, and was soon
swallowed up from sight in the darkness that now
environed the dense swamps of the Loosa-Chitta.
CHAPTER VII.
Corb
.
I know thee honest.
Mosca
.
You do lie, sir.
Volpone
.
It
was quite dark before Horsey and his
companion
came to a halt; and when this was done, the
former looked round him with astonishment, as he
could not well divine at first the reason for doing so.
There was no more sign of habitation or human
comfort then, than had been seen at the moment
when he encountered the dwarf. Indeed, if
possible
,
the
locale
looked decidedly worse than ever.
The very spot on which they stopped was a perfect
quagmire, to which the rising waters of the
contiguous
river had access at every freshet; and, beheld
in the uncertain starlight, our actor could see that
there were ponds all around him, and little crossing
brooklets that seemed to struggle slowly through the
thickening ooze, as if seeking to regain the parent
stream, by whose subsiding torrents they had been
left. A dense wall of canes spread itself over the
path in front, and Horsey was about to give
utterance
to the doubt and bewilderment which he felt,
when his companion, who seemed in no ways
disconcerted
,
uttered a shrill whistle, which was
immediately
answered by the deep bay of a beagle at a
little distance ahead.
They will find us now in a twinkling, said
Jones; that dog will soon tell them where to look,
even if that crooked scamp, Stillyards, should prove
a sluggard by the way. You will be relieved of
your nag in a few moments, Mr. Horsey, and we
will coon a log for the rest of our journey. So
much for living in a swampthese are difficulties
which would scarcely trouble us in Natchez or New
Orleans.
Well, but why do you incur them? Why live
in the swamp? demanded Horsey, to whom the
increasing difficulties and perplexities of the last
twenty minutes of circuitous navigation had begun
to suggest certain doubts of the policy of choosing
places of abode for which there seemed no
justifying
necessity.
Ha! said the other, with a laugh, there are
troubles in the city which we have not here, and
which we count a great deal worse. Here we
should laugh at a sheriff's officerthere we should
pull hat and bend knee to him in respectful
deference
;
and if you ever blarneyed a tailor or bullied
a landlord
Say no more, said Horsey, to whom the
references
of Jones seemed to have almost a personal
direction, and were therefore sufficiently conclusive
say no moreI see the wisdom of your
arrangements
,
and were I as near New Orleans as
you are to Vicksburg and Benton, I should most
probably have needed no explanation.
Some merry references to the artifices and
annoyances
of duns and dunnees followed this sally,
in the relation of which the experience of the two
seemed to be by no means unequal. If Jones had
his story of sharps and flats in Vicksburg, Natchez,
Manchester, and Benton, Horsey could tell tales
quite as lively of Mobile and Orleans; and could
these stories have been heard by the city sufferers,
the consolation would have been of a sort to have
induced a large addition to the sum total on the off
side of the profit and loss account. Certainly, the
most patient of all fashionable costumers would have
cursed such customers. Their merriment had not
subsided, when the figure of a man plunging from
a fallen tree that lay half covered and quite
concealed
in the dark by the canes which grew luxuriantly
around it, presented himself in front, and
immediately
took charge of their horses. A word
between
Jones and the new-comer furnished sufficient
explanation; and the former, telling Horsey to
follow
him closely, put aside the canes which concealed
the fallen tree, and was, an instant after, hidden from
sight. Horsey followed promptly, and found himself
on a sort of natural bridge which carried him safely
over a creek, of whose existence, though but ten feet
from where he had been standing, he had not till that
moment been aware. Though deep, and pursuing a
direct course to the Loosa-Chitta, it kept so quiet a
travel all the while that its murmurs were barely
heard among the canes that grew out of it, even
when Horsey stood directly above its bed; and the
assurance of his companion only then certified him
of its existence.
Steady now, Mr. Horsey. The creek below
you has a depth of ten feet, and a sudden souse at
this moment would startle more alligators than a
man could ride for a half-mile around us. There is
some soft clay on the log that makes it slippery, and
if you find it ticklish, you had better squat in time
and coon it.
But Horsey was too good a Mississippian to need
such cautious counsel, and he boldly followed his
conductor after his own fashion, and in perfect
safety. A few moments brought them to the end of
10*
the tree, when, leaping to the earth, after the
example
of his companion, our traveller once more, after
a long interval, found himself upon
terra firma
.
Here we are, exclaimed Jones, in the
immediate
neighbourhood of Cane Castle. Our way is
clear enough, though it still seems thick to your
eyes. We are in an Indian trail, which the
Choctaws
have used, I reckon, for a thousand years. I
know it was ready made to our handsour feet,
ratherand very good use we've made of it so far.
Congratulate yourself, Mr. Horsey, that there's no
hope for a sheriff here! We have security in the bog
and liberty in the brake, for which I know one poor
devil that would pray in vain were he in the swamp
at Natchy. Here you may laugh as loud as you
please, and sing as perverse, and no one to remind
you of laws and judgesno one to say `shut up
you shall neither sing nor smoke.' There's no law
here against tobacco.
These assurances, which promised so great a
degree
of liberty to the habitual swearer, singer, and
smoker, and which, in brief, summed up the amount
total of what are usually defined as the blessings of
civil and religious liberty, did not, however, seem to
awaken that degree of satisfaction in the mind of
the actor, which was justified by the importance of
the promised benefits. A word about the cast of
characters, or the selection of pieces, or any thing,
however immaterial, in the business of staging,
would have called for infinitely more of his regards.
Receiving no answer to what he had spoken, Jones,
with practised cunning, readily changed the subject
to one more grateful; and mustering all that he
could remember of the plays he had ever read and
seen acted, he contrived, by some imperfect
quotations
,
to divert the attention of Horsey from such
subjects of speculation as would most probably have
occurred to almost every ordinary traveller in his
present situation. Naturally frank and unsuspicious,
it was by no means difficult to deceive a person
whose mind was so completely surrendered up to
the one engrossing passion; and though
exceedingly
acute in his judgments, and active in his
inquiries
,
on all subjects not actually swallowed up
in the maelstrom of that mania which, at an instant,
absorbed every thing that came within its whirling
vortex, yet nothing was more easy than to lead
him off from the minor pursuit by the suggestion
of the smallest gleam from that greater object which
was the all in all of his desires. But on this head
the reader wants no new lights at this late moment.
He, perhaps, unlike the deluded traveller of whom
we write, is not so sure of the Thespian character
of those performers whom the worthy Horsey is
about to encounter in the swamp. He is not now
to be told thatbut why should we anticipate?
A few moments sufficed, following the little
Indian
footpath and his companion, to bring the actor
into something like an opening in the forest, which
consisted of mingled pines, cypresses, and ash-trees,
closely set, and still more closely unitedsave in the
opening mentionedby the matted canes, which
seemed to fill up all the intervals between them,
and, in fact, formed a dense margin to every one of
the hundred beds of watery ooze which skirted the
river, the rank and festering deposit of a thousand
years. Here the actor was encountered by gay
gleams of firelight at a little distance, by the
imperfect
blaze of which, he discovered himself to be on
the verge of a little area, or amphitheatre, in the
swamp, high and dry, a sort of island, the circuit
of which was probably a meagre quarter of a mile
in extent. This, following his conductor, he
rapidly
overpassed, until they reached a sort of nook
from whence the fire met their eyes. Here they
found as merry a set of scamps at their revels as
ever blessed the sight of a wayfarer on the edge of
a gipsy encampment. They were about seven or
eight persons, squat upon their haunches, and
busily engaged in the adventurous business of
vingt-un;
a sight that warmed the heart of our
traveller even more than a smoking supper might
have done, since, though not absolutely dramatic
in itself, it suggested to his mind one of those
leading
associations of theatrical life, which brought
back his fading memories with fresh colours, and
greatly increased their vitality. But if their
present
employment seemed natural enough to the
heyday
recklessness of the ordinary actor's life, there
was little beside, in their air and appearance, to
justify, in the mind of Horsey, their adoption of the
business. He looked in vain for that happy ease,
sometimes, in mouths of wisest censure, esteemed
impudence, which distinguishes so greatly the actor
by profession. The dashing effrontery, the
devil-may-care
deportment of the sect was lacking. There
was none of the graceful swagger of the genteel
comediannone of the solemn emphasis of him who
wears the image of fate, and looks habitual tragedy
upon his brow, a Prometheus-like gloom and
defiance
which would have realized the ideal of an
schylus, and filled the eyes of the poet with the
figures that else had only had existence in his mind;
and as for the comedy of stare, and grin, and clatter
the broad fun, and ridiculous, reckless, farce
never was pleasant companie so utterly without its
enlivening and mirth-compelling attributes. The
very soul of every rascal in the group seemed set
only upon the sixpences before him. Mammon, not
Momus, was the god of the entertainment, and our
traveller's anticipations were taken half aback, as
he beheld an expression of care and intensity in every
face, so utterly unlike that good-humoured
indifference
to fate and fortune, which hitherto had been to
him one of the chief attractions among his intimates
of the lobby and the green-room.
These chaps have greatly mistaken their
profession
,
was the unexpressed thought of the idealist.
There is not a scamp among 'em who will ever do
more than snuff a candle or shout at a pageant.
They will give me no supportthey will bungle
most damnably. `Then came each actor on his ass.'
Gad! the ass will be uppermost here. But these
are supernumeraries only. There must be others.
I must wait. At least, I am sure of good foils, if I
have no rivals; and if they can make play at all,
they will give me all the chance I want. But they
are mere Turks and Muscogheesa sort of savages
that will never stop till they scalp what they have
murdered. Their parts are all in danger of a bloody
death. Butbuz! buz!
The introduction of the stranger was rapidly gone
through withtoo rapidly to enable our traveller to
witness any of those beauties of deportment which he
still fancied might make their appearance in that
nice performancethe reception of a guest for the
first timewhich so eminently calls for a pleasing
and prompt gracefulness, without which reception
is more properly repulsion, and an invitation to make
oneself at home, looks very like a suggestion to
depart
.
Jones seemed to conjecture what was passing
in Horsey's mind, and took an opportunity, a few
minutes after, to say to him, in a whisper, that the
giants were yet to arrivethese were the
pasteboard
personagesthat class of creatures which
we use from necessity, and keep out of sight when
we can.
But they will improve, Mr. Horsey, under your
tuitionunder your example I mean. They have
had no opportunitieshave seen no shining lights,
and are shy, sir, very shymuch cannot be
expected
from them as yet; but when you have given
us some readings, Mr. Horseythen, &c.
It was not surprising after this appeal, that our
vain actor beheld his companions with a look of
greater indulgence and more charitable thoughts.
The wily Jones knew all his soundings, and the
tragedian was little more than a puppet in his
hands.
Meanwhile new fires were built, new
combinations
formed, and Horsey found himself as busy
about the blaze as the rest, and, though with a less
intense feeling than the rest, receiving his cards,
and planking his shillings. His friend Jones sat
beside him and assisted him as a partner to lose his
money in the game. As the stakes disappeared,
the good humour of the group seemed to increase,
and the contagious mirth soon made Horsey as
indulgent
in his criticism as unmindful of his losses.
He thought the scamps susceptible of improvement,
and, stimulated by the suggestions and applauses of
Jones, his quotations became recitations; and his
own language was at length limited to a few
occasional
comments which served to introduce and
link together the choicest declamatory passages of
Shakspeare. The Toms, Dicks, and Harries around
him looked as grave and seemed as attentive as
possible
;
but it might have been perceived by one
more watchful than our amateur, that none of them
forgot the game in the delight which he felt or
affected to feel, and the stakes were always lifted
as soon as won. They were men who had long
since learned to combine the severest cares of
business
with the utmost relaxations of pleasure.
That was superbly said, Mr. Horsey, remarked
the attentive and respectful Jones, as the actor
concluded
the famous soliloquy in Hamlet, to be, &c.
I can say with confidence that I have never
heard that passage delivered before, though I have
heard it a hundred times from other lips. You
make us feel the poet, sir, and tremble at the
philosophy
.
Ah, sir, how these reflections come to us,
poor outcasts of fortune, like so many dreadful
experiences
.
Who has not asked himself whether it was
not better and nobler to make his own quietus with
a bare bodkin, rather than suffer the thousand cruel
and crushing evils, such as the rest of the passage
has described. Not that it is all evil, Mr. Horsey.
I am disposed to think, so far as my experience
goes, that that part of it about `the law's delay'
might very well be left out. The law's delay, sir, is
one of the most agreeable features which the law
ever shows to a poor debtor like myself, and as I
have said before, but for the law's delay, and that
of the deputy, many's the poor devil who would
have lain at the mercy of tailor and tapster, without
hope or redress, to the detriment of his genius, and
to the great loss of the majority of mankind. I'm
thinking, Mr. Horsey, that that half line might very
well be left out of the passage.
Impossible, Mr. Jones,there would be an ugly
hiatusthe music of the line would be lostutterly
lost.
But the passage might be alteredsomething
might be supplied in its place. Suppose we were to
read`the play's delay'now that would be such
an improvement as would be grateful to every
ambitious
actor.
This suggestion grated on the ears of our
amateur
.
He was one of those profound devotees of
the great literary outlaw, who venerate his very
faults, even as the antiquarian treasures up the rust
and canker of the relic. To remove any thing, in
his eyes, would be to impair the value and take from
the propriety of what remained; and his reply was
uttered in tones more energetic than he had hitherto
employed.
Sacrilege! sacrilege, Mr. Jones,how can you
think of it! No, sir, the passage must stand as it is
neither too little nor too muchnothing can be
added, nothing taken away. It's true, as you say,
the law's delay is a very agreeable thing to the
debtor. Gad, sir, I have been indebted to it quite as
often as yourself; but our notions would be greatly
altered if we stood in the creditor's shoes; we should
then hold the passage to be perfect as it is; as,
indeed
,
I hold it now, having no debtors, and being
still overshoes on the books of other men. No, no!
sirno
liberties
with Shakspeareremember the
admirable counsel to this effect which he gives to
our profession in particular on this very headto
`speak no more than is set down for them.' I can
forgive a fellow when he is out and the audience
waiting, and the prompter asleep, if he fills out from
his own head; but when he does it out of
presumption
,
seeking to improve the work of the mighty
master, `that's villanous, and shows a most pitiful
ambition in the fool,' that does it.
I don't know but you're right, sir.
I am! I am right, Mr. JonesI am positive in
this matter. The more you think of it, sir, the more
you'll have occasion to agree with me; and in the
beginning of our campaign, sir, the thing cannot be
too much insisted upon for the benefit of the whole
company.
I was thinking, sir, said Jones, with some
hesitation
of manner, and a bow and look of particular
deference almost amounting to venerationI was
thinking, sir, that it might be of great service to our
boys, if you'd be so good as to give us your reading
of that very part.
What! the advice to the players?
Yes, sirI'm sure there's not one present that
would not be delighted to hear it from your lips.
What say you, boyswhat Ricks, Mason, Baker,
Bull?
Ay, ay! let's have it! was the lively cry from
all, in tones far less full of solicitous deference, and
a great deal more indifferent than those of Jones.
Meanwhile, however, the cards were shuffled, the
stakes set down and lifted, and the game underwent
no cessation, though, in the excitement of his
declamation
,
our friend Horsey's cards remained upon the
turf, from which, however, his stakes were always
considerately withdrawn by the banker, as soon as
laid before him.
But it will interrupt the game, was the
considerate
suggestion of the actor. Our friends would
rather play than listen to those dull recitations, of
which they hear so much professionally.
Devil a bit! was the warm reply of Jones to
the modest apprehension of Horsey. Devil a bit!
Dull recitations, indeed. By ! such luxuries
are more than they are used tomore, perhaps, than
they deserve. Put up your hands, men, while Mr.
Horsey gives us these passages; down with your
pictures, take up your picayunes, and let us
surrender
our souls for a while to the scene. By the way,
Mr. Horsey, if you have no objection, the thing
might be made more completethe illusion
rendered
more striking and fascinating,in short, sir,if
you would consent
He paused and looked in the actor's face with
doubt and entreaty, equally mingled with respectful
deference;but he spoke not.
What, Mr. Jones? was the demand of Horsey,
VOL. II. 11
who was at that moment too well pleased to have
refused the speaker any thing in his power to
bestow
,
and who felt assured, from the manner of Jones,
that he was only about to solicit some farther
extension
of that courtesy, the concession of which
was, perhaps, far more gratifying to him than it
could be to the hearers. The reply of Jones was
uttered in the hesitating accents of one who still
scrupled to give offence.
If I rememberI think, Mr. Horseynay, you
did tell me, that you had brought with you a portion
of your wardrobe.
You are right, sir,I have with me a Hamlet
and a Romeo, a Rolla, a Turk and two field officers,
in my bags, but
The very thing, my dear sir! cried Jones, with
an air of inexpressible delightand now, sir, he
continued, if you would only crown your favours
and give us your readings in costumegive us the
favourite passages in Hamlet, which, I should think,
from what you have suffered us to see, your best
performance, you would bind us to you eternally.
It would make us so happyit would help us so
greatlywe should all be so much pleased, not to
speak of the immense benefitthatthat
Here the cunning dog stopped very judiciously,
leaving unexpressed the superb climax which the
imagination of the hearer was better able to
provide
,
than the flattery of the eulogist. Soothed,
seduced
,
perfectly overcome, in the weakness of his
heart, by the adroit management of the wily Jones,
the reluctance of the actor was very feeble. He
said something about his horse and saddle-bags not
having come, and murmured a fear that he might
be tiresome. But these objections were soon met
and overruled by the other.
Your horse is here in our stables. The bags
you can get at in a moment; and if you will go with
me, we can put you at once into a chamber where
you can make all your changes without
disturbance
.
There was no resisting the pleasant importunities
of his companion; and, following his guidance,
Horsey
was led through a contiguous thicket into
another
smaller area, where he found several huts of
bushes and bark, in one of which his horse was
fastened, along with that of Jones; while the fellow
who had taken charge of them, lay fast asleep
before
the door, using the saddle-bags of the actor for
his pillow. He was soon aroused, and made to
carry them into another of the huts, where Jones,
having studiously repeated his flatteries, left the
delighted
actor to prepare his toilet prior to his first
rehearsal before his new companions.
These, meanwhile, had their own thoughts on the
subject of the new-comer.
Now, what the devil can Jones be after, was
the muttered speech of one surly fellow of the circle,
in bringing this conceited ass among us? He seems
to have precious little money, and he's not worth
robbing; he's a fool and can't be trusted; and why
we are to pretend to be actors, and all that nonsense,
and listen to his stuff, is more than I can reckon up
at a single tuning. What do you say, Bakerdo
you understand it?
No better than yourself, but I s'pose there's
something in it, since Jones says that he's ordered
by Saxon. Saxon's after some strange business, I
reckon, and I s'pose he's got his reasons. What
they are I don't care to know, so long as the fellow
has a Mexican to lose, and don't know when he
loses.
Nor when he wins, for that matter, said
another
.
Bull gathered up his stakes and winnings
together, the first time in his life that ever his losses
filled his pockets.
The fellow's well enough, said Bull, with a
growling chuckleso say no more. I'm for his
playing cards, or any thing he pleases, so long as
the playing is profitable to us. But here's Jones
coming back; let us know all about it from him.
How now, growlers? said this last named
person
,
as he returned among the group. Can't you
be satisfied with your gettings, when they come with
so little trouble. This fellow's your pidgeon, pluck
him as you please; but look you that he does not
guess what you're about. Take your counsel from
me, and humour him awhileit will give us quite as
much sport as profit.
But what's the upshot of the businessare we
to stop his wind, or is he to be one of the family?
He'll never make a beagle, so long as his head's full
of play stuff.
Let that give you no trouble. It's enough that
Saxon plans it. This fellow's nothing in himself,
but we use him against another. There's one thing,
let me tell you, before you go further. Weston is dead
shot through the head by a young lawyer going
up to Lucchesa, on t'other side of the river by Big
Ben's. There's a start below against us, and the old
methodist, Badger, is beginning to growl aloud.
So, lie closethere's no fear of the dad, while the
son is a beagle. He'll give tongue enough when the
hunt's a-foot. As for this chap, all that you have to
do is to wink, look wisetalk what player nonsense
you can, and praise him for his acting, whenever he
asks questions that you can't answer. That will stop
his tongue, and turn his thoughts, and that's all that
you've to do. I'll manage all the rest of the
business
.
Put up your cards now, and get the grog in
readiness, and let Girhan get our supper, while I'm
gone for the actor. You'll see him in his glory when
he comes back, but no grinningnothing to frighten
him. Hear him with open mouths, and if you can
throw in a bit of blarney, let it be done. But do it
neatlynothing slipperynothing stupid. The
fellow's
no fool when he aint flatteredit's soft soap
only that turns his head. Enoughyou have the
trail.
11*
CHAPTER VII.
Serv
.
My lord, you nod; you do not mind the play.
Sly
.
Yes, by Saint Anne, I do. A good matter, surely. Comes
there any more of it?
Taming of the Shrew
.
When
Jones returned to his comrades,
accompanied
by Horsey in character, the scene had
undergone
a change. The cards had disappearedfires
were lighted anewa rude plank table, with rude
block seats, had risen in the midst, garnished with
sundry black bottles of strong waters, and every
thing looked fair for a promising carouse. The
men, too, had undergone some little change. The
exhortations of Jones had not been lost upon them,
and, taking it for granted that their account lay, as
it had always done before, in securing the desires of
their leaders, they were prepared to yield themselves,
heart and hand, to the game that was before them.
A warm cheer, thrice renewed, received the actor,
who stalked before them in all the mournful and
philosophical
dignity of the youthful Dane. A buza
murmur of approbation, followed this outbreak, and,
whether sincere or affected, the result was every
thing that might be desired. For the first time in
his life, Horsey found himself in the presence of
actors
who were not rivalscandidates for popular
favour, who had no jealousy of their neighbours
and professors of an art that lives on popular
applause
,
who were yet no less prompt in bestowing it.
Our traveller was the last man in the world to
mortify
himself with any unnecessary doubts of that
sincerity which spoke in the language of encomium.
And yet, to do his understanding all justice, it must
be added that Jones took infinite pains to avoid
arousing his suspicions. His own applauses were
all well timed, judiciously expressed, and had the
appearance of being urged with great hesitation
and forbearance. A respectful deference
distinguished
even his solicitude; and his chief argument
to Horsey, and one which he insisted on in frequent
whispers, was the necessity of a good model for his
wretched creatures.
These fellows have never played before, my dear
Mr. Horsey. They have been picked up from all
parts of the country. Some of them have never
even looked upon a play, and none of them
have any just idea of what a performance should be.
I know the trouble it will give you to tutor them,
but it is so important that we should make a good
figure at first, and if, as I believe, you regard the
drama as so important to the civilization of the
people
to
the improvement of popular taste, and
and
All this kind of stuff was very convincing to our
stage-struck hero. His eye brightened while he
looked around him, and surveyed the mute
watchfulness
and vague curiosity of stare that met his
glance on every side.
Something can be made of them, Jones, he said
paternally, in a confidential whisper, and,
considering
the great importance of the thing, I am not
unwilling
to undertake their tuition. You are right in
regarding it as all important that they should know
something before they begin; though, really, it is
surprisingvery surprisingthat they should have
ever thought of the stage. It seems to me that any
other vocation
The comment was answered by a conclusive
whisper.
Beggars, you know, Mr. Horsey, cannot be
choosers. We must make the most of them till a
better bargain offers, and then I'm clear that we get
rid of them. On this head we must confer together
hereafter. We must take the management into our
own hands, since Tilton's off, and there's no knowing
where to set hands on Peters. It is a happy chance
that sent you in our neighbourhood. I was
beginning
to think matters desperate, and had almost
given up in despair, and gone off. Now, there's no
danger. You will set us on our feet again. But
there's time enough to talk of this hereafter. Now,
the lads are waiting. Gentlemen, Mr. Horsey is
readypray give your attention.
Ay, ay, exclaimed the surly fellow, Bull, and
so are we. We've been ready this half-hour to hear
him; but, Jones, s'pose, if it's not disagreeable to
Mr. Horsey, let's take a swig all round to better
acquaintance
.
It sort-a makes a body easy to listen
when the liquor's afloat; and sort-a softens the ear
and opens the understanding. I always feels a great
deal easier to judge, when I'm in sperrits.
Vulgar fellow! muttered Horsey to himself,
annoyed at an interruption at the very moment
when, throwing himself into posture, he was about
to begin. He concealed his chagrin as well as he
could, while the vigilant Jones, calling to order,
endeavoured
to keep down the moral scum which
promised to rise up with quite as much pertinacity
as ever, with the very next agitation of the
atmosphere
.
A good idea of Bull's, that, Mr. Horsey, said
the politician. A glass to better acquaintance is
not amiss; though I'm not so sure it makes one
judge the better in intellectual matters and things of
art. What have you there, gentlemen?
Monongahela, fresh from Beattie's Bluff, was
the reply of Bull. There's a piggin of peach in
the bushes, the last of the barrelp
re
haps the
gentleman
will take his pull from that?
P
re
haps!Take his pull! Horsey could scarce
suppress his astonishment, and forbear repeating the
offensive vulgarities aloud.
Our Jack Pudding!our fellow for broad grin
and buffoonery! whispered Jones in the ear of the
amateur. A very comical fellow when he's in the
humour, Mr. Horseynever saw so comical a dog
as he can make himself. All this is put onit's in
character only. He is only disposed to let you see
that there are other actors beside yourself.
Indeed! Is that it? but he looks very serious for
a funny fellow.
That's the beauty of it, sirthat's the wonder
that's what makes him inimitable in his way. You'll
hear him speak the dialect of the most ignorant
backwoodsman
,
as if he was born to it, and look for all
the world as if he never could have spoken any
other. But, I can tell you, so far from that being
the case, he's well educatedspeaks Greek like a
native, and is profound in mathematics, besides
having an excellent taste in poetry.
Is it possible?
True as Holy Writ; but he has humours, sir
and one of them is to disparage himself. He will
even lie, sirlie like a Trojanin order to make
himself little. Ask him now about Greek, and if
he happens to be in the humour for running his
cross rigs upon you, he'll swear he knows nothing
of what you say, and will probably answer you in
the coarsest lingo of Catahoula and the swamp.
A strange perversity, indeed.
It's the way with all geniuses, I believe; but
here he comes. Don't mind his extravagancies.
You'll see the fun of them, now that you know
something of the fellow.
By this time Bull returned, bearing in his hands
the piggin of peach-brandy, for which he had gone
to the bushes where it had been concealed. His
salutation as he placed the vessel on the table, was
calculated to justify in some sort the description
which had been just given of his eccentricities.
Here, you bitches, he cried aloudhere's
stuff enough, and sorts enough, if your stomach's
not too swingy proud for an honest liquor. This
peach is a beauty, and the whisky's as lovely as a
sinner alongside of it. If you don't like one, take
the other, and if you don't like neither, mix 'em and
swig both, and see which end'll come uppermost.
Blast my buttonswhat do you wait for, you
We omit the more decided expressions of
blackguardism
.
You see, whispered Jones to the actor, he's as
full of Aristophanes as an egg's full of meat. Fond
of all the old comic writers, and don't stand at
calling
things by plain names. You'll know more of
him directly.
Horsey drew a long breath as he replied
'Gad! he is the strangest fellow
His speech and wonder were briefly cut short by
the uproarious challenge of the eccentric Bull, who,
having filled a tin mug of more than usual
dimensions
with one of the two potent beverages so highly
eulogized, extended his gracious permission, after a
fashion of his own, to all others who might be
disposed
to follow his example.
I'm a man that has a notion that all sperrits
loses that stands too long open to the air. You must
pour it down or cork it up, one or t'other, and so,
fellows, I drinks to you, and my sentiments is
here's to the tongue that never sticks in the way of
the swallowmeaning no harm to them that stands
off talking, when they might be doing a better
business
.
And with these words, and a scornful leer at the
actor and his companion, Jones, the Grecian
humourist
turned the bottom of the can to the north
star, while the mouth of it clung for an instant to his
own with a sympathetic tenacity.
Well said! Well hit! exclaimed the ready
Jones, with a wink, to Horsey. We certainly
deserve
the censure of all good spirits, when we leave
such good spirits untasted. Horsey, my dear fellow,
shall I pour you out from the jug or the piggin? I
can answer for this peachit's as good as any of
Crumbaugh's.
The peach, I thank you, was the answer of
Horsey, in somewhat subdued accents. The fact is,
his genius was confounded in the presence of that of
Mr. Aristophanes Bull, of whom, as yet, he could
not exactly succeed in reconciling what he saw with
what he heard. A little time after, and he grew more
flexible; but let us not anticipate. His glass was
filled, and with the kindest condescension in the
world, he bowed to the company ere he drank, and
uttered some common-place compliment, which
was lost, like many better wishes, in the unheeding
air.
And now, gentlemen, give attentionnow for
the part of Hamlet by Mr. Horsey, of whom you
all have heard, and by whose counsel and example,
I trust we shall all improve. Mr. Horsey, perhaps
that part about actors and actingI mean the advice
to the playersmight be the best to begin with;
unless
,
indeed, you should prefer to give us some more
tragic parts. I know that your forte lies in tragedy.
Such was the conciliatory preludium of the adroit
Jones, and its effect promised to be exceedingly
happy
upon the person to whom it was addressed. A
smile rose upon his lips, his eyes sparkled, as he felt
the convincing deference of the speaker, and a ray
of self-complaisance, such as the sun sheds over the
western heavens, after he has done a good day's
work of illumination, gave to our actor's face an
inexpressible benignity of beam, which was most
unhappily overcast, in another instant, by the
intrusive
comments of the eccentric genius, Bull.
Tragedy be dd, said he, striking his hand
down upon the table, to which, in the next moment,
he elevated his foot; tragedy be ddthat's all
in my eye and Betty Martin. There's no fun in
that, no more than in thunder and hoxy-doxy. Who
wants to see a fellow get up and blow out his cheeks,
and roll up his eyes, and growl and roar and choke,
and shake all over as if he had an agy? None of
your tragedy for me. There's no sense in it. 'Taint
raal. I was once down in Mobile, when I saw them
making tragedies, and, darken my peepers, but the
bloody bitches made me mad enough to swallow
'em, they were so cussed r
e
diculous.
But, my dear Bull, was the beginning, thrice
begun, of our friend Jones, in the endeavour to stop
the torrent of the humourist. In vainBull kept his
ground, and shook off the intruder with as much
ease as a three year old colt would shake off a
Connecticut
cavalry officer.
Oh, be dd, said he, don't I know? There
was a tragedian that came in looking after his enemy.
He had his sword out, and he made a show as if
he was mighty angry, but, between you and me, he
didn't want to find him, no how. The other fellow
was hiding behind a tree, and this chap looked for
him every where but there. So, as I wanted to see
how they'd fight, I up and told him where to look
for himsays I, bung up my peepers, if you don't
find him agin that rock, squat, jist hiding behind that
tree. It was a scrub oak, or something like itI
never seed sich a tree before. Well, instead of
thanking me, he dropped his jaws and his sword,
looked at me as if he'd seed a ghost, mumbled
something in his throat, nobody could tell what, and
then there was a spree among the people, and some
of the larks below cried out as if they were gwine
to lick me. `Lick and be dd,' says I, `lick if you
can. Where's the first man?let me look at him.'
So up I stands, and devil the bit of a nigger among
'em to say another word. Well, that was all bloody
foolish. If the chap was in 'arnest, it was the easiest
thing to find the other. He had only to say I'm
ready, clap his hip, and crow like a chicken, and if
they was ser'ous, what more? But tragedies aint
ser'ous things. It's all make-b'lieve. They know
there's nobody to be hurt,nobody's in 'arnest; for
they'll stand and talk for a long quarter, though the
enemy's at the door, with bullet and bowie-knife;
and they pretending to be mighty scared all the
time. Then they hide where it's so easy to find
'em. Grim! only let a nigger hide from me in
Loosa-Chitta as them fellows hide from one another
in tragedies, and how soon I'd ride through their
rig'lets. I'd be into 'em, and on 'em; over 'em, and
through 'em; round 'em, and about 'em; front 'em,
and a-back 'em; in the twinkle of a musquito
race-lightning
never could go quicker. No! no! None
of your tragedies for me.
But, Bull, my dear fellow! expostulated Jones,
with something more of anxiety in his accents and
manner, as he saw the almost pallid expression of
VOL. II. 12
discomfiture in the blank visage of Horseywhy
should you go on so? Though you don't like
tragedy
,
that's no reason why other people should not,
and we who labour for the public, or propose to do
so, must do that which will best please the public.
Now, there's no doubt that most people prefer
tragedy
The more fools they! stoutly replied the
obdurate
Bull. They're not of my kidney, then, by
hocus; and I reckon there's none of the boys here
that wouldn't prefer a sup of whisky at any time,
and a frolic at mother Surgick's, to all the tragedy
stuff.
But, Bull, my dear fellow Jones resumed his
expostulations, but in vain. Bull had been supping
whisky for a good hour before Horsey had reached
the camp, and had grown too inflexible to engage
with readiness in any scheme so intricate as the one
proposed.
Butt Bull, he retorted, using the language of
Jones, with a grin, as if a good joke lay at the
bottom
Butt
Bull, and get the worst of it. See who's
head's the hardest, you bh, and be off with your
mug broken. It's a bad chance to butt any of my
breed. No, blast my buttons! hide and horns, head
and tail, are all too much for such as you, Jones;
so no rearing, unless you want to come down on
your haunches.
A wit, you see, said Jones, in a whisper to the
waiting Hamleta fellow of infinite humour;
and as he's a little drunk he begins to show it. The
true nature always comes uppermost with a man in
liquor. A fellow of contradictions,we must bear
with him a while longer.
There was little or no consolation in all this for
the actor. He began to suspect that the
organization
of such an unruly gang would task the best
manager in the worst fashion. He saw treason,
uproar
,
and utter discomfiture in all the proceedings of
the green-room. But he said nothing in reply to
Jones, and before the latter could say more, the
sarcastic
Bull had resumed the subject of which he
seemed as tenacious as the grave.
Now, said he, if you're for acting at all, give
me them funny things, where they make all sorts of
faces, and play tricks, and tumble one another about,
and jump on shoulders and ride like monkeys, and
run up the chimney, and hide behind the door. Give
me the comedies and farces, and them sort of things
that make a fellow laugh to split. I'm for the
frolicking
plays, and I reckon we're all for them. Aint
you, Baker?
Ay, deuce take me, if I don't vote with Bull,
was the response of Mr. Baker.
And I too, said another.
And I, said a third.
And the majority sent up an assenting voice which
put a stop for an instant to all the expostulations of
the indefatigable Jones. Bull looked round him with
an air of triumph and complacency, as much as to
say,there, you have our decision, so let your
tragedy
be comedyyour fate, fun! He filled up his
can, as the difficult question was thus determined to
his own satisfaction; and, as if to reconcile the
minority
to a decision which is always disagreeable to
a minority, he proposed a bumper all round.
Come Jones, come Doughty, so he named
Horsey
,
my dogs, we'll begin the fun by a full swallow.
I'm always for a frolic when there's good stuff to go
upon; and a comedy, says I, because a comedy's
always ser'ous earnest, and it's all my eye when
they makes tragedies. Tragedies is mighty foolish
and ridiculous things. They aint ser'ous. The
killing
aint ser'ous. I don't reckon a man was ever yet
killed in a tragedy. Now, I'm for killing in 'arnest
when I set about it. I don't leave off when I begin,
and if I once put knife into a fellow's ribs to make
small meat of him, wouldn't I be a blasted fool to go
off, before I made sure that the thing was done in
right 'arnest? I'd git on him astraddle and feel at
his kidneys; and if there was only the littlest shaking
of the flesh, dme but I'd give him another dig or
two to make sure and put him out of his misery. I
would, dme.
There was something exceedingly literal in the
latter part of Bull's speech, which our friend Horsey
found it very difficult to account for. It seemed to
him that the witty fellow was confounding real
events with theatrical illusion; and the idea of his
bestraddling his slain opponent, and giving him a
thrust extra seemed rather Choctaw-like and savage.
Besides, he could not understand how such a
proceeding
should ever be tolerated by an audience.
On this head he thought it important to express his
doubts. This he did, however, with less than his
usual fecund flow of language, and with a hesitancy
of manner which showed how greatly the eccentric
genius of Bull had cowed himself, no less than the
rest of his companions.
I am afraid, Mr. Bull, the spectators would not
permit such an unnecessary proceeding. The
moment
the man lies, apparently dead, the end of the
performance is obtained. There is surely no sort
of necessity to repeat the blow; and I am afraid that
the dignity of tragedy would be utterly overthrown
by bestraddling the slain man. I am also disposed
to think
Look you, Doughty, my boy, cried Bull, with
an air of most paternal superiority, clapping his open
hand as he spoke over the mouth of the tragedian
you're but a young hand at the hatchet, I see. Do
you think, with an air of great seeming
circumspection
,
as he bent his mouth to the ear of the
hearer, and spoke in a half whisperyou talk of
spectators, but do you think I'd be such a blasted
bh of a fool as to let any body see me at the
business
?
How! how!the audience not see you?
The actor was bewildered. Jones, with some
consternation interposed. The game at
cross-purposes
,
which he had so cunningly introduced, was
on the verge of a sudden termination.
Ha, ha! A good jokean excellent joke! he
exclaimed aloud, laughing immoderately as he spoke
Bull, you're a born devil of a joker. He's
trying
to quiz you, Mr. HorseyI warned you how
'twould bea very Momus, sir,all fun, all mirth,
all deviltry.
Quiz me! exclaimed the actor, with a genuine
expression of tragedya sublime indignationin his
countenance as he spoke, which, in an instant after,
changed to one of haughty defiance, as his eyes
turned from Jones to the person of him to whom
had been ascribed the impertinent effort which
promised
to be so offensive.
Nay, take no offence, Mr. Horseydon't you
see the man's drunk, said Jones, in a whisper.
But I'll mend his mannersI'll lead him off for a
while, and cool him. I'll say that which will bring
him to his senses.
Tell him you'll discharge him! said Horsey,
with all the terrors of a managerial countenance, as
he whispered this severe counsel in the ears of the
other. By the body of Polonius, it would be
impossible
to keep such a fellow in orderall his
merits
,
were they twice what they are, could never
reconcile me to tolerate such presumption.
You are right, perfectly right, sir, and I'll make
12*
him hear to reason, said Jonesmeanwhile, sir,
when I take him off, do you occupy the rest. They
are very anxious to hear youvery good fellows,
sira little tainted with Bull only. They will keep
order.
While this brief dialogue proceeded between the
two in whispers, the eccentric Bull had glided, by a
very natural transition, from the proscenium into the
orchestra, and was leading off, in a dithyrambic,
famous
among the beagles of the borders, to the air
of the Raccoon skinneda melody which only
needs the lyrical genius of General Morris, who
quelled the rioters of New York in 1834, to marry
to universal song, and embalm, with other refrains,
in the cedar oil of immortality. We shall copy it
out, when more at leisure, for the special benefit of
that gentleman; at present, a single verse must
suffice
,
as well for him, as for our amateur.
Bish war ben it dan it nee
Blit nel de mor;
So ma nol, it cal a fe,
Chi, cha, cho, chow,
Tra la chin, et car it lee,
Chi, cha, cho, chow,
Blit nel de mor,etc.
Bull, a word with you, said Jones, abruptly, as
the uproarious ditty was ended.
Well, out with it, and be dd to you. If it's
only one, the pain's soon over.
Come with me.
Why can't you out with it here? Dn my
sixes! There's no use to get up while one's able,
and there's any stuff left. See here.
Let it rest! It'll wait till you come back.
I don't know that, retorted the humourist
and though it might, these dd fellows won't
they swallow like a sandhill after a long drought in
August. I'm almost afraid to leave it. If I go
now, it's like parting with a friend for ever.
Pshaw, Bullwhat nonsense. There's business,
I tell you. These words, coupled with a
particular
and significant movement of the hands which
escaped Horsey's observation, at once had an effect
upon the person addressed. He rose, grumbling all
the while, and followed his companion, leaving the
field to our actor, who, like long pent up torrents,
glad of the moment of liberation, soon burst with
all his thunders upon the remaining assembly, and
strove to make up for lost time by redoubled efforts.
He was beginning to forget his previous annoyances
in the evident attention of his audience, when Jones
and the refractory Bull reappeared. The latter was
somewhat sullen, but he remained silent for awhile,
contenting himself with refilling his glass, and
resuming
his seat as before. He stuck his legs boldly
upon the table, crossed his arms as if in
contemplation
,
and, not deigning a glance at our actor, fixed
his eyes upon the heavens, tracing Botes, Orontes,
and the rest, with a face of particular and
philosophical
speculation, and, possibly, discoursing in
fancy with that venerable old gentlemen of nursery
authority, the ancient and ever to be remembered,
man in the moonhis dog and his bush. Thus he
sat for some time in dogged silence, while our actor,
who needed but little encouragement to rouse every
echo known to the tragic muse, having already gone
through several passages, proceeded to Macbeth.
The soliloquy in the dagger-scene, being one upon
which every witling labours to expend himself, was
that which tasked all his powers; and whether he did
well or ill, or whether it was because of some
affinities in the passage which came home to the
bosom and the business of Bull, it is certain that
our actor's declamation in this part was honoured
with a greater share of his attention than he had
condescended to bestow previously. This did not
escape the notice of Horsey, and he was beginning
to congratulate himself that the eccentricities of the
genius were about to pass away, leaving his lights
their accustomed brilliance, when the grateful
anticipation
was suddenly defeated by the latter's
starting to his feet, and thrusting his mug, well filled
with the generous potation, full in the face of the
actor, exclaiming, while he did so, and cutting off
entirely the closing lines of the part
Oh, dn it, Thompson, take a drink and shut
up. This tragedy stuff is too dry and dulllet's have
no more of it. Here, drink, and let your tongue
have a bit of a holiday.
The indignant actor could no longer restrain
himself
.
His hand, which had been extended to grasp
the imaginary dagger, was swept round in the
twinkling of an eye, and the next moment the
vessel
was seen flying in the air, liberally bestowing its
contents, in its flight, upon the face and bosom of
the circle, among which the portion of Mr. Bull
was in no manner stinted. This proceeding was
the signal for an uproar, and Bull's hand was
already
laid upon the collar of Macbeth, whose blood
was still rising, when the sudden appearance of
another
personage upon the scene, produced an
instantaneous
change in its circumstances.
CHAPTER IX.
Ay, answer that,
The questioner hath need,where went he then?
The Royal Fugitive
.
The
effect upon the group of the sudden
appearance
of a single person was no less strange than
instantaneous. And this person was a woman. She
emerged from the edge of the little nook, near which
the revel had been carried on, and stood, without
speaking a syllable, for several seconds, looking
upon the circle with an expression of high-raised
scorn in her countenance, which, though beheld
only by the ruddy blaze of firelight, seemed to the
eyes of our actor to be haughtily beautiful. Her
complexion was dark, but richly lustrous. Her hair
black as midnight, and glossy almost as its stars.
Her eyes were large, quick, and dazzling, of the
same deep raven hue with her tresses, which hung
down upon her shoulders, streaming from beneath a
sable network, which, covering her head, partially
concealed her forehead also. Her person was
rather masculineher carriage majesticand the
involuntary notion which rose in the mind of
Horsey, as he beheld her, was that she would make
a most magnificent Lady Macbeth. Somewhat
ashamed of being caught by a lady in a
hand-to-hand
scuffle with a genius like Benjamin Bull, our
actor drew off from his opponent, who, to his
surprise
,
exhibited an equal degree of willingness with
himself to bring the contest to a sudden conclusion.
He slunk away, and, with an evolution no less
prompt than unlooked for, actually took shelter
behind
Horsey, surveying the intruder with eyes of
cat-like cunning, mingled with some little
apprehension
,
from over the shoulder of the actor. The
effect upon the rest of the revellers was very nearly
the same. In a moment they had left the board;
and one or two, who were nearest to the woods,
might have been seen stealing out of sight into the
shadow of the contiguous trees. Jones was the
only one of all the assembly who maintained his
former place, and exhibited neither apprehension nor
confusion. He met the gaze of the lady with
respectful
firmness, and, as he passed our actor in
approaching
the spot where she stood, whispered in
his ears
Our prima donnaour heroinea star of the
first magnitude. Butmum!
His finger touched his nose, and his air and
gesture
was that of one whose words, had they been
supplied, would have been
But a tartar of the first degree.
Horsey fancied such to be the meaning of the
other's gestures, and was half confirmed in this
opinion, when the first accents fell from the lips of
the intruder.
Mr. Jones, I would speak with you a moment.
Certainly, ma'amI will but give some
directions
to the gentlemen, and follow you.
Gentlemen! was the half-subdued utterance of
the lady in tones of scornful irony. Gentlemen,
indeed!
The words came faintly to the ears of Horsey,
who stood, with Jones, somewhat in advance of the
rest; and however little complimentary to himself
and his companions, he could forgive the sneer which
they expressed, in consideration of the intense
superiority
of manner which accompanied their
utterance
,
and which assured him that the company was
not entirely without a redeeming measure of that
talent for theatricals, the want of which had hitherto
appeared painfully conspicuous in his eyes, in spite of
the obvious genius of Mr. Benjamin Bull and the
flattering judgment of Mr. Jones. The lady turned
on her heel, without farther word or look,
disappearing
in the recess of the woods, as suddenly as she
came.
So, Bull, said Jones, reproachfully, when she
had gone, it's just as I told you. Mark me,you
haven't heard the end of it. I warned you, but you
must be drinking; and all that I said by way of
counsel has been wasted upon you. She's heard all
the uproar, and seen it too, and she will tell
him
every syllable when he comes. She will forget
nothing
.
You know that.
Ay, ayblast itshe has the memory of a
devil's dam. Well, there's no help nowI must
grin and bear it, said the genius, sullenly.
At least, it will be wise only to do no more
mischief
for the night. Away, all of you, to your nests;
and no more uproar. There's no telling how soon
he
will be here, and if he finds you
The speech was finished in a whisper to the
parties
immediately interested, and lost accordingly to
our amateur. He had heard enough, however, to
perceive that there was some mystery connected
with his companions, some matter of domestic
history
,
which was yet withheld from him. Who
was
he
of whom Jones had spoken so
emphatically
,
yet left unnamed; and why should a woman,
however great might be her merits as a player,
maintain an influence over the company, of such
seemingly tyrannical extenta tyranny which, from
their spontaneous recognition of its sway, would
seem to have been of habitual and undisputed
exercise
?
The approach of Jones arrested his
cogitations
.
This path, Mr. Horsey, will lead you to your
place of sleeping for the night. You will there find
fire-light, and a boy waiting you. I will join you
before you sleep.
But, Mr. Jonesthe ladywho is she?
Our great gunour princessa most royal
heroine. You see what a magnificent carriage she
has?she is tremendously popularwins applauses
wherever she goesour trump-card which always
secures the game. But she knows it, sirthat's the
misfortune. She knows her popularity too well, and
she is capricious in consequence. We have to
humour
her, sir, in all her fancies, and some of them
are strange enough. You have no idea how
extravagant
she can be at times. Exercises the most
tyrannous authority, and we dare not offend her.
I'd like to know her. Suppose I go with you.
You can introduce me, and, by the ghost of Garrick,
Mr. Jones, to have a chat with such a woman, will
only be a proper compensation for the annoyances
I have had to undergo from that dd comedian
that fellow Bull, of whom you think so highly.
Not now,not for the world to-night. She's in
her fit to-night, and would fly at you like a tigress.
To-morrow, or the next day, Mr. Horsey, as soon
as the fit passes off. I'll tell you when she's in the
humour to be seen.
Do, do,I long to know her. She looks as if
she'd make a first-rate woman. But of whom did
you speak when you threatened Bull with the anger
of some person whom you did not name.
Oh, that was her husband,our chief musician.
A bloody fellow, by the way, of whom Bull has a
monstrous terror. He came nigh cutting Ben's
throat once already, for some liberties he took with
his wife, and since then we know how to keep him
in order. We have only to say, `
he
is coming'
meaning her husbandand the fellow's tail's down
in an instant. He loses all his with and humour, and
skulks off, as he did to-night, out of sight and
hearing
,
a most thorough-paced coward, as ever you
saw. But I must leave you. Our princess is as
jealous as her husband; and as I am acting manager
at present, I must be careful how I offend her. Your
path lies thereI will look in upon you as soon as I
am dismissed from her presence.
Horsey, somewhat bewildered, followed the path
which had been pointed out to him, while Jones
proceeded
to join the empress whose dictatorial
summons
,
he really did not dare to disobey. The spot
in which she received him was not far distant from
that which the revellers had occupied. It was more
thickly garnished with trees and shrubberymore
closely encircled by the swamp thicket, and, in place
of a rude tent of bushes, such as served the rest of
the company, a log-house was provided for her
ladyship
,
rude and clumsy, it is true, but comparatively
full of comforts, and not without its attractions.
Deference
,
if not affection, seemed to have striven to
gratify her pride, and commend itself to her
consideration
.
A little arbour was raised before her
door upon which the wild grape clambered; and
rose bushes had been planted along the path, which
was neatly shorn of weeds and made free of all
obstructions
.
Within the cottage, the same care might
have shown itself, in a hundred little particulars,
VOL. II. 13
but we need not waste our attention upon
details
.
The lady met Jones at the entrance, and, without
a word, led the way into the dwelling. Her manner
betrayed no little impatience.
You have been slow, Mr. Jones. I heard of
your arrival some hours ago, and have been
expecting
your presence ever since.
I had a particular charge, ma'am, which kept
me busy. We had a stranger to manage, and
Ay, ay,some other hopeful schemebut I care
not to listen to the small details of some new
villany. My desire is to know where you left
Saxon. That you have seen him, I knowthat you
must have seen him within a day, I am convinced.
What I desire to know is, where you saw him last,
and when I am to expect him here?
Really, ma'am, it would be very difficultnay
almost impossible, for me to answer all these
inquiries
.
You know, quite as well as I do, the
danger
that our captain incurs at this momentnay, at
every moment, and
Pshaw, Mr. Jonesyou speak as if you thought
me a fool, or doubted my prudence and fidelity. Is
it likely, do you think, that I shall prove a traitor to
Edward Saxon? or is there any probability that I
shall deal in the small tittle-tattle of my sex, and,
with its usual vanity, reveal, with unconscious
stupidity
,
what I know, to those who might do him
hurt. You know me betteryou would evade my
inquiries.
On my honour, ma'am
None of thatnone of that. Leave off your
long preambles, and answer my question. When
did you see your captain last, and where?I repeat,
I know that you have seen him within the last two
dayswhere was it, and what was the precise
time?
Perhaps, ma'am, you have more knowledge at
this moment of the captain's movements than myself.
He has not confided to me any particulars but those
which had connexion with the tasks upon which he
has set me, and which I was endeavouring to
execute
at the very moment when you came out upon
the bayou.
The woman looked upon the speaker with a
degree
of intense earnestness in her glance which
savoured of a rising anger. Her dark eyes gleamed
with the fires of a gathering thunder-storm, while a
smile of ineffable scorn, that seemed like its softer
lightnings, passed over her thin and ruddy lips.
Mr. Jones, you look upon me as upon a child,
with whom you may trifle at pleasure. Why do
you talk to me of your duties, and your efforts to
execute them? I do not doubt your diligence, nor
am I a miserable spy to watch your performance of
them. I ask a simple answer in reference to the
movements of anotherof your captain, sir?
Yes, ma'am, but you know my oath. I am
forbidden
What! to communicate with me? Has he then
forbidden you? Ah! has it come to thatdoes
he fear that I should know? Are his doings of such
a character? An outlaw to society, is he faithless
also to me?and youyou, sir, know, and are
forbidden
to declare. It is well, sirvery wellit is
exactly what I thoughtexactly. You may go, sir,
go! I ask you not to betray your leader, sir,
keep his secretsconceal his perjuriescloak his
excessesyou are both worthily employedboth.
Fear not, I shall do you justice to your captain.
You may go now. I have done with you. I have
no more questions.
This speech was spoken with an impetuosity which
defied all interruption. The torrent of passion
convulsed
the frame of the speakerfired her eyes
made her cheeks glow with the tempestuous blood
that coursed through her veins with the fierce rush
of a stream that no longer knows its limitsbut
offered no interruption to her accents, while her feet
traversed the little floor of the cabin, with every
sentence which she uttered, arrested only at the
close of each when she stopped to confront the
hearer with her flashing eyes.
Madam, said Jones, when her pause suggested
to him an opportunity for reply, what will you
have me say or do? I am commanded to obey
you.
Yet forbidden to answer my questions.
No, madam, only on such subjects as concern
the movements of the beagles.
Ay, that is the pretence. You know that I care
to know nothing of your movements, or of any
movements which merely affect your schemes of
plunder, and when I would ask of
him
, I am
answered
by a reference to your oath. What has your
oath to do with his movements?
He is one of ushis movements are those of
the beagles.
You will not answer me, Mr. Jones?
Madam, are you not already in possession of
all the information which I can give you? said
Jones, significantly.
What mean you, sir?
The dwarfStillyards.
What of him?Has he returned?
He has, madam. He stood near the captain
last nightso near that, had he been discovered, his
life had been but little worth. Saxon would have put
a bullet through his head had he known of his
presence
,
and dreamed that he had been sent as a spy
upon his actions.
Ha! what mean you by calling him a spywho
sent him as a spy?
You, madam, should need no answer to that
question. Enough, that I know that he was present
that he was present as a spy, and may reveal to
you those matters which I dare not. Stillyards is
already here, if you have not seen him; and has,
probably, been so far successful that he is able to
answer all your questions: as he has no such
scruples
as myself, he probably will do so. But, let me
counsel you, madam, for your own sake, no less than
that of our leader, that you employ that crooked
scoundrel no farther in such matters. If discovered,
Saxon will kill him, and if not, he may pick up some
secret of the leader, upon which his own life and
the lives of all of us might depend. You do not
know the evil which may follow this evil practice,
for which, if you will permit me to declare, there
can be no sort of necessity. Saxon, let me assure
you, is as faithful to you as he is to us; and if ever
mortal man loved woman, it is certain that he loves
you.
Ah, Mr. Jones, responded the woman in milder
accents, could I be sure of this; but the feeling of
my own unworthiness, is one that always produces
a doubt of his fidelity; and if he loves me as you
say, why is it that I am now so constantly
deserted
?
Believe me, madam, it could not well be
otherwise
.
Would I could believe you, Jones; would I
couldbutbutno matter. You will keep my
secret, Jonesyou will say nothing of what you
know?
Why should I, madam?it were of no use,
13*
unless it became necessary to prevent a repetition of
a practice which endangers the lives of all.
Stillyards
must not be again employed in this business.
How, sir, do you command me?
No, madam, far be it from me to do so. But I
take leave to counsel you; and to add, that my own
knife should silence the dwarf for ever, should I
again detect him in the position in which I
encountered
him last night.
Enough, sir, replied the lady, proudly, I shall
take care that the lad encounters no such risks at
your hands in future, and warn you, therefore, that I
shall avenge any injury which your suspicions or
your malice may prompt you to inflict upon him.
Malice, madam!it would be malice were I to
declare to our captain what has passed between us.
But you mistake me, madam, I have no malice
against you, if for no other reason, because I
sincerely
love our leader.
Mr. Jones, said the lady, I requested you to
say nothing to Saxon of what you know. I now
amend my request, simply to beg that you will
merely give me an opportunity of anticipating your
communication to him of every particular relating
to the spy, as you have been pleased to call the
dwarf, in my employ. It shall never be said that
Florence Marbois, whatever may be her errors and
her vices, dreaded to speak the truth herself in the
ears of the man she loved. I may have wronged
him by my suspicionsbut I will not wrong him so
greatly as to yield to an underling any confidence,
however unimportant, which I yet withheld from
him. You may leave me now, sir.
A faint smile passed over the features of Jones, as
he left the apartment.
Now, were I the malignant she has called me,
he uttered in low soliloquy as he entered the woods,
I should not forgivecertainly never forgetthis
bitter and foolish speech. It were no difficult
matter
to ruin her with Saxon for ever. But what use?
A woman in all her pride and glory is something
like a soap-bubble after all. She glitters and floats
in air for a while, is decked with all the colours of
the rainbow, but you see through her all the time,
and she bursts at last. I pity Florenceshe has
many excellent qualities, and, but for the convulsive
jealousy of her temper, would be as amiable as she
is lovely. She will break some day, and cover us
with lather. It will be our care to see that she does
not blind our eyes with the soap.
With this effort at small philosophy and smaller
wit, the outlaw proceeded to the hut of the
wandering
actor. His place was supplied, in the presence
of the lady by the dwarf, Stillyards, who made his
appearance the moment after the departure of the
other. He had evidently continued his occupation
of the spy, and had listened to the whole conference
between them. With a grin, which had in it as
much malice as delight, he prefaced his revelations
to the lady by some natural remarks upon what he
had heard; but was surprised at receiving a rebuke
for his ill-timed impertinence.
To your business, Stillyardsyou saw the
captain
he
was well?
This question answered to her satisfaction, she
dismissed him without farther inquiry, betraying, in
the novel forbearance which she manifested, the
influence
had upon her mind by the serious caution
which Jones had given her. The importance of the
dwarf was in no small degree lessened by this course
of proceeding.
A fool's journey, indeed, he muttered to himself
as he went, if I'm not to use what I went for. But
I'll pick a hole in both their coats when they're least
a-thinking. I've a word to open madam's ears
whenever I choose it, and I'll speak it too, sooner
than lose my best business. The only good shares I
gits comes from my lady, and if she stops hearing,
she'll stop paying. Well, it'll cost 'em both a great
deal more in the end; and if I don't git nothing by
it, I'll git satisfaction. I'll show 'em that the broken
back that makes 'em laugh, can make 'em cry too;
and if I only gits my laugh for my painswell,
that's something.
CHAPTER X.
And he had learn'd to love,I know not why,
For this, in such as him, seems strange of mood.
And there was one soft breast, as hath been said,
Which unto his was bound in stronger ties
Than the church binds withal.
Childe Harold
.
Jones
, when he returned to the woodland cover
which had been assigned to Horsey as his sleeping
apartment, discovered the worthy actor half
undressed
,
squat upon the turf, and looking around
him with a countenance in which consternation
might be said to be the prevailing expression.
Why, what's the matter, Mr. Horsey?
demanded
the outlaw.
Matter, sir, returned the other, matter
enough.
How! you seem alarmedyou seem angry.
Not alarmed, but cursedly astounded, and, as
you say, a little angry. Mr. Jones, I'm cursedly
afraid that this company of yours will not exactly
answer.
How, sir?
They lack moral, sir, was the reply of Horsey,
in lower tones, and something more of caution in his
manner.
Indeed, said the other, what leads you to this
conclusion?
Nay, let me not do injustice to all, when the
offence may be that of one only. Would you
believe
it, sir?my clothes are stolen!
Can it be possible?
Not only possible, but true. They are gone, sir,
a tolerably new coatblue cloth, gilt buttons, with
velvet collar, and silk liningtwo shirtspants,
a sort of pepper-and-salt, very fine though, with
figured braid front and broad edgingvest, fine satin,
a little frayed at the right pocket, double buckles in
the back, no strings, and my name, written in
India-ink
on the lining, `Thomas Horsey, American
Theatre, New Orleans,' all in full. In the vest, a
silver pencil-case, ever-pointed, without leads; in
the pants, a penknife, toothpick, and comb; in the
coat, a handkerchief and pocket Shakspeare, fine
miniature, Cadell's edition, London, much used, and
with pencil-marks for reading, under emphasized
passages. I would not take twenty dollars for the
Shakspeare alone, to say nothing of the clothes.
Truly a very serious loss, if they be lost, was
the reply of Jones; but I'm in hopes, Mr. Horsey,
that they are only mislaid. Our profession, as you
well know, calls for persons of nice honour in
particular
,
and I should prefer believing any mischance
sooner than the dishonesty of any of our men. Have
you looked where you left them?
Every where.
Let us look again. It is too much to lose
without
some effort, and you may have overlooked them
in the darkness of the night. Where did you lay
them?
Here, on this very pole, and beneath these two
trees; I changed my dress behind them. My
saddlebags
,
you see, are safe, and that is fortunate, for
my favourite costume, and the most costly, is within
them. I have a Romeo there, sir, a Richard, two
field-officers, a Mustapha, and other uncertain
characters
.
My Hamlet, you see, I have on, and, egad,
`motley's my only wear' now, unless I can recover
the missing matters. The only citizen's dress I had,
is gone, and I should make a comical figure by
daylight
,
in this dress of Denmark.
A noble figure you mean, siryou never looked
half so well in any dress in your life, Mr. Horsey,
as in that, was the reply, full of tones of
admiration
,
which the outlaw made. It went consolingly
to our actor's heart, through the medium of his
vanity; and the importance of his loss became a
little
lessened in his eyes.
Upon my soul, continued the outlaw, with a
successful gravity of countenance, while he affected
to look for the missing articles, were I you, Mr.
Horsey, I should never desire any other dress than
that which you wore to-night. Your figure and
general air, sir, suit admirably the costume of
Hamlet.
Do you really think so, Jones?
Indeed I do; your carriage was particularly
finethe union of royal dignity and profound
human
thought, which you contrivedI know not
howto throw into the countenance of the
melancholy
prince, was inimitable. The habitual sense of
royalty was therepresent always to the sight; and
yet every movement of the lips, every turn of the
body, every glance of the eye, subdued while
graceful
,
and full of signification while most easy, seemed
to say, with the preacher, `Vanity of vanities, all is
vanity.' Your Hamlet, sir, seemed to denote, what
he must have felt always, that he was the victim of
the destinies.
That is a good idea, Mr. Jonesa devilish good
ideaa correct notion of the character. I must
confess I never thought that before, though, certainly,
I must have felt it, if my personation was correct. I
must read the play more closely,I must renew my
studies. Dn the fellow for stealing the bookthe
breeches he may havecan't you make it known
without offending the company, Mr. Jones?Say
that the thief may have vest and breeches, returning
me my Shakspeare and the coat?
The result of the search, in spite of the liberal
offer which Horsey had made, was unsatisfactory.
The worthy actor was compelled to wear his
professional
costume in common, and the merriment which
his appearance by daylight occasioned among the
outlaws, whom he was still persuaded to regard as
brethrenfellows of the sock and buskinmay be
more easily conjectured than described. Not that he
himself was suffered to become conscious of the fun
which he inspired. Jones had his object in
preserving
order, and was successful in curbing the open
expression of that mirth which was felt on every
side as the actor strutted among themperhaps not
so much dissatisfied with his losses, as pleased with
the opportunity of appearing so often in character,
to a person who, like Jones, seemed to behold his
display with so much unction, and with such a
laudable
desire to profit by his exhibitions. It would
have been easy to have kept the actor some time
longer in so pleasant a captivity, had it been the
object
of the outlaws to have done so. It was only
necessary on the part of their leader to hint a desire
that the phlegmatic, yet fanciful Hamleta Jacques
under different aspects of fortuneshould become
the proud and passionate Moor for a season; and
Horsey, whatever might have been his rising
suspicions
of his companions, dismissed them on the
instant
that he put on the habit of Othello. Vanity is
one of the most unsuspicious of all moral objects.
The ear that is open only to praise seems to acquire
its intense eagerness at the expense of the other
perceptive
faculties. The eye is closed to the sneer that
lurks about the lips of ironyand a general
obtuseness
of the judgment, in all but the leading desire of
the mind, distinguishes that moral gourmand, for
whom toiling Flatterya creature that is base in
proportion to the folly which it feeds,ministers its
spurious sweets, that, perhaps, only do not satiate,
because they are so utterly unsubstantial. But let
us not anticipate. It will not be necessary here to
say how long Horsey remained in the neighbourhood
of Cane Castle, or what were the events that
subsequently
befel him. Let us finish with the night in
which he lost his inexpressibles, and in which we
have still something more to do, and some other
parties to produce.
After devoting considerable time, and a
reasonable
degree of effort, for the recovery of the lost
wardrobe, Jones left the actor to his sylvan couch,
while he returned to his owna shelter of twigs,
bark and bushes, some fifty yards distant. The
actor soon slept, to dream of parts and persons, in
the assumption of which the loss of his own
garments
could not have been seriously felt. Sleep
soon overcame the outlaw also; and it was only
after several shakes of the shoulder that the latter
was awakened from his slumbers by a stranger at
his side.
Ha! captainyou! he exclaimed, when fully
aroused, and starting to his feet as he distinguished
the face and form of his visiter in the dim star-light.
Yes, was the answer in the tones of Saxon.
Have you found your man?
He is here,we have played the game so far
with tolerable success.
VOL. II. 14
You have the clothes then?
Yescoat, vest and breeches.
That is well. Let them be well blooded; put a
knife and bullet hole in the breast and body, and
send them off with the first peep of morning to
Nawls. Keep up the game with this silly fellow a
few days longer, and I will then give you orders
what to do with him. He is unsuspicious of the
truth?
Quite.
That is wellkeep him sobut do not suffer
yourself to be deceived. He may play in
characters
more troublesome to a good beagle than Othello
or Macbeth. You were careful to take him along
the cross paths to the swamp?
Ay, sirit would puzzle him to find his way
out again without help; but he will not seek to do
so while we hold to our theatrical purposes, and
this we can safely do for a reasonable space longer.
Do you leave the castle to-morrow?
To-night. I will but see Florence first, and
excuse
myself for another flight.
That is only a proper caution, sir. She needs
it.
How! Have you seen her? demanded Saxon,
with some anxiety.
She came out upon us while we were
drenching
the boys, in the very height of our play with the
actor.
Ha!well! The old passion, I suppose?
inquired
the outlaw, with some disquiet in his tones.
Would she were safely in Orleans again. What
did she come for?
To summon me to the castleto make inquiries
after youyour whereaboutsyour objectsthe
cause of your delay.
Jealous, suspicious woman!I must cure her
of this; but the task is not so easy. She has a
furnace
in her veins that maddens her. Her brain is
all fire and suspicion, and her heartbut I must
forgive
her all, since her madness grows out of a love,
which is as little qualified and doubtful as her
jealousy
.
And yet, heaven keep me from such a
passion
as hersto be its object even is a terror. It
would consume while it worshipsand still enslaves
by the intensity of its regards. There is no tyranny
like that which never suffers you from under its
eye.
The conference between the two outlaws was
continued for a brief space longer, but as it involved
matters which have no connexion with our
narrative
,
it needs no record here. When they separated,
Jones resumed his couch, while Saxon, passing
through the narrow pathway already traversed by
the reader, entered upon that densely encircled area,
on the edge of which stood the little cottage of his
leman.
Florence Marboisthe young, the beautiful, the
devotedwas a Creole of Louisiana, whose parents
were French, and who, dying of yellow fever in
Orleans when she was yet a child, left her to the
doubtful care of indifferent relatives, whose
responsibility
,
however lightly it may have been felt, had been
abruptly terminated by her clandestine flight to the
arms of another guardian, from whose affection she
had better hopes of those regards and that
tenderness
,
which were so dear to one so adhesive as
herself
,
and of which she had heretofore known so little.
Edward Saxonof whom she then knew nothing,
but that he was noble in form, handsome in features,
proud in spirit and intelligent in mind, far beyond
the average of those intellects to which she had
been accustomedbecame her protectorher
protector
in that sense of the word which excludes her
from all social consideration; and though it may
most frequently have its origin in love, more
certainly
finds its termination in disgrace. She fled to
his arms, and in the intoxication of a first dream of
passion realised, she felt no rebukings of conscience
no compunctious visitingsno misgivings that the
love which had prevailed over virtue would fail to
survive its loss. But the heart which craved the
affection which it has not often found, is of all others
the most suspiciously watchful of that brief portion
which fate allows it; and when, in process of time,
the various employments of her lover, took him
from her side, and kept him absent for days, and
weeks, and sometimes months, Jealousy, that
twin-passion
of love, which, perhaps, must always be as
active as its elder sister, particularly where the
rights of the latter have been left unestablished by
the legitimate authorities, grew no less violent than
the flame of which it may be called the black and
veiling smoke; and she who could dote, at one
moment
,
with devotion, on the bosom of her seducer,
soon showed him that she was not without the spirit
to rise, at another, into rebellion and hostility. Her
fits of passion annoyed and sometimes confounded
him; and the first impulses having subsided, which
had led him, as fiercely fond as herself, to assume
the charge of one so wild and violent, he sighed
with something of regret as he looked back to a
condition of freedom, which he now craved, but
which he found himself utterly unable to restore.
Though outlawed, he was not utterly abandoned,
and his soul shrunk from the suggestions, which had
never been self-prompted before, to rid himself, by a
single act of brutality, from ties which, however
sweet at first, had now become an encumbrance.
Now, for the first time, however, dark resolves were
self-offered to his mind; and ere he emerged from
the wood which separated the encampment of the
robbers from the area in which the cottage of his
mistress stood, he paused under their influence, and
his lips parted in murmured soliloquy:
And why should it be borne longer? he
exclaimed
why
should I be the victim of eternal
jealousiesa suspicion that haunts my footsteps
that watches my actionsthat hangs like an incubus
upon my heart? Can there be any wisdom in such
patience? Shall it be that I, who have shaken off
the fear with the love of manwho have bidden
defiance
to his power no less than to that of Godthat
I should yield up life and freedomthe enjoyment of
other society which might in part console me for
the loss of those which the outlaw must ever forfeit,
in a base homage to one for whom I have no love
for whose claims, even lust now fails to offer any
argument? Beautiful oncebeautiful stillloving
me as I believe thou hast doneFlorence Marbois,
thou art yet nothing in my sight. Thy love is
persecution
;
and it is pitypity onlywhich has made
me, at great effort, wear a face, when I approached
thee, of regard which I can no longer feel. I
remember
what thou wast when I first saw thee
when I first took thee in my arms that fatal night,
when, in a boat which might have been a coffin to
us both, the winds bore us over the Pontchartrain
togetherI remember what thou wast, and what I
promised to thee then, and the memory of that night
rises up to save thee and to soften me. But, can I
always sparecan I always endure the tyranny
which thy vain jealousies inflict? Is there reason
why it should be bornenay, is there not good
reason
now, why it should cease soon and for ever. It
mustit shall! There is a bound where patience
may not goa limit where endurance stops, and
forbearance becomes a shame as it has long before
14*
become a weariness. That bound is reachedthat
limit is overpassed; and the heart which now flows
with all its streams to another, must soon be freed
from thee. But for this I had borne with thee still
longerI had borne with thee in pity for thy youth
for that love even, which thou still bearest to one to
whom it has been an annoyance for weary months,
and to whom, unless checked in season, it must
become
a curse!
He paused and looked around him, as if struck by
approaching footsteps, but no one approached him.
As if reassured, his words again broke forth in
soliloquy
such
soliloquy as denoted the doubts and
indecision
of a spirit, for the first time approaching a
purpose of excessive guilt and danger. What he
said tended to show that the woman whom his arts
had betrayed, was about to be cast from his least
regards; and nothing seemed to be wanting to the
more fell and cruel resolution which would thrust her
from his path, but that frequent contemplation of the
subject, which reconciles the corrupted heart, step
by step, to the last degree of crime. That this stage
of wickedness had not yet been reached by the
outlaw
,
was clear enough, by the frequent recurrence,
in what he said, to that period in the history of their
mutual fortunes, when the intercourse between them
had been productive of equal pleasure to them both.
So long as the memory may still look back with
tenderness to the green garden spots of youth, the
heart is not utterly corruptthere is still a part not
yet ossifieda narrow, isolated spot, from which the
springs of relieving pity may well up and soften,
though they may not often heal, the rest.
CHAPTER XI.
Die all my fears,
And waking jealousies, which have so long
Been my tormentors; there's now no suspicion.
Massinger
.
It
was midnight, but Florence Marbois did not
sleep. She sat beside the window, looking forth
upon the various shadows of the night and forest.
The scene was unspeakably sweet and soft, but it
was also sad and mysterious. A faint murmur, like
the distant moanings of a spirit at watch over the
desolate abodes of youth and happiness, came to her
ears through the subdued silence hanging over the
scene. The shadows drooped, as if in kindred
affliction
,
beneath the grave and brooding starlight. The
gray cypresses rose up like spectres amidst the green
foliage that grew thickly along the edges of the
swamp, and looming forward in the dewy haze of
midnight, seemed to harmonize with the melancholy
aspects of the region. Nor was the voice of the
water, as it rose from a brooklet that gurgled under
the upbulging roots of a tree which it had partially
detached from its foothold, without a fitting tone of
sadness for the scene. The heart of Florence felt
the mysterious sympathies accorded by the
unintelligent
nature at her feet. Her head rested upon her
palms as she looked forth and listenedher eyes, as
if satisfied, strove not to pierce the dense maze of
forest all around her; and while her lips murmured
a complaint of solitude, such as seemed to be the
burden of all voices, her cheeks were glistening with
those holy dews which such beauty as hershad
she been still alive to social vanitiesshould not
have regretted, since they served to crown beauty
with the more prevailing charm of sweetness, and
consecrate to love the very sorrows in which their
origin is found. The heart of Florence was
softened
,
but not at ease. Tears had brought reliefa
brief respite from the gnawing discontent which
preyed upon her heartbut not a curenot a
remedy
.
If she felt more at ease, it was the ease of
one who has just drank the soothing draught, and
can only find relief while under its influence. Fancies,
which are sometimes hopes disguised, the ephemeras
of the soul, had been with her in momentary
visitation
;
and, though vague, unstable, and illusive, they
had at least diverted the grief which might else have
overborne. True, they fly at last, but so do the
angels; and who would refuse the blessing of the
visit, in which the very air blossoms through which
they come, because of the conviction that they must
fly with the morning? The heart that has been full
of sorrow, should be the last to speculate upon the
always unprofitable future.
Unfortunately, the hopes of Florence had not been
wise, hopes, for they had not been good ones. She
loved unworthilyshe had sinnedshe lacked the
securities of virtue, and had no confidence in that of
others. Her hopes, based upon the probable truth of
her lover, were idly founded. They were made to
rest upon his tastes, his passions, her own powers of
pleasing, her frail and fading charms, and her
undisguised
attachment for him. They had not been
placed where, to be secure, all affections must be
placed; upon her own just claims to respect, and
upon the inflexible principles of truth in the man to
whom her affections had been given. He had
raised his hand in defiance to society, in the rigid
exercise of whose laws the only security of woman
may be found; and her appeal for justice now lay
to his passions and caprices aloneto passions
which constant provocation made active and
imperious
to
caprices that fluctuated with an appetite
more peevish with every indulgence, and more
recklessly resolved with every denial. But Florence
Marbois was a creature of impulses, not of thought;
and if there were moments in which she estimated
correctly her miserable condition of dependence,
such thoughts were soon driven away as intruders,
by the gentle accent, the kindly solicitudenot often
shown in the latter days of her heart's history
which the pity of her betrayer vouchsafed to bestow,
in return for that increasing homage and devoted
loveshown even in its most jealous phrensies
which she had never ceased to feel for him from the
first hour of their ill-appointed union.
And, sitting beside the window of that rude hovel,
alone, in the deep mazes of an uncultivated forest
the savage almost at her sidea band of outlaws at
her feetmidnight gathering, vague, wild, indistinct
and mysterious around her:the playmates of youth
the friends of maturitythe social and kindly
world in which she had livedall banished from her
sightall lost, and, probably, lost for ever:still she
thought of no privationshe knew of no lossshe
dreamed of no evilno dangernothing to make
her doubtnothing to make her dreadshe thought
only of him! Where was he? When would he
come? Was he still true? Did he still love her as
before? Could she have found a grateful answer
to these questions, her heart might have been
pacified
.
She would have asked no other questionsno
other fortune from the hands of Fate. Such is love
that thing of greatest dependenceof greatest
strength and weakness. Strong above all powers
for enduranceweak beyond all moral supports,
when it knows not where to confide, and cannot
command the sympathy which it ever seeks, and
without which it is little better than a flower cast
upon the unreturning waters, and borne with feeble
struggles to the wide ocean, where it is swallowed
up. Strong, vigorous, climbing, triumphant, and
beautiful, like the vine, when the gigantic tree
suffers
its embraces; but wretched, sinking, and
perishing
,
prostrate upon the earth, when, throwing out its
tendril-arms for the support to which it was destined,
and without which it cannot live, it grasps only the
unsubstantial air; and perishes at last in feeble
despondency
upon the damp and noisome ground from
which it has ever sought to rise. In the cold world
how many affections spread forth their arms, seeking,
but in vain, to clasp themselves around the rugged
nature which they would adorn and beautify
failing
in this, that perish upon the spot which gave
them birth but denied them sustenanceputting forth
no fruits, bearing no flowers, yet beautiful while they
livedso beautiful in promise, that the heart cannot
help but weep, for its own sake, that they were
denied
all fruition.
The tears were yet on the cheeks of Florence
when Saxon entered the apartment. He entered it
unobserved. Her face was yet turned upon the
foresther thoughts were far distant; and in the
absence of her thoughts, her present senses had
become
obtuse, or heedless of their duty. He strode
firmly, but not heavily, over the room, but she heard
him not. He stood almost immediately behind her,
and still she turned not. He stood awhile surveying
her in silence. Many and changing thoughts seemed
passing through his mind. His brow darkened for
an instanthis hand was lifted in the same time,
and seemed searching in his bosom, while a glance
of savage ferocity lightened in his eye. At that
moment a deep sigh escaped from her lips, and the
expression passed from his face, his hand was
withdrawn
from his bosom, and, placing it upon her
shoulder, he pronounced her name. She turned,
almost with a screaman exclamation which had
in it as much delight as surpriseand, rising from
her seat, threw herself into his arms with all the
abandonment of joy.
Oh, Edward, dear Edward,it is youyou are
come,you are come at last, and I am so happy.
But you have been gone so long,so very long,
Edward, that I feared you had forgotten methat
you had deserted me for ever, and my heart sank
within me, and I have been so miserable that I
wished myself dead a thousand timesindeed, I
didfor it seemed to me far better to be dead and
cease to feel than to have such miserable feelings as
have filled my heart. But you are come nowyou
will now stay with me a long time, and I shall be so
happy.
While the poor heart-dependent hung upon the
bosom of the outlaw, and poured forth these words
in a stream that lacked emphasis as it lacked
obstruction
for
the sentences which she so rapidly
uttered were spoken without the cessation of the
smallest pauseshis looks were cold, his eye was
aimless, his whole air and manner were those of a
man who could no longer be moved by any thing that
she might say. His head was thrown back to avoid
the flowing tresses of her hair which brushed his
face, and his arms made a slight movement to put
her from him. This she feltthis she resisted, and
clung to him with a firmer hold than before.
Do not push me from you, Edwardnot yet
not awhile,let me cling to you only a little
longer. I have thought upon this dear embrace,
and wept and prayed for it so long that you must
not deny it to me now. Yet I will not worry and
vex you with it. I know you have grown colder
and harsher than you werethat you are not so
fond as you used to be when we first came to the
woods. I feel thatI know it; forgive me that I
press it upon youbut remember I am a woman,
and believe me that I love you, oh, Edward, as
warmly as ever, in spite of all the changes which I
cannot but see in you.
It may be so, Florenceit may be so, replied
the other coldly.
It may be so, Edwardmay be so? Can you
doubt itcan you think otherwise for a single
moment
?
Have you not seen it in all my lookshave
you not felt it in all my actionsfrom the first to
the lastfrom that sweet,perhaps, most unhappy
hour, when I believed all your assurances of love,
and gave you, oh, how entirely! all of mineeven
to this, when you speak as if you believed me not,
and look, as if you are indifferent whether it is truth
or not which I speak? Do not force me to think
this, dear Edwarddo not, I implore you,unless
you seek to discard meto crush me quiteto
trample me for ever in the dust. I can bear the
world's scornnay, I do not seeI do not feel it.
I can bear any thingall things,denial, privation
banishment from friends and family,burial in
these swampsany thing but the conviction that
he, for whose sake I am thus desolatethus
dependant
now
makes light of the sacrifice, and takes
from me, all at once, that love which I found more
than a recompense for every loss. Turn not from
me, Edwardspeak not,look not so again upon
me, for in truth, I am very, very wretchedI know
not well why, unless it is that I see so little of you.
And unless you smile upon meunless you are
willing
to let me love you when you come to meI
would rather far that I were deadI would rather
far that you would kill me with a sudden blow and
end all my sufferings at once. The pang of the
blow, even from your hands, given in your anger,
would not be half so great a pang as that which I
should suffer without mitigation and without cure,
could I feel that you were indifferent to my love.
The imploring solicitude of this speechthe
tender
accentsall failed to move the now cold heart
of the outlaw. He suffered her hand to rest upon
his armbut his eyes turned away from the large,
tear-filled orbs that implored more eloquently for
his love, than any of her accents. He had not yet
attained that recklessness of spirit and of conscience
which could enable him to meet without shrinking,
the glance of her, whom he was not unwilling to
destroy.
Florence, he replied,either I have, or I
have not, to go elsewhere, and be absent from you
long. If such be the necessity, you have no reason
to complain of me; and if there be no such
necessity
,
then there is no policy in your complaint.
Indeed
,
you will only drive me away from you by
such complainings. I hate such scenes.
Edward, returned the other, reproachfully.
He proceeded with an air of dogged
determination
,
to push his new-formed resolution to the
utmost
.
The best regards in the world may become
oppressive
.
There is a season for love as for other
things. When a man has reached the age of thirty,
VOL. II. 15
life has other businesses besides love. It is
surprising
that you have not discovered this truth before
that you should need now to be informed, that, even
with the most pliable men, there are certain moods
and dispositions of the mind when love is an
intruder
,
and the embrace of the most lovely woman,
an annoyance. I do not profess to be of more
tender
stuff than other people, and I confess to you
that I hate very much to be continually
excruciated
!
And this was the end of passion! Of a passion
that had seemed more like phrensy than feeling
more like the outporuings of a heart convulsed by
its emotions into madness, than the ebullitions of
human
hopes, fears and fancies. And this was the
man who had persuaded Florence Marbois to give
up allhope, honour, societyfriends and family,
and fly with him into the wildernessto share with
him his shame and guilt, his exposure and isolation.
Verily, there is no stingno sorrowgreater than
the wrong of the beloved onethe desertion of him
in whom we had put our bosom's trust!
This was the first time that the unhappy Florence
had ever been compelled to listen to language so
unequivocal
from the lips of her betrayer. It has been
said already that, up to the present moment, a sense
of pity, rather than of justice, had prevented the
outlaw from showing the indifference which he felt.
Hitherto, he had made an effort to exhibit a
fondness
which he had long since ceased to feel. A new
passion for another, made him anxious to cast off a
connexion which had become an encumbrance; and
the desire which had almost moved him to the
commission
of a more brutal, if not a worse crime than
that of his first wrong to the unhappy womanif
insufficient
as yet to reconcile him to her murderwas
quite active enough to render him unscrupulous to
the open declaration of those true feelings which he
had only successfully disguised, because of her
unwillingness
to behold and to believe them. His
tones and language now, no longer to be mistaken,
were instantaneous in their effects. She started from
his sideher hand shrunk from the arm which it had
grasped, as if there had been danger in the contact,
and she retreated for a few paces, then stood with
arms drooping at her side, and her head slightly bent
towards him. Her eyes, no longer suffused, became,
on a sudden, keen, arid and burning. They shot forth
an intense glarean expression of mingled
consternation
and inquiry; and, when they encountered
only the cold inflexible gaze of one from whom all
motives to farther deception were removedwho
now, perhaps, rather sought an occasion to declare
the indifference which a better feeling had once made
him studious to concealit was then that they
became
fixed, as it were, with a death-like distension
of orb, such as betokens the first bound to madness
of an oppressed brain and overpowered reason. A
brief space of time elapsed, in which she preserved
this posture without speaking. Her intensity of
stare was painful to the outlaw, even if he no longer
felt it to be reproachful; and he advanced, speaking
as he did so, towards his unhappy victim.
Come, come, Florence, I must not suffer this.
These arts must no longer be practised upon me.
Let us understand each other. Let us put an end to
these follies. We have both of us lived too long in
the world, not to feel the wear and tear of such
passions
as these; and the impolicy of indulging them
should be known to all who have discovered, as I
have long since done, that our affections and
sympathies
,
to be grateful and worth preserving, must
not be suffered to become tyrannies. Do you
understand
me, Florence?
He approached her as he spokehe made a show
of taking her hand, but she retreated, drawing her
arms behind her as she did so, but preserving, at the
same time, the same searching scrutiny of gaze
which he had found so painfully oppressive.
No! no! no! she exclaimed, mutteringly, a
moment after. It cannot be. It was a dream. I
could have heard no such accents from his lips. It
cannot be that I am reserved for so dreadful a
punishment. I know that I have done wrongthat
I am guilty before manguilty in the sight of
heaven
but
oh! not to him! He cannot have spoken
thusI will notdare notbelieve it!
She paused, her eye still followed his, and,
unwilling
to endure its expression, he turned away to the
window she had left. A new resolve entered her
mindshe darted rapidly towards himcaught his
wrist with a nervous grasp, and spoke in clear, soft,
untremulous accents
EdwardEdward Saxonwhat was it that you
said to me but nownot a minute since?Speak!
Speak aloudlet me hear your words again, for
I feel that I have not clearly understood themI
hear badly, Edward, of late, and, unless the words
are spoken very distinctly, I am very apt to
misunderstand
them.
Florence, why do you annoy me in this way
when I come to see you? You know that I hate
these wild passions. These tumults that produce
no good, and are without any necessity. They
trouble
they
oppress menay, more, I confess the
truth to youthey make me exceedingly reluctant
to approach you.
It is true! It is all true!my ears did not
deceive
meI heard it allall! she exclaimed,
breathing deeply, after several protracted moments
in which her bosom seemed not to heaveher lips
gave forth not the slightest respiration. Her eyes
were fixed upon him with a gaze of mingled horror
and surprise, and, more than once, as she gazed, her
hands were passed over her brows, as if striving to put
aside some obscuring tresses, which were yet not in
the way. Well might she doubt her sight, when she
could no longer withstand the evidence of her other
senses. The now desolate and abandoned woman
abandoned by the man for whom she had long since
abandoned virtuehad still a hope that there might
be some smile on the lips of the speakersome
expression
in his eyes, softening, subduing, qualifying,
disarming the deadly accents which had reached her
from his lips. But no! In his cold, calm features,
she beheld most truly the hopelessness of her heart.
She saw that she was for ever banished from those
affections, in which she deemed herself secure. The
veil, with which pity had striven for awhile to hide
from the eyes of passion, the fatal truth, that love had
for ever gone from the shrine where he had been
worshipped, was ruthlessly torn away; and the
mocking spectre alone remained, to grin over the
devotee, who had for so long a season bent before
its unholy and delusive features. The sin which
had assumed the aspects of a power the most
commanding of all others in the heart of woman,
having secured its victim, beyond recall or recovery,
no longer cared to preserve its disguises, and she
stood alone in the presence of the tempter, his veil
uplifted, his scorn openly declared.
Florence Marbois, weak though she had been at
first, and easy, like all her sex, to be overcome where
she loved and believed herself to be beloved, had
yet her strength; and the strength of woman,
defrauded
of her hope, and despised in her affections,
is no less immeasurable than fearful. The cold
composure of the outlaw's glance moved her
indignation
,
15*
and a bitter smile of equal scorn flushed the
face that a moment before had been of a deadly
whiteness.
I thank you, Edward SaxonI thank you.
Cruel as the truth is which you have at last spoken,
it is some consolation that it is the truth. You have
deceived me for a long time; and in this practice
my own blind attachment has made the toil of
artifice
an easy one. But your looks tell me more than
your language; and there are other truths, yet
unspoken
,
which I need not that you should declare.
Edward Saxon, you love another! I know itI
feel itelse why should you now forego the
deception
,
so long continued, and which you found so easy?
Why should you teach me with such effortso
plainlythat you had ceased to love me, when it
cost so little effort to persuade me that you did, and
when such a faith was so gratefulso essentialto
the poor heart that loved you. You are not
naturally
cruel, why then be guilty of so great a cruelty?
why open my dreaming eyes to the loss of all for
which I had lived? There could be but one reason
but a single motive. From the moment that you
fixed your eyes upon another, the task had become
irksome of continuing those shows of love to me on
which I have fed so long. There was no absolute
need to wear a mask any longeryou had nothing
to hope, and, in the excess of your power, you,
perhaps
,
felt assured that there was nothing which you
had to fear. Perhaps not! Edward Saxon, you are
free. You shall hear no farther reproaches from
Florence Marbois. Devote yourself to the hapless
woman whom you have selected to fill my place.
You may never discard hershe may never suffer
my wrongsand yet, if she is unlike me, perhaps
she may avenge them. Enoughyou are free to
seek her. Though my heart withered, and my hope
died, yet, I tell you, Edward Saxon, they should do
so, sooner than I would implore you for the delay of
a single instant ere you cast yourself into her arms;
or for a single accent of reluctant love, from lips
which have been so dishonoured as yours.
Florence, this is a sort of madness to which
your constant jealousies have long made you liable.
They have annoyed me long enough,they shall
annoy me no longerand since you so boldly
declare
yourselfnow learn from me, that your
conjecture
is true. There is anothera woman,
loveliest
among the lovelyyou shall see hershe shall
even dwell with you here for a seasonthough I say
not that she shall take your place.
Wherefore not say it? Think not you will
offend
me farther, Edward Saxonthink not you
offend me at all. I tell you, my heart has survived
the possibility of offence at your hands. You have
wronged me too deeply to offend me. I see not
your scornI hear not your accents of coldness and
crueltythey are lost in the overwhelming
conviction
of the injury which you have done me. You
are a bold man, Edward Saxon,a bold, brave, bad
man. I am but a womana frail, feeble, desolate,
abandoned woman
She paused.
There is something more, Florence. Why do
you stop? Surely the comparison demands an
inference
a
conclusiona point. Shall it be a
sting?
She looked on the speaker, whose contemptuous
smile showed how little he valued the feelings which
he had so deeply outraged, with a grave
countenance
,
expressing a singular degree of composure,
which, but for the feelings that it really served to hide,
must have been unnatural; and replied briefly
It may be sobold, bad, reckless as you are,
Edward
Saxon,worthless as am I, and feebleGod
will raise me up an avenger. I may be guilty in his
sight, but it cannot be that you, to whom I owe it
all, should be suffered this double triumph over me.
There will be an hour of retribution. There must be
pangs for the betrayer as well as for the betrayed;
and I will only pray that I may live long enough to
know that you feel them.
The prayer of the wicked, you know, was the
sneering reply of the outlaw. I could preach you
a sermon from that text, Florence, were I in the
mood, which would be unctuous enough for the
orthodox
in any congregation in Mississippi; but I
spare you that, and my farther presence. I must
leave you for a while. I trust to find you in a better
humour when I bring you a companion.
Now, may I have strength for my vengeance
against that day! was the exclamation of the
discarded
woman, as the outlaw left her; and a wild,
cruel resolution rose up in her mind, as, brooding
without sleep through the remainder of that weary
night, she thought only and ever of the woman who
was destined to take her place in the embraces of
unlawful love, as of a victim!the last sacrifice upon
that altar of passion, on which her own virtue had
been the first.
CHAPTER XII.
I'll no more tender him,
Than had a wolf stol'n to my teat in the night,
And robb'd me of my milk.
John Webster
.
Saxon
knew, in fact, but little of the nature of
woman. Her heart was a fountain shut up, and a
book sealed to him. He had the arts which could win
these, perhaps, are few and not difficult of
attainment
.
They may be acquired by almost every youth
of tolerable deportment and moderate common sense.
But those finer arts which may secure the possession,
and make the conquest permanent, he did not seem
to possess, and, indeed, did not seem to value. Men
who are rapid in their conquests, are not apt to value
them. Easy won, easy lost, is something of a
proverb, which holds no less good in the affairs of
the heart than in those of the purse. Had Saxon
been a more thorough examiner of that various
province
,the
heart of a woman who loves;could he
have looked deeply into its hopes and fears,its
tumultuous
passions, and capricious fanciesits
suspicions
,
which grow naturally out of a just feeling
of its dependance upon that arbitrary lord whom it
is born to serve and must suspect,and which make
it a thing all watchfulness and jealousy;he would
have known that there was no object in nature so
sensitiveno object so perfectly fearful,when
touched rudely by reproach, or mocked by
indifference
and scorn. Perhaps, had he not grown too
indifferent to the possession, he would have been
more considerate of the claims of that affection
which he once sought with avidity, and which was
never more truly and devotedly his than at the very
moment when he encountered it with a contumely
as reckless as it was underserved. He little knew
the fierce and uncontrollable spirit which he roused
in the bosom of Florence Marbois during the brief
interview which has been just recorded. She might
have forgiven the neglect which was only suspected
she might have forgotten the partial inattention
of his regards, so long as he still returned, and
while his lips still yielded, however unfaithfully,
some vague assurances of his attachment. But when
he boldly declared his defectionwhen the vain
beauty was taught to know that there was a more
highly esteemed beauty, set up as her rival;when
the devoted heart was rudely thrust from the altar,
where its tendrils were still resolute to cling,when
love could no longer doubt its desertionit was
then that another and a wilder nature, rose up,
gloomy and terrible, within her soul. Some glimpses
of this nature had been shown the outlaw a moment
ere their parting, but he had not seen them. These
had been the outbreakings of a spirit which could
not altogether be suppressed; but its language was
beyond his comprehension. He had heard so many
upbraidings from the lips of the neglected woman
that his ear had grown obtuse to their true
signification
.
He confounded the vindictive mutterings of a
passion which was scorned, with the tender
reproaches
of a heart which was still allowed to hope.
Having denied hope, having trampled upon love,
having
cast faith and feeling from his consideration,he
should have known that Hate would be the deity
most likely to be raised upon their ruins, by the spirit
which he had so rudely driven from all communion
with his own.
There is quite as little wisdom as virtue in
injustice
.
Perhaps it may be affirmed, with equal truth
and certainty, that it is also without cunning. The
wholesomest moral prudence is truth and good faith.
Had Saxon not been blinded by his resolution to do
wrong, he must have seen, in the keen yet composed
glance of the womanin her deliberate accentsin
her slow, cold, resolved mannerthat a sudden and
singular change had come over all her feelings in
the moment when he made his open avowal of
injustice
.
Her temper, passionate and deep, earnest,
and gushingoverflowing in its fulness, and always
warm in its expression in all ordinary cases of
excitement
was
now, when the occasion became one,
perhaps, of the greatest and most painful
provocation
,
suddenly subduedalmost frigidan
embodiment
,
in marble, of lofty elevation and dignified
indifference
.
The change in character should have
occasioned surprise; and reflection should have
taught the outlaw, that the woman he had wronged
had become an object of apprehension. But he had
none. He was too glad of an occasion to shake off
bonds which had become irksome, to see that, in
doing so, he had incurred the resentment of a heart
which could be as dangerous as it had been devoted.
This sudden obtuseness of intellect may be accounted
an essential part of that blindness and madness to
which the gods deliver over those whom they have
previously determined to destroy.
Florence Marbois watched at her window while
the night faded away; yet she seemed utterly
unconscious
of its passing hours. She was
unconscious
of all things around her. Her heart was
changed within her, and bitter thoughts and
envenomed
resolutions were growing up, and taking
the place of those which, but a short time before,
had been only those of tenderness and love. The
cruel iron of desertion, and the sharp steel of scorn,
had entered deeply into her soul, and left nothing but
rankling irritation where they went. Desolation she
had endured for himbut desertion by him was
unendurable
;
and wild, vague, changing, but always
hostile measures presented themselves to her mind,
as she brooded, in the darkness and stillness of the
night, over her wrongs, and the bitter-sweet hope
which she indulged of redressing them.
There are means, she murmured at intervals,
there must be means every where provided to
humble the oppressorto revenge the injured. I
am weakI am womanbut God has not left me
utterly helpless, if he has made me destitute. I
know that I can have my revengeI know that I
can strikethat I can triumph;and herehere in
the darkness of this hour, and in the presence of
such spirits of evil or of goodI care not which
as travel the eternal realms of space, I swear that,
sleeping or waking, my prayer, my dream, my
desire
my
only study, as it is my only hopeshall
be in what way to revenge my wrongto bring
this proud, insolent man to the dustto deprive
him of those joys of which he has for ever deprived
me!
By what means she hoped to effect her object,
may not even be conjectured in this early stage of
her resolution; but no one could have hearkened
to the tone of her accents, or beheld the fixed
expression
of decision in her eyes, and reject the
conviction
that she was as solemnly sworn to her
revenge
,
as if the demons of the air whom she
invoked as witnesses, had received and registered
the oath. They did so; and it may be that,
ministers
of justice, no less than of evil, they wrought in
behalf of the deserted leman of the outlaw, when
the ordinary powers of society would have failed,
and the laws would still have been, as they had ever
been before, objects of scorn and mockery to the
reckless spirit who had so long held them in
defiance
.
But let us not anticipate.
In leaving her that night, he also left the
encampment
to which had been given the ambitious title of
Cane Castle. Another brief conference with his
coadjutor, Jonesthat dexterous agent, who had so
successfully entrapped and deceived the unwary
actor
by
which he was provided with final
instructions
for the future dispensations of that unconscious
worthy; and then the outlaw sped off to those other
performances, which have been already narrated,
and which ended in the arrest of Harry Vernon.
The next day rose upon Horsey, still as Hamlet.
The grave habit of the Prince of Denmark was
that which, in all his wardrobe, came nearest to
the guise of a simple citizen; and half reconciled to
the costume in character, from a pleasant
conviction
which the flatteries of Jones encouraged, that he
looked a marvellous proper man in it, the worthy
actor renewed the search after his ordinary
garments
with something more of equanimity than he
had shown on the preceding night. Still, he did not
hesitate to speak of the robbery in proper terms.
The mere loss of the clothes is nothing, Jones,
said he, but that we have thieves in the company
is most shocking. There must be a stir about itthe
rogue must be found out, and we must purge
ourselves
of the connexion as soon as possible. Our
profession is one quite too noble for any such
communion
.
VOL. II. 16
Jones fully agreed with him that it was shocking
indeed; but suggested the difficulty of finding out the
thief, and the awkwardness of any direct inquiries.
It was agreed upon, that their conduct was to be
governed by circumstances; and, meanwhile, a
sharp look-out was to be maintained upon the
movements
of all suspicious persons;Jones confessing
that there were some two or three of the band
whom he really believed to be no better than they
should be.
Now, that bull-headed fellow, Bull, I take to
be one of these suspicious persons, said the actor,
remembering the annoyances of the previous night;
a fellow that gets drunk and makes a beast of
himself
,
will be very apt to steal. Don't you think so,
Jones?
I do, replied the other, very courteously. As
a general rule, Mr. Horsey, a drunkard is bad
enough to be a thief; but there are exceptions to
all general rules, and Bull is one of them. He's
a genius, Mr. Horsey, as I said beforean immense
genius. You may see nothing of it for some days;
but he'll break out at last, and overwhelm you.
He's the very impersonation of fun, farce, and
frolic.
But the heroine, Jonessha'n't I have a talk
with her to-day? It's strange that all your
firstrates
should be so eccentric.
Natural enoughthey all know their value.
You would not think it strange, when you know
them as I do, and know the extent of their
popularity
.
And what do you call herwhat's her name?
Her name?oh, yesher name's Clifford
Mrs. CliffordMrs. Ellen Cliffordshe's married,
you know I told you, andanother reason why you
should be cautious in approaching her, and why she
should be devilish shy of all third personsher
husband's
worse than a Turk for jealousy. He flames
up, like a rocket, on the smallest occasions. Nay,
it is said he gave a poor fellow three inches of his
bowie-knife in Natchy, only for praising her beauty
off the stage. You see she's very beautiful.
What a dd fool. Egad, I'd like no better fun
than just to plague such a fellow; and if you had no
other reason than his jealousy to keep me from
looking
her up, I'd be at her in twenty minutes. Can't
you get me a chance to talk with her. I'd like to
see what sort of stuff she's made of.
Time enough to-morrow. Let us go now and
see after the boys. We have a boat here on the
bayoua little dug-outand, if you say so, we'll
take our fishing-tackle, and get some fish. Fishing
here is our most profitable idleness, as, indeed, it is
every where else; and, if you like it half so much
as I do, you will not think much of the manager's
absence.
But my Hamlet! exclaimed the actor, looking
at the costly garment. Such a dress as this,
Jones, won't do for every day. The dd
strange-looking
green and yellow mud of this riverthe
water, if I'm splashedwill play the very dl with
my Hamlet.
Won't splash you, said Jones, hurrying along.
I'm like a bird in a boatcan't be said to dip a
wing, even when I take my fish. I handle a
dug-out
,
Mr. Horseynot to compare low things to
highwith almost as much grace as you do the
foils in Hamlet. But come onfear nothing, and
if we get no fish, why, you can give us the grave
scene, which shall make our time pass with less
gravity.
The last suggestion was the finishing stroke, and
Horsey followed without farther opposition, though
not without sundry misgivings that his sables might
suffer some hurts much too serious for any
smoothing
or stitching, even from hands so white and
dextrous
as those of Mary Stinson. Many a
compunctious
glance did he give to his inexpressibles as
he went forward, following his cunning confederate
through bog, bush and briar, until they reached the
muddy mouth of the narrow creek where lay the
egg-like skiff which was to bear the twain to the
main trunk of the Chitta-Loosa. Here they
embarked
in the trembling fabric, the heart of Horsey
rising to his throat, with every roll and reel of the
frail vessel; while his eyes, drawn by a natural
attraction
to the banks, surveyed, with momently
increasing
disquiet, the yellowish slime upon their
surface
;
the soft miry ooze of which seemed for all
the world as if it were intended to receive with
close embrace and a most yielding compliance, the
pressure of any derelict body, the waif or tribute of
the slow and turbid river which had left it where it
lay. But that which disturbed the composure of the
actor had no effect upon his companion. His
muscular
arms sent the little dug-out through the narrow
passage, with a dexterity no less prompt than
fearless
,
and Horsey had not drawn a second breath,
before the boat quivered upon its centre, and hung
suspended for a moment in its course, as, leaving the
sluggish canal through which it had emerged, it felt
the downward rush of the main current, in its
restless
passage to the Mississippi.
Florence Marbois, as soon as she discovered that
Jones had left the islanda knowledge obtained
without
difficulty by one who was so well served as the
lady in questionimmediately went forth from her
little habitation to a spot, the path to which seemed
familiar, where she found the dwarf Stillyards, busy
mending his nets. He stood up as he beheld her,
with an air of deference in his manner, which he
was not wont to show to all other persons.
Richard, she said, I have need of you again:
are you ready?
Soon will be, ma'amhave nothing to do but
tie a few threads, and lay a draw-cord through the
end-loops of the net. This hole here would let a
dozen jacks through; and there's not a suckfish
in Big Black that wouldn't laugh at this for
gill-tackle
.
Richard, continued the lady, in tones at once
of command and entreatyput by your net for
the present,I would speak with you.
The foot of the dwarf turned the net over a low
bush; his hands would have done it more effectually,
but his vanity was unwilling that he should stoop,
in the sight of a lady, to a performance, in which his
physical deformities became only the more
conspicuous
.
His manner the while was that of the most
respectful deference. He declared himself ready at
that instant to obey her commands, and made some
rude assurances of his great willingness at all times
to do her service.
I know it, Richard,I know that you have
always
served me faithfully,and believe that you
will continue to do so in this, probably, the last task
which I shall ever give you again.
Ma'am! Hehwhat?
She did not seem to heed the interruption or the
exclamation, but proceeded:
You have kept my secrets, Richard, and always
made, I have good reason to believe, a faithful
report
of what you saw. Here is some money for
you. It is more than I promised you, but not more
than you deserve, and not near so much as you shall
have when you have done for me another service,
and as I said, most probably, the last.
16*
The last, ma'am?
Yes, Richard, my fears will be soon at an end,
replied the ladyshe should surely cease to fear,
who has at length ceased to hope.
The dwarf looked up, wondering more at the
looks and accents of the speaker, than at the words
she uttered. She continued:
Did you know that Saxon was here last night?
He nodded assent.
He went before daylight, continued the lady.
He went from me for everwe are no longer one,
we are parted,parted for ever.
The dwarf grinned, but not with any pleasure.
The expression of his face was that of good-natured
incredulity.
You smile,you believe me not, Richard.
Ah, ma'am Florence,how can I believe you
you know how often you've said the same thing.
Every time you've sent me to look after him.
A faint smile passed over the lady's lips as she
listened.
You are only right to doubt, Richard. I have
indeed too often
spoken
only, when I should have
performed. I will not seek now, by any new
assurances
,
to make you believe my present
resolution
.
Whether you believe or notwhether
he
believes
is
of little importance to either of us now.
But there's some difference of circumstances,
Richard
,
of which you may have no knowledge.
Hitherto
,
I may have done him wrong by my suspicions
now I can do him none. Last night he told me that
he loved another.
He!
Ay, he! Edward Saxon, for whom I gave up
allfriends, family, good life, good namehope,
truth and innocence! He has forgotten the
sacrifice
,
which, indeed, I too had forgotten so long as
he loved me. But that is over, and I am now lost
to him as I have been so long lost to all. I have
nothing now left me but to die.
Nothing, ma'am Florence, nothing! Sure
Ay, there is something, Richardthere is
something
more. It is a woman's feeling, Richard, to
desire some knowledge of her rivalto desire to
see her, to know if she is beautiful, to hear her
speak, and hearken if her accents be sweet; and,
perhaps,but I need not say more of this to you,
Richard.
Oh, yes, ma'am FlorenceI beg you do.
No, no! was the rather stern reply. It
needs not. It was only of another feelingthey
call it a woman's feeling toothat I would have
spokenthat I would gratify. But here it shall
remain
secret
from yousecret from alldoubly
sweet to myself that it is so secret!until the blessed
day, which shall enable me to realise my last hope
the hope of
The word was unspoken, but the vindictive
gleaming
of the eye, and the convulsive quiver of her lips
while she shut them together, as if to prevent utterance,
were sufficiently conclusive that revenge was the
only word which could have properly finished the
sentence. Her heart heaved with the suppressed
secrether hand was clenched, and for a moment
she stood gazing on the dwarf with an expression of
face, which almost startled him with a feeling of
personal apprehension.
Richardyou must follow Saxononce more
you must follow him. Find out where he goes
whom he seeks. Look not on herso that you
may not be won by her beauty also, to betray the
poor Florence,then come to mecome back and
get your reward. You shall have money and
jewelsall the jewels and money that I have,
Richardthey will almost make you rich; but you
must be sure and tell me where he hides herwhen
he brings her here, and how soon I may look upon
the woman whose feet have trodden upon my heart.
Go! let me hear your horse's tread immediately.
Away, Richard, sleep not as you goGod be with
me and strengthen me, for well I know, I shall never
sleep till you returneven if I sleep then. Away!
CHAPTER XIII.
I do pronounce him in that very shape
He shall appear in proof.
Henry
VIII.
The
dwarf listened to the commands of his
mistress
,
and prepared to obey them. He had been
accustomed
to do so; indeed, it may as well be stated
in this place that Richard Stillyards, as he was called,
was rather an attendant of Florence Marbois, than
of the outlaw by whom she was betrayed. What
were the particular circumstances by which he
became
bound to her service, may not here be known;
but it has been seen that there were events and
performances
by which she had deserved his gratitude;
and his devotion to her service showed that he was
not unwilling to give it. He had been faithful to
her for a long period; obeying her slightest and her
strangest behest; ministering, perhaps harmfully at
times, to her jealousies of the outlaw, though
without
seeking to encourage them; for Stillyards, so
far, had been able to discover no single instance of
a departure from his pledged faith to his leman on
the part of Edward Saxon; and he now regarded
the bitter rather than the angry mood of his mistress,
by which she declared her renewed suspicions, as
being equally without foundation with all which she
had entertained before. But though he assured her
of this conviction, his assurances were made in
vain; and he was sagacious enough to perceive that
her present disquiet was of a character which she
had not before exhibited. Hitherto, she had shown
a vague jealousya general but uncertain
suspicion
of
the truth of one upon whom she felt she had
none of those holds, which can alone be found in a
compliance with the established laws of virtue and
society. There was hostility now, and hate, mingled
with her suspicions; and the very calmness which
overspread her features, and which regulated and
made deliberate the tremulous accents of her voice
as she spoke, convinced him that, whether she had
or had not occasion for her anger, it was yet of a
kind to prove dangerous. Stillyards was not so
bound to Florence Marbois, as to lend himself to all
her purposes; as to become the mere tool and agent
of a rash and improvident vengeance; and while he
prepared, without scruple, to set forth in obedience
to her commands, he half-resolved that Saxon should
have warning that his mistress was no longer to be
trifled with. Still, with a partial curiosity, he
resolved
first to discover, if he could, whether the
outlaw was really unfaithful to his vowsan
assertion
made with so much solemnity now, by the
deserted
woman, as to impress itself upon his mind
with some force, in spite of his constant conviction
heretofore, that she had but little reason for
complaint
.
His purpose was to counsel the outlaw, if such
were the case, to greater prudence in his
declarations
and proceedings; and, tickling his own vanity
with the patronizing idea of being an adviser to the
master beagle of the band, he saw but little harm in
practising a like unfaithfulness with his master
towards
the mistress whom he served. These
resolutions
passed through his mind as he proceeded upon
his mission. He soon got upon the track of the
outlaw
,
and followed him to Lucchesa, where he
arrived
in time to become privy to the position of
Vernon in the house of Mr. Wilson, and that of
Saxon in reference to his daughter. He was soon
convinced that the story of Florence was not
without
foundation. For the first time, he beheld the
reckless outlaw in the character of a devoted, if
not a sighing lover. He saw that the affair was
rapidly advancing to a close, and on the afternoon
of the day when Vernon was hurried from his
mistress by the self-created officers of justice, he
availed himself of an opportunity to emerge from
his cover and present himself boldly before the
outlaw. The place chosen for this revelation, was
a thick copse in the very wood in which the final
scene had taken place between Vernon and the
maiden. To this copse Saxon had retired after
he had witnessed the successful termination of one
portion of his projects. Stillyards had been equally
fortunate in beholding the events which we have
already described, and he was, therefore, very well
able to speak home upon the subject. While Saxon,
seated upon a fallen poplar, was busy chewing the
cud of various thoughtthought no less perplexing
in some respects than it was exulting in others; and
while his eyes, fixed upon the ground, saw no image
but that drawn by his amorous fancy upon the warm
glass of his affections, he was suddenly and
unpleasantly
startled into a new sphere of existence by the
abrupt appearance of the dwarf at his side.
How now, sirrah!What make you here? he
demanded in harshest accents, as he beheld the
intruder
.
With a grin of equal consequence and
humility
the dwarf replied
She sent meshe's heard it, sirheard it all
knows all about it, sir, and it's only right, sir, you
should know, it won't do to vex her;she's angry
as a tiger-catlooks as if she could bite and do a
great deal of mischief; and though she don't say,
yet I can see, and I thought it only right to let you
know, and to warn you, sirthere's dangerdanger
in her eye
What the devil do you mean, fool! demanded
the outlaw, with an impatience momently increasing,
as he beheld the airs of self-esteem which now
distinguished
the manner of the speaker.
Fool! cried the other, with a vexatious
diminution
of his importance; fool! Not so great a fool
neither, if you knew all.
All!what all? What is it that your sagacious
head carries, that it is fitting I should know? Speak
out, booby, and leave off your damnable faces.
This startling, and most humiliating reception,
effectually turned the sweet milk of the dwarf's
disposition
,
and a burning sentiment of indignation in
his bosom, made him wish he had left things to
themselves, confined himself to the old system of
espionage, and suffered the revengeful mood of his
mistress to work its own way, without offering any
obstructions to its progress. It was necessary,
however
,
that he should now speak, and to some
purpose
,
in order to account for that obtrusion of his
ungainly person, upon the secrecy of one who
seemed in such excellent temper to resent it. It
may readily be conjectured that what he did say, in
the momentary confusion of his thoughts from such
a reception, was scarcely satisfactory.
You don't know, perhaps, sir, that she sent me.
Pshaw! you are a spy upon my actionsyou
have long been so, booby. Do you think me ignorant
of that? Her folly and your stupidity have taught
me this long ago, and but that you could do me no
harm, and that I care as little for your cunning as
for her jealousy, I had stretched you out straighter
with a bullet than you have ever been able to stretch
yourself. Begone, foolshe is no less a fool that
sends you. Cross my pathlurk about my
footsteps
let
me but catch a glance of your monkey
visage again where it should not be, and I silence
you for ever. Begone!Butremember!
With these words the outlaw rose, and seizing the
dwarf by the ears, sunk his finger-nail into the
flesh until the blood oozed out from the wound, then
flung him from him with a force that needed not the
additional impetus given by his foot, which was yet
applied with no qualified energy. The violence of
the effort flung the deformed upon the ground, from
which he sprang to his feet with the agility of a
tiger. He turned upon his assailanthis eyes
glared with the vindictive and unreflecting rage of
the same animaland his unarmed fingers were
extended
,
as if endued with an instinct of their own,
to grapple with the foe. But the eye of the outlaw
quelled the inferior, and a pistol which he drew from
his bosom, effectually counselled him to increase the
distance between them. Slowly he sank from sight
into the neighbouring woods, from which, however,
he did not then depart. The watch which he had
hitherto kept over the movements of the outlaw, on
account of his mistress, was now maintained on his
own account. The malice which is the fruit of
outraged
self-esteem, is that which is the last to forgive
its victim; and when Stillyards crept into the woods,
it was with the stealthy mood of the wild beast to
which we have already likened himthe appetite
which never knows repose until it gorges the full
feast from the very lifeblood of its prey. Saxon
had some lurking doubts that he had provoked an
evil spirit into activity, and though his apprehensions
were kept down by that scorn of the feeble and
deformed
VOL. II. 17
which the strong and proud are very apt to
feel, yet a momentary conviction of the necessity of
curbing or crushing such a spirit in the beginning,
persuaded him, the moment that Stillyards had
disappeared
from sight, to pursue him. This he did,
but without effect. His search was fruitless. A
creature so active as the dwarf, who could crouch
with so little effort, and conceal himself in places
into which other men could not penetrate, could not
well be discovered, unless with his own consent;
and hopeless of a search which was no less
tiresome
than fruitless, he left his unprofitable quest in
the prosecution of others far more attractive.
That evening, Saxon, who had sundry agents at
work, succeeded in getting Mr. Wilson to the hotel,
and safely seating him, with three others, at a game
of whist. Without knowing the history of this
unfortunate
gentleman, which would have given the
outlaw a very desirable power over him, the latter
had yet been able to discover that leading passion
of the other, which had led him from folly to excess,
and from excess, by a very common transition, to
crime. He saw, in the eager anxiety of the stranger
when engaged at cards, in his flushed cheek, fitful
eye, and tremulous impatience, the peculiar material
out of which the devoted gamester is made. That
passion for small risks,that pleasure in a hope of
gain that rises up into a feverish sentiment in spite
of every defeat, and goes on renewing itself day
after day, till the very dregs of moral life are
reached, and the carcass becomes a thing of
spasmodic
and convulsive action, without stability or
strengthwas there, preying upon and
predominant
in the soul of Wilson, and renewing those
bonds of slavishness and sin, in the coercive
trammels
of which he had sunk, first into the debtor, and
next into the felonfrom deep to deepuntil but
one more gulfthe closing covering gulf of all
remained
yielding
him refuge and utter ruin at the
same moment in its unrelaxing jaws.It was not
long before Wilson surrendered himself up to the
game; and when his tens, twenties, and hundreds
lay upon the board, and when his hands touched the
cards with a tremulousness that betrayed all the
reviving
passions of his feeble nature, leaving him no
thought of other objects or relations, Saxon stole
away from the company, unseen by any but the
lynx-eyed dwarf, who, himself unobserved, was
now a far more devoted spy upon the actions of his
master than he had ever shown himself before. His
own bitter hostility was now his prompter in
addition
to the jealousy of his mistress; and, he half
forgot, in pursuing his own malice, that he had
pledged himself to any other service. He followed
the outlaw from the threshold, and was the master
of all his movements.
But a brief space had elapsed after the departure
of Saxon, when a billet was put into the hands of
Virginia Wilson. She was sitting, sad and
sleepless
,
keeping a watch doubly lonesome and
apprehensive
in the absence of her father, to whose errors
she could not be altogether blind, in the stillness and
silence of her chamber. The younger sister already
slept in the couch beside which she sat, and her
own loneliness grew more oppressive to her heart
as she listened to the sweet, equal respiration from
her lipsthe breathing of that undisturbed sleep of
innocence and youth, ere care has deemed it
worthy of a blow, or defeated hope, and anxious
affection, brought restlessness and wakefulness to its
hours of repose. How she envied the child that
sleep. How she wished she could forgetthat she
could close her mind as easily as she could close
her eyes, to the apprehensions which beset her soul
in reference to the fortunes of him, who already
occupied
so large a place in its interests and being.
The billet which was brought her, came from
him
.
That assurance aroused her. She seized it with
trembling hands and breathless anxiety. She
carried
it to the light and read:
I am free, dearest Virginiabut a fugitive. I
dare not show myself at your dwelling. I dare not,
at this moment, show myself to any but to you.
Will you come to methough for an instant only.
Come to me, if you love meif you have faith in
my loveif you believe in my innocenceif you
would make me happy at a time when I am most
miserablemeet me by the fallen pineunder those
old grovesin the dear sweet walks which have
been already consecrated to our hearts by moments
which were too blissful to have been so brief. I
wait for you, dearest Virginiamy heart trembles
with impatient hope.
Vernon
.
Vernon would not have written such a letter;
but Virginia Wilson was no critic. Her own
feelings
were too quick, too active, too excited, to
suffer
her judgment to examine the epistle calmly. Her
heart beat with new emotions. What could be his
present danger? Why should he be a fugitive?
Was he, in truth, a murderercould he have slain
his friend by accident? She had his own assurances
that he had not done so, and she believed them.
But there was still a mystery, and doubts, to the
heart that loves, are agonies. There was but one
mode to escape them; and though not insensible to
the awkwardness of a situation which in ordinary
cases would seem to be an impropriety, she
determined
on giving him the meeting which he craved.
Leaving or entering her chamber, she had been
accustomed
to kiss her sister. The custom was a
sweet one. They had been almost the all in all, and the
only, to each other. Nevertheless, there were
circumstances
and causes, which, in spite of the real
tenderness of the father, made Virginia not
unfrequently
feel that they were almost fatherless also;
and now, when bending over the sleeping girl, and
pressing her lips gently upon her cheek, the tears,
few but big, fell from her eyes, and trembled upon
the forehead of the sleeper, like dew drops, in a
summer moonlight, beading the soft crimson of the
half-opening flower. But tears, though not
unseemly
on the cheeks of so fair a blossom, yet
appeared
to the mind of Virginia as of evil omen. She
kissed them off with the haste of a maternal anxiety,
and hurried from the chamber. There was none to
obstruct her departure, for the indulgence of her
father had left her the complete mistress of his
household
.
She hurried by the garden pale, the forest
groves were soon reachedthe well known shadows
of old trees surrounded her, and now the fallen pine
tree appears, and she stands in the presence of
Edward Saxon!
17*
CHAPTER XIV.
The innocency lost,
The bating of affection soon will follow.
Ben Jonson
.
Though
the shadows were thick around her, and
the evening light of the moon imperfect, the keen
eyes of love soon discovered the difference between
the man she met, and he whom she expected. She
recoiled with a natural emotion of surprise, but did
not feel any suspicions that the appearance of
Saxon in that spot was the result of any sinister
design
.
He might be the trusted friend of Vernon on
this occasion, as he had always appeared hitherto
but where was Vernon? She looked round anxiously,
but without a single doubt of his near neighbourhood,
until the outlaw approached and addressed her
You look for Mr. Vernon, Miss Wilsonbut I
come from him. He has told me allI am his friend
he has sent me to bring you to him.
But where is he, sir? He should have met me
herehereit was so written in the note.
Did not the note also tell you, Miss Wilson, that
he is a fugitive? He has need, let me assure you,
of every precaution. He is in dangerhe dare not
show himself.
You alarm me, sir. What may this mean
what is his danger?
He has escaped from the officersthey are even
now in pursuit of him!
Escaped!Can it be? But why should he
escape
,
if innocent?Why? But he is here!Here!
At handwithin hearing. You are his friendand
I!What can he fear from me?Why should he
not come forward? My voice shall re-assure him
when he hears me, he will know that there is no
danger here. Vernon! Vernon!
Twice she called aloud, and waited for the
answering
sounds that she desired. But her summons
was made in vain. A faint echo of her own accents
alone reached her ears. The outlaw stood patiently
and smiled, but did not speak until her eyes were
turned inquiringly upon him again.
He does not hear you, Miss Wilsonhe cannot
hear you at this distance; yet it is not far where he
hides. I can guide you to the spot in a few minutes.
And why should he not come here, Mr. Saxon?
Who, beside ourselves, know that he is near us?
But, perhaps, you can tell me more, but you will not.
He has been pursuedhe is hurtwounded in
escaping
!Speak,
sirspeakfear not my strength
l can listenI can bear it all.
You have guessed rightly, Miss Wilson, though
I feared to tell you, replied the outlaw, promptly
availing himself of the suggestion which her fears
had made; he is hurt, but not seriouslyhe awaits
you at a little distance, and I am ready to guide you
to him.
There was a moment's hesitation about the
maiden; not that she doubted as to what should be
her dutynot that she had any doubt of the truth of
Saxon's narrative; but the requisition had been so
sudden, the event so unexpected, which required her
presence, that her sense of propriety had been
startledher thoughts were all in confusion. The
wily outlaw conjectured the true state of her
feelings
.
Am I to think you indifferent to his fate, Miss
Wilson? His hurts require
Indifferent! Oh, no! no! no!but these woods
look so wildand you, Mr. Saxon, are a stranger.
But if he confides, Miss Wilson.
It should beit is enough for me. I will confide
also. I will go with you. Lead me to him, Mr.
Saxon, I have no scruples now.
He took her arm within his own, and led her
along a little Indian foot-trail, which carried them
over the hill, and still deeper into the shadows of
the forest. The heart of Virginia Wilson beat with
momently rising, but unexpressed emotions, as the
way became more intricate, and as she perceived
that every step carried her still farther from the
cottage
.
Still she went on, anxiously expecting to hear
the sounds of that voice which alone could re-assure
her. But the woods were silent, and the only
murmur
which reached her ears, was that of the
melancholy
pilgrim, the wind, pursuing his sleepless way
among the branches. At length they emerged into
a little opening, and Saxon paused, as if to listen.
Is he not here, Mr. Saxon? We are far from
the cottage.
Not herea few steps farther; and he would
have advanced, as he spoke, to a dark and dense
grove in front of them, but the maiden hung back.
There was something in the reserve of Saxon
something in his mannerwhich made her reluctant
to commit herself longer to his charge, and inclined
her to regret that she had already trusted him.
Besides
,
the reflection was so natural to a mind
conscious
of its own good faith, why had he deceived
her, when she had declared her willingness to go
with him? They had now been walking full fifteen
minutes, yet saw no signs of the person who had
been described as immediately at hand.
I will go no farther, sirI dare not. If Mr.
Vernon
be not within hearing now, I can advance no
farther. I am afraid I have already erred in leaving
home.
It is too late now to think of this, Virginiatoo
late to retreat, exclaimed the outlaw, throwing off
his disguises, and grasping her wrist firmly as he
spokeyou must go with me.
Ha, sir!will you dare?
Ay, muchevery thing, where I lovewhere
there is a prize to be won so lovely as yourself. You
must go with meyou must be mine, Virginia.
As he spoke, his arms encircled her waist, and she
felt herself lifted from the ground.
Monstervillainrelease me! screamed the
maiden, with a voice of equal indignation and
terror
Vernon!
Vernon! come to me! Save me!
You scream in vain, Virginia. I have deceived
you. Vernon is not nearnot within hearingthe
billet which brought you to my arms was a forged
one. But be not angry. You have found a lover
who will be no less trueno less devoted than
himself
one
who is no less willing, and far more able
to serve you with his love. The life of Vernon is
forfeit to the laws.
God help me! God help him! Villain! I
believe
you not. He will soon be here. He will
follow
he
will save me. Beware of his anger, and
his vengeance!
Ah! Virginia, if you but knew how little I
regard
these threatenings, and of how little value they
really are, you would surely forbear them. Why
should you thus afflict yourself and me. I suffer
only as I see you give yourself fatigue and pain.
Your screams are idle. In these pathless forests,
there is none to hear you, unless it be the wild cat,
who, if the humour suits, will give you scream for
scream.
Yes, villainthere are others nigh to save me.
Men are nigh. I hear the tread of a horseI hear
the voices of men. They comethey come! It
is Vernonit is my father. They come to save me.
They will avenge this insult. Set me down, and fly!
Do this! Release me on the instant, and I will tell
them nothing of the outrage.
The outlaw laughed aloud as he listened to this
language.
The men you hear are those whom I have
commanded
here to assist me. The horses they bring
will help to bear us away together. They will carry
us, sweet Virginia, to a place of retreat which
neither
father nor lover can find out. Do you hear
that sound?it is that of the beaglewhen I have
answered it in like manner, they will be here.
Hark!
And, as he finished, the outlaw replied to the
signal
in a clear, ringing note, which rose triumphant
even above the piercing shriek of despair and
terror
with which she accompanied it. In a few
moments
after, the agents of the outlaw, guided by his
answer, approached the spot, where the maiden, still
struggling and shrieking, was held by the firm grasp
of the ravisher. His assistants were three in
number
.
One was mountedthe other two on foot.
Where is the jersey? demanded the outlaw.
On the edge of the woodwe couldn't get it
through the brush, was the answer.
Enoughlead the way.
Shall I help you, captain?
No, no! Clear the way only, replied the
powerful ruffian, lifting the maiden, while he spoke,
as if she were a child, and bearing her forward,
indifferent
alike to screams and struggles, threats and
entreaties, until he reached the spot where the
vehicle
had been left. Into this she was placed, with
all tenderness, but no little difficulty, and leaping in
beside her, Saxon secured her within his arms,
while one of his emissaries, occupying the front
seat, assumed the office of Jehu on the occasion,
and drove off with as reckless and rapid a speed,
as ever did that renowned whip of ancient days.
Their course was for Cane Castle, in the swamp of
Chitta-Loosa. They drove round Lucchesa,
avoiding
the thoroughfare with some caution at the first.
After a little while, they turned into it, and before
midnight, the carriage came to a halt with the
thickening ooze of the swamp plashing clammily
about its wheels. Before this time, exhaustion had
come to the relief of the unhappy maiden, and when
she was lifted from the vehicle, she was in a state of
utter unconsciousness and stupor. Jones, the wary
coadjutor of the outlaw, was at hand ready to
receive
him.
Well, Jones, we are here in safety, and all is as
we could wish it. What of Florence? We must
have her help here.
Can you think of it, sir? demanded the other,
with some astonishment. Can you hope for such
a thing from her?
Ay, this or any thing as I please, my good
fellow
.
I command hershe is minemy slave, as
thoroughly bound to my service as if the bond were
written with her blood. Her love for methe very
passion which works her jealousy to madnessis
my best security for her devotion and her service.
Think nothing of her grumbling, JonesI have
heard it too often to hearken to it now. A kind
worda soothing entreaty,and all's over. She
will forgive the rival, when she can share the
conquest
.
I hardly think it, sir, with Florence. There's
something I don't like in her eyes, and the way she
speaks. She's changed very much these three days.
Jones, you're a fool. You know nothing of
women
,
my good fellow, or you'd not give yourself
such troublesome notions; certainly you would not
afflict me with them. Florence is not different from
all the rest. She will have her own way if she can,
and when she finds that impossible, she will content
herself with all that you are willing to allow her.
But the two in the same house, said Jones, in
a tone of farther expostulation.
And with one man between 'em! continued the
outlaw, with a laugh. But let this not trouble you,
Jones. They shall be kept apart. There's the
squatter's cabin by the Little Bendto that I will
carry Virginia. Florence shall see her thereshe
will need some assistance.
Better keep them entirely apart. If the young
lady needs helpfemale helpthere's Brown Bess
you know.
What is she hereand Yarbers? How's this?
Your orders, I hear. There's a warrant out
against John Yarbers from old Badger. Ned
Mabry's
sworn against him about that horse business.
True, trueI had forgotten that. Bess is the
very person to be with her. Let us have help now,
Jones, so that we may carry her safely through the
swamp. The river's risingis it not?
Considerablythere must have been a heavy
fall of rain among the hills above.
And when did Yarbers arrive?
It's been four days now and better. He got in
on Monday.
Not pursued?
Not that he told me.
Cane Castle, must look a little livelier than ever;
and how does your Shakspearean reconcile
himself
to his bondage. What of the actor-fellow
have you been able to keep up the ball?
There was some hesitation in the reply of Jones,
and his accents were those of a man conscious,
perhaps
,
of some fault of commission or neglect.
I'm sorry to say, sirhe's off.
Off! How off? You don't mean to say escaped,
heh?
Fact, sirand how, there's no saying at
present
.
I had him well watched, as I thought.
The tidings had the effect of making the outlaw
instantly grave. His accents became stern.
This is a bad business, Jones. Can there be
traitors among us? Another Hurdis affair! This
must be seen to, man. We are not secure an instant
if we cannot see our prisoner. But you pursued
you have beagles on the track. What have you
donehow was it? Speak! By heavens, you are
a duller fellow than I counted you.
I can really say nothing, sir, as to the manner
of the escape. The chap was safe enough so late
as this morning.
The dl, and so he got off in broad daylight?
Jones gave a mortified assent, and was compelled
to submit in silence to the severe upbraidings of his
principal, whose reproaches did not lack sarcasm to
heighten their severity.
By heavens, Jones, but I thought you more of a
man than this speaks for. With five active fellows
in the swampall at your summonswith nothing
to do but thisyou suffer yourself to sleep in your
watch, and neglect every thing. Did the fellow go
off on foot?
Here Jones was compelled to make another
confession
VOL. II. 18
which completed the story of his inefficient
watch. Horsey had contrived to resume possession
of old Bowlinehis worthy father's venerable
dot-and-go-one
.
Worse and worse! exclaimed the other. There's
treachery somewhere. We must sift the matter
closely. Yarbers, you say is herehis wife and
daughter. Ha! Jonesthat womanthat wife of
hisBrown Bess is at the bottom of it all. She is
shameless enough to be more honest than her
husband
,
and will no doubt think it a moral duty to
hang us all if she can, and him, for distinction sake,
at the head of the string. Wellwe must use her
now. Away, and let Yarbers bring her to Little
Bend at once. I will meet you at Cane Castle in
half an hour. Say nothing to Florence of my
arrival
nay,
do you avoid seeing her. I will tell her
all myself. Away!
But Florence had not been left uninformed on
any of these subjects. She had, as we have seen,
her own emissaries at work, and the dwarf had not
only beheld the transfer of the captive maiden from
the wagon to the squatter's house at Little Bend, but
he had listened to every word of the dialogue
between
the outlaw and his agent, which had
accompanied
and followed her removal, and which we
have endeavoured in the preceding passages to
abridge to our own limits. He delivered his
information
to his jealous mistress some time before Saxon
made his appearance.
She's here, said he to Florence, as he stood
suddenly before her where she sat in the gloom and
silence of that lonely chamber, looking out upon the
solemn swamp. It was in the same chamber that
we found her first, when far other thoughts filled
her mind, and far other feelings dwelt in her bosom,
than those which rule over them nowmaking the
one wild and the other wretched. She started as she
heard his accentsshe rose from her chair and
approached
him.
You do not say it, Richard! she said, with a
solemn tremulousness of accent. You do not tell
me, that she is indeed herethat he has dared!
The dwarf nodded his head ere he spoke, then
answered her.
At the squatter's old cabin, by the Little Bend.
So near! was the exclamation of the unhappy
Florence, as she walked to the window and looked
outthough, through the dense woods, her eyes
could distinguish nothing in the direction of the
designated hovel. She turned again, after lingering
a moment, and approached the emissary.
Richardyou have served me faithfully, and
one of the last acts of my life shall be to reward
you. But tell mehave you seen her. Is she so
very beautiful?
Very beautiful they saythough I don't care
much to see beautiful people, and didn't look much
at her.
But you saw her?
Couldn't help itsaw her a'most every day since
I left you. I always followed
him
, and he went to
her every day, and they walked out sometimes in
the woods.
Ha! ha! They walked out in the woods, did
they; and she is very fond of him, I suppose? They
are well matchedvery well matcheda loving
couple, Richard? Did you not think them so? But,
do not answer me now. Go, Richardleave me
nowI would rather be alone.
Look you, ma'amthere's one thing, said the
dwarf, lingeringIf you think this strange gal's
fond of Saxon, you're altogether out. She aint
fond of him no how. She don't like him. He put her
in the jarsey by main force, and she screamed and
made a mighty fuss.
Ha! Is this true? demanded Florence, with
considerable interest.
P'int blank truth. I saw her fighting him, and
you might hear her screech for more than a mile
that you mightafore she fainted.
What!she fainted?
Died off, like 'twas all over with her, and didn't
move ag'in, till they lifted her to carry her to the
squatter's house.
Richard, are you sure of this? Speak nothing
but the truthyou know not how much depends on
this, said Florence, with solemnity.
I'll take Bible oath to it, ma'am. I'll kiss the
book to it. There's no mistake in me this time, I
tell you.
Enough! she said, waving him, with her hand,
to depart. Enough! I thank you, RichardI will
reward you in the morning. Leave me now.
When he had gone, she returned to the window.
This makes a difference, she said, musingly
a great difference. If true, she is already a
wretched victim, and no blow of mine would do her
harm. Yet, even if she be a willing creature of his
lustif he find in her, what he found in mea weak
heart, a yielding nature, a confiding faith, that loved
blindly and weakly, and was lost, before it became
conscious that there was any thing to losestill, why
should she be the victim even then? She knows not
that she wrongs anothershe does notbut hehe
who knows allwho wilfully wrongs, and scornfully
defies, hebut he is hereit is he who should feel
the blow. It is his heart, and his only, which my
hand should strike. And it shall strike. I am sworn
to this. Lostan outcast from all hope, all life, all
loveI am not so base, so worthless, or so weak,
that I cannot strike for vengeance. No! Edward
Saxonyou have dared to scorn the heart which
you once imploredto insult that womanly pride
which you once solicited!and yet, it livesit lives
to strengthen my arm and resolutionit lives, and
will not cease to live, until you are humbled in the
dust. For this triumph, and in this hope, I live only.
Besides this, what is there in life to live for now;
and when he falls, there is nothing then that I shall
even care to hate! God of Heaven, how strange it
is to me now, that I once should have loved this
manand so loved himhe, who stood over me
but a few days ago, and mocked me with the story
of his devotion to another; and bade me do her
bidding, and commanded me not as a slave only, but
as a slave whom he despised! Ha!It is his
footstep
he
comeshe comes to renew his mockery. I
should not meet him unprepared.
She went, as she spoke, to a little dressing-case,
and, lifting the upper compartment, drew from
beneath
it a small silver-hilted dagger, which she
concealed
in her bosom, then, turning to the entrance of
the chamber, encountered her betrayer with a smile.
18*
CHAPTER XV.
Observe this creature here, my honoured lords,
A woman of a most prodigious spirit.
John Webster
.
He
also smiled as he appeared in sight, but smiled
in such a sort as to add fervour to her resolution.
There was a recklessness in the scorn which he now
betrayed to the woman he had once loved, which
was certainly as impolitic as ungenerous; but
having discarded his mask, Saxon seemed anxious
to show how ill-favoured had been the aspect he had
concealed beneath it. He was obtuse enough not to
see that the feelings he had trampled had risen up
in indignation. He was blind enough to mistake the
smile upon her lips for a return of her former
feelings
of devotion. So it is, that the wisest of men
will err at those moments when they need all their
wisdom. Sagacious beyond most men of his sphere
and neighbourhoodparticularly conversant,
according
to his own notion, with women, he was
yet deceived, without effort, by one with whom his
communion had begun by his own successful
deceptions
.
She had been won in a momentby a
word!how idle to think that there were depths in
her mind which he could not sound, that there were
feelings written in her features which he could not
read. Such was the case. The cunning man was at
fault. There was that in the bosom of Florence
Marbois, which he could neither sound nor see; but
it was written that he should be blind in this, as in
other matters. She had been the victim of her
blindnessit was just, for the sake of retribution, that
he should have his moment of blindness also.
Perhaps you believed me not, Florence, when I
spoke to you last; but I spoke nothing but the truth.
She is herehere in the swamp, beside youthe
woman whom I now loveyour rivalyour
successor
.
It was thus he spoke, in the language of mockery.
Her eyes met his glance unshrinkingly. Her cheeks
were palevery palefor a single instant. In the
next moment they were flushed with a redness which
did not depart throughout the whole of their
conference
.
Her reply was uttered in tones of calmness
which surprised her seducer. He knew not where
she got the strength for such equabilityhe knew
not the deep, dark sources of her present
consolation
.
You mistake, Edward Saxon. I believed you.
If I were a vain woman, it might be some
gratification
to me to know that my frequent and previous
jealousiesidle as they were in some respectswere
yet not unfounded. I rightly judged your character.
My passions have not been wholly blindthey were
always capable of the taskperhaps, not a difficult
oneof estimating yours. I know you now, in that
matter, to be what I then believed you. If I erred in
my conjectures, I have already borne my
punishment
.
The time for error and regret, so far as you
are interested, is for ever past with me.
I am glad of it, upon my soulvery glad of it.
You speak now like a reasonable woman, Florence,
and I think the better of you. Now that I find you
so calm and sensible, I am free to speak to you with
more confidence. You must have discovered by
this time, as I have done, that these early notions of
love, that so mislead the dreaming girl and the
desiring
boy, are only so many masks of passion
masks under which the considerate nature disguises
those tumultuous phrensies which might terrify the
young from the paths of pleasure and true
enjoyment
,
much more frequently than they could ever
entice or gratify. As the experience grows, the
mask ceases to be necessary or even useful. It is
then that we cast it aside as an incumbrance which,
in fact, impedes possession and qualifies delight. I'm
sure, Florence, we shall enjoy ourselves much more
by understanding these things correctly.
A faint smile covered her lips as she answered
At least, it is quite as well that we should think
sothat I should think so. With the conviction
that all is lost, a resignation to one's poverty is no
less becoming than necessary. But do you only
come to tell me this, Edward Saxon? Have you
not some other purpose? I knew all this before.
To say truth, FlorenceI came to try you. To
see if you had got over that madness that used to
possess you in your days of jealousy
And which it gave you pleasure to see.
Not so. It vexedit worried me to bear with
your complaintsto listen to your harsh reproaches
to hear your unfounded suspicions.
But they were not unfounded.
Till now they were. If I was ever true to
woman
,
Florence, I have been true to you till now.
Never had I thought to wander from you, till I met
with her.
And sheshe has a name! exclaimed Florence,
with something more of curiosity and interest in her
looks and language. If I am to yield my place to
anotherif I am to be deprived of that for which I
have been so well content hitherto to live, at least,
let me know something of her who rises on my
ruin? She is beautifulthat I knowthat you have
told mebut her name? Who is shewhat is her
familywhere did you find her?
All in good time, Florence;but you do me
wrong, and yourself wrong. She takes no place of
yoursshe only shares itand now that you show
so calm a temper on the subject, let me tell you that
you have risen greatly in my favour. This is the
condition of mind to which I would have brought
you years ago, if I could. It is the only condition of
mind which would make either of us happy. I am
one of those men who are always apt to resent and
fly from an effort to restrain my liberty. My heart
must share the freedom of my limbs, and that sort
of exacting love which suffers no exercise to my
eyes, my thoughts, my actions, is, of all others, so
tyrannous a bondage, that, to confess a truth to you,
Florence, you became hateful to me when you began
to exercise it.
Ha! Hateful!
It is truetoo true. But do not understand me,
Florence, as applying to you any such epithet, now.
This resignation on your part to my will, places you
in a very favourable position; and if you keep in
this mood, there can be no good reason, why we
should not be to each other as before. Let it be
understood, that I am to do as I please, and feel as
I please, and go where I please, without having
that dd hunchback at my heels, and without being
compelled to hearken to the perpetual growlings of
suspicion and complaint,and nobody could love you
better than myself; and if you will only promise me
to yield to my wishesto haunt me no more with
your jealousy, and pursue me no more with irksome
reproaches
Be sure, Edward Saxon, I never will, said the
unhappy woman, with solemnity. Jealousy of you
will never more fill the heart of Florence Marbois
reproaches will never reach your ears from her
lips. I have seen the folly of such conduct.
Why, Florence, this is wisdom. We shall do
well after this; and you can bear now to behold me
in the arms of Virginia.
Virginia! is that her name? asked Florence,
with a continued effort at calmness, which, had the
outlaw been studiously observant, would never have
concealed the tremulous curiosity that filled the
heart of the speaker.
It is a sweet name, Florence, but not so sweet
as herself. But you shall see her with your own eyes.
You shall behold her charms, if you are willing and
can keep down your jealousyif you can still
continue
unmovedif you will not hate her.
Hate her! I hate
her?
Why should I hate
her
,
Edward Saxon? In what has she wronged me?
No! no! I will not hate herI cannot.
Well, this is the right temper. By heavens,
Florence, but you are wondrously changed for the
better within a week. But will you love her,
Florence
?
You shouldshe is so beautiful, so gentle,
and will make you so excellent a companion.
I cannot promise that until I know
The speaker stopped abruptly.
Know what, Florence?
Does she love you?
The more obvious signification of this question
was grateful to the outlaw's vanity. He laughed
aloud, as he replied
Ah, traitor! what would you have? Suppose
I tell you, that she does not love me.
You jest with me.
Gad, I know not that, Florence. I don't know
whether I can say with safety, that she does love
me.
How then came she here?
Hum!I brought her; and, to tell you the truth,
not altogether with her own consent. But I doubt
if her opposition was earnest, Florence. Like most
womenlike yourself, Florenceshe probably hides
the real sentiment under the disguise of one which
she does not truly feel. There was no small portion
of this sort of trickery in yourself, Florence, when
we first metwhen we used to meet by the lake
the little lake
Remind me not, I pray you, said the outcast
woman, with a sternness of accent that caused the
outlaw to gaze at her in suspicious silence for
several
seconds. With a countenance only half assured,
he proceeded:
Florence, I half suspect you now. I doubt you
are only striving at composure. Your jealousies
are returning, and the old reproaches will be
renewed
Never! Edward Saxon, never! Before heaven
I swear that I can never reproach you again; and
as for jealousy
Enough! I am too willing to believe you to
insist
upon too many assurances.
The outlaw did not see the contemptuous scorn
upon the lips which concluded fitly the unspoken
sentence.
I can be happy with you, Florencenay, I
could have been happy with contented with you all
along, but that your unwise suspicions and goading
jealousies drove me from your side, and made me
not only indifferent to your society but anxious to
escape it. Now that you have grown wiser, I trust
that no such necessity will again prevail to make
either of us less happy, than we should and may be.
With Virginia and yourself
But, if she loves you not? said Florence,
coldly.
I have not said it, Florence; nayI am not
willing to say, and still less to believe it. True, I
brought her with less willingness on her part than I
should have desired to see; but now that she is here
in my powerat my mercyshe will seeher
own common sense
Edward Saxon! you surely mean no violence
to the girl?
Why, Florence! exclaimed the outlaw, as he
read the horror in her countenance, which was not
wanting to the accents of her voice. Do you
think it so hard to persuade the maiden, that I am
as proper a man as she could find among a
thousand
?
She, I doubt not, will be as flexible as
yourself
,
when the season comes. Nay, have I not told
you already, that I look upon her reluctance as
nothing
more than that disguise which women
naturally
put on to hide their real sentiments. She will
love me quite as well as another, when she has paid
those due sacrifices to false delicacy which form a
part of the social religion of the sex. You are all
alike, Florenceall alike. Virginia, like yourself,
will go through the various stages of passionfirst,
a pretty fear, that woos you to pursue while it only
affects to fly; then a yielding gust of tenderness,
that is all tears for a seasonthen a glow of greater
delightthe intoxication of new passion, which is
all smiles and burning blushesthen comes the
deliberate
devotionthen, the jealousy, Florencethe
jealousywhich is as certain as the upward progress
of the sparks; and, until this stage is over, no peace
for either party. Then, as in your case again, and
as I rejoice to behold it now, the quiet calm of love,
which is resolved to take it on the easiest termsto
suppose it nothing but what it should be, and
believe
,
with the poet, in love, as in the case of higher
destinies, that `whatever is, is right.' You can't
conceive, my dear Florence, how much I am
rejoiced
by the change in you.
I'm very glad of it, was the reply.
We shall be as happy in the swamp as if the
world was in our grasp. With Virginia on one
hand, and you, Florence, on the othersatisfied as
you both should be, that the heart of a man is
capacious
enough for bothI could pass my days, I
think, without any sentiment but that of contented
enjoyment, and my nights with no other dreams
than those of security and bliss. You have read,
Florencenay, you have heard and seen something
of those gay rovers of the gulfthat were kings
upon its billows, and, fierce in waras fierce as its
own stormswere yet as peaceful as its hours of
calm, when they surrendered themselves, upon the
green palm-covered island, to the embraces of
beautylying beneath the shade of the plantain and
the fig, and, with lip to lip, and heart, melting as it
were, into the dissolving sweetness of the mutual
heart, they gave up life to the sweet deliriumthe
pleasant reposethe happy confidence of love. Shall
we not have these joys again, Florence? No storms,
no fear, no scolding, no capricesnay, turn not
away, my girlforget that there have been words
or looks of unkindness between us. Now, that you
have come to a right understanding of what should
be the condition of our ties, there can be no cause
of discontent or strife hereafter. A kiss, a sweet
embrace, dear Florence, in token that there is peace
between us.
As these words were spoken, he drew nigh to the
VOL. II. 19
woman, whose face had been partially averted while
he spoke. A tempest was in her heart the while,
and a vexing commotion and a burning heat within
her brain. Her hand trembled within her bosom,
that trembled also with a degree of emotion which
shook her whole frame. Meanwhile, the outlaw,
utterly deceived by her deportment, and, perhaps,
quite as much deceived by his own desires on the
subjectpleased to find her so easily reconciled, and
beholding her now, in this alteration of her mood,
with something like the renewal of an ancient
sentiment
intoxicated
no less with the warm fancies
which he had been breathing in her ears
approached
her, and, passing his arm suddenly about her waist,
drew her towards his bosom.
Yes, dear Florence, he continued, let this
embrace
renew the pleasures of the past, and this kiss
be the token that all unkindness is forgotten, and
there is nothing now but peace between us.
A shadder passed over her frame as she felt his
arm encircle herfor a moment she seemed desirous
to shrink from his embrace; but, in another instant,
turning as if to requite it, she suddenly extricated
one of her arms, which she threw behind her as she
exclaimed
Ay, Edward Saxon, peace it shall be, but it
shall be the peace of death. Take this!this! Let
this be the token of my forgiveness. This for my
wrong. This to the heart that could not value the
sole, the worshipping devotion of such a heart as
mine.
She struck as she spoke with the little dagger
which she had concealed within her bosom. Twice,
thrice she struck, and for a moment the outlaw spoke
notmoved not. Astonishment seemed to possess
and overcome his faculties. But when she had
given the third blow, he threw her from his arms
with a violence that sent her against the opposite
wall; where she stood, glaring upon him like a
tigress, her eyes starting from their orbs with an
expression of mingled hate and horror. But Saxon
fell nothe seemed not even to be hurt. He advanced
to her without discomposure or irregularity of step,
yet every blow had been planted by the hand of the
most determined hostility upon his heart.
Your arm is feebler than your soul, Florence
Marbois, else had your hateful purpose been
accomplished
.
Woman, how have you deceived me!
She lifted the dagger again as he approached her,
but, as it met her eyes, she flung the worthless weapon
from her hand with a scream that denoted the
disappointed
fury in her bosom. The steel, small and
slender, having met with the resistance of a button
when she struck, had yielded and curled up at the
contact, without penetrating more deeply than his
outer garment. He was utterly unharmed.
Florence, you are mad, was the remark of
Saxon. This attempt
Ay, man, monster, villain,I am mad. But who
has maddened mewho has driven me to this? I
am doubly mad that I have failed in what I have
sought to do. Feeble handworthless steel! But
why stand you looking on me, Edward Saxon?
Will you not kill?Here, I am readymy heart is
openmy bosom is bared to the blow. Strike, and
strike quicklyit is your only chancefor I have
sworn, Edward Saxonsworn by heaven and by
hellby all powers that may yield me power for
revengethat the world shall not contain us both
that one of us must die. I am ready now, Edward
Saxon!I would not liveI hate you too much to
breathe with you the same atmosphere of life.
Strike! strike! You would have given me peace
just nowit is not too late! I wish no other.
With a desperate hand she tore open the vest
which covered her bosom, and the white realm
still so full of beauty and sweetness, if not of
innocence
and lovethose heaving hills on which his
head had so often rested in other dayslay bare
before his sight. He turned from them without a
word. The picture reminded even his cold and
careless bosom too warmly of that past, in which
his betrayal of her love had so amply justified her
present hate.
I leave you, FlorenceI leave you and forgive
you. He said no more as he parted from her
presence
,
leaving her where she stoodher hair
dishevelled
,
her bosom bare, her eyes wild like those of
the maniac, but her ear too dull to hear his last
words,her thoughts any where but where they
should be, and her whole brain in the wildest
commotion
.
CHAPTER XVI.
How's this? Let me look better on't: a contract?
A contract sealed and ratified.
Beaumont and Fletcher
.
No
sooner had Saxon disappeared from the
apartment
,
than it was entered by the emissary,
Stillyards
.
This indefatigable urchin had maintained
beneath the eaves his habitual practices, and his
keen senses had suffered nothing to escape him of
the scene which has been just described. Florence
beheld not his entrance. Her eyes were open, but,
like those of Lady Macbeth, their sense was shut.
He coolly proceeded across the room, and took up
the dagger. With a curious grin of equal scorn
and merriment, he examined the worthless
instrument
which had so amusingly failed to serve the
purposes of vengeance. While thus engaged, the
returning consciousness of the woman apprised her
of his presence. She rapidly crossed the intervening
boards that separated them. She grasped his arm
with one hand, while with the other, she repossessed
herself of the ineffective, but handsome weapon.
This she hurled from the window, with a laugh of
bitterness that seemed a fitting and mocking
commentary
upon her own unperforming endeavour.
Ha! ha! ha! Soyou have seen it all,
Richard
?
19*
Weak hand, and worthless steel! Ha! ha!
ha! did it make you laugh? No! and why not?
He laughed? Did he not? Did you not see him
laugh? He laughs nownow! Well he may
laugh! What a fool am II that am wronged and
ruineddishonoured, scorned, abused, and deserted.
What a fool am I to dream of justiceto think
that there could be vengeance for the lone and
feeble
woman. To think that a weak arm like mine,
should avenge my weaker heart.
And, as she uttered these wild and passionate
words, she cast the arm which she reproached,
heedless of the pain, with fearful violence down
upon the jamb of the window, the blood spirting as
she did so, from the ivory-white and soft flesha
sight to make even the rude, but devoted dwarf,
shudder, and to awaken in him a degree of
sympathy
which lifted his nature and turned all his better
feelings into pity.
'Twa'nt the arm'twa'nt the arm, Ma'am
Florence
'twas
the knife only that wa'nt fit for
nothing
,
with all its shine and silver about it. If it
had been this now, ma'am, displaying his own
heavy bowie blade, as he spokethere's no curl
in this!no mistake!
Give it me! she criedthis it shall be yet.
This feels like vengeance, Richardthere is strength
enough in my arm, and resolution still in my heart.
I cannot fail nowthere is still something for which
Florence Marbois may live.
She seized the weighty instrument as she spoke,
turned it beneath her eye, grasped with one hand
the massy blade, which she strove in vain to bend;
then, as if satisfied that it was now only necessary
to strike the blow, was about to hurry from the
apartment, as if in pursuit of her victim; but the
cooler dwarf threw himself between her and the
door. Significantly putting his fingers on his lips
as if in token of silence,with an audacity which
was unusual, and which, at any earlier day, would
have found its immediate and unmeasured rebuke
from the lips of the haughty womanhe gently
grasped her wrist, and led her back into the darker
part of the room out of sight and hearing from the
window. Once there, he counselled her to the
delay
of a few moments, while he left the house, and
stealthily examined all its approaches which might
conceal a lurking spy. His own practices had
necessarily
made him properly suspicious of all others,
and had endowed him with the skill to provide
against all detection. Finding that the coast was
clear, and having ascertained that Saxon and Jones,
whom he most apprehended, were gone to some
distance in the encampment, he hastily returned to
his mistress, after the lapse of a few moments. He
found her as much excited as ever, and doubly
impatient
to proceed in consequence of the unwonted
constraint which had been put upon her. The
reasons
for this restraint he proceeded to declare in his
own rude language:
Why, Ma'am Florence, it's no use for you to
go nowSaxon 'll never let you try it again. You
can't get nigh enough for a single dig at him; and
if you did, he'd be wide awake for you. He'd take
the knife from you, 'fore you could say Jack
Robinson
,
and laugh at you more than ever.
A glance of firea fierce starerewarded the
speaker. There could be no enmity at that
moment
more decided, in the estimation of her
anguished
heart, than that which seemed to insist upon
the impracticability of its hope of vengeance.
What then? Am I to submit? To bear his
scorn, his desertion? Is he to walk with booted
footstep across my heart? Wherefore do you stop
me? Speak, sir,I command you! Tell me other
things than this, or be dumb for ever. I will not
hear you,I will hear nothing that takes from me
the last hope of my heartwhich baffles and denies
the only prayer which I am prepared to make
in life.
The dwarf was not unwilling to comply. He
had no purpose of baffling her vengeance. A bitter
smile passed over his squalid cheeks. His mouth
widened into a grin, and at another time, the
malignant
fires which darted from his eye, might have
awakened in the bosom of his fair companion, a
feeling of shuddering disgust. Her own roused and
embittered spirit, jaundiced by the passions which
inflamed it, sufficed to blind her to the unconcealed
malice of his. She saw not the gloating expression
of his features,she heard only those accents which
promised her the vengeance she desired. He showed
her how vain would be her hope to succeed in any
renewal of her late attempts, to avenge her wrong
in person. He admitted, also, the great difficulty in
the way of his succeeding, unless with
circumstances
greatly in his favour, of a conflict with a
man so powerful of frame and so practised in his
arms as Saxon; but there was another way, which,
while it demanded greater delay, promised to be
followed by better results.
The reg'lators are out, and it's how to hide is
the talk among the beagles. There's an old man,
a preaching Methodist, that's all bite, on t'other side
of the Big Black, at a place called Zion's Hill,
he's been a mustering more than a week now, and
it's only because he don't know which way to set his
nose, that he aint on trail after the beagles afore
this. He's got a son that barks with us, and we
know from him how the cat jumps. Then there's a
lad, one Wat Rawlins, that's been a contriving again
us too. Jones is more afraid of him than t'other,
'cause he don't say much, and Badger always
preaches what he's guine to do; now, it's only to
show this here chap, Rawlins, how to find the
track for Cane Castle, and let him make a start on
a sudden, and its all mush with Saxon. There's two
dogs that barks between us and Rawlins, and its
only to send 'em off sarching for John Cole's mare;
then Rawlins can bring his men into the swamp
unbeknowing to all, and it's a better knife than yours
or mine, Ma'am Florence, that does the business.
I see! I see!and you will go to these men,
Richard, you will bring the avenger into the swamp
you will show them where
he
sleeps,Ha!
To these eager demands and exclamations the
answer of the dwarf was slow. He had his reasons
for deliberationhe had his own bargain to make;
and, with the policy of a more cunning tradesman,
his reluctance to answer the requisitions of the
superior
,
grew in proportion to the eagerness of her
demand. That she might be avenged amply by the
means he suggested, and by his means, he
proceeded
to reiterate. The particular process was all
shownhis own consent to do the office, which
could evidently be done by no one so well as
himself
,
was the only point upon which he hesitated to
declare himself.
I will reward you, Richardyou shall have all
every thingmoney, jewelsevery thing, I
repeat
for
why, she added mournfully, as if to
herself
why
should I keep aught? I shall have little
need for gold or jewels when that is donelittle
need, and oh! how much less desire,speak,
Richard
,
tell me that I may rely on you for this last
service
.
Be faithful as you have been before, and take
what you willtake all that I have to bestow.
You say it, Ma'am Florenceyou'll promise
me, demanded the dwarf with an eagerness
equalling
her own, while, in his gloating eyes an
expression
of anxious desire, might have been easily read
by any observer less blinded than the woman to
whom it was addressed.
Have I not said? Surely I promise. Why
should you doubtwhy hesitate? Have I ever
failed where I promised, Richard? Have you not
ever had your reward from me? I repeat, you shall
have, when you have done me this service,when
you have brought the officers of justice into this den
of thieves,when the chief villain of the band is
a captive, and the hope from his heart, like that
from my own, is gone for everyou shall have all
the wealththe money and the jewelswhich I
have! Nothing shall be withheld of value that you
may demand. You shall be my heir, Richardyou
shall inherit all!
All in your power to bestow! slowly spoke the
dwarf, repeating a portion of her previous words.
'Twas that you said, Ma'am Florence.
Yesagain I say it: you shall have all in my
power to bestow.
It's a promise, Ma'am Florencegood as Bible
oath.
As if I had sworn it! solemnly replied the
woman.
He caught her wrist eagerly in his hand, drew
her towards him, and, rising on tip-toe, whispered
in her ear. As the communication, whatever it was,
reached her senses, she recoiled from his contact
shook herself free from his grasp, and, receding a
step, regarded him with an expression of
countenance
in which contempt and scorn were mingled
equally. The eye of the abashed dwarf sank
beneath
the fire-flashing glances of hers; his frame
faltered, and an effort which, at the same moment,
he made to speak, died away in confused and feeble
accents, which were utterly unintelligible and almost
unheard. Meanwhile, various were the thoughts
which coursed rapidly through the mind of
Florence
Marbois. Anger and vexation at first were
predominant feelingsso strong in the first moment
after his communication had been heard, as almost
to obliterate, during the same brief space, all
memory
of the vengeance which she had sworn
against her seducer. But very soon these feelings
passed away.
I must be proud no more, were the words
which at length broke from her lips. I mock
myself
with these shadows. Richard, she said,
advancing
as she spoke, and extending her hand, it
shall be as you say. All that is left me to bestow,
shall be yours, when you have accomplished my
vengeance.
He grasped the extended hand, and carrying it
to his lips, covered it with such caresses as a she
bear might have lavished upon her last cub in
licking
it into shape. Florence Marbois had sunk
wofully
in her own estimation. Her pride was gone,
and she had nothing to live for; but she withdrew
the hand that suffered from the slaver of the
deformed
,
with a strong expression of disgust.
Enough, Richard. And now to the prosecution
of these plans.
It will not need that we follow the dialogue in all
its details. It is sufficient for us to say, that
Stillyards
,
being familiar, by reason of his espionage,
with all the circumstances of the chief robbers in the
swamp, and with all those more prominent sources
of danger which they feared, was better prepared
than Saxon or Jones could have believed, to devise
an effectual plan for their capture. It was not long
before he was despatched by his mistress from her
presence. There were new reasons added to old
ones, why she should desire to send him forth as
speedily as possible. He was not simply a means
of vengeancehe had become a creditor; and the
miserable debtor, who, though ruined, had still in
her soul some glimpses of the better nature from
which she had fallen, began to shudder at the
humiliating moral bondage which such a condition
always seems to imply. The instrument of her
necessity
was an object of her disgust. Hitherto, she
had been able to reward him with money; now, he
felt the large increase of his power, and his demands
had grown in proportion. He was become
ambitious
money
no longer answered his desires; and
he, who by reason of his low birth, vulgar life, and
deformed person, had never been able to attach the
affections of another, now aimed to secure the highest
and finest and sweetest of all human affections, as
the reward of his ministry.
And wherefore should I scruple at this? was
the demand which Florence Marbois made of
herself
,
as if in self-justification, when she was left
alone. It is at best a worda pledge which is
dissolved in the very hour which brings Edward
Saxon to his doom. She is a fool, a worse than
idiot, who survives life's purposesand I have but
one purpose in life. That satisfied, and I may well
assure this vain and miserable game-make that all
shall then be his which is in the power of Florence
Marbois to bestow.
CHAPTER XVII.
Good sir, softly: you ha' done me a charitable office.
Winter's Tale
.
Let
us now return to our Thespian in the swamp.
We left him, with Jones, skimming along in a little
dug-out over the turbid waters of the Chitta-Loosa.
Jones delighted in fishing, and found sufficient
employment
in pursuing this occupation. Horsey
seemed
content to be a spectator; but the wily outlaw
very well knew that his content would be of no
very long duration, unless the food on which he
better fed than any thing besidesthe oily applause
of the audiencewas brought in, to quiet an
appetite
that no measure of success could satiate.
Accordingly
,
he suffered not his own vocation so far
to occupy his attention, as to make him regardless
of his companion's temper. From the moment when
he cast forth his lines, he began to ply the actor with
stage reminiscences, and to challenge his opinions
upon all stage matters. These requisitions were
all-important
to the perfection of the proposed
establishment
at Benton. Finding deception easy on
all kindred subjects, Jones enlarged his fictions. He
suggested a grand scheme of theatrical
organization
,
which was to extend itself over the whole
country, from West Tennessee down to the Bay of
VOL. II. 20
Biloxi. A company was to be planned, with
corporate
powers, in several of the southwestern states,
which was to build theatres in all eligible places,
and divide the year in separate seasons of three
months in each of them. The management was to
be conferred on Horsey. Never did the innocent
flats of our backwoods suffer the delusion of a
mammoth
bank, or a mammoth railroad, to take such
complete
hold of their credulous imaginations. Like the
schemes of these great companies, generally, the
wily outlaw made it appear, that the plan was not
only to be pleasant and profitable, but excessively
patriotic.
At least, said this experienced stockdealer,
at least, my dear Horsey, we shall make, as
salaried
officers, though the stockholders lose. The
profits, if enough to pay us, are enough for the
patriotism
of the thing.
But it must be profitable to all parties, said
Horsey, whose morality was somewhat less
discursive
than that of his companion.
Ay, ayto be sure it must. The country will
be a great gainer in money and morals, and
Certainly, such a diffusion of Shakspeare alone,
must have that effect.
It will. That alone should be a sufficient
consideration
to induce the state to subscribe largely;
and I have no doubt she will, when her legislators
are mado to perceive the patriotism of the thing.
Then, if we can get a charter for a banking house
with a capital of ten millions, our triumph is
complete
.
We can establish houses every whereraise
companies,issue moneysdo any thing. Our
labours
being for the public good, we can appropriate
lands and tenements, I am of opinion, without ever
paying for them.
Impossible! exclaimed Horsey, who had
evidently
less legal learning than his companion.
And why impossible? Ours is a public work.
Our charter, it is true, declares it to be private; but
it is admitted that our labours are likely to be
productive
of public good, and would it not be
monstrous
if a single citizen, here and there, should
resist
a measure that is for the good of the whole.
True, there is something in that, said Horsey;
but is it so clear that we can take private
property
at pleasure for the public good.
Certainlythe majority declares what is for the
public good, and makes the law accordingly.
Butthe constitutionwhat does the
constitution
stand for thenof what use?
Nay, I don't know that. For my part I never
did see the use of a constitution at all; and it is
clear to me, that it could be of no sort of effect
against our company, if we can only get a charter
for it. That we can do, if we only pay two or
three lawyers handsomely, and secure a few of the
most famous orators at a fine salary. They'll gull
the flats by fine speeches which shall prove to them
that they're the most noble, patriotic folks under
the sun; and we'll pick their teeth, while their jaws
are on the stretch, listening to these fine sayings.
Two to one on it, Horsey, that in a year's time, the
state will lend us a million to begin with, and take
stock in the great Mississippi Shakspearean and
Thespian Company, to three times that amount.
I'm not so sanguine, Jones, said the other, but
I'm sure if it would do so, the stock would be a
cursed sight better than that of half of these banks
and railroads. As for the banks, it's clear, they've
swamped all the planters; and as for the railroads,
I reckon we shall have to leave them in the swamps,
where they'll stick for ever. Your plan, I'm afraid,
is almost too grand a one. Something on a smaller
scale now, would be more likely to be successful.
Lord love you, Horsey, my dear fellow, you
know nothing about our people when you talk so.
It's nothing but grand schemes that go down with
them. They can only understand the
incomprehensible
they
can only admire what is beyond their
calibre. Tell them of small schemes which are
possible and practicable, and which might yield them
moderate profits and be of some service, and they
will turn up their noses in disgust. They despise
little projects. But get up a grand Religious Steam
Association; or a company for connecting
Pensacola
with San Jacinto by means of chain or
floating-bridges
;
or a line of Balloon Stages to the North
Star, or a Patent Process for Converting Bad
Planters into Great Merchantspropose some such
moderate matters to them as these, and they'll take
stock directly. They've lately formed a society in
New England for keeping the peace among the
potentates
in Europe, and there's not an old woman in all
the villages that don't subscribe a shilling weekly to
prevent Louis Philippe from kicking the Grand Turk,
and arrest the Emperor of Russia in his indecorous
attempts to void his quid in the face of Sultan
Mahmoud
.
That's a society now that's likely to be
profitable
.
The outlaw was about to pass, by a very natural
transition, from the consideration of these grand
and patriotic modes for picking the pockets of the
people, to a short analysis of the half exploded and
vulgar methods of doing the same thing as practised
in ancient times. He was prepared to show that the
old highway custom of bidding a true man stand
and deliver, was altogether, and happily, abrogated
by such small legal processes as are comprehensively
described under the general designation of charters.
It would have been very easy, indeed, for one so
well versed in the inquiry as himself, to showwhat
the reader is already prepared to believethat the
Border Beagles were, indeed, chartered
libertines
of the same class; yet, as they did not
transact
business on a scale so magnificent, and as they
were rather less ostentatious in their operations,
they could not so openly challenge the admiration of
mankind. It caused the worthy outlaw, indeed, a
sigh, when he reflected that all that was necessary
to enable the company under whose authority he
performed his operations, to become shrined in the
admiration and estimation of the people from the
Tar River to the Colorado, was a simple instrument
under the hands of a State Legislature, which a
fine orator could readily procure, and a docile
representation
would delight to grant. A change of
name might, indeed, be necessary, and, perhaps, a
declaration of objects slightly differing from that
which were in reality entertained. A people, it
seems, who are fitted for self-government, must yet
have its expenses concealed from their sight, and its
penalties disguised under the name of pleasures.
Border Beagles was a good nameeasily
articulated
but
to get a charter for far more increased
operations
,
it might be necessary to change it into
something
of a more imposing, and less vague
signification
The
Great Southwestern Transportation and
Specie Deposite Company, would be a longer and
more specific titlelong and loose enough to obtain
charters from any six States in the Union.
Jones was full to overflowing with these ideas
and their tributaries; but Horsey was something
less of a moralist and politician than the outlaw;
and his undisguised yawns soon apprised his
companion
of the necessity of returning to the ground
from which they had episodically departed. Even
20*
the establishment of great houses for stage-playing,
were as nothing to the play itself, in the imagination
of the actor; and when his attention flagged in
considering
the former, it revived with double force and
interest when the latter topic was resumed. Jones
professed himself tired of law and morality, and
begged that Horsey would restore the tone of his
mind by a specimen. One specimen begat two,
two begat three; specimens produced varieties of
readings in favourite passages; and in twenty
minutes, with a patient and applauding auditor,
Hamlet was himself again. Never had he read
so well beforenever had his action been so flexible
and felicitous.
Cautiously, my dear fellow, said Jones, with a
warning voicecautiously, and trim the boatshe
dips already, and it won't take much to bare her
bends.
Yes, yes! impatiently replied the actor, I see
I'll take care; and then he returned to his theme
which had been the discussion of one of the
readings
of a favourite actor.
Now you see, Mr. Jones, in the reading of that
passage, Forrest is clearly wrong:
`Hang out our banners!'
he says with an exclamatory pause; then adds,
`On the outward walls,
The cry is still they come.'
Now, why should he depart from the old style of
reading, which is thus:
`Hang out our banners on the outward walls;
The cry is still they come!'
Why should we suppose that the coming of the
enemy is only announced on the outward walls?
The cry is every wherethe whole castle hears it.
Macbeth himself announces it, he being
within the
castle
at the time. In this reading the passage is
without sense. The truth is, that the intelligence
having reached Macbeth that the enemy is still
coming,a fact, which his previous confidence in
the weird sisters has led him to doubthe gives those
orders which would be given even now by every
commander. `It is time to hang out our defiance
they have come near enough to see it. It will show
them that we are prepared for them,it will show
our own people that we do not fear the foe.' It was
not customary to hang out the banners except on
occasions of state and danger. In old times,
banners
were more costly things than they are now.
They were covered with gold and blazonry of a
very rich and perishable character. Even now,
they are never hung out except in cases of
ceremony
,
or in the expectation of actual conflict. They
are kept carefully within the castle till the approach of
the foe, and then, with the soldiers, advanced to the
walls. The same scene in which this passage
occurs
,
describes, as stage directions, the entry of
Macbeth, with drums and colours,
within the castle
,
followed by Seyton and the soldiers. They were
then about to go forth to the defence of the walls,
the sentinels on the watch having warned them that
the time for actual conflict was now at hand, and
the hanging the banner on the outward wall, was
the only mode by which the proper defiance of the
defenders was to be displayed.
Clearly you are right, said Jones, whose turn
it was now to yawn.
Now for that famous and much disputed
passage
`She should have died hereafter.'
Mind the boat, remonstrated Jones, who felt
his little cockleshell becoming momently more and
more capricious under the increasing earnestness of
the actor.
Ay, ay! said the other, reciting
`She should have died hereafter;
There would have been a time for such a word,
To-morrowand to-morrow, and to-morrow'
By Jupiter, Horsey, we shall be over it you don't
be very careful.
No fearno fear! said the actor impatiently,
as he hurried with the passage,
`And to-morrow, and to-morrow,
Creeps in this petty pace, from day to day,
To the last syllable of recorded time;'
Jones, at this recorded time, was constrained to
give all his attention to the trim of his boat.
`And all our yesterdays,'
Proceeded the actor with the solemn
sententiousness
,
and gloomy moral reflection of the tyrant at
this period, when the last evils of life were
accumulating
about him, making him sick at heart. He,
Horsey, was as thoroughly blind to the wrigglings
of the outlaw, as the outlaw was now become
indifferent
to the readings of the actor.
By Gd! muttered the former, we shall have
a capsize.
`And all our yesterdays have lighted fools
The way to dusky death. Out, out, brief candle!'
Here the action of Horsey verified the
apprehensions
of the outlaw. That putting out of the
candle
did the business, said Jones, afterwards.
Life's but a! The water rushing into
Horsey's
ears, nose and mouth at this moment, put an
effectual extinguisher upon the sad, moral reflection
of Macbeth, and ended the new reading of the
much disputed passage. The boat went over in
spite of all the outlaw's efforts to maintain her
equilibrium
,
and Macbeth ended his speech by a puffing,
plunging, and blowing, which might have done
honour to the wind-bags of a porpoise.
Phew! Joneswhat the devil's the matter? was
his cry, as he rushed to the top of the muddy river.
`Out, out, brief candle!' exclaimed Jones,
struggling to the banks. I warned you, Mr.
HorseyI warned you several times.
Warned me! How warned me?warned me
of what?
Of tilting the boat.
The devil you didI never heard you.
`Life's but a walking shadow,' said Jones,
repeating a fragment of the passage; but you'll
find it difficult to walk where you are. While you
have life for it, Mr. Horsey, you must strike out
the water's at least twenty feet over your head.
So I find, replied the actor, striking for the
shore. With some difficulty he scrambled up the
oozy elevations, borrowing from the liberal banks
as he went, a portion of their capital at every step.
Good Gd, Jonesmy Hamlet! exclaimed
the unfortunate histrion, surveying the ruined
garment
,
which had swallowed up so many goodly
pounds of his father's cotton. My Hamleta
splendid black silk velvet jacket, fly-trunks, and
mantlemagnificently bugledcost me at Stubb's
three hundred and sixty dollarsand now utterly
ruined. Dn the boat,that I should have trusted
myself in such a trap as that!
Don't be angry, my dear fellow, said Jones,
with a grin which conveyed very equivocal
consolation
.
Once under way, and you will soon be
able to replace it, I trust. That scheme of ours
the Grand Mississippi Shakspearean and Thespian
Company
Look you, Mr. Jones, don't talk to me of
schemes. Let's go back where I can get my bags.
I must change. I feel like a drowned rat. I'm as
slimy as an eel. It'll take me a week's washing to
get this dd ooze out of my hair.
No, no! not half so long, said the other, I
was once much longer in the mud, and got clean in
three days.
This was said with great gravity. Horsey
looked
suspiciously upon the speaker, and for the first
time, a latent notion seemed to waken in his mind
that he had been quizzed a little; but, just at this
moment, his eyes were attracted to the opposite
banks.
'Gad, Jones, I must hidethere are women
yonder. Who are they?
The actor stole behind some stunted bushes, from
which he peeped out upon the distant cavalcade.
That's Brown BessBess Yarbers, as I live
and that's my Julietmy pretty Mary Stinson!
Eh! Jones, am I not right? What the devil do
they want here?
Hush! Come to join our company, I suspect,
replied Jones, with some anxiety in his voice.
'Gad, I'm glad of it, exclaimed the actor,with
a delight which made him quite forget the hurts of
his Hamlet. That Mary will make the loveliest
Juliet, the sweetest Ophelia, the dearest Desdemona
that ever was smothered when she should have been
kissed. I told Bess to make an actress of herI
knew what she could do. It's a great acquisition,
Jones. I'll go and meet 'em.
What! in that trim?
Ah, dn the boat! was the bitter exclamation
of the enthusiastic actor, as, sinking back into his
place of concealment, he suffered the new comers to
pass from sight, and impatiently waited the moment
when Jones might deem it proper to permit of their
return to the encampment. The latter busied
himself
in recovering the boat, which had drifted a mile
below, and was only kept from the embraces of the
Mississippi by the branches of a fallen tree, among
which it got entangled. By dint of swimming and
wading, the outlaw recovered it, and Horsey was
with difficulty persuaded to resume his seat in a
fabric in which he could use no action, and
accordingly
could not speak. To deny him to suit the
action to the word, was to make him dumb; and
equally soaked, silent, and sad, the luckless actor
suffered himself to be paddled back to the place from
whence he set forth, only consoled under his
misfortune
by the reflection that he should soon see the
lovely little damsel in whose sight, it may be said in
this place, he had found quite as much, or even more
favour, than she had found in his.
CHAPTER XVIII.
`This subtle world, this world
Of plots and close conspiracy.
Shirley
.
But
he soon found it was no such easy matter to
behold this damsel. The course of true love was not
permitted to run smooth in his case, any more than in
that of Romeo. It was not the policy of Jones to
suffer the actor to come in contact with the
Yarbers
family. He knew the intimacy which already
existed between him and brown Bess; and as the
reader may have seen, the adherence of John
Yarbers
to the brotherhood, did not imply any
attachment
of his wife in the same quarter. Awkward
revelations, for which the faternity were not yet
prepared
,
might have resulted from a meeting of that
dame with Horsey; and Jones made his
arrangements
accordingly to prevent it. But Jones could
not be every where, however ubiquitous may have
been his desires; and Bess, by some means, found
out that Horsey was at Cane Castle. She probably
had caught a glimpse of him as he emerged from
his oozy bath, in the waters of the Chitto-Loosa;
or, as is equally probable, John Yarbers was
partially
in the habit of serving two masters. He may
have shared some of the secrets of the beagles, with
his larger, if not his better, half. How she arrived
at her knowledge, however, is very unimportant to
our narrative. It is enough, that, once possessed of
this knowledge, all the strategics of feminine policy
were put in exercise to defeat the uncharitable
designs
of Jones. It was not a mere female curiosity
which Bess sought to gratify in once more desiring
to see the actor. Far from it. Other and more
serious desires filled her mind; and the evident
admiration
however
strangely shownwith which
Horsey regarded her daughter, had inspired her
with the hope of connecting Mary Stinson with
better fortunes, and less-doubtful family connexions,
than those to which she had unhappilyand, to do
her justiceunwittingly bound herself. Horsey was
a wild chapthat she knew;but his heart was
in the right place, and he was the son of one of the
most substantial of the small planters in Mississippi.
Old John Horsey had what he had, free from debt,
and was therefore more independent than most of
his class. As he owed nothing, he had no
favours
to ask of the Brandon Bank, and could keep
back his cotton till a favourable market. Alas! for
Mississippinay, for half the southwestthat his
policy had not been more general among the
agriculturists
of that region. The debtor is every
where at the mercy of his creditors, and we are
all debtors.
But a truce to this; and, to sum up in brief,
Brown Bess contrived to find a way to the actor.
There was a moment when the outlaw, to whom
Cane Castle was given in charge during the
absence
of the master beagle of the band, was
necessarily
withdrawn; and, seizing upon this moment,
the persevering dame sought Horsey with success.
At this interview, the poor actor was utterly
overwhelmed
by the tidings which he heard. At first,
indignation seized upon him to think how he had
VOL. II. 21
been imposed upon and laughed at; and he was for
seeking the outlaw, and punishing him in the midst
of the encampment. But the cooler woman checked
these ebullitions of mortified vanity and impatience.
She showed him the danger of this proceeding, and
counselled him to a policy as deep and quiet as that
of the beagles. Under her direction, arrangements
were made for his escape; and wisely leaving all
these to her, our actor, now considerably sobered
on the subject of his grand steam company of
theatricals
,
in which the state was expected to subscribe
so largely, was content to play second fiddle for
awhile in this political duet. Perhaps, he was the
more readily reconciled to this inferior position by
the presence of a third person, who had been
judiciously
provided to appear at the nick of time by
the calculating Mrs. Yarbers. This was Mary
Stinson. After her appearance, the mother might
have made what arrangements she pleased. That
nothing should be wanting to her schemes, she made
away with herself after awhile, leaving the two
children togetherthe babes in the woodHorsey
being as much a dreaming boy and as full of heart
and enthusiasm, as if he never had known any of
the world's experience; and Marypoor Mary
as simple of soul and innocent of mind, as the
adhesive
,
dependant and docile daughter of Polonius
herself
.
It was strange with what rapidity the
moments
flew, when these two were left together.
Therein that deep and quiet woodthickly shaded
by the intricate forests, that had never echoed to
the dull cleaving blow of the destroying axe,on
the edge of that dark mysterious waterand with
no sounds in their ears, but those which seemed to
invite them to mutual sensibilitiessounds of birds
and insects that hummed beside and above them,
without any regular song, and with efforts that
seemed to imply wakefulness and not worklife,
rather than exertionthe hearts of the twain, in
which the fire had been placed, if not kindled into
flame, before, now warmed with a mutual ardour,
and gushed freely with the sweet waters of a mutual
affection.
It will do, was the whisper of the mother of the
girl, as through the leaves of a copse on one hand,
where she had concealed herself, she saw the ardent
amateur impresshaving not the fear of Ned
Mabry
in his eyeshis second kiss upon the lips of the
trembling and very much frightened damsel; and
heard his pledges of love and promises of marriage.
Then the old dame contrived to reappear and
separate
the parties. The very day on which Saxon
bore away Virginia Wilson to the recesses of
Cane Castle, our amorous actor might have been
seen on old dot-and-go-one, his father's steed,
with Mary Stinson perched behind him, going as
fast as his passions could drive, and his decrepid
steed would permit, in the hope of finding a
convenient
magistrate willing to officiate for love in a
hurry, after the fashion of the Gretna blacksmith.
The policy of Dame Bess might be supposed rather
censurable by the very staid and starched prudes of
a metropolitan city; but let them not bite their
thumbs too inveterately. The old lady was desirous
of getting her lovely daughter out of the swamp,
and freeing her from that miserable connexion with
a clan of robbers, from which, under existing
circumstances
,
she could not free herself. She was
anxious to marry her to a man of family and
substance
,
and she knew that she could trust the honour
of Horsey, to transact the business of hymen
according
to the State laws, on that subject made and
provided. She could have wished, it is true, that
the affair might have been conducted with more
deliberation
and under her own eyes; but as this could
not be the case, she was too wise a woman to suffer
such matters to stand in the way of primary objects;
and, counselling the couple how to keep the narrow
road on the swamp, which would lead them, by a
short ten miles, to Squire Nawls, she sent them off,
with a God-speed, to be happy after a fashion that,
however constantly practised for six thousand years,
has not yet fallen into disuse.
One incident, which occurred before the departure
of Horsey from Cane Castle, should not be unnoted.
While yet utterly undreaming of the revelations
subsequently made by Brown Bess, and while still
perfectly persuaded that he was the member only of
a brotherhood of Thespians, who, if ignorant, were
yet innocent, the enthusiastic amateur found an
opportunity
of making his way to the presence of
Florence Marbois. Regarding her as the prima
donna, the great gun, the tragic muse of the
company
,
he could not refrainthough counselled to
beware of the weapon of her husband, whom
Jones described as worse than a Turk for
jealousyfrom contriving an interview with one
from whose great powers he promised himself no
small support in the personation of his loftier
characters
.
The play at cross-purposes between them
which followed this interview was as mysterious to
both, as it would have been ludicrous to a spectator
at all aware of their true history. Horsey
addressed
her as Lady Macbeth, or Portia, or
Constance
,
and she replied to him in such language as
would have suited well the auditories of a conscious
knave. The poor actor was utterly confounded,
and did not feel at all satisfied with, however much
as an amateur he might admire, the lofty scorn which
looked out from her eyes, and the contemptuous
language which rose upon her lips, in reply to all
his high-flown speeches. She sooner comprehended
his true position than he hers. Perhaps she had
some inkling of the truth before.
You are mistaken, sir, in me, if not in yourself.
You have been imposed upon, and are in a den of
thieves, from whence you had best escape as soon
as possible. Leave me, sir.
But, my dear Mrs. Clifford, was the
objurgatory
opening of the bewildered actor.
Clifford! Begone, sir,you are mad. I tell
you, you are among knaves and thieves. You are
gulled, imposed upon. Go home to your parents.
`Was ever woman in such humour wooed?'
was the slowly spoken sentence of Horsey, as the
haughty Florence, after this scornful counsel,
withdrew
from his presence. Two hours after this
interview
,
he was made to comprehend its true
meaning
and the manner in which he had been played
upon, by the more painstaking and common-sense
personage whom he was about to select as a
mother-in-law
.
It might not have been so easy for herto
subdue the wrath which her revelations excited in
his mind, had it not been for her lovely daughter;
and that movement of the maternal tactician which
left the two children to their own cogitations. The
result of these cogitations we have seen in the
departure
of the happy pair, riding double on
dot-and-go-one
,
in search of the country squire. But one
thing qualified the otherwise unmixed joy of the
actor in this novel situation. It was the necessity
of leaving his saddle-bags behind him, with the best
of his theatrical wardrobe. This necessity
occasioned
some serious fears, but the better baggage
which filled its place, soon reconciled him to, if it
did not make him absolutely forgetful of, his loss.
Let us now return to Harry Vernon, whom we
left, attended by the faithful Jamison and the two
21*
constables, on his way to Mr. Justice Nawls, to
undergo his examination for the murder of Thomas
Horsey, Esquire. The justice was a plain
farmer-looking
person, very ignorant of books and
refinement
,
but with some knowledge of men and things,
which, on the borders of every country, is by far
the better sort of knowledge. He came out of
his fields, and in the same condition in which he
used his hoe, he sat down to make his examination.
He was in his shirt-sleeves, which were rolled up to
the elbow; his bosom was bare, and none of the
cleanest; and the perspiration, discoloured by the
dust through which he had been, stood in dark dots
upon his cheeks and forehead. What a lecture on
American jurisprudence would have been written
by that profound spinster, Harriet Martineau, or
that profound sea-attorney, Captain Basil Hall, or
that social martinet, Col. Hamilton, could they have
been present at this examination. Justice Nawls
had no need of books, or statutes, or authorities,
and still less occasion did he seem to have for
tablets and a clerk. The proceedings were
summary
enough. There were two sly fellows who
swore to several suspicious circumstances against
our hero. It was proved that Horsey and Vernon
were seen together lastthat the time of their
separation
was unknownand that, a short time after,
poor Horsey was found in the woods bored through
with bullets, dirked in sundry places, his ribs
literally riddled and laid bareand his bloody coat
and breeches were finally produced in damning
confirmation of this tragedy. Such was the
testimony
of Augustus Mortimer and Edward
Montmorenci
.
The alias of a rogue is usually a very
ear-taking concatenation of syllables; and,
par
parenthese
, what an adroit rascal is Davy Hines,
the
celebrated
South Carolina swindler (all rascals
are celebrated in North America, while great
statesmen, orators, poets, and actors, are simply
notorious), in the selection of his temporary
nom de
guerre
. He is for the nonce, an Allston, a Hamilton,
a Rutledge, a Berkeley, a Singleton, or a
Livingston
.
Sometimes he condescends to be a Hayne, or a
Benton, and he has even been known, on trending
farther east, to contract himself into a Webster or
an Adams. Colonel Augustus Mortimer swore with
singular precision and confidence, and Major
Marcus
Montmorenci followed him. Vernon examined
these two worthies with the utmost care and
vigilance
,
but they were as impenetrable as they had
shown themselves incorrigible. They just swore to
enough to place the offence at his door, without
committing themselves by the positive asseveration
that they had seen him do it. They were old
practitioners, in one form or other, in half the courts
of Mississippi, and knew all the quirks of justice,
however little they might have really cared about
its principles. Poor Vernon was in a quandary.
He saw that Squire Nawls could do no less than
commit him, on the strength of the testimony
offered; and though this testimony fell short of
convicting
him of the offence, he yet could not but feel
that the refined rascals whose deposition had been
just taken, had wrought him some very troublesome
meshes, from which it would not be so easy to
extricate
himself upon trial. Still the awkwardness,
if not the danger of his own situation troubled him
less than his particular arrest at such a moment.
There was the affair of Carter, his friend, which he
was anxious to bring to a conclusion which might
save him as well as the miserable father of the very
lovely Virginia. And shejust won, and so soon
lost. Ah! reader, if you have a heart at all, and
have not forgotten all the love-passages of your
boyhood's
days, think of the thousand privations
involved
in that separation.
If Vernon was annoyed, poor Jamison, his
Alabama
friend, was utterly confounded at the aspect
of his affairs. Unwilling to believe the youth guilty,
for whom he had taken a liking as extreme as
sudden
,
he was yet staggered by the closeness of the
testimony against himthe nice linking together of
the circumstances as declared by the joint evidence
of Messrs. Mortimer and Montmorenci, and the
grave, deliberate, and very genteel appearance of
those worthy witnesses. It was in vain that he
added to the cross-examination of Vernon, as many
questions as, in his sagacity, he thought might be
instrumental in bringing out a difference in their
statements. His efforts were more perplexing to
himself than to the witnesses, and with a groan that
came from the bottom of his heart and was almost
a growl, he gave up all farther attempts at
examination
.
So also did Vernon himself, and Justice
Nawls proceeded to write out and sign the
commitment
of the prisoner, for further and final triala
manual performance, not so easy to one whose skill
in penmanship was of that dd cramp sort,
which bothered Tony Lumpkin.
The deed was done, however, and the constables
were just beginning to bustle about for the
resumption
of their charge in conveying Vernon to prison,
when a hubbub was heard without, and the accents
of a voice which, to the ear of our hero, seemed no
less sweet than familiar.
Now is the winter of our discontent made
glorious
summer, cried one from without.
By heavens! exclaimed Harry Vernon, that
is Mr. Horsey himself.
So it is, Harry, my boy, cried the actor,
rushing
in and bearing on his arm the shrinking form of
the half-affrighted Mary Stinson, whose cheeks,
glowing with the deepest tints of the carnation,
betrayed
the mingled effects of a ten mile ride with
her lover, and the not unpleasant novelty which she
felt to exist in such a situation.
Who else but Horsey, exclaimed the delighted
actor,who but the young Lochinvar, and he
concluded by singing a stanza from the popular song
of that name, by which he communicated the tenor
of his love adventure, and the reason of his
appearance
with his fair companion.
They'll have fleet steeds that follow, Harry,
my boy, he continued, though, truth to speak, had
they started as soon on the chase of old Bowline, as
they did after Lochinvar, Tom Horsey would have
won no bride to-day. You recollect my little Juliet,
Harry?Mary Stinson? Come forward, Mary
don't be shydon't be scary,it's Mr. Vernon, that
came with me to your houseMr. Harry Vernon;
and there's the squire that's to make us man and
wife,and these gentlemen, why I take it, they're
all friends to a frolic, and a good fellow when he's
about to go off, like a comedy, in a happy ending.
Mr. Horsey, I was never more rejoiced to see
any one in my life, than I am to see you; said
Vernon. You've come at the most providential
moment for my safety.
Your safety!
YesI am here before the magistrate charged
with murdering you.
The devil you say!
However strange, it is no less than truth. Squire
Nawls, let me introduce to you my friend, Mr.
Thomas Horsey, of Raymond, the gentleman with
whom I travelled, and whom I stand suspected of
having killed. You see that as he is alive, I cannot
have murdered him.
Squire Nawls looked bewildered, and turned
inquisitively
to Messrs. Mortimer and Montmorenci.
An incredulous and sarcastic smile sat upon the
countenance of the first named of these gentlemen,
A brief pause followed.
You see, gentlemen, continued Vernon, turning
to them also, that the body which you found and
buried was that of some other person, and the
clothes which you have shown
Were those of Mr. Thomas Horsey and no
other, said Mr. Augustus Mortimer, with the
utmost
coolness and a quiet imperturbable composure,
that obsolutely shocked the Alabamian, whom the
promise of a change in the colour of Vernon's
fortunes
had provoked to a shouting, cheering, and
dancing, which, for several moments, utterly
banished
silence and stateliness from the hall of justice.
That is not Mr. Thomas Horsey, continued
Mr. Mortimer; we buried the poor young
gentleman
with our own hands. Did we not, Major?
Major Montmorenci confirmed this statement, by
a conclusive nod to Justice Nawls.
The devil you did, exclaimed Horsey, utterly
aghast with the reckless hardihood with which the
lie was spoken.
Yes, poor fellow,he lies in the wood, a little
way beyond the lower fork that leads to the two
ferries.
The devil he does! continued the actor, with
increasing astonishment, as he listened to the
manner
in which his body was disposed of.
Yes, we can show you the grave at any
moment
.
We cut his name, T. H., with the year, in
the bark of a hickory that stands over the spot.
You were very good, said Horsey.
No, no, not at allit was only common
charitable
.
Pray, my good fellow, said Horsey, dropping
the arm of Mary Stinson, and crossing over to
where Mr. Augustus Mortimer stood, on the left
hand of Justice Nawls, and looking him in the face
with as much curiosity as astonishmentpray,
my good fellow, who may you bewhat may be
your name? I am, in truth, very anxious to know.
Augustus Mortimer, Esq., was the calm reply,
son of the Hon. Bannister Mortimer, Judge of the
United States District Court, in West Tennessee.
You areare you?and you, sir,to the
other witnesspray, oblige me with your name
and connexions.
The answer was equally prompt and civil.
Major Marcus Montmorenci, last from
Virginia
,
a late settler in the Choctaw purchase.
And you are sure, gentlemen, that you buried
Thomas Horsey, of Raymond, under a hickory tree
on the lower road to the ferryand it was over his
body that you were good enough to mark T. H.,
with the yearperhaps you put a death's head and
cross bones above the inscription?
No, sir, we put nothing but the initials, and the
year; and we did not cut them as well or deeply as
we could have wished, owing to the dullness of our
knives, said Mr. Mortimer.
And you are sure that it is my bodythat is, the
body of Tom Horseythat you so charitably put
from sight in that place?
Very certain.
How do you know that?
Oh, my dear sir, these questions are very
unnecessary
and your manner is somewhat offensive.
When I tell you, that my poor friend, Tom Horsey,
was seldom out of my sight and company for a
spell of four years at least, that we lived together,
travelled together, and slept together at different
and long periods, you certainly can't doubt that I
ought to know him.
And you, sir, have been equally intimate?
Equally, said the more sententious
Montmorenci
.
It would he difficult to describe the expression of
Horsey's face, as he hearkened to these cool
asseverations
,
and marked the stolid composure of the
two.
Really, gentlemen, you must excuse me, if I
ask a few more questions. The Horsey, who is
dead, and whom you burieddid he look any thing
like me? There is some mistakesome deception
in this, Squire Justice, which I must find out.
Nothing, said Mortimer.
Nothing, said Montmorenci.
And yet, said the former, looking at
Montmorenci
,
with a grave inquisitiveness, don't you think
there is something in this gentleman's chin that
looks like poor Tom's?
Why, yesthere is a somethinga
A sort of splita
There's no split in my chin, gentlemen,
exclaimed
Horsey, smoothing the misrepresented
member
it's
as smooth and round as any chin in
company.
Oh, sir, we don't mean to say that they're alike
but there was a something
Yes, only a somethingthat is, they were both
chins, said Horseyfor that matter, don't you
think that we had other features in common? How
about eyes, nose, head and hair?pray, gentlemen,
oblige me, by answering closely. The question is
important, I assure you.
Well, now, sir, to speak plainly, you are
nothing
like our poor friend, Tom Horsey. Tom,
though an excellent fellow as ever lived, was
monstrous
ugly; now, if I were asked my opinion, I
should say you are a very good-looking sort of
person.
Indeed! I thank youso Tom Horsey was ugly,
was he?Squire Nawls, do me the favour to
marry me with Mary here, while I have some
remaining
confidence in my own identity. If I talk
much longer with these rascals, I shall begin to look
upon Tom Horsey as a dead man. I suppose if she
takes me as Tom Horsey, you can have no
objection
to give me that name till the ceremony's over;
and after that, it's just what you please about the
trial. Harry Vernon, don't think I am indifferent
to your concern, my boy; but Mary's here alone
with mea sort of runaway match you see, though
we have the mother's consent,and I shan't be
easy any more than herself, till she has a lawful
right to look to me, and I have my lawful rights as
well as herself. There may be another Tom
Horsey
but I don't believe it, and I know he can't be
Tom of Raymond. Those breeches and that coat
are mine, though how they came so bloody and
holy is past my telling. They were stolen from me
in the Big Black Swamp, as the newspapers say, by
some scoundrel or scoundrels unknown. I don't say
you stole 'em, Colonel Mortimer, or you, Major
Montmorenci
,
but I intend to make you show how you
got 'em, if there's any justice in Mississippi.
The answer of these worthies was made in high
head and with some show of valour and defiance;
but this, Horsey, whose regards were chiefly given
to Mary Stinson, at this moment, did not seem to
heed.
All in good time, gentlemen, he said, after
the ceremony's over. I invite you to remain till
then, though, in your ear, let me tell you, I look on
VOL. II. 22
you to be as arrant a pair of liars as ever wagged a
Munchausen.
Squire Nawls was better skilled in that
department
of his business for which Horsey demanded his
present aid, than in any other of its requisitions. He
saw no reasonable objection to giving the actor a wife
as Thomas Horsey, though, in the next moment, he
refused his own evidence as such, to prove himself
alive. No assertions that he could make, no proofs
that he could offer, could impair the positive and
sweeping testimony of the two witnesses, or disturb
the settled decision which the Justice had made
before he came; and, in equal fury, the actor and
the Alabamian listened to the regrets with which he
sought to mollify his resolve, to commit the
supposed
murderer of Tom Horsey to prison. Before
Nawls came to this conclusion, howeverfor the
dull country justice had been somewhat confounded
by the
contre temps
of the dead man's reappearance
he was compelled to retire in private conference
with Mr. Augustus Mortimer, a minute's talk with
whom was quite enough to set him on his legs.
Let him be Tom Horsey or the dl, it matters
nothing to you. You have the evidence of two
witnesses that Horsey is dead, and you might go
farther
and arrest this fellow as an imposter. Though
we've no instruction to do so, yet it might be good
service to the beagles. Your account is easily
squared with the state's attorneythere's the proof
on which you committed Vernon to prison, and
that's enough. Send him on his way, and let Cane
Castle do the rest. I'll engage you never hear of
him again from that quarter.
The commitment of Vernon was accordingly
made out and delivered to the two emissaries of
Saxon, in whose custody he had been left before.
They had their instructions as well as Nawls, and
they knew if he did not, that the unfortunate youth
was reserved for the sacrifice by those whose secret
haunts he was supposed to have invaded as a spy,
and whose practices of crime he had been
commissioned
to arrest and punish. Meanwhile, the
keen-searching
mind of Vernon had discovered the true
circumstances and secret of those difficulties by
which he was involved. While he was under the
impression that Horsey had really been murdered,
he had little cause to think himself the object of an
organised plan of injustice or detention. But the
reappearance of the actor, and the revelations which
he made during the random dialogue which took
place on the examination, together with the fact
that his clothes had been stolen, mutilated, and made
bloody,were circumstances of sufficient strength
to open the eyes of the lawyer to the whole hidden
truth. The conviction that he was singled out as a
victim, and that the persons around him were
mostly
parties to the conspiracy, strongly impressed him
with the necessity of being as cautious, yet seeming
as little suspicious as possible. A look, and the
significant
application of his finger to his lips, at a
moment when Horsey was about to blurt out in
public, the whole burden of his discoveries in the
swamp, fortunately served to check the torrent of
his speech, and to impose upon him the necessity of
a caution like that of Vernon, whose composure had
seemed in his eyes very much like the most
unmanly
tameness. When the resolve of the magistrate
was made known, Vernon remarked quietly,
without
any show of anger or suspicion to the justice
I cannot blame you, sir,as a lawyer, I should,
perhaps, say that you have done nothing but your
duty. There is evidently some mistake in this
business
,
for this I know to be Mr. Thomas Horsey
from Raymond, who was the only travelling
companion
I had from that place. Still these gentlemen
who have given their evidence, may know another
of the same name, who has unfortunately been
murdered
as they state. I do not gainsay their
assertions
I
only declare my innocence of the crime.
Still, sir, you are not to know that, and could only
do as you have done. One privilege, however, I
must pray to be allowedthat of writing to my
friends in Raymond and elsewhere, for the necessary
evidence to prove my innocence and the identity of
this gentleman. If you will suffer me to have a
brief private conference with my two friends here,
Mr. Horsey and Mr. Jamison, I will provide them
with directions for seeing to this business, and
procuring
all the necessary proofs.
This small favour could not well be denied to a
man in such an emergency. The calm, respectful
deportment of the prisoner, his forbearance to hint
or even look any of the suspicions which he really
felt, deceived the witnesses as well as the justice.
Looking upon it as certain that any evidence which
he might procure from Raymond would come too
late to affect a trial which was to take place in Cane
Castle, and to be as summary as it was certain to be
secret,Mr. Augustus Mortimer, to whom Squire
Nawls was wont to refer privately in all cases of
especial doubt, recommended that his prayer be
granted.
It will be getting these fellows, Jamison and
Horsey out of the waythey might be
troublesome
and
before they get back with their
witnesses
,
Cane Castle will have done his business
beyond any Horsey's undoing. Let 'em talk
together
.
And what are we to do for you, Harry Vernon?
demanded Horsey, the moment they reached the
little chamber to which the courtesy of the justice
had permitted them to retire. Say the word, and
I'm for you,
`To the last gasp with truth and loyalty.'
In less classical style and language the Alabamian
made a like offer of his services and sinews.
You shall say yourselves what you shall do for
me, when I tell you how I stand, said Vernon. I
am in the hands of outlawsthe witnesses who
swore against me are outlaws, the constables who
guard me are outlaws, and the justice who commits
me is their creature.
After this startling preliminary, Vernon proceeded
to classify those details of factthose floating
circumstances
,
which, picked up from sundry quarters,
formed the groundwork of the faith that was in
him.
And knowing this, you took it so patiently,
was the joint exclamation of Horsey and the
Alabamian
.
Had my passions been suffered to play as freely
as yours, Horsey, Squire Nawls would never have
permitted me this interview. But, stay, I do not
hear their footsteps belowthey have ceased
walking
they
are watchful. Not a word now above
your breath, gentlemen, for it is now doubly
important
that we should be secret as the grave. Now,
then, hear me. You are both strong men, and I am
sure, as fearless as you are strong. I claim your
help in a matter, which, were it your case, should
freely command my own. You must help to rescue
me from the clutches of these fellows.
The hands of the two were instantly clasped in
frank and manly assurance upon that of the speaker.
22*
CHAPTER XIX.
Come, my good fellow, put thine iron on:
If fortune be not ours to day, it is
Because we brave her.
Shakspeare
.
The
reader must not, however, suppose that our
three friends concluded their conference with this
vague determination. Vernon was too good a
politician
,
too keen a lawyer, not to see that, left to
their own judgments, Dick Jamison might lose the
game by his rashness, and Horsey by his frivolity.
Their dialogue, which was somewhat farther
protracted
,
was carefully given, on the part of the
former, to a consideration of the difficulties
surrounding
him; and to the necessary steps which
were to be taken by the two in effecting his rescue.
It does not need that we should report these
directions
in this place, but leave to time, which usually
ripens all projects, even those which events baffle,
to bring about its natural results in this case as in all
others. It will suffice to say that the manner in
which Vernon carried their minds forward, step by
step, with his, confirmed in him that tacit
superiority
which, from the first, neither of them had
seemed willing to dispute. If Jamison regarded
him as a fine fellow before, he now looked upon him
as a mighty wise one; and the importance and
dignity of the new offices put so suddenly on his
hands, seemed to elevate the mind of our actor in
his own estimation. He had never been much
trusted with matters of importance before; and the
idea seemed suddenly, though, perhaps, imperfectly,
to open upon him; that, after all, Mr. Aristophanes
Bull was not so great a booby, when he denounced
tragedies as not ser'ous things; certainly, the
new task before him of getting Vernon out of his
present hobbles, seemed the most serious business of
any to which he had ever yet set his hand. Not
that Horsey had any scruples or apprehensions.
There was no better pluck in Mississippi than that
of our amateur. But he had just entered upon a
new and exquisitely delicate condition. He had
just formed a new and responsible relationship in
life; and when he heard from Vernon that there
was no doubt that he should be hurried off that
very evening on his way to prison, and that any
attempt to rescue him, to be successful, must be
made that very night, he could only exclaim with
a tribulation in his accents and countenance, which
compelled the smile to the lips of his two
companions
But, dear me, Harry Vernon, what the deuse
am I to do with Mary?
Vernon had not been inconsiderate on this subject.
He had prepared himself to meet this difficulty, and
by his counsel, Horsey was persuaded to make
application
to Squire Nawls for a temporary lodging
for his new wife, until he could procure facilities for
conveying her home to Raymond. This pretext
enabled him to set forth that very evening, and
simultaneously with the departure of Vernon under
his guard, as if for Lucchesa, where he proposed to
find a horse and side-saddle on sale. Nawls, after
some moderate objections, was persuaded by a
week's board paid in advance, and the honied
arguments
of the young husband, to accede to the
proposed
arrangement; and this matter settled, love
consented to waive all farther objections to the
quasi
warfare which implored his assistance.
Vernon
communicated to both his companions the
knowledge which he had acquired from his intimacy
with Walter Rawlins and the methodist Badger.
To the former he recommended them in the event
of their failure to rescue him. As a sanction for
their own proceedings in a business which promised
to involve a great deal that was extra-judicial, he
drew from his bosom the envelope which originally
contained the blank commissions of the governor,
intending to fill the blanks with their names, and
thus furnish an authority which would not only
assist
them in commanding means for acting against
the outlaws, but sustain them in their use, He now,
for the first time, discovered the robbery that had
taken place upon his persona robbery which he
could only ascribe to the practised and adroit hands
of Saxon, performed while he was insensible. A
bitter smile passed over the lips of the youth as he
made this discovery, and traced, with rapid thought,
the connexion of event with event, and agent with
agent, all co-operating to the same endhis
entanglement
in present intricacies. But the
resolution
of Vernon, his sanguine temper and great
self-confidence
conspired to make him still hopeful even
against the great odds of the beagle confederacy.
Having satisfied himself, to his great relief, that the
other packet, which contained the papers of Carter,
remained in its original integrity, he determined still
to keep it in his possession; as it was now fair to
assume that the outlaw, convinced that he had
obtained
all that was hidden, and that he had found a
sufficient clue to the progress of Vernon, would
never dream of looking in the same place for a
second deposit. With this conviction, he ceased to
feel the loss of the one packet as a very serious
evil. That packet involved none of
his
confederates
none
of his friends. He alone was singled
out as the victim, and, bating the loss of the
commissions
,
which might be perverted to evil use by
the outlaw, the utmost extent of his misfortune was
already known in his own capture, and threatened
imprisonment, if not murder. Vernon was not
insensible
to the risk he incurred among the outlaws,
as one whose supposed endeavour had been to
expose their haunts, detect their doings, and entrap
their persons. He felt that should his two allies fail
him at the fortunate moment, his blood would
probably
be poured out in some lone swamp fastness, while
his mangled body would be left uncovered to yield a
midnight repast to the gaunt and famished wolves,
that traversed, at that period, the savage and
uncultivated
hills of the Choctaw purchase. These were
annoying convictions, but Harry Vernon was a man.
He spoke none of his apprehensions, and contenting
himself with obtaining from Horsey all that he knew,
had seen, or heard, while in Cane Castle; and with
renewing his instructions on all matters which he
deemed essential to the successful prosecution of
their adventure, he presented himself to the officers,
and declared his readiness to go with them. He
had done all that it was in the power of man to do
at that momenthe had exercised the closest
judgment
of which his mind was capable, uninfluenced
by his own feelings, and the consciousness of
danger
,
of which he could not entirely divest himself;
and with a cheerful manner, and a resolute spirit, he
left the rest to the courage and conduct of his friends,
under the crowning favour of Providence.
These did not desert him. Though neither of
them very wise men, or solid counsellors, Horsey
and Jamison were yet men of great nerve and
composure
;
strong, as we have shown, of limb, and of
undoubted energy and spirit. In their plans and
schemes, alone, was it likely that they might fail;
and in these respects, the forethought of Vernon
had taken every precaution and made every
arrangement
that might be done by him under
existing
circumstances. His directions, which
contemplated
even the particulars of the scuffle with his
robber guardians, the time, the manner, and the
probable place, were ample, if not copious. But little
more was needed, than that their objects and course
should be unsuspected, that their horses should bring
them to the season, and their hearts not fail them in
the trying moment. Of course, it was the
assumption
of all parties at the outset, that the strife was
to take place with the two outlaws, and those only,
who had served as officers of justice from the
beginning
.
One little difficulty, however, started into sight
before they left the presence of the magistrate, and
made Vernon tremble, for an instant, in doubt of all
his schemes. The sturdy rogues, his captors,
having
no more to say in respect to himself, were
disposed to annoy his friend Jamison, because of
his interposition at Lucchesa in cutting the cords
which bound their victim,an act which they had
then called a rescue, and which they were still
disposed
to consider so. They had probably consulted
with Nawls on the subject, while Vernon and his
comrades were planning his rescue in fact; and
with the sober confidence of veteran knaves, they
were resolved to extort a reasonable amount of
hush-money from the sturdy Alabamian, while in
presence of the justice. But Jamison's blood, which
had been with difficulty restrained by the counsels
of Vernon, and the obvious necessity of preserving
a large degree of temperance in consideration of
his friend's predicament, fired up at the first motion
of the rogues. Knowing them, as he now did, to be
the most impudent pretenders to official sanction,
it was with no small difficulty, that he restrained
himself from declaring aloud all that he knew, and
pouring forth all that he felt. With all his attempts
at moderation, his speech was certainly of a
character
to show but a very limited degree of success in
attaining that which he sought.
Look ye, judge, said he, these niggers ought
to be licked for tying a free white man as they
did. I'm the man to lick 'em, let 'em give me the
littlest eend of an opportunity. I was a-thinking to
bring it afore you myself, because I'm hopeful there's
something in the law books to make 'em sweat
for roping a white man the same as if he was an
ingin or a nigger; and if there aint, there ought
to be, and our
rip's
can't put it there a bit too soon.
I did take out my bowie-knife, jist as they say, but
'twa'nt to trouble them; though, Lord bless you,
'twouldn't ha' been so hard a matter neither, to cut
'em up mighty small as they run; but, as I don't
altogether like to use a man's weapon upon a chap
that shows me nothing but his back, I had no more
thought of troubling them with it, than I have of
troubling you. I used the knife only to cut loose
the rope; and, all that was wrong in that business,
was in using a weapon that was bigger than was
needful, and that made two big men so shameful scary.
As for 'resting me for that, squire, why, all I can
say, 'two'nt do for them to try it, while I've got the
same knife yet, and to the back of it a couple of
pair of such bull-mouthed biters as these here
perquissions
.
You've seen the new perquission guns,
squire? Well, these pistols are after the same
fashion
.
Here's four of them, and they're a wing or
two quicker in the shot than any race-lightning.
One pair of these pistols and this here knife, belongs
to Mr. Vernon thereand I'll take care of them for
him till he gets out of jail. I'll drop the rammer
down their throats, and you'll see they all have
their bellies full of bullets. Now, I'm a peaceable
man, squire, for one that's so well prepared for war;
but if I was twice as peaceable, and only half so
well off in perquissions, if you was to say the word
for these chaps to 'rest me, which I know you can't
do as a gentleman and a righteous justicewhy,
I've only to turn one of these perquissions round
about among the companynow here on this one,
and now on thatand as there's no taking aim in
such a promisc'us business, particularly with these
mighty quick perquissions, I'm almost afraid to say,
squire, how much risk you'd run yourself; though
I'm hopeful the bullet's far off that'll ever trouble
you. 'Twon't be such a death, squire, as I'd have
you die of. As for theselook at 'em, squire, how
they dodgelook at 'em, Harry Vernon! Ha! ha!
ha! That's jist the way they were scared at
Lucchesa
jist
the way exactly;they dodged when
there was no sort of call upon 'em for it. Lord love
you, my lads, if it makes you so squammish when
I only p'int the thing at you, it would make you
deathly sick, when I come in 'arnest. Squire, let
me go home to my business in a civil manner, and
don't listen to these ridiculous fellows. I've done
for Vernon all that I reasonably could; and by the
hocus, I'll be at court when his trial comes on, and
if it's the last picayune in the pocket of Dick
Jamison
,
or the last blood in his heart, it shall go to help
him out of his troubles. If I hear you say, I'm not
to be 'rested about this business, well, I'll be off
at once, before night, for Lucchesa. If I'm to be
'rested for cutting loose a free white man, that was
tied up wrongfully, say it as soon, and let's see the
eend of it at once. P'int your finger now which way
you please, and I'm ready, any side. If it's civility,
well, I'm all civilityif it's for a close hug, tooth
and timber, why there's not a bear in Loosa Chitto,
that'll come to the scratch with rougher arms than
Dick Jamison.
This interruption consumed some time; and long
speeches, for which the western wanderers are
rather famous, were as frequent and as fine, after a
fashion, as half of those listened to with so much
patience by the nationparticularly as they have to
pay for themat every session of Congress.
Vernon
confirmed the simple statement of Jamison, and
insisted that all the violence shown on the occasion,
was no more than was required to separate the
bonds of a prisoner, who made no attempt to escape,
and professed his willingness to go freely with the
officers. True, this was a rescue in legal
acceptation
,
but, under the circumstances, not such an one
as would render a prosecution necessary; and
Vernon
contended for the point the more readily, as he
could perceive that the justice desired nothing more
than a loophole by which to escape from the
necessity
of taking steps against a man who had avowed
such levelling principleswe had almost written
pistols. The pistols indeed, were the principles; and
no effect could have been more ludicrous than that
which Jamison produced upon the company, justice
and officers, as with a huge pistol in each hand, both
of which he cocked, he made their muzzles describe
a slow circuit round the apartment, allowing them to
rest for a few awkward seconds whenever the line
of sight was brought up to the face of one of the
opposite
faction. The constables dodged with little shame
or scruple on such occasions; and the very Justice,
VOL. II. 23
it is painful to add, though he did not allow his
limbs to yield to such a discreditable weakness,
could not keep his eyes from winking with singular
frequency; and his cheeksthe Alabamian remarked
afterwards with a singular show of satisfaction
grew whiter than any clabber that he ever saw or
swallowed. The affair was compromised by the
justice bestowing a reproof upon the offender, to
which he submitted with the indifference of one who
rightly estimated its value.
You've got to say it, squire, said he, it's your
business and you can't help it, and that's the reason
I let it pass and say nothing. But look you, Squire
Nawls, if you wa'n't a justice, but jist a common
man, I'd ha' been on top of you and through you,
afore you'd 'a half finished what you've been saying.
If there's any one thing in this world that I never
could like, it's when I'm found fault with, jist at a
time when I know that I'm doing the very thing
that's rightand then to be spoke to on behalf of
such a couple of small-souled sappy sticks as these
Grim! it makes me all bristles. I feel wolfy in
twenty places, anddang my buttons, judge, if the
thing was to be done over ag'in, 'twouldn't be the
rope only that my knife would slit; if I wouldn't
cut a juglar or two there's no snakes in all
Alabam
.
It was with a feeling of relief that Nawls and his
two emissaries beheld this sturdy democrat take his
departure. He set out as if for Lucchesa,
accompanied
by the amateur, whose parting with his young
wife was equally dramatic and characteristic, though
still full of genuine feeling. Resolved on having, in
these volumes, as little of the lachrymose mood as
possible, we refrain from the tears and tenderness
shown on the occasion. Our readers of the gentler
sex, will please suppose that the omission is ours
only;had they seen the happy couple at the
parting
moment, had they heard the low tones and
sweet assurances of Horsey, and witnessed the
embrace
,
and seen the face of Mary buried in his
bosom, and hearkened to her half-suppressed sobs,
which spoke of hope and joy rather than any other
emotionthey would have seen that there was no
love lacking between the two in this early stage of
their matrimonial felicity. Love, however,
domestic
love in particularis proverbially a thing of
short stages; and the sun which is warm and bright
to-day, may be under a very ugly cloud to-morrow;
but this is none of our businesssufficient for
the day is the evil thereof.
Vernon saw his friends depart with some anxiety.
His own movements, under the guardianship of the
tenacious constables, followed soon after. The
evening
shades were thickening as they set forth, and
grave thoughts become gloomy ones in the twilight
hour. Those of our hero were sad ones, at least,
and they restrained his natural vivacity of temper,
if they did not subdue and dispirit him. He was
without arms, without present friends or succour,
accused of crime, and at the mercy of criminals.
The increasing gloom of the forest, as they
advanced
upon their way, served to increase the
cheerlessness of his situation, and to give an
oppressive
weight to those doubts, which necessarily came
with his very hopes and anxieties. Horsey and
Jamison were brave, but might they miss the
route taken by the outlawsmight they not fail at
the proper moment? Precipitation might be worse
than halting apprehension, and the very levity of
the former, with the rough and ready boldness of
the latter, might serve to defeat the plans of the most
deliberate and thoughtful. To a man of mind, there
is nothing so productive of annoying doubts, as the
dependance upon mere muscle.
He turned for some sort of relief to his attendants.
It was advisable to disarm their watchfulness, and,
if possible, to impress them with the conviction that
no kind of doubt of their professed character, had
as yet risen in his mind. To seem to rely upon
them, as peace officers of the country, was the most
effectual way to assure them, that he was perfectly
resigned to their custody. He, whom they well knew,
was guilty of no crime, had nothing to apprehend
from the awards of justice; and the mere
temporary
detention of his person, however troublesome
and unpleasant, was not so great an evil as to make
it likely that he would incur those risks to avoid it,
which would inevitably follow any violent attempt
to shake it off. It was no hard matter to engage
them in easy conversation; and having paved the
way for a familiar chit-chat by some good-natured
common-places, Vernon proceeded to carry out his
design in the way that he calculated would be most
likely to effect it. He inquired of them, what they
knew of the two men who furnished the evidence
against him; and when, as he expected, they denied
all knowledge of the witnesses, he boldly assured
them, that they had sworn to utter falsehoods.
There can be no sort of doubt, he said, that
Mr. Horsey is alive; and that is he, who came in so
unexpectedly, when the case was going on. I never
knew any other Horsey, save his father, in my life;
and I am now convinced, that these two persons
have uttered, what they know to be untrue; and if
they dare come to the trial, I shall convict them of
a base conspiracy against my life. It will be easy
enough for my friends, to bring proof of what I say,
and of my innocence. Indeed, as soon as Horsey
and Jamison go where I have sent them, I shall
come out under habeas corpus. But these scoundrels
shall suffer for their malice, if there's law in
Mississippi
.
I don't knowmay be so, returned one of the
constables; but what should make two men, whom
you never saw before, swear ag'in the life of
another
?
and then it seems mighty strange, if so be,
the man that come to be married, was the raal
Horseyit seems mighty strange he should pop in
jist at that minute.
It was no less strange to me than to you,
replied
Vernon; but the truth is not lessened by the
strangeness of the circumstance. That he is the
real Horsey, I hope to show, as soon as my friends
return from where I've sent them. As for the
malice
of these two witnesses, that I confess to you, is
as singular and surprising to me, as it can be to any
body esle. I never saw them befoream sure, I
never did them any injury, and
But why should you call it a conspiracy?
It evidently ishere are two men, whom I
know nothing of, coming forward most strangely, to
swear a crime against me, which I never did
commit
.
Yesbut you see, we are not to know that
Squire Nawls aint to know that.
TrueI don't blame him. He has done nothing
more than he was bound to do; but I am speaking
of the two who have sworn to this falsehoodwhy
they shouldfor what reasonwith what hope or
objectis a wonder of the strangest sort to me.
You're sure you never had any quarrel with
them before?
Never saw them in all my life.
Well, it is strange, if so be you didn't kill
Horsey, and you never had a quarrel with these
gentlemen, that they should swear ag'in you. You
23*
aint made no enemies of any body? Beca'se these
chaps mought be employed by somebody else.
Not that I know of. I've quarrelled with
nobody
,
and have made no enemies. Stay!there
is one thing! exclaimed Vernon, with sudden
earnestness, correcting himself as he spokenow
that you put the question, I am reminded of a
circumstance
which may account for it.
Here he proceeded to relate the event recorded
in our first volume, in which, while rescuing the
traveller, Wilson, he shot the outlaw Weston, who
was astride his body.
This robber might have friends and relatives,
who have sought in this manner to avenge him.
I don't think that, said the rogues with one
breath. It would be more apt to scare his friends
off, and if they was rogues themselves, they'd know
better than to come before a justice. Squire Nawls
is a mighty keen man when he's a judginghe'd see
through a rascal as clear as a whistle, and pick the
crooks out of his story in the twink of an eye. No,
no! I reckon there's another way to account for it.
We don't want to git you to confess, Mr. Varnon,
for nobody's bound in law to tell ag'in themselves,
but I reckon you did shoot the poor man, though, I
s'pose, 'twas by accident, or else you fou't him
fairly, and he got the fling.
Vernon re-asseverated his innocence, with the
solemn earnestness of one who was really anxious
that they should be convincedso earnestly, indeed,
and with such warm simplicity in his manner, that
the rogues burst into a good-humoured laugh, and
one of the most forward among them, clapped him
civilly upon the back while he expressed the hope,
that, even if he did kill the man, he should pass
under the tree without sticking fast to the limb; or,
as it is sometimes expressed, that he should graze
the timbers, without becoming dead wood.
It was just at this moment that a faint whistle
reached the ears of our hero. This was the signal
agreed upon between himself and his comrades;
and circumstances seemed to be particularly
favourable
to their project. The road was narrowa
mere wagon-trackthrough which they were
passing
;
night had set fairly in, and though a bright
star-light
whitened the wide arch of heaven, but a faint
effusion of its rays guided our travellers along the dim
and shady paths of the forest. To maintain a more
certain power over their prisonerwhom, perhaps,
because of the disgrace which had followed their
first attempts to cord him, they had not boundthey
rode close beside him on either hand. In
consequence
of the narrowness of the road, this mode of
riding brought the horses of the three in absolute
contact. The opportunity was too gratefully
tempting
to Vernon, and his heart bounded with the
anxiety which he felt during the brief interval
between
the first and second signal of his allies.
That second signal was the
beagle-note
. With a
conviction that the robbers who attacked Wilson's
carriage, and those who escorted him belonged to
the same gang, Vernon had suggested the
employment
of this imitation sound, with the hope of
misleading
his guardians. The whistle which preceded
it, was simply meant to indicate to himself the
certainty
of the subsequent signal being given by his
friends. As had been anticipated, an echo from the
right hand of the prisoner threw back an answering
voice.
There's somebody's dog in the swamp, said one
of the rogues carelessly, prefacing with these words,
his own excellent imitation of the cry. Again, more
near and more distinct, came the note of Jamison,
who proved no unworthy beagle whether in voice
or limb. As if in sheer idleness of mood, did the
same outlaw again respond to it. The third signal
from the Alabamian, which immediately followed,
was delivered from a bush almost beside the party;
and at the same instant, the two constables drew up
their horses, setting each a hand on the rein of
Vernon's
,
to arrest his forward movement.
They naturally looked to a meeting with their
comrades; but were surprised in the next moment,
as Vernon, yielding his rein entirely, threw an arm
round the waist of each of his attendants, and by a
sudden exertion of all his strength, drew them
together
before him upon his steed, until their heads
clashed with a stunning concussion. Before they
could recover from the shock, draw knife or pistol,
or make the smallest effort, a stout hand from below
had relieved Vernon from his burdens; and the
self-appointed
officers of justice found themselves let
down with no gentle ministry upon the earth, which,
fortunately, being on the skirts of the swamp, and
sufficiently pliable, manifested no stubborn resistance
to the reception of their persons. The surprise was
as successful as it had been sudden; and while a
stout man bestrid each of the prisoners with a heavy
and bright bowie blade pointing down and
sometimes
painfully tickling their throats, Vernon, having
secured the three horses, proceeded to divest the
rogues of all their weapons. This done, under the
direction of Jamison, who had taken care to provide
the necessary plough-lines, he bound their arms
securely behind them, and thus fastened, they were
once more permitted to rise upon a level with their
captors.
A short horse is mighty soon curried, said
Jamison, when the business was finished. I know'd
all along, Varnon, that these here chaps hadn't any
perquission
in their guns, and it's now what we're to
do with 'em. That's the question. They're to be
lynched I reckon, of course; but whether to lynch
'em here where nobody can get any good from
seeing
it, or to lynch 'em at Lucchesa where it'll be
a warning to all rogues, and gamblers, and
abolitionists
,
that haven't the fear of God in their eyes,
and do large business with the devilthat's what I
aint yet detarmined about.
To lynching, altogether, Vernon absolutely
objected
;
but he did not content himself with uttering
moral objections only. With such a man as
Jamison
,
such scruples might not have been so forcible
as those which sprung from mere momentary policy.
We have not time for that, said he in a whisper,
and when out of hearing of the captives. Besides, to
go to Lucchesa with these in company, before we have
beaten up the whole gang and obtained the proper
evidence of their villainy, will be only to expose
ourselves to discovery, prosecution, and probably
punishment by the laws; not to speak of private
assassination from the hands of some of the
numerous
outlaws with whom the whole country seems
to be infested. To carry these fellows with us any
where, would be to encumber ourselves with a
burden
that would be troublesome and may be
dangerous
.
No! my counsel is that we bind them to trees
in the most secret places in the swampthere leave
them till we can muster a sufficient force to secure
them, and to pursue their comrades. We are now in
possession of one of their signs, and if we can keep
these fellows from communication with the rest, until
we can penetrate their hiding-places, we may
capture
a good many more. I have already told you
of friends on the other side of the river. We must
join ourselves to them as soon as possible. You will
set off to night. You know all that I can tell you
about our friend Rawlins. Horsey and myself,
meanwhile
,
will ride to Lucchesa, where I will see to some
business which I have with Mr. Wilson, while he
procures a horse and saddle for his wife. With him
I will join you to-morrow, and with Rawlins, who
I doubt not by this time has got a pretty strong
party together, we will try what we can to capture
the master spirit of the band. If we take him, we
need give ourselves but little trouble about the rest.
He is the chain that binds them togetherand
without
him, they fall apart without strength, success, or
object. We will rope these scoundrels to trees
where they cannot see or communicate with each
other, and lest they should employ our signals, it
will not be amiss to put a handkerchief in their
mouths.
A handkerchief indeed! cried Jamison,that
would be a mighty foolish waste, when there's so
much fine green moss to be had for the picking.
The economical views of Jamison prevailed, and
the mouths of the struggling prisoners were well
wadded with green moss in preference to silk
bandannas
.
They were roped to trees in deep and
dark recesses of the swamp; but it was not without
great reluctance, that Jamison was persuaded to
turn away, and forbear the use of a certain bunch
of hickories, armed with which, he had prepared
himself to requite the rogues for the offensive
rebuke
under which he had been compelled, after a
fashion, to submit in the presence of Mr. Justice
Nawls. Vernon saw that he was dissatisfied with
the forbearance of his friends towards the criminals,
which he thought as little due to their deserts, as to
the cause of justice. They all rode from the place
together to the high road, but the Alabamian was
very taciturn as they rode; his mind seemed to be
brooding over some yet undigested purposes. Their
parting was evidently hurried on the side of
Jamison
;
and when his two friends had gone from sight
on their way to Lucchesa, the matter that troubled
him, found expression in words aloud.
Grim! But I'd sooner sleep in the swamp
myself
,
than let them chaps off without a licking.
'Tain't every day that a rogue gets what he
deserves
,
and 'tain't every month that Dick Jamison
cuts a bunch of hickories to throw away. It would
be a most monstrous wasting of the wood, to cut a
dozen hickories for nothingbesides, it's a mighty
great resk to leave the fellows behind, any how:
'spose they get awaythen, where's the satisfaction?
No, no, that's not my notionI must write a name
on the backs of the critters, so that I may know 'em
again, when I see 'em. Then, if they get away,
'twon't be so bad; and one person, that I know of,
will be a mighty sight easier in his conscience. I
reckon, if I did'nt lick 'em, my horse would go
mighty rough over the road to-nightI know I
shouldn't sit well in the saddle, and my spirits would
be a cursed sight heavier than a fat parson's after a
bad collection-Sunday.
This soliloquy was made while the speaker took
his way back to the spot which he had just left.
We need not add, that he carried out in execution,
the sentiments and resolutions which it expressed.
The hickories were not wasted; and, according to
the usual ideas of border justice, in all parts of the
world, the rascals met with their deserts. Satisfied
with his administration of the border law, the
Alabamian
found the movement of his horse and
conscience
equally easy while he rode upon his way that
night. He sat as well in his saddle as ever, and a
heavy load, for the time being, was taken from his
heart.
CHAPTER XX.
Take him to ye,
And, sirrah, be an honest man; ye've reason;
I thank ye, worthy brother: Welcome child,
Mine own sweet child.
Beaumont and Fletcher
.
The
impatient Saxon, impatient for his revenge,
vainly looked out that night for the coming of his
followers, to whom Vernon had been given in
charge. His arrangements had been so made as to
put his plans, seemingly, beyond the reach of
disappointment
;
and, resolved effectually to arrest the
farther efforts of an individual, whose courage and
conduct gave him some reason for apprehension,
he had prepared himself and his accessories in the
swamp, for the summary and terrible punishment of
one, whom they considered a spy and had destined
to those cruel severities which, under their laws,
had been decreed for such an offender. The evils
which had followed the successful attempt of
Richard
Hurdis, had mortified the vanity of Saxonor
Clement Fosterand rendered him unforgiving.
From the moment when he became convinced that
Vernon was an enemy, he had solemnly sworn to
destroy
him. His plot for this purpose was a good one
his officers were truethe justice was his willing
creature; and, Mr. Augustus Mortimer and Major
Marcus Montmorenci, were, he well knew, the most
trustworthy witnesses that were ever yet suborned
to carry a crooked character straight through the
sessions. How then should he account for the
delay
of his agents in bringing their prisoner to
punishment
?
Should it be that dd actor, Jonesshould he
have spoiled the matter? Would you had put your
knife and bullet through his carcass as well as
through his clothes. I fear he will work us evil.
Such were his muttered doubts, at midnight, to
his wily companion, who could say little to relieve
them.
And this proud girl! She, too!but it cannot
be very long. She shall submit, if it be only to
save the life of her lover. I shall obtain my
conquest
over her, though, as a condition, I am
compelled
to forego my vengeance upon him.
But his life is forfeit to the law! said Jones.
I am the law! returned the other, haughtily.
Then, softening his tones, he addedbut, I am too
feverish, Jones, to be just or reasonable now.
Forgive
me if I speak hastily or harshly. Go you now,
and see if there be any tidings of these fellows.
Meanwhile, Richard Stillyards, the dwarf, was
already on his way to the upper ferry, as fast as he
could go; and Vernon had reached Lucchesa in
safety. His purpose in returning to Lucchesa was
to declare himself in private to William Maitland;
to reveal his whole connexion with Carter; to
unfold
the favourable terms which he was
commissioned
to grant, and, finally, to crown the work of
peace and good will, by offering himself in marriage
to Virginia, whose own consent, it has been already
seen, he was happy to secure at an early period.
But the misery of the father, and the deep feeling of
interest which he too had in the matter, which
VOL. II. 24
seemed almost to deprive the former of his reason,
struck the lover dumb:
One stupid moment motionless he stood;
And then his resolution returned to him as he
witnessed the old man's despair. The natural and
nobler feelings of old Maitland's heart recovered all
their strength at this moment of his greatest
privation
.
Virginia was the apple of his eyethe solace
of his bitter cupthe very light that relieved the
otherwise groping darkness which had environed
his affections. Bitterly did he now accuse himself
of neglect, of cruelty, of crimeof all things and all
thoughts evil,while, as the anguished words poured
from his lips, the big, burning tears rolled down his
cheeks, on which, the consciousness of evil thoughts
and deeds, had placed many a premature line and
wrinkle. The younger daughter, wild and
frightened
rather than grieved, as she beheld these
ebullitions
of a nature which had never shown itself to
her under such an aspect before, stood beside the
old man, with one hand round his neck and one
resting on his head. He himself sat upon the floor
in a state of utter abandonment.
Cheer up and rouse yourself, sir, exclaimed
Vernon, as he looked upon the melancholy
spectacle
,
with a sentiment of pity that became painful
rouse up, sir, I will give her back to you though I
perish.
Will you? Oh! will you, Mr. Vernon?God
bless you if you will:but I fearI fear you
cannot
.
She's goneI've looked for her every where.
It was I that left her for that accursed tavern, and
those thrice accursed cards. I am not worthy of
my childmy poor child. Oh! where can she be
nowin what dangerwhat villains. Oh! God,
keep me from
that
thoughtGod in mercy keep her
from
that
danger.
And the miserable father threw himself forward
upon the floorthe blood gushing from his nostrils,
while his hands tore the scattered white hairs from
his venerable head and strewed them around him.
The screams of the trembling child mingled with
his moans, making a discord which, while it filled
the ears of Vernon, did not now so much annoy
him. There were some evident fears, not so
evidently
expressed in the last speech of the father,
which made the blood recede from the heart of
Vernon, leaving a painful coldness and vacancy
behind
it. In what danger was Virginia now? What
villain held her in his embracesscorning her
prayers
,
her tears, her trembling entreatiesher wild
but feeble efforts at release? What brutal violence,
sickening to chaste ears, assailed her gasping
innocence
:
and none nigh to save by equal violence
from that worse violence that defied the imploring
service of every sweet, and soothing, and pure
human
affection? Vernon felt, as these dreadful doubts
and apprehensions rushed through his mind, that he
too could throw himself in utter abandonment upon
the ground and mingle his groans also with those
of the miserable father. But other feelings,
strengthened
by the blood-giving energies of youth, came to
his aid. A fiercer power rose up in his heart, and
with accents of recovered might, he repeated his
assurance to the old man, that he would rescue and
restore his daughter at the peril of his life. While
he made this assurance, the pitiable prostration of
the father struck him as not less discreditable to
manhood, than it was grateful to his paternal love.
Maitland was still a vigorous mannot too old for
exertionnot too feeble at such a time, to seek for
his child, and strike a desperate blow in her behalf.
Besides, men were wanting now to prosecute the
enterprise against the robbers in the Chitta Loosa,
with whom Vernon could not fail to connect the
outlaw by whom Virginia had been torn away from
her dwelling. Circumstances had sufficiently shown
the father that her absence arose from an
abduction
,
which the whole tenor of Virginia's life and
virtuous deportment conclusively convinced all
parties
,
must have been forcible. A sudden resolution
filled the mind of Vernon. He saw that no better
mode remained of arousing the father to his duty,
than by awakening other fears in his bosom. This
was, indeed, the fitting moment to declare to him
the full extent and powers of his own commission.
To ordinary minds it might have seemed cruel, while
the father so keenly suffered, to vex his spirit with the
terrors of discovery and punishment; but the more
correct philosophy of Vernon convinced him that
the prostration and infirmity of Maitland could
receive provocation and stimulant from no other
source.
Mr. Wilson, said he, risesend your
daughter
to her chamber for awhile, while I unfold to you
some business of great importance. I am the bearer
of other evil tidings which you have not yet heard,
but which, sooner or later, must reach your ears.
There can be no better season than the present.
The solemnity of these preliminaries had the effect
of commanding the attention of the criminal. The
daughter was sent from their presence, and the
father rose slowly to his chair, with eyes full of
a most painful anxiety. Vernon did not delay his
communication with any idle formulhumanity
forbade all such. It will be understood, however,
that he omitted nothing which might soften the
natural
severity of truth, and maintain for himself the
proper deportment of a gentleman, and one, too,
so closely allied by the tenderest promises to the
daughter of the person he addressed.
You are known to me, siryou are William
Maitland, late cashier of the  Bank.
The miserable old man shrieked in insuppressible
terror at the words, while his hands clasped and
covered his face. His daughter's fate was in an
instant forgotten in his own. The selfishness of his
nature preponderated in an instant.
Spare me, spare me, Mr. Vernon!for God's
sakefor my children's sakespare me! I am a
miserable old manspare my gray hairs; and I
will bless you for everthey will bless you. Spare
me!
Vernon took his hand kindly.
Be not alarmed, Mr. Maitlandthough I come
commissioned to recover this money from you, I
yet come as your friend, and from one who has
ever been your friend.
Who! who! exclaimed the wretched man,
with as much eagerness of hope in his face as it
had lately expressed of fear. But when the lips of
Vernon uttered the name of Carter, his
countenance
fellhe sunk back in his chair with a deep
groan, and again covered his face with his hands.
Do not doubt the friendship which has ever
served you, even when the noble person whom I
have mentioned has been suffering most from your
injustice. I know your story, and I know his. I
know how much you owe to his friendship, and
I know how ill you have repaid it. But I am not
sent to reproach you, and well I know, were he
himself present, his own reproaches would be
spared at such a moment as this. My mission
brings you safety, Mr. Maitland, though I come as
the messenger of justice. Hear me with patience,
then, while I communicate to you the benevolent
24*
designs of my friendyour friend, still, Mr.
Maitland
in
behalf of yourself and children.
This communication was soon delivered. The
reader is already familiar with its purport. We
need not repeat it here. As little necessary would
it seem to say, that it was listened to by the
undeserving
criminal with some such feelings as those of
the culprit under judicial sentence, suddenly relieved
by an unlooked for respite from the supreme
authority
while standing on the very precipice of
death. Vernon did not stop here, though the
frequent
groans and ejaculations of Maitland, now of
remorse and self-reproach, and now of gratitude
and exultation, subjected him to frequent
interruptions
.
He at once unveiled to the old man the
relation
in which he stood to his lovely but lost
daughter
.
Alas! for the long diseased heart, and the
pampered and prevailing sin which possessed it!
Even in that hour of his greatest privation, and pain,
and humiliationthat hour of his partial relief from
the fear of punishmentan hour distinguished alike
by the keen sorrows of the father at the loss of the
beloved child, and the abased feelings of the felon
who suddenly finds himself convicted before man,
without escape, and with his mouth choked with the
bitter dust of his own degradationin that very
hour the shape of his old sin once more stood up
triumphant and audacious as ever. The latter part
of Vernon's communication, which declared the
nature of the tie which now united his feelings and
interests with those of Virginia Maitland, suggested
to the miserable old man a new resource for his
crime; and he eagerly insinuated proposals to
Vernon
that, instead of restoring the vast amount of
moneys which he had purloined, and which he
admitted
himself still to have in great part in his own
possession, to the rightful owners, they should retain
it among themselves, and, by a timely and far
retreat
,
secure themselves and it from the grasp of all
pursuers. The infatuated gambler, whose moral
sense, by a tendency as certain as death, had gone
down, step by step, with rapid but self-unnoted
transitions, to the lowest sink of depravation,
vainly imagined that, to a lover, and one so young,
the charms of a mistress, and the splendid bribe
which formed her dowry, must prove irresistible
temptations. Vernon shrank back with an apparent
shudder from the grasp which the eager fingers of
Maitland had taken upon his arm; while his eye
regarded
the stolid criminal with an expression quite
as full of sorrow as of scorn.
Mr. Maitland, for your daughter's sake, I
implore
you to suffer me to respect her father if I can.
Let me hear no more on this subject. I will strive,
for my own sake, to forget this most humiliating
offeran offer no less insulting to me than it is
degrading
to yourself. You have heard me state
what were Mr. Carter's propositions. You perceive
that he is willing to providethat he pledges
himself
to provide amplyfor your children, on the
restoration
of the sums in your possession.
Circumstances
have favoured you, and have spared me the
necessity of proceeding harshly. I count myself as
singularly fortunate as yourself in being the
messenger
of such benevolent intentions on the part of
one upon whom you have no claims of kindness.
Carter, indeed, is a ruined man. Having carried
out his designs, and secured your children in the
sums specified, he will have no more left him than
will barely suffice to make his friend Gamage
secure
against all losses. Let me know at once what
is your resolution; for we have little time to lose.
The safety of one who is now no less dear to me
than to you, requires our instant pursuit.
Doubly humbled, though, perhaps, not yet
contrite
,
Maitland acceded to all the requisitions of the
youth, and, with a hurried consent, he would have
dismissed the subject, while he proceeded to bustle
forward to command the horses. But Vernon was
one of those men who do their work thoroughly.
Mr. Maitland, said he, this matter must be
settled to-night, and the money delivered. I have
my credentials ready, and will prepare your
guarantee
,
while you are getting things in readiness. If
you are resolved to go with me in pursuit of
Virginia
,
it will be your better course to order your
barouche, and take Julia with us. The night is
pleasant, and she can be wrapped up carefully. It
will be better than to leave her here, in the care of
servants only, and in a place which has already
proved itself to be so very insecure. You can
have no reason to dread returning now, and at Mr.
Badger's she will be in perfect safety, while we
traverse the swamp in search of her sister. I know
no better course either for safety or propriety.
Briefly, Vernon had his own way in all respects.
His firmness, mingled with that becoming deference
of manner which youth always owes to age, even
when it is criminal and debased, cowed the spirit
and commanded the respect of Maitland. The
money was restored, and in one hour more the
cottage
was deserted. The poor Julia, trembling and
wondering, confused at all things, and almost totally
inapprehensive of any, was wrapped away in the
barouche, with her father beside her, sad, ashamed,
and silent; while Vernon, mounted on horseback,
and once more armed, after a long interval, with
the weapons of which the sturdy Alabamian had
taken such excellent charge during his arrest and
sicknesswith spirits unconsciously heightened by
the sense of liberty and strengthrode alongside,
and strove to cheer the miserable father and the
innocent and unconscious child. Though his
anxieties
and apprehensions were in no respects lessened
in regard to the lost Virginia, yet the conviction
that he was now able to strike in her behalf, made
him sanguine with hope, and rendered him elastic
in movement. He suffered no unnecessary delays
to restrain his progress, and by his voice and
example
,
he urged the driver of the vehicle to a
corresponding
action with his own sinewy steed.
The reader, if he be not more dull
than the fat weed
That hugs itself at ease at Lethe's wharf,
will be pleased to spare us some unnecessary
narration
,
and readily imagine a few things in our story
which are quite as easy to conceive as to write.
He will take it for granted that the progress of our
night travellers was uninterruptedand that a
union was safely effected the next morning at a
tolerably early hour between themselves and their
friends Jamison and Horsey. He will farther learn
that, shortly after the meeting of these with
Vernon
,
they were joined by Walter Rawlins and
Master Edward Mabry. The eyes of the latter,
which the adroit fists of Horsey had sealed up for
a season, were now in tolerably good condition
they wore less of the plethoric form and rainbow
aspect, than they did a week past; but, though
restored
,
they did not seem to regard the actor with
any more favour than before. Some mutual efforts
were made by Rawlins and Vernon to bring the
parties to friendly offices; but they were partly
ineffectual
.
Still, there was no open show of hostility
between them. Horsey, certainly, preserved none.
He was a generous fellow at heart; and would have
scorned to have fostered any feeling of malice at an
enemy. Besides, he had been successful, and as those
always laugh who win, his good humour was in no
wise diminished, because the hand which he offered
with frankness to his foe was taken with reluctance.
He disarmed the active rancour of Mabry, by making
some concessionswithout which it might have been
that the operations of the party would have been
exposed
to conflicting feelings and divided counsels
which he was neither bound by courtesy nor
expected
by his opponent to make. As for Rawlins, his
delight at seeing Vernon was excruciating. He
hugged him to his breast with what seemed to the
latter quite a superfluous degree of affection, and in
the same breath, though in a whisper, told him that
Rachel had at length yielded to his persuasions, and
had consented to name the day. Another matter of
far more gratifying import to Vernon at this
moment
,
was the information which he received of a
new ally in the person of Stillyards, the dwarf.
That elegant young person, elated with the boon
with which Florence Marbois had consented to
reward his industry in promoting her purposes of
vengeance, had made his appearance at the door of
Rawlins, a little after daylight that very morning;
and his communications had quickened the
preparations
of the latter for the pursuit of that enterprise
to which the counsels of Vernon had before impelled
him. He had not been idle, it may be said here,
during the interval which had passed. He had
secured
the co-operation of nearly twenty menall
stout fellowsgood men and truewhom the blast
of a horn would bring together in half an hour,
from a circuit of five miles. The revelations of
Stillyards had much more effect upon Vernon than
they could possibly have had upon Rawlins. The
abduction of Virginia Maitland was now known
with certainty; and it was with no less certainty
that he knew where she was hidden by Saxon. It
was no small addition to his desire for immediate
enterprise, when he found that her ravisher, and the
consummate chief of the Beagles of the Border,
were one and the same person. These discoveries
he kept from the father. He had come to the
conclusion
that William Maitland could be of little
service
in the adventureand he counselled him to
proceed at once with Julia to the security of Zion's
Hill. He particularly cautioned him against
suffering
his own near neighbourhood to be known to the
venerable and dogmatical head of the establishment;
still less to suffer it to be suspected that any
enterprise
was on foot, by which to rout the outlaws. To
render the old man more cautious in this and every
other respect, the doubtful character of young
Badger was revealed to him, and the danger fully
shown of any premature development of a project
which could only be successful through perfect
secrecy. Having sent the unhappy and criminal
father upon his way, Vernon proceeded to the
examination
of Stillyards, whom Rawlins had kept
under close watch in the neighbouring wood.
CHAPTER XXI.
She scorn'd us strangely,
All we could do, or durst do; threatened us
With such a noble anger, and so governed
With such a fiery spirit.
Bonduca
.
Though
naturally impatient to commence the
war against his enemies and rescue the fair
Virginia
from her abductors, Vernon was too thoughtful
and deliberate of character to defeat his own objects
by any premature or precipitate attempts. He
retired
as soon as possible into the cover of the forests
and from sight of any but his own comrades, after
sending Maitland on his way to Zion's Hill. Here
he closely examined the dwarf Stillyards; and this
done, he despatched Jamison with two others for
the purpose of bringing in, and more effectually
securing the persons of the two rogues, whom we
left fastened in the swamp the night before. There
were two other rogues to be secured of whose
neighbourhood he was now first informed by the
dwarf. These were fellows, who, in the Beagle
dialect, went by the significant name of smellers.
They were, in fact, advanced sentinels, the keepers
of outposts, watching the highways leading to the
swamp fastnesses, and conveying the earliest tidings
of the approach of any uncongenial or hostile
influences
.
To divert these watchers from their posts,
Stillyards, whom they knew, was immediately sent
forward, as if with instructions from their captain.
Being in possession of all the first signs of the band,
there could be little or no difficulty in deceiving
them by means of his agency; and not altogether
prepared to rely wholly upon a rogue, even in the
hour of his first conversion, Vernon sent Rawlins,
secretly, with two othersall excellent woodmento
follow the dwarf, and correct his treachery, should
he happen to prove faithless to his trust. But his
precautions, though proper, proved unnecessary.
Stillyards was now the sworn enemy of the outlaw
chief on his own account, even if he were not bound
as the agent of Florence Marbois. The humiliating
indignity to which his ears had been subjected by
the fingers of Saxon had turned all the sweet milk
of his nature into gall and bitterness; and he was
now prepared, without fee or reward, to prove to
his superior the extent of that malignity, which, in
the base spirit, never forgives a wrong, and in the
weakly, vain heart never forgets a slight. The wish
to prove his capacity for vengeance, to him who was
to be the object of it, had kept the deformed
absolutely
sleepless; and it was with the keenest and
most suspicious impatience that he heard the
resolution
of Vernon to make no movement, until night,
against the outlaws of Cane Castle. This resolution
was productive of surprise to other minds than his.
Rawlins himself wondered, that, with a body of stout,
fearless men, which, at mid-day, exceeded in
numbers
the entire force of the beagles known to be
then within their camp, he should forbear instantly
proceeding towards their prey. But the
determination
of the leader was a judicious one; and when
explained to the few comrades whom he trusted
VOL. II. 25
with his plan, its evident policy overcame all their
scruples and disarmed their doubts.
It was not till the evening shadows had fallen that
their movements were begun. Before this time,
however, the party which had been despatched for
the two prisoners had returned with their charge;
while, with equal success, the dwarf Stillyards, had
beguiled the Smellers from their station into the
very hands of the attacking party. Before they
knew where they were, they encountered a dozen
armed men in front, while the three who had been
despatched to follow Stillyards, seasonably arriving
behind, cut off all chance of retreat. The four were
despatched under an equal party towards Zion's
Hill, in time to reach it, a few hours after dark. They
conveyed a request from Vernon to the venerable
elder of that establishment, that they might be
suffered
to remain under guard at his retreat, until the
return of the party the next day. Having several
miles the start of the Methodist, it was no longer a
cause of fear that their plans might be defeated
either by the perverse self-esteem and dogmatism
of the father, or the treachery of the son; of whom,
by the way, Rawlins had meanwhile gathered such
knowledge from Rachel Morrison, as confirmed all
his previous suspicions.
These minor matters attended to, Vernon set his
party in motion as soon as the darkness was
sufficient
to conceal their movements. But instead of
taking his way down, he advanced up the river,
and in a course directly opposite to that where
Cane Castle lay. Two miles above the place where
he had been concealed through the day, was the
ferry which he had that morning crossed, and while
crossing, had scanned curiously, yet in silence, the
place where the boat was fastened, and as much of
the scene and circumstances around him as he
deemed effectual to his purposes. Having reached
the neighbourhood, he ordered his party to halt in
the woods, while, alighting from their horses,
Rawlins
,
Jamison, and himself, went forward to
reconnoitre
.
Finding the coast clear, they loosened the
ferry-boat from its fasts. This boata huge flat,
suited to the transportation of wagons of the largest
dimensions across the riversoon received the party
without their horses. These were sent to await
them, under the charge of a couple of the troop, to
a spot, on the same side of the river seven miles
below
,
which was described to be directly opposite to
that where the outlaws held their abode. Under
the guidance of Rawlins, who knew the river, and
Stillyards, to whom the upper shore was sufficiently
familiar, the flat was suffered noiselessly to fall
down with the current; the only toil of the party
being to push her off when she touched the shore,
and keep her free from the snags and sawyers
a task not so easy to execute in the
imperfect
starlight, which guided them in their
progress
.
But they experienced fewer difficulties
than Vernon had anticipated, and arrived at the
spot already known to the reader by the fishing
adventure
of Horsey, in perfect secrecy and silence.
The flat was now run up, and suffered to rest upon
the oozy plane which skirted the river and lay
between
it and Cane Castle; and through this bog,
the most toilsome and unpleasant part of their
journey, the little troop were compelled to scramble
the silence imposed upon Horsey at this juncture,
being the worst portion of the business to that
worthy amateur. The restraint he found
excessively
irksome, at a moment and in a place, which
reminded him of some of his strangest experience,
and of events which had been sufficiently exciting
to himself to make him sure of the dramatic effect
which they must produce in the minds and
estimation
of all others. It did not alter the case very
materially that he had discoursed over his
experience
to several of his present comrades more
than once already. All day he had exercised his
tongue in the reminiscences, always pleasant when
past, of peril and annoyance: still, some had not
heardand then, the minuti!
It is in the little touches, my dear fellow, he
said to Vernon, in a whisperthe nice and
seemingly
unimportant features of a subject, that the
whole character speaks out. A look, a nod, a wink,
or the slightest gesture in the proper place, makes
all the difference in the worldmakes eloquent the
commonest passages of the poet, which the ordinary
reader would slur over in impatience.
Be a man now, not an actor, Horsey. Every
thing in season, was the stern response of Vernon,
in a like whisper. He is neither man nor actor
who cannot keep his tongue, when the part actually
calls for silence.
You're right in that, by the ghost of Solomon,
Harry Monmouth; and as the actor contented
himself with this reply, he sunk back, murmuring
from one of his favourites
This is no world
To play with mammets, and to tilt with lips:
We must have bloody noses, and crack'd crowns,
And pass them current too;
A reflection, we may add, that only distressed him
as he thought how awkward he should look,
appearing
a second time, with a bloody nose before Mary
Stinson, otherwise Mrs. Horsey. He was beguiled
from his annoyances, however, by finding that the
next person at his side was Master Edward Mabry,
his late rival. This discovery led him to some
vague musings about coincidences, from which he
was only aroused by the summons, which sent him
forward with three others, for the capture of his
quondam companion, Jones; a summons which
enlivened
and gratified him greatly, as it seemed to
imply some retributive agency in Providence, which
thus left open the door to an atonement for all the
indignities of Mr. Aristophanes Bull, and the ruin of
his Hamlet. He followed Rawlins, to whom
Stillyards
had given particular directions for finding the
sleeping-place of that sturdy outlaw; while five
others, equally well instructed, were commissioned
for the capture of the rest of the gang. Vernon,
reserving to himself the dwarf Stillyards, only, took
his way with a cautious step, but a bounding heart,
towards the squatter's hovel, where he had been
told by his companion that the maiden was
imprisoned
.
His command to the rest of his party was,
that the followers of Saxon should be surprised and
captured;a more sudden, if not more severe doom
he purposed for the outlaw himself. For him the
sudden shot or stroke was designed, as from him
was anticipated the most reckless and resolute
resistance
.
Meanwhile, the commotion at Zion's Hill, inspired
by the astounding intelligence brought by those who
escorted the captured outlaws, was such as might
have been expected from the vexed self-esteem of
the venerable veteran. The attempt of Vernon and
Rawlins to effect so important a business without
his agency, was a source of equal surprise and
indignation
.
That Rawlins should be so
presumptuous
,
was monstrous in the extreme; and what made
it seem more so, was the fact, that in all his schemes
and counsels, submitted from time to time to the
latter, after the departure of Vernon, it seemed to
the dictatorial elder, that the woodman was
uncommonly
25*
obtuse and wretchedly deficient in
honourable
enterprise. His son, Gideon, on the contrary,
by the boldness of his expressions, and the warmth
of valour which he displayed whenever the capture
of the Beagles was the subject, had doubtless
commended himself to the old man's heart. He
even began to think, after making due comparisons
between the two on this subject, that it would be
only a legitimate right which he had as a guardian
of Rachel Morrison, and a becoming exercise of his
wisdom, to urge his wishes upon her that she should
marry a youth of so much more promise, and
discard
one of whom so few expectations could be
formed. He had forborne any attempt hitherto, to
bias her affections; but to one who assumed to
himself
so large a portion of the allotted sagacity of
mankind, it began to seem perfectly proper and
praiseworthy to employ it in his own way, for the
use of one, who still toiled in a sort of moral
darkness
and among the shadows of ignorance. His
first attempts at this sort of jurisdiction, were,
however
,
moderate enough. He began by reproaches of
Rawlins for his indirection and infirmity of
purpose
,
and a recommendation, only implied,
however
,
of the worthy and valiant Gideon.
What Walter Rawlins can mean, he remarked
to Rachel one morning shortly after the woodman
had taken his departure, by keeping his hands from
the good work, I do not understand. Surely he
lacks not heart,he hath courage for strife. There
hath been no shrinking hitherto, on his part, in the
hour of danger.
He has courage, believe me, was the reply of
Rachel, with the natural and unrestrained warmth
of one who loves without doubt or qualification.
There is no man of more courage on the river.
It would please me to think so, Rachelnay, I
have thought so, but a short while since; yet, to say
truth, I have my misgivings. Why is he backward
to stir up the people when I bid him? Why, when
the occasion is so pressingwhen evil men gather
with deadly weapons in their hands, and deadly
malice
in their hearts, as I may say it, around the holy
places of the Lord; and the innocent traveller is
waylaid for his spoil; and they fear not to smite the
unoffending, and the unprepared, and the innocent
why doth he keep himself aloof at such a time
how may he justify himself for such slackness of
spirit? Were he feeble of limb, and slight of
person
,
it were, perhaps, to be forgiven him that he is
backward; but he hath a strength beyond that of
ordinary men, and with a fitting strength of heart,
there would seem to be no justification for this
lukewarmness. Truly, Rachel, it humbleth me
muchthis falling off in our friend.
There is no falling off, dear uncle, believe me.
I will answer for Walter, that when the fitting time
shall arrive, he will be ready, and among the first.
When the fitting time shall arrive! was the
exclamation of the elder. Have I not said to thee
and to him, already, that now is the time and the
season? Now! now! Can there be a better hour
than the first for the good performances of a man,
and those which are so needful for human safety?
He hath heard my thought more than once already,
in behalf of this necessity.
But, if he thinks otherwise! was the
imprudent
reply of the maidenher anxiety for the
justification
of her lover, making her forgetful of the
mortal stab which such a suggestion must give to
the old gentleman's conceit of heart. His hands
and eyes were uplifted in unmitigated astonishment.
Ha! It is so, then, even as I expected. He hath
better assurances of wisdom and the truth than older
mennay, than all men around; for all men seem
to hold it needful that the outlaw should be arrested,
out of hand, in his deeds of evil. He thinks
otherwise
,
doth he? He will tell us when it is the fitting
season, will he? He is good and wise, but it is
unfortunate
that we must do without him. We must
content ourselves with the strength we have, and
only pray to the Lord that it may be equal to the
work before usthat we may go forward without
faintness of heart or slackness of spirit, and that
success may be vouchsafed to us, not because of the
strength which we have, but the will for the
performance
.
Oh, my uncle, speak not thus harshlythink not
thus unkindly of Walter; responded the maiden,
now fully awake to her indiscretion as she listened
to this outpouring of the morbid vanity of age.
You do Walter injustice; I'm sure you do; and
he'll be ready to go with the rest, as soon as ever
they're ready. He may think it too soon, but
I'm sure, when you once set the example, and
name the day, he'll be among the first to turn out
at your summons.
A reply no less bitter than the former answered
this additional speech of Rachel; and was followed
up by a sneering comment of Master Gideon
Badger, who made his appearance while the
controversy
was in progress. He muttered some
general
remark about the not unfrequent incompetency
of the soul to the frame which enclosed it; and
concluded with assuring his father that mere bulk
or even numbers were not so necessary as spirit
and resolution for the adventure which they had in
view.
And the sanction of God, my son, said the
now approving father.
The eye of Rachel Morrison turned upon the
hypocritical Gideon, with an expression of fiery scorn
which he shrunk to encounter. Her heart swelled
within her with a feeling of indignant resistance as
she replied, addressing herself only to the son
I can answer equally for the spirit and frame of
Walter Rawlins, Gideon Badger, and will warn you
in season how you provoke either.
Rachel Morrison! exclaimed the old man
sternlywould you threaten Gideon with the
violence
of a stranger?
A stranger, uncleWalter Rawlins a stranger!
Has it then come to this?But if he is a stranger
to you, sir, as indeed he seems to be, from the
manner
in which you speak and think of him, he is yet
no stranger to me. I can answer equally for his
strength and courage. As for threatening Gideon
with them, I had no such thoughtbut I thought it
prudent to warn him against offending either.
Walter
is patient enough, but he is young, and he is
human
;
and when human passions are treated with
scorn, they are very apt to rise in resentment. I
respect the courage of Walter sufficiently to make
me think it would not be safe for Gideon to doubt
it in his hearing.
In a good cause, and with God's blessing, said
the devout young man, I have little fear of him or
of any other person.
And with such principles, Gideon, my son, you
need have no fear. The gates of hell shall not
prevail
against him who goes forth armed by God's
favour, and in the prosecution of the just war of
truth. It is even such a war as this, which Walter
Rawlins thinks it not yet a seasonable time to begin;
but, as you have already said, we need not numbers
in a righteous cause. God will provideGod will
strengthenGod will see that numbers even shall
not be wanting, in the hour when the banner is to be
raised and the blows are to be struck; and if I have
a sorrow because of the absence of Walter Rawlins
from this conflict, it is because of his own great loss
therefrom.
He will not be absent! exclaimed Rachel
Morrison
I
know he will go in search of these
robbers
,
when the time comes, so far ahead of some
others, that even their eyes will not dare to follow
him.
This sarcasm was felt by Gideon, but passed the
old man without attracting his notice; an escape
which no doubt saved the damsel a lecture on
presumption
of heart, and pride of opinion, and some
dozen more of the vital sins of ignorance and
presumption
.
The arrival of the captured outlaws, and the
message
from Rawlinsevents which took place only
two days after this dialoguewhile they completely
justified the warm confidence of the maiden in the
manhood of her lover, as completely confounded
the stern old Methodist, and baffled all his estimates
of character. Not that he thought any better of
Walter Rawlins than before. If forced to believe
him brave and ready now, he was at least
thoroughly
vexed with the audacity that dared to
undertake a business so important without his
cooperation
,
Naynot only without his co-operation,
but actually, with a studious reservation from him of
a task in which his own threatened performances
were to be the most conspicuous of all human
adventures
.
His self-complacency did not permit him
to imagine, for a single instant, the true reason why
he should be kept from the knowledge of a scheme,
the object of which he had as sincerely and
notoriously
at heart, as any body else; and it would
have been very difficult to persuade himthe fact is
not easy of beliefthat a dogmatical old man is of
all others the greatest obstacle to the progress of
any business, where young men are to be the
performers
.
That Badger would have rejected every
plan but his own, for the capture of the robbers,
and spoiled any that might be undertaken, the
shrewd sense of Vernon perceived in the first hour
of their acquaintance; and the doubts which were
entertained of the fidelity of the son, naturally
combined
to strengthen his objections to any
participation
of the father in the business. His views of the
subject have been already given to the reader.
The exultation of Rachel Morrison may be
imagined, when these proofs of the courage of her
Walter were producedan exultation which spoke
in tearful eyes, and a trembling and bounding heart.
Old Badger, as one of the quorum, and one learned
in the lawin all lawsclothed in official authority,
and no less delighted with, than conscious of, the
the power which it conferred, washowever angry
with the captorsnot unwilling to take into custody
the captive outlaws. He secured them under good
locks and keys, having first taken the precaution,
with the assistance of the detachment under whose
guard they came, of roping them to some very
heavy articles of furniture. The two
soi disant
constables were bound, with upward-looking eyes,
on the flat of their backs,
tte--tte
, to a dresser of
prolonged dimensions, but not so long, as, when the
rogues were stretched upon it, to admit of a
support
to their legs, which were, in consequence,
suffered
to dangle from it, only in partial possession of
their wonted liberty. They could kick the wall or
each other, at either end of the board, but to these
limited exercises they were unequivocally restrained.
If the other two were not equally well cared for, it
was their misfortunethey were certainly equally
well fastened. It needs not that we should describe
the particular privileges of their situation. Two of
the guard were reserved to keep watch over them
until the proper officers of the law could be got in
requisition, while the other two were dismissed, at
their own request, that they might rejoin the
attacking
party that night, and before the descent was
made upon the camp of the outlaws.
After dismissing them, which he did in no very
ceremonious or friendly manner, old Badger was
suddenly seized with the conviction that he should
have gone himself. His
amour propre
was interested
to lead in an expedition for which his past
acquaintance
with the wars, and his present connexion with
the peace
, seemed equally to constitute a peculiar
justification of his claim. Besides, had he not been
beating up recruits for this very expedition? Were
not some of them in the neighbourhoodcould they
not be easily mustered? There was Gideon and
himselfJoe Tompkins, the hired ploughboy,
Nicodemus
Root, the schoolmaster, who, though a
Yankee
,
was able to ride and shoot, and had done
execution
more than once at pigeon-distance. A timely
use of the six or seven hours remaining between
that and daylight, would enable him easily to
muster
up some half a score; and with these the
veteran
was not unwilling, in a fair day, and after due
preliminaries of prayer and fasting, to face all the
outlaws between the Alabama and Arkansas. From
the guard that brought in the prisoners, he had been
led to believe that the party of Vernon would not
commence the march before dawn; and as he had
no thought of the use which might be made of the
ferry-boat in such an expedition, he took it for
granted, that hard riding would bring him to the
post of danger in season for all its honours. This
new course of thought led to instant preparations,
which need to be adverted to only. They do not
affect our expedition at this moment.
But when his plans had to be carried out, the
venerable elder discovered that one of his chief
agents was reported missing. This was his own
son, the worthy Gideon, who was no less
confounded
than his father at the developments of the
night. If the old man was vexed and mortified,
Gideon was terrified. The danger was at his very
door. The rascals who were taken, knew him as a
confederate, and in the very presence of the old man
exhibited those secret signs of intelligence which
made the profligate youth's heart quake within him,
though he sufficiently preserved his equilibrium to
return them. The keen eyes of Rachel Morrison
beheld his consternation, and her piercing and
suspicious
glance did not fail to perceive that there was
some communion even then going on between the
parties. Gideon, with every additional moment of
reflection, fancied the danger to be increasing. He
knew that the outlaws looked to him for assistance;
nay, looked to him to liberate them;and also
remembered
some of the painful conditions which
were coupled with his association with the Beagles.
He was sworn to convey the tidings of danger to
his comrades in the swamp. Their arrest almost
necessarily led to his own. The discovery of their
secrets involved his safety; and what security could
he have against the revelations of frightened rogues
at the foot of the gallows? He was divided
between
conflicting fears and desires. It was
important
to rescue the outlaws already in custody
it was equally, if not more important, to counsel
those in the swamp of their approaching danger.
A few moments' reflection determined him to address
himself exclusively to the latter object. The danger
VOL. II. 26
of the prisoners was not immediate. They were yet
to be committed for trial, and a considerable stretch
of time lay between the present and the period
assigned
for the County Court Sessions. If the beagles
in the swamp continued free, it would be no very
difficult
matter to rescue the prisoners at some more
favourable moment; and the only evil would be their
temporary detention in confinement. He was well
assured that such hardy rogues would never make
their confessions a moment sooner than was
necessary
.
That the beagles in the swamp were
prepared
for their enemies was very probable, and yet
a promptness, spirit, and vigilance, such as had
already been shown by the assailing party, rendered
important every measure of precaution, and
demanded
the instant activity of every member of the
fraternity. Vernon and Rawlins were obviously
men to be feared, and the reader has already seen
that Gideon Badger was one of those men who are
soonest to despair their charm. He wanted
the natural hue of courage, and his fears on the
present occasion, even exaggerated the danger,
pressing as it really was. To give a sign to the
outlaws in custody, significant of his resolution to
serve them, and to slip from the apartment
unobserved
,
even before his father had yet dismissed the
two men of Rawlins's party who had brought in the
prisoners, were the first steps of Gideon after he had
concluded upon his course. The venerable
Methodist
,
with eyes shut and hands uplifted, was too
busy delivering a searching sermon to the prisoners
and their captors, alike, to observe the movements of
the son. But they were seen by the keen eyes of
the damsel, who already knew enough of the truth
to comprehend the condition of Gideon's mind, and
to anticipate his probable course. She followed him
silently from the apartment, and traced his steps to
the foot of the garden. She came up with him as
he was about to cross the fence, and called him
instantly
by name.
Gideon! Gideon Badger!
How shrunk his heart in terror at the soundthe
sound of his own name uttered by the lips of a
woman
!
But at that moment he knew not whose lips
uttered it, and it was a sound of terror. His
apprehensions
had rendered his senses dull to discriminate,
however acute in the appreciation of all sights and
accents. The summons seemed full of terror, and
it was not till she approached and he turned full upon
her that he felt relieved.
Gideon, she said, go not if you would be safe.
I warn you, stay where you areyou are in danger
if you leave Zion's Hill.
In danger, Rachelin danger, my pretty
cousin
!
he replied, with some show of recovered
impudence
,
if not courage, in his mannerwhy,
what should be the danger that I must apprehend,
unless it be that to which I have been so long
exposed
?
My danger is from you, Rachelyou
only.
He would have taken her hand as he spoke, with
an air of excessive familiarity, but she repulsed him
and drew back at his approach, with a manner, the
evident aversion of which brought a burning flush
upon his cheek.
This is no time, she said coldly, for these
follies
;
and least of all is it a season for you to indulge
in them. Hear me, GideonI am in possession of
your secretsI can guess where, even now, you
would bend your steps. You go to warn the
robbers
in the swamp of the danger that awaits them.
Ha! It was all he spoke, and his teeth almost
chattered in the utterance.
Yesit is known to methe dreadful tie that
binds you to these miserable men. I have heard
you in speech with their leader, and others of the
band. They are in dangeryou cannot show them
this, without involving yourself in their danger, and
it is beyond your power to save them. Stay where
you areor, if you leave Zion's Hill, let me
counsel
you to take a course far different from that you
intend to-night. Fly to the eastwardI will keep
your secret, and do my best to get the means for
you from my uncle.
Rachel, you must really care for me. This
friendly revelation,this pursuit of methis interest
in my fortunesthis care for my safety, sufficiently
prove it. Be mine, dear Rachel, and I will do as
you counselI will fly from this confederacyI
will go with you where you please.
This is only trifling, Gideonyou should know
me better. I have already told you that I am
pledged to another.
But you do not love himyou cannotnay,
can I doubt your feeling of preference for me after
this proof. It is midnightthe darkness of the night
and forest are around usyet you seek me to
counsel
me against danger; you
God help you to wiser thoughts, Gideon. Is it
not enough that you are the only child of that uncle
who has been a father to me? Is this not sufficient
reason why I should seek to keep you from danger,
and him from misery?
I must believe there is yet another and a better
reason. I am sure, Rachel, that we can be happy
together.
Never! never! she exclaimed, with impetuous
energy, as, provoked by the insolent
self-complaisance
of his tone and manner, she wrested from him
the hand which he had partially taken in his grasp.
Flatter yourself with no such idle fancies,
Gideon
Badger. Happiness with you is impossible.
Sooner shall the heavy sod lie upon my bosom, and
I not feel it, than I yield myself up to the hope or to
the chance of finding happiness in any closer
connexion
with you than now. Even now, I pain to look
upon you as I must daily, and see you as I do, and
know you as you are!
Rachel Morrison, you have determined your
own fate. You know too much for your safety and
for mine. My security henceforward must be in
securing you. You have been at some pains to pry
into my secretsto follow me here and there, and
become a party to those concerns in which you
were required to take no part. This proves that
you have sufficient interest in my fortunes to justify
me in forcing a portion of them upon you. You are
rightI am about to join the beagles in the swamp.
It is useless now to deny to you that I am one of
them. You must go with me. You must be mine
from this instant. Your own lips have sealed your
doom. Your man, Rawlins, is not here to save
you now.
He advanced upon her as he spoke. She
retreated
a pace and spoke with tones of coolness and
deliberationtones which trembled only from the
aroused energies of her spirit.
You are mistaken, Gideon Badger. I am
prepared
for this. It is you that have sealed your doom,
or will seal it, if you advance another step towards
me. If the man, Walter Rawlinshe is a man,
Gideon Badger!if he be not here to save me, he
has left me that with which I shall save myself.
One of his pistols is now in my handloaded by
him and left at my requestwith a fearful conviction
that it might be necessary at some such moment as
the present. Your threats have thus prepared me;
I have learned the use of the weapon, and as I hope
26*
still to maintain the whiteness of my soul to the last
I am resolved to use it against yourself, sooner than
suffer you to sully the purity of mine. You know
me well enough, Gideon Badger, to know that I
will as solemnly execute the resolution which I have
so solemnly made! Now, approach me with
violence
,
if you dare.
CHAPTER XXII.
Such a life,
Methinks, had metal in it to survive
An age of men.
George Chapman
.
The
solemn accents, the deliberate, resolved tone
of the maiden, not less than the energetic language
which she used, would have impressed a much
bolder person than Gideon Badger with the danger
of trifling with such a spirit. It was evident that
all was serious and composed earnestness in her
mind; and her words derived no emphasis, or very
little, from the exhibition of the pistol, and the click
of the lock as it distinctly sounded under her fingers.
To the dastard soul of Gideon Badger it struck a
sentiment of fear which at once disarmed him of
his insolence and arrested his approach. But a
moment
before he had persuaded himself that he should
be able to carry her in safety to the swamp. He
had no sort of doubt that the beagles would escape
the pursuit of Rawlins' party, even if they remained
uncounselled by himself; for, well apprised of the
numberless ramifications and resources of the
fraternity
,
he did not fear but they would be advised
of the approach of the enemy by at least a dozen
out-sentries. How easy to find shelter with them
for Rachel Morrison; and there, secure from
pursuit
,
and having her entirely in his power and at
his mercy, what should hinder the consummation of
any, even of his worst purposes? Such was the
precious
scheme which his mind conceived from the
first moment that night when Rachel appeared upon
the scene. Such was the scheme which her
masculine
resolution and her foresight so easily defeated.
Gideon Badger was not calculated to be a
magnificent
villain. He was a petty rascal only. In a city
like New York he would have made an excellent
auction-dealerone of those cunning gentry, that
sell baubles by the lot, and bluster when you refuse
to keep your hasty purchases. Still, base as was
his nature, he felt the meanness of his present
position
.
Incapable of pressing his villany to the
utmost
,
he would have ascribed his abortive attempt
to merriment only. With a laugh, which did not
altogether disguise the tremulous tone of his voice,
he said:
Why, Rachel, you seem to think that I was
seriousat least you are grown serious yourself.
And so you actually go armed? That, of all things,
is the strangest! Why should you go armed? What
would you do with a loaded pistol, I should like to
know?
Use it for my protection, Gideon, if I found
any one seriously bent to assail me, was the cool
reply.
But you could not have supposed that I would
do such a thing, Rachel!
I doindeed, I know that you would if you
dared. It is well for both of us, Gideon, that you
are not quite so resolute as you are wicked.
You speak plainly, Rachel, was the hoarse
reply.
It is best, answered the maiden; it is for
your safety that I have spoken thus plainly. Hear
me, Gideon, while I speak more plainly yet. To
save you from a great peril, I have ventured into
these woods at this hour of the night, in spite of the
fears and scruples which are so natural to my
sex
And of which your own share seems
unaccountably
small, was the sneering interruption of
her companion.
That is as you think, was the composed reply.
Small or great, they were sufficient to have kept
me back from this interview, but that I was resolved
to add one more effort to those I have already made,
to save you from the dangers into which you are yet
resolved to fall.
You are very kindvery benignant.
She did not heed the impertinence of this speech,
or its equally impertinent manner, as she proceeded
Yet, not because I had care or interest in you,
Gideon Badger, did I take these pains, or incur a
risk, which your own conduct has just assured me
was no small onebut for that good old man, your
father, who has been more than a father to me, and
whose gray hairs would go down to the grave in
wretchedness, did any mishap or dishonour reach
his son. I do not seek to save you from the danger
so much as I seek to spare him the sorrow and the
shame. You have shown yourself too little careful
of my feelings, Gideon, during our long
acquaintance
,
to deserve much at my hands either of respect
or kindness. On the contrary, since we have
reached maturity, I have known you by your
persecutions
by
your ungenerous persecutionsrather
than by any more commendable qualities or
conduct
.
Still, I would save youfrom your comrades,
from yourself, from the laws which you have
outraged
,
and which you are now about to outrage. I
have kept your secret from your father, from
Rawlins
,
from allI have restrained, though with great
difficulty, another from declaring it. I now tell you,
Gideon, solemnly here and seriously, that if you go
this night into the swamp, you go into unnecessary
danger. I have a presentiment, Gideon, that you
go never to return.
He would have ridiculed her counsels and her
fears. He made an attempt to laugh at her
solemnity
,
but the effort degenerated into a lugubrious
chuckle, that died away in a hoarse whisper in his
throat.
Tell me what
you know
, he at length exclaimed,
in a tone of emphatic utterance which sufficiently
declared
his apprehensionsspeak not to me of your
presentiments, and all that sort of superstitious
nonsense
,
but tell me what you have heard
what you
know
. Come,you have it all from your man,
Rawlins;if you really desire to serve my father,
and to save me, his dutiful son, to his embraces, let
me know what the plan is for the catching of the
beagles. A word, Rachel Morrison, a single word
of positive assurance will do more than all your
conjectures, superstitions, and fancies. Speak that
word, and I remain at Zion's HillI remain with
you.
With me!But no! I will speak no bitterness,
Gideon, in this moment, when your life and my hope
may equally rest upon the verge of a dreadful
precipice
.
Your hope and my life! What mean you? I
do not understand the connexion.
Nor will I explain it, Gideon. The only
warning
which I am willing that you shall understand is
one that I am willing to repeat. Your insolent
words, tone, and manner, shall not make me less
desirous of your safety; since nothing that you can
say or do, can make me lose sight of what I owe to
your venerable father.
Oh, this is all talk, Rachel. Can you, or will
you tell me nothing of these handsome fellows that
are so valiantly resolved to pursue my comrades into
the swamp? You see, I admit them to be
comrades
.
You have proved yourself so close a keeper
of the secret heretofore, that I cannot hesitate in
confiding to you my admission of the truth. I tell
you, therefore, that I am sworn to go to the swamp
to-nightsworn to myself and themto convey the
intelligence of the danger which is supposed to
threaten
them. I am bound to them for this. My safety
my very life depends upon it. If I fail them, they
have their laws and penalties, to which those of
society
are but toysthe merest trifles that ever yet
assumed the features of danger to the eyes of man.
Now, Rachel, let me but clearly see that there is an
occasion for your caution, and I will not go. I will
have an excuse which shall secure me from the
penalties of any violated oath.
Father in Heaven! and can it be, Gideon
Badger, that you are so fearfully related to these
men?
Pshaw! Rachelyou waste time with these
interjections
,
replied the youth with tones of dogged
impatience. To the pointto the point. Is there
present danger to me, and what is its formwhence
comes itfrom whomwhere? To thatto that,
Rachel. Speak to that.
Have I not saidhave you not heard? Surely
you do not despise the attempts which Walter
Rawlins
and Mr. Vernon are now making? You have
heard the men that brought in the prisoners?
Surely I know all this, Rachel Morrison, but I
thought you knew more. Knowing this, I yet
resolve
to go. As for the danger, set your heart easy
on that subject. By the dawn, when your gallant is
in motion for the swamp, I shall be at Zion's Hill
again, or so near it, as to smell the breakfast; and
the beagles will be so far on their way from the
place of danger, that their nests will be cold enough
when the hunters arrive. So, Rachel, if you will
not think better of it, and go with meI renew my
offerthe best counsel I can give you is, to get to
bed as soon as you may, and dream of more evil
for Gideon Badger. It will be easy to dream of that
which we sincerely wish.
I wish you nothing but good, Gideon, and once
more warn you not to go into the swamp to-night.
There is blood upon the path. Something tells me
it will be fatal to you if you go.
Unless you go with me, Rachel. Nay, why
will you be so stubborn? You know not what you
lose, Rachel. Joys of which you never dreamed,
and
Go! evil son of a worthy fathergo! was the
stern interruption of the maiden, as she turned from
the reprobate. You obey a written destiny. God
will not suffer you to be saved by so feeble an
instrument
as I.
The solemnity of these tones sounded like a
trumpet
in the ears of the dissolute youth, and the feeling
of awful conviction which lay at the heart of
Rachel Morrison, and which impressed her with
the faith that no farther effort could help him who
had been delivered over to his doom by the fiat of
Heaven, for a moment impressed itself also upon
the soul of the person whom it chiefly interested.
But this feeling was not suffered to obtain more
than a moment's ascendency. The coward is
frequently rash through a consciousness of his
own cowardice, and the conviction that he really
trembles, leads him to resolve upon a course which
should convince the spectator that he was never more
courageous in his life. He laughed at the omens
which made him shudder, and mocked at the
warning
which terrified him. He strove to shroud his
apprehensions in his ribaldry, and his last words to
the maiden consisted in a renewal of his proposition
to share with him the licentious life of the swamp;
the freedom from all restraint, which, to his mind,
seemed the very acme of human freedom and
felicity
.
She answered his proposition by a prayer
contained in a single sentence, which increased the
awe that dwelt within his heart.
Cut him not off in his sins. Oh, God! smite him
not suddenly in thy anger.
He disappeared in that instant. He had not the
spirit to respond to this.
Meanwhile, the reader must not suppose that the
business in the swamp remained at a stand. On
the contrary, never were men more alert to do
execution
in an enemy's country, than the worthy
fellows
under their several leaders, Rawlins, Jamison,
and the amateur. The latter, however, resolute as
any of the rest, when he reached the spot where he
had lost his every-day habiliments, could not resist
the temptation of giving to his little band, a brief
narrative of those afflicting events and the other
circumstances
that followed his arrival in the swamp,
and his connexion with that arch-beagle, Jones. At
another moment it might amuse the reader, who is
already familiar with these circumstances, to hear
Horsey relate them. His story would seem a very
different one from ours. Nay, the two would scarce
seem identical in any one respect, so completely
did he suppress those proofs of mental
flexibility
not
to say gullibilityon his part, which
rendered
it so easy a matter for the cunning outlaw to
VOL. II. 27
persuade him that the moon was a green cheese,
and he the best man to cut it. As he told the tale,
it seemed to his hearers, that he had traced the
outlaws
to their haunts designedlythat he had cheated
the dull dogs into the belief that he was a simple
citizen, ambitious of no fortune more lofty than that
of bringing the house down in applauses of his
superior merits as an actorbeyond Kemble and
Forrest, Kean and Cooper. How he had concealed
his real purposes, and fathomed theirs; how he had
traversed their haunts, traced their secrets, learned
their signs and read all their mysteries, is a history
to itself which might deserve its own volume.
Yet, such was the fellow's ingenuity, he told no lie
no actual lieand certainly meant none. His was
one of those active and flexible imaginations that
grow ductile at the slightest pressure and catch the
slightest change of colour from the most casual
cloud. His bricks soon became marble, and his
fancy never went without its wings.
On the present occasion it almost involved him
in a worse difficulty than he had ever been in
before
.
While he related his experience among the
beagles, who should he encounter but his old
acquaintance
,
Mr. BullAristophanes Bullwhose
headstrong opposition had already been a source of
such infinite discomfiture to him; and who, if time
had been given him, might very soon have
corrected
the little mistakes so naturally made in
Horsey's narration. Fortunately, Bull had been at
his usual potations, and our actor was no less
prompt in action than in speech. When Bull
struggled forward, with a skin full, thoroughly
soaked, and only half conscious of the globe's
motion
,
asking in hoarse tones, and with a hiccough:
What the hell's the matter here, boys?he
received, in reply, a blow over the skull from
Horsey's pistol in such downright good earnest,
that it would have tasked the powers of all the Bull
breed to have kept him well-balanced under it.
Down he went, with a thump that fully assured the
actor of his intention to await him there. This
occurrence took place not twenty steps from the
sleeping-place of Jones; and Horseylittle prudent
as he wasbegan to entertain some misgivings
that this cunning outlaw might be alarmed by the
noise, and would give him trouble. A clump of
shrub trees and one sturdy pine, stood between
them and the victim; and here he commanded his
men to pause until he should survey the ground
alone. He advanced cautiously, keeping himself
under cover of the shrubbery as he went forward,
and soon had the satisfaction to find that all was
quiet in the sylvan wigwam. He then motioned
his fellows to advance; and two at the entrance,
and three others conveniently stationed to yield
assistance
to the active assailants, entirely cut off the
outlaw's hope of escape. Still he might give the
alarm, and this it was important to prevent.
Handkerchiefs
were brought forward and got in
readiness
,
while Horsey led the way and boldly
penetrated
the tent of poles and bushes under which the
enemy slept. A stout fellow followed and seconded
him, and the deep breathing of the outlaw guided
them to the particular place of his repose. Still
they could see nothing. They had to be guided
entirely by the sense of feeling and the ear. At
length, after much cautious management and some
delay, they placed themselves on each side of his
head. This ascertained, a whisper gave the signal,
and while the stout companion of Horsey threw
himself on the body, the latter adroitly passed a
slipnoose
around his neck, and awakened the sleeper
to consciousness by a pressure of no moderate
force. The arms and feet of their captive were
meanwhile secured by the rest of their comrades,
and the power of further harm was taken from him
with a promptness and completeness, that would
have been creditable to greater proficients. Still,
with all their precautions, they could not altogether
prevent his giving some alarm. With the readiness
of a veteran, the outlaw at the first consciousness
which he had of the danger, endeavoured to shout
the signal of the banda whoop, borrowed from
the Indians, which, with better lungs, they had
learned to endow with a somewhat more terrific
energybut the unrelenting fingers of Horsey were
as prompt as the beagle's tongue, and the pressure
of the ligature around the jugular, suddenly cut
short the sounds before they had acquired sufficient
vigour to pass beyond the gorge of his throat. A
guard was set over him, with orders to shoot him at
the first movement or show of rescue, while the rest
of the captors proceeded in search of other foes.
It will not need that we follow them. It may be
necessary, however, to note one adventure of the
party under Jamison. The worthy Alabamian was
a second time fortunate in meeting with his
quondam
friend, the Irishman, Dennis O'Dougherty.
His knee was upon the fellow's chest in the dark,
when the brogue of the struggling prisoner declared
who he was.
Ha! Dennis, my boyis it you?
By Jasus, honey, but you're a bit mistaken in
the parson. I'm a very different jontleman, to your
liking.
An effort to rise succeeded this speech, which the
Alabamian effectually arrested by tickling the throat
of his prisoner with the point of his bowie.
Be asy now, will you?and don't be afther
giving yourself any more throuble. Don't you
think I understand plain spaking, my honey?
You're no fool, Dennis, said the Alabamian, as
he found the Irishman lying quiet. Had you
twisted the littlest inch of your animal, Dennis,
after the hint I gave you, I'd ha' been through you
with more steel than Dick Smith ever swallowed.
I will but run a ploughline under your arms, Dennis,
to keep you comfortable, and you may thank me
that I don't put it about your gullet. Is it easy to
your elbows, Dennis?
Asy! Jasus, Mr. Jamison, are you a
jontleman
?
Well, any thing to make you comfortable; and
so I'll let out a little; but, look you, Dennis, be quiet.
I'm going from you a bit, and if you're not quiet, the
man that watches you won't leave the skin to your
teeth. He's a raal Ingin at sculping, and your head
will be at his skirts, while your tongue's chattering
about it.
But the smaller villains are not our object, and it
will suffice to say, that it was not a difficult task, so
complete had been the surprise, to capture nearly all
the inmates of the swamp. The number at Cane
Castle was usually smallthe great body of the
fraternity, as detailed in our former work, being
engaged in active operations while traversing the
country. Vernon knew that every thing depended
on the capture or death of the chiefthe
masterspirit
who had conceived a plan of operations so
extensive, so bold, so well detailed, and so sternly
carried out. To this labour, as we have seen, he
devoted himself. A livelier interest served to
stimulate
his zeal, and to make him no less anxious and
eager than resolute for the conflict. He knew that
if he found Saxon awake, the struggle that would
27*
probably ensue must be mortal. For this issue his
energies of mind and body were braced to the
utmost
,
and the image of Virginia Maitland, in the
power of the ruffian and suffering from his violence,
gave a terrible earnestness to his deportment, from
the first moment when he embarked upon the
adventure
.
He did find the outlaw awake, and under
circumstances
to keep alive the indignation and resolution
of his heart. Conducted by the dwarf, Stillyards,
to the wigwam, known among the beagles as the
squatter's cabin at Little Bend, he beheld at a single
glance, the object of his affections and the object of
his hate. Virginia Maitland was before him, and
before her was Saxon. The circumstances under
which they stood, made the blood boil within
the veins of the inflamed beholder, and he found
it difficult so to restrain his passion, as to look
around him with deliberation, and determine calmly
what course to pursue. The house in which they
were was a common fabric of logs such as is
universal in the new countries of the southwest. It
stood upon pine blocks, about four feet from the
ground. It consisted of two rooms, separated from
each other by a thin partition, the door of which
opened in the centre. Each room had an entrance
from without, independent of the other, and a
single window in each sufficed to give it light. On
the present occasion the doors and windows were
closed, and the observation of Vernon was made
through crevices between the logs of the building,
of which the number was sufficient for all the
purposes
of espionage. Conducted by the dwarf,
Stillyards
,
to one of these crevices, which the urchin
seemed to find very readily, the objects that met the
eyes of Vernon increased his emotions. Virginia
Maitland was seated on a rude chair, at the
doorway
between the two rooms, her back to the one,
which happened to be the sleeping apartment, and
her face to Saxon, who strode the room before
her. Her hands were clasped and resting upon her
knees. Her neck and head were bent forward,
while her eyes, with a tearless anxiety, watched
every movement of the outlaw, as keenly as one
would watch the form of the panther crouching in
the tree above him, and in the attitude to spring. It
was evident that as yet no outrage, other than that
of her abduction, had been attempted by the ruffian;
but her looks amply testified her fears, while his as
clearly manifested his desires. That the outlaw
had been striving to persuade her to his purposes
was evident enough, and that his persuasions only
awakened her apprehensions, might be inferred from
her attitude of mixed prayer, watchfulness, and
terror
.
Such was the picture that first met the eye of
Vernon. The words of Saxon, a moment after,
that met his ears, confirmed all the first impressions
which it made upon his mind; and he placed the
muzzle of his pistol, which was already cocked and
in his hand, at the opening, which was sufficiently
large to admit of his certain aim at the ruffian. But
his cheek glowed a moment after with a feeling akin
to shame. Vernon was not familiar with the
shedding
of blood, and no man who is notunless he be
equally cowardly and malignantcan possibly take
life, except in the whirl and excitement of actual
conflict. He felt that there was something base,
from his concealment, to shoot down the unconscious
man, however deserving he might be of his doom.
To fling down from its erect place and posture an
image so noble, made after the form of God, and
filled with such godlike attributes and endowments,
is, at best, and under its most justifiable
circumstances
,
a melancholy performance; and with
something
of a romantic resolution, such as makes the
wisest of men rash at seasons, he determined upon
the bolder and more generous measure of giving the
outlaw the benefit of an equal struggle. Such a
prize as Virginia Maitland, seemed to justify every
hazard, and Vernon resolved upon the very last. He
rose from his recumbent position, and was about to
proceed towards the doorway, when he felt a hand
laid lightly upon his shoulder. Stillyards, meanwhile,
had disappeared. He turned at the interruption
fancying another enemy at his elbowand met the
eyes of a womanone so youthful and so beautiful
as to strike him with wonder at seeing her in so
wild a place. She met his gaze seemingly without
emotion. There was a calm solemnity in her aspect,
seen by the serious starlight, which riveted his
attention
,
commanded his respect, and would have
subdued, even in a far less reverent mind than his,
any ribald thoughts or suspicions.
Stay!But a single instant, she whispered, and
her uplifted finger gave him like warning. Before
he could answer her, or imagine the object of her
intrusion, she was gone from sightliterally vanished
behind an angle of the building.
But her warning was forgotten with her
disappearance
.
Vernon was too much aroused for
unnecessary
delay, particularly too, as he saw not
the reason of the woman's injunctions; and, just
then, the pleading tones of Virginia's voice reached
his ears in supplication and alarm. Breathless, he
darted upon the steps of massive pine that led to
the door of the building, and with a single blow of
his heel, sent it from its hinges. Another moment
found him within the apartment, and face to face
with the outlaw.
The proceeding was the work of an instant, but
it found the outlaw prepared. He seized his pistols,
which lay on a table near him, and instantly
presented
them. Vernon had not seen them before;
and had he but waited, as he had been counselled
by Florence Marbois, this danger would have been
spared him. In the same moment when Saxon
grasped the weapons, the hand of Florence was
stretched out from the inner apartment to which
she had penetrated with noiseless footsteps, for the
purpose of securing them. But, though Saxon
grasped and cocked the pistols at his enemy, he
did not dare to use them. With the first appearance
of Vernon, Virginia had started to her feet, and at
the sight of his danger, she rushed between the
parties
,
alternately turning an imploring face and an
uplifted hand to each. She no longer exhibited the
passive attitude of fear. All apprehension for herself
departed when she feared for her lover; and that
living grace of form and movement, which speaks
out when the mother-mood prevails, riveted, at the
same moment, with a sense of equal admiration, the
souls of Vernon and the outlaw. And there, on
each side of her the hostile parties stoodshe, the
angel between them, preventing strife, if not securing
peace. Her words, wild, incoherent, impetuous,
addressed the one and then the other; but failed of
much effect upon either. Her position alone controlled
the warfare which her presence was yet calculated
to inspire. Suddenly, the arms of Saxon were
grasped by Florence from behind; a deep
imprecation
burst from the outlaw's lips as he distinguished
her. Vainly did he strive to shake her off; and
the moment lost in this effort enabled Vernon to
grapple with him at advantage. While they
struggled
,
the dwarf, Stillyards, dropped upon the
shoulders
of the outlaw from the scantling above; and
before he could be shaken off or removed, he had
thrust his nails, which had been suffered to grow to
an inordinate length, entirely through the ears of
his late leader. This was one of the forms of
retribution
which consoled him for the similar indignity
to which Saxon had subjected himself. By this
time the house was filled; and the outlaw chief,
who had struggled manfully while any hope
remained
to him, now yielded quietly to numbers.
This, then, is your work, Florence! he
murmured
,
as the woman he had wronged, confronted
him.
Ay! mine! I glory in itI rejoice too that you
feel it to be mine. You could scorn my love!
perhaps
,
that was not so great an error as to scorn my
power. It glads me to the soul to think that you
can feel it and acknowledge it at last.
If that will give you pleasure, Florence, be
happy. If it can atone for the wrongs which I have
done you, to know that you have compassed my
doom, you have ample vengeance. I owe my death
to your hands.
Your death atone, Edward Saxon, for my
misery!for the wrong done to my honourto
my hopeto my prideto my affectionsto all
things, and thoughts, and feelings which are dear to
womanwhich ennoble her to herself and endear
her to society. Monstrous vanity! Your death,
Edward Saxon, were you thrice to die, could never
atone for the wrongs you have inflicted on the frail,
fond, foolish heart of Florence Marbois. You have
taken from her all that made life preciousand the
life which seems so desirable to you, is her scorn.
Look, and see what is her value of life, Edward
Saxon; and, if you be not utterly base, you will
yet learn from her example how to baffle the
hangman
.
She to whom you ascribe your fate, will
show you how completely indifferent you have made
her to her own.
She advanced closely as she spoke to her
betrayer
.
Her majestic form seemed to tower far
above its usual height; and no language could
describe
the bitter scorn which looked from all her
features, as she mocked him with that love of life
which she professed to feel no longer. While yet
the last words trembled on her lips, she drove a
dagger, which till then was concealed within her
garments, deep down into her breast. The deed was
done before eye could see or hand interpose to
prevent
it. She was caught, while falling, by Vernon.
Her last words, clear and emphatic, though broken,
were addressed to the outlaw
Live, Edward Saxonif life be so precious to
youlive! It has nothing precious now for me.
To you I owe it, at least, that death is also without
pain. Live!live!
Her eyes followed him even in death. He strove,
but vainly, to avert his own. He could nothe
dared not. She had conquered, and the spell of
her power was upon him in her dying moments.
Unconsciously, the long breath escaped from him
like a convulsive groan, when the thick glaze
passing
over her eyes, rescued him from the fascinating
intensity of their glance. Thick drops stood upon
his brow, as if he underwent a fearful agony; and
his limbs tottered like one feeble with a long
sickness
,
as they led him from the apartment under
guard.
CHAPTER XXIII.
Last scene of all,
That ends this strange, eventful history.
Shakespeare
.
Vernon
bore Virginia Maitland, swooning, from
this terrible scene, the actual performance of which
had occupied far less time than our description of it.
It had passed before the maiden's eyes, more like
some dreadful phantasmagoria of the magician, than
an event of actual life. He bore her into the fresh
air, which partly revived her; and, under the
direction
and with the assistance of Horseywho
affected
a better knowledge of Cane Castle than he
really had,succeeded in finding and conveying
her to the little cottage, the mistress of which had
put so fearful a finish to a life of feverish pain and
most unhappy excitement. The last sacrifice was
paid to the lingering sentiment of that love which
still survived jealousy and anger, and which nothing
but death could utterly extinguish. She had
obtained
the vengeance which she sought; and the
thirst for which, in the first moment of her misery,
had overborne the more native feeling of her heart.
That done, the original passion resumed some
portion
of its activity, but only to make her feel still
more acutely the undesirable and worthless
character
of all that remained to life; and the resolution
to end ittaken at a moment when her vengeance
was yet doubtful, seemed more than ever proper to
her abased and erring spirit, when its claims were
all satisfied. Is it sinful to hope that her crime was
softened by her sufferings? There was so much
that was bright and noble in her soul amidst all its
smoke and impurities, that humanity may well be
suffered to presume upon the indulgence of mercy,
in behalf of one, in whose soul, amidst all the cloud,
the smoke, and the impurity, there was so much
that was really noble in sentiment, and bright and
beautiful in thought. Florence Marbois, under other
auspices, had been one of those lovely lights of
society
,
that guide the hearts which they warm, and
hallow the affections which they inspire and
requite
.
Pass we to the living, no less lovely, and purer
womanto the fair Virginia, who, in the arms of
Vernon, was soon restored, not less to the
consciousness
of life, than of those dear emotions that
sanctify and sometimes make it heaven! If the
past scene of terror, and strife, and death, through
which she had been hurried, was not forgotten, its
sting at least was taken away by the conviction
that all who were dear to her had gone through it
in safety, and that all danger to herself and others
was
past
. She could now breathe in unrestraint,
and yield herself for a space to that freedom of
soul which delights in making its acknowledgments
to the beloved one. If ever maiden were justified
in speaking freely her happiness to her lover, it is
she who has just been rescued by his gallantry from
the most evil forms of danger. Virginia in the hour
of her deliverance had no reserve. She hung upon
the bosom of Vernon, happy in the weakness,
which, while it made his valour dear to her,
furnished
VOL. II. 28
her with the best apology to cling to his
embrace
.
A moment was given to these rapturesa brief
moment; and the lover was recalled by one of his
subordinates to a recollection of his farther duties.
The night was fleeting fast, and it was the counsel
of Rawlins, Jamison, and such other of his men as
had a claim to advise in the proceedings, that they
should instantly cross the river, and with their
prisoners
retrace their steps towards Zion's Hill. But
Vernon thought otherwise. He knew the difficulty
of travelling by night through unaccustomed swamps
along with a daring set of men, who, though bound,
might yet prove troublesome; and who, indeed,
might readily find succour from passing bands of
their companions. There was yet another reason
which led Vernon to defer the movement of his
party until morning.
Doubtless, he said, there are individuals of this
gang going from and coming into the swamp at all
hours of the night. By preserving the utmost silence
where we are, placing a guard in each of their places
of watch, and answering after their own fashion,
any signals that we may hear from without, we shall
be able to gather into our fold a few more of these
scoundrels. I would not like to do the work by
halves; still less am I willing to risk what has been
gained by any precipitation of movement to-night.
Our task now is easy; we have only to secure
thoroughly
the prisoners.
That is already done, said Rawlins,
interrupting
him.
Then our work is easy. It lacks but three
hours to the dawn. We must keep our eyes open
for that space of time and our weapons ready, and
with the first gleam of light we can safely cross
the river with all our captives. To move now
would be to risk their loss, and perhaps our own.
It is no easy matter to keep track in a strange
region
,
and at night, with prisoners whom we may
have to drive before us, and who might drop us in
the darkness without greatly suffering from our
pistols. Have the horses come? have you heard
the signal from the other bank?
They are there. Pollard crossed over to them
by my order a bit ago, was the reply.
It is well! Every thing favours us, men. We
have lost no life, but little blood, and have so far
succeeded in all our objects. Let us lose nothing
by rashness. Coolness now and carefulness can
alone secure our conquests. To you, Rawlins, as
you know the swamp best of all of us, I must assign
the task of placing guards over the best positions
andhark! do you hear nothing? That surely
was a signal.
A beagle, by the powers! Here's fish for our
net! exclaimed Rawlins, as he started from the
thicket where this conference had taken place.
Jamison was about to follow, as also Horsey, but
Vernon arrested them.
Rawlins is enough, and you might confuse him.
He is equal to any robber of the gang, and will do
the business more effectually if let alone. Hark!
already he answers. His bay is quite as good as
any of the beagles.
Vernon's judgment was correct. The sturdy
woodman hurried in the direction of the sound,
which still continued to reach his ears at intervals,
becoming more and more clear and distinct as the
party drew nigh. He stationed himself under cover
at a point where he had surprised one of the
robbers
,
and responding to the signal as he did so,
coolly awaited the approach of the intruder. As
the latter emerged on horseback from the woods
above, he addressed the counterfeit presentment
with all the familiarity of an old acquaintance.
Ha! that you Baker, or Chambers, which?
Rawlins grunted forth a sound which might pass
for an affirmative. He feared to trust his own
voice till he had the robber in his power; and it
was fortunate that the latter had too much himself
to say to regret the taciturnity of his companion.
As he spoke, a chill went through the bones of
Rawlins. A few sentences soon assured him that
it was Gideon Badger who addressed him. That
profligate son of a man whose purism assured him
with a chuckle, that he was not like the miserable
Pharisees around him, having demanded of the
sentinel to lead him to the place where the chief of
the outlaws slept, proceeded to develope his great
discoveries to his companion, in anticipation of that
revelation which he proposed to make to Saxon, and
with which, with all the mean spirit of an inferior's
servility, he calculated to commend himself to new
favour in his sight. Rawlins could only make his
responses in a groan.
What do you groan for, Baker? demanded
the other. There's no danger now that we know
all about it. We've time enough to scud and run
to-night, and to-morrow we can turn upon that
bullhead
Rawlins, and dog his heels back to Zion's
Hill. Nay, with a little increase of force we should
be able to lather him at his own weapons and at
any weapons. For my part, I'd rather it should be
so. Nothing would give me half so much pleasure
as to try the chance of a little scuffle with that
fellow. If I didn't
Gideon Badger, said Rawlins, in his natural
tone of voice, you have your wish. I am Wat
Rawlins, and we're face to face. Now, show your
manhoodall your manhood, Gideonfor you fight,
let me tell you, for something more than Rachel
Morrisonyou fight for life! You fight with a
rope round your neck.
Wat Rawlins! gasped the confounded youth,
as he heard the words and recognised the voice of
one whom in his secret soul he fearedcan it be!
Are you ready? demanded the woodman.
Be quick, Gideon;I know I'm not doing right
when I give you this chance for your life; but
I want to save your old father from the shame
of having son of his hung up by the neck. If I
kill you, which will be all the better for you, I'll
keep the secret, and bury you in the swamp with
my own hands, so that nobody shall over know that
we met you here to-night. Come!
I will not fight with you, was the hoarse but
tremulous response of the youth.
I'm sorry for you, Gideon Badger, said
Rawlins
,
with an expression of pity in his accents, not
unmingled with disgust. I would have saved you
from something worse than death. I'm sorry you're
not as brave as your father. I can do no more.
You must go with meyou're my prisoner.
He grasped the imbecile around his body as he
spoke, with a grasp that would have defied his
utmost
powers. But these the unhappy youth did not
offer to exercise. His heart seemed to have turned
to water with the first conviction of his mind that
Walter Rawlins really stood before him. His
nerves failed him. His muscles shrunk and seemed
to wither. Rawlins carried him into the presence
of Vernon and the rest with as little trouble as if he
had been an infant.
The victors, having secured their new captive,
had no farther interruption in the swamp that night.
With the first glimmering of dawn, Vernon made
his preparations for crossing the river to the place
28*
where the horses of the party had been carried.
This was a task more tedious than difficult. Some
of the men were compelled to swim the river with
a rope which had been previously fastened to the
flat, and which was absolutely necessary in
conveying
across the river Virginia Maitland, Mrs.
Yarbers
who
had been an active coadjutor of the
assailing
partythe prisoners, and the inanimate form
of Florence Marbois, which the gentler heart of
Virginia would not suffer to be buried in the still
and gloomy recesses of that swamp-forest in which
she had dwelt so long. Rawlins ventured to
promise
that the cemetery at Zion's Hill should yield
her a more consecrated place of repose. Her
body, stretched out in the bottom of the boat, and
completely enveloped in a cloak, was a subject of
fearful interest to Saxon, who was compelled, from
the smallness of the vessel and the number of its
passengers, to remain unwillingly contiguous to it.
More than once was he seen to shudder as he
looked
upon the unmeaning and almost shapeless
outline
,
through the thick envelope of which, however,
his keen-eyed and conscious spirit, beheld the
reproachful
expression of that face, and all those
glances of love, and those features of beauty, which
had once yielded him so much delight, and which
his own capricious and unjust passions had
obliterated
and destroyed. His present situation, mostly
to be ascribed to his own injustice to the one who
most loved him, gave emphasis to those rebukes of
conscience which now, for the first time, were
acutely active in the contemplation of her corse. At
this moment a persuasion of sentimental softness
almost seized his mind,he felt that love would
have still preserved him, had he still been true to
love. Unhappily for him and her, love and
conscience
equally spoke too late. A desperate
resolution
succeeded in his mind, and he turned his eyes
upon the dark and turbid waters over which he
was passing with an expression of anxious desire.
Could he gain the side of the boat, a single plunge
would baffle his captors, and defeat all the terrors
of a public doom. His hands were bound, but his
feet were free. He gave a single glance to the
inanimate
form of Florence, and made a movement
to the opposite side of the flat. Already his foot
touched the low gunwale, when the firm grasp of
the watchful Vernon upon his shoulder, showed him
that his object was discovered. He was led back
into the centre of the boat, and surrounded by those
who noted all his movements, with eyes too jealous
to leave him any present hope of baffling their
observation
.
Bitter, indeed, was the glance which he
cast upon Vernon, as the latter withdrew his hand
from the shoulder of the felon.
There was a time, Mr. Vernon, when you were
less willing to approach me with so little scruple;
that, however, was when I was better able to
approach
you. Times change; and he who would
have trembled to hear the lion's growl in the desert,
takes him boldly by the mane when in the
menagerie
.
Well! courage seems to depend very much
upon the season. A bright or dark day makes a
wonderful difference in the hearts of men. You
are in season now, sirmuch more so, I think, than
when I met you at Lucchesa. Your hand is more
ready now.
It is my good fortune to improve then, sir,
replied
Vernon, mildly and with a smile. As for
your notion of my courage, let that be as you choose.
If you can really persuade yourself that it is not of
the proper kind, and the persuasion pleases you,
indulge it. My courage is of a sort that will
remain perfectly unaffected, whatever course your
opinion may take upon it. Another quality of it
will be to take every precaution against the
exercise
of yours. In my custody you are safe enough.
I would not forget myself, sir, by using the language
of exultation over a prisoner, however small may
be the forbearance which he merits at my hands.
Oh, you are too indulgent! was the almost
fierce reply of the outlawtoo indulgent! Would
I could thank you as I could wishas you
deserve
.
A moment after, and Saxon felt the feeble fury of
his manner, and stopped suddenly, while a burning
flush passed over his cheeks. Vernon turned away.
They had now reached the opposite bank.
An hour after this, and the cavalcade encountered
a motley party of ten or a dozen men, headed by
old William Badger himself. He was dressed up
partially in some of the remnants of the ancient
uniform
which he wore when he followed Andrew
Jackson down from Tennessee to his Indian battles
in the southwest. The old and ragged cap which
covered his grisly locks; the pistols in his holsters;
the belt about his waist, and the long rifle in his
graspwere all the same; and here, it may be
added, that, though he wore it not on this occasion,
he yet, before sallying forth that morning, gave
a long and curious examination to the ancient and
motley blue wrapper, known in its day as a
hunting-shirt
which
had been too intimately associated in
all the deeds and doings of his prime, to be
discarded
altogether even when the period of its usefulness
was past. The ancient leader, however, made a
far less ludicrous appearance than his men, with
whom, in the sudden emergency that called them
forth, motley seemed indeed to be the only wear.
At another time, the appearance of this regiment
would have moved Vernon and all his followers to
unrestrained merriment; but there was a strong
feeling in their hearts at this moment which
effectually
restrained all lighter moods. The thought
that the venerable old man was marching forward
to behold his own and only son, bound as an
outlaw
,
and destined to all the penalties of such a life,
filled them all with a sorrow that was not less deep
because it was speechless. The very
unconsciousness
of the old man as he drew nighthe rigid and
pompous erectness of his carriage, and the swelling
dignity of his mannercontributed to increase the
solemnity of their feelings. Who should convey
the truth to the father? It tasked the boldest heart
and the best mind of the troop. Vernon rode
forward
as he approached, and giving instructions
with Rawlins to keep his prisoners out of sight as
long as possible, undertook the painful task of
revealing
the truth to the venerable elder. The task
was rendered more difficult by the self-esteem of
Badger. Assuming himself to have been ill-treated,
overlooked, slighted, and in fact, thrust aside from
the performance of his proper duties, by beardless
boys, still in the gristle, inspired more by
presumption
than patriotism, he scarcely gave Vernon a
civil recognition. But the latter, at such a time,
and to one so much his elder, would have been
ashamed to entertain any boyish resentments; and
he bore patiently with the captiousness of the father,
and by gradual degrees, brought him step by step
to a consciousness of the gulf that was so suddenly
to open before him. When the truth was fully
shownwhen the tale was fully toldthere was no
more visible emotion in the face of the hearer,
beyond
a slight quiver of the lips, than if he had
listened
to the most ordinary intelligence. His keen
eyes, from under their gray shaggy brows,
narrowly
scanned the countenance of the speaker, and
there, reading nothing but sincerity and distinctness,
dropped quietly upon the ground. His lips opened
but to exclaim:
Son of mine! son of mine! Oh, God! thou
hast indeed stricken me with thy wrath. Verily,
thou hast terribly rebuked the pride that was
shooting
upwards like a rank weed within my heart.
The exclamation denoted that self-esteem, still
strong, still luxuriant, and still well cultivated in a
favourite field, which was the predominant
characteristic
of his mind. That Gideon should be a bad
fellow, was an unfortunate thing for Gideon; but
it was something monstrous exceedingly, that
Gideon
,
the son of William, should become so. After
thissuch was the still self-complaisant reflection
of the elderwho will believe in education?
The stern habits of the soldier, and the pride of
the patriotic magistrate, came to the succour of the
old man.
These wretched people must be committed for
trial, Mr. Vernon, and though you have heretofore
found yourself sufficient to do without my help, as a
man, it is probable that you will require my
assistance
as a magistrate. Let them be brought before
me, sir, as soon as you please, that I may examine
them for commitment.
All, sir? said Vernon.
Ay, sir, all! God will sustain me, I trust, as he
hath ever done, so that I shall be able to perform
the trusts which have been confided to me, without
fear or favour. I trust in his mercy, to have no
feeling with one more than another of these unhappy
wretches.
The reader need not ask to know, how such a
man went through such a trial. William Badger's
proceedings, on the present occasion, would have
gained for him, in Roman ages, a column of
enduring
fame.
Our story is nearly ended. That very day
Horsey
was made a special deputy, with two others, to
arrest Mr. Justice Nawls; but the bird had flown.
He had received from some secret quarter a warning
of his danger, and had disappeared on a fleet horse
an hour before the appearance of the party sent to
arrest. The return to the magistrate was one which
is said to have assumed the official dignity in some
of the StatesG. T. T.which, rendered into the
vernacular, signifies Gone to Texas. There is a
report current at this time on the Big Black, that
Nawls has become a great patriot in Texas, and has
distinguished himself by several military
achievements
of no common order. He is not the first
citizen
who has lived a scoundrel and died a patriot.
It was fortunate for the amateur that he did not
take Mrs. Horsey with him to Texas, and make her
a patriot too. Perhaps he would have done so, had
time been allowed him. How many good deeds are
defeated through a want of time.
When the roving husband and his lovely wife
returned
to Zion's Hill, who should they encounter
there but the venerable sire of the former, limping
as much as ever, quite as rash and boisterous, and
full of storms and cataracts, at the sight of the
fugitive. He had come, in obedience to Vernon's
letters, along with Ben Carter; and was confounded
to meet a living son, where he thought it might be
difficult to find even a dead one. His very joysuch
was the force of habittook the features, and
indulged in the language of anger and abuse.
You ungrateful spendthriftyou
He was silenced by a very summary proceeding.
He little knew the sort of answer his son had in
store for him.
Make you acquainted with Mrs. Tom Horsey,
dad; said he, with a swagger admirably theatrical,
as he strutted full up to the old man, with the
shrinking
Mary hanging on his arm.
Mrs. Tom Horsey!Why, Tom, it can't be
possible. I expected to find you dead, and here
you're only married. But are you married, Tom?
Ay, dad, if the ceremony performed by such a
rascal as Squire Nawls is worth a fig.
Well, God bless you, Tom,you're born to be
an actor after all. And you, my gal,who are
youwhat's your name? Andsince you are
Tom's wife, give's a smack. Another! another!
Well, Tom, to a young man, marrying's not so bad
after all. But where's Ben Carter?
This is a question which we may also ask. In
another apartment, to themselves, Carter and his
unfaithful friend Maitland communed for a
lengthened
hour. They came forth reconciled. Maitland
frankly confessed his offences equally against
friendship
and good morals; and in making every
atonement
which had been left, he found Carter as he had
ever found him, an indulgent benefactor. The
relation
in which Vernon stood to Virginia contributed
greatly to this end. They also, to themselves, had their
own explanations to make, and their several
adventures
to relate; the day promised fair, amid all the
clouds that overcast the horizon at the beginning,
to terminate in equal calm and brightness. To the
three happy sets, whom we have conducted with
persevering industry through the groves to the
temple
from
love to marriagesuch, indeed, was its
termination; but there was one storm that passed
through the forest about this time which filled even
their hearts with solemn shudderings, and for a long
season after maintained a heavy weight upon their
memories. Rawlins, who, with a select party, had
the charge of the prisoners, returned at midnight,
alone, to Zion's Hill, and brought with him a
terrible
narrative of outrage and bloodshed. The mob
had risen upon his little party, and rescued the
prisoners
from his hands. But they did not rescue them
to save. Goaded to madness by the long repeated
crimes of the outlaws, they had resolved not to wait
the tardy proceedings of justice; and in equal
defiance
of the entreaties and the efforts of the little
guard, the unhappy criminals were dragged to death
from their custody and protection. Another moment
precipitated their doom. They were drawn up by
the ropes which bound them, to the swinging
branches over head, and hurried into eternity
without
a moment's gracetheir prayers drowned
their convulsions mocked in the frantic joy, and the
exulting shouts of the populace. The unlawfulness
of their punishment, suggests the only occasion for
sympathy in their behalf. They died on a spot
which they themselves had deprived of all the
securities
of law, and had shadowed with every sort
of crime. They perished by a reckless rage, for
which a partial sanction may be found in the
wantonness
and brutality of their own deedsin their
unscrupulous robberies, their frequent cruelties, and
most unfeeling murders. Saxon died as he had
lived, a brave, fearless man. Perhaps, the
compunctious
writhings which troubled him at the death of
Florence Marbois, had made him better prepared
to die. In his death perished the spirit, the energy,
and the capacity of the Border Beagles. He had
made them what they wereresolute, compact,
one, and indivisible. Scattered at his death, they
lost the faculties which had made them powerful,
and have generally given up the more daring
profession
,
for others of a like, but less dangerous
character
.
Some, like Nawls, have gone to Texas,
filled with a sudden desire of becoming patriots
others have taken to shaving, speculating, and
banking; and a few, it is reported, have formed a
new confederacy which bears the innocent, if not
unmeaning title of The Hypothecators. What
is the particular occupation which, under this head,
they intend pursuing, is only conjectural. The more
knowing seem to think that their purpose is nothing
worse than the invention of fancy stocks; the
designs
of which they will dispose of to the
numberless
associations of Humbug, which cover this
scheming nation as with an eighth plague. The
locusts of the Egyptian never diminished his crops
with half the success with which our locusts, the
progeny of that fruitful Scotchman, John Law,
have devastated the fields of Mississippi. The
Border
Beagles were nothing to them as public
enemies
.
THE END.