CHAPTER I.
I had
changed my lodgings, seeking shelter in the suburbs, from
the crowd and confusion of Broadway and the Park. The
omnibus
,
at a shilling a ride, enabled me, while enjoying a seclusion
akin to that of country life, to seek the city at any moment when
pleasure or business called me thither. The second morning after
my transition, I suffered myself to look round upon my new
neighbourhood. I found myself in very good quarters for a
single man. Our house was well arranged and spacious. It
stood apart from all others, while, on either hand, the green of a
well-stored vegetable garden gratified the eye, and the breezes
from two quarters of the compass poured in at my windows. We
were just in advance of the onward march of city improvements.
Our pavements were incomplete, and the clang and clamour of
cart, cab and carriage, were moderate accordingly, when
compared
with the stunning sounds with which they momently
assailed
me in Broadway. But, as if to qualify this advantage,
there was just opposite, one of those annoyances which are to be
found in the suburbs of every large city, in the shape of a cluster
of low, crowded and filthy looking rookeries,a nest of wooden
structures, dingy, dark, narrow, and tumbling to decay, which
still, however, gave shelter to a crowd of inmates. Every
tenement
of this nest, was filled from basement to attic;the people
were of the very poorest, and some of them, evidently, of the
most dissolute, character. Rags and dirt were the conspicuous
badges at every window, and no prospect could be more
melancholy
than that of the poor, puny, little children, who were
despatched from rise of morn to set of sun, to glean, as beggars,
from better furnished portions of the city, their daily supplies of
pennies and cold victuals.
I am not, however, one of those persons who sicken at the
thousand aspects of human misery. Some experience of the
world and its vicissitudes, acquired at a period when other men
are usually about to begin their lessons, had fortified my senses,
and prepared me to look with fortitude, if not indifference, upon
those evils of life which are unhappily inevitable. I did not
forego the prospect from the window, because it showed me
suffering as well as sunshine; and, if I could not, in any great
degree, alleviate the one, I saw not, in consequence, any good
reason why I should reject or forego the other. My morning
and afternoon contemplations included the `rookeries.' I saw the
outgoings and incomings of their motley population, and acquired,
after a moderate period, a certain degree of interest, in some few
of the several inhabitants. There was one old woman, a sturdy
Meg Merrilies sort of body, who carried out, empty, a sack some
five feet in length, which I am sure she always brought home full.
What she brought, and what use she made of the commodity, I
never troubled myself to inquire or even to conjecture. The
simple appearance of the old dame at her departure and return,
was enough for my curiosity. In going forth, her tongue sounded
an alarum to the whole neighbourhood, which sufficiently
apprised
it of that important event. Very different was the manner
of her return. She entered without beat of drum. Her tongue
was most singularly silent, and the fierce, consequential air with
which she sallied forth, was exchanged for that of the most quiet,
meek and cautious of all humble adventurers. She was not my
only acquaintance among the inhabitants of this motley
settlement
.
There was a great, hulking, heavily built person most
like a sailor in appearance, but one, evidently too well fed to
relish a frequent journey to the cross-trees, who also secured some
portion of my daily consideration. He, too, presented himself
under different aspects, at his diurnal periods of egress and return.
In the first case, he went forth, feeble, tottering, slightly lamed,
and, I think, irrecoverably blind;a decided improvement,
however
,
always followed his morning visit to the city. He evidently
met with Brandreth, the pill dealer, and Williams, the oculist, by
the way. His eye-sight left him in no doubt about his
home-ward
bound course; and his legs were then better able to
pursue
it. This was the more remarkable, as, at such periods, his
arms were usually filled with stuffs, clothes, food and fragments
of one description or another, in such quantity and weight as
might have given a more vigorous person reason to stagger
beneath
the burden. He evidently pursued his craft with a success
which convinced me that he might have arrived, in other days,
at a post of high command even in Alsatia. There were other
persons in this community, who, in their places and periods, also
provoked, though in a far less degree, my observation and
inquiry
;
and it would not, perhaps, be a very difficult matter, were
I so minded, to awaken a similar interest in most of my readers
in behalf of one or more individuals of its population, quite as
mysterious as that of the Stout Gentleman, of one of our most
graceful writers, whom all are pleased to honour. Certainly,
there were physical allotments among my friends of the `rookery,'
which, alone, were sufficient to impress the spectator with
heedful
deference. Brawny arms of Hibernian vigour brandished the
broom, and flourished in the suds. Voices, of aristocratic
authority
,
rose suddenly and stunningly upon the senses, and never did
the damsels of Eleusinia declare themselves in a dialect of more
1*
unctuous emphasis and spirit in the hearing of assembled Greece.
Of the mysterious character of those business operations which
were pursued among them, I have already spoken. A very
curious scandal-monger in literature might live for months in the
periodicals by examining the domestic records of my suburban
neighbourhood.
My tastes did not exactly lead me to institute any such
examination
.
I was content to see the beauties of the scene afar off.
Morning and evening glimpses satisfied my curiosity; and my
old woman with her long sack, and my sturdy sailor with his
imperfect eyesight, upon both of whom such radical changes
took place in the progress of each diurnal sun, were studies
which amply requited all my curious
cacothes
. The morning
cries and clamour of the former aroused me from sluggish
slumbers
;
and her usual period of return at evening, was equivalent
to the tintinabulary summons to my evening repastboth of
these important events happening to occur usually at the same
hour of the day. A little pleasurable excitement, which was
pleasurable, perhaps, only because of the excitement, served to
reconcile me to a neighbourhood, the contemplation of which,
while it failed to stimulate curiosity, did not contribute to the
gratification of any of my usual tastes. I was just sufficiently
remote from the scene I witnessed, to make it visible to me
through that hallowing medium which turns the past into poetry,
and elevates the foreign into dignity and grace. I must confess
to a reluctance to any nearer approximation, which was so strong
as to prompt me to make use of the back door of my lodging
house, in the greater number of cases; and to seek, by a street
in the rear, that outlet to the city, which, otherwise, could only
have been marked by almost actual contact with the suds and
sentiment of the `rookery.'
CHAPTER II.
But
a few days made a great difference in my mode of
thinking
and feeling in regard to some of the persons of my Alsatia.
The cries and clamors of which I have spokenas the familiar
sounds from that neighbourhood, underwent a sweet and
singular
modification. A new and very different voice from the rest,
aroused me one morning from my slumbers, and drew me to my
window, with a sentiment of pleasurable anxiety, which was
altogether new to my experience. Such a voiceof so much
powerso much sweetnessso touching, so energetic, at once
so expansive and insinuating, arch and tremulouspassionate,
yet full of the most gentle fear.
I am not a musician myself. I am neither performer nor
connoisseur
,
nor do I profess to have any great passion for that most
pure and elevated of all the sensual luxuries:but I should have
been more or less than mortal to have withstood the
Divine, enchanting ravishment,
of that voice whose sudden song, penetrating the thick folds of
sleep which enveloped me, commanded me to rise from my
couch and compelled me to listen. The song was an English
oneone of those simple old ballad ditties, the taste for which
has undergone some revival in recent days;but the air was
decidedly foreign. The artifices of Italian music linked with the
direct, natural and earnest language of English poetry, struck
me on subsequent reflection, as suggesting a moral discord, which
was unpleasant; but, while the performance lasted I was not
sensible to this or any objection. I had no time to make itno
feeling for dissent or dissatisfaction, and it was only, long after
the voice became silent, that, in seeking to be critical I found any
thing to qualify its complete harmonies. I listened breathlessly
while it proceeded. I was confounded to perceive that it came
from a hovel, the very meanest of the group, which stood almost
in the centre of the `rookery.' If I wondered, however, at the
first moment of the discovery, I had no time, just then, to yield
myself up to mere astonishment. Delight occupied all the
emotions
of my soul; and it was not until the music had ceased for
several moments, that I was able to shake myself free from that
overpowering spell which its sovereign sweetness had imposed
upon me. It was only when my ears ceased to find employment,
that my eyes began to resume their accustomed exercise. It
was only then, that, in examining the miserable dwelling from
which such intoxicating sounds arose, I perceived the partial
profile
at
one of the low, unsashed windowsof a woman,
seemingly
very youthful, in whose style of face, I fancied I discerned
the marked outlines of the English character, and yet, not
entirely
English. The black eyeshair, long and glossy, of the
same colour, which streamed upon a neck of unusual whiteness,
seemed to distinguish one who had in her veins a warm, rich
tincture of Milesian blood. I subsequently discovered, however,
that she was of direct English parentage. Still, her more remote
ancestors might have come from the sister Isle.
I had now a new employment for my vacant hours, and a
new motive for the survey of my `rookery.' I watched and
listened
long enough, and often enough, to discover, in the next five
days, sufficient cause for a greatly-increased wonderment. The
girlfor she was young enough to be considered under this head,
was really beautiful. Her appearance, air, manner and
behaviour
,
were such, also, as to justify the belief that she had
come of good family, had been used to gentle nurture, and
had been blessed with something more than an ordinary
education
.
Yet how came she in such a placeso meanly habited
so poorly tendedso wretchedly provided for? The hovel
which she occupied, was decidedly one of the meanest of the
`row.' The apartment in which I usually beheld her, and
which I could easily overlook from mine, was almost entirely
without furniture. A rude box beside the window formed the
only seat which I perceived it to contain; and the bed, the foot
of which was all that I could see, was spread out upon the
floor. The wild and tender ballad which she sangthe style of
her performancethe subdued and sweet resignation of her
countenance the while,how little did these correspond with the
wretched state of every thing around her! What could have
brought her to this condition? I mused over this question long,
and approached it frequently. The answer which I found
seldom
satisfied me. I was unwilling to believe that mere
misfortunes
,
the hazards of a capricious fate alone, could have so
reduced worth, accomplishment and talent;and yet, how
difficult
,looking
on her face of angelic purity of expression, and a
placid resignation not less angelic,to believe that she was the
victim of guiltthe creature, self-impelled to sin, by her own
bad passions, or pliant virtue.
CHAPTER III.
The
more I thought, the more I was confused; and I became
hourly more and more interested in the subject. My caution
and my studies, and sometimes my landlady and supper, were
equally forgotten. I became something of an amateur in music;
though, after the few first days, my eyes were probably far more
busy than my ears. I almost lived at that window of my
chamber
which looked out upon the `rookery.' My own movements,
at length, came to be almost as much matter of observation and
scrutiny to others, as were those of the fair singer to myself.
Perhaps, I became somewhat indiscreet in the watch which I
kept over her. Not content with the advantages of my position,
I was tempted forth at evening by the sweet song of the syren,
and without determining upon my movements, by the exercise
of any previous thinking, I found myself, finally, under her very
window.
This was a stretch of freedom rather large for one who had
usually maintained, in his conduct, something like the regimen
of a purist. It was an indulgence, the exercise of which soon
brought me a rebuke, which, if it did not fully answer the
intended
purpose, of chiding me back to my own territory, at least
served to remind me that I was an invader of that of another.
The second time that I ventured to cross the street and place
myself beneath the window of the musician, she was engaged
in a touching little ditty, which I had never heard before, and
the mournful sweetness of which brought to my soul as I
listened
a most luscious sentiment of grief. Perhaps I should have
been amply satisfied to listen from my own chamber, had not
the tones of her voice been unusually low. There was, that
night, a faintness in her utterance which seemed to denote a full
feeling in her heart of the sorrowful sentiment which other lips
only sung. An undefinable curiosity made me throw by my
books, extinguish my lamp, put on my cap, and steal forth to
the `rookery.' The evening was darka faint starlight through
apertures in a dense mass of sullen clouds served only to confuse
the aspects of general objects;and secure, as I fancied myself,
from all observation, I crossed the street, and placed myself
against a lamp-post which stood in front of the miserable
dwelling. Here I had not been many minutes before the music
ceased. I could hear a brief conversation carried on in low but
harsh tones in the apartment which had been so lately the
prison of the sweetest song. The mean light of the chamber
seemed extinguished, and while I waited for the strain to be
resumed, the door below suddenly opened, and I was abruptly
confronted by one, who, emerging from the dwelling, in almost
rude accents, demanded my business.
CHAPTER IV.
There
was surely something very impertinent in the demand.
I had, by the common law, quite as much right to be where he
found me as any body, so long as my presence did not conflict with
the similar rights of any other citizen. The querist was a man,
slight of frame, apparently decrepid in his limbs, and evidently an
Italian. I could see by the lamplight, in the full glare of which
he stood, that he was violently agitated. His thin, dark features
were almost convulsedhis lips quivered, and his eyes emitted
a fiery gleam, in which I fancied that I beheld the expression of
a very malignant and personal hostility. This was all matter of
very curious surprise to me, and it was only, I suppose, because
of my exceeding surprise, that I did not, at the first moment, resent
the impertinence of his demand. It may be that I felt also, that,
however justly, according to law, I might maintain my position
where I was, in spite of him or any body else, yet that, in my
heart, and some of its desires, I was, in truth, a trespasser upon
his rights. I certainly longed to get into his householdif it
were his,and to gaze my fill, at the sweet prisoner-bird thereof.
That she was a caged songstress, I could not allow myself to
doubt. I had caught, during the day, more than one glimpse of
her sweet, sad countenance; and I fancied, more than once, that
I read in her eyes as they encountered mine, the yearning to
be free. Perhaps, in this reading of her eyes, my boyish vanity
led me to fancy that I saw a great deal more. Perhapsbut
there will always be time enough for the confessional. Enough
to say that my conscience somewhat interfered in the desire
which I certainly should have felt under other circumstances, of
knocking my impertinent querist into the gutter, in answer to his
demand.
As the matter was, I hesitatedactually stammered, and failed
to reply in a satisfactory manner either to him or to myself, until
provoked to a right feeling of resolution by the repetition, in
broken English, of his inquiry:
What you do here? What you want? The style of the
question was unbearablethe manner in which his face was
thurst forward into mine, was not to be endured, and I boldly
blunted out the truth, or that which was truth,
per se
, with a look
and accent of defiance.
I stop here because it pleases mebecause I wish to hear
the music.
Ah, ha!it please you, dis music, eh? But you shall be go
to you placeyou shall nevare come stop here, no more,
nevare!
And the shrivelled, angry, bilious, fiery-eyed little fellow, shook
his finger almost in my face.
Human stomach could not stand this, and an involuntary
emotion caused me to double my fist and raise my arm, with an
action which left him in little doubt of my summary intentions.
He receded at the sight, and, as I fancied, in order to effect a
retreat as abrupt as had been his entrance upon the scene; but I
was mistaken. It was only the better to prepare himself for
defence. In another moment a stiletto glittered in his hand, and
he assumed an attitude of the most determined preparation. This
would not have discouraged me,for I was conscious that a
frame evidently so feeble as his, armed with any weapon, the use
of which depended upon his muscle, could not oppose much
obstacle to the blow of an arm like mine, endowed with no small
share of masculine vigour, and under the direction, too, of some
small science, the due result of an occasional exercise, in a very
good school of the fancy. I felt confident that I could have
muffled his skylights in a single instant, and long before his
Italian weapon could be brought to bear upon the action. But
a moment's reflection convinced me how seriously foolish would
be any conduct which would bring me into a street-brawl with
one like my opponentso feeble in personso superior in years
and so wretched in his condition. My arm was instantly lowered,
and, murmuring something of a disinclination to chastise age,
however impertinent, I was about to draw off from the ground
and seek my own proper bulwarks. But he was not disposed to
suffer this; availing himself of a change in my position, which
half removed my face from him, he sprang towards me,with
what purpose I could only conjecture. I had just time to turn
and grasp his uplifted arm, from which I wrenched the weapon.
In another moment, such was my indignation, I might have used
it upon him; but I was happily spared this folly, by the sudden
appearance, from the house, of the young woman who had been
the innocent occasion of all this difficulty. At her approach I
withdrew the grasp which I had taken upon the fellow. He
trembled like an aspen in the wind. His teeth chatteredwith
rage, not fear. He shook his impertinent finger at me in hate
and defiance; and when the hand of the woman was put upon
his shoulder, as she threw herself between us, he flung her from
him with a degree of violence, which almost renewed in my heart
the desire to pummel him. The next moment he grasped her
about the body and dragged her within the entrance. Her eyes
were turned full upon me while she was passing from sight; and
it was a small solace to my feelings at that instant, to fancy, as I
did, that there was any thing but unkindness for me in their
expression. I was but a youth at that period, and the vanity which
seems natural enough to youth, must not be visited by the reader
with too harsh an expression of opinion.
CHAPTER V.
However
ruffled I might have been by this event, there was
yet something in it which soothed and satisfied me. The heart
of man is a very selfish substance, even in its impulses of greatest
generosity. Perhaps, in a world, in which so superior and vast
a proportion of the performance depends upon man, it is not
unfitting
that it should be so. He must be impelled by influences
of self even to the execution of those social achievements which
would seem to be most universal in their tendencies and aims.
But this is no place to philosophize. It is enough for me to
confess
that I found pleasure in the conviction that the unknown
songstress was unhappy, without finding it a cause of
unhappiness
to meet my glancethat she dwelt with one who was
evidently
not satisfied with her; and with whomshe being the
creature of taste and sensibility which I readily assumed her to
beshe could still less be satisfied. But in what relation did
they stand to one another? This was a mystery to me which
brought with it feelings of disquietude and pain. He was old
enough to be her father. Was he so? I would have given
somethingthough I knew not whereforecould I have
believed
it. I prayed, unconsciously, that she was not his wife,
and shuddered, the next moment, with the apprehension that she
might be something less, and something worse.
For two days after this I heard no music, and in all this time
the windows remained closely fastened. I saw nothing of the
songstress;but the man, to whom I now addressed no moderate
degree of my attention, but whom before, though I had seen, I
had scarcely notedhe went forth as usual, just after my
breakfast
hour had been passed. I took the precaution now, to do
my espionage through the blinds of my window, which I kept
as carefully closed as my opposite neighbour. I could see that
his eyes were cast upwards as he passed out and came in, and I
readily conjectured, that, having noted my constant
watchfulness
from the window, the quick instinct of jealousy converted
my appearance at night beneath his, into proofs, and
Confirmation strong as holy writ,
of evil purposes contemplated, and, possibly, evil deeds
performed
.
Yet, truly, did I mean no evil. At the worst, that
susceptible
vanity of the youthful heart which makes it equally
ready to exercise its own, and to believe that the affections of
another are sympathetically awakened, was all my error. The
strange surprise of hearing such music, and seeing such a face, in
such a dwelling, was, perhaps, more than any thing beside, the
source of that interest which the songstress awakened in my
bosom. Had she come and gone, without bringing about the
annoying little incident just mentioned, she would most probably
have been nothing more in my eyes and thought, than any other
among the sweet singers of Israel.
CHAPTER VI.
It
was impossible, now, that I should feel any such
indifference
.
Curiosity was awakened, within me, and sharpened into
activity all those other emotions which had been merely roused
before. Every thing about her lowly household had now an
interest
in my sight which kept me feverishly alive to every sound
which reached my ears from, and every movement of life which
took place in, that quarter. Her ugly, little, bilious-faced and
fiery-eyed protector, was, in particular, an object of excessive
concern with me; and I followed his rickety movements, as he
went abroad, and was careful to scrutinize them as he returned
home, as if it were possible for me to derive from such a scrutiny
a knowledge of those secrets which had become so annoyingly
worth knowing. I was not long, however, permitted to
maintain
this watch upon his movements. On the third morning
after the night on which we had encountered, I was impressed
with the conviction, after resuming my usual post of survey at
my window, that the dwelling of the suspicious pair was no
longer occupied. An air of unusual stillness overspread the
establishment. The windows and doors were all sealed up and
silent. No smoke ascended from the chimneyno voice
resounded
from the enclosureno old woman knocked at the gate
for entrancenobody went in and nobody came out. It
presented
a lamentable contrast to the busy hum of the thick
clustering
hive around it. I waited with some impatience for the
breakfast hour. I hurried through the meal without asking
whether I had satisfied appetite, and certainly without doing
justice to my landlady's coffee biggin. I hastened back to my
window, and waited for the customary departure of my male
neighbour on his daily journey. He failed to appear as usual;
and I was pained to think that I should hear no more music
from the lips of the sweet, but melancholy stranger. My fears
were well-grounded. My venerable landlady congratulated
herself
at dinner, that those noisy people, across the street, who
sang so loud, had moved away under cover of the last night
the latter circumstance being one that awakened all the good old
lady's apprehensions for the security of the rent due; in which an
old lady of like dimensions with herself, had, it appears,
considerable
interest. But even this fear did not diminish her
satisfaction
at the removal when she recollected her escape from the
music which annoyed her. The other sounds from the `
rookery
,'vile,
various and discordant as they werenever
offended
a single sense in her whole system. They were natural
and familiar, and, like certain other natural and familiar objects,
they signified love.
But to me this confirmation of my fears brought with it a
degree of discomposure for which I was myself unprepared. I
had sustained a loss, which pressed for the moment heavily upon
me;the loss of that object of secret sympathy which responds
to our emotions, though in tears that we are not permitted to
see, and in sighs that we cannot hear. I felt the privation so
seriously, and my curiosity had been so highly stimulated, that I
could no longer keep within the house, and actually sallied forth,
on the wild-goose chase of looking-up the fugitives in such a city
as New York.
A few hours ramble soon cured me of this folly, though it
failed to bring me to my senses. I gave up the search after
persons
whose names I did not know, and who, if they had not left
the city, could only have found shelter in some one of the
thousand purlieus of destitution which cover its filthy spots. I
returned home soured and dissatisfied, and went back, in sheer
doggedness of purpose, to my solitude and studies.
2
CHAPTER VII.
It
may have been three weeks, or more, after this, that there
was a great stir in New York about a foreign Prima Donnaa
singer whose excellence was equally indisputable and great.
The newspapers which, in such matters, usually speak in the
superlative style of
Euphrosine
, and in words as magnificent as
those of Brobdignag, now, in the excessive warmth of their
enthusiasm
,
happened upon a newer set of phrases, which left the
ancient forms of eulogy far behind them. The fountains of
public admiration were opened. The praises of the new
candidate
for applause and sixpences, sounded from the high places of
authority, were heard repeated at every corner. The singer was
pronounced to be one who could sing louder, squeak longer, and
prolong the note through a more numerous and symmetrical set of
quavers than any vocalist of past or present celebrity. She was,
in short, the last lion of the town, and absorbed in her own glory,
for a season, its thousand phrases of hyperbole.
As a general rule I never suffer myself to do as all the town
does; but on this occasion I fell into the current and went
forward
with the stream. I had my reasons, apart from any
curiosity
either to see the lion or to hear his roar, which induced
me to depart from my wonted resolution. I fancied that the
music of the new performer would impair my recollection of the
old, and do away with the impression of that which I had lost so
suddenly. Up to this time I still deceived myself with the fancy
that all my interest in the unknown creature whom I so much
missed, had been the pure result of her musical sweetness and
superiority. I wentthe house was full to overflowingall
hearts save my own were full of expectancy and impatience.
The curtain rosethe crowd roared and clapped. With an
indifference
the most unfashionable, I looked up at the performer,
and beheld in the famous Prima Donna, my own musical
Unknown
!
CHAPTER VIII.
It
may be readily imagined that my indifference, from that
instant, disappeared. I was now all eyes and ears and devoted
attention. I drank in every sound, watched every expression,
and was ready to believe any extravagance which the public
enthusiasm might exhibit or express. She was triumphant in
her performances that night. She was said, by the critics, even
to have surpassed herself. Opinion had but one voice, and that
was admiration; feeling but one emotion, and that was love. She
was, indeed, a most lovely creature. Her form, which I now
beheld entire, and in a perfect light, for the first time, was one,
harmoniously rounded into grace, whose every movement seemed
to swell into expression. She looked admirably the character
she playedfor the time she wasone of those sylphs of the
moonlight and the sea, which breathed in poetic spirituality from
the works of the ancient masters of English romance. Nor was
the intellectual spirituality of her appearance, lessened by the
unvarying sadness which prevailed upon her countenance,
a sadness not unfitly suited to the looks of a being otherwise
pure and designing to be so,born for heaven, and ultimately
secure of it, but whom, a single, sad lapse, has banished into short
but painful exile from its bright and blessing abodes.
I cannot say that I listened to, or even heard, the music. The
seat which I occupied was in the pit, and so near to the footlights
the orchestra being between, that I could note every change in
the expression of her face. I may have deceived myself, but I
certainly fancied, that she at length saw mine. If she did, she
read a volume in the quivering of my lipin the tearful
admiration
of my eye. There was one period in her performance when
I
know
that she beheld me. She had advanced to the outer edge
of the procenium in obedience to the action of the piece. My
emotions had been gaining strength for a considerable time before.
Heedless of the impropriety I had risen from my seat, and
without
a consciousness of my folly until forcibly drawn back to my
place by some one behind me, my motion towards the stage had
corresponded entirely with hers. The good people ascribed to a
music frenzy the absurdity of my conduct. But sheshe knew
better; she saw the movement of my personshe beheld the
outstretched action of my hand, and never could intelligence like
hers, mistake the unequivocal language in my eye. Her
countenance
changed on the instantI could see
that
, though I could
see little elseher cheeks became flushed, her lips trembled and
her voice for the first time faltered as she sung, while her eye
was fixed upon me with a tearful but sweet intensity of gaze.
Let it be remembered that I was little more than a boy at this
periodthat I had seen very little of the witchery of dramatic
representationthat I had no sort of suspicion of guile in the
heart of one, who could personate innocence and grief quite as
truly as her own form and features personated lovelinessthat I
looked upon the ideal in all things, and knew nothing of the real;
and believed that truth was an undoubted presence, for ever
manifested where it was professed. To those who have been
once young, I need not undertake to account for this confidence
in the humanitiesto those who are still young, there will be no
need for me to make any such attempt. Enough that I looked,
listened and believed. I will not say that I loved. I am not sure
that there is any passion in the heart of man worthy of the name
of love, until the character is fixed by experience, and the heart
subdued by some degree of suffering. Perhaps it will be quite
enough to admit that my passions were activemy sensibilities
without referring to any more subtle influence.
CHAPTER IX.
I waited
with indescribable impatience for the close of the
performance, and was the first, when she retired from the stage,
to leave the theatre. I went round and stationed myself at the
place of private egress. My former adventure under her window
had taught me to be cautious, and I took care to place myself
as much in shadow as possible. Here I watched and waited,
counting the moments as if they had been hours, and even
reproaching
the object of my admiration, as if she had known that
I awaited her. In reality there was no great delay. It might
have been a half hour after her share in the performance was
ended when she came forth, conducted by her ancient protector.
They passed close beside me, her garments brushed against me,
and her eye, keen and quickened, as I fancied by feelings like
my own, rested full upon my face. Involuntarily, she seemed to
pause, and I trembled with a secret joy which the restraints upon
it seemed to heighten. Her attendant, however, hurried her
forward
,
fortunately without beholding me, and I only lingered
long enough behind to avoid awakening his suspicions.
I had not far to follow them. At the corner of the same street
a carriage stood in waiting, into which she entered, closely
followed
by her protector. Vainly did I stretch my head forward
to catch the words of direction which he uttered to the driver.
My hope was about to be defeated, and all my labour taken in
vain. There was but a single alternative. I bounded forward
lightly, and, amidst the rattle of the carriage as it rolled away
from the stand, placed myself upon the flat in the rear without
detection.
Our course lay toward the suburbs, but on a side of the city as
far as possible from that which they had left. My anxieties
while we rode were prodigious. I heard the occasional words
which were spoken by those within the vehiclethose of the
man were most frequent,hers were monosyllables only, and so
faintly spoken that I could not divine their character. I would
have given worlds to have risen upon the flat and looked in upon
the ill-connected couple, but I dared not incur the risk of such a
movement. At length we approached our stopping place. The
speed of the horses was lessenedthe carriage was about to
stop, and I leapt to the ground in anticipation of this event. A
tree, one of the few which city improvements had left in the
neighbourhood, yielded me a covering from which I beheld
without difficulty the new place of retreat which the fugitives
had chosen. The edifice itself in which they lived was of that
better sort, which amply testified to the successes and improved
fortunes of the Prima Donna. It was now of brick, newly built,
two stories in height, with green blinds, a small verandah on the
southern side, and a little patch of green sward in front. You
passed to the door of the dwelling through a low white paling
gate, upon a neatly gravelled walk edged with box, trimmed
grenadier fashion, in stiff, slender and unbroken lines. I made
these observations that night after the departure of the carriage.
I gave myself ample time for the survey, for it grew rapidly to
the small hours of the morning before I left the spot and returned
to my own lodging house.
Shall I confess my folly? The next night found me again at
the theatre, and every night on which she did not perform, I was
a ghostlike stalker through the lonely streetto me not lonely
in which she lived. She saw me notshe knew not of my
proximity, though I sometimes fancied, with the vanity of a
youthful spirit, that she suspected it. She had seen me at the
theatreshe had seen me beneath the lamp on the night when I
followed her home. She could not doubt the admiration which
was expressed by my action and my eyes, and surely, she knew
enough of the nature of man to know that where his heart is,
there will his form be also. I drew conviction, on this head, from
another fact. Nightly and constantly she sang while I traversed
the
pav
before her dwelling; and the strains were those of a sad
tenderness, of a heart pouring forth the irrepressible moans of a
defeated love. At the theatre, her eyesso I persuaded myself
frequently sought out mine; and it seemed to me, at such
moments
,
that her song trembled, and her voice became subdued,
even though the burden of the music called for the greatest
exertion
of her powers. How small and shadowy are the tokens
which persuade the youthful imagination into confidence and
hope!
CHAPTER X.
The
passion which this girl had awakened in my bosom was
such as to lead me to a complete departure from many of my
usual habits. I now remembered certain old acquaintance
among the editorial fraternityclever, good-humoured fellows
who, I well knew, possessed
carte blanche
at all the theatres.
One of these, in particular,a vivacious literary and political
writera fellow who could write a comedy after supper and a
review before breakfast, and who was sufficiently popular in the
2*
community to do as he pleased with every bodyhad been a
frequent companion of my idle hours during my first
acquaintance
with New York. Him I had seen frequently at the theatre
while my inamorata was playing, and his voice, through the
medium of his papers, had been one of the loudest in her eulogy.
I resolved on renewing my acquaintance with him, and availing
myself, as far as I could, of the privileges which he possessed to
procure some of those which I desired. I did accordingly. I
called on him, and after listening to his good-humoured reproaches
at what he was pleased to call my neglect of old friends, I plainly
told him what I came for. I wished an introduction to the
Prima Donna.
Ah, ha! said heso you too are among the thousand in
the meshes of Mam'selle .
She is then unmarried? I exclaimedshe is not the wife
of
The little old Othello that has her in keeping! Well! of that
the least said the better. We know nothing. Enough to tell you
that she passes for his wife, and for aught that any body knows
in New York, she may be.
But you call her `Mam'selle?'
True, but that means nothing. A miss is always more
attractive
in theatrical parlance than a mistress; and I have known,
in Green Room history, a woman who had buried eleven
husbands
,
more or less, who never once changed her maiden name
in the bills! This is only a trick of trade, and the stage, as you
should know, has, perhaps, a hundred and one tricks beyond any
other craft or profession. Mam'selle  is assuredly married
to the little old Italian; and if not married
A shrug of the shoulder finished the sentence of my editorial
friend, very little to my satisfaction.
The story goes, he continued, that he happened upon the
poor girl in London, while in a state of great destitution, just after
she had lost a mother, or while the mother was in the last stages
of decay. That he provided them with present means, and
availing himself of their necessities, married the girl,
Against her will? I interrupted.
Nonot soagainst her wish, perhaps, but not against her
will. Destitution, and poverty, and hunger, have no will in such
a place as London; and famine will reconcile a girl, however
lovely, to a very strange connection. Mam'selle, who is English
by birth, was thus persuaded to couple with this Italian, who
makes himself very ridiculous here by his jealousies. He has
already had a dozen quarrels where he had no cause for one;
for, though the girl is a sort of rage at presenta distinction
which she owes more to me than to herselfyet she is not
deluded
by applause, and takes it as humbly as if she knew its real
value as well as the oldest veteran among us. If you really
desire an introduction, after what you have heard, I don't see
that there will be any difficulty. She will be at rehearsal to-day
at 12, M., and the matter can be easily managed.
I readily embraced the proposition. He continued:
A week more will finish her career in New York. The rage
now, she will soon give place to another novelty, and in ten days
more be among the things that were. We are to have, by the
next packet, a celebrated Harlequin, who can jump twenty feet
high, take the ceiling in his teeth, and hold on thereby sufficiently
long, to enable him to poach a dozen eggs for his supper by a
machine which he takes up with him for that purpose. His legs,
meanwhile, not to be outdone, are to go through all the
movements
of the famous Tilsit Waltz, and at the close he professes to
be able to shuffle them off, with his boots, and drop down, finally,
with his stumps again falling into the dismembered sockets, as
truly as if the position had undergone mathematical
arrangement
.
Oh, nonsense!
Well, I doubt not that the report of his wonders is somewhat
exaggerated, but the report is enough. It will kill Mam'selle
most effectually for the season, so that, to know her in the day
of her glory, you must know her at once. I shall look for you
at 12.
CHAPTER XI.
I was
punctual. The hour was fortunately chosen. Mam'selle
was in the Green Room alone. Her ugly little protector was
absentwhere, it mattered not to me,so long as he was absent;
and I had at length the felicity of speaking to the fair creature,
whom, hitherto, I had not been permitted to approach. My
address, I had reason to believe, said little in my favour. I was
flushed, confused, agitated. I feel that I stammered while
speaking the most customary nonsense; and I was so little the
master of my own faculties, that I could not tell whether her
composure was less or more than mine. But, in either event,
perhaps
,
I had no reason for annoyance. If the woman, in such a
case, preserves her composureif she be any thing of a veteran
in the arts of lifeit does not displease her to look on the
bashfulness
of the unsophisticated heart of youth. There is a
compliment
conveyed by his terrors which is grateful, because of its
freshness, to the heart which is no longer so: and if she was not
composedif like myself she trembled and was confounded, then
it followed that my emotion must have escaped her sight. My
friend, the Editor, congratulated me on my leaving the apartment
upon the obvious impression which I had made. Before we left
her the company began to pour inthe various assemblage of a
good stock-management. There were others too, not of the
company
,who
possessed the privileges of the interiorto whom the
wires might be shown, and the mechanism of the magic, without
danger. There were the Editorsa numerous tribethe writers
for the stage, some of the proprietors of the establishment, and a
few of the dashing bloods of the town. To all of these the Prima
Donna was the eye of attractionthe centre of the solar system in
that little world. I felt myself very small and very awkward,
when I witnessed the dashing freedom and consequential airs of
most around me, as they approached to converse with one whose
very glance had so completely unsettled my nervous system.
Finally, the little, old Italian, her protector, made his appearance,
and with his
entre
you would have fancied that we had
suddenly
fallen in with a mountain of ice. Every thing was frigid
after his appearance. The dandies bowed at a more respectful
distance, at the object of their previous devotion, while his little
fiery eyes seemed to scrutinize every countenance with suspicion,
and to find in every movement abundant cause to congratulate
himself on having arrived in the very nick of time to prevent the
worst of mischiefs.
To me, he gave less attention than I feared would have fallen
to my lot. I had even begun to think that he failed to recognize
me, and should certainly have believed so, but for a single
sentence
which he uttered with a sinister grin, as we underwent the
usual forms of introduction to one another.
You be love music, vera moch, sare, I remembair, eh?
The remark was simple in the ears of all but the Prima Donna
and myself. I took care to regard it as such in the reply I made
at the moment; but I remembered it, and availed myself of the
opening which it gave mefor purposes of explanationto call
upon the couple at their residence.
CHAPTER XII.
I did
so, and found the Prima Donna alone. I was this time
sufficiently calm myself, to see that she was terribly agitated.
Her dress and whole appearance were disordered. Her hair
had found partial freedom from restraint,her eyes were red with
weeping,and the traces of recent tears were apparent upon her
pallid cheeks. She met me with a look full of equal intelligence
and alarm.
Oh! why, why have you come hither? Leave me, leave me,
I implore you, sirit is not wellit is not right; and he will
believe
every thing that is wrong. Leave me, sir, leave me if
you
How would she have finished that sentence had her tongue
not failed in its office? I had barely time to form a pleasing
conjecture
on the subjectnot to answerwhen the little old Italian
burst into the room, with the fiery, fearful, malignant aspect of a
Sirocco. The poor woman sank upon a settee at his appearance,
and covered her face with both her hands. The big tears oozed
through her fingers, and her sobs were almost convulsions.
Ha! ha! what for you come to my house. You lov' music,
but I break up de musiclook you, I break up de music
so! so!
And with the action of a madman, seizing upon a guitar
which lay upon one of the tables, he dashed it into a thousand
fragments by repeated blows against the elbow of the sofa.
Then turning to me, he exclaimed
You is villain, sare. I is turn out, tree, five villain from my
house dis day, and break up de music. You is great villain, and
you is come to my house,dere is no more music in my house,
what for you is come, eh?
I had risen on his entrance. I could scarcely contain myself
during his proceedings. The tears of the girl had awakened my
indignationhis brutality scarcely left me prudence to forbear
violence, which seemed to be almost the duty of a gentleman
under existing circumstances. Nothing but a consideration of
her claims, and the wretched relation in which she stood to this
miserable tyrant, kept my hands from his throat. For her sake,
I subdued my tiger,for her sake, I strove to answer mildly. I
contented myself with saying that I came to explain my conduct
in the previous interview when he was so much offended. But
the violent old wretch did not allow me to finish what I was
saying. He gave me the lie direct.
You come for make my wife lef' me, and go wid you. You
tell lieyou is one villain, dat I shall make lef' my house for
evare.
My blood was getting the better of my judgment, when the
Prima Donna interposed. She rose from her seat with the
manner of one who has conquered, but after a violent effort, and
about whom still remain all the traces of the conflict.
Oblige me, sir, if you please, by leaving the house; oblige
me still more by avoiding it, and me, for ever. To acquire a
friend is with me a misfortuneI need one, how much, Heaven
only knowsbut I wish for none. Leave me, sir; and, in
going, believe me, that
I
at least suspect you of no evil, and am
as grateful to you as if you meant nothing but good. If you
fancy that you leave me unhappy, at least be satisfied that
nothing which you could do or say would have the effect of
making me otherwise.
Ha! you speaks to him in dis manner. You will have me
kill you to death, you
I forbear to repeat the horrible epithet which the monster used
on this occasion. His words provoked me to fury, but when he
coupled them with a blowa blow by his vile hands upon that
pure, sweet, imploring and noble face,my fury became
violence
.
I grasped him in my arms. I lifted him as if he had
been an infant, in spite of all his struggles. I hurried with him
to the window, the sash of which was raised, and a moment
longer would have sufficed me to pitch him into the street. But
my better angel, in the aspect of the wretched woman, his
victim
,
came to keep me from a deed which I might have repented
in suffering and shame. She recovered from the blow which had
staggered her against the wall, and grasped my arm in season.
I put the reptile down unharmed upon the floor, and he seized
the first moment of his liberty to hurry from the apartment, not
without giving a glance at the woman, which spoke volumes of
treasured bitterness and revenge.
CHAPTER XIII.
My
situation was now one of considerable awkwardness, and
it did not lessen my annoyance to reflect that it was one into
which I had been hurried by my own unregulated passions and
imprudent vanity. But this was no moment for reflections such
as these. It was evident that I now had no business there, even
if the business had been legitimate which had carried me there
at first. To remain longer in the house of one who had ordered
my departure in language of brutality, and whose conduct had
provoked me to violence, was surely against all received rules of
gentility. And yet, how to leave the poor woman to his rage?
Would he not wreak upon her weak person and unoffending
head, all the venom which would be idly shown against the
bosom of superior manhood? This was my apprehensionthe
apprehension that made me linger,it was evident that the Prima
Donna, herself, was not entirely without it.
Do notdo not leave me, she exclaimed passionately, as
she beheld his departure, while with hands clasped in something
like a mortal agony of fear, she approached me. He will soon
returnhe is terrible in his angerhe will do some dreadful act.
Fear nothingI will protectI will stand by you to the
last.
I spoke with the look and language of a knight of the middle
ages. Forgetful of the matter-of-fact and every-day character of
the busy world around methe age of money-changers and their
greatest mart,I was hurried away by my boyish feelings, and
utterly lost in the seventh heaven of heroism. I would have
taken her hand in mine as I addressed her; but the attempt
brough about an instant change in her manner. The fear of
doing, seemed suddenly greater than that of suffering, wrong;
and in tears no less energetic if less passionate than before, she
now entreated my deaprture.
Go, for God's sake, and leave me, leave me for ever. I do
not blame youno, no! But you cannot know the mischief
you have done. My husband will never forgive me for this
folly; and every moment of your longer stay will increase the
difficulties, perhaps the dangers, in my way.
I told her there should be no difficultiesno dangersthat I
would stand by and shield her from all harm. At that moment
I felt myself equal to every danger; and would have faced the
giant Ascaparte himself in her battle. But she knew her own
relation to her jealous liege, and resolutely insisted upon my
departure. I lingered until longer delay would have been
impertinence
,
and then prepared to comply with her demand. But
before leaving I proffered my assistance in the event of any
further difficulty. I put my card into her hand. She calmly
tore it into fragments which she threw into the grate.
No, sir, no: I thank you, but you can render me no helpI
shall need no assistance. I only ask you not to see menot to
know me any more. Forget that you have ever seen me.
Impossible!
She silenced my raptures by an impatient movement of her
hand, and the sad sorrow of her countenance was exchanged to
an expression of dignified purity, as she thus rebuked my
extravagance
.
My passion yielded to respect. Her beauty and
talent aroused the oneher virtuous and becoming conduct
commanded the other. I bowed and was turning away, when,
as if moved by some fear that her sternness had given pain, her
features softenedshe advancedgave me her hand for a
moment
,
then left me hurriedly for an inner chamber.
CHAPTER XIV.
I find
it difficult for me to close this narriative. The events
startle myself as I recall them with an air of utter improbability;
and yet I know them to be true, and how many share my
knowledge. The next week the famous Prima Donnashe who
had been the orb of loveliest attraction, rising nightly in song
and splendour before the eyes of the whole citythe next week
she had not only survived her glory, but was a corpse! She
went to rehearsal the morning after the seene which I have just
described was over; and, though indisposed, she played
successfully
that night. I saw her, and saw that there was a serious
sickness in her system; but I ascribed the sickness rather to her
soul than to her bodyto that poor heartso fond, so young, so
tender, so attractive,sacrificed in the first hour of its maiden
dawn to such a dreadful tyranny as that from which she suffered.
For two nights after, being those of Saturday and Sunday, I saw
nothing of her. Monday night she was announced to play, but
her malady had increasedshe did not appear, and her absence
was accounted for by the manager. Tuesday produced a crisis
in her professional fortunes. The great harlequin, who could
jump twenty feet and take the ceiling in his teeth, made his
appearance that night with wondrous clat, and the Prima
Donna, as my friend the editor had predicted, was almost as
much forgotten as if she had never been. The next morning
she was dead! The terrible annunciation came to me, while at
the breakfast-table, in the morning papers:
Mysterious
. We are told, just as our paper was going to
press, that Mam'selle , the lady who has been making
such a sensation in the musical circles of our city for the last ten
days, died suddenly last night, at the house of her protector,
Mons. , in 's Place. There are some circumstances
connected with this event which have awakened the suspicions
of the police. An examination by the coroner takes place at an
early hour this morning. The lady was young, very pretty, and
singularly well constituted for the part of Prima Donna in the
company to which she was attached. She was acknowledged
by Mons. , to be his wife, and her virtue is stated to be
beyond reproach, though, we understand, it has not been without
suspicion. We trust for the credit of our city, that her death
will be found to have taken place according to the ordinary
events of nature.
What a shock did I feel when I read this paragraph. I felt as
if sight had been suddenly deprived me; but I recovered instantly
to the most acute excitement of feeling. I darted up from the
table, hurried to my chamber, put myself in condition to go forth,
and reached the dwelling of the lovely victim in time for the
examination
.
I too had my suspicions of foul play, and in my
heart I swore that the malignant wretch who claimed to be her
husband, and who, I felt sure, must have been her murderer,
should not escape from the talons of justice and a just
punishment
,
if my vigilance could fix them upon him.
A crowd was already assembled, and the coroner busy in
telling
out jurors for the examination. The corpse of the victim was
placed at length upon a table. The eyes were closedthe
features
composedshe had died seemingly without a struggle, and
this appeared to prove that she had died without pain. The
presumptions were, accordingly, in favour of the supposition that
her death had been natural. Not a muscle seemed out of place,
governed by extreme tension, or strained in the slightest
particular
.
The blood-vessels of the neck and forehead were charged
fully, and shone,oh, how freshly with life and beauty,through
the clean transparent whiteness of her skin. I could have bent
down, amidst all that crowd, and pressed my lips upon those
rigid features which had teemed, but a few days before, with all
that was pure, and sweet, and charming, in my sight.
The examination led to no discoveries, though it was conducted
with considerable closeness and sagacity. The coroner was
familiar with his duties, and not disposed to pretermit their
exercise
.
He was acute in his inquiries and closely observant of the
persons who were examined as witnesses. Among these was
Mons. . His features, now passionless and cold, dark yet
inexpressive, confirmed the impressions of my own bosom that
he was guilty of her death. How was it that he, who, while she
lived, had been jealous to madness of all her movements, should
so soon, so suddenly, lose all interest in her fate, unless he
himself
knew the fitting solution of the mystery. This, though to
me conclusive, of the one conviction, was quite as conclusive with
all around me of his innocence. His composure was in his
favour. Strange enough! as if a man who was innocent of her
murder, could have looked with composure, upon the inanimate
form of one who had lately slept upon his bosom, whose eyes
had gleamed with fire, whose cheeks with youthwhose voice
had sent forth such heavenward aspirations of tenderness and
love.
A cautious verdict of the jury finished the investigation. She
died from the visitation of God. True: death from any cause,
however strange,however hurriedis still a visitation of God
God in that form of power which is most terrible to man. The
glance of dire enmity and malignant hate which the Italian shot
towards me from his half-shut eyes, as the verdict was declared,
convinced me, not the less, however, that she died also from the
visitation of the devil. His black heart had decreed her doom
his viperous hands had compassed ithis Italian art had
enabled
him to do so with impunity. After life's fitful fever she
sleeps well!The murderer still lives, but is he, therefore, the
less a token of God's eternal justice? Has he escaped
punishment
?
Is he safe? No! no! The hangman is for ever present
to his imaginationfear dogs his footstepshe is haunted by the
hounds of terrorhe breathes the breath of sleepless
apprehension
bitterness
is in the bread he eats, and venom in the cup
from which he drinks. He lives a prolonged form of death, only
too happy if it could be that he might not live for ever.
THE END.