PELAYO:
A STORY OF THE GOTH. BOOK I.
Vol. I.B
I.
There
is, after all, only a certain quantity of power
in the world, and the loss of it from one spot simply
announces
its transfer to another. Our plaints for the
decayed town or the ruined empire, grateful enough to
the spirit of poetry, are not often called for in reality.
These events usually result from some leading necessity,
which, deplorable enough at the time, the foresight of a
benevolent Providence designs for some lasting and
general benefit. Our regrets are most usually
precipitate
:
our sorrows, in half the number of cases,
in advance of their occasion, and imagination, in this
way, too frequently usurps the province of experience.
Change is the subject of lament, for ever, with the men
who are themselves stationarythe men who receive,
but never transmit, opinions. Innovation, sometimes
ruinous, is always of good import, since it indicates
mental activitythe lack of which is the worst feature in
the history of men and nations. Even revolutions, the
horrors of which are lamentable, are injurious to places
rather than to people. The great bulk of mankind grow
wiser upon them, and the discovery of a new
abiding-place
,
like the discovery of a new truth, must always
afford an added empire to thought, and a wider realm to
the wing of liberty.
II.
With
the decay of Rome arose the stupendous genius
of the Gothic empire, happily imaged by Hercules, its
tutelar divinity. Auxiliaries first, then allies, the
Visigoths
became at last, under Euric, protectors of the
Romans. The power of this monarch was prodigious.
In the language of history, as well as of the poet, the
North was excited or appeased by his nod; and Rome,
the proud and terrible, was content to receive the aid
and recognise the law, of a race it still continued to
consider as barbarian. At this period the Visigoths
were dreaded among the mightiest nations, even so
remote
as Persia; and the oracle of history here pauses
to demand, to what magnitude would their power
have risen had Euric, under whom it grew, survived
till the maturity of his son Alaric, and had not the
national
adversary been Clovis, the valiant and ambitious
genius, raised up, we may suppose as an especial agent,
for its control. France took rank with the death of
Euric. Alaric ascended the throne of the Visigoths
when a mere boy, and the circumstance stimulated the
bigoted Franks into hostile activity. They were
orthodox
Catholics, the Visigoths were Arians. It grieves
me, cried Clovis to his warriors, it grieves me to see
the Arians in possession of the fairest part of Gaul.
Let us march against them, and, with the aid of God,
vanquish these heretics, and divide their provinces.
Bigotry and spoil, the common stimulants of war, had
their due influence. The proposition was received
with a unanimous shout of assent, and Clovis marched
upon his enemy. The two monarchs met near
Poictiers
;
a decisive battle took place,the Visigoths were
defeated, and Alaric slain. The provinces were divided,
and the honours of the Catholic faith restored by the
strong arm in all those portions of Gaul from which the
Arian Goths had hitherto expelled it.
III.
Sixty
years after this event, Leovogild ascended the
throne of the Goths. He rolled back the tide of war
upon his enemies, sustained and reinvigorated his
drooping
people, and by mixed valour and prudence
effectually
restored the confidence and stability of the kingdom.
From his time to that of Witiza, a space of a hundred
years, this prosperity continued, and the Goths were still
powerful by sea and land. The reign of Witiza at the
outset promised a like increase of glory with that of his
predecessors. Brave and equitable at first, he gave to
the choice of the people the fullest sanction, while
maintaining
for a long period the same elevated character.
Justice and moderation, so far, marked the progress of
his rule; and the best evidence, perhaps, of the
correctness
of history in its estimate of his virtues, may be
gathered from the fact that, for the first time in a long
series of years, a liberal and independent spirit began to
prevail throughout the nation, adorning, with a show of
moral beauty, that name which was soon to be blotted
out for ever. Powerful and seemingly united at home,
feared, or at least respected, among the neighbouring
nations, the empire of the Goths, at this time, was not
unworthy of the high-flown pretension with which it
claimed and challenged a comparison with Rome.
Almost
arrogant in its boldness, we may yet estimate
highly its firm resolve and elevated character, when,
under the sway of the present monarch, we find the
National Council of Toledo firmly and successfully
resisting
the demand then urged by the Pope, as successor
to St. Peter, of absolute dominion in and over the
Christian states of Europe. Such was the nation then;
but, in one sense, the evidence of character is defective.
The nation was never nigher than at that moment,
to its overthrow. The independence and improved
mental character of the people were the deadliest foes
possessed by the existing government. Their affections
were not with their rulersthere was no community
of feeling between them. A new truth had gotten
abroad among men. Veneration, the bearded despot,
was tottering upon his ancient towers. Implicit
obedience
had given way to doubtdoubt had brought
inquiry
into exercise, and the scales of superstition and a
blind obedience had fallen, in consequence, from a
thousand eyes. Once seeing, it saw allit never slept
again. The very power which had bidden defiance to the
chains of Rome was of itself fatal to the old tyrannies
which had made a serf of the subject, and degraded the
neck of manhood to a collar. Power was embraced by
change, and the issue was revolution.
IV.
Moderate
tyrannies are of all others the most
dangerous
and deadly, and it is therefore fortunate for
mankind that it is the very essence of misrule to glide or
leap into excess. Excess provokes resistance, and the
tyranny is overthrown. To Witiza himself, the reigning
prince, is ascribed the activity of innovation and thought
among the people. Though, at first, rather remarkable
for the equity and moderation of his rule, the possession
of power beyond the legitimate grasp of his own intellect,
as in the case of Nero, is said to have corrupted his
heart: it certainly changed his character. His reign, in
progress of time, became unpopularwith a part of the
nation at least; and some harsh proceedings against the
Jews, who continued to draw out a miserable existence,
under every sort of privation, among a people whose
laws denied them toleration and decreed their expulsion,
at length prompted this oppressed and wretched people
to an intrigue with the neighbouring Saracenseven
then, to the Goths, a frequent and formidable enemy.
B 2
Such an event threatened the empire, at the same
moment
,
with foreign and intestine war. But the aim of
the Jews miscarriedtheir plans were discovered in
time for prevention, the insurrectionists were put down;
and, as a necessary consequence, their bonds grew
heavier and their penalties less endurable than ever.
V.
But
though the insurrectionists were quelled, or
quieted, the general discontent following internal strife
and unaccustomed privation was not so readily subdued.
War and disaffection had brought their own troubles
along with them; and, as in the old condition of all the
European states there never could have been any
sympathy
between the ruler and the great body of the ruled,
the intrigues of the oppressed Jews had opened the eyes
of thousands, in other classes, to their own oppression.
In the general ferment, the Gothic nobles, who were
luxurious and sensual, had their sufficient share; and
by their arts the people were stimulated to that fever
which was to be their own death. They were no longer
the brave barbarians who, under Euric, had vanquished
the martial nobles of the Tarragonese provinces, had
penetrated to the heart of Lusitania, and, when Odoacer
usurped the sovereignty of Italy, compelled him to yield
up, as far as the Rhine and the ocean, all the Roman
conquests beyond the Alps. They were no longer the
people whose dauntless valour overcame the hardy
discipline
of the Roman legion. They too had soon fallen
into all the degeneracies and the tastes of Rome. Like
her, and with far greater rapidity, they had sunk from all
the attributes of that forward valour and manly simplicity
of character which had made them, like her, the
sovereigns
of the world and period. To a people so
deteriorated
,
the consequences of unaccustomed warfare may
readily be told. Discontent among the people grew with
increasing expenditure on the part of the nobles. The
latter, under oppressions not sanctioned by popular
sympathy
,
had occasioned expenditures which that people
were yet to satisfy. This taught them the difference of
interest which, once known, must overthrow every rule
the difference between the people and their rulers
the consciousness of a dissimilarity of purpose and
position, at once provoking discontent and demanding
hostility. Nor was this spirit of dissatisfaction entirely
confined to the people. The inferior nobles had their
discontents also; discontents which continued to
increase
as they surveyed the excesses in which the more
wealthy of their order engaged. They craved equally
their indulgences, but they lacked the necessary
resources
.
To oppress the inferior, thereforeto imitate
the exactions of those above themwas the resort of this
latter division. The Jews, for whom, after their late
intrigue, there was little sympathy, were the first and
legitimate victims. Their goods were the common spoil,
and what they could not withhold or secrete, became, in
great part, the prey of their oppressors. After these,
the inferior orders of the Christiansfor religion does
not hold ground against misrulesucceeded to their fate,
and a reckless and rash spirit of provocation throughout
the land paved the way for a downfall of that power in
which the sway of the government seemed to be
deposited
.
Nothing could limit the excesses of this petty
nobility, which did not content itself with the possessions
of the inferior, but, in the end, proceeded to subject to
its unrefined desires the wives and daughters of the
classes most unprivileged, or seeming least secure.
VI.
With
a re-awakening of the early spirit of virtue
which was said to have distinguished the outset of his
reign, and from which he had himself lamentably fallen,
the king, Witiza, determined to make head against these
excesses. In aid of this determination, it so
happened
that Theodofred, an old and decayed noble, was
guilty of a gross outrage upon a woman of the lower
orders. The rabble took up the cause of justice, and
pursued the offender into the very court of the palace of
Toledo. Theodofred, secure as he thought of the
protection
of the king, no less than of his caste, looked to
be defended against the rabble which pursued him;
but he was mistaken. Whether it was that a sentiment
of right in reality gave the monarch a spur to justice,
or whether, as is more probable, he hoped by a timely
and severe act of authority to win back some of those
golden opinions from the people which he had but too
obviously neglected, may now only be conjectured; but
his proceeding was marked with all the decision, even if
it lacked the impulse and the intention of justice. He
met the crowdassured them of his sympathy, and
promised them the adequate punishment of the criminal.
They were pacified, and he kept his word. Theodofred
was immediately deprived of his sighta favourite
punishment
with the Gothsand, in despite of the prayers
and murmurs of the nobles, was immured, under the
doom of imprisonment for life, in a dungeon at Cordova.
VII.
This
terrible, but strictly just, punishment was the
signal for a greater rebellion than that which had been
recently put down. The nobles made common cause
in defence of their order, the privileges of which they
asserted to have been invaded. Witiza refused to make
any concessions, and they raised the standard of
insurrection
throughout the kingdom. The common people
themselves, though truly without motive for coalition
with the nobles, joined with them against the sovereign,
in whose person they saw only the imbodied form of
that domination which had oppressed them. To these,
the Jews, glad of any chances for that commotion which
they had themselves laboured to provoke in vain, at once
gave all their assistance. Thus, welded into one, the
extreme castes of the nation stood up, a solid and
headlong
power, in array against their common ruler. It
was Roderick, the son of Theodofred, that led them.
His wrong was that most present to their eyes, and his
valour and known recklessness, at the same time, lent
force to the suggestion that proposed him as their leader.
His first stroke against the sovereign was made in the
city of Cordova. The dungeon which enclosed his
sightless father was assaulted and stormedthe son
stood before the sire, and was unseen.
Who is it that approaches?what new danger awaits
me? Must Theodofred look now for death from the
hands of Witiza? Lo! I am ready, was the speech
of the captive.
Not death!not death! but freedom! exclaimed
the son.
Who speaks?that voice cried the victim, as
he tottered forward at the well-known sounds.
Is thy son'sis Roderick's. He brings thee
freedom
and vengeance. Father! I stand before thee.
I hear thee, but I see thee not, my son!
That is a word for strife and a fierce vengeance, and
thou shalt have it! I swear it on my sword, the tyrant
shall perish, even as thy sight.
Approachlet my hand press thy headlet me
feel, for I know thee not, my son.
The son knelt to the blind old sire, and the guided
hands rested upon the uncovered head in benediction.
The warriors around hailed the auspices with a shout
of fierce enthusiasm, and they daringly began the war
which was destined to shake the kingdom of the Goths
to its centre. Three armies, at the same moment,
traversed the empire. One of these was led by Witiza,
who, lacking nothing of the valour come from his
ancestors
in direct lineage, at once went forth against the
insurgents. Another, and the most numerous, was
that of Roderick. The third, infinitely inferior in every
respect to both of these, was led, in support of the
reigning
monarch, by his two sons, Egiza and Pelayo; but
at too great a distance from the scene of war to
co-operate
with their sire against the approaching power of his
enemy.
VIII.
The
respective armies of the sovereign and the rebel,
after several skirmishes, indecisive and only stimulating
a wish for a closer struggle, met, at length, under the
walls of the capital city of Toledo. The close strife
of the sword, the spear, and the cleaving battle-axe,
came terribly on, after the manner of the time, and with
a revival of much of that sanguinary valour long
suspended
in their history, but which, at one time, had made
even the Imperial Queen of Cities, the mighty Rome,
cower and give back before the Gothic arms. Then
rose the shout and the hurrahthe cry of conquest and
the shriek of painthe concentrated hate and malignity
so naturally the result of a strife in which people of the
same land and origin stand up in arms against each
other. The insolent hope of rebellion rose into a
desperate
halloo, mingled with the confident cry of legitimate
power. Both were anxious, prompted by leading, but
different motives. Never were the arms of opposing
arrays more equally balanced. The battle was protracted
from sunrise to sunset; now approaching, and now
receding
from beneath, the walls of Toledo. The citizens
thronged upon the towers and the battlements, looking
forth in anxious doubt upon the progress of the strife.
Twice did the insurrectionists fall back in panic before the
well-ordered array of the sovereign. Twice did Witiza,
with the golden horns of royalty upon his brow, and
mounted upon a car blazing with jewels, such as was
common
to all the luxurious monarchs of the Goths, rush
forward upon the retreating thousands of Roderick,
crying
,
Victory!victory! gallant nobles and fair
gentlemen
of Spainone more blowone more blow, and a
rich prize for the head of the traitor. But such was
not the destiny of the insurgent chief. He threw
himself into the thick of battle. He stood in the path
of his retreating troopshis own sword cleft the neck
of the foremost fugitive, and his voice rang, like a clear
note from the full-throated trumpet, in a peal more full
of terror than any shock of the foe. He cheered them
with a new hopehe led them forward with a fresh
strength and better decision, and, for the third time, the
armies clashed spears in opposing battle. How close
was that strugglehow doubtful the result! What then
were the hopes of insurrectionwhat then the doubts
of legitimacy! The stake was great alike, to the
sovereign and the rebel; and the efforts of both were
worthy of the adventure. For a long time the battle
hung in suspensea feather's weight, a word more or
less, on either side, had determined the issue; and, duly
conscious of this truth, Roderick determined to single
out, and by opposing manfully the danger in its very
head, if possible, to make it less. Through the thick
masses he pressed forward on his way. Amid the
crowd and the dust, defying the hostile spear, and
dashing
aside the friendly, the strong-armed rebel rushed
daringly to grapple with his king. Witiza beheld his
approach
,
and readily conceived his object. He shrank
not from the encounter, but, leaping from his car of
battle, armed only with battle-axe and sword, he stood
upon a small eminence, and waved his hand in signal to
his enemy. His nobles gave back at his bidding, and,
as if by tacit consent, the two armies threw up their
crossed spears and suspended their strokes, in breathless
anticipation of the single combat of the chiefs.
I have thee, tyrant!I have thee now, for vengeance!
cried Roderick as he came; and he lifted his battle-axe
to his shoulder, and rushed fearlessly up the hill.
Thou comest for justice, and thou shalt have it,
traitor! cried the monarch, who knew how much he
might rely on his ancient prowess.
And then came the stroke and the clashthe
affronting
thrust of the sword and the resolute parry, the keen
eye guiding it in the true direction, so that it touched
not. The king gave back before the rebel, and then
rose, with a thrilling joy, the shout from the force of the
insurgents; then trembled the ranks of the sovereign,
and they would have rushed forward to his aid; but
when they looked again, it was Roderick who had shrunk
Witiza pressing upon him, and the rebel partly upon his
knee. Once more did he recover to the attack, and so
stoutly plied he his blows that the weary arm of the
monarch might well have failed to meet them with
corresponding
vivacity. But Witiza had an old renown.
Had he not met the insurgent Basques, and overthrown
the Tarragonese nobles, and driven back the invading
Franks, until his name became a terror to each foreign
power? Should he now give back before rebellion?
He did not; he knew the strength of his armthe
superiority of his skilland his soul was fearless as his
steel was true. He put aside his enemy's blows, and
dreadful and thick were his own. It was Roderick's
turn to shrinkto give wayto flee. He yielded to
what seemed his destiny, and the brave monarch pressed
hard upon the rebel, as, fighting and facing to the last,
he descended, still battling, from the eminence where, in
the sight of both armies, the combat had been going on.
At that instant a voice arose from the crowd of
insurgent
chiefsa solemn, deep voice of inquiry. It came
from the lips of the blind Theodofred.
Speak! cried he to the warriors around him
speak! tell me how the fight goes; for I hear not the
shouts of our people, and my eyes see not the form of
my son.
Roderick heardand shame and a new fury grew
active in his bosom.
I fight still, my father. Thou shalt have
vengeance
,
though thine eyes behold it not. Ho! Witiza, I
cross swords with thee again! and he resolutely rushed
up the hill. The monarch met him, unrelaxing, with his
ancient spirit.
Thou art not stronger, nor I weaker, thou traitor,
than when I struck with thee before. Thy hope shall
be the same.
And they renewed the strife; but scarcely had it
begun
,
when an arrowa single arrowperfidiously shot
from the insurgent ranks, with deadly aim, penetrated
the eye of Witiza. The monarch reeled beneath the
shaft, and his lifted battle-axe struck wide of the head
of his enemy, upon which it was otherwise unerringly
descending. In that moment he cried
Ha! slave, thou hast slain thy king! It is over.
Dizzy and dazzled, he reeled about like one drunk
with wine, and the steel of Roderick's weapon then
penetrated his bosom. He clasped the weapon-blade
in his hands, and fell heavily to the earth. The star of
rebellion was triumphant and in the ascendant, while
that of Witiza went down in blood. The king of the
Goths lay prostrate beneath his conqueror, the foot of
the rebel was upon his breast, and the cry of horror
from the one array, and the shout of exultation from the
other, went up in a fierce diapason, as thus, bestriding
his victim, his sharp blade smote the neck of the
sovereign
,
till the gray head rolled from it along the hill.
That event determined the conflictthe courage of
Witiza's army fell with its leader; and, now a confusion,
and now a rout, they fled before their enemy. The
streets of the neighbouring city of Toledo, to which they
retreated for shelter, ran thick with their blood, as,
without offering resistance, they sunk under the swords
of their pursuers. In that hour, while yet the conqueror
stood over the body of his sovereign, and on the spot
Vol. I.C
where he had slain him, three of his bravest warriors
seized upon him, and pinioned him to the earth. A
dozen crossed their spears over his body, while in his
sight waved as many swords.
Swear! cried the chiefs.
Swear! cried the people.
Swear as a Gothic noble! cried the nobles.
Swear as a Goth! cried the common soldiery.
I swear as a GothI swear as a noble! was the
response of Roderick.
Swear to be honourable! cried one of the former.
Swear to be merciful! cried one of the latter.
Swear to be true! cried the noble.
Swear to be just! cried the soldier.
In the name of the great God of heaven and earth
the friend of manthe protector of the Gothsthe
father of the most holy faith, I, Roderick, son of
Theodofred
,
and true descendant from Chindaswind the Goth,
I swear to you, nobles of the GothsI swear to be
honourable
and true. I swear to you, people of the Goth
I swear to be just and merciful. God sees, God hears!
I have sworn!
Bring the bucklerhe has sworn, was the cry
of those around him. The buckler was brought, and,
raising the successful rebel from the earth, they placed
him upon it, pronouncing him their king, and the king
of the Goths. As with one voice, the vast multitude
then swore allegiance to one destined to be the last
monarch of their once mighty empire.
IX.
A few
leagues off from the scene of battle, but
rapidly advancing along the Tagus with levies hastily
gathered among the neighbouring towns and provinces,
came the two young princes, Egiza and Pelayo, sons
of the monarch whose death we have just witnessed.
They had been aiming at a junction with their father,
but though they had hurried with all due diligence with
this object, they were still at some distance when the
battle joined. It was in a narrow valley, about seven
miles from Toledo, that they paused at nightfall for a
brief rest. Their troops had been greatly wearied by
the rapid and continued travel of the long day, and such
a pause became absolutely necessary to enable them to
commence their march again that night. It was then
that they gained the first intelligence of Witiza's defeat.
Fugitive after fugitive, each confirming, with some new
disaster, the story of the preceding, made his appearance
in the camp of the young princes, until the narrative of
misfortune was finally complete, in the appalling
communication
,
to them, of the murder of their father.
Then the elder brother burst into tears and lamentations
before his whole army, and his heart sunk within him at
the tidings; but Pelayo, who was a brave and fearless
spirit, rebuked this weakness, and spoke boldly to the
messengers.
Now, tell ye forth your story, ye that have run
so fleetly with its burthen. Halt ye not in what ye
came for, but impart the manner of the fight. Say out
the wholewhere stood the kingwhat force brought
Roderick onwho was the traitor lord that led the
flight, and had no thought for vengeance. Speak it all.
The fugitives then told him what he sought, dwelling
with closeness upon all the events, until he came to the
death of the old monarch, when the sorrows of Egiza,
the elder brother, burst forth afresh.
Now shame on thy woman heart! cried the sterner
Pelayo; thy tears were fitting were they those of the
man, which are blood, and not those of the woman,
which are water. Go toare we the sons of Witiza,
and shall we borrow a thought from the child and weep?
No, EgizaI have for thee a better counsel. We shall
fight. Let not thy tears damp the brave hearts of the
warriors that follow us. Look battle, and send out a
fierce cry, that we may all gather strength for
vengeance
.
Thus saying, he strove to fill the soul of his
elder brother with his own brave spirit; but Egiza took
greatly to heart the news which he had heard.
I hope my father is in heaven, cried Pelayo to the
troops. Mine is a true charity, my friends, since I
would despatch after him the traitor Roderick, who sent
him there. So make fitting your weapons, and let us
at once go forward to avenge our friends. Let us
pluck down the rebel and do justice upon him, showing
ourselves worthy in the sight of our country.
And faintly the soldiers cheered at the speech of
Pelayo
.
They had been depressed by the intelligence
brought by the fugitives and looked not with their former
spirit. When Pelayo saw this, he rebuked his brother.
This it is to be a woman; thy weakness has dashed
the spirits of thy men, and they have grown feeble like
thyself. Speak thou to them, and put on the show of
a valour which thou seem'st not now to have. Let
them hear thee, and, if thou canst, teach them to have
souls fit for their swords, which are of Toledo.
Thus, nobly encouraging both his brother and the
army, did Pelayo speak. Moved by his rebuke, Egiza
threw aside his sorrows, and addressed the warriors
manfully, as became the good stock from which he
sprang. But their depression had been too great from
the news brought by the fugitives, and, in addition to
this, the emissaries of the rebel lurked even among
themselves. The young prince spoke to men who
were blinded or staggering. Conscious of their own
numerical inferiority, and assured of the complete
dispersion
of that stronger array of the monarch, on the
junction with which they had so much relied,they began
to sink under the overwhelming despondency which
these events brought along with them. But a few chiefs
and warriors showed signs of a true courage, and a
willingness
to advance; and these too soon drew back when
they found how feebly they were seconded by the
remainder
of the army. Even the valorous and sanguine
Pelayo saw plainly enough that nothing could be hoped
from them in their present condition of mind; and,
with shame and sorrow, he assented to the necessity
which compelled them to fall back with their force upon
the city of Cordova, where they hoped to find support in
their quarrel. In this retreat their power gradually
diminished
,
until at length, approaching Cordova, and
hearing that it also had declared for Roderick, the two
unfortunate princes now found themselves sustained
only by a small band, chiefly of the nobles, who had
clung to them and were true in all seasons. The rabble,
always fickle and uncertain, had fled in every direction;
some with the fear of punishment, and some in the
hope of reward from the conquerorso that the policy
left for the young princes was, simply to disband their
small, but trusty, remaining force, and wait for better
times. This done, though they well knew the danger,
yet, as they had many friends in Cordova, they approached
that city. Carefully disguising themselves, unattended,
they entered the city at nightfall, amid the sound of
barbaric
music, and the shouts of thousands assembled to
glorify the annunciation of a new monarch over them
he the usurper of the throne, and the destroyer of one
whom they had so lately professed to love with a feeling
little short of adoration. Bitterly cursing their
insincerity
in his heart, and musing upon the instability of
fortune, Pelayo led the way for his less elastic brother,
until, sheltered by the night, they entered unperceived
into the palace of their paternal uncle, Lord Oppas,
the Archbishop of Cordova. It was then, at midnight,
in the dim seclusion of a secret chamber, that the
archbishop held conference with the young princes, his
nephews, on the best mode for regaining the empire of
which they had just been deprived by the successful
usurpation of Roderick. The churchman and the elder
prince, Egiza, the immediate heir to the throne, were
seated thus in conference, the brow of the prince sad and
C 2
thoughtful; while Pelayo, the younger, who was of a
fiery and restless spirit, strode, gloomily and impatient,
to and fro along the apartment.
X.
'Tis an evil day, my sons, exclaimed the archbishop,
after they had briefly related to him the particulars of their
late mishap, 'tis an evil day, but it is not all evil. We
have lost the battle, and, for the time, our enemy is
victorious
.
But cheer ye upall is not lost, if we be not
lost to ourselves. Let us not be downcastlet us not
despair. 'Tis the woman's heart that will not hope on
in spite of denial and in defiance of the misjudging
fortune
.
'Tis not for the strong man to be shaken with
the sudden tempests nor the mighty tree to be cast down
like the timid shrubwherefore, then, Egiza, do you thus
hang your head as if it awaited the stroke of the
headsman
?
Look up, my sonput on the semblance of
battle
;
and though we hide our weapon for a season, let us
have the spirit for ever warm and ready within us that
shall prompt us to its use.
While he spoke the clangour of the oriental drum,
mingled with the shrill notes of the Roman trumpets,
and the clamours of the multitude, announced to them
the exulting progress of Roderick's faction. The finger
of Egiza was uplifted as the sounds filled the apartment,
but he made no other reply to the encouraging
exhortations
of the archbishop. The latter continued,
'Tis truethose clamours and that exulting trumpet
tell us allthe throne is lostyour father slainthe
power departed to another hand, for a season at least;
but they only tell us what your own lips have already
been free enough to utter. They give us no new cause
of apprehension. They carry with them no terrors to
heighten those of the disastrous field where the sun of
Witiza set in blood. Let us not despond, and, above all,
despond not thou. Thou art the rightful heir to the
throne, and, if thou be'st a man, they can only keep it from
thee for a season. That season over, and, by the holy
martyrs of Antioch, I promise thee thou shalt come to
thy own.
The words of the archbishop aroused the youth, if
they did not encourage him. With a deep sigh he
answered
I would hope, my uncleI would that I could not
fear. But give us better ground than these empty words.
Whence comes your hopewhere are our friends, our
arms, our confidence? We stand alone. The warriors
that followed us so lately are all fled, and, by this time,
I doubt not, those who fled not fill the ranks of the
usurper. The base multitude, forgetting their past
favours
and the glories of our race, shrink from the sides
of those whose sires led them in triumph over the neck
of Rome, and bore the banner of the Goth from the
Danube
to the Atlantic Sea. On such as these we may not
rely, and for such as these we should not look. The
coward hinds, though they swore most trimly when the
foe was yet distant, had neither word nor blow when he
approached us. They lingered not even to behold him;
and are now, such as follow not in his train, shut up and
trembling among the caves of the mountains, without
the spirit of utterance, when a stout battle had given
them the victory and me the crown that I should
challenge
but vainly now.
They will come with the occasion, my son, replied
the archbishop. Their flight and terror now are
natural
enough; let us not upbraid them, but content
ourselves
,
as we well know that the unobtrusive power (so
ordered
by the mazy Providence) comes ever with the
necessity
which demands its service. Let us await its
coming
.
'Tis not now that we can challenge the sudden
growth of Roderick, and raise a party for his overthrow.
It were madness to move in such an effort. We must
abide our time, watch patiently the season when he
sleeps, and when they whom he oppresses are ready to
awake in a common cause with our own.
'Tis a long watch, said Pelayo, now for the first
time joining in the discussion, and asks more patience,
my good uncle, than altogether befits my temper. I am
not in the mood to wait. I have resolveday, sworn
by the sword and by the soul of my fatheran awful
spirit now hovering over usto yield it no such leisure.
To-morrow I speed for the Asturias. We have some
friends theresome true, strong-handed friends; men
who lock not up their anger in smooth discourse, and
plead, even while the foe plucks them by the beard, in
long, dull maxims of propriety, till the hot blood grows
cold.
You are rash, Pelayorash and ill-advised,
exclaimed
the archbishop, in tones more moderate than his
language. Your active and open movement, my son,
would be fatal to our success. It would take from
wisdom
its design, and, where a sober and calm thought
would win the way, by some hasty movement you were
sure to lose it. Hear to my counsel, son. We must not
offend the uncertain power of the tyrant, who is not yet
easy in his seat. He is jealous now, and watchful, and
not his own eyes merely, but a thousand others watch
for him, if 'twere only to buy his favour. We must
pause until he ceases to fear from opposition, until his
eyes close. Any movement now, even if the tyrant
failed to arrest it, would only arouse him to a closer
watch, which must keep off the good day of our
deliverance
.
And how long are we to watch thus, good uncle
and where is the better hope from delay? The reason
must be strong to make me sheathe the sword. Did
they not tell us, brother, that the blood-streaming head
of my father was stuck high upon the gates of Toledo?
There let it remain, said the archbishop, coolly;
and, for your vengeance, let it remain also. Know, my
son, that the appetite grows the keener from the delay;
and this knowledge alone, were it not our policy too,
should make us deliberate in our movement. Hear me,
Pelayo, and hearken to my hope, which springs rather
from the nature of this people and this tyrant than the
particular strength of the army we might bring against
them. What is the Goth in Spain? Rude, wild, ever
bent for action, sickening with peace, yet swilled and
drunken with the sensuality of the Greek. They
cannot
bear long with one like Roderick, whose
self-indulgence
shall prove a barrier to theirs, offending them by
restraints which he attaches not to his own wild passions.
What of the Iberian?
He is with usmore with us than with Roderick
I too am an Iberian, exclaimed Pelayo.
Ay, but he is broken in spiritdispersed and
ill-directed
.
Dreading every leader as a new tyrant, and
having but little hope from any. Teach them to confide
in thee, and thou wilt do more than Wamba or Ervigius.
I will do it! said Pelayo.
Be it sobut thou canst not now, and our better
hope is in Roderick himself.
Howwhat mean you, uncle? exclaimed Egiza.
From his tyranny over Goth, and Iberian, and
Basque, and Jew, and allfrom his fierce nature and his
jealous passion. I know him well, my sons. I have
long known him, and I well know he cannot long please
the nobles. His lustful thoughts, always passionate
and wilful, wanting now the curb which belonged to his
lowlier station, and kept him within due limits, will soon
work ruin for his cause among their haughty leaders.
Let him have but little sway, and, my life upon it, he will
make for us a thousand partisans among his most
favourite
nobles.
Speak, in what way, sir? said Egiza.
In a thousand ways, my son, and each of them
helping on to our purpose. He is voluptuous as the
Moor; and, now that he is sovereign, will not pause, like
him, to satisfy his fierce passions at every risk. Some
damsel of the court shall catch his eye, and he will
straight assay her as a prince having power to take his
will. With his blood roused, it will not be her plea or
the Lord's prayer that shall make him give over his
purpose
.
He will on, though maidenhood survive not in
Iberia. Some youthful noble shall but look awry upon
his amours or his insolence, and his head pays for it, and
crowns a pikestaff rather than its own shoulders. In
this and a thousand other ways shall he offend the people
and make us friends; and, as we are better secure of
this than of any open movement, we gather by delay.
No delay for me! exclaimed Pelayo, abruptly.
How, brother! said Egiza.
How! responded the former; wherefore ask me
how? What see you in this argument of the Lord Oppas
to stead you by delay? I see nothing. Roderick may
be lustful and insolent, or nothe may make enemies
or not among his followers; but how does this affect
either our rights or duties? I see not. I know that
my king has been deposedmy father has been slain
and that a tyrant rides in his place. The sacred
person
which we have honoured has been hacked by
rebellious
swordshis reverend head, which, until this evil
time, they had never beheld but with downfalling eye
and bending reverence, by this usurper has been stricken
from the bleeding trunk, and set on high for the Arabian
vultures
But, my sonPelayo, said the archbishop,
seeking
to interrupt the vehement youth; but he continued
thus
If you have patience, brother, such as our uncle
counsels, be it so. I am of different temper. I am
not pleased to listen to such laggard hope as prates for
ever of pause and pationce, of what may chance
to-morrow
,
and what notwaiting for opportunity to do its duty,
which the honest and fearless mind should ever carve
out for itself. You can stay listen, if so it please, to the
lord bishop. His preachings shall persuade you, I
doubt not, to a most easy duty. For my part, I must
seek me out a wilder tutor in the Asturias, and content
me with a philosophy which, if less musical, shall, at
least, be much more manly.
Truly, Pelayo, for a younger brother, you have but
a slight cast of humility in your deportment. But I
forgive
you. Your rebuke is scarcely merited. It is my
will to avenge the fate of our father, not less, I trust me,
than it is yours; and I pledge myself to you to that
purpose, as solemnly now as erewhile I pledged myself
to his shade. But I seek not to strike till I can strike
hopefully. Not to strike fatally were ruinously to risk
our object; and it is in this that the reason of our uncle
lies. His words are wisdom, and should control our
thought. We do not yield our purpose when we delay
it; we rather give it strength, and reduce to a measured
certainty that which in your movement might well be
declared madness.
The archbishop now approached Pelayo, and putting
his hand affectionately upon his shoulder, thus urged him
to a temporary pause in his contemplated journey.
Hear me a moment, son; the delay I ask is but a
brief one. I have some friends who made our cause
their own. They meet with me to-morrow night.
Wait patiently till then. There will be little loss of
time, and none to make serious concern. Be thou
there; hearken their counsel, and, when we have all
conferred together, we may then more wisely determine
upon our common course hereafter.
This is right, brother, said Egiza; the counsel
of our uncle is good. Be not distrustful, I pray you.
Let us listen to the wisdom of age, and grow wiser in
our own purposes, as we needs must.
But this suggestion did not seem to strike Pelayo
with the emphasis with which his brother gave it
utterance
.
He replied with increased impatience.
I am no child, Egiza, he exclaimed; why, then,
talk to me of age? If that the aged have more wisdom,
they also have greater caution; and, in time of civil war
and strife, caution is a quality which shows too much
like cowardice to be altogether grateful to Pelayo. The
aged, indeed! What, I pray you, have the aged to do
with those who feel? I'm wrongedI feel my wrong.
My heart, that bleeds for love of a dear father, impels
me to my purpose. What need I of other lesson?
Much need, my son, replied the archbishop.
The heart does well to maintain its feelings truly, but
the head must guide them wisely, or they must ever err.
Hear me still farther, Pelayo. I have a plan of counsel
with Count Julian of Consuegra, and certain arguments
which, I trust me, shall move him to our cause. He
was the favourite once, and for a long season the
follower
of your father. He thinks, most surely, with us,
and did counsel many adversely to Roderick who yet
maintained his faction.
A stale soldier! Why, then, kept he aloof from
action? Why drew he no weapon against the rebel?
demanded Pelayo.
The wiser, perhaps, for his forbearance, my son,
since, as events have shown, his labours must have been
unavailing. He kept a neutral station
And thus joined the rebels. Avoid him, say I.
Wherefore give confidence to him who neither helps his
friend nor strikes his foe? We'll none of him, I think.
Nay, Pelayo, but we must, said the archbishop.
He has but late come from Tingitania, and has no
part in the conflict, and but little knowledge, as yet, of
the condition of the realm. We'll seek him out at once.
Hard by is his castle, where he seeks present repose
with his fair daughter Cava. Let us find him soon,
and, by early speech, secure him for our cause. 'Tis
a battle gained. All the troops love him in Ceuta; and
be it known that he is with us, a goodly army follows.
And thinkst thou, demanded Pelayo, that he will
listen to our argument when he left our father to his
fate? Methinks, good uncle, this is a most wanton
hope, if, in truth, thou feelst it.
The case is not the same, replied the archbishop,
quickly; thou shouldst remember that Julian has had
separate and remote command in Africa, having a force
to govern and a duty to perform making him foreign, as
it were, to our internal strife. The African had made
bold with the Pillars of Hercules but for the close watch
of Julian upon him. When the strait of Witiza came to
his ears it was too late to serve him. Did he know
did any of us know that the peril was so instant; that
rebellion had grown so insolent and commanding, to
grapple with the sceptre in one night, and strike down
its high sovereign in an hour? Whatever had been his
faith, submission to the usurper whom he could not
overcome
was wisdom; and Julian has submitted to the
rebellion
only as it has been successful. Let but the
people
murmur; let them but look their discontent, and
Julian, whom we shall now secretly secure, will strike
with us, and for our cause.
And with this shadowy hope, said Pelayo, this
pause for the rascal discontent, we must go sleep and
drowse, without dreaming, if we can, of the rusted
weapons
by our side, and the heavy tread of the usurper
above us. This is but another of thy texts, good uncle,
which teach delay.
Even so, my son; and the delay is wise which all
texts incline to teach. We must wait for another and
yet another day, since it were madness now, in the face
of the successful rebel, to attempt the struggle for his
Vol. I.D
overthrow. But, though I counsel delay, I counsel no
relaxation of our purpose. I but require that we should
wait a fitting time, and I promise that we shall not wait
for it in vain. The hour of hopeful circumstance will
come, and, if we are ready then, clothed in our armour,
watchful, we shall strike home, even to the heart of our
enemy, and make our fortune certain. Any effort now
would keep back the hour, and bring sure defeat upon
our purpose. This is reason, sonwisdom speaks
thus, Pelayo, and she counsels you, even as I do now,
to patience. Hearken her counsels, Pelayo, and do
nothing
rashly which shall prejudice thy brother's cause or
thine own.
Methinks, good uncle, you do wisdom grievous
injustice
when you fill her mouth with counsels she were
loath to utter of her own head. Is't wisdom, think you,
that hath the trick, even ere the morning begins, of
brooding on patience under all privation, and
counselling
the humblest submission to all manner of wrong?
You mistake her, uncle, or I know her not. Is it she
who pleads through the long day and the longer night
a most patient and most needless pleastill for the boon
of patience? who puts off all duties for her prayersa
priestly practice in faith, if not a wise oneand learns
one lesson only to the grievous exclusion of a thousand
better?
Thou dost mistake, Pelayo, exclaimed Egiza;
thou dost wrong our uncle's argument.
Ay, do I, then? Well, I will phrase it more
seemingly
.
Is't her voice that, when the heart beats with its
wrongs, implores it to bear its burden, complain, turn
humbly to the stripe-giveray, solicit newer strokes
when, with a single impulse of honourable wrath, it
might avoid the tyranny, avert the scourge, and, giving
weapons to the arms that lately bore but a mule's
burden
,
destroy the cruel oppressor, and break his rule for
ever? This is thy wisdom, uncle, but not mine. Thou
hast ever ready thy lessons of patience and
forbearance
which I love not. They better suit the mule than
the man. They will do nothing for the cause of our
country, or, as thou hast it, my brother's cause and
mine.
The archbishop paced the room angrily while Pelayo
spoke. When the latter had finished he approached
him, and replied in words and with a manner which
sufficiently denoted the roused temper of his mind.
Foolish boy, still wayward and impetuous as thou
hast ever been from thy childhood, but that I would have
this cause to prosper, I would leave thee to play at thy
own pastime with it till it drew down ruin upon thee.
What wouldst thou, or what canst thou do of thyself
which would avail to bring thee a step nearer to thy
revenge
,
or thy brother to the throne of Witiza? What
if thou didst rouse up thy Asturian people into
premature
action, they could help thee only to a sight of the
foe, which their unaided weapons could never overcome.
If the Asturians are brave, they are also savages; and
mere brute valour would do little against the practised
arms and superior aid which Roderick will now bring
with him to battle. Our hope now is in wile and
strategy
.
Thou hast said well when thou saidst that the
part which I counselled thee was that of the mule rather
than the man. That, indeed, is the part we shall play
for a season. We must bear with the heavy burden of
our wrongs; go forward with dull pace of the
unconscious
brute, until we feel the reins of the rider slacken
upon our neck and the steel relax within our jaws. The
same policy, then, which taught us, while our rider was
awake and watchful, to submit, will teach us now, when he
sleeps, to resistthrow off our burden, and trample with
our heavy heel the head of him who has bestridden us.
By the mule-seeming, only, shall we delude our tyrant,
and persuade him to the lulling security in which we
shall destroy him. Yet may we toil, meanwhile, for
ourselves
.
I counsel not lethargy when I counsel caution
and forbearance.
Cross counsels, uncle. If we are to have no blows,
in what shall we labour? demanded Pelayo.
By art, which supplies to the weak in arms the ally
which shall make them able against the strong. We
have many modes of action, though we lift no banner
against the usurper now. We must win over the nobles
secretly, such as we deem to favour us; such as the
tyrant
may offend; such as were the best friends of your
father; and such as may, from phlegm or deliberation,
have kept themselves neutral in the strife just ended.
With this object would I go to Count Julian, who is the
best able to serve us of any officer in Spain.
To these arguments of Oppas, Egiza added others not
less urgent, together with his own prayer that his brother
might not prejudice their cause by any unnecessary and
injurious precipitation. Pelayo heard him with
impatience
,
but replied thus.
Have it as you will. You shall not impute it to
my rashness, as you are but too prone to do, that I
strangled our purpose by quick movement or by hasty
deed of mine. I'll be the mule you would have me,
and bear my wrongs and my bosom's grief as a heavy
weight that would weigh me to the earth, but for the
promise of the day of vengeance. I will wait as
patiently
as I may, but I promise you I wait not long.
Let me see you relax in your labours, or fail in the men
you look to secure, and by Hercules' awakening, I will
use my club, counsel how you may.
'Tis well, Pelayo, replied the archbishop; we
plead for nothing more than this. I trust we shall wait
not long, though we wait patiently. I know that
Roderick
cannot long satisfy the imperious nobles whom he
has bought for the present to his cause; that they must
fly from his banner, if 'twere only to escape from his
injustice
,
and they will fly to ours if 'twere only from the
love of change. Our best hope is in this; and I doubt
not that it must sufficiently serve our purpose. And
now, PelayoEgiza, my childrenI pray you, embrace
each other. You have spoken impatiently, and your
tones erewhile were ungentle in your mutual ears. This
must not be. Remember, ye are alone in your fortunes,
and out of the world's love; this were strong reason that
ye should more than ever love one another. Embrace,
my children, forget the unkind words, and God's
blessing
be upon you.
True, uncle, said Egiza, we have spoken wildly,
and we should pray to be forgiven. Pelayo, forgive
me, as I truly forgive thee what thou hast said in thy
impatience; this, indeed, I may the more easily do, as
it would need a word unknown to me now to make me
greatly angered with thee. Give me thy hand, Pelayo.
Aymy hand, my heart, my sword, all that is mine,
Egiza, so that thou wait not too long with this mule
purpose, was the reply of Pelayo.
Fear not, Pelayo, and be not suspicious of our faith,
to thy own pain and the injustice of those who feel and
wish as thou wouldst have them. But it is fitting that
ye sleep now, my sons. Your toils have been many,
and your fatigue must be great. I will conduct you to
the secret chamber, where you will lie in perfect safety.
But, ere the dawn, you must leave the city. You shall
wear the habits of my household, that ye be not
discovered
;
and in this disguise ye will go with me to the
castle of Count Julian. I know him well, and will
discover
his leaning ere I unfold to him our purpose.
This caution thou regardest with scorn, Pelayonay, I
see it in thine eyesbut thou wilt yet have to learn, my
son, that wisdom requires such art for her purpose,
which would fail by directness, and sometimes falter
even by the weight of her armour, were she not to
crave and keep such assistance.
Wisdom call you it? said Pelayo, scornfully.
D 2
WellHeaven help us to right names, or we are like
to make sad mistakes ere long. Wouldst have my
name for this art, good uncle?
Ay, let us hear, Pelayo.
Hypocrisy, I call it, was the reply; the cunning
of the knave who dares not show his purpose, and
meditates
deeds which he fears to utter even to the friendly
arm which shall help him in their performance. These
are goodly lessons for mankind and morality; and thus
it is that the wise man, so called, tutors his scholar
unto wrong; and thus it is that the father counsels his
son to falsehood; and thus it is that the predominant
and infallible priest trains the suppliant soul to an
everduring
damnation. Go to with thy philosophy, good
uncle, and lead the way to our chamber. Thou wilt
not counsel us to patience and forbearance in the matter
of sleep which we are to take.
With a grave countenance the archbishop listened to
the free words of the fearless Pelayo, and, without
farther
speech, led the way to the secret chamber which
had been assigned them in his palace for repose.
There, promising to arouse them ere the dawning, he
bestowed his blessing upon them, and left them to those
slumbers which the fatigues of the day had made
absolutely
necessary, but which the thoughts and excitements
of their minds continued to baffle until a late hour. It
seemed to them but a few moments after he had left
them when the archbishop awakened them for their
morning journey.
XI.
A few
leagues from Cordova lay one of the castles
of Count Julian. Fortunately for the conspirators
seeking
him, he was even then within its walls. In a
splendid
antechamber they waited his coming, and thus
discoursed
among themselves prior to his approach;
Pelayo
,
whose impatience grew with every moment of
delay
,
being the first to speak.
'Tis an old saw: truth is still a beggar, whom they
let feed as she may without the temple. 'Tis pretence
only that can force its way within, since 'tis pretence
only that keeps the entrance.
It were little better for her, my sonperhaps much
worsewere she to become bolder. Hospitality, at
least among the Goth, would be apt, if she thrust
herself
in without command, to thrust her back again over
the threshold. It is for that reason that I counsel you
to the mule's part, since any other would be too
presumptuous
for those who toil in the cause of truth.
And therefore would I not counsel the patience
which is ever thy lesson. It is because of this so
severe
condition that the friends of truth need to draw the
sword in her favour, and pierce her way to justice.
And yet her cause, my son, said the archbishop,
she being the acknowledged parent of peace, would
seem to crave more forbearance from her worshipper.
She may be denied, and she may be baffled, my son;
but know we not from the word that is blessed, as it is
truth's own, that in time she must be triumphant? The
very destiny, being at the end of a supposed period,
would, of itself, counsel us to patience.
Ay, 'tis our patience, uncle, that baffles her so long.
Were her friends but as prompt as her enemies, we
should have but little wrong in the world, and justice
would have no judgment-place, as she would never need
to hear appeal. 'Tis in our pause now that she suffers,
and every moment that we linger adds a new link to
her bonds.
Be not rash, Pelayo, in what thou sayst before
Julian
;
I pray thee let thy speech be modest, like thy
present fortune. We are too weak to be bold, and can
offer but little in temptation which should make us
confident
of him we seek. Above all, we too greatly need
the aid of Julian to offend him by precipitate look or
language. Remember that Roderick is now strongly
seated; the nation submits to his rule even if it does
not love it; and so long as the name of the usurper is
new in their ears, and so long as he lavishes the
treasure
of your father, will the rabble cling to his feet and
strive in his behalf. These truths will press on Julian
as they press on all minds throughout the nation; and
it will be only through nice argument and liberal
promises
that we shall be able to win him to our cause.
Whatsoever, then, you hear from his lips, my son, I
pray you let pass; say nothing that may vex or startle
him, and I trust we shall secure him. It will be for me
to show him the policy of his action with us, to note his
fears or his feelings, and to meet them with proper
argument
,
which shall help to bend them to our purpose.
Short speeches, then, good uncle, I pray you, for
such has been the practice of your Seville bishopric
that, I trow, your grace for festival and prayer for grace
do equally grow into a sermon.
The archbishop turned away from the reckless
speaker
,
while Egiza expostulated with him.
Nay, Pelayo, you are too rude; you vex our uncle
by your timeless speech.
Oh, go; you are as much a priest as he, Egiza,
though your sermons be not quite so long. Let me
enjoy my humour after my own fashion, or let me go
sleep.
And better do that than vex our friends for ever
while you wake, responded Egiza; and he would have
proceeded farther, but the impatient Pelayo arrested the
exhortation in the opening.
Enough, good elder brother; you are the wiser
brother as the elder; I yield to you. Enough, then,
this acknowledgment made, for this brief season; we'll
have time enough to prate at another, when our patience
is in full exercise. We'll have need of words then to
make up the lack of action, and you and our uncle will
do wisely to keep your sermons for the day of need.
May it be a day of grace to us all, for our patience will
be perfect then.
'Tis much to be hopeful of thine, Pelayo, for thy
stubbornness grows upon thee. Wherefore is it thus,
my son? Why wilt thou not list to reason?
There it is again; the cold-blooded jade, misnamed
Reason; we shall have the burden-bearer next, the mill
jade, the mule, Patience.
Be patient, brother, said Egiza.
I knew 'twould come. Patience in thy speech,
uncle, and my brother's, is as necessary an ingredient
as gold in all the doings of the church. Thy
exhortations
to me end with a prayer for patience, while those
of the church end with a prayer for gold. Were I
possessed
of the gold, wouldst thou tax me for so much
patience as thou dost, uncle? Alas for thy soul and
mine, I fear me not. I should be permitted my mood,
of whatever make it might be, could my coffers bear me
out in the purchase of indulgence.
I bear with thee, Pelayo, said the archbishop, in
love of our dear brother, and because of the duty which
is before us. But have a care, my son, the messenger
of Count Julian approaches.
At that moment a page entered the apartment, and
briefly stated that his master awaited them above, and
solicited their attendance. While he did so his eyes
were fixed upon the person of Pelayo with so much
earnestness
as to provoke the attention of the latter, who,
forgetting the disguise which he wore, in his impatience
thus addressed the slave.
Dost know me, fellow?
The slave hesitated, but after a moment replied,
It is the Prince Pelayo.
Ha! exclaimed the archbishop. Pelayo coolly
spoke:
Thou know'st too much, fellow, for thy honesty or
my good: but take this gold, and preserve thine eyes,
that they may peruse some lesson which thou hast not
yet learned. Go thy way.
The abashed page received the piece of gold which
Pelayo put in his hand, and, without looking up for an
instant, led the way to his master. The thought of
Pelayo
,
meanwhile, broke forth as they proceeded.
This is one lesson of adversity. That fellow's eyes
had guaranty from our misfortune, and he felt himself
the greater because his superior had been somewhat
humbled. The sod-bearer thus stares when the clay
stains the gay cloak of the nobleman, and the
water-carrier
laughs aloud to behold the rents in a prince's
garment. Our kindred from the dust begin to claim
us, and I am more disposed, good uncle, to look upon
thy rule as a good one.
What rule, Pelayo?
The mule's, besure; the patience that makes the
text and the tail of thine and my brother's preachings.
XII.
In
another apartment of his palace, more secure from
the intrusion of the crowd, Count Julian prepared to
receive
his visiters. Busied with his official duties, for he
had just been apprized, by despatches from the usurper,
that he had determined to continue him in his public
station, he hurriedly gave his commands to several
attendants
in waiting as the guests approached the
chamber
.
Take these, he said to one of the couriers, to
my Castle of Algeziras; see that Count Astaulph's
hands receive them, and await his answer. Bring
them with all speed, on thy life. Hence; thy errand
is of worth, beyond the value of the steed that bears
thee, ay, beyond thy own. Spare neither in thy
journey
.
Hence. These, he said to another, when the
first courier had gone, these are for Merida; seek for
the Lord Ervigia; let him note their purpose, and haste
thee with his reply. They need despatch; see that they
lack it not.
As the courier passed from the apartment the
archbishop
and the two princes entered it. Count Julian
advanced to receive them with friendly countenance,
motioned the slave to withdraw who had shown them to
the presence, and thus addressed them.
This is a courtesy, my Lord Oppas, which glads
me, though unlooked for. And these gentlemen?
The archbishop replied, as they advanced,
The princes, Egiza and Pelayo.
Sons of the late Witiza? said the count; the words
were scarcely uttered before the voice of Pelayo was
heard
The
King
Witiza, sirthe murdered King Witiza;
a king murdered by subjectssubjects beholding it;
the crown upon his head, the sceptre in his hand,
Heaven-anointed, and girded with all the outward signs
of royalty, as he was endowed with all its substance
within. Such, sir, was the
King
Witiza. We are his
sons.
Count Julian turned upon the speaker with a
countenance
in which surprise was equally mingled with
respect
.
Thou speakst truly, though somewhat hastily,
Prince Pelayo, he replied, after an instant's pause.
Truly was Witiza the king thou declarest him. I
meant no doubt, no denial in my words. It were but
slack justice for me to say that he was a most gracious
and a noble monarch. My honours came from his
hand, and my first field was battled beneath his eye.
His sons are welcome.
The manner of Count Julian, as he spoke these words,
was well calculated to subdue the harsher mood with
which Pelayo began the interview. It was calm, gentle,
and ingenuous. An air of bland sincerity marked his
demeanour, and won the easy confidence of Egiza, while
it encouraged the archbishop to hope for ultimate success
from his contemplated application. But the more
penetrating
mind of Pelayo was less hopeful, even from the
first. He saw the features of one who was utterly
unmoved
;
whose impulses had been checked by years;
and whose desires were sufficiently under his own
control
to be governed and modified according to the press
of circumstances. Such a man, high in station, having
a large influence and considerable authority, was not
easily moved, he well thought, to desire or to toil for
any change which could add nothing to his present height,
and might, indeed, subtract from his power. But though
he thought thus, with more forbearance than was his
custom, he withheld the speech which would have given
it utterance, and listened, without interruption, to the
reply
which his uncle made to the seemingly hearty
welcome
which Julian had given them.
We are indeed grateful for this courtesy, Count
Julian
;
so strange has it become to these, now deserted of
all who served them once, that it hath a value in itself,
even if it did not promise something more substantial.
It is not much, my lord, that a prince overthrown in
battle
by a usurper may hope from those who are not
bound to him by blood; and the service of such has a
merit in the eyes of God and man alike, as it would
seem to be a tribute beyond the ordinary claims of duty.
Your kindness to them now must tax their present
acknowledgment
,
as, if followed up, it should command
their more honourable reward.
No more of this, my lord bishop, replied Julian;
I know not what you may mean by the duties and the
reward of which you speak; but it glads me, as I've
said, to see them, thus young, still manly and buoyant
in defiance of the storms that have wrecked the fortunes
of their sire.
Not wrecked, I trust, my lord, not if there be hearts
in Spain that love the memory of Witiza, respect justice,
and are not utterly ungrateful for the blessings, general
and individual, which his sway distributed over the land.
It were grievous wrong to the brave nobles of Iberia,
who owe so much to King Witiza, were we now to think
they could utterly desert the cause of his sons. There
must be hope from them when the first pressure of the
storm is past. They will not always submit to the
usurpation which is now triumphant for the time. They
will take up the cause of the Prince Egiza as their own,
and with this hope have we now come to speak with
Count Julian.
With what end? demanded Count Julian, looking
gravely.
That question answers all! exclaimed Pelayo,
with his accustomed impetuosity; let us begone, my
brother, let us begone. We have no farther business
here; and well may our noble host demand with what
end we came.
Brother, you are mad! exclaimed Egiza, vainly
endeavouring to sooth the irritable youth, whom he led
aside to a remote part of the chamber, leaving Oppas
and Julian still in conference. But the words of Pelayo
were still sternly free; and there was no yielding
conciliation
in the tones such as Egiza prayed for.
Oh, yes! he replied, it is madness, and little
else, to feel that we are wronged and robbed, and yet
complain of desertion by those who should be true;
men that we have raised from dust and dregs until they
grew strong to reject the hand that supports, and base
enough to forget the favour which has uplifted them.
It is madness, I know, but it is a natural madness, and
is not an effect beyond a proper cause.
Wherefore this coil, my lord bishop? demanded
Julian of his companion.
Vol. I.E
Nay, it is nothing, count; it will soon be over. A
feverish blood, recent strife, and the painful overthrow
of his fatherthese have vexed him. He is impatient
nothing more,
Impatient! nothing more! exclaimed Pelayo,
scornfully, as these last words of the archbishop, though
spoke in low and subdued tones, came to his ears.
Egiza
anxiously caught his arm, and, fearing some more
violent
burst of utterance from his lips, led him to the
farthest
end of the apartment, and thus earnestly
expostulated
with him.
Wherefore wilt thou do thus, Pelayo? Thou wilt
spoil every thing with thy rashness. If thou art reckless
of thy own hope, be not regardless of mine.
Remember
that I am the rightful sovereign, and what thy
impatience
may lose will be my loss rather than thine. Come
not, I pray you, between us and the narrow point to
which we aim, nor mar by an idle word what thou canst
never mend by thy weapon.
Pshaw! thou talkst idly and madly, Egiza, though
thy tones be far more temperate than mine. Thou
mayst deceive thyself, and thou dost, but thou canst not
deceive me. What hope hast thou from the warrior who
demands of his princehis prince overthrown by a rebel
wherefore he seeks him? The cold question were
enough, did it not prove the lacking thought and the base
spirit.
But you mistake, Pelayo
Well, I mistake, thenand youdo not. We shall
see. Go, humble as you please, to your servant.
Implore
from him the succour which you should command
and he proffer. I shall say nothing. Yet hearken me
ere you go.
What would you, brother?
Be patient, an it please you. Look soberly, with
a downcast eye, and let your words be sweet and
slender
,
and speak them with a modest voice, as if uncertain
what grace they may find in the ears of him to whom
you offer them.
Thus speaking together, the two once more
approached
the spot where Julian and Oppas had been all
this while in close conference. The latter had been in
no wise sparing of arguments and promises to effect his
purpose with the former. It may be added that he had
been much less successful than his earnestness in
argument
,
the warmth of his promises, and the justice of his
cause would have seemed to promise. The
confirmation
by the usurper Roderick of the military and high
appointment which his predecessor had conferred on
Julian
had alone defeated the hope of the archbishop, even
if Julian had been lacking in other reasons. The
former
did not abate his zeal, however, as he found the
latter
cold. He proceeded thus in the discussion, which,
we may premise, was scarcely conducted with logical
precision on either hand at a period when the laws of
succession and divine right were so commonly
interrupted
and broken by the custom, borrowed from the last
days of Roman greatness, of electing by the military.
Roderick's best title came from this source, and it was
the policy of Oppas to argue only from what he assumed
to be the legitimate origin of power.
But, my Lord Julian, he continued, if the claim
of Wamba to the throne be doubtful, what better claim
is that of this son of Theodofred? Wherefore should
Roderick have sway over one holding a more perfect right
than ever did the mighty Wamba? The title of Witiza
comes down purely and without interruption from Recared
the Great; and that of Egiza is not less certain. How,
then, shall we pause for judgment between the usurper
upon the throne and him who now claims your succour
for its attainment?
The archbishop was earnest, but Julian was
collected
.
It is true, he replied, that the blood of Witiza, the
father of these noble youths, comes from the heart of
Recared
the Great; but even this gives them no title to the
crown. You startle, but I speak the truth.
Indeed! said Oppas; but this makes wide
disagreement
between us. How prove you the truth
thus?
A word will do it, my lord bishop; for, by the
Gothic law, it was not in Recared to convey the crown,
even though his blood might move him to the desire;
and quite as little is the right to challenge it by his
successor
.
He himself, yea, all of his successors, took
their rule from the National Council. The popular
assembly
decreed and determined the election. They
have ever had this office; and the same power hath
raised Roderick on the shield in the presence of the
army
and commanded our obedience. On what plea
shall we refuse it, then, and how sustain our opposition
to the law, which has had the voice of the whole nation
in its favour?
The archbishop hesitated for an answer, but Pelayo
did not. He had so far listened patiently to the
arguments
,
but the last words of Count Julian annoyed him,
and he spoke with instant readiness.
The whole nation, my lord?not half of it. And
who were they that spoke? It was not the army of the
Gothic or of the Iberian people, but of the usurper, that
raised him upon the shield. An army of ruffians
creatures
drawn from the prisonsthieving Greeks from the
market-place, and such worthless nobles and citizens as
had been banished in the previous reign of my father.
These are theybanished brawlers, hireling soldiers,
and swilled retainerswho assume to themselves the
voice of the nation. It were a sin and shame if Roman
nobles gave place to such authority; bow when they
nod, and whom they elevate cry sovereign, and make
sacred from assault. Shame on such thought, I say;
but I forgetI should be silent herepatient, sweet
brotheris not that the word?
Foolish boy! said Oppas, grasping the arm of
Pelayo
,
and whispering the emphatic adjuration in his ear;
foolish boy! will nothing hold you boundcan you
not keep your counsel in quiet for a while, and let us
labour
who would still hope?
The effort to suppress the speaker had a contrary
effect
.
He broke from the grasp of the archbishop, and,
with a voice rising with his movement, he advanced
towards
Julian, speaking, while he did so, with terrible
emphasis.
No, I must speak, my Lord Oppas, though we
despair
.
Hear
me
, sir count, he continued, now
addressing
Julian; hear me, I pray you, and impute it rather
to the feelings of justice in my heart than to the
presumption
of my youth that I am thus confident while I
demand
your ear.
Julian bowed his head with grave respect, and the
youth proceeded thus abruptly
'Tis not for a warrior such as you have been, such
as you are, sir count, to assume the office of the
schoolman
,
and, ere you draw sword and lift banner, deliberate
nicely upon the right of him who calls upon you for the
service which it has been your wont to yield. To the
true man it matters but little who should be present king
and who should not. The laws change daily with the
moods of those who make them, and the true warrior
may not hold by these. He must seek other standards
for his guidance, andthank Heaven that it is so!
even as he seeks shall he find them. They are in his
heart; they come from God; they grow out of warm
and honourable impulse, and suffer no cold interest to
come between them and the duty which they owe and
the service which they have pledged. These teach us
never to desert our friend in peril; never to shrink from
our foe in fear; to hold fast the right, even as we
determine
E 2
it upon the first movement of our thoughts and
feelings, without that delay of the trader, who makes it
a thing of prudential and profitable calculation. Ay,
more. These standards teach us, farther, in the cause
of our country to sacrifice friend, self, and allall that
we honour, all that we love and would cherish, in the
field of battle, at the flame, and upon the cross, if need
be, and to glory in the prized things which we so yield
in compliance with the nobler promotings of our hearts.
Surely, Count Julian, these standards of the heart are
thine. It cannot be otherwise with the gallant warrior.
If't be that they are, they call for but little argument from
my good uncle here, and still less from me, to move you
in our battle. They must enjoin that, as my father held
your faith, it is your duty to maintain his right; that, as
my father held your friendship, it is your duty to avenge
his murder; that, as my father was the unquestioned
sovereign of the Goth, it is the duty of the Gothic noble,
pledged to him in faith, in friendship, and no less bound
to his country, to punish the rebel who hath slain his
sovereign and usurped the rule which he bore so
worthily
.
These are my thoughts, Count Julian, my free
thoughts; I fear not to sustain them. It is not wise,
perhaps, to speak so bold, and were more prudent, in
the world's esteem, for one so free-spoken as myself to
have said naught; but I hold you to be a warrior, Count
Julian, and I have faith in the honour of a warrior. I
fear not, therefore, to offend you in what I have said;
and yetdo me justice. If there be right and reason
in this plea of mine, my brother here, having the
birthright
,
has the benefit. Give him thy weapon, Count
Julian; I plead for no service to myself.
It may be supposed that a speech so daring, so full
of defiance, and so pregnant with assertion, if not truth,
was well adapted to startle, if not to change the
resolution
of Count Julian. He paced the room for an instant
before replying, and his face was full of thought when
he returned to speak.
There is matter in what thou sayst, Prince Pelayo,
which may well task the thought, if not the weapon of one
who was a soldier, and, let me add, a true one, while he
lived, of the late monarch. Perchance, had it been
practicable for me to have moved in his battle before he
perished, your speech had been unnecessary now. I
must think on what thou hast boldly, but not unwisely
spoken. At present let us stay this discourse. My
daughter approaches to bid us to the board.
XIII.
Now the Lady Cava was the loveliest lady in all
Spain; the only child of her father, whose affection
placed her above all estimate in his idolatrous regard.
She was little more than sixteen, and of a beauty that
did not the less continue to charm because it was so
sudden and so sure to captivate. Yet, to this time, had
she little homage from the young gallants of the day,
for she had dwelt with her father in seclusion. Here
he had studiously maintained her, as he too well knew
the dissolute character of the court of Toledo to intrust
her there in his absence. Loving him, as she did, with
a warmth of regard corresponding to his own, this
seclusion
had not brought with it a solitary feeling of
privation
or regret; and in the valley, overhung with high
mountains, in which she dwelt usually, or in the frontier
castle of her father at Algeziras, where, with his force,
he watched the insolent Saracens, she still found it a
sufficient pleasure to be alone in the company of a
gentle heart and a lively fancy, both of which were
truly her own. It was a new feeling that came to the
scarcely less youthful bosom of the susceptible Egiza
as he looked upon her. His cheeks were flushed, his
eye sunk yet kindled, and his bosom heaved with
emotions
which he had never known before. While he
gazed upon her he forgot the purpose on which he
sought her father; he forgot the memory of his own;
he forgot all things in the new and absorbing passion
which, like sudden electricity from heaven, penetrated
his bosom, and deprived him of every consciousness
save of its own consuming fire.
By your leave, sweet Lady Cava, he exclaimed,
taking her hand after she had been severally introduced
to the guestsby your leave, lady, and he lifted her
hand to his lips with a sense of rapture which he had
never before experienced. Her own emotions, not less
strong than his, were yet more easily restrained; and
while her bosom glowed with warm, fresh feelings, her
eye looked nothing but the nice modesty, the shrinking
gentleness, and the winning timidity which so adorn her
sex.
I greet you, gentle lords, she said, in reply to their
several addresses, I greet you with thanks and
welcome
.
The pleased wonder of Egiza could scarcely forbear
uttering aloud those delighted fancies which he was
constrained
to murmur
Oh, beautiful! Can such be mortal, having such
grace, such movement, such expression? I may not
speak to her; nay, I should not look, lest that I
madden
.
The approaches of Pelayo were of another sort, and
his tall, athletic person seemed but ill calculated for the
genuflexion which he made on her appearance, while his
words were rather hesitating and confused.
Your slave, fair Lady Cava, he said, hurriedly, as
if he dreaded that his utterance might fail him ere his
part were over; ladyyesyour true servant. He
sank back apace when this was done, muttering to
himself
as he did so
I'm a poor gallant, and have no touch of the
courtier's
quality. I were ill to serve dames or princes,
since the painted flesh of the one and the toys that deck
the other would never win me to the falsehood, in look
or word, which is so much the delight of both. I have
no fingers for fine action. I grasp the flower as if 'twere
an axe for battle; I press the velvet fingers as if they
were those of the rock-heaving warrior. My brother
were the best minstrel, and, doubtless, the more
graceful
king. Let him have the gifts of my mother; I lack
them, but I desire them not.
While he muttered thus in soliloquy, Egiza addressed
himself with the warmth of a lover and a courtier's ease
to the beautiful girl who stood beside him.
Speak again, sweet Lady Cava; let me not break
the music of your lips by praying thee for more of it.
Brave enough! exclaimed Pelayo to himself as
the words reached his ear. He were not half so
eloquent
to her sire, nor half so warm in winning back his
kingdom.
The answer of Cava, who was scarcely less pleased
than Egiza, came to his ears.
You flatter me, gracious prince; 'tis the vice of the
court, they tell me, to pour sweet falsehoods into willing
ears. My ear drinks in the deceit with gladness, though
my thought does not the less teach me my
undeserving
.
Thought has the right on't, murmured Pelayo to
himself; but the response of Egiza was in a very
different
language.
Nay, it wrongs thee much, fair lady, if it tells thee
other tale than my lips bear thee. What though sweet
flattery to willing hearts be the vice of the court,
believe
me, it is not my vice, nor do I esteem it thy
weakness
to listen to such pleasant falsehoods. It is because
my words are true that thou yieldest me hearing, sweet
lady. Ah me! I would it were otherwise, for then
might I the better hope to defy the eyes which assail me
now, and the sweet lips which delude me while they
glow.
The rapturous glances of Egiza as he spoke this
impassioned
language, so natural to the time and country,
but so little in correspondence with the proper mood of
one like Egiza, who had his own and the wrongs of a
father to redress, provoked the indignation of Pelayo.
Oh, patience! he exclaimed, in tones nearly
audible
to the rest. Oh, patiencethe mule, the mule
now. 'Tis a fit servant here. I must con these
lessons
of my uncle for very safety. What a dangling
shame is this good brother of mine, that shows more soul
in seeking a boy's puppet than in struggling for a
country
and a crown. He hath but just wakened in the
woman's presence, and we shall have him prating of
patience
when he leaves it. Well, they have such tales,
even of Hercules the Striker, and it needs not that I
should chafe. Yet Hercules could better afford the
loss of his beard than can Egiza, who has scarcely got
one.
The lovers were too closely engaged and interested
with one another to heed the increasing sternness in the
looks of Pelayo. They pursued together the same fond
wild style of dialogue, which, indeed, was natural enough
to the period, without a seeming consciousness that they
were remarked by any foreign eyes; and the musings of
Pelayo kept pace with their abstraction. As he watched
the passionate movements of his brother, the rapturous
glances of his eye, and heard the flow of his enamoured
speech, his indignation grew more vehement, and at
length attracted the notice of the archbishop.
We wait for thee, Pelayo, he exclaimed. The
answer was not to the address.
A frail thing, which every breath of the season may
whirl about at will. Now has he all forgot the business
that he came for, and the ghost of our father may go to
his tomb again without revenge. Beggary of fame and
honourbutah, uncle, patience, I bethink me
patience
is the word here, is it not?
How? what mean you, Pelayo? asked the
archbishop
,
who, by this time, approached him. Pelayo
slightly touched his arm as he replied.
Thou hast been a sportsmanthou lovest the sport,
dost thou not?
Ay, son Pelayo, thou shouldst know what thou'st
seen. We have struck the red deer together. Why
askst thou this?
Thou hast sought thy game, uncle, with a closer
speed than thou hast ever sought for heaven?
Belike, Pelayo, it is truth that thou speakst,
replied
Oppas, with humility. The church hath but too
many servants like myself, who forget their duty in vain
pursuits and idle imaginings.
Pshaw, uncle, keep thy homily and self-reproach
for those who know thee and the church less. Thou
hast wasted one of thy best texts of humility. But to
thy sports, good uncle. Look on yon hart and hind.
But look on them. 'Twere an easy toil for thee, with
all thy bulk upon thee and on foot, to strike both with a
single shaft.
The archbishop with his eye followed the direction of
Pelayo's finger, but the feelings were not like those of
the nephew with which he surveyed them. A new plan
for effecting his object arose in his mind as he beheld
their manifest regard for each other. He spoke not,
and Pelayo continued.
Let us put aside this prayer for patience, good uncle,
or we lose the gameand the hunters, too, will be loss
no less. Let us join them, uncleand see, Count
Julian
beckons our approach.
They did so, and, as they came nigh to the lovers
for such they wereEgiza, with some incertitude of
manner, turned from the maiden to Pelayo, and thus
addressed
him.
Brother, the Lady Cava has much wonder to know
wherefore you have been so strange, and why you hold
yourself so distant. She would know you better, as she
misdoubts whether it were easy, so foreign have you
proved yourself, to distinguish you hereafter. Pray
you, approach, and speak her.
Indeed, fair Lady Cava, but you would have little
loss if you knew me not hereafter; and there would
be but little profit in your knowledge of me now. Mine
is no courtly temper, such as my brother carries. Where
he looks smiles I would look spears; where he talks
of delightful things, my speech is only of things
dangerous
and dreadful. His thoughts are of gentle waters
and nodding groves, sweet moonlights and tripping
damsels
.
I think only of the array of battle, of slain
tyrants
;
and I have but little mood for other more sightly
objects. For a gentle damsel, his speech were better
than mine. I, that mourn the loss of a dear father, the
wrongs of a brave people, and revenge upon an enemy,
may not move my lips to courtly language and gay
compliment
.
Let him who suffers no such sorrow have thy
ear. He hath sweet ballads, and will sing thee when
in voice, until thou, like him, shalt forget there is aught
of sorrow in the world.
But he hath his sorrow like thine own, Prince
Pelayo
,
replied the maiden. Doth he not mourn like
thee the loss of a dear father?
Ah, Lady Cava, thou hast asked this question of my
lips; wouldst thou had asked it of thine own thought.
Behold him, lady. He looks too happy in thy smile to
know aught of the sorrow in my heart.
Nay, but thou dost him wrong, replied Cava,
quickly, and blushing deeply as she spoke.
Egiza replied also to the reproach of Pelayo, the
justice
of which he, nevertheless, felt in all its force.
How nowwhat mean you, Pelayo, by such
speech?
What should I mean? sternly replied Pelayo, in
tones suppressed duly for the hearing of him only to
whom they were addressed. What should I mean,
but to tell thee that thou growest sinewless in thy
purpose
?
The words of Cava bidding them to the entertainment
interrupted the vehemence of that anger which Pelayo
had only begun to express, and, meeting her glance,
he was compelled to soften those features into a smile
which, at that moment, were better fitted to denote scorn
and indignation. It was no easy task; but, with a power
which he possessed over himself, however unfrequently
disposed to exercise it, he readily did so.
Sweet lady, we obey you. Hold me your subject
no less than my brother's. I followfollow where I
may not lead! was the muttered close of his speech
of compliment, which, spoken in lower tones that the
rest, only reached the ears of Egiza.
Now be at peace with your suspicions, said the
latter. Wherefore chide me thus? dost think because
I speak gently with a noble lady I am less fit to do battle
with a rugged man?
Pshawwouldst thou deceive me, Egiza? replied
the other. Thou canst not. I see into thy soul;
thou art readier for the damsel than for thy duty; and
if thou heed not she will win thee from it. Beware!
Julian advanced to them while the young men thus
spoke together, and, with considerate courtesy, he prayed
them to attend his daughter to the feast. This done, he
followed with the archbishop; while, rapidly advancing,
Egiza placed himself at the side of Cava, and led the
way to an adjoining apartment. Pelayo, musing to
himself, followed at a slow pace.
We came for succour, he said, but shall go hence
with loss. I see it in his eyes. Welllet him but
palter with us, and brother though he be
Vol. I.F
Pelayo, exclaimed the archbishop, looking behind
him.
Ay, ay, good uncleI come.
XIV.
Thus
moving, Count Julian in close discourse with
the Archbishop Oppas, and the elder prince, Egiza, not
less closely in converse with the Lady Cava, they took
their way into the banqueting-room; the young prince,
Pelayo, following at a little distance, musing upon his
various distresses, soliloquizing sometimes, as thus he
went, in that form of humour which to him was most
natural, though to others strange enough. And now
when they were entered within that noble apartment,
which, in every castle, the Gothic nobles assigned to the
social purposes of the banquet, their noble entertainer,
the Count Julian, with a lofty but gracious cordiality,
pressed them to the board, and assigned them
honourable
places, either beside himself or his fair daughter,
who presided with a natural grace, no less winning and
becoming in her than the same cordiality was frank and
manly in her sire. The board was amply provided
with all the most acceptable viands of the time; and
nothing was wanting, save the perfect appetite, which
could do justice to the hospitable feast. But the guests
were in no mood for animal indulgence, and they
partook
but sparingly of the banquet. The minds of the
archbishop and the Prince Pelayo were but too full of
the object for which they came to feel hunger or to
desire
the tempting food which was before them; while
Egiza was but too busy gazing upon the beautiful Cava,
and in feasting upon her charms, to give heed to any
other less heavenly refreshment. Vainly did Count
Julian
endeavour to tempt them to a greater indulgence;
they ate but sparingly, and the repast went off in
comparative
silence. When, after a while, the Lady Cava
rose, and, bringing a napkin to each of her guests, took
her departure to another room, into which she was quickly
followed by the amorous Egiza. Meanwhile the
archbishop
and Count Julian resumed their discourse; while
Pelayo, who sat by them in silence, chafed within
himself
momently, to listen to the compromising propositions
of his uncle, and, as he esteemed them, the evasive
replies
of the count. Fearing to trust himself to listen
longer lest that he should again offend by an abrupt
obtrusion
of his thoughts, he finally arose and followed his
brother into the neighbouring apartment, in which Cava
and himself, in the dreamy illusions of their newborn
love of each other, contrived to wile away the time in a
most perfect and sweet unconsciousness of its flight.
Their eyes were too much given to each other to
behold
his entrance; and gazing upon them sadly and in
silence, Pelayo heard the idle but fond discourse in which
they indulged.
Alas! sweet lady! exclaimed Egiza, taking her
hand while he spokea liberty which she only slightly
resisted, and to which she yielded in the end; how
hast thou come between me and my purpose. Thy
beauty hath misled me from my own thoughts as from
the fixed resolve of my duty. Thou hast unmanned me,
lady; and, in the happiness of my heart's visions, I forget
the toils to which my body is devoted.
And wherefore these toils, my lord? Wherefore,
if they comport not with the heart's happiness; though
truly, I believe not, as thou sayst, that these visions,
which give thee such pleasure, have their spring in me?
I am but a silly maiden. I have but little knowledge
of the gayeties and gallantries of the court; and how
should a life spent among these mountains give me skill
to move one that hath always been a dweller within it?
Trust me, sweet prince, thou canst not deceive me with
thy speech. My father hath but too well forewarned
me against the glozing wiles of the Toledan nobles.
He hath done them wrong, sweet Cava, or thou
dost me wrong to rank me with such as these. By my
soul, I swear to thee
Nay, if thou swearest, my lord, I cannot believe
thee. I will trust not the oath which is so ready to thy
lips.
A wise girl, murmured Pelayo, as he heard her;
she had better not; for if he doth not forswear her
he will yet forswear himself; and if he keep truth with
her he were but basely false to his people. True or
false, he were yet a traitor, or in the one behalf or in
the other; but he speaks again. She hath blinded him,
and his very soul seems sapless. Here he prates with
a silly maiden, when he should grapple with Julian in
argument
,
if he seeks his sword. Shallow trifler! that
cannot maintain a noble purpose, pledged in a calm
moment
,
and pressing upon his honour for its instant
execution
.
And here, I doubt not, will he linger conning
love ditties to idle ears, and giving idle ears to love
ditties in return, till he grows puny as the bird he would
emulate, and falls an easy victim to the cunning fowler.
Meanwhile the fond Egiza, whose want of character
was but too well known to the penetrating mind of
Pelayo
,
continued to pour his flatteries into the ears of the
credulous maiden, who, kept for so long a time in
seclusion
,
and now just budding into womanhood, was but
too susceptible to such subduing music.
Till this hour I have not lived, sweet Cava. Thou
hast given me life in the new feelings which possess me.
Nay, turn not from me thus. Look not coldly, but
believe
me what I say. Thou hast inspired me with life
thou hast brought a new joy to my heartthou hast
given to my eyes a vision of heaven.
Love at first sight, or love at any sight, was
something
new to the thought of Pelayo, who gave little heed
to such idle influences. He listened with curious
anxiety
to hear the answer of the maiden to such a
rapturous
declaration.
Ah, my lord, thou dost make sport of me, I fear.
Thy compliment is too reaching for my belief. I will
not hear thee longer, and were foolish to hold thy
flattery
as truth.
Stick to that damsel, I pray thee, muttered Pelayo.
Believe him not; for, if true to thee, he is still false;
and though thou give him all faith, he will rob his
faith from others if he requite thee. Buthear him.
Nay, Cava, thou art no less unjust to thy own
beauties
than to my heart which adores them. Trust them
and me, and believe me not wild or wilful when I tell
thee that I love thee.
Ha! What will she say to that? murmured
Pelayo
,
gloomily.
Oh, sirmy lord, I were wrong to heed thee longer.
Let me leave thee. Nay, sir, but I must. Thy speech
hath a tone of artifice, and it becomes not me to hear
thee. Thou art rash to speak to me thus; thou hast but
seen me; and I were more rash to hearken thee, who
may not see thee again.
Cunningly ended, said Pelayo, while Cava,
retreating
,
or seeming to retreat, moved away towards a long
gallery, to which her froward lover did not scruple to
pursue her. Pelayo came on as they disappeared.
Now, should I not follow him? he exclaimed.
Should I not follow him, and stay this folly? It were
well for both were I to do so. It were well for the
cause, which this folly mocks, and his vain spirit seems
to forget. All's lost that hangs on him. It must not
be thus! What right hath he to throw away our hope,
and cripple the cause which needs every arm, and will
brook no delay for such pastime? 'Tis no season for
love when the tyrant ragesthe bird sings not in the
tempest. I'll go between them; I will disturb their
F 2
music; an they will parley after this fashion, they shall
have grave counsel. They shall not fall into folly
without
warning, though I preach to them after a favourite
text with the Archbishop of Seville, and cry `patience'
as a charm against too much vigour of blood. There
they palm it in the gallery. I'll follow them.
XV.
Full
of his newborn admiration for the beauties of
the Lady Cava, Egiza, with that flexibility of soul which
was his prevailing defect, now pressed his love upon
her in another apartment. Even as he spoke, his
younger
brother, Pelayo, whose spirit had no such mood
within him, and whose only thought now was the
rescue of his people from the despotic Roderick and
the revenging of his father's death, walked forward
gloomily to where the two held their discourse. The
eyes of Egiza were too much with his heart to behold
his coming, and those of the Lady Cava looked not up
once from the floor as she listened to a strain of
profession
which she readily drank in from the lips uttering it.
Now will they curse me in their souls for an
intruder
upon their pleasures, murmured Pelayo, as he
beheld the two. He paused in his progress and
hesitated
.
While he did so, the urgent and persuasive tones
of his brother's voice came to his ears.
Nay, chide me not, sweetest Cava, that I thus fondly
pursue thee with my love. Hear me plead, dearest lady,
with sufficient reason for my prayer. The times are
wild, full of images of danger, full of strife and
apprehensions
.
Should I now forego the blessed chance
which has yielded me thy hearing, I were not sure that
like good fortune should be mine hereafter. The next
hour may lose me the opportunity of which I now seek
to avail myself.
Oh, sirmy noble lorddo not, I pray you, look
upon me, and implore me after this pressing fashion.
You do wrong to a timid maiden by such prayer. Mine
eye hath only seen you; it were rash, and worthy of a
long sorrow and a heavy judgment, were I so quickly to
incline a willing ear to your soliciting. Let me go free,
my lord, and I will think of what thou hast spoken.
He is no man if this answer baffles him, murmured
Pelayo; it is a denial very like a consenting. A pretty
hypocriteshe does it well. Her eyelids point to the
floor which her eyes see not; her arms hang idly, as if
they felt it wrong to be without employ; and, do but
behold her feet, how they peep out and play apart upon
the floor. There is a strife between the tongue that
speaks and the heart which speaks not, which these
pretty feet do show, and which the soft warrior watches.
Stayhe speakshe hath paused for memory. Belike
the flowers of his fancy need to be looked after; he
hath not tended them lately.
Nay, sweetest Cava, wouldst thou then leave me?
and whence this fear? What though your eyes have
not until this day beheld me, it makes not against your
taking the homage of the heart which their first glances
have won.
It were a weakness, noble lord, she murmured in
reply.
And the weakness of love, sweetest Cava, is the
very strength of nature, and may not be gainsaid by
reproach. It is no weakness such as makes the heart
ashamed. It is none to bring shame to thee.
But sorrow, perchance, my lordmuch sorrow.
Wherefore? The decree of love is from Heaven,
and the destiny is but a sad one in which its pleasant
law is not written. To deny love's prayer is to defy
Heaven's destiny, and set at naught the duty which, if
obeyed, were not less for our pleasure than our good.
Hear me, then, dearest Cava; be not stern, be not cold,
lest that thou wrong Heaven's own laws by withholding
thy obedience.
Thou dost press me too closely, my lord; I am too
young to answer thee.
The reply was uttered in broken murmurs, and
Pelayo
well saw that the words which she spoke were
foreign
to her meaning. His sarcastic humour noted well
the contradiction.
And yet, by the distaff of Hercules the Slumberer,
even as she speaks there is a warm wish in her heart
that he had pressed her more closely yet. The old
snake again; and our Adam may well beware, since
the hypocrite that counselled Eve hath not withheld his
lessons from her daughter. See, her head bends towards
him, though her lip prays him to keep his distance. Well
Heaven keep us, we shall know some day what we
need, or would have, at least, for we do not often say it
for ourselves.
Egiza did not mistake the true nature of Cava's
feelings
.
Her words misled him as little as they did his
brother, and his prayer became more earnest.
Oh, be not thus chary of thy charms, sweet Cava.
Look up, dear lady, and hearken to love's argument not
less than to his prayer.
Love's argument! said Pelayo. Well, that's
new. He'll give it her, I trust.
Thou dost object the briefness of our knowledge
our discourse; thou sayst that 'twere a weakness,
having seen but once, to dispose ourselves in love, and
might bring sorrow upon our hearts.
In truth, I fear it much, my lord. We were but
rashit were a child's weakness to yielo us up to such
sudden passion.
The girl has sense enough in her head if her heart
were out of the way! exclaimed Pelayo. But the
answer
of Egiza was in another mood.
And yet how else, my sweetest Cava, are spirits to
be won and wedded, if not thus? Love is no sober
student  he needs no long study  no books  no
schoolsno teaching. He moves to his purpose by no
measures, no scales, no weights. He gains not his
conquest by a ten years' siege, which, sovereign though
it may be for patience, were but a death to him who,
in an instant, leaps to his possession when we least note
his movement. 'Tis an instinct, sweet Cava, and not
a study. It is the first instinct of the heart; for, until it
loves, the heart has no consciousness of life. My heart
has not lived till within this hour  ah, may it be that
thine has taken life in the same sweet consciousness with
mine. This is my prayer, sweet Cavathis my hope.
Hast thou not an answer for me, dearest? If thou hast
notif the heart which mine own seeks feels not now,
with an instinct quickening into life, like mine, then am
I lost. I hope not from other pleading. Is it thus,
Cava? Tell meart thou unfeeling? art thou cold?
wilt thou deny me? shall I pray to thee in vain?
The respiration of the maiden seemed checked, and
the broken words which followed were a full answer,
had the excited feelings of Egiza suffered him to note
their emphasis.
Oh nonot unfeelingnot cold, my lord.
Tell me then, dearest Cava, that the instinct of my
heart is thine. Say to me that thou lovest me.
The game is too close huntedI'll give it reprieve
come in at the death, but not see it.
Speaking thus, Pelayo advanced; and, ere the lady
could frame her answer, the heavy tread of his step
reached the ears of the lovers, and arrested their
dialogue
.
Ah, lady, he exclaimed to her as he approached,
thou hast made but little count of thy guests, since
thou hast left them to seek thee out as they might. I
had hoped to find thee ere my brother; but, as he has
the birthright, so, it seems, he has the good fortune. I
have but stumbled upon thee without guidance, since he
has had thine eyes to himself.
With the instant readiness of the woman, the
confusion
which a moment before overspread every feature of
the maiden's countenance now utterly departed; and
she replied with ease by saying, what, indeed, was the
truth, that she had left him and his brother alike under
the guidance and in the company of her father.
Why, true, fair lady; and yet my brother, you see,
could escape to seek out a better guide; and a like
passion beset me, the more, indeed, as I left the good
count under my uncle's homily, and he in the highest
heaven of his self-esteem while he bestowed it upon him.
I had no wish to rob your father of the blessing, and, I
fear me, have stolen here upon devotions even more
urgent
than those I fled from. My brother has a most
priestlike visage, and you, Lady Cavanay, you look
not like one who could well guide either of us now to
the fine prospects of this noble castle.
Egiza now beheld the renewed confusion of the
damsel
at these words, and interposed for her relief.
Nay, nay, brotherwe did but step aside that our
uncle should speak securely to Count Julian on the
subject
which, as thou well knowst, he has so much at
heart. It were not well in us to meddle with the better
arguments with which it is his hope to move him to our
aid.
And hop'st thou aught, demanded Pelayo, in a side
whisper, of his brother, and hop'st thou aught from
this appeal? If thou dost so far deceive thyself, good
brother, thou canst not deceive me. The damsel's
father
will do nothing for usI say the damsel's father,
Egiza.
A moment, fairest lady, said Egiza, as he turned
from Cava to Pelayo; I will but speak a moment
'tis an urgent matterwith my brother.
The maiden bowed, and turned from the speaker to
the corner of the gallery.
How know you  wherefore think you thus,
Pelayo
?
Seethe Lord Oppas comes with Julian. Behold
the brows of your uncle, and take your answer from
them. 'Tis written there legibly enough; but I knew
it long before, from the face of Julian himself. See
his
brow, how smooth; he has had his response ready
ere he heard our uncle's argument, of which you thought
so greatly, and which, from the beginning, I held of but
little account; and now go, if it so please you, and
prattle your gay conceits in the ears of the maiden whose
sire denies you justice, denies you the due of his life
and good sword, both of which, as his proper sovereign,
you have the right to challenge. But, ere you go, hear
me. Prepare to give up the crown and kingdom of
our father, or go with me with the dawn for the
Asturias
.
When he had ended these words, Pelayo turned from
his brother to where the two of whom he spoke were
approaching, and with a scornful composure of
countenance
awaited their coming. Count Julian, who beheld
and understood the glance, did not, however, suffer it to
move him, but continued to speak of the topic between
himself and his companion, which, from his remarks,
seemed about to be brought to a full though not a
favourable
conclusion.
You have my thought, my Lord Oppas, without
restraint
.
I have spared nothing and strained nothing in
my judgment on this subject. It would glad me much
that these young men should have the station to which
they assert a right, for I cannot forget the many and
great kindnesses bestowed upon me by their father.
But I cannot hold the cause of Roderick to be less just
than is theirs. The right of election is with the people,
and they have raised him upon the shield; and I hold
that whatever might be the blood within his veins,
whether
it sprang from the heart of the Goth or the Roman,
or from the base puddle of the Iberian or the Bascone,
it were still in the power of the Gothic people to lift it
to such honourable estimation as now crowns the
ambition
of Roderick.
It grieves me that you think so, Count Julian; and
no less great is my sorrow that you have proved
yourself
insensible to the other arguments of force which I
had deemed it useful to urge upon you. You will not
esteem it an obtrusion, Count Julian, if I pray you still
to consider them. There is yet time.
The count smiled as he replied gently, but with
sufficient
firmness of air to show that he was inflexible in
the resolve which he had made.
The arguments, as you are pleased to style them,
my lord bishop, move me not. Were it wise in me, at
my years, to seek for place and power beyond that
within my present possession, this commission just
received
from King Roderick, giving me the highest
subordinate
power in the kingdom, without prayer or
service
from me, would reasonably encourage me to hope
for more at his hands, were I moved to wish such
gain. But I desire no greater honours, as I desire no
additional toils and responsibilities. I take not my
present charge, which I had thought to have yielded up
to some fitting successor, but that the Moor threatens
at our gates, and the soldiers who are accustomed to
defend
them are no less accustomed to me as their
captain
in such defence. To this effect is the answer
which I have prepared for Roderick, in acknowledging
the trust which he has been pleased to confirm in my
hands.
Pelayo joined them at this moment, and, speaking
abruptly, arrested the courteous response which the
archbishop
was preparing for the ears of Julian.
Soh, good uncle, now that you have your answer,
let us be gone. Let us give our gratitude and our
thankswords, words, alland then away. We need
make but little pause, and may make great speed in
our progress, since we carry no burden, unless it be
my brother's impatience. We have come hither hoping
much; what we bear hence will diminish our hope, and
so lessen the weight we bear away. We do not leave
our host in such good fortune, since thy homily, Lord
Oppas, has made him reasonably grave.
And what need of such haste, my friend? give
yourselves leave to-night, and enjoy our couches. Do
me grace, my young lord, whose speech is more sharp
than needful, and wrong me not in your thought that I
adventure not with you. If my prayer and reason might
avail, I would have you forbear your purpose also, as
it were but desperation to lift an arm against Roderick.
He is too firmly seated in the throne for any force, such
as yours to overthrow.
Perhaps, perhaps my lord;  but my lessons
have not taught me this heedful policy. That rule of
narrow selfishness which determines of its duty by its
chance was not among my lessons. I measure no
virtue by expediency. My duty must be done, though
Count Julian counsels against it; I must strive at the
work which is given me, though I perish in the labour.
I know there is a more sleek sort of virtue in the world
which takes easier roads of duty; I gainsay not him
who prefers it; and well I know that such have always
fine arguments for its defence. Let it pass. Yet I
thank you, my lord count, for your courtesy; nor, though
I use it not, am I less grateful for your good counsel.
It might profit others, but would only beggar me; and
Vol. I.G
I leave it, therefore, my lord, for those goodlier persons
whom it would better stead than myself. Shall we not
depart, good uncle?
Ay, my son, if it please you. Yet a moment.
He turned to Count Julian as he thus replied to
Pelayo
,
and in tones which were audible only to the two,
and were meant only for the ears of the former, he thus
spoke.
What we have spoken, my lord count, I hold to be
in sacred trust between us.
Julian put his hand on his heart as he replied
You are safe with me, my lord bishop; for though
the officer of King Roderick, my honour is in my own
keeping. If I betray not my own trust, he cannot
demand
of me to betray the trust of another.
And if you did, my lord, exclaimed Pelayo,
misunderstanding
the import of Julian's reply, and striking
the hilt of his weapon as he spokeand if you did,
my lord, you would not find us willing victims. There
are swords to be bared and blows to be struck ere the
betrayed fall at the mercy of the betrayer in sacrifice to
his tyrant.
There needs not this display of valour, young man,
replied the count, calmly. I mean you no wrong.
You have sought me trusting to my faith, and you shall
not suffer by your confidence. Yet it were well to say
that I would not have you again seek me on such
mission
.
It is enough for you to know that I shall this day
accept the trust of King Roderick; such trust will be
incompatible with your purpose; and I must not know
of it. From this moment, what has already passed is
forgotten. You are free to depart without interruption
when you please, though it were no wrong to my
honour
to give you honourable tendance and fresh couches
for the night. Let me pray you, then, to remain.
I
know
, my lord count, that we
are
free to depart
I, at least, am free. I carry my freedom here,
touching the hilt of his sword. Hold me not
unthankful
for your courtesy, my lord, when I decline it;
but I must be soon a traveller if I would not that my
head should keep countenance with that of my father
the King Witizayour friend, Count Julianupon the
gates of Toledo.
There was much in this speech that pained and
offended
Count Julian; but, with the subdued superiority
of age, he freely allowed for the warmth and
impetuousity
of youth, angered as it was, in the case of Pelayo,
by his late and painful losses. Still, he could scarce
forbear stern reply; yet he turned away, and bit his lip
in silence. Meanwhile the three prepared to depart;
and, while they bade their adieus to their host and his
lovely daughter, Pelayo addressed himself to the latter
with more freedom than he had before shown in his
approaches
to her.
Lady, by your leave, he said, taking her hand and
carrying it to his lips, an action which not a little
annoyed
the jealous Egiza, who was engaged in speech with
Julian. Oh, you shall be my queen, sweetest lady,
and no subject in your realm should be so true to you
as I, if you can but persuade my brother here to rid
himself of a certain damsel whom he wills for ever to
ride in his train.
A damsel, my lord? demanded Cava, in unfeigned
astonishment.
Ay, lady, a damselnot so fair as thou art, but one
he would keep with no less.
I pray you, what is she? inquired the maiden.
Ask you for her name or quality?
Oh, both, my lord.
Well, then, her name is Patiencea goodly
scripture
name. Our uncle, the archbishop here, taught it
him, with her choice qualities, in sundry exhortations;
until now, he takes her to his bosom instead of many
virtues. She is now, indeed, my brother's mistress.
She rides with him, nor trusts him at any time from
her sight. If he would move, she plucks him by
the sleeve, and counsels him against rash riding and
youthful venturesomeness; and when other youth not
so counselled would urge him on to greater daring, she
quarrels with them in a mood too spiteful to keep faith
with the name she bears. Truly, Lady Cava, would I
rejoice that my brother should ride with any damsel but
this, for she drives better spirits from his side, and keeps
him in a sad lonesomeness, and all the bondage of the
solitude she makes. Couldst thou help him, sweet
lady
The approach of the jealous Egiza enabled him to
hear much of what his brother had said, and to interrupt
him at this moment
He jests, sweet lady. He hath a stray spirit,
which moves him ever to such speech of his friends.
Heed him not, I pray you.
I jest! exclaimed Pelayo. I tell thee not to
believe
me, sweet Lady Cava, for I know thou wilt. I
cannot jest. I can understand no jest. When I jest
teeth are brokenay, and heads too. He knows I do
not jest, and jests when he tells thee thus. I leave you,
lady.
Farewell, farewell, sweet Cava, was the parting
whisper of Egiza. You are in my heartits
substance
and its soul, dear lady.
And in mine too, sweet lady, said Pelayo, whose
keen ear caught the whisper, if thou wilt but do as I
have prayed thee. Teach him to rid himself of that
damsel of whom I told thee, so that he shall awaken
into the life that is his duty, and the rough speech of
Pelayo shall take a goodlier tone, and shape your
praises even into sounds of music.
You overrate my power, Prince Pelayo.
Not a whitI would that thou shouldst use it for
his good. I pray thee, lady, if again he seeks thee,
that thou wilt do so.
Egiza murmured over these words as he passed from
the threshold:
If he seeks thee? Can I else than seek her? I
have no thought now but to remain; and if my power
serve but with my will, I cannot help but return.
You grow impatient, brother, exclaimed Pelayo,
after he had bidden farewell to the count. Why do
you linger? The fair damsel, Love, has departed, and
the other damsel, who is not so fair, Dame Patience,
grows chill with waiting.
XVI.
There
was no hope from Julian. He was firm in
his refusal to take part with those, whose cause, however
rightful at first, was, in truth, unlawful nowinasmuch
as the Goths, according to ancient usage, had duly
elected the usurper Roderick. The usurpation had
been legalized by the strongest faction, and there was
little doubt but that the greater portion of the people
were with the tyrant. In this condition of things, his
rejection of the arguments of the Lord Bishop Oppas
was peremptory, and that ambitious and intriguing
churchman was compelled to forego all hope from the
quarter to which his eyes had been directed far too
much. Leaving the palace of the count, the mood of
each had in it much of disappointment. That of the
archbishop arose, naturally enough, from the refusal of
Julian. Pelayo, only chafed with the delay, as at no
period did he look to have aid against the usurper from
one who consented to hold office under him. The
disappointment
of Egiza was soothed by the passages of
G 2
love which had taken place between the Lady Cava and
himself, and his regret arose rather from the necessity
compelling him to leave her presence, than from any
great sense of mortification following the refusal of
Julian to take part in the conspiracy. The several
moods of the parties resulted in a falling off from each
other of their usual sympathies, and, with but small
show of cordiality, the two young princes listened to
new suggestions from Oppas.
Heed it not now, Pelayo. It is a sad chancebut
we have friends leftmany, glad to serve us, and not
less willing to bring down the usurper. To-morrow
night we meet. There you will see themhear their
advice, accept their pledges, and prepare, at all points,
to gain the vantage ground in the commotion which
must come ere long. Think not of the Asturias yet.
The peasants there may be true, but they are too remote.
To bring them here, on his own ground, to fight with
Roderick, it were only to destroy them. We must
strike here, and suddenly. You will come to-night?
I will, good uncle, though I look for other defeat
from thy ministry. Thou art too subtle to be certain
too skeptical of man's honesty properly to believe, and
considerately to serve, the people. With no faith in
others, they will not wisely do to believe in thee; and
it is the nature of thy practice to scorn the direct, in a
fond search after the pathway which is hidden. Go to
this policy may seize but will not secureit may
win, but is not worthy to winit may conquer in battle,
but the strife is without honour, and would tarnish the
spurs of the good knight, though he conquer by it.
Thou wilt say I dream in this, as it is the wont always
with the cunning to say of those who hold man higher
than he holds himself. But, if my thought were the
world's thought, then wouldst thou lose thy bishopric,
for then would men be far more Christian than all thy
teachings could make them, or approve thvself. Of thy
holy practices, good uncle, I speak notI will not do
thee so much unkindness.
Thou art most considerate, Pelayo, but thou endest
thy speech where it were better to have begun. Take
a better mood to thee, and be prudent to be wise. I
forgive thee all thou sayst, for the cause we hold is ours
in common. Thou hast thy venture along with thy
brother's and mine, and I can well understand the rash
words which the peril of its loss may prompt thy lips in
their utterance. The bishop spoke soothingly, and to
him Pelayo replied without the pause of an instant
I have no cause such as thou claimest in this, lord
bishop. Speak not of mine, or of thine, or of my
brother's cause, when the beautiful country of our fathers
is trodden by an accursed tyrant. That is my causeI
aim at no crown, either for Egiza or myself.
This is our cause as well, promptly responded the
archbishop, who felt the necessity of conciliating one
already renowned for his valour, and possessing a
wonderful
influence over the few knights of their party, who
admired his courage and conduct, and were secure in
the knowledge which they possessed of his virtue and
patriotism. This is our cause, as well as thine,
Pelayo
,
and the cause of all who feel with us; as thou
shalt see to-night, at thy coming. Thou wilt come?
I will.
Where goest thou now, Pelayo? inquired his brother,
seeing him about to depart. The person addressed
turned abruptly upon the speaker, and with eyes that
seemed to pierce him through, after a moment's
hesitation
,
thus addressed him in reply:
Thou hast known me long, Egiza. Shall I say to
thee that Pelayo has no thought but of his dutyhis
duty to the livinghis duty to the dead. The good of
the onethe just homage to the other. I go upon these
duties. I work through all the hours in our labour
yet think not that I work for thee. My dream by night
my thought by daymy hope, through all seasons the
same, is, that the creature who has limbs such as mine
should have thoughts such as mine. There was a dream
of freedom among the nobles of ancient Rome, while
they rode over the necks of their barbarian captives.
Thou hast thy dream of freedom too, Egiza, when thou
hast supped plentifully. The dream of Pelayo is not
like thine, nor yet like that of ancient Romeyet it is
also a dream of freedom. His dream of liberty shows
it all alikea principle like truth, such as no season
can change, no condition magnify or depress, no rule
subjugate, no soul avoid; whose temple is of universal
adoration, and whose light, like that of the sun, is seen
from all the nations.
Why, thou dost dream, surely. What meanest
thou by this freedom? asked Egiza, wondering.
The freedom of man.
And what is that?
The absence of that necessity which imposes a
condition upon man adverse to the nature within him.
He is no slave whose intellect is not beyond his
condition
.
He is a slave whose ambition, guided by a just
impulse from truth, is restrained by a will hostile to his
own, and defrauding him of his right, while defeating the
purposes of the God who made him.
Oh, this is idle, my son; and such words, which
mean nothing or little, are out of place in the mouth of
a noble and a prince. Thou art, indeed, dreaming,
Pelayo, said the archbishop.
Thou wilt seethou wilt see. Oh, would thou
couldst dream with me, Lord Oppasbut it is not for
the sleek churchman to learn how godlike is the
sacrifice
which the noble heart can makehow vast the
labour the high mind can compasshow great the trial
the nerved form may overcome and defy, when cheered
by such a vision which that dream affords of the future.
I see what thou canst not. I hear sounds which reach
thee not. Know, my lord bishop, that he who labours
for mankind has already begun his immortality.
Very goodbut my thoughts are not so foreign,
my son; and such as thou hast were better discarded.
They will profit not thy cause.
My cause!would I could teach it thee. Thou
wouldst use me for thine. I purpose to do the same
with theenot for my cause, not for thine, save only,
as we both make a part of that condition which can only
be happy when officered by the truth. My cause is not
the cause of to-day, but of time. The labour of to-day
is only useful to my cause, as it belongs to man, and holds
a portion of the hours which are his; and the individuals
who work in it are of no import in its progress, only as
they precede countless generations yet to come, having
their feelings and thoughts, and subject to the same
necessities
.
The error of all thy thought is, that thou
thinkest only of to-day.
Welland enough too. But then thou wilt be
here to the time?
I have said.
Shall I go with thee, brother?
Stay, and keep counsel with our uncle, Egiza. Win
him to give thee some new homily, which shall serve thee
in lieu of good works, when thou comest to the throne.
Pelayo left them, and Egiza, with Oppas, proceeded
to the palace of the latter, where arrangements were to
be made for the secret reception of the conspirators.
XVII.
After
leaving them, Pelayo went forth into the
country, having a secret object and without a thought,
save only of the duty he had before him. He now
rambled along a narrow valley, on either hand of which
rose the towering sierras, dark, steep, and lonely. The
solemn silence of the scene suited well with his musing
temperament; but his meditations were interrupted by
the sudden appearance of a steed, bounding with
head-long
course along the narrow gorge, and making directly
towards the spot on which he stood. As he approached,
Pelayo saw that he had been recently mounted, and
most probably had thrown his rider, for the saddle was
upon his back, and the housings were all in order, as
for a journey. Down, as the steed came forward,
Pelayo
leaped from the little crag, and throwing himself
directly upon the path of the fugitive, spoke to him in a
voice of authority. The animal stopped at the instant,
even as if he had known the voice, then half receded,
and lifted his head in air, but without other motion.
Pelayo advanced and seized upon his bridle. Another
instant found him upon the back of the now completely
docile animal, and turning his head again upon the
path which he had overrun, the prince now sought with
him to find his owner.
XVIII.
He
soon came to the place from whence the fugitive
had fleda little hollow of the hills, about a mile from
the spot where Pelayo had arrested him, near which
bubbled up a pure fountain of water, to which travellers
in that wild country usually bend their steps. There,
close by the fountain, lay a man at length, his head
resting
upon the arm of a slender page that knelt beside him.
A little palfrey, upon which the boy had probably ridden,
stood fastened to a neighbouring shrub. As Pelayo
came near, he saw that the man was agedhis beard
was venerably long and white, and his face was marked
with the deep lines of thought and experience. He
seemed to suffer pain, and the boy was busied in
binding
up a wound upon his head with a sleeve of his
garment
.
He had been greatly bruised by his fall, for the
horse had thrown him; but his hurts were not dangerous,
though the concussion which his head had sustained,
coming suddenly upon the rock, for a time had stunned
him. As Pelayo approached, the boy spokethe eyes
of the old man were fixed knowingly upon him, while
his face assumed a quick expression, and he half-raised
himself from the ground. The boy continued to hold
his head, with a tenderness which Pelayo saw even more
fully expressed in his pale countenance and quivering
lip, than in the solicitous care exhibited by his actions.
Thou art not much hurt, father, I hope? said
Pelayo
,
speaking kindly, while fastening the fugitive steed
to a shrub.
The old man paused a few seconds before he
answeredall the while surveying the young prince
with an earnest penetration of glance, which at length
became unpleasant to Pelayo, who now repeated the
inquiry.
Not much, not much, my son, I thank theebut
who art thou, and how hast thou chided that vicious
beast into subjection? He hath a spirit that is wrathful
and vexing.
Not so, father, thou errest in thy thought of this
fine-eyed Deserter. He is a true Barbary, and is not
less gentle than fleet and forward.
Ah, he knows his master. It is with thee he is
gentlenot with me. Thou hast a strange power, my
son, to do that which none might hope to do before.
See, he looks to thee as a tame thing of thy household.
Who art thou? I gaze on thee again, and thy features
grow full in memory. Art thou not
Nothing!
The prince, the Prince Pelayoson of King
Witiza!
The same, old man. A name not oversafe to him
who uttersor to him who hears. I am the Prince
Pelayo!
The old man looked at the speaker again, then
groaning
audibly, turned his face, and buried it for a moment
in the arms of the boy, whose looks expressed more
than usual solicitude. Pelayo, who suffered none of this
to escape him, now asked, with some curiosity, Who
art thou?
Ask notask not, Pelayo. To thee, I should be
nameless, even as thou wouldst have thyself to me.
And wherefore, father? inquired Pelayo, with
increasing
curiosity.
Ay, whereforewherefore should I dread my fate?
Why should I longer hold life a thing to strive for? I
will tell it thee.
Oh no, no, no! Speak it not, I pray thee, my father,
speak it not to him. Thus interposing, the boy threw
his arms affectionately, and with great earnestness,
around the neck of the old man, and sought to stay his
words; but the sudden determination which he seemed
to have made was invincible, and he shook off the boy,
addressing him at the same time in language, which, if
not ungracious, was at least stern.
How now, boyhast thou forgotten? Go to thy
place, and meddle not with the doings of thy betters.
Thou wilt mar, where I would make thee.
Meekly, at the rebuke, the boy sunk back behind
the speaker, and, with arms folded upon his bosom,
awaited in silence the progress of the scene. But his
interruption had led Pelayo to look more narrowly than
he had done before to the features of the attendant, and
he now saw that the tearful eyes were of a most glorious
and glowing black, and the hair, which was confined by
the close folds of a cap, not unlike the turban of the
Moors, was glossy and dark as that masking the wing
of the full-fledged raven. The figure, too, though
exceedingly
slight, was distinguished by an eminent grace,
and, as he sank down upon the earth with humility,
Pelayo thought his attitude and expression such as would
have delighted Erzelias, the sweet painter of the Gothic
court, in the time of Witiza. The old man went on
with his speech where the boy had interrupted it.
I will tell thee all, my prince, though I should be
but loath to tell thee any thing, if I had not long since
learned to compute lifethe life not ready for quick
sacrificeas a poor labour for a profitless spoil. Thou
shalt know me. My name is Melchior. Thou hast
heard of me before.
What! Melchior the Hebrew?Melchior, as thy
people call thee, of the Desert?
HeMelchior of the DesertMelchior the
Hebrew
!
The boy clasped his hands, and threw himself
forward
to the old man, but said nothing. Pelayo recoiled,
as if in horror, for a moment, then suddenly and fiercely
exclaimed, as he bared his dagger
And what if I slay thee on the spot!
Oh, strike not, strike not, mighty prince, strike not
the old father! See his white hair, and the blood on it!
His limbs totterhe is weak and old! Strike him not,
strike him not, I pray thee!
Thus pleading, the boy rushed in between, and, with
uplifted hands, and a cheek flushed over with
excitement
,
while his eyes flowed with tears, he prayed for
mercy for the aged chief of a despised and persecuted
sect. Pelayo regarded the old man and boy alternately,
and though possessed of many of the prejudices
common
among the Christians of the time, which held the
Jews an odious race on many accounts, as well of trade
as of religion, his mind was too superior to the prejudices
of the period, too noble and truly chivalric, not to
forbear
.
He covered up his steel, and, in a calmer tone,
thus addressed him
Melchior of the Desert, enemy of my father, of my
country, and of me, I should do thee but faint justice
were I to slay thee, even on the ground where thou
liest.
I am not thy enemy, Pelayo. Thou wrong'st me
much to say so. Thou art as one sacred in the sight
of Melchior of the Desert.
What! thou wouldst lie for life, too, at thy years?
For shame, old man! This is to be a Hebrew. Why
Vol. I.H
shouldst thou hold for me a gentle thought, when thou
didst hate my father?
Hear me, my son. I say, as I have said to thee,
thou, Pelayo, art sacred in the sight of Melchior of the
Desert. Even as thou approached to me, leading that
fierce steed, which thy one word had tamedthen,
though a thick film was before mine eyes, and all my
senses swam in a dull stupor, from my many hurts
even then I saw it.
Saw what? inquired the prince.
Yes, even then, I saw the green wing of the
humma
,
the sacred bird of Heavensuch as the Arab sees
such as I saw once, many years ago, in a far vision
of a spring, vouchsafed me in the desertI saw it
thrice sweep closely round thy head, and straightway
I knew thee for a mighty prince. I saw, and could not
doubt. Then I knew thou wert the chosen of the God
of Abraham, to be the king of thy people. Thou art
their king, and whether thou strik'st or spar'st me, still
Melchior of the Desert must call thee king. I cannot
be thy enemy.
He is my enemy who is the enemy of my people.
Am I not one of thy people? Do I not own thee
for my king?
Ay, the king whom thou wouldst betray to death,
even as thou didst league thy accursed sect with the
Saracen, to destroy my father and my people.
I did league with the SaracenI would league with
the Saracen again, that the enemies of man should not
make a dog of him. But I will not league against
thee.
I am my country'sso wouldst thou be, were the
ties of country aught to a spirit so base as marks thy
tribe.
My country! exclaimed the Jew, bitterlyand
what is my country? what is the country of the Hebrew?
This is not his country. The ties with which thou wouldst
bind him to it are the scourge and the chain, the cruel
taunt and the unlimited exaction. These are the ties
of country to my tribe. How should they be true and
faithful to the rule which yields them for sympathy
the stroke, and for security and peace all manner of
persecution
?
I have leagued with the Saracen against the
tyranny of the landthe tyranny that was death unto
my people.
And didst thou hope for a kinder sway from the
children of the accursed Mahound?
Hear me, Prince Pelayo. Melchior of the Desert
has wandered with the Saracen in his tents, as his
captive
and his slave: and though cruel is captivity by
whatever name, and softened by whatever indulgence,
yet was it with the Saracen a gentle providence,
when compared with the intolerance of the Christian rule.
I speak to thee as one who may soon be gathered to
his fathers, having no hope from the judgment of
Jehovah
,
but from his justice. My words are those of truth,
even though the grave were open before me. The
practice of the Saracen was the Christian faiththe
Christian practice to the Hebrew were worthy of the
name of terror and of cruelty thou hast given to the
Saracen.
I fear me, Melchior, much thou hast spoken of the
Goth is sorely true, and sadly do our people now bear
testimony to the error which overreaches the land. The
Jew is hardly dealt with, and I know there can be no
faith where there is no trust. To hold thee bound in
honour to thy country, thou shouldst possess thy
country's
confidence.
Thou hast spoken, Prince Pelayo, as a prince should
speakwith the thought of a father for his people.
Thou lookest, with me, beyond the high hills, and
through the thick clouds that keep other men from the
distant truth. Thy thought is the true wisdom. All
that the Hebrew claimsall that is claimed by Melchior
of the Desertfrom the land that asks his service, is, its
confidence. But give it himkeep it not back from
himlet him but know he has a country, by her trust,
her love, her care in his concern, and not, as now, by
scorn, wrong, and all manner of oppressionlet him
know this, my prince, and not a Christian dwells
throughout Spain shall better serve herwith a truer
love, or a more perfect fidelity. He will not shrink
from her battleshe will glory that he may range under
her banner. Her pride shall be his ownher fortune
as much his care, and as well worthy preserving, in his
thought, as they may seem to any of the proud nobles,
who now cry aloud against him.
Could I think this, Melchior, as thou hast said it,
replied Pelayo, musingly, to the old man, who had
grown warmed by his feelings, and now hastily answered,
half rising from the ground
Believe meI will swear. The great God of
Israel shall hear the solemn promise that I now make
thee for my whole tribe. Not a Jew of Toledo that
will not move at Melchior's bidding. Thou shalt see
I swear for them. Thou little know'st my people,
Prince Pelayo. How glad were they to learn they had
a countryhow glad to die for it.
And for a rule that brings them to this knowledge
for one which gives them the same freedom with the rest,
to hold their faith and wealththeir several thoughts
to shape themselves in lifepursue their venture,
whether in worship, or in toil, or trade, each with his
single mood, with no restraint, save of the wholesome
laws that all obeyfor this thou'lt pledge thyself?
Ay! I swear it all! My arm, my wealth, my
peopleall shall swear. Say but this word to them,
and be their king.
Not I, their king. My brother holds the right.
'Tis he shall promise this.
Ha! not thou? I tell thee, Prince Pelayo, thou
art hethou only can'st do this. Thou shalt be king
of thy people. Have I not seen it? I may not doubt
the promise which has shown it me, when, at thy first
coming, the green wing of that bird of Heaven shadowed
thy rising forehead with its glory. Thou wilt be king
of Spain.
Pelayo searched the venerable speaker narrowly with
his eyes, and plainly saw that he spoke in all sincerity.
The wild oriental faith in the crown-giving wing of the
humma, the fabulous bird of the desert, was strong in
the soul of him who had dwelt for so long a season in
the tents of the Arab; nor was the belief of the
Christians
,
at that time, much less certain on the same
subject
.
The Prince Pelayo, however, was superior to the
superstition, and he calmly enough replied to the speaker,
whose manner had become rapt in due correspondence
with the strain of enthusiasm which had fallen from
his lips.
No, Melchior, none of this. My brother Egiza
shall ascend the throne, and his power shall do for thee
and thy people as I have said. It will be to thee and
them the same, if thou wilt make the same pledge to his
rule as thou profferest to mine. What force mightst
thou array?
Three thousand men. Not practised, as thou
know'stnot skilled in arms. The stern sway of thy
father took greatly from the ancient valour of the
Hebrew. But they will follow and fight for thee, so
thou wilt lead them.
Will they not for my brother?
Ay, for the king who does as thou hast promised.
Thyself shall lead them. They will follow thee.
I know thy power over them of old, when thy rash call
unto the Saracen brought them to that peril which
attends
thee now.
Yes, even now I flya fugitive. My head is
forfeit
.
But if thou, my prince, wilt move thy brother to
the thought thou speak'st, old Melchior will not fear the
foes that hunt him. My beard is white, but look upon
mine arm. The cimeter is pleasant in my grasp, and
H 2
let me know the country I may strike forI shall grow
young again.
Thou shalt know this, and grasp the cimeter against
the bloody-minded Roderick. Egiza shall requite thee
with a pledge. Come, go with me. Give me thy arm
I'll help thee to thy horse, which is now gentle.
What means the boy?
Thus Pelayo spoke, and the old man was about to
accept the proffered assistance, when the page, who had
all the while been a silent but attentive listener, now
arose hurriedly, and pressing between the prince and
Melchior, sought, by the substitution of his arm, to
render
unnecessary that of Pelayo. At the movement,
the old man seemed to be conscious, too, of the
impropriety
of which he should be guilty, were he to task the
aid of a Christian, in contact with one of a people, at
that period regarded in a light the most offensively
odious.
Now what means this? inquired Pelayo, with some
surprise. They boy is weak, Melchior, and cannot
help thee.
Pardon me, prince'twould not beseem thy name,
thy race, thy Christian bloodthou'dst vex at what thou
hadst done.
The boy spoke hurriedly, but with an appearance of
gratification still in his countenance, which sufficiently
proved that the fear of impropriety, and not a feeling of
aversion, prompted his interposition.
Thou little know'st Pelayo, boy. Thou'lt learn in
time. Come, Melchiortherethy page is forward
though. Is he thy son?
He ishe is, my lord. He is a gentle lad. A
goodback, Lamech, back.
The old man answered confusedly, and the boy, as
he spoke, proceeded to mount his own palfrey. In the
mean time Melchior was firmly seated, with the aid of
Pelayo, and his majestic and venerable form, at its
fullest height, seemed to have been greatly inspirited by
the prospect held forth to his ears of his people's
redemption
.
He now proceeded to describe the place of
his concealment in the neighbouring city of Cordova, so
that Pelayo should not fail to find him; and having
promised to go with the prince, that night, to a meeting
of the conspirators arranged to take place at the palace
of the Archbishop Oppas, they separatedMelchior,
with Lamech, proceeding in the direction of the city,
and Pelayo taking a path leading from it.
XIX.
With
the approach of night, the Prince Pelayo, as
had been agreed upon, proceeded to the dwelling of
Melchior of the Desert, under the guidance of the page
Lamech, who had been despatched by his father to the
prince for this purpose. The boy was now differently
attired from what he was when Pelayo had first seen
him; and the prince could not help remarking the
exceeding
and effeminate beauty of his face and person.
His eyes were darkdark and glittering. His hair was
smooth, like that of a girl, and of a rich blackglossy
beside, and fine as the most delicate silk. His figure
was so slender, it might have been thought almost too
ethereal for mortality, and so symmetrical that the eye
always looked for it again, as if for a thing that was
necessary.
Thou art but a child, Lamech, said the prince,
kindly, to engage in toil like this. Are not thy limbs
weary?
Oh no, my lord, they never weary when my heart
goes along with them, was the gentle response, uttered
by the lips of a childish innocence.
'Tis a right spirit thou hast, and God hold thee in
it, boy; but these are dangerous seasons for the mild.
Thy meekness will put thee at the feet of bad men, who
will ever trample upon thee, if thy ready weapon teaches
them not to fear. Thou wilt find it wise to lift steel
when thou get'st more years.
And so I have learned already, my lord. See
my arm is weak, I know, but I am strong in heart; and
with this dagger, methinks I could teach the insolent
man a goodly lesson.
He disengaged from his tunic, as he spoke, a small
and richly-ornamented poniard, which had been hitherto
concealed within its folds, and nothing could have looked
more pretty or more amusing in the sight of Pelayo,
than the glow of valour in the eyes of one so
exceedingly
effeminate and slight of form. The prince
smiled slightly as he replied
It is well that thou'rt provided, boy; but hold
it no slight to thy valour, if I counsel thee to a greater
gain of strength than thou hast. Why, what would thy
arm do in a stroke with mine, even though mine carried
no weapon, and thou wert ready with thy steel?
The boy looked at the extended arm with a glance
expressive of innocent admiration, as he surveyed the
knotted muscles, that, swelling here and there into hills,
indicated the great strength of the owner. But his
features
underwent a change corresponding with the active
movement of his thought.
Why is thine eye sorrowful?thou weepest, boy,
said the prince, curiously.
It is a child's weakness, my lordwhen I thought
of thy strength, I thought how thou wouldst use it.
Thou wilt go into the battle, where the spear strikes,
and the sword cleaves; and what were thy strength
then?
All, boy! It is then that I will strikethen will
my strength avail for conquest.
Ah, but my father. It is thus Melchior speaks to
to Lamech. Thus went he in fight against the Saracen,
when they made him captive, and he led the camels in
the long march of the desert. I was but a child then,
but I remember.
Thou hast had an ill chance of fortune, boy. Wert
thou a captive, too, with thy father?
For three long years; but I chafed not in my
captivity
,
for the Saracen was tender, and had pity on my
youth. They gave me no task which was not a
pleasure
,
and they taught me much that they knew. I
learned to read the stars in their teaching, and to heed
their language; and many a song they taught me, when
we lay, at the warm noon, in the camel's shadow, made
my heart soften so that I forgotshame on me that I
didthat my father was a captive.
And thou hast always been with Melchior?
Ever since I knew him. They were kindthe
Saracenwhen they made us captive, for they did not
part the father from his child.
How old art thou now, Lamech?
Sixteen, my father tells me. But I am much older
than that, I know.
How! What dost thou mean?
Oh, sometimes I have lived two days at a time, and
then I learned all that I know.
Indeed!but art sure thou knowest where thou
lead'st me? I know not this place. It looks strange
to me.
Quite sure, my lord. I know it by day and night,
the same. It is the suburb of the Hebrews.
Ha! Well, I am pledged for this, and must go on.
As he spoke, Pelayo crossed himself with an air of
strict devotion; then continued, And the Christian
does not often come to this quarter of Cordova?
Only when he seeks for money, was the reply,
uttered in a tone of deep emotion, and with a subdued
sternness of accent, which showed a larger share of
character in the speaker than his previous language had
led Pelayo to anticipate. The prince gazed on him
earnestly, but the eyes of the boy were busy in his
progress.
The two now pursued their way through a strangely
clustering assemblage of small and uncouth dwellings.
The owners had been studious, it would seem, to avoid
any show of external splendour in their habitations.
The assessor came too frequently, and was satisfied with
too much difficulty, not to compel a due forbearance on
the part of the wretched Israelites, of all those
exhibitions
of wealth, which, as it was, they could not often
conceal. No one not familiar with that people would
have looked for its possession in the quarter of the city
through which Pelayo now made his way. Silence and
an air of unnatural repose was over all; and the
occasional
light, shining stealthily through the crevice of the
household, was hurriedly obscured with the
consciousness
of approaching feet. Thus moving, they came at
length to a long low dwelling, crowded in by others, all
larger and more imposing to the eye, yet all around, in
some way or other, connected with that to which they
now advanced. A slight tap upon the door, by the hand
of Lamech, obtained for them admittance, and passing
through a long and dimly-lighted gallery, they entered a
spacious court, over which they moved in a direct line,
and Pelayo then found himself in another passage,
equally dark and narrow with that which he had just
left. He might have thought the boy had mistaken his
way, but for the unhesitating progress which he made,
and the knowledge which he had then in his memory
of the exceeding necessity for caution on the part of one
so much in danger, and whose arrest was so desirable,
as that of the man he sought. Pressing on, therefore,
with a speed that still at times left him short of his
conductor
,
he at length ascended a flight of winding stairs,
which carried him into a small chamber. Here he
paused while the boy tapped upon an inner door. He
heard a hum of retiring voices before it was opened,
but in the next moment he was ushered into the
apartment
.
XX.
The
eyes of Pelayo were almost dazzled by the gay
lights and the gorgeous shows around him. Costly
drapery, splendid mirrors of polished steel, and furniture
of inlaid work, such as the eye of the Moor loved to
rest upon, were clustering in every form beneath his
sight. Rich ornaments of massive gold, sparkling gems,
and a thousand glowing forms of luxury, which, however
natural to the view of one born and once living as a
prince, were yet altogether unanticipated in the spot
where he now found them. It was thus that the
persecuted
Jew endeavoured to indulge his own eyes in those
luxuries which he might not dare to expose to the eyes
of others. It was thus that he strove to satisfy himself,
by an extravagant crowding of his wealth around him,
for the thousand privations he was compelled to undergo
in his commerce with the world.
Thou art gloriously provided, Melchior, and may
not repine for thy losses, said the prince.
The old man sighed as he answered, These are
vanities, my prince, pleasant to the eyes, and grateful to
the thoughts of children only. The wealth of gold and
of gemsof the rich robe and the glowing wineswhat
are these to the sad heart? to the fettered spirit? to the
soul denied its exercise? to the form denied its
freedom
?
Thou hast never known this bondage of the
spirit, my prince: thou hast not felt this denialthis
worst doom that can fall upon the nation or the man.
This wealth is none of mine. Melchior of the Desert has
only its wilderness and the privilege to roam in it, in
momentary
fear of the Saracen's sabreyet is it dearer to
him, this condition, than all the enjoyment of the wealth
thou seest. Thou shalt judge how the Jew values the
freedom thou hast promised Melchior, when I tell thee
that all this wealth is subject to thy word in the war
thou shalt wage with the tyrant Roderick. Nor is this
all. The Jew shall bring from every city in Spain
from Toledo, from Seville, from mountain and valley
he shall bring thee his vessels of gold and of silver, his
rich silks, and the carefully-hidden jewels so dear, as
the Christians think them, to his best affection. Thou
seest. They are thine! Now am I ready to go with
thee where they talk of strife against the enslaver of my
people.
Father, shall I go with thee? spoke the boy,
coming
forward.
Thou wilt stay, Lamech. It is men alone that can
go with the Prince Pelayo. Stay!
The boy pressed his hand, and shrunk back hurriedly;
but an instant after, coming forward, whispered thus, in
a language unknown to Pelayo:
The prince is a sweet noble, and speaks kindly.
He will not chide that I go.
But others will, my child, Isamechothers will.
Stay, and fear not. I will not keep from thee long.
The boy followed them to the door, and watched their
forms until the turn of the long avenue took them out
of his sight.
XXI.
From
the dwelling of Melchior, they proceeded at
once to that of the archbishop, where, by this time,
generally assembled, the conspirators awaited the princes.
Taking a route less indirect than that by which he had
come, Pelayo followed his conductor into the street, and
it was not long before they reached the palace of Oppas.
In a secluded and low-vaulted chamber, the enemies
of the usurper, each having his own peculiar wrong to
avenge, not less than that of his country, were crowded
together. They were a small, but trustworthy band
fierce in the assertion and faithful in the maintenance
of their rights. A mean lamp,suspended from the
ceiling
,
gave a sufficient degree of light to enable the eye
to take in the dim outline of their several persons, and
possibly the darker expression of their faces, but little
more; and this, perhaps, is quite as much as conspiracy
at any time calls for, however laudable its object. Here,
half impatient that the leaders of their enterprise had
not as yet made their appearance, they discussed their
plans of conduct and their resources, uttered their
several causes of complaint, and spared not their threats
of vengeance. From group to group, among them, the
archbishop moved continually, studiously infusing into
their minds, so far as he could, his own particular thoughts.
He was a dark, cold, designing mana restless
malignant
.
With a thirst of power, which had always engaged
him in mischief, he was now earnest rather to promote
his own than the interest of the princes. The
honourable
spirit which was their prompter was not his, and
he rather feared that of Pelayo in particular. He had
no love for them, and little cared for their father's, his
brother's, memory; but he professed much, for their
name and cause were essential to his purpose. He
dared not offend them; and with a spirit of hypocrisy,
which was his nature, while seeking to excuse or to
account for their absence, took care to urge upon the
attending nobles his own views of what would be their
best course of proceeding. He was interrupted in this
work by the entrance of Pelayo, whose appearance was
instantly hailed with a murmur of applause, which well
testified the favourable opinion of those around him.
Thanks, noble gentlemen, thanks. Your love is
much to us in our humility. We are too poor now to
offer more than this; but there will come a time, when,
with your own good arms to aid us, we shall work out a
better estate for all. How, my Lord Oppas, where is
Egiza?
Has he not been with thee, my son?
Vol. I.I
Not since the morning. You took note of him. I
left him with you, and looked to find him here.
He staid not with me long; but, as if impatient for
other tasks, he broke away, and gave no word, save that
the night should find him at our meeting. Yet is
he not.
Laggard! but we must on. What is our purpose,
uncle?have you spoken?
Yesbut most briefly. Some of them are firm
all of them with us. But who have you here, my son?
Oppas, as he spoke, pointed to Melchior, and Pelayo
then turned to the spot where the old man stood behind
him in waiting, and motioned his advance, while
replying
to the inquiryMelchior, as he spoke, advancing
sufficiently forward to stand, at the moment of his reply,
in the fullest glare of the lamp.
Look on him, my Lord Oppasgentlemen. Do ye
know this man?
We do not, was the reply.
Know him from me. This man, once the deadly
enemy of my father and of our country, I have made
bold to bring among you as our friend. I look to have
you hail him so. This is Melchior of the Desert!
Ha! was the exclamation of the nobles, and the
greater number shrunk away as from'a polluted and
polluting
presence. The high, dark brow of the Hebrew
gathered into a momentary scowl, while his lips curled
into something like scorn; but the expression passed
off in an instant, and in another he had resumed the
habitual, calm, almost melancholy look of benevolence,
which he commonly wore.
How!son Pelayo, is it the Hebrewthe slayer
of his Godthe foul and beastly infidel, thou wouldst
bring into the presence of Christian nobleseven in
close neighbourhood with the humble servant of Christ?
Is this thy pride of lineage, my son? What scorn is
this that thou wouldst put upon thy friends and people?
The archbishop, as he spoke, crossed himself with an
air of the profoundest devotion.
No scornmy lord bishop, and most Christian
uncleno scorn, but rather good service. I bring
Melchior of the Desert to your knowledge, and to the
knowledge of the friends I see around me, as one willing
and able to do much for our cause. He, too, is a
sufferer
by the tyrant who now sways the landhe is here
to strike with us that Roderick shall fall from his
usurped throne; and it is something new to me, good
uncle, that thy Christian spirit, which has not shamed
ere this to employ many unchristian and unworthy
agents in the doing of works we may not always
consider
good, should scruple now to achieve a good and
glorious work with the unworthy instrument, if he be
such, whom I now bring you.
It is an unholy agent thou wouldst give us, Pelayo,
and as an humble follower of Christ, I am not free to
counsel that we accept it, replied Oppas, who,
unscrupulous
enough in almost every thing else, yet felt that
his profession, at that period, derived its chief
importance
by earnestly encouraging a most bigoted hatred
to all forms of infidelity. To do murder for his cause
was legitimate enough, but it was grossly unbecoming
in a Christian to employ a Jew for that purpose.
I ask not for thy counsel, my Lord Oppas. It is
to these nobles I submit
And they will refuse, cried the archbishop,
interrupting
himthey will refuse all hand in a strife, if
the Jew be there.
Let me speak, I pray you, was the deliberate and
calm reply of the prince, as he turned to the nobles,
many of whom showed quite as much reluctance to
accept
the aid of the Hebrew as did the archbishop, and
were indeed, most probably, influenced by his expressed
determination.
Speak on, Pelayo, said one; let us hear thy
thought, and why thou bring'st us a Hebrew for a fellow,
and he too one of our land's enemies. Did he not
betray
Auria to the Moor? owe we not to him the rise in
battle of five thousand of his base tribe? and how should
we trust in one who has been so false before?
Count Eudon, you speak fairly. Hear to me.
This morning did I meet with Melchior first, and my
first thought was to slay him, as the enemy of my father
and my country
A good thoughtHeaven had given thee bliss,
Pelayo, hadst thou but done it. And as he spoke, the
archbishop again devoutly crossed himself, and muttered
a prayer half audible to the crowd. This was one of
the thousand arts of the venerable superstition.
Thou wilt not break upon me thus again, my Lord
Oppas, unless thou seek'st for rude answer in
acknowledgment
.
My mood is something stern to-night
already
,
and thy chafings make it not smoother. I
proceed
,
Count Eudon. My thought was harsh like thine,
and in my first feeling I would have slain him, but that
he made his proffer of good faith.
Did you believe him, prince? was the inquiry of
one of the nobles.
I am not moved to this warfare against Roderick
by my own loss of right or that of Egiza; but by a
sense of wrong that, in my own feeling, tells of my
country's suffering. The men of Spain are menI
hold them sothe rich and poor alikeand, more than
this, I care not for their creed. Let them pray or not
believe or not, if that they wrong no law that's based
on reasonif that they keep their faith unto their
country
the
country that protects and watches for them
they are alike to me. In this I speak for Melchior
for the Jewso does my brother speak. I speak for
him; and, strange as it may sound unto your sense, I
freely say, Lord Oppas, that you, not less than this old
Hebrew, are no Christian. The faith of Christ is that
of liberty. It teaches that the religion of mankind must
spring from each man's reasonit so requires that he
shall have free thought, and no restraint to make his
reason yours, save as he comes to it of his free will and
unimpeded conscience. Thinking thus, the Jew shall
be a fellow with the Goth, held equally in estimation of
Pelayo. So, too, my brother speaks.
Strange thought, indeed, Pelayo; but if you make
the Hebrew thus secure, how will you make him true
how bind him to you?
Your's is a narrow spirit, good mine uncle. We
elevate the soul when we do trust it, degrading when we
doubt. But now apart. In your ear, good gentlemen,
I pray leave to whisper more.
Then taking aside a few of the leading nobles,
together
with the bishop, he whispered to them as follows,
urging more selfish considerations upon them.
Hear to my reason, gentlemen, for this confidence
we give the Hebrew. He may not choose but be
Roderick's foe, for Roderick has proscribed him. A
price is set upon his headmakes him a common mark
and by the decree of the usurper, whoso shall keep
him safe shall suffer death and forfeiture of goods.
This makes him ours. To be true to us is to be true
to himself, for we are the enemies of his enemy. It
were his policy to strike for us. Thus we may trust
him. Then he brings us the gold which otherwise our
coffers would lack knowledge of. Smacks not such
promise sweetly to your sense? To me, more than all
this, he proffers in our battle a strong forcethree
thousand
fighting mengood subjects we shall make them
ready to follow as his will may guide. He is a
leader too. His battles were well fought; and if he
strikes for us, as once before he struck against my
father at Alpuxarra, I shall approve him, Hebrew though
he be. These are my arguments, and strong enough to
me, though my uncle's conscience receive them not.
I wash my hands of itI'll none of the Jew,
Pelayo
,
exclaimed the bishop aloud.
Could you but wash them clean, uncle, it were
I 2
better. Tutbut you lead not here as 'twere your
own. The cause is for my brother and his people.
The Jew is of his people; and, I swear it, he shall be
free to lift his arm in this great service. So take a
wiser thought to your mind, and reject not the
instrument
Heaven sends us in our need.
Could he embrace the churchput on the sign of
the cross, as a badge of honour and of glory? Say,
Jew, couldst thou do this it were all well.
Never! the heart of the Jew clings more firmly to
the faith of his fathers as thou seek'st to degrade it.
Even chains and the scourge are sweet, when they tell
him of the ancient altars of his nation: the sacred ark
of the temple; the temple itself, hallowed by a thousand
gloriesby the awful front of Jehovah, and the song of
the monarch minstrel. Shall I put off the joys of my
spiritthe pleasant thoughts of my boyhoodthe old
fancies that came with the mighty Jerusalem, and of the
parent God of the patriarchs? Thou know'st not the
Jew that asks it. Thou canst not feel his thought
thou canst not grasp the glory in his imagining. It is
not the spoil and the suffering of to-day that shall make
him renounce the bright promise in the future for his
nation. He knows that the scattered people shall be
unitedthat there shall come one who is to lead them,
so that they meet again, the world's master, and there
shall be no oppression.
He is come!the prophecy is fulfilled! cried the
archbishop triumphantly.
So thou say'stso doubtless thou think'stbut, if
he is come, the prophecy is still incomplete. Where is
the gathering of the nations shown? where is the
security
of the flock? where is the shepherd that is to
protect
and give them peace? Dost thou behold its image
in the tyranny which makes wretched this thy own land
and people? which denies all peace to mine, while
robbing
them of their substance? Is this thy fulfilment of
the glorious prophecy which promised to man the
kingdom
full of good-will and endless joy, of a time unbroken
of security, when the good angels, as of old, may again
walk beside us in the quiet valleys, and from the hill-top
at evening the fine sense may catch the faint notes of
that spirit-born minstrelsy which trickles from the
thousand-stringed
harp at the golden gate of heaven? Has
thy Saviour brought thee all this? for such is the blessed
promise of that sacred prophecy.
Strike down the impious wretch!he blasphemes!
was the sanguinary cry of the archbishop, as the warmly
roused Melchior, whose spirit was deeply impregnated
with the wildest fancies of the desert, poured himself
forth in the most fearless strains of enthusiasm. The
old man stood firm, and his dark eye was fired like that
of the eagle fresh descending from the sun. One or two
of the crowd moved towards him as if in compliance
with the call of Oppas, but Pelayo passed calmly
between
.
Go to, lords, this is my guestunder my
protection
,
and, to silence all further coil, one for whom my
honour stands pledged to yours. I answer for his faith
to uslet the God we all worship see to his own rights.
He is a better judge than either you or I, uncle, and
quite as able to avenge his wrongs. Have done, and
now to counsel.
XXII.
The
opposition of Oppas and the nobles ceased,
rather in deference to the expressed will of Pelayo than
because of any diminution in their minds of the ground
of scruple. Still, cautiously avoiding all show of
connection
with Melchior, they began their deliberations
freely, each suggesting his own view of the course
which should be taken. It happened here, as in most
cases where the counsellors are numerous, that much
difference prevailed among them. One party was for
secret corruption, the other proclaimed its sentiments
fearlessly in favour of an open warfare. The leader
of the former was Oppasand this was by far the most
numerous body. Pelayo counselled the other. Many
were the reasons given by the archbishop in behalf of
his suggestionsreasons all highly politic had the cause
been less just and honourable than it wasreasons
wisely framed for the rebel, but not so moving for him
who claimed rightfully his throne from the hands of a
usurper. Pelayo saw through the designs of Oppas
he saw that the plan suggested by his uncle would have
the effect of binding his followers to the guidance of a
secret and irresponsible authority, which, should the fate
of Egiza or himself prove unfortunate, would vest the
power in the hands of one, not less a usurper than was
he who now swayed the empire. He, therefore,
resolutely
opposed it.
My brother, said he, has a right in this, a sacred
right, left him by a thousand sires, each having it the
same. 'Tis not for him to hide it in a cloak, but, with
good argument, he well may lift his banner, and declare
his full resolve to make it good or perish.
'Tis not wise, my son'twere better policy to move
in quiet. Let us not offend the eyes that watch us,
until we may defy them.
We may do so now, my Lord Oppaswe may do
so now. The people chafe already under the rule of
Roderick, and, with their wonted impulse, they will
gather to the banner of Egiza, when once they see it
waving. They love the change, for they are the
creatures of the common nature, and her element is
change. Give them a new cry`Egiza, and close
ranks for Spain!'and they will peal it from each
sierra under the blue arch of heaven.
Such is my thought, cried Count Eudon. And
mine, and mine, cried others of the more daring
and restlessthose in particular who had personal
wrongs to avenge at the hands of Roderick.
I thank you, friendsI thank you. This is good
service, true. I love not this same cunningthis
concealment
.
Truth needs no bush for cover, and the good
cause has in itself a strength which virtue gives, shall
always make it mightiest in the end. What is your
force, Lord Aylor?
Twice two hundredmen good at spear and axe.
Bowmen, too?
But fewtoo few for note.
And you, Count Eudon?
As many moresome thirty bowmengood at
close strife too. Stout, ready, daring.
Wherefore this, Pelayo? cried the bishop, now
approaching. Sure you press not the strife until your
brother speaks?
I speak for him, my Lord Oppas, even as I speak
for Spain and these assembled nobles. It is not more
the cause of Egiza than yours, and yours, and mine.
He but imbodies, in the name he bears, the rights of
those who make him. He is their king, 'tis trueking
for their goodno king for them, if not.
Truetrue! Our king, and not his own, was the
ready cry, in response, of the nobles generally. Such
an expression had the effect of silencing Oppas for the
present, and the council then proceeded to deliberate
upon the farther action of the conspiracy. By careful
computation it was found that a force of six thousand
men or more, not including the three thousand promised
by Melchior, was at commandscattered, however, at
various and remote points, and requiring some time for
assembling. In addition to this difficulty, the present
want of money was suggested; and it was then that
Melchior again spoke, pledging the necessary sum.
This was one of the greatest obstacles to the enterprise,
for the nobles thus gathered were many of them
destitute
,
and hence much of their discontent. A small
party was designated for the purpose of procuring the
amount needed, by attending Melchior to his abode;
and the Hebrew, with a smiling scorn, which he did not
seek to hide, beheld the ready spirit with which they
now consented, having such an object, to seek the
habitation
of one whose very contact, but a little before, they
had been so shocked to think upon. Having arranged
their next meeting, as a national council, to take place
in the Cave of Wambaa huge cavern in one of the
neighbouring mountains, where they proposed to
elevate
Egiza to the throne of the Gothsthe assembly was
dissolved; Pelayo, with the small body of nobles
appointed
to go with Melchior, moving off with him to his
secluded dwelling-place.
XXIII.
They
reached it, after a while, by the same indirect
route which Pelayo had pursued af first with Lamech,
and the boy awaited him at the door of an inner
apartment
.
Pelayo looked with surprise and some
dissatisfaction
upon the fondness which he showed his father
upon entering. He thought it unbecoming in one who,
however young, might be required, before long, to
engage
in strife and bloodshed. But when he saw the
eyes of the boy, the next moment, fixed upon himself,
with a gaze, seemingly, of admiring emulation, while a
fire of unusual expression rushed into and kindled them
up, he did not doubt but that he also possessed a fine
spirit which would sustain him nobly in every form of
trial.
Melchior led the way for the nobles into a gorgeously
decorated chamber. They threw themselves upon
cushions of the richest covering; and Lamech soon
appeared, as they spoke, with a pitcher of the finest
wine. When they were well served and refreshed, the
Hebrew brought forth his gold, in large sacks, and
such a supply as more than met the expectations of
the most voracious of the discontented nobles. Pelayo
alone forbore providing himself with the rest, and having
reminded Melchior of the meeting at the Cave of Wamba,
for a future and appointed day, he took his departure
with his company. Soon as they had gone, and the
doors were secured, the boy Lamech went to his
chamber
,
and after a brief space returneda boy no longer
but a womana tall, beautiful, dark-eyed Arabian
maidenthe daughter, and not the son, of the venerable
Hebrew.
Oh, my father, how I love to return, though but
once in the long day, to the garb of my mother. I feel
so unhappyso awkward in that foreign dresswhen
shall I be released from the task of wearing it?
Ay, when, my Thyrza, when? The garment of the
boy is now thy security; and though I love not to see
thee in it, yet, as it keeps thee from harm, I must even
love it too. Perhaps, my child, if the God of our
fathers turn not again from us, the time is but short in
which thy present servitude, and mine, and our people's,
shall continue.
Ah! I understand thee, father. Thou art again
about to lift the spear and the sword; and thine eyes
look forward to the fight with an old kindling. Thou
art leagued with the princes of the Goth, who now cry
war against Roderick.
It is even as thou say'st it, Thyrza. I am sworn
with the battle of the princes, and, God help me, I
shall strike fairly with them against the bloody ruler of
my people. It cannot be that Jehovah will always look
dark on Israelit cannot be that Judah will always
be a dweller in the tents of the stranger, beaten with
stripes, and born to do his bidding. So long as this
bondage is his, so long must Melchior battle for him,
and against his oppressor.
And yet, my father, what hope is for the Hebrew?
the despised, the persecuted Hebrew? How wilt thou
confide in him whose pleasure and whose pride it is to
scorn and to abuse thy people? Thou didst league,
having this hope, with the savage Count Generic, and
with Witebrode, yet what was thy fortune? When
came the peril, they shrunk from theewhen came the
triumph, they trampled upon thee, needing thy service
no longer. Ah me, my father, wherefore shouldst thou
strive, when Israel himself lies down like a beaten dog,
and howls only when he should hurtwhen the lion of
Judah sleeps under the foot, even as the imaged stone,
at the doorway of his oppressors. Why shouldst thou
toil in battle for such as these? why pray to them,
when they hear thee with but half an ear, and turn to
thee with an unwilling spirit?
Thyrza, my child, thou speakest melancholy things
most sad, as they are most true. But the spirit
which labours for man is a spirit from heaven, and the
sacrifice is not idle, though the victim appears to bleed
in vain. It must be that the prophet shall speak to
unheeding
earsit must be that the patriot will strike for
hearts that merit not freedom. Yet must the prophet
speak on, and the patriot strike. They do not this for
a race, nor for a generationthey do it for God and for
man; and the glorious principle which men flout and
deride to-day, shall, to-morrow, when the blood of the
good hath been poured forth in attestation of its truth,
become a sacred thing which all the world shall delight
to behold and worship. Think, my child, if Melchior,
the wanderer with the Saracen, the beaten slave of the
Roman, the persecuted and hunted outlaw among the
Gothsthink what would have been the blessing of life
to him had his spirit lived only for the day of its
exercise
.
Thou knowest not how high, how stretching were
his thoughts, when his eye counted the blessed stars of
heaven, from the wide and cheerless bosom of the
desert. They taught him that so numerous and so
scattered were the myriad families of man; and even
as he borrowed light from glories so remote as theirs,
so to the immeasurable worlds of man should be his
various thoughts, all coming from the great Jehovah,
and all going forth to bless and illumine his divided
people. Melchior, my child, has had but one selfish
thought since the departure of thy blessed mother, and
that thought has been of thee.
My father! and as she spoke she threw her white
arm around his neck, while her head rested upon his
shoulder.
Thou wert that thoughtand sometimes it has
prompted, even as thou hast counselled; and I would
have given up this struggle for the Hebrew, leaving him
the trampled and beaten dog that I have found him, but
that a spirit, like that which came to Job at midnight,
has filled me with a chill and a trembling, that seemed
a punishment for mine error. I must labour for my
people, let me love them as I mayay, my child, even
though thou art the sacrifice. I have leagued with the
sons of my enemy Witiza, in a cause full of hope for
the Hebrew.
And yet, my father, in what can be thy trustthou
so much wronged, and so much misguided as thou hast
been before?
My trust is in Godhe who gave the lion-spirit to
Judah, and whose promise yet stands for my people, in
the thousand prophecies of our fathers. Yet not
altogether
do I withhold my confidence from man. I hold
much to the faith in this noble youth, the Prince Pelayo.
Did not my eyes, even when I lay half stunned and
insensible
upon the rocks, open into consciousness as he
came? did they not behold, above his head, the thrice
circling wing of the sacred bird the Arabian worships,
with its green glory, promising him a crown? And then,
his speech is noblehis thought is wise, far beyond his
years and people; and he loves truth as a thing for high
spirits, and the becoming language of a God. I
believed
him when I saw him firstI believed him when
he spokeI cannot but believe him.
And I believe him too, my fatherI do and,
with a strange emotion, the cheeks of the Hebrew
Vol. I.K
maiden glowed like fire, and she buried her face upon
the bosom of her father, while her young heart beat
audibly.
And now, Thyrza, thy harp, my child. Tell me
of that solemn march of our people from the bondage
of the Egyptian, when the prophet of God led them
through the waters, and the hosts of Pharaoh were buried
in their depths. And with a slow, sweet accent, the
maiden sang to her harp the story he required.
XXIV.
THE PASSAGE OF THE RED SEA.
Then Thyrza took the harp,
And, with a strange sweet sorrow in her voice,
That won the tear to come,
She straight began the strain that Miriam sang
Miriam the Prophetess, old Aaron's sister
As, when, the Red Sea passed,
She, with the maidens pleasantly about her,
Sat by the bitter waters of Marah,
And sweetly struck the timbrel while she told
Of Israel's triumphof the sea o'erpassed
In safety by the Hebrew, while its waves
Went o'er the Egyptian hostchariot and horse
Monarch and subjectbanner and array.
Chorus of Israelites
.
Oh, wherefore hast thou led us forth to die
Amid the desert, with a cruel death?
Were there no graves in Egypt?
Moses
.
Lift your eye,
Nor murmur, for the Lord, with sacred breath,
Hath spokenand this day, that ye deplore,
For that the Egyptian warriors pursue,
Your eye that sees them now, shall see no more:
They shall all perish.
Chorus of Israelites
.
Be your promise true,
Then shall we still the blessed Lord adore.
Moses
.
Adore, adorethe blessed Lord adore
For look, where now behind us, like a shroud,
Solemn and vast, has gone that mighty cloud,
With face of fire to us, that guides our way,
And, though the night hours come, still yields us day;
While black, upon the host of Pharaoh glooming,
It speaks for Godthose cruel warriors dooming
Who shall all perish.
Chorus of Israelites
.
With a mighty voice,
In thy great honour, Lord, we now rejoice
Thou art the God of Israel, and hast kept
Thy holy watch above him when he slept.
Moses
.
Yea, borne him out of bondage, made him strong,
And taught his lips a triumph and a song;
And now, ev'n now, when murm'ring, ye repine,
Because he left ye not as dogs and swine,
To your Egyptian lords, hath led ye forth
To be a mighty people of the earth
He builds ye up a holy habitation.
Chorus of Israelites
.
Great is the Lordthe Lord is greathe builds,
He builds us up a holy habitation
So ran the prophecy when Abraham's fields
Had but a hundred shepherds with their flocks,
Scatter'd and lonely, on the inclining rocks
And Israel shall become a mighty nation.
Moses
.
Praise ye the Lord! Oh, praise'tis now the hour,
When the Egyptian comes in all his pow'r
Ye hear his rolling chariots, and the tramp
Of his fierce horsemen crowding on our camp
He comes with an exulting thought to slay,
And bear us in captivity away;
But God is with his people, and this day,
Shall honour win from Pharaoh by his deed.
Follow ye to the waters when I lead,
And fear not, though I leave ye now to pray.
Chorus of Israelites
.
They come, they comeoh, whither shall we flee!
Moses
(apart)
To thee, to thee, O Lord of Hosts, to thee,
This day be all the glory. Leave us not,
But keep thy people from the evil lot
Of blows and bondage. Let them not prevail,
Thy foes and Israel's, who, with rude assail,
And a fierce cry that mocks our heart's distress,
Press on us in our infant feebleness.
And now they comebe with uslift thine arm,
Strike down the foe, thy children keep from harm,
And turn aside this peril.
The Voice
.
Wherefore cry
In anguish to me? I am ever nigh
To thee and Israel. To thy people speak;
Bid them go forward. Let them not grow weak,
But teach them what thou know'st. Then lift thy rod
Above the waters.
Moses
.
Lord, I adore and tremble. Mighty God!
'Tis done as thou hast said.
The Voice
.
Look and see,
The waters are divided. Thou art free
To lead thy people over the dry land.
Moses
.
Oh, great and wonderful. On either hand
The heaping seas are brokena high wall
Towers around us. Praise ye, Israel, all,
Advance, and praise the Lorda mighty song
Shall speak his mercy that endureth long
His justice is for ever. Onward press,
While the high waters, mute and motionless,
Look down upon us. Is the Lord not nigh?
He keeps their walls apart, he builds them high,
So that ye pass in safety. Praise, oh, praise,
Lift high your hearts, oh Israel, in his praise
By his hand's strength the Lord hath brought ye forth
From bondageand shall make ye of the earth
The greatest, building ye a habitation
Holy and high.
Chorus of Israelites
.
And raising Israel to a mighty nation,
As promised unto Abraham, when the Lord,
While he lay sleeping in his Chaldee tent,
Said to him in sweet vision, angel-sent,
I am thy shieldI am thy great reward,
And bade him count the thick'ning stars and see,
Many, like them, should his own people be.
Praise ye the Lordoh, praise!
K 2
Moses
.
Now Pharaoh's host
Advances on us, with a cruel boast,
And a fierce cry; but fear ye not his pow'r,
For God is with us in the darkest hour,
And ye shall see this day his triumph vast
Over our foe. Rejoice, the sea is passed,
Lift ye your hearts in song! I speak to God,
While ye do praise him.
The Voice
.
Moses, lift thy rod
Once more above the waters.
Moses
.
It is done!
O, thou eternal and all-powerful One!
The waters roll above them. Israel, see,
And sing, the Lord hath triumphed gloriously.
The rider and his horse are overthrown,
And Pharaoh's chariots and himself are down
All crushed and buried in the gathering sea.
His mighty captainswhat are they to thee,
O mightiest Captain! Thou'rt the man of war,
And all the valiant else but children are!
Lord is thy name, and, glorious in its pow'r,
Thy right hand dashest into naught thy foe!
Thou speakest, and the winds begin to blow,
The floods stand upright, till thou bidst them go,
And then they rush in overwhelming show'r,
Swallowing their thousands. Mighty art thou, Lord,
Most mighty! Be thy name for aye adored,
In Israel, by thy people. Lo! they stand
Trembling, to see the wonders of thy hand.
Rejoice, rejoice, oh Israel! For He brings
His children out from bondage. With His arm,
Above their enemies, the sea He flings,
And keeps His chosen people from all harm!
He doth set free the captive, and He builds
For Israel now a holy habitation.
Sorrow shall fill the Palestinian fields,
He gives them up a spoil unto our nation.
Edom shall be amazedthe mighty men
That dwell in Moab shall all tremble, when
Our march is on them; and beneath our sway
Canaan's people shall all melt away.
Thine is their land, and thither we advance,
Now, Israel, to thy great inheritance!
XXV.
The
solemn strain was finished, and in a style of
beauty not more remarkable for its exquisite simplicity
than for its exquisite harmony. Thyrza had been
educated
chiefly by her father, and had acquired, as much
from his as from her own spirit, no small portion of that
lofty and high-souled enthusiasm which made up so much
of his character. Glowing with the rich exuberance of
excited religious feeling, when the performer turned
from her seat to look upon the old man, she beheld him
upon his kneeshis eyes lifted to heaven, and the
sentiment
of prayer deeply written upon every feature of his
face. She glided to him softly, and knelt down quietly,
without a word, beside him. He acknowledged her
presence with a start, then clasping her to his arms,
thanked her for her performance, and gave her his
parting
blessing for the night.
Now go to thy chamber, my childtake thy sleep,
and may the God of Abraham watch over and keep thee
from harm. Good-night!
She murmured a similar aspiration, and left him.
The old man again sank back into prayerful musing,
for his mood was eminently devotional, though his
pursuits
all his life had been wild, and many of his more
vigorous years had been spent in unprofitable strife.
When, oh, when shall Thy people now pass out from
their bondage? When wilt Thou come to their aid, O
Thou, whose arm shook the waters over Pharaoh, and
humbled the hosts of the Philistines! Oh, wouldst
thou endow me, for their good, in this great service
wouldst thou smile upon my hopewouldst thou give
strength to our warriors, and fortune to this our
enterprise
,
then would thy servant gladly lay down his own
life, happy in the sacrifice that brought with it so great
a profit.
He arose at length from his knees, placed a keen
dagger in his girdle, and wrapping himself closely in
his mantle, went forth into the city.
END OF BOOK THE FIRST.
BOOK II.
I.
Age
had not diminished, nor could defeat and
disappointment
discourage, the energies of Melchior.
Desert-born
,
he had been taught to endure trial and to love
adventure. Enthusiastic and resolute by nature, the
life which he had led had early tutored him in a habit
of mental concentration, which made him equally
tenacious
and fearless in the pursuit of his object.
Vicissitudes
had taught him religion, and its ennobling
sentiments
,
linked with his natural enthusiasm of character,
had made him zealous in the prosecution of what he
deemed his duties. The dangers which surrounded him
in that strange city, full of his enemies,the darkness
of the night,his own fatigues of frame in the long
travel of the day, and the excitements through which he
had gone,were all as nothing to the aged man. Filled
with the cheering hope which the conversation with
Pelayo
had imparted, of improving the condition of his
people, he thought neither of danger nor fatigue. His
spirit was aroused, and he suffered no sleep to visit his
eyelids until he had done something towards the great
object with which his bosom laboured. His purpose
now was an immediate conference with such of his
people as had power over the rest, and could be relied
upon in a scheme so perilous as that in view. This
was a work of caution, and well did Melchior know that
there were few, even among his own tribe, who could
well be trusted. There were but few, indeed, to whom
he could dare confide the secret of his own presence in
that city of his foe; and this was one of the reasons
which prompted him to go forth, at that late hour, under
the shelter of the night. Moving through the gloomy
city like one long familiar with all its haunts, he made
his way to a yet more secluded portion of the Hebrew
suburb than that which he had left. At length he
reached a dwelling that stood at a little distance from all
other buildings. It was a poor and mean-looking
fabric
,
and nothing in its external appearance could
possibly
have spoken for wealth or affluence within.
Melchior
tapped lightly at a little low, arched entrance,
and was instantly admitted. A few words, uttered in a
strange language to him who waited, were soon
understood
,
and the visiter at once followed the porter into
the body of the dwelling.
If the outward aspect of this fabric was base and
unassuming
,
such certainly was not the character of the
interior. The apartment into which Melchior was
conducted
amply compensated, by its exquisite beauty and
richness of ornament, for the humility of its outward
show. It was a chamber of surpassing grandeur of
decoration and arrangement. All things familiar to the
luxurious tastes of that period and country, for the
gratification
of the eye and the pleasure of the senses,
seemed here to have been studiously and profusely
drawn together. Roman luxury and Saracen
voluptuousness
were made to vie in the wealth and
multiplicity
of their productions. The oriental storehouse
had been ransacked, and a foretaste of the future glories
of the Alhambra might have been found, like so much
hidden treasure, awaiting the hour of its delivery from
the mine, in the humble home of a trembling father to a
degraded and derided people.
II.
But
the eye of Melchior rested not upon the wealth
and splendour which were clustered around him. The
glitter of the mine, the glow of the palace, the pomp of
aught save Heaven, were as nothing in his
contemplation
.
He turned away from the glare and the tinsel in
his glance, and his eyes rested thoughtfully upon a couch
disposed after the fashion of the Moor, and richly
habited
with a profuse drapery of fine silks, fretted and
inwrought
with gold. On this couch a youth lay fast
sleeping. His dark skin, his thick, black, glossy hair, the
lightness and symmetry of his limbs,all told of his
oriental origin; while the narrow face, the finely oval
cheek, impaired, however, by the sudden and enfeebling
sharpness of his chin, as certainly determined him to be
of Hebrew parentage. He was richly habited, and not
seemingly for slumber. He appeared rather to have
thrown himself casually upon the couch, and to have
fallen unconsciously into that luxurious repose which, in
the summer, steals so insidiously and with such lulling
sweetness upon the unwary or exhausted senses. His
tunic was of a thick purple silk, and a long sash
encircled
his waist. Gems of value glittered upon his
fingers, and a heavy chain of Moorish workmanship,
even more valuable for the exquisite taste and delicacy
of its construction than for the intrinsic weight of the
metal, hung loosely around his neck.
Melchior, while his guide departed as if in quest of
another, drew nigh and seated himself upon the couch
at the foot of the sleeper. The slumbers of the youth
were uneven and disturbed, though his sleep was
unbroken
.
His limbs were tossed about at moments,
from side to side, as if his blood was in fever; and
Melchior pressed the pulse of his extended arm with his
finger, as if to satisfy himself that such was not the case.
Long and earnestly did the aged man contemplate the
person of the youth before him with a look full of
melancholy
dissatisfaction. While he gazed, muttered words
broke forth from the lips of the sleeper,words of anger
and defiance; and now an oath, a bitter, blasphemous
oath, startled the venerable man with the atrocious
impiety
that seemed to be dwelling, as if at home, in a
bosom so very youngin a form, to the eye, so
promising
.
He turned away as if sickening at the survey, and
the painful thoughts which it had forced upon him.
III.
In
a few moments, and a door curiously wrought in
the tapestry of the chamber, for the purposes of flight
and concealment, was silently thrown open; and a
venerable
man, not less aged than Melchior, though
without
any appearance of his elasticity and strength, now
entered the apartment. He came forward with a slow
and stealthy movement, as if fearing to break the
slumbers
of the sleeping youth. In silence he approached
his guest, and the two, as if long and dearly known,
embraced each other without uttering a word. In a
whisper, the new-comer instructed Melchior to resume
his seat upon the edge of the couch from which he had
arisen. The other occupied a place beside him, giving,
as he did so, a glance to the sleeping youth, which, to
the eye of Melchior, was full of an unadvised and
mistaken
fondness. The thought of his mind at that
moment
gave to the venerable man occasion for a remark,
which, though strong, and delivered with emphasis, was
yet uttered in a whisper.
The boy is a boy no longer, Adoniakim: he has
advanced in growth and strength, and is a goodly youth
to look upon.
Vol. I.L
Veryvery goodly, indeed, to look upon, said the
other, with a sigh, at the same time that his eye dwelt
with fondness upon the features of the youth. Melchior
proceeded:
Goodly to the sight is he, but I fear me,
Adoniakim
,
that the evil spirit of self is still the master within
him. He heeds thee not, Adoniakim, as a child should
heed his father. The stubbornness of boyhood, of which
I warned thee, has grown stronger in his years, and,
with his growth, has become too vigorous for thee now
to restrain. Alas! brother, thou hast been erringly and
sadly fond of thy firstborn.
My only one, Melchior. True,thou hast said
but truly. I have greatly erred in my teaching. The
boy is wilful, and heeds not much the commands of his
father or the counsels of his friends: he inclines but too
much to serve the devices and desires of his own heart.
I knew it, Adoniakim. I knew that the nature
within him was wayward and wilful from the first, and
greatly did I fear that thine was not the spirit to subdue the
evil temper. Thou hast smiled when thou shouldst have
looked sadly, and been but sad when thou shouldst have
been stern. He has been too dear to thee in thy
loneliness
,
and thou hast been too much a dependant upon
him to do him and thyself that justice which would have
reproved his error and punished his disobedience. I
fear me thou wilt have much sorrow yet from his wild
nature and vicious mood.
And yet, Melchior, I have not forborne to punish
and restrain. Many stripes have I given him while he
was yet a boy; and, since he has grown up, as thou
seest, into a youth seemly to look upon, much sage and
solemn counsel have I bestowed upon him.
Alas, Adoniakim, I fear me thou hast not punished
wisely nor counselled prudently. The guidance must
be habitual, and the punishment in season, or they
are equally bestowed in vain. Thou hast punished
when too much provocation has chafed thy heart, and
not because thou wouldst chasten to improve. Thy
stripes have been given in thy anger, and not for his
good; it was thy passion, and not his deserts, that
prompted thee to punish; and we may not wonder that
thou hast pacified thyself without improving him. It is
a sad thing for the young and erring spirit when the
father loves unwisely, for then the strong feelings of the
heart rise up against the sober thoughts of the head, and
the eyes of a calm reflection are blinded by the rushing
impulses from within. I warned thee of this danger,
Adoniakim, when last we took counsel of the youth. He
is soon to be a man,goodly to the sight, my brother,
but greatly I fear me, Adoniakim, not goodly to the
thought. He will vex thy old heart sadly ere thou goest
down to the tomb of thy fathers.
Alas, Melchior, I tremble at what thou sayest.
Tell me, whence come these apprehensions?what hast
thou heard?what hast thou seen? Thou hast not
spoken with the boy,thou hast only beheld him as he
slept. Thou hast had no word with him or with me
that could teach thee of his erring. What, then, is the
art that so informs thee? How is it that thou so
quickly
dost dive into the deep soul for its secrets?
And, as he spoke, the aged parent turned fondly and
gazed upon the sleeping subject of their deliberations.
Even while he slept I judged him, said Melchior,
solemnly. Even while he slept, my brother, evil
thoughts were busy in his mind, and a foul oath and
many dark threats gathered upon his lips. Behold,
even now, the big, swollen vein upon the ruffled brow!
see to the lips which are now compressed as if in
strife, only to part in bitterness!
Stayhe wakes! said the other, and his hand
rested upon that of Melchior while he spoke, and they
both paused from speech, as a repeated movement of
the youth's person led them to apprehend his awakening.
But the limbs were once more composed, as if in
slumber, and the youth lay again in silence as before.
Thou misjudgest him, Melchior, said the father,
deprecatingly: the boy is rash and wilful, but thou
errest when thou thinkest him vicious. The spirit is
wild, but, I trust, not evil. There is, indeed, much
truth in what thou sayest, but it is not all truth,not all
not all: it would be a dreadful sorrow, Melchior,
could I think it so.
Is it not now thy sorrow, Adoniakim? demanded
Melchior. Dost thou not even now mourn ever with
fears of thy son's wilfulness,fears that come to thee
unbidden? Deceive not thyself, my brother. This is
always the error of the father. Declare to thyselfto
mewhat is thy thought, and thou wilt say that what I
have said to thee of the boy has been long thy sorrow
thy deep sorrow. Hast thou any care on thy heart but
this, unless it be for thy trodden and thy trampled
people
?
Does not the boy afflict thee by his profligacy
and his profusionby his wilfulness and scorn of all the
checks thou wouldst put upon him? Is he not
licentious
and wanton? Does he not debauch after the
fashion of the Gothic nobles, and ape their miserable
vices, not having even their freedom? I have heard no
one speak of thisI have seen none of it myself; and
yet, Adoniakim, from thy heart unfold to me, speak I
not the truth?
No more, Melchior, I pray thee. Spare me: thou
hast said enough. Let us now speak of our people, for,
if I err not, this is the concern upon which thou comest.
Thou hast been waited for. Tell me of thy hopeof
thy success among the tribes.
Not here, Adoniakimthe youth sleeps not
soundly
.
But fear not for him,is he not a Hebrew like
ourselves?
No! exclaimed the other, sternly. He feels not
with us. He is not prepared to deny himself for the
goodly cause of his people, and only such are with us.
Leave the boy,better that he should sleep on. He
would but take thy thought from my tidings, for thou
hast more pleasure in beholding him than in aught else.
And truly might Melchior say that the aged
Adoniakim
had more pleasure at such a moment, and in the
survey of his son, than in any thing beside. The look
was long and lingering which he cast behind him, as he
led the way for Melchior from the apartment through the
secret panel out of which he came at first.
Scarcely had the door been closed behind them when
the youth leaped to his feet.
I thank thee, good Melchior, for thy friendly thought,
and thy brotherly labour to hurt me with Adoniakim. I
will requite thee yet for thy toil, or I deserve to sleep.
Now, what does the old goat seek with my father, that I
must needs not hear? But I will hear. I love not to be
shut out from the truth; and, by the beard of Samuel! I
will share in this conference, though mayhap I say
nothing
myself. I will but give other ears to the eloquence
of Melchior; and he who so loves to hear his own
language
may scarce complain of an addition to his
audience
.
So!
Thus did the youth mutter to himself, as he
approached
the aperture in the tapestry through which the
aged men had gone. This he slightly unfastened, and,
placing his ears upon the opening, the sounds of voices
from within were borne distinctly to them.
Gradually
his knee sank to the floor; and it soon seemed that
he heard and understood, for his action was quiet and
patient, like that of a satisfied listener.
L 2
IV.
In
the private apartment to which they had retired,
Melchior narrated to Adoniakim the particulars of his
far travel and adventures during all the long period of
his absence from Cordova. In this narrative there was
much that does not affect ours. When the traveller had
spoken generally of the things which he had seen, and of
his own fortunes in the time mentioned, he proceeded to
confer with his friend upon the condition of their people,
to the improvement and melioration of which both of
them had long before devoted themselves. It was at the
close of a survey of the recent deposition of Witiza by
Roderick, and the dispersion of the troops led by Egiza
and Pelayo, the two sons of the former, that the dialogue
thus proceeded
Thou hast seen Moussa Ben Nassir?
At Tangier. It was my counsel that moved the
Saracen to the conquest of that city.
Wherefore did he not advance upon Ceuta? Now,
when two factions ragewhen the children of the Goth
and the descendants of the Roman struggle against each
other, and when the people of the soil, hating both and
fearing both, are not unwilling to join with any power
which may give battle to their double tyranniesnow is
the time for the Saracennow is the time, Melchior, for
the Hebrew.
Such was my counsel. In Moussa's private ear I
unfolded the history of our people, and of the people
who oppress them, and strongly urged his march upon
the Rock of Calpe, whose fortress then was but meanly
defended.
Why did he refuse?
He dared not, for he had been summoned back to
Syria by the calif, who demanded from him an account
of his expedition; but my counsel was not forgotten, for,
as thou knowest, when he came back from Syria, he
laid siege to Ceuta.
But failed.
He came too late. Julian, the Count of
Consuegra
,
who is generalissimo of the coasts of Andalusia,
came to its defence, and so severe was the defeat of the
Saracen, that it will be long before he is prepared to
renew
the invasion.
But he will renew it?
I fear it.
How! Thou fearest it, Melchior?
I do fear it, Adoniakim; since I sorrow to think
the Hebrew has not more to gain from the success of
the Saracen, than he has to fear from the continued
power of the Goth. The Hebrew will be too feeble to
give weight to either side when a new power comes into
the field. With the contentions of the old we may do
much. We may turn the scale to the party which shall
most extend our privileges, and from which we may
receive
the best pledges of security.
Could it be so, exclaimed the other, despondingly.
Hear me! said Melchior. Don Roderick, the
Goth, is now upon the throne, and has been proclaimed
in all the cities. The sons of Witiza have dispersed
their followers, but they are not overthrown. One of
them I have conferred with on the part of the Hebrew.
To him I have pledged our aidfrom him I have had
pledges in return, which shall give us the privileges we
demandsecurity in our religion, property, and persons,
upon the payment of a regular and certain tribute. For
this security we will give him the aid and treasure we
should else have given to the Saracen; and strong is
my hope, and confident my faith, that we shall be at last
successful in obtaining the end that we desire: for
never
,
oh, Adoniakim, have mine eyes looked upon a youth
more noble to the sight, more like a prince after the
fashion of the ancient kings of Jerusalem, than Pelayo.
With a brow that is high and commanding, and an eye
that is bright with unwavering fireswith a cheek that
does not blanch, and a lip whose form is full of a sweet
majesty, the face and air of that noble prince are a
guarantee
for all that is high in mind and noble in soul. He
will not do us wrong; he will keep his faith with us, I
am fond to believe, for I have had signs and tokens
which tell me to confide in the promise which he brings
us.
Wisest among us, as thou art, Melchior, will it not
be rash too readily to confide in any of these Gothic
princes? Thou hast not forgotten the false Witebrode,
and the base Count Genseric? Did they not promise
freely till they possessed themselves of our substance,
and did they not then scorn and desert us?
Pelayo is a prince not after the make of these, said
Melchior, hastily. But thou shalt see and confer with
him thyself. To-morrow night he will seek me at my
dwelling. Thither shalt thou go also.
Hast thou the treasure from the Hebrews at
Merida
?
It is safe with me.
And the weapons of warare they out of sight in
secure places?
They are ready, yet remote. All this has been
cared for.
And Thyrza?thou hast said nothing of thy child,
Melchior. Thou hast not left her still in the tents of the
Saracen?
She is with me; but the guise of a boy, after the
Roman
fashion, conceals the person of my child. It were
not well that the eye of a Gothic noble should look upon
one so lovely.
Thou art right. It were but a dove's plea to the
kite, the prayer of womanly innocence in the relentless
ear of the Goth. Ah, Melchior, the brute vices walk at
noonday through the land, and none so pure as to feel
offence at their presence. A weak hold has virtue here
against the vice of the nobles, to whom goodness is a
thing of mock, and debauchery and sin the practice and
the credit which give command, and are the decoration
and the attribute of power. There should be a fearful
hour at hand, my brother, if the wrath of Jehovah be not
forgotten eternally.
It is a bolt suspended only, Adoniakim. The
punishment
is at hand, and it may be that, at this very hour,
we, humble and aged as we are, are the chosen
instruments
for bearing the red vengeance into the courts and
palaces of this Gothic tyranny. May Jehovah gird up
our loins, and give us strength and heart to perform his
wishes. Let us strive to be ready for the call,
Adoniakim
,
that the goodly purpose fail not through lack of
ours.
Amen! exclaimed the other, solemnly; and they
both arose from their place of conference, and turned
towards
the apartment which they had left. Heedful of
their movements, the unhappy youth, who had been
meanly hearkening to their speech the while, rose from
his place of watch, and, stealing cautiously to the couch
where he had before been lying, resumed once more the
show of those slumbers which had been partially feigned
before. The two looked upon him, but without seeking
to disturb him; and regarding his sleep as real, the aged
Melchior took leave of his friend in a whisper and with
a cautious footstep.
When he was gone a while, the youth seemed to
awaken.
Thou hast slept long, Amri, my son, said
Adoniakim
,
in a tone of ill-suppressed fondness, but thy sleep
has been troubled, and thy limbs were tossed about
unquietly
,
as if the fever-plague had fallen upon thee. The
veins in thy brow, even now, are swollen greatly, and
there is a red flush upon thy cheek, which is a token that
thy sleep hath availed thee little.
Is it not enough, my father, that my sleep should be
troubled, when thine eye is turned upon me in anger?
Alas! my son, and wherefore should my anger
disturb
thy slumbers, when thou dost give it so little heed
in thy wakening? Thou hast too little thought of me
to make it a matter of concern to thee whether my looks
be those of love or anger. Would it were otherwise, my
son.
It is otherwise, my fatherthou dost me wrong.
Surely I seek thy lovesurely I grieve at thy
displeasure
;
but my mood is wild, and the youthful, like
myself
,
do not often think the grave thoughts which make
propriety in the estimation of the aged. It is not reason,
but rather a harsh injustice, when the blood is quick in
the veins, and the heart beats high with young life, to ask
that the step be slow like that of age and wisdom, and
that all the movements of youth do wait for a directing
reason.
There is truth in what thou sayest, Amri, responded
the father, solicitous to excuse in his weakness the
errors
of a character which his calm judgment could not
forbear to see. Amri was cunning enough to know his
father's foible, and of this knowledge he availed
himself
whenever he had a suit to present.
There is truth in what thou sayest, Amri; and, could
I deem that such were thy nature,that thou didst only
err from quick blood, and with the natural fondness of
youth
Believe it, father and he put his arms about the
neck of his doting sire, while he continued thus:
Believe it. I know that I have erred; but I have
erred through youth, and not from a wilful love of error.
I will strive to amend it; only be not wroth with me,
look not again in anger upon me.
Yet, these moneys, Amri? said the old man,
sternly
,
and withdrawing himself from the youth's embrace.
It was my folly, my father,my madness. The
young Lord Astigia
A vicious youth, Amri,a debauched and dishonest
youth! A poor noble; and such are the worst. What
has he to do with a Jew?one of a people whom he
scorns? What, but to gather means for the profligacy
which he loves. And what shouldst thou, a Hebrew,
one of a different and a singular people,what shouldst
thou do with him? What hast thou in common with a
Gothic noble? Thou shalt give him upthou shalt fly
from himthou shalt leave his haunts, Amri, or I give
thee not these moneys.
I will, my father, even as thou sayest, was the
docile
reply.
That is well, Amri; forgive me if I have spoken
thus harsh to thee, my son; but it is for thy good that I
have spoken.
Do I not know it, my father?
Thou shalt have the money, Amri; thou shalt pay
thy debt to this noble,to all of those that have claims
upon thee.
Thanks, dear father.
They shall not say that the Jew is mean and
dishonest
,
as it is their wont to say. Thou shalt pay thy
debts to them in honour, though they have won them, as
thou sayest, in dishonour.
By trick, fatherby cheatas I live.
Thou shalt pay them, nevertheless, my son; but as
thou knowest them, thou wilt seek them no more when
thou hast done so. Here are purses. This for the
Lord Astigia. It is even more than thou sayest is his
demand; but give it him all; he shall know that thou
hast no meanness, even if such be the failing of thy
people
.
This for Edacer,another spendthrift,a
debauched
and decayed noble,another of those who have
nothing of nobility but the name, and stink in poverty
even as they stink in vice. Thou wilt leave his
gatherings
also: thou wilt quit their walks. Thou shalt
promise me this, Amri.
I willI do, my father.
God bless thee, my son, that thou speakest me so
fair! Truly do I think thou wilt keep thy word to me
that thou wilt go out from among these vicious and
debauched
youth that have so led thee astray, my son,
from thy God, thy people, thy own duty, and thy father's
love. Keep thy faith to me, Amri, and my heart is
thine, and my wealth is thine, and I will bless thee with
a father's blessing when the death angel waits.
Believe me, father, thou wilt not need to rebuke me
again. I will but rid me of these dues to Astigia and
to Edacer, and see them no more.
Go not to them; send them the moneys; avoid
them and the places which they haunt. Their presence
makes an atmosphere of death in the house, where they
gather together for sin. It is a taint that is like a
pestilence
;
it goeth in at the nostril, and thou knowest not
of the dangers, my son, till thou art lost for ever. Keep
away from the haunts of the wicked, I pray thee, Amri.
As thou sayest, my father.
Thou hast spoken, Amri, as I would have thee, my
son. Thy ear is open to my word; thy heart is not
leprous. No, no! he muttered, half to himself,no,
no! Melchior has done him injustice,he sees not the
heart of the youth as I behold it. He knows him only
in the day of his wilful boyhood. No, no!the eye is
dark and sweet; it is too like that of his blessed mother
to speak falsely now to my own. Go, my son!go,
Amri, to thy chamber, and may the wing of the good
angel bend over thy slumbers!
V.
The
youth retired, but not to his chambernot,
certainly
,
to his slumbers. With a stealthy step he
withdrew
from the dwelling, after such time had elapsed as
he deemed sufficient to wrap his father in that sleep
which he did not himself seek. A whispered word to
the porter, who appeared to be in his confidence,
procured
him a free passage into the street; and it was not
long before the youth, so earnest in his pledges to a too
indulgent parent, was revelling with the most worthless
comrades in scenes of the most degrading debauchery.
His associates, as we have seen, were of another caste,
and a higher condition than his own. They tolerated the
despised Hebrew, not as an associate, but as a minister
to their excesses. The money drawn from the coffers
of his sire paid for their indulgences; and the unhappy
and depraved youth was not unwilling to share their
countenance and their excesses on terms so unequal.
Thou art late, Amri, were the first words, uttered
in a harsh tone by one of the dissolute young nobles, as
he made his appearance.
Too soon, cried another, if he has not brought
the money.
He knows better than to come before us without
it, said the former, and a harsh frown gathered upon
his countenance as he spoke. How now, Jew! thou
hast not dared
The money is here, my lord: be not impatient; I
have brought thee all,the whole sum, and even more.
Good!I knew thee, Amri, too well, to fear that
thou wouldst play false, said Astigia, as he received the
purse and proceeded to tell over the amount.
And what hast thou to say to me? demanded the
brutal Edacer.
Vol. I.M
Thou hast not been forgotten, my lord, replied the
Jew, respectfully, yet with a tone of ease that showed
how confident he was of favour when the bearer of such
a burden as that which he now placed in the ready hands
of his questioner.
Provided now with the means of indulgence, these
hopeful youths sallied forth for the purposes of excess.
They rushed like madmen through the streets,
whooping
,
howling, assailing the peaceful whom they met, and
disturbing the midnight quiet of the city. They then
retired to a house allotted to the purposes of debauchery,
where, with wine and profligate women, they passed the
remainder of the night. By the dawn, half inebriated
and quite exhausted, the son of Adoniakim stole
silently
to his chamber, having obtained a ready entrance to
his father's dwelling from the porter, who was in his
pay. When he awakened, his father was about to go
forth. He watched the departure of the aged man;
then, gliding down to the place where the porter stood
in waiting, he thus counselled him:
Go forth, Jared,follow Adoniakim, and tell me
where thou seest him enter. Note thou his movements,
and suffer none to escape thee. I have gold for thee if
thou reportest truly to me in this matter. Go!
meanwhile
,
I will wait for thee at the gate.
The subservient porter departed, as a spy upon his
master; and the dishonourable son, throwing over his
shoulder the rude cloak which the other had worn, now
took the place of his watch at the entrance. His
motives
may in part be told, as we know them from himself.
Adoniakim is gone to the dwelling of Melchior: I
must find out the way thither also. I must see Thyrza,
the maiden of whom they speak, and of whom I had
sweet glimpses in my boyhood: she must now be a
goodly woman, and my father has told me she is lovely.
While thus he addressed himself in soliloquy, a slight
blow upon the gate over which he watched warned him
of his newly-assumed duties. When he opened it, a
slender and handsome boy stood before him.
What wouldst thou? demanded Amri.
This to Adoniakim, said the messenger, from
Namur of the Porch. It brings him tidings of the trade
to Algeziras.
Adoniakim is not within, responded the porter, as
he received the packet which the boy brought, surveying
curiously, as he replied, the smooth, soft, and
harmonious
features of his countenance, and the fine symmetry
of his form.
Namur of the Porch has a goodly page in thee,
was the complaisant remark with which Amri continued
his speech. What is thy name, and where did he find
thee? I will look to-morrow for one like thee in the
same place.
And what hast thou, a porter, to do with a page?
was the reply of the boy. See to thy master's gate,
sirrah, and keep thy speech for his ear. Give him the
packet, as thou fearest the whip, the moment when he
shall return.
And the boy turned away as he spoke, leaving Amri
too much astounded to reply. When he was gone, Amri,
after his usual practice, and by an art with which he was
familiar, contrived to unfold the packet and possess
himself
of the contents without impairing the silk and seal
which had secured it.
Ha! Melchior! he exclaimed, as he looked on the
contents. Melchior! he is the writerand that boy
that pagebeard of Samuel!that boy must be
Thyrza
!
With an oath he dashed open the wicket, and rushed
into the open courtbut he did so in vain. The page
was gone, and he returned to his station cursing the
dulness which had suffered him to misconceive one so
lovely.
VI.
But
the tidings which the letter contained were
important
.
They ran as follows:
Adoniakim, my brother, the hunters are upon my
path. They have pursued me to destroy, even from
the country of Algeziras; and they bear the commands
of the tyrant to take no slumber to their eyelids, and no
rest to their feet, until they have secured the worthless
but persecuted Melchior. This, from a true friend,
compels
me to fly the dwelling which had received me, and
to seek for another yet more secure. I am now with
Namur of the Porch, where thou wilt find me at evening.
There were other matters in this epistle which Amri
could not so well comprehend. That which he
understood
was sufficient, however, for his purpose. While
he read, he conceived a plan in his mind which he was
impatient to execute; and he scarcely waited for the
porter, Jared, to resume his place, so anxious was he to
prosecute his new purpose.
Thou hast seen him in the way he went, Jared?
was his question to the spy. The latter told him of the
route taken by his father.
It is wellhere is goldthou hast served me ably,
and thou shalt have yet more. Take thy cloak now,
and resume thy place, Jared, for Adoniakim will soon
be here.
It was not his purpose to await the coming of his
father
.
He would not tell me of Melchiorof his place of
dwelling. I care not now. He shall find that I needed
not his aid to bring me to a sight of the maiden:and
Melchior, toowherefore should I care for him, whose
thought and word of me are so unfriendly? He shall
see.
Thus speaking, he hurried from the dwelling, while
yet Adoniakim was absent. He proceeded at once to
the dwelling of Edacer.
Why art thou here? demanded the fierce and
brutal
Goth. Why comest thou to me at this hour, Jew?
Dost thou not apprehend blows for thy intrusion?
Pardon me, my good lord, but I came upon thy
service
.
Wouldst thou not have moneys?
Dost thou ask, Amri?look at the purse which but
last night I got from thy hands.
It lay almost exhausted upon the table.
There is more in thy hands already, if thou wilt
avail thyself of it, said Amri to the now complaisant
Goth.
Speak.
Thou hast heard of Melchior of the Desert?
Have I not? The traitor!he who gave Auria
into the hands of the Saracen infidel.
The same.
What of him? demanded the Goth.
Thou knowest that a great price is put upon his
head by Don Roderick?
Ay, I know it. But what does this concern me?
Speak outI am impatient.
Melchior is in Cordova.
Sayest thou! exclaimed Edacer, starting to his feet
from the couch on which he had been lying. Where?
Thou shalt know after thou hast prepared thyself.
Thou shalt get the soldiers in readiness for him, and at
midnight thou shalt lead them to a place which I shall
name to thee hereafter.
Do this, Amri, and thou shalt have good share of the
reward.
What share? asked the Hebrew, with something
like a sneer of scorn upon his lips. The noble saw not
the expression as he replied
M 2
A goodly share, he satisfied. Come to me at
evening
,
and direct our way.
I may not guide thee, said the Jew, abruptly. I
will tell thee of thy route, but I may not guide thee to
the spot. Melchior is a Jew like myselfhe is one of
the tribe of my father.
The noble laughed loudly and scornfully at the
distinction
which Amri made.
Be it so, said he. Let thy words teach us the
way, we shall not ask thy finger to point it out. Thou
wilt be here at evening with thy tidings?
I will, was the reply, and the traitorous youth
departed
on the prosecution of his own schemes. At
evening, punctual to his appointment, he came to
Edacer
.
The Goth had made his preparations, and his
dwelling contained the soldiers who were to arrest the
outlaw.
At midnight, seek the Porch of Namur, said the
Jew. The wicket on the right hand of the court leads
to an ancient dwelling of stone. Behind that is another
of greater size, and around it many, but none so large.
A tower leans, as if about to fall, on one side of the
greater dwelling. In that tower will Melchior be
found.
If thou liest, Amriif thou leadest us falsely, said
Edacer, thy father's gold shall pay for thy insolence.
Be it so, said the Jew. It is there that Melchior
has pledged another to be at midnight.
And thou wilt not go with us, Amri? demanded the
Goth.
He is of my father's tribe, said Amri, as he left
the apartment.
VII.
The
design of Amri was a deep one. He desired,
in the first place, to obtain access to the presence of
Melchior and of his daughter. This, at present, seemed
impossible. His father had kept him from the
knowledge
of Melchior's visit, and exhibited no sort of
disposition
to extend his confidence. In no way could he
have shown the possession of the secret, unless by an
exposure of the dishonourable means which he had taken
to procure it. He adopted means yet more
dishonourable
to effect his purpose. Having prepared the
enemies
of Melchior, it was now his purpose to defeat
their aim. Such a service must commend him, as he
thought, to the person he had betrayed, and procure him
a degree of confidence which he well perceived he was
not likely to obtain otherwise. He cared but little for
the annoyance which such a proceeding must bring to
the aged man,he thought still less of the degrading
falsehoods and dishonourable means through which he
would have to wade to effect his object. These were
no considerations to one so base of heart as Amri.
An hour before the time at which the proposed visit
of the officers was to be made in search of the outlaw,
at the Porch of Namur, Amri hurried to the spot. He
pressed his way, by a cunning story and the utterance
of his own name, through the persons appointed to admit
the visiters, and, to the surprise of Adoniakim, his father,
who was present, not less than of all the rest, he stood
suddenly before them.
What brings you here, my son? cried Adoniakim,
with alarm, seeing the well-feigned apprehensions of the
youth.
Your safetyyour safety, my father. Melchior,
your enemiesthe guards of the Goththey will be
soon upon thee.
How!speak, my son, cried Adoniakim, in
terror
;
but Melchior said nothing, and looked calmly upon
the youth.
The officer of Don Roderick, with many soldiers,
even now bend their way in search of Melchior.
How knowest thou this, Amri? asked Melchior;
how didst thou thyself learn so readily to seek me out
in my dwelling?
Ay, tell me, Amri, how didst thou learn the
abiding-place
of Melchior?
From Edacer, the Goth, my father, replied the
youth, with unexampled effrontery; thou knowest, my
father, of the moneys I had in trust for him?
I doI do,speak nothing of that, my son.
I sought him out but a little since, that I might
deliver
them into his hands. There were persons with him,
and they bade me wait at the entrance. It was then
that I heard loud talking from within concerning
Melchior
,
and I strove to hear what they should say of thee.
It was by this means that I came to know of thy
dwelling
,
for the soldier who spoke pointed it out with great
exactness in the Porch of Namur, and I found that they
awaited but the hour of midnight to approach in search
of thee. When I heard this, my father, I did not
scruple
to seek out Melchior in his seclusion, though it was
not my thought to find thee here also, and exposed to
the same danger.
Now, bless thee, my son! cried the delighted
father; thou hast done rightly and well. Said I not,
Melchior,said I not, that the heart was right,that
the warm blood and the giddy head, and not a vicious
spirit, led the boy erring?
Amri has done us good service, Adoniakim, and I
give him thanks for the good disposition and the ready
speed which have brought him here to-night; and yet I
would not that he had listened secretly to the language
of the Gothic noble whom he had styled his friend. It
was not the right part for the noble spirit; and while we
acknowledge the good service, Adoniakim, we must
chide the means, even for the good of the youth, by
which he was led to perform it.
Now out upon the preacher! said Amri to himself,
as he heard this rebuke; but he bore it with seeming
humility, for he well perceived the necessity of moving
cautiously in all that he did under the piercing eye of
Melchior.
We must provide against this danger, Namur.
Thou must prepare the secret passage, while I send one
to preserve the young prince, so that he fall not into the
hands of his enemies.
This was said by Melchior, in a whisper, to the aged
man called Namur of the Porcha man of substance
and of great repute among his tribe. He then called to
him Lamech. As the features of the boy, whom he had
seen in his assumed capacity of porter, met his eye, a
strange emotion ran through the veins of Amri. He
scarce could withdraw his glance from the rich, clear
loveliness of her countenance; and the capricious fancy
which prompted him curiously to seek her at the first,
now grew into a strong and passionate desire to possess
her. Melchior led her, still in the garb of a boy, and
still known by the name of Lamech, into an adjoining
closet.
Thyrza, thou dost not fear to go forth into the city?
Father, I fear nothing which thou believest right.
Go, then, my child, to the outer lodge at the Porch
of Namur, and watch for the coming of the Prince
Pelayo
.
Thou wilt know him well, methinks?
Well I know him, father.
Guide him from this spot, and seek me in the
dwelling
of Barzelius. At the eastern gate I myself will be
in waiting to receive you; and thither we shall now
retire. Thou fearest not to trust thyself with the prince?
he will protect thee if there be need.
I fear nothing with him, father. He is a noble,
he
She paused, and her words became confused. The
old man did not observe the interruption, but led her
forth, saying,
Thou hast thy dagger? Leave it not; it may serve
thee, my child, in some dreadful strait, as once before
it served thy blessed mother, whom yet it could not save.
Heaven keep thee, my child!
He led her forth from the apartment where the rest
were in waiting, and long after she had gone did the
eyes of Amri bend towards the dark passageway through
which she had departed.
VIII.
When
she had gone, a secret door in the wall was
thrown open, through which Melchior, Adoniakim, and
Amri passed, leaving Namur, the proprietor of the porch,
to meet the approaching enemy,a task to which, in
the persecuted condition of the Jews in that time and
country, he had long before been familiar.
Meanwhile the Jewish maiden, with a heart that
trembled with various emotions, but with a step as
confident
as if she were really of the sex whose habiliments
she wore, made her way, as she had been directed by
her father, to the lodge which stood at the entrance of
the porch. Here, concealed in a dark recess of the
wall, she took her station, and patiently awaited the
coming of the person she had been sent to guide. An
hour, probably, had elapsed, when her ears distinguished
the sound as of many persons approaching. There was
a hum of voices, the tread of several following feet, and
once she distinguished a rattling noise, as of the heavy
iron head of a lance clashing against the solid wall.
Cautiously, and trembling all the while, she stole forth
to the entrance of the little recess where she had
stationed
herself, and her eye discerned, moving down a
dim lane that stretched away into the distance on her
right, a group as of armed men. She saw in the
starlight
the glittering of steel; and she plainly saw one
shining helmet, towering brightly in advance of the rest.
At that moment a light but firm footfall, near at hand,
also reached her ears. She turned; and, though the
approaching person was enveloped in a cloak, she could
not doubt that it was him she sought. The erect and
elevated form, the free, unhesitating tread, all spoke for
Pelayo; and, perhaps, there was an instinct in her own
bosom that needed no aid from her senses to speak for
his presence.
He, too, seemed to have discerned the coming
enemy
;
for once he paused, and his head was turned, as if
inquiringly, in the direction of the intruders. At that
moment she emerged lightly from the recess, and her
slight hand and trembling fingers plucked him by the
skirts of his cloak. He started, and his ready hand
clutched his dagger.
Lamech, said the maiden, in a whisper, Lamech
I come from Melchior.
Ha! where is he?
She motioned him to follow her, and led the way into
the recess from which she had just emerged. He
followed
her promptly, and a few words told him all, and
accounted for her presence.
These are the soldiers now, sirmy lord. We
must keep in silence here till they have passed.
Get thy dagger ready in the meanwhile, Lamech,
for they may think it well to look into this alley. How
nowwherefore dost thou tremble? Thy fears will not
make them blind, nor better thy own strength. Pluck up
thy spirits, and fear nothing.
Well might she tremble. She stood beside the Prince
Pelayo, and his hand rested upon her shoulder while he
spoke. The voices of the soldiers were now distinctly
heard, and it could be distinguished by the two that they
spoke of Melchior and of the promised reward.
Lamech
trembled like a leaf in the October winds, as he
heard their fell threatenings. Pelayo felt distinctly the
beatings of that fluttering heart, and, in a whisper,
endeavoured
to reassure it.
Thy father is safe now, Lamech, and we are safe,
I doubt not, since, in their great thirst to pursue him, they
will not pause to search out other places of which they
have no suspicion. Why dost thou withdraw from me,
boy, and bend forward as if thou wouldst go forth? Move
not; thy weight is nothing against my arm. I could bear
thee like a child in flight.
A voice was heard at the entrance of the alley.
Here is a dark holedark enough to hide a dozen
outlaws. Shall we not look in here?
Pelayo thrust the trembling boy, as he heard these
words, behind him, dropped his cumbrous cloak from his
shoulders, and stood in the centre of the alley, prepared
for the intruders. But the words of the fierce Edacer in
reply rendered his preparations unnecessary.
Nowe have no time for this. I know where the
outlaw is. Let us haste, and we shall find him. We
have already wasted too much time with that drunken
Astigia. On!
Their heavy tread was heard passing before the
entrance
,
and Pelayo resumed his cloak.
Come, boycome, Lamech, he said, in gentle
tones to the maiden. Thou hast nothing to fear now,
and canst lead me to the place thy father appointed.
Thou art but a frail ally, Lamech, and wouldst not stand
well the assault of thine enemy. Thy people have too
long been wanting to the strife, and may not lift sword
with cool hand and reckless spirit.
Yet Judah was a lion once, my lord, was the
response
of the person addressed.
Thou art not Judah, then, Lamech. The dove's
spirit is thine rather than the lion's. But lead on,
Lamech
lead
on, and fear nothing. Thy hand yet
trembles
under mine.
This was true, and as strange, in the thought of the
maiden, as it was true. Why should her hand always
tremble when it met that of Pelayo? Why should her
heart tremble when she heard him speak? Why should
she fear him? Did she fear him, and wherefore her
emotions? Vainly did she ask herself these questions.
Her thoughts could not give her back an answer, and
her heart dared not!
IX.
Edacer
found no victim. The bird had flown. Old
Namur received the intruders with as little emotion as if
the visit had been expected, and the disappointed Goth
led his myrmidons away, swearing vengeance upon Amri,
whom he supposed to have deceived him. Meanwhile
the fugitives sought another place of retreat in the
Hebrew
suburba region at no time deficient in secret
passages and haunts. At the gate of the dwelling
Melchior
received his daughter and the prince. The latter
he conducted into an apartment removed from the rest.
He had his purpose in this. He was unwilling that
Amri should know that Prince Pelayo was committed
with them, and in the city. With a something of divine
prescience, he suspected the honesty of the son of
Adoniakim
,
and prudently resolved to keep from his knowledge
as much as he could of the designs and progress of the
conspirators. In this determination he had a stout
opponent
in the person of Adoniakim, to whom Amri had
greatly recommended himself by what he had unfolded
Vol. I. N
of his doings of the night. Fond and confiding, the aged
man was easily assured of his son's discretion and
patriotism
.
Of his integrity he never seemed to have had
a doubt. It was after a warm struggle, therefore, that
Melchior succeeded in impressing on him the necessity
of confiding nothing to the youth.
We must have more proof of his discretion. When
he has given up these profligate associates and these
idle habits, we shall confide to him all; but nownot
yet, Adoniakim. There is too much at risk, and we
must not forget that the lives and fortunes of othersof
the young Prince Pelayo, and of the brave men who are
pledged with him, are at stake. We have not the right
to unfold our knowledge of these to the youth, however
much we esteem him, and however able he may be to
maintain the trust.
Accustomed to yield to Melchior, Adoniakim at length
forbore to press the matter; and, returning to the
chamber
in which, during this brief conference, they had left
Amri, the task devolved upon the old man of sending his
son away. The duty was a hard one, fond as the father
was, and esteeming the youth worthy, as he did, to
partake
of their great enterprise.
Go now, my songo back to the dwelling, and
leave it not again, I pray thee, till my return.
What! leave thee here, my father, and wherefore?
Why shouldst thou grope thy way home again through
the gloomy streets at so late an hour, when thou hast a
son able, like myself, to succour and attend thee?
Nay, Amri, I shall not leave the dwelling of
Melchior
in the dark hours. It will be bright noonday when
I return, and then there can be no danger. I have much
of grave business to consult upon here with Melchior,
and I need not, though much I should love, thy tendance.
Thou must go.
I see it, I see it, my father, said Amri, impatiently,
for he longed once more to behold the maiden, whom he
now knew as such, in the guise of the page, and was
reluctant
,
therefore, to depart.
I see that I am not trusted by Melchior or by thee.
Thou thinkest me a rash and thoughtless boymayhap
and the smile of Abraham be on me, for it is sad to
think somayhap, a vicious one, and that thou mayst
not confide to me thy secrets. But I know themI
know them without thy words. Thinkest thou I am
blind, not to see that thou art toiling for Israelthat
thou aimest for his freedom from the bondage of the
Goth?
Oh, my son  Amri  where gottest thou this
knowledge? exclaimed the astounded father. But the
son did not answer the inquiry, though he continued to
speak.
I know thy purpose, and I know thou dost not
desire
to trust me. I, thy sonI, the son of Israel, and
bound to thy people, and loving them no less than thou
and Melchior.
Melchior, to whose ears the last words had come as
he was entering the apartment, now spoke in a rebuke
which silenced the voluble declamation of the presuming
youth.
Thou dost prove thyself deserving of thy father's
confidence when thou dost refuse to obey his
commands
.
Go to, Amri,thou hast yet much to learn.
If, as thou sayest, thou knowest thy father's purpose,
and the labour that is between us, thou wilt prove to us
the strength of thy faith and wisdom by putting a seal
on thy lips henceforward, heavy like that of Solomon.
When we behold thee having sealed lips, we shall know
thee to be prudent, and esteem thee to be wise: we shall
then come to thee for counsel. Go now, seek thy father's
dwelling, and maintain its quiet, as a good son, while he
remains abroad. Adoniakim is now waited for, and, if
thou goest not, thy stay will be but tedious, for thou
wilt linger here alone.
Let the page Lamech but keep with me, and I care
not for the night: I will remain in waiting for my father,
was the suggestion of the youth.
The boy has gone to his repose, was the quiet
answer of Melchior; but his eye searched narrowly the
features of the rash youth who stood before him. The
thought of Melchior was troubled. Was the daughter of
his heart known through her disguise to Amri? He
knew not, for the countenance of Amri stood the close
scrutiny of his glance, and betrayed none of the secret
thoughts labouring then in the mind of the profligate.
In a moment after, hopeless to gain his object, Amri
departed from the dwelling.
X.
The
three, Melchior, Pelayo, and Adoniakim, met
in secret conference.
Thy brotherthe young Prince Egiza, said
Melchior
to Pelayo,thou shouldst have brought him;
thou didst promise it.
I did, was the reply of Pelayo; and his brow was
gloomy as he spoke, and the words came sternly through
his clinched teeth: I did promise thee his presence,
Melchior, yet have brought him not. Speak not of him
now, I pray thee.
He does not shrink from us?he doth not refuse?
He doth not, but he loiters: he hath been a
laggard
too
much a laggard, in this matter, Melchior; it
chafes me when I speak it.
Wherefore this,doth he avoid connexion with the
Hebrew?
No!
Perhaps he will not hold himself bound to the
pledge which thou hast made
He shall! was the stern response of Pelayo,
interrupting
the speech of Melchior,he shall! It is not
this that keeps him from our councils: it is his
weakness
,
an evil weakness. Thou shalt know all hereafter:
to other business now.
'Tis well,even as thou sayest, Pelayo.
Pelayo then spoke:
I have done much since the last night, and my
captains meet with me to-morrow, at this hour, in the
Cave of Wamba. Thou shouldst be there.
I will.
Who wilt thou bring else? demanded Pelayo.
But two: a brave youth of Meridaa strong and
fearless spirit, who will lead a chosen band of Israelites
to the battle, and with a heart brave as any in thy
service.
A Hebrew, he? inquired Pelayo.
Of my own tribe. I know him well, my prince.
Do not misdoubt the Hebrew valour always. He will
fight nobly.
Thou shouldst know, Melchior. Thy valour, like
thy judgment, is approved. I know it. What other
comes with thee?
But this old man, Adoniakima father of the
Hebrew
.
His word is a power among our people which
shall move them like a tempest.
What name does the youth bear of whose valour
thou hast spoken?
Abimelech.
Forget not that he comes. My soul rejoices in the
brave spirit; and, let him but approve himself, Pelayo
will not know he is a Hebrew. I will leave thee now,
since, before morning, I must seek the Lord Oppas.
What of the weapons of war, Prince Pelayo?
Convey them as thou canst, in secrecy, to the Cave
of Wamba: then shall we distribute them to the chiefs
who meet with us. But be not rash,move them not
all at once, but in small number.
N 2
Much more was said, between the parties, needful to
the preparations and purposes of the conspiracy, before
Pelayo left the conference. When he did so, he found
the boy Lamech, who preceded him to them entrance,
which he opened for the departure of the prince. The
hand of Pelayo rested gently on the head of the youth,
as he spoke to him thus:
Thy limbs should be at rest now, on a soft couch,
Lamech,they are too feeble and too slender to sustain
thee in a watch and labours like to these. Thou wilt
grow weary, and then sickness will come to thee; for
even mine, which are stronger and older, might not bear
with such toils, but that a sleepless feeling within my
heart sustains and impels them thus.
Pelayo little knew how strong was the feeling in that
boy's heart also, which sustained and strengthened his
otherwise feeble limbs.
Go now to thy rest, Lamech; and, though a Jew,
I will not chide if thou namest Pelayo in thy prayers to
the Hebrew God whom thou servest. The prayers
must be of avail from a young and faithful heart such as
thine.
He pressed the hand of the maiden-page as he bade
her good-night, and the touch went like so much
spiritfire
into the veins, even to the very core, of her young
and devoted heart. She watched from the door along
the path upon which he had gone, and her eye seemed
endued with a strength beyond humanity to see him, far,
far away in the dim street, though but few stars shone
out from the heavens. She turned away and closed the
door when she could no longer behold him; and then,
for the first time, did her limbs feel weary for sleep.
XI.
Wherefore
hast thou lingered from thy couch so
long, Thyrza, my beloved? Why hast thou not gone to
thy slumbers?
Thou didst not bid me, my father; but I will go
now. Thy blessing, father.
And she sank upon her knee before him as she spoke;
and fervently and fondly, though in silence, did the aged
Hebrew invoke God's blessing on his child.
And thine, Adoniakim, said the maiden.
May the God of Israel be thy God, Thyrza,may
his good angels watch thee, beloved one! was the kind
prayer of Adoniakim, and the maid retired with no other
word from the presence. Her absence gave an
opportunity
,
as her appearance had furnished an occasion, to
Adoniakim, which the good old man earnestly desired.
Melchior, said he, thou hast a blessed and a
blessing creature in that child of thine.
The eyes of Melchior were full of tears, and he
replied
in no other language.
Thou mayst well love her, for she is worthy of all
love in herself; and to thee, Melchior, she must bring
ever back the memory of a time when life was a thing
of love, and all its creatures, and all its objects and
desires
,
were sought for and beloved. How like is she,
even in my eye, to her gracious mother.
Speak not of this, Adoniakim. I would not, my
brother, that the weakness of my heart should be beheld,
even by thee.
It is the strength, and not the weakness of the heart,
Melchior, which I behold in these tears of thine eyes.
Weep on, my brother, for the tears that flow from
affection
are sweet, even though they fall only upon its grave.
They hallow love, they embalm memory, they consecrate
mortal things, and make them eternal as thought, and
lovely as the first look of innocence. They are blessed,
my brother, and sweetly do they bless the heart from
whose deep and silent fountains they flow.
Truly hast thou spoken, Adoniakim. The tears of
mine eyes are grateful to my heart. Yet I would not
that men should see me weep; for it is the wont always
with men to scorn the suffering which they do not feel.
I have spoken to thee of Thyrza, my brother, as of
one dear to thee from old memories, and not less dear to
thee from her own loveliness and worth. She is dear to
me the same, and it has been my thought and prayer,
Melchior, that our own hearts should be more closely
joined together in the pleasant bonds which we might
behold our two children weave around the hearts of one
another. Amri
Say not, Adoniakim. I know thy thought and thy
prayer, but speak not again of this.
The youth is erring, but not vicious.
I pray thee, Adoniakim, forbear. What is it to us
we who are toiling for Israelfor our people, and our
people's libertiesto bend ourselves to the fruitless
employ
of teaching young hearts to commune in love?
Thy son is dear to thee, and my daughter is dear; but
what to us should be their mortal happiness at a season
of trial and storm like that which is impending? The
bird sings not a love-ditty when the tempest clamours in
the air, but sinks secure into his cover, and waits the
moment of repose.
I speak not of the present season, Melchior, when
I speak to thee of these hopes upon which my heart has
been set. There will come a time when the storm is
endedwhen the strife is overwhen the danger is
gone by;there will come the time, and then, my
brother
,
how greatly would it rejoice my spirit to behold thy
Thyrza the beloved wife of Amri.
Nevernever! was the energetic response of
Melchior. Amri the lord of Thyrzathe master of
her fatethe dictator of her movementsthe arbiter of
her affections and her hopes? Nevernever! Speak
to me no more of this, Adoniakim, for I may not hear
thee with patience. God crush me with a bolt when I
give my child up to a tyranny like that of Amri! She,
the dependant, the humble, the uncomplaining, the
gentle
meek
as the night-dewsfond like her blessed
mothergiving all her heart, and devoted to the death
for him she is bound to:shall I give such as she to
Amri? To Amri, the impatient, the capricious, the
wanton profligatehaving his own will and vicious mood
for his master, and owning no authority besides! I tell
thee, Adoniakim, I will not hear thee speak of this.
Thou knowest not my daughter, or thou lovest her not;
and still less dost thou know thy son, however thou lovest
him. I know him better than thou. I see into his heart
I trace his thoughtsand I tell thee, Adoniakimin
grief but in truth I tell theethy tenderness is blindness,
and thy misused love is a very madness of the heart,
which will one day wither it as with fire. Forgive me,
Adoniakim, that I speak thus of one that is so dear to
thee; but I may not speak else. He honours thee not,
Adoniakim, and his days in the land will be short; and
he will scatter sorrow and evil, like a pernicious and
fast-growing
seed, all around him. Let us part now, for we
have both much to do ere the gray light of morning shall
cheer us.
The language of Melchior fell chillingly upon the
heart of Adoniakim. He had been wont to regard the
Hebrew of the Desert as one wise beyond men, and a
reader of the stars. He bowed his head in acquiescence,
and without a murmur, to the words of his companion,
even as to an oracle; but his eyes were full of tears, and
there was a heavy sadness upon his spirit. They parted
for the night, and the gray dawn streamed through the
casement ere Melchior sought his couch.
XII.
The
gloomy Cave of Wamba received the
conspirators
.
A hundred armed and brave knights were
present
.
Melchior came also, and the valiant Hebrew,
Abimelech
.
There also came the venerable Adoniakim, who
was too much devoted to the cause of his people to heed
the fatigue of such a journey. The enthusiasm of his
heart gave strength to his limbs, and made them light to
bear the toil, so unusual at such an age as his, which he
now put upon them. When they were all assembled,
there was but one voice in the assembly, and that was
addressed to Pelayo in a tone of thunder.
Where is the Prince Egiza?where is thy
brother
?
Pelayo looked sternly around upon the assembly in
silence, for a few moments, as if disdaining their inquiry.
Then he spoke
My lords and gentlemen,noble knights and men
of Spain,if Egiza toils, as he should, in the good cause,
which is thine and his alike, it may be well looked for
that he is sometimes absent and afar. I had thought to
find my brother here with the Lord Oppas. That he is
not, and this business so much his, should prove him
more profitably labouring elsewhere.
This was thy speech to us before, Pelayo, replied
Count Aylor. We know that thou hast been busy, ay,
without sleeping, prince, and so have others of our band;
yet thou canst come, and they can come, when our
pledges so demand it, fearless to meet with those
pledged
along with us, and doubting, as they well may, the
brother who forbears to come. Thy brother must have
wrought nobly, indeed, to excuse him for this slight upon
us.
No slight, Count Aylorno slight, gentlemen, as I
trust and know. The soul of Egiza goes with you,
responded Pelayo. But his voice, though firm, had in
it a something of self-reproach and sorrow, which did not
escape the senses of the conspirators. Much did he
misgive that his brother had forgotten or been heedless
of his duties.
How know we that he will bind himself to secure
us in the privileges thou hast promised us, Pelayo?
was the farther demand.
He shall speak for himself, my friends. I pledge
myselfI, Pelayothat Egiza meets with you three
nights hence, and ratifies the bond which I have made
you, or yields you release from all your pledges.
How!think you that he will forego the enterprise
that he will turn traitor to his people, and leave them
to the tyranny of Roderick? We claim no release from
our pledges, Pelayowe are resolved to die, all, sooner
than bear the iron sway of this Gothic usurper.
Thus exclaimed one and all of that fierce assembly.
The spirit of Pelayo glowed with unquenchable delight
as he listened to this language.
Noble gentlemen, and brave knights of Spain, he
cried to them, in a voice of pride, yours is the true
spirit, which is to secure you conquest. Think not,
though Egiza prove recreant, that Pelayo falters in the
enterprise. His soul is in it; and, if Egiza prove false
or feeble, Pelayo is yours,he will lead you to the
usurper's palace,he will be the first to strike for your
freedom and his own.
Loud cheers rang through the vaulted chamber, and
it was long before their clamours suffered him to
proceed
.
When the applause was over, he thus continued
But I hope for better things from Egiza. He is
not, he cannot be, forgetful of his trust. He will lift the
swordhe will lead you onand, as your crowned
king, will give you the privileges and the liberty which I
have promised, and which your valour so well deserves.
You shall hear this from his lips: you shall see him at
our next assembling; when, God with us, we shall lift
the banner of Spain, and do battle with the usurper.
Living or dead, if Pelayo lives, ye shall behold Egiza
then. I swear it on the blessed sign.
And fervently, as he spoke, he kissed the
cross-handled
weapon at his side.
XIII.
Ere
the dawn of the ensuing day Pelayo entered the
secret door leading to the chamber of his uncle. The
Lord Oppas was even then awake, and busied with the
toils of the conspiracy. Not limited was the share
which he had assigned himself in the enterprise. He
had his own ambition, and it was reckless beyond belief,
to gratify in these labours. But he was prudent in his
measures; and, so cunningly did he play the part of
the rebel, that his practices were hitherto unsuspected by
the most watchful emissaries of King Roderick. His
thoughts, ere the approach of Pelayo, found their way to
his lips in broken and almost unconscious soliloquy:
This boldness which Pelayo meditates, he
exclaimed
,
is but sheer folly. He has but to speak
aloud, and show himself with the feeble numbers which
we now command, to be crushed for ever. He must
not be suffered to risk everything of our causeof
my
causeto his insane valour. And yet, unless we move
Julian, the day of our best hope is distant. He is strong
stronger than any noble in the realm; and, but for
this strength, had surely never received the favour of
Roderick, confirming in his rule the command of
Andalusia
.
He can move the natives with a word; and but
little less is the power which he holds among the Gothic
nobles. They notefully regard his word, favour his
course, hearken his direction, nor strive to assail his
power. We must win him to win our way. The crown,
the kingdom, my hope, all rest upon his favour; and to
rise in arms ere we have won him to our purpose were
but to bring down all his power upon us, and defeat, by an
idle rashness, not the present plan alone, but all the rich
hopes of the future. Yet how to move him now? He
hath heard my proffers, and in calm thought rejected
them. The gold which had tempted any Gothic noble
is valueless in the sight of Julian; and for the power
which pleaded with his ambition, he hath all from
Roderick
which he could ever hope to gain from us. His
love of the old king moves him not to revenge his
murder
,
since he holds the election of Roderick to be not
less legal than that of Witiza. What thenwhat then?
How move him, when these things, which had wrought
madness in other minds, fall fruitlessly upon his?
Through herthrough herhis daughter. Through
her alonethere is no other argument. She is the idol
of his soul, and he loves the ground upon which she
treads. His heart is wound up in her charms, and she
restores to him the beauties of her whom he had else
lost for ever. He will dare in her behalf all danger;
and the wrong done to her will arouse him to that
unwitting
vengeance and wild treason to which no
temptation
may win him now. Through her, thenthrough
the devoted love which he bears her, I have a power
to move him. He shall be ours; he shall be
mine!
The archbishop paced the room hastily as, with
increased
emphasis, he uttered these words and came to
this conclusion. His project, but half conceived in his
mind, in the mean time underwent closer analysis. He
spoke at length, though in a more subdued tone, as if
he had reached a desired result.
I know this Roderick well. A wild profligate;
passionate and voluptuous; reckless of right or reason
when his blood quickenshe will but need to hear of
the beauties of Cava to madden for their enjoyment.
Vol. I.O
He shall hear of them; and the choice phrases which
teach him where to look for his pleasure will not fail to
heighten their excellence. He shall become wise in all
her charms, and his daring arm will rest not till he has
them in his power. Let him but gain his purpose, and
we gain ours, and I gain mine. He will rouse the
stern old father to vengeance, and secure for us the
succour which our prayers and promises have alike
failed to compass. It must be so. 'Tis a wild design,
without fair defence, but that it helps to the right, and
thus becomes a virtue. Ha! who comes? Pelayo.
The same, good uncle, was the reply of the youth,
who entered the room at this moment. A red spot was
upon his brow, and the closely compressed lips, and the
quick and fire-darting eye of the speaker, betokened a
degree of anger which had not yet appeared in his
language
.
Well, my son, said the archbishop.
It is not well, mine uncle, was the sudden reply.
It goes not well. Where's Egiza?
Nay, I know not. Is he not with you?
With me! The red curses seize him,
passionately
exclaimed his brother. His lukewarmness will
ruin us, as it already dampens the spirits of our men.
A hundred good knights gathered at my summons at
the Cave of Wamba, and he was pledged to meet them.
They were true, but he failed them. They waited long,
and, with reason, grew impatient. 'Twere cause enough
that he should claim their duty while utterly heedless of
his own.
They were not angered, I trust, Pelayo, said the
archbishop.
Your trust is profligate, my lord bishop, replied the
youth, quickly; they were angered, and rightly. I
have soothed them as I could with such lessons as I
got from thee. I prated to them of patience and
deliberation
,
of reason and caution, and other stuff of the sort.
By my faith, if they think as little of the counsel as does
the counsellor, they would eat up their own swords
through vexation.
And where, think you, my son, can be your brother?
SureI hope notno harm has befallen him.
Thy hope is late, and, like thy trust, profligate.
Harm hath come to him, mine uncle.
What harm, Pelayo? demanded the archbishop,
with great anxiety.
He is in fettersin bondagein villain bondage,
replied the other.
In bondage, son?
Aya witch hath fettered him. He hath eyes
amorous eyesand he loves beauty. He is in a
woman's
bondageworst bondage of all; since the soul
slackens in its purpose and sleeps in the chain, which, if
the bonds were other, the strong limb would rend with a
bound. The tyrant's bonds were but flaxen cords to
such fetters as now wrap the feeble spirit of Egiza. He
can no longer serve us with resolution; he hath no
energy to serve or save himself. His truth is forfeit;
his pledged faith denied; his duty to his country left
undone; and all for a silly, simpering, painted plaything,
such as tickle boys with amorous fancies to their ruin.
But, though he be my brother, I shall slay him, even
as a dog, if he fulfil not his pledges.
Nay, do nothing rashly, Pelayo, said the archbishop.
You are but too ready to strike, and your promptness
is no less an evil than is the lukewarmness of Egiza.
But where do you conceive him, and of what woman do
you speak?
Julian's daughter, the Lady Cava. He is in her
weba long-legged butterfly in a gray spider's house.
Would she feast on him now, the game were at rest.
'Tis she that hath dammed up the proper tides of
manhood
in him, and made him what he isa soulless
murmurer by the silly brook that prattles away the hours
with as little purpose as himself. Well I saw, what
time we sought her father's castle for his succour, that
Egiza grew her slave. I warned him then, and dreaded
this same chance.
What would you do, Pelayo?
What I have sworn, good uncle. I am pledged to
bring him to our council; living or dead, Lord Oppas, I
have sworn to bring himand I will do it. Living or
dead, Egiza shall meet our friends at the Cave of Wamba,
as he has promised them, and as I have sworn.
When seek you him?
To-morrow.
Should you find him at the castle of Julian?
Well?
What will you do?
What should I do, good uncle, but make all effort
for his liberty? Try to break his bonds, and lead him
out from his captivity. Entreat him by his honour, by
our father's memory, by his country's sufferings, to
return
to his dutiesto the pledges sworn to his people
the ghosts of Witiza and his murdered followers being
by the while.
What if he refuse you? Should the witcheries of
Cava still more effectually persuade him? What then?
What then should I do but stab him to death, and
vindicate our name, and the oath which I have taken
before our men? responded the fierce warrior, whose
height, already majestic, seemed to rise still higher, and
to expand in majesty, with the angry answer of his lips.
That were too rash, too bloody a deed, my son,
rejoined the archbishop. It were unholy, and most
horrible
,
that in any cause thy hand should spill the blood
of thy brother. Wouldst thou have the curse of Cain
upon thee, Pelayo?
I slay him at no altar, replied the youth. It is to
that I would bring him. It is because of his desertion
from the altar of his God and his country that I would slay
him.
'Twere not wellnot wise, Pelayo, replied the
archbishop, to do this rash and cruel act. Hear me,
my son; I have a better plan of counsel, which shall
break this bondage; nor break the bondage of Egiza
alone. It will break our bonds also, if it succeeds; it
will help us to our battle with the usurper.
Thou'lt pleasure me to speak it, uncle, was the
more temperate reply of Pelayo. I would not wrong
a lock of Egiza's hair if he would do his duty, and
confirm
me in the pledges I have made in his behalf.
He will do this, be sure, was the promise of Oppas.
We shall help him to break these bonds, escape from
this bondage of which thou hast such dread, my son,
and, by the same art with which we achieve his rescue,
compel Julian himself to choose his side with ours.
I grow impatient, uncle, said Pelayo, as the
archbishop
appeared to pause.
You're full grown, Pelayo, and if we measure your
manhood by your impatience, my son, 'tis long, very
long, since you have been a child. But hear me out.
I have a little scheme.
Another?
Yes, another. But hear me. The father of this
maiden, whom you now regard as your brother's mistress
or his fate, loves her to so earnest a degree, that she
stands in his thought as one worthy of heaven's own
worship. He doth little less than worship her himself
on earth. He hath kept her from the court, as he feared
its license
He did wisely, said Pelayo, interrupting the speaker,
who continued thus, after a moment's pause.
And in his own castle retreats he hath provided her
with attendance and delights which amply supply the
loss of such pleasures as the court might bring, without
its infirmities. In this devotion of the father to his
daughter, my scheme hath its birth. Upon his
exceeding
fondness I build all my hope, as well of Egiza's
O 2
rescue as of the succour to our cause which the arms
of Count Julian can ably give us.
I am dull, good uncle.
Thou wilt grow wiser ere I am done. Well, then
thou hast seen her beautyshe is beautiful, thou
knowst.
Ay, she hath glances that warm, and she walks
daintily
.
Wouldst have me chronicle and number them in
order?
Noenough of that. She is beautiful; but, as her
beauty doth not work upon either thee or me, it needs
not that we speak farther of it here. But should this
beauty be unveiled to Roderickthou knowst his
lustful
naturedwelt on in free and speaking words until
his fancy becomes fired with desire for its enjoyment,
then shall he madden, and his heart grow wanton like
thy brother's.
Well?
With a bolder spirit than Egiza will he then labour
for her possession.
What of this? responded Pelayo, coldly. How
will it help our cause, or rid Egiza of his bonds, even
should the lustful tyrant aim, as thou sayst, and as I
doubt not he will, at this foul measure?
Hear me. He will pursue her with unholy fires.
He will contrive means to elude the father; and, when
he hath achieved his purpose, the sword of Julian will
be ours for revenge, that hath been heretofore withheld.
The insolence of Roderick will provoke his anger even
to fury, and the personal wrong of the tyrant will prompt
the rebellion which his usurpation provoked not. Julian
will join his ten thousand soldiers to our cause, and
AyI see it now, replied Pelayo. And you
have taught all this to Roderick?
Deceived by the calm and subdued manner of Pelayo,
the subtle priest did not scruple to proceed in the
development
of his foul project.
Not yet, my son, he replied; but we have time
enough to do it. In a secret missive which I shall
contrive
to fall into his hands, or into those of his minion
Edeco, I will arouse him to this knowledge of the
damsel
.
I will urge him on by a warm portrait of her
charms, and counsel him how best to succeed in their
attainment. This done, I will, with no less diligence,
send tidings of his disaster to her father, and counsel
how best to revenge the wrong of the tyrant to his child.
See'st thou not how this works for us? The appeal
will then be from Julian unto us, and the vengeance
which he seeks upon Roderick will make him a true
soldier to our cause.
'Tis a hopeful scheme, said Pelayo, his eyes
resting
with keen gaze upon those of the archbishop; 'tis
a hopeful scheme, my lord; and this poor maidenthis
just budding child, whose bosom hath not yet well
throbbed with its own virgin consciousness, who is just
breathing into lifeshe thou hast decreed as the
victim
,
whose sacrifice is to give us the justice and the
victory we seek.
'Tis her fate, my son, was the calm reply of the
archbishop, who was still deceived by the unusually
subdued
and quiet manner of the prince. But the next
moment
,
and the indignant burst of expression which fell
from the lips of the noble-minded Pelayo, soon
convinced
the archbishop of his error, and taught him how
greatly he had mistaken the moral sense of his nephew.
God help thee to a heart, my Lord Oppas. God
help thee, I say, to that which thou seemst to have not
a heart. Thou art cursed, and wouldst curse others,
with its lack; and I pray Heaven to supply thee soon,
ere the curse grows too heavy for cure, and the doom
beyond all endurance.
The astounded archbishop could only reply
What mean you, my son?
Without heeding his involuntary inquiry, the prince
proceeded thus in the same strain of indignant
apostrophe
Thou hadst a mother oncethou shouldst have
had
Dost doubt, Pelayo? Beware that thou sayst
nothing unjustlyshe was thy father's mother, my son,
no less than mine.
Ay, ay! I hear thee; yet, if thou hadst, my Lord
Oppas, and if she were not dishonest to thy father, and
sinful ere thy birth, her curse is on thee for thy damnable
thought to this poor maiden. She will come to thee at
midnight and will affright thee, not less with her presence
than with the hell which she will promise thee for the foul
practice which thou meditatest against a weak creature
of her sex. Thou toilest madly for such doom, my
Lord Oppas, and I bid thee, churchman as thou art,
beware
of it. How should thy cross protect thee in the
perilous moment, when thou hast not suffered its
presence
to protect the frail maiden who wears it? How
should thy prayer avail thee before Heaven, when thou
hast taught the monster the hiding-place of his victim,
and counselled him to be deaf to all her prayers? Thy
thought is damnable, my Lord Oppas, and I pray thee
vex not my ears by more speech upon it.
Thou art harsh in thine, Pelayo, said the
archbishop
,
half stunned by the vehemence of his nephew.
The latter instantly continued:
I could be, my Lord Oppas, if my feeling, and not
my lips, had language. Words are frigid and feeble to
the indignation in my soul. Nothou shouldst know
thou, whose duty it is that virtue and not vice should
have spread among mankindthat I am not harsh in
my present speech; not half so harsh as thy cruel
purpose should deserve. Once more, then, I pray that
God may help thee to a heart. Thou needst some
better teaching than thy head affords thee. Nothing of
this scheme of thine shall my hand grapple. Our cause
is too true to suffer me to give it up to shame, and stain
it, through hope of human and temporary aid, by such
polluted purpose. Rather than this, let the crown of
Spain settle for ever upon the head of the usurper; let
Egiza forget his name and his duties; let my father's
ghosthis bloody murder unavengedgo howling to
the furies; and let Pelayo live on with his present
sleepless discontent of soulimpatient, yet hopeless
clamouring, yet achieving nothing, to the end. I'll none
of thy scheme, my Lord Oppas.
The young prince was not to be misunderstood.
There had been no hesitancy in his reply, no doubt, no
pause, leaving it still a hope with the archbishop that he
might be won by plausible argument to the adoption of
the foul plan which the latter had meditated. The
direct
mind despises all insinuation, and pierces with a
single glance to the core of its subject. Had Pelayo
suffered argument from the archbishop, he had probably
yielded. It was now left for the latter to do so.
As you deem wisest, Pelayo. It is for Egiza and
yourself to resolve upon your plans of action. I do but
counsel.
Sad counsel, uncle, was the prompt reply, and
thou wilt be wise to drive its recollection from thy
thought, as I would fain drive it for ever from mine.
Its very consideration taints, as we do soil ourselves
even when we spurn the vile, and trample upon the
unworthy, object. Let us look to means not less noble
than the end which prompts them. It may be that we
must move secretly. That I love not! I would that
we could move boldly, and challenge daylight and the
eyes of men for our actions; but, if we may not, secresy,
though it may help the work of crime among the pliant
and the weak, is not crime itself. It shall be my care
that it becomes not so in our progress. My purpose
still remains. To-morrow will I seek Egiza, and chide
his misdoings, implore him to his duties, obey him as
truly as a subject should, if he will keep his pledges
and share the perils to which he has brought our friends;
and if he will notif he denies me, and seeks again to
make me his creature with our menspeaking promises
through my lips, which he has made false in the moment
of their utterance, as he has done alreadyif he does
this, I say, uncle! but no! he will notI think he will
nothe dare nothe dare not.
But should he, Pelayo? was the suggestion of the
archbishop, who, knowing the temper of Pelayo, spoke
with no little anxiety.
I have said! was the prompt reply. Then will
I slay him, my lord bishop, though he prayed with a
tongue which proved him at every syllable to be the
firstborn of our father. I will slay him as a dog that
wears a badge he dares not fight for.
Be not so rash, Pelayo.
'I've sworn it'tis an oath in Heaven, uncle, and I
will keep it.
A rash oath, Pelayo.
Rash or reasonable, uncle, I care not. Living or
dead, I tell thee, he goes with me to counsel with our
men, as he pledged them through me, and as I have
pledged them for myself. I leave thee now, uncle
yet, a worda prayerbefore I go. No more of that
dark scheme, that foul thought touching the silly
maiden
.
Set not the foul lust of Roderick to spoil her
innocence
.
Rather let us lose all that we love, and all
that we would live formy brother's strength, his
honour
,
his kingdomthan do aught shall make these
things less worthy in our hearts. Spare the poor
maiden
God
forgive thee the thoughtthe thought, no less
foolish than foul, which thou didst breathe to me, I trust,
with little thought. He should howl in fearfullest doom
that toils in such practice; and little good can ever
befall
the throne built up upon the ruins of innocence.
Whither goest thou now? demanded Oppas, whose
lips shrank from all speech on the guilty subject of his
thoughts.
To seek Suintilla, replied Pelayo, naming one of
the best warriors of his faction. He, with other
nobles
,
await me at the Gate of the Tribune. I must
meet them ere the falling of the sun.
Dost thou not risk much, Pelayo, by such
meeting
?
was the question of the archbishop. The Gate
of the Tribune is a thoroughfare, and thou art known to
many in Cordova.
I risk not more than they whom I am pledged to
meet; I must not shrink to keep my pledges when my
brother proves himself so heedless of his. Whatever be
the risk, I cannot heed it. I must teach them a better
thought in his behalf than they hold of him now. His
late default hath roused them, and justly, unto anger.
When I have appeased them, I will seek him. I will
arouse him to his duties, or thrust him out of the way,
which he does but choke.
It must be as thou sayst, my son, and yet, let me
pray thee to be patient.
Ha! the old strain, uncleI wonder thou hast kept
from it so long. Thou hast taught me that song of
patience
until I have it in memory, if not by heart. I con
it without a consciousness, and think some day to have
it sung. Wouldst thou could teach it to Roderick,
uncle; it would better serve us if he should practice
it.
Thus, with a playful scorn of the favourite counsel
which it had been the practice of the archbishop to
bestow
upon the youths, Pelayo took his departure,
leaving
him to meditate upon the interviewa task which
yielded him but little real satisfaction.
I will teach him a better song, Pelayo, spite of thy
silly scruples, were the muttered words of the
archbishop
after the departure of the youth; I will not
bind myself to the silence thou wouldst impose, when so
much may be secured for our cause by a breath. I will
speed the letter to Roderick: he shall know wherefore
Julian keeps from the court. He shall hear of the
loveliness
of Cava. I will set his lustful soul on fire by the
praises of her beauty, and nothing question of the coil
which is to follow; a happy coil for us, since it must
break the ranks of the usurper, and force Julian into
ours.
Thus saying, Oppas retired to a secret chamber to
prepare the cruel scheme which his dark policy and
vicious
soul had engendered for the destruction of the
innocent and unconscious maiden who had enslaved the
young Prince Egiza. Pelayo, on the contrary, with a
better purpose, though with the same great end in view,
the overthrow of the usurper Roderickproceeded to
seek the conspirators, many of whom were chafed at the
seeming indifference manifested by the elder of the two
princes. Throughout the day, and not unsuccessfully,
did he toil with this object. He soothed, entreated,
argued, and reassured, by turns, the doubtful, the
suspicious
,
and the timid. To one he painted the triumphs
of successful strife, to another the security which would
follow in the elevation of a just monarch to the throne.
Some he stimulated by the love of glory, others by the
thirst for gain. To each he brought an argument of
strength, and, with all his earnestness, spoke for his
sincerity
while securing theirs. It was only when the
exhaustion
of his frame rendered it scarcely possible for
him to labour longer and to live, that he retired to an
obscure dwelling, which he had chosen for his temporary
abiding-place in the city's suburbs, to snatch from care
and exercise a few brief hours of refreshing slumber.
XIV.
Let
us now return to Amri, the son of Adoniakim.
We have seen his anxiety to remain in the dwelling of
Melchior, accompanied only by Thyrza, during the
conference
of her father with his. As yet, she was only
supposed to be known to him as a boy. But
Melchior's
suspicions had been much aroused by the
pertinacity
of the youth, and hence, in part, his inflexible
opposition
to his wish of remaining. Hurried away from
the place of retreat to which the aged man had retired
under the hot pursuit urged by his enemies, Amri had
sought the dwelling of his father with a mind breathing
nothing but vengeance upon Melchior, yet full of a wild
passion for his daughter. Accustomed to the full
indulgence
of his desires, he could ill bear restraint or
opposition; and the necessity of concealing so much
while in Melchior's presence, and of subduing for the
present a temper so irascible and so little subject to
control, aroused him, when alone, to a degree of
excitement
and irritation little short of absolute fury. He
resolved
upon the possession of Thyrza, and meditated,
if he did not resolve, upon the sacrifice of her father.
The sympathies of kindred alone restrained the activity
of his thoughts and feelings in reference to the latter
subject; but these sympathies grew fewer and weaker in
due proportion to the increase of that lust for the
maiden
,
which he felt persuaded he could not so readily
satisfy
while the father lived. To this matter he gave all
his thoughts, so far as one might do so who was the
creature of changing impulses, and who seldom referred
to a deliberative reason the regulation of a most
imperions
will.
Before he came to any conclusion on this matter, he
felt that it was necessary to see the Gothic noble, whose
Vol. I.P
successless pursuit of the night he felt sure must
greatly
annoy and irritate him. It was necessary that he
should seek him out soon and account for his failure.
This was no difficult task to one so habitually cunning,
and so versed in all the arts of deception, as Amri. He
knew the fierce but obtuse nature of the Goth, and as
he had done frequently before, he did not despair of
being
able again readily to deceive him. Taking due
care to carry with him a well-filled purse which his
father had previously given him, and which he well
knew would satisfy, for the time, the rapacity of one
even more avaricious and vicious than Edacer, he
hurried
away to the dwelling of the latter, preparing, as he
proceeded, the fabrication which was to account for the
failure of his purposes.
XV.
The
fierce noble gave him but little time to
deliberate
after his arrival. His lodgings were in confusion.
The half-drunken soldiers whom he had employed
were yet clamorous around him for their promised
pay, which he could not so easily provide; when the
presence of Amri, if it did not at once relieve him from
this difficulty, furnished him, at least, with a victim upon
whom to vent his indignation.
Dog of a Jew! he cried, as the youth appeared
before him; dog of a Jew, am I thy sportthy
plaything? Dost thou think to serve me at thy
pleasure
to
lead me into the haunts of thy accursed tribe on
a profitless quest for that which it holds not? Speak!
ere I bid the spears of these men search thy bosom for
their prey. They shall have it freely an they find it
there!
He grappled the throat of the Jew with a grasp of
iron as he spoke these words. But Amri was nothing
dismayed. He well knew where the power lay to
manage
his superior.
My lord He began to speak when Edacer
interrupted
him.
Hast thou money? I ask not for thy words yet!
Thy goldthe men must be paid. I have none.
I have but little, my lord, and
Give it, and think not long, whatever thou dost; for
it is easier with these spears to search to thy very heart
for thy wealth, than to wait for thy slow hands to pluck
it forth from thy vestments!
It is here; thou hast all.
The Jew gave forth his purse freely, since he well
knew that it was idle to oppose a demand made in a
form so unequivocal. But he had previously abducted
from the purse a goodly portion of the precious pieces,
which he had elsewhere hidden about him. With these
the Goth paid his retainers, whom he at once dismissed
from his presence, but he bade them keep at hand in
the event of other employment. When they had gone
he again addressed Amri in the wonted language of
extortion
.
Thou seest! All that I got from thee have I given
among them. Not a piece remains.
Truly thou hast paid them freely, my lord, seeing
that they have done thee but little service, responded
Amri.
And have I let thee to my company, Jew,and
held thee fit for my friends, in their moments of mirth
and freedom, to be requited after this fashion. Shalt
thou pay nothing for this privilege?
Do I not pay? Have I not paid, even now, my
lord?
Hast thou not seen? Have I thy moneys? Thou
hast paid but the base agents of thy own scheme, which
yet has failed us. For that thou shalt answer.
Wherefore
is it so? Wherefore hast thou led me into the
vile quarter where thy tribe harboursamid its sinks
and filthy cornersin an idle search after that which it
holds not? Am I thy thing of sport?the instrument
from which thy base fingers shall bring forth whatever
sound shall offer to thy mood? Answer me! for I
meditate for thee a shrewd penalty unless thou showest
me wherefore thou hast done this.
I told thee truth, my lord.
Thou liest!I sought the Quarter of the JewI
sought the dwelling of Namur of the Porch. I
searched
it narrowly, both high and low. Melchior was not
therenor had he been,else how should he have
escaped?
He was there, my lord. He had been. It was
thy own fault and my misfortune that thou foundest him
not. He heard of thy approach.
Traitor! By thee
The Jew started. The reply of the Goth, uttered at
random, and without a purpose, save that of anger on his
part, had touched truly. But he recovered himself
instantly
,
and replied
No! by the creatures thou didst have with thee.
What creatures, Jew?
The drunken Lord Astigia! was the bold reply.
He it was that defeated thy pursuit. He it was,
and those with him,that forced Melchior to escape.
What! shall the hunter clamour aloud to warn the game
he seeks? Shall he who seeks the conspirator, in his
place of watch and hiding, bid the trumpets bray to
make his coming known? Yet such was the clamour
of Astigia, as he came upon the Hebrew Quarter.
How knowest thou?wast thou nigh? demanded
the Goth.
Not I. But from one who saw it all I heard it
truly. The Lord Astigia grew drunken, and then
furious
,
and fought with thee. This was the story brought
me.
He did'tis true, was the reply.
He clamoured much, and all the quarter was
aroused
to hear his howlings, and the clash of swords in fierce
strife even came to my ears that were distant. But I
thought not that it came from thee. I thought not that
thou wouldst go on a quest so secret and so full of trial
with a besotted train who must defeat thee.
Thou art right, Jew; though thy speech does not
beseem thy lips to speak, nor my ears to hearthou art
right nevertheless. Astigia did as thou sayest, though I
thought not that his clamour had reached the Jewish
Quarter. Indeed, I think not so now. How
knowest
it?
Thinkest thou a hunted man, like Melchior of the
Desert, will adventure himself among his enemies
keeping
no watch? His friends are all about him, and they
heed the public ways. The quick ears that heard the
clamour ere thou reachedst the quarter, had ready feet
that soon bore their intelligence.
'Tis like, said the Goth.
'Tis certain, boldly pursued the Hebrew; 'tis
certain. Had he not been so warned thou hadst
entrapped
him, even in the dwelling of Namur.
We must do it yet. The prize is great. Thou
must search out his hiding-place again, Amri,we must
share the treasure.
Shall I? responded the Hebrew, assuming an
expression
of sullenness as he spoke; shall I pursue
againfind where the game sleeps, to have the hunter
lose him?
It shall not be again, Amri, replied the Goth, in
gentler language.
The Hebrew continued in the same strain.
Then, if it fail through the mischance of others,
shall I have the lifted spear to my breast, and a fierce
threat, and a foul oath of scorn in my ears, until I give
money? Such is the share of Amri.
P 2
It shall not hap again, said the other, soothingly;
for without the aid of the Hebrew he felt that he could
do nothing. Thou hast had wrong, Amri,thou shalt
have justice. Seek out the man againfind where he
lies, then come to me. The reward will then be ours,
and then thou shalt have a goodly part of it.
The Hebrew promised, and was about to go, but
Edacer detained him.
Thy purse was but scantily filled. I must have
more. Thou hast itthou must give it!
Thou wilt take all I have, gloomily answered the
youth.
What! dost thou murmur? Have I not made thee
free with the Lady Urraca?does she not love thee,
and let thee to her affections?
For money! She hath an affection for gold, my
lord, like all thy nobles.
Wellwhat of that? Thou hast her.
'Tis true, said the Hebrew, giving up his money,
even to the last piece, to the unglutted noble.
'Tis true, he muttered to himself on leaving him,
I have Urracaa Gothic dame, not too noble to sell
herself to the Jew she despises for the gold he brings.
I have herbut I hate her. I have been her slaveI
will be so no longer. The loveliness of Thyrza has
freed me from that bondage. I loathe the very thought
of Urraca when I think of the loveliness of the child of
Melchior.
And he hurried away, as he mused thus, with more
rapidity to the dwelling of his father. His aim was now
once more to gain access to the abode and presence of
the damsel.
XVI.
When
he reached the dwelling of Adoniakim, he was
told by the porter, who was in his pay, that Melchior was
even at that moment in the private apartment of his
father
.
The design of his mind was strengthened by this
intelligence. His decision was immediate; and he was
only too ready to put his plan in execution to scruple at
the impropriety or the difficulties which were yet before
him.
Bring me another garmenta disguise, which shall
conceal me quite, he said, to a favourite attendant. In
a few moments he had altered his whole appearance.
He then sallied forth without seeking his father or
Melchior
,
or suffering them to know that he was at hand.
His thought was full only of the image of the lovely
Thyrza. The warm fancy had superseded every thing
in his mind, unless it breathed of her.
She is in the dwelling of Barzelius. 'Twas thence
my father came at morning. He thought to have
deceived
methe old fool! He little knows how close a
watch I keep on all his movements.
He hurried on through the deepest haunts of the
Hebrew
Quarter, till he came near the dwelling of Barzelius.
He then paused, and arranged his farther progress in his
mind before proceeding upon it. He anticipated some
difficulty in entering the dwelling in which Melchior had
taken up his retreat, but trusted to his own ingenuity to
carry him through successfully. Nor did he rely too
much upon himself. He succeeded, after some effort,
in procuring admission, and his way now lay through
certain intricate chambers of the dwelling; though he
was bewildered, and knew not in what direction to turn
in order to find the apartment of her he sought. While
he paused, the sound of a sweet voice, linking itself
naturally with the rich tones of the harp, came suddenly
upon his senses, sweet, soft, and delicious, as an evening
zephyr floating through the precious gardens of Yemen,
bringing music to their flowers, and taking in return
their tribute of perfume. The strain ravished his senses,
and he lingered on the spot where he first heard it, even
to its conclusion. The words were sweet to his ears,
though the sense seemed singular and foreignbecause
he knew not yet of the native hopelessness of the true
love, and he could conceive of no reason why Thyrza
should repine and doubt. The song was evidently
herswho else, that he knew, could make so sweet a
harmony?
THYRZA'S SONG.
I.
If thou wert in the desert, oh, my heart,
Watching its stars, and watching them alone,
Thou wert far happier than even now thou art,
Watching but one!
II.
What though it be the loveliest to thine eye,
The desert yields to thee a better sign,
Since, of its millions shining in the sky,
One must be thine!
III.
Yet 'tis not less thy joy and happiness,
Hopeless, to watch that single glory on,
Without one cloud to make its lustre less
Till life be gone!
IV.
Let the life gobe the poor heart denied,
An humble, hopleess worshipper afar
'Tis still a joy that love has deified
So pure a star!
XVII.
The
air seemed to be charmed at the close of the
song, and the feet of Amri were fastened where he
stood. Was it fancy that made him think that a
breathing
sound in the air around him was the renewed
respiration
of spirit forms, that had heretofore been listening?
His own breathing was still suppressed. But he heard
a movement below, and he went forward. The song
had guided him in the direction he should take. He
reached a little gallery that overlooked a small but
richly-decorated
apartment. He gazed wistfully down upon
it. Thyrza knelther arm clasping the harp, while her
head was bent down, and resting upon the golden image
which crowned the instrument. One hand hung at her
side, while her long black hair, which had become
unfastened
,
now fell loosely, and mingled in lovely contrast
with the bright strings, which it equalled in length. She
looked up as she heard him, and he saw that the dark
eyes of the maiden glistened with their tears. But the
sentiment of her face was so holyso subduedso like
that of one crowned with the joys and filled with the
spirit of heaven, that the intruder was awed while he
surveyed her. She knew him not in his disguise, and
for the first time, for many years, he beheld her in her
woman vestments.
Who art thou?what wouldst thou? she
demanded
hurriedly, as she beheld him.
What! thou knowest me not, Thyrza? he
exclaimed
,
forgetting his disguise.
How should I know thee? she replied. Tell me
thy name, stranger, for I remember not to have seen
thee before.
He leaped boldly down into the chamber, and threw
aside the garment which disguised him.
Amri! she exclaimed, with astonishment, as she
looked upon him.
The same, sweet Thyrzathe same. Amri, the
son of Adoniakimthy father's friend, and thine.
Does my father know of thy coming here, Amri?
she demanded.
He does not, was the answer.
And wherefore hast thou come? she asked.
Wherefore not? he replied. I came to see thee
to hear theeto look upon thy lovelinessto know
thee welland, if thou wilt, sweetest Thyrza, to love
thee.
Leave me, Amri, was the calm response of the
maiden. Leave me! Thou hast done wrong in
coming hither without the presence or the permission of
Melchior. I fear me that he will chide.
The fault is mine, dear Thyrzahe cannot complain
of thee.
I should be guilty of thy fault too, Amri, if I did
not urge thee to depart, replied the maiden, with some
show of annoyance in her manner, but still with a
degree
of calmness and decision which altogether surprised
the intruder.
Nay, he replied, I have but seen thee, beautiful
ThyrzaI would know theeI would have thee know
me.
I do know thee, Amri, was the quiet answerand
she seemed unconscious of the sarcasm of her speech,
though Amri was not.
Thou dost notthou canst not know me, Thyrza.
Thou hast heard of me from those only who know me
not, or speak falsely of their knowledge. Thou shalt
know me better. I would have thee know me, Thyrza,
as I know thee.
She looked at him with inquiring eyes, but spoke
nothing
.
He continued
I know thee to love thee, ThyrzaI would have
thee know me until thou hast learned to love me in
return
.
Love thee! she exclaimed, sadly, and her eyes,
still tearful, looked upward, as if seeking the glance of
that one single star, for worship, of which her song had
spoken.
Yes, love me, Thyrzacanst thou not, dearest
Thyrza? Believe me when I tell thee that I love thee
much.
Speak not thus, Amri, I pray thee. Leave me now.
My father will chide that thou art here.
Wilt thou not answer me, Thyrza? Speak to my
prayer. I came to thee for this. Thou hast won my
heart till it hath no self-mastery, and it comes to thee
in devotion, and it seeks for thee in hope. Tell me,
then, dearest Thyrza, that thou holdest me not in
scorn.
I do not hold thee in scorn, Amri, said the maiden,
meekly.
Tell me, then, that thou wilt love methat thou wilt
strive to love me;that I may hope for thy heart in
season.
I cannotI dare not, Amri. I should speak falsely
to thee if I did so.
Now, out upon thy cruelty, exclaimed the
passionate
youth; thou hast but seen me, yet thou tellest me
thou canst not love.
Be not angry with me, Amri, said the maiden,
gently; be not angry with me, I pray thee, that I tell
thee so. But it is truthI cannot give thee such hope
as thou desirest.
Thou lovest another, he furiously spoke.
She did not reply; but her lip quivered, and the tear
rose, like a brilliant jewel, upon her long lashes. He
repeated the words. She raised her head and looked
steadfastly upon him ere she replied. When she did so,
he remarked that the tones of her voice were no longer
tremulous, and he thought that they were now rather
stern than sad.
Wilt thou not leave me, Amri, when I pray thee?
And why dost thou pray me to leave thee, when
I have but a moment come? Dost thou hate me,
Thyrza?
It is not for me to hate; I hate thee not.
Thou wilt love me, then?thou wilt strive to love
me?
Leave me, Amri.
Not till thou hast promised.
Thou dost wrong,and my father will chide when
he cometh.
She spoke so gently that her manner deceived the
youth, whose eyes had seldom seen resolution expressed
except when associated with stern words and every show
of violence.
I will leave thee if thou sayest it; but first,
dearest
Thyrza
He paused in his speech and approached her. She
retreated a pace.
Fly me not, lovely Thyrza; but, as a sign that thou
wilt strive to love me,as a promise which shall give
me to hope, let my lips
Awaytouch me not, Amri, and her eye kindled,
and her hand was uplifted as he advanced.
But one embraceone kiss, sweet Thyrza.
Leave me, sir, I command you.
But Amri was not accustomed to be controlled or
commanded when no power stronger than that of a
gentle
woman stood in opposition to his will. Blunt in his
own sensibilities, and with appetites that defeated his
finer feelings, he regarded her objections as those only
of form and artifice. He continued to advance,
therefore
,
and she to retreat, until farther retreat was
impossible
.
She leaned against the wall of the apartment,
and bade him desist. He heeded her not, and his arms
were stretched forth to embrace her, when her own arm
was uplifted. He started back when he beheld,
glittering
in her hand, the poniard which she always wore.
Go! she exclaimed; leave methou hast done
wrong, and I will tell my father all of thy intrusion when
he returns. Thou wilt do well not to see him, for he is
quick to strike when there is a wrong purposed to his
child. I would not that he should harm thee, Amri, and
I pray thee to keep from his presence.
The base soul of the youth cowered before the
majestic
person of the maiden. Her eye was fixed upon
him in the unmoved calmness of a conscious and
fearless
superiority. She kept her position, and, with the
point of the lifted dagger, she indicated the entrance to
the chamber. Ashamed and shrinking, he obeyed its
direction and left the apartment. The maiden remained
alone. When he had gone she fastened the door
carefully
,
and restored the poniard to the sheath at her side.
But it was long before her limbs resumed their firmness,
though they trembled not, in the slightest degree, while
Amri stood before her. When Melchior returned, she
communicated to him the particulars of the interview
which she had had with the intruder, though she dwelt
not harshly upon the more unfavourable features of his
behaviour. Melchior heard her with grief and
annoyance
,
but he approved of her conduct.
Thou art like thy mother, my child,thou art
sweet and true. Thou hast done rightlythou art not
in fault. But this boyunhappy Adoniakim! what a
curse thou hast made of a blessing sent thee from God.
Much I fear me this boy will work thee the bitterest
sorrow. We must strive, my Thyrza, that we are not
made to partake of it.
Shall I bring thee wine, my father?thy cheek is
pale with thy toils of the morning
A cup, my child, and then get thee to thy harp. I
would forgetI would remember. Give me an old
Vol. I.Q
memorya lay of the desertthat, in looking back,
I may not see the gloom and the trial which are before
me.
The Hymn to the Departed, dear father,shall I
sing thee that?
It is solemn,it is sweet,it looks to the past and
to the future,it may well hide the present from my
sight. Sing, Thyrza, as thou sayest.
THE HYMN TO THE DEPARTED.
I.
Oh! ever thus, in earnest prayer,
My spirit claims and clings to thine,
And longs to fly and seek thee, where
All things, for ever blessed, shine,
All beingnot less than theedivine;
And, in the silent hours, I pray
The Huma's sweeping wing were mine,
That I might soar and be away.
II.
And in that high and bright abode,
Where, in eternal anthems dressed,
The prayers of millions seek their God,
For ever blessing, ever blessed,
I know thy song above the rest;
The purest strain of music, where
Eternal gladness is the guest,
And love's own spirit speaks in prayer.
III.
The heavy earth is on my wing,
And human fears and pains are mine;
Panting, I seek the gushing spring,
Its waters teem, and taste of brine.
Oh! for one genial draught from thine
Thy quiet home, those blessed airs,
Enough for love, nor less divine,
Though full of dreams, that move our tears.
How holy were both hearts when Thyrza had finished
this hymn! How upward-looking their eyes! How
upward-lifted their souls! Though the thought of
Melchior was of waryet it was a war for the people
and the God of his love; and if, in the heart of Thyrza,
a more earthly flame and feeling had a home, it was
sublimed by a sweet unselfishness, which would not
have been unwilling, if, like the daughter of Jephthah, the
God of her worship or the father of her love had
required
it, to offer herself up in sacrifice for the cause, and at
the requisition of either.
XVIII.
But
Amri was not to be baffled. He had set his
thought upon the possession of Thyrza; and, with that
persevering fixedness of purpose which, in a good
pursuit
,
would command circumstances and achieve
greatness
,
he concentrated all the forces of his mind upon the
attainment of an evil object. He saw all the
difficulties
before him at a glance, and he felt that his entire
prospect of success must lie in his perpetual watch over
the movements of Melchior. Without a knowledge of
these movements, he could hope for none of the
opportunities
which he desired with the daughter. He mused
his plan aloud in his chamber.
Melchior will change his abode after this. By
night he will be gone. His steps must be regarded
closely. What then? Shall I deliver him yet to
Edacer
?
Why should I keep terms with him? True, he
is of my tribe, but he regards me not as one of it. He
doubts my faith,he distrusts my honour,there need
be no terms between us.
An agent, whom he had called, now entered the
apartment. Mahlon was a creature in his pay, and
partially in his confidence.
Mahlon, hast thou prepared thyself as I bade thee?
was the question of Amri.
The habit is ready, Amri; and I can now conceal
myself within it so that Adoniakim himself could not
distinguish me, even if I stood before him.
It is well. Go then, as I bade thee, and watch the
dwelling of Barzelius in front. Barzai keeps watch
upon the inner court. Watch closely when Melchior
comes forth, and the pagedo not fail to note if the
page goes with him;follow them so that they escape
not an instant from thine eyes, then come to me, to the
dwelling of the Lord Edacer, and report to me the
truth. Away!
The spy departed, and the youth resumed his
musings
aloud.
I owe him no lovenothing but hate; and, though
of my own tribe, wherefore should I be held by that to
keep from destruction one who hates and distrusts me?
He shall perish! Melchior shall perish for his scorn of
me!
He paused, and strode his chamber as if in
troubled
thought. He spoke again after a slight interval.
Yet his sacrifice brings me no step nearer to her,
unless by taking from her one protector. That is
nothing
,
unless, in the same moment which gives him to the
soldiers of Edacer, I can secure her person. I must
think on that. There would be no hope to win her by
persuasion, if she dreamed that I had part in the
sacrifice
of her father. I must keep her from that
knowledge
from
that thought.
This latter suggestion, as it exhibited a new form of
difficulty in his progress, produced a farther pause in his
speech, which he gave up to meditation. The result of
his deliberation was soon shown in his uttered musings.
He resolved that Melchior should not yet be given up
to the fierce Edacer. It would be time enough, he
thought, for his sacrifice, which he yet resolved upon,
when he should either have entirely succeeded with
Thyrza, or when he had discovered that success with
her, during her father's life, would be hopeless. His
plans were soon fixed and finished in his mind; and,
towards evening, he proceeded to the lodgings of the
dissolute Edacer.
XIX.
Meanwhile
, as Amri predicted, Melchior had
resolved
on changing his habitation. Such were the toils
and trials, the dangers and necessities, to which the
persecuted
have been ever subject.
We must leave this place, said the old man to
his daughter, as the declining sunset warned him of
the approaching season of shelter and cover to the
hunted man. We must now to the last place of
retreat
secure to us in this weary citythe house of thy
kinsman Samuel. Thither with the sunset will I go,
while thou shalt seek for me the young Prince Pelayo.
Where seek him, father? Thou knowest that he
hast left the
Yes; but thou wilt seek him at the Gate of the
Tribunethou knowest the place?
I do, my father.
Bear him this packet, then. Let no one behold
thee give it him. It were dangerous. But watch thy
time to call upon his ear. There will be some who are
to meet him there; let them not see thee look on them.
Pass them by as if thou didst not heed themas if thou
sawest them not. When they have left the prince, then
make the signhe will come to thee. Give him the
packet then, and heed well the words that he shall say to
thee. They will have meaning. Forget not aught,
my child, that his lip tells thee.
Fear me not, father,I will heed closely,I will
forget nothing.
Well and securely might she give such an assurance.
The smallest accents from Pelayo's lips,the slightest
Q 2
movement of his form,the most passing glance of his
eye,or the most transient play of expression upon his
noble countenance, once perceptible to her, became from
that moment a strong memory in her mind, and an
imbedded
and growing feeling in her soul. The warning
of Melchior for her observance was indeed idle.
XX.
Amri
proceeded to the dwelling of Edacer according
to previous appointment. It was now almost night, and
Edacer had gone forth from his lodgings. A slave
directed
Amri where to find him, having a command from
his master to that effect. Edacer had gone to visit the
Lady Urraca;a lady of evil repute, and of whom we
have already spoken. Amri was, or rather had been,
attached to her, and even now there was some show of
regard between them. Of this we shall see more. She
was a lady of the Gothic stock: and, though vicious,
such was the degraded character of the Jew, that it had
been a condescension with her to smile upon Amri, and
a favour bestowed by Edacer to procure him her
knowledge
.
The gold of Adoniakim procured indulgences
for the Jewish youth from the prostitute of a race which
considered him, even while bestowing upon him the
utmost
favours of a seeming affection, degraded even
below
humanity, and sometimes treated him accordingly.
Amri received the message with some chagrin.
Now would I not see her! he muttered to
himself
;
I hate her now as oncePsha! she loves me
not,it is but a stale fetch,the trick of the trade;
love, indeed! To think of love with her,to think I
should once have been so foolishso blindedso
besotted
as
to fall into her bonds,and such accursed
bonds. But I must meet her,I must seem to meet
her joyfully, too, as if I did not hate, and fear her, and
despise.
He left the dwelling of Edacer, and moved onward to
that of Urraca; but his thoughts were bitter in the
extreme
as he proceeded.
Now will they clamour for the Jew's money,the
eternal cry! And I must bear abuse and every scorn
meekly, as if I found some pleasure in it. Would I
were free of her. I fear her now. She doth suspect
my coldness. She has doubts. I must seem fond, for
she is passionate. She would not scruple at my blood,
if she but thought that I strayed from her.
Soliloquizing thus, he entered the dwelling of the Lady
Urraca. A richly-decorated chamber received him, at
the farthest end of which a pile of cushions sustained the
majestic and symmetrical person of this princely dame.
She wore her most imposing look and expression of
loveliness. Her whole figure was one to fix the eye
splendidly formed, yet exquisitely and nicely elaborated.
Her skin was darker than that of the Gothic damsels
usually, and a bright Moorish teint might almost have
persuaded the spectator to conceive her a daughter of
that nation. Her eye was black, and suited to her
complexion
,
while her hair, streaming in rich volumes of
flowing
silk down her neck and shoulders, was raven-like
and glossy. Her glance was bright and piercing, like
that of a young eagle for the first time challenging the
sun; and, at the first view, none might seem to be more
innocent, as certainly none could have been more
beautiful
,
than the Lady Urraca. A second look, however,
would better advise the observer. Quick passions,
sudden
moods, impetuous emotions, irresistible impulses,
were momently shown to be in her heart, by the
changing
colour on her cheeks, by the violent and rapid rush
of blood through her veins, by the flickering and
uncertain
expression of her keen and restless eyes. Her
brow, too, was full of action, and therefore of speech.
It had a power of contraction which threw together a
series of muscular folds just between the eyes,
whenever
she became excited, which formed a complete cloud
above them, while they darted forth perpetual lightning
from below. This cloud was partially formed upon her
brow as the young Hebrew came into her presence. She
motioned him with her finger, and he approached.
Edacer
sat upon a low cushion by her side. To Amri she
assigned one at her feet. When he had seated himself,
without addressing him with any word, the dame turned
to Edacer and thus spoke:
My lord Edacer, think you that I am less beautiful
to-night than I was last night, or the night beforeor
the past nights for a goodly and long year? Speak, I
pray thee,have I grown ugly in this time?
Truly, Urraca, I were a false lord to think so.
Thou hast lost no beauties, but hast rather acquired
many. I see thee not, but to see in thee each day some
newer lovelinesssome better sweetnesssome dearer
and more exquisite charm.
Mine eyes are yet bright, my lips sweet, my person
has lost nothing, dost thou say?
Nothing!to me, if thou hast changed in any wise,
it has been a better change, if it be that one so lovely
as thyself may change to lovelier and yet continue
mortal
.
And there is no other beauty to vie and mate with
mine, newly come into the city?
Nonenone! was the still flattering answer.
Then wherefore is it, I ask thee, that Amri seeks
me not of late? He has beheld the change which has
escaped thine eyes, Lord Edacerhe has noted the
absence
of some charm which won him onceor else he
hath seen the newly-arrived beauty, which thy glances
have not yet distinguished. And, as the vain lady
spoke, with a mixed expression of pride and vexation,
she fixed her keen eyes upon the changing features of
Amri. The Hebrew started; he trembled for his secret,
but a second glance at Urraca reassured him. He saw
from the fickle gaze that her charge was vague and
conjectural
,
and simply spoke for the natural jealousy of the
woman, having no aim but for the devotion of her
creatures
,
and apprehensive at all times of new and rival
influences
.
Recovering himself, therefore, from the
momentary
confusion which his own consciousness rather than
her charge of falsehood had induced, he replied promptly,
and with as much show of earnestness and passion as
he could well assume under the emergency,
Thou dost me wrong, Lady Urracathou dost thine
own beauty and surpassing excellence no less a wrong,
when thou sayest I have not willed to seek thee of late.
I have suffered that I have seen thee not. Thou canst
not know the pain I have felt when away from thee.
And wherefore didst thou keep away? Do I not
know that thou hadst no occasion?
Ay, lady, but I had! The Lord Edacer will do me
justice, and tell thee that we had a serious task together,
which kept me from thee.
Edacer, thus appealed to, leaned over to where Amri
sat, and whispered him,
Hast thou brought the jewelsthe gold?
Amri whispered him in return,
Thou wilt find the gold in the silk mantle which is
behind thee.
What say ye to each other? demanded Urraca,
impatiently
.
We spoke of that same business, Urraca, which hath
kept Amri from thy presence; and, while he spoke, the
mercenary Edacer assured himself that the mantle and
gold were behind him.
Thou answerest for him, then? she asked.
I doI know what cares have kept him from thee.
He hath spoken but the truth, Urraca, and thou must
forgive him.
And for my forgiveness, fair Lady Urraca, I pray
thee to wear this; and, as he spoke, Amri arose, and
drawing from his vest a glittering ornament of precious
gems, making a rich tiara, was about to place it upon
her head, when, suddenly grasping his arm, she tore the
jewels from his hand, and dashed them upon the floor.
It buys no forgiveness from me, Amri! Thou
knowest me not,neither thou nor the Lord Edacer.
Leave me, my lord, I pray thee, for a while. I would
be alone with Amri. Leave me with him. I have that
to say which is for his ears only. Go to the other
chamber
till I call.
In silence and astonishment the Gothic noble
withdrew
,
leaving the no less astounded Hebrew with the
now deeply-excited woman. But he preserved his
composure
,
and prepared himself, as well as he might, for the
anticipated outbreak.
XXI.
Rising
quickly from her cushions after the departure
of Edacer, she carefully fastened the door behind him.
She then turned, and slowly approached her companion.
He had risen, meanwhile, from the stool on which he
had first been seated, and now stood in the centre of the
apartment, awaiting her speech. She approachedshe
stood before him. Her eye was fixed upon him as if it
would look him through, and the heavy muscular folds
of her brow lay, one upon another, like piled clouds full
of storm and thunder. Her finger was uplifted as she
addressed him in low, half-suppressed tones.
Thou art false to me, Amri!
He was about to speak, but she interrupted him.
Speak not! I know itthou art false to methou
canst not deceive me. I see through thee. I know thy
heart.
It is thine, Urraca.
Thou liest! I am no longer sought of theethou
carest for me no longerthou art indifferent to me now,
and thy indifference is worse far than thy hate! Thou
hast deceived methou, only, hast deceived me. I
have trusted thee only.
Thy words have a dread meaning in my ears,
Urraca
,
and they do me a sad injustice! Tell me by what
thou judgest so unkindly of thine own Amri.
She looked on him with scornful countenance as she
replied
Thou seekest me not now,thine eye no longer
dwells upon me in fondnessand thou heedest not now
that Edacer should be with me for long hours alone.
Why is this now? Once it was not so. There was a
time when thou wouldst chafe and madden, Amri, to find
another with me in secret.
It pains me now, dear Urraca.
Dear me not, Amrifor again thou liest! Hear me.
Once, when I did rebuke thee, thou cam'st to me
with fond words and devoted looksthou wert then all
fondnessall devotion,thy very heart seemed flowing
like some full stream into my own, and thine eyesthey
took their light, their very life, from mine! For this I
loved thee, Amri. What else? Was't for thy gold,
thy jewels, that I let theea Jewone of a people
whom my own hold accursedwas it for these that I let
thee to my love?I, the proud, the beautiful, the
sought Urracathe sought of nobles and of princes!
Did thy gold tempt me to this kindness to thee? No!
'Twas that I thought thou lovedst me'twas with that
lie in thy mouth thou camest to me,'twas for thy love,
Amrinot for thy gold and gifts. Gold and gifts I had
from mine own people in profusionthey bought my
smiles with themnot my heart. I gave thee that,
not for such gifts as theirs, Amri, but for that which
none of them could give mefor thy love!
Thou hadst it, sweet Urraca.
Hadst it, dost thou say? Hadst it! Her whole
frame was in convulsion, and she darted towards
him.
And hast it still, Urraca, he replied quickly,
shrinking
back at her approach.
That I believe not. Thou canst not now deceive
me. Thou art falseay, false as hell, Amri!
Wherefore thinkest thou so? he asked. Who
hath belied me to thee?
No one. Thou thyself hast told me. Hear me,
she continued, impetuously; when we met first, if
then I chided thee for coldness or neglect, thou didst
persuade me to believe thee then, with fond wordswith
constant devotionwith unwearied efforts to behold and
seek me
Do I not now? he asked.
No! thou dost not. Break not my speech till I
have said it all. It is soon said. Now, when I chide
thee for thy absence or indifference, thou strivest to bribe
me with a pauper-boon. Thou bringest me gold and
jewels. Need I these? Is not my state most rich?
Have I not wealth and splendour? What are these
chambers?are they beggarly?seem they not well
provided? Thou givest me what I lack notwhat I
ask notwhat I require not from thee. I would have
thy love, which thou deniest me.
Her whole features seemed now to be convulsed
her breast heaved with passionand Amri, who had all
the time preserved his composure, perceived that the
moment
of exhaustion was at hand, and that tears must
relieve
the excited bosom of the voluptuous woman. He
led her unresistingly once more to the cushions where
she had lain, and seated himself beside her.
Thou dost wrong me, Urracadear Urraca,I
take from thee no love,thou hast it all.
I should have it, Amri, but I believe not thy words.
She turned from him and gazed upon the wallher
paroxysm
seemed almost subdued.
Thou must believethou hast my heart.
I've let thee to my embraces, she spoke
incoherently
;
thy lip hath pressed my ownthou hast lain
close to this heart, till thou hast known all its beatings
and I let thee to all this because I thought thou lovedst
me.
Amri could not forbear a sarcasm, or something that
sounded to her ears like one.
But others fared as well, Urraca. Edacer
No! she exclaimed, almost fiercely, and the words
of Amri seemed once more to arouse her fury in all its
strengththey bought my embraces with gold. But
thou hadst more. I thought I had thy love, and,
thinking
so, I swear I gave thee mine. I joyed in thy
embrace
theirs
I but suffered. But no more of this. I
feel thou lovest me not. Away!
The tears now flowed freely from her eyes, and she
sank back upon the cushions exhausted. He leaned over
her, and employed those arts of soothing which he had
previously practised with no little success, but which he
had quite too much neglected of late, not properly to
create in her bosom a doubt of his continued regard.
He bent over her, andfirst symptom of returning
regard
she
submitted for a moment to his attentions.
But for a moment, however. She started in another
instant
from his contactshe thrust him from her with all
her strength, and the sternest expression of her scorn.
Take thy hands from my neck! she cried, almost
fiercely. Thy embrace is like that of the serpent; it
is to deceive and sting.
Urraca!
Ay, Amri, it is spokenit is true. Why should
Ia Gothic ladyerring, but desiredsought by the
proudest,honoured, too, in spite of mine own life of
dishonour,why should I care for thee?
For my love, Urraca.
Aybut for thatfor nothing else, I swear. And
Vol. I.R
wherefore should I value that from thee, but that I was
destitute of all love? The nobles seeking me brought
wealth; but none brought love. My poverty in that,
and not thy worth, made me to seek thy love as
something
worthy; and thus I learned to love thee in return.
Why should I else have suffered thee, thou so degraded
in thy sect,so much the slave even of the vile
associates
that thou bringest me here?
Art thou now done, Urraca? Wilt thou hear me?
Take off thy hands from my neck! He obeyed
her quietly, as he asked
May I speak to thee in answer?
Speak on, I hear thee,but bend not over me.
I've loved thee but too well, Urraca. I have
forfeited
much for thee:the friendship of my people,
the affection of my father,his esteem. Does the Jew
love gold beyond life?I've brought thee gold. Had
I aught by which to show thee that I loved thee?I
brought thee all. Shall it be strange to thee that, when
I beheld others winning thy favour by such gifts, I
should bring thee like gifts to win like favour too?
'Twere strange if I had not done so.
Accursed be thy gifts!thy gold!thy jewels!
I ask them not. It was not gold from thee that I
desired
!
They were but gifts of my heart. I gave thee
love.
Thou sayest it.
I mean it. But, when I suffered in the displeasure
of my father,the outcast from his favour,could I be
fond, Urraca? Could I come to thee, and look happy,
and be devoted, an exile from the heart and the home
of my sire?
Thou didst not tell me that. I knew not this.
No, I did not deem it well to vex thee with my
sorrows
,
and
Edacer came to the door at this moment, and
demanded
admission. When he entered he called Amri
aside.
Mahlon awaits thee,he has tidings for thee,
something, I deem, of Melchiorthough he speaks
not.
XXII.
Amri
descended at once to meet the spy.
Wellhast thou seen aught, Mahlon? he asked
of the slave.
They have gone forth, Amrithe old man and the
page.
Ha! on what course?
The old man to the house of the Father Samuel.
Andthe boy?
Him I followed close, even to the Gate of the
Tribune
And there
My comrade Barzai still watches him there. He
saunters by the gate.
'Tis well,thou shalt wait here to guide my steps.
I'll be with thee again immediately.
He returned to the chamber where sat Edacer and
Urraca.
I must leave thee, were his brief words.
Pardon
me, Lady Urraca, that I fly from thee so soon,but
the Lord Edacer will answer for me that I go on a
most serious business.
What business is't, Edacer? demanded Urraca.
Is't of Melchior?hearest thou aught of him?
was the inquiry which Edacer proposed to Amri, as
they stood apart.
It isMahlon has tracked the page that waits on
him. I must pursue and follow up the track. Bid thy
two followers with me, Lord Edacer. They wear thy
badge,none will dispute their progress,and we shall
get the page in custody. The game is then our own.
Sayest thou? It shall be so. Go you below and
tutor them a while. I'll speak to Urraca. She shall be
satisfied.
They turned to the lady, and her glance was fixed
upon the countenance of Amri.
Must he go? And is it thy business, Edacer?
she demanded.
It is, fair lady,give him thy leave of absence.
The toil is heavy,'tis for me he toilsbut he will
soon return to thee.
Amri, she simply spoke his name. He
approached
her. She whispered him,
I will not take thy jewels. It would seem as if I
sold to thee my love for them. Had I believed thee
true, I would have worn them in pride and pleasure,
still misdoubting thee, I cannot take them. Give
them elsewhere. I will not chide that thou shouldst
thus requite some other for the love she gives to thee.
My love thou buyest with loveor not at all! Give
them to her!
There is no other, dearest Urraca.
Well, as thou sayest it. Thou art free to go.
But take the jewels hence.
XXIII.
When
Amri had left the apartment, Edacer resumed
his seat beside Urraca; and though he saw that her
feelings were yet excited and her spirit greatly aroused,
he did not scruple to ask an explanation of the scene
which he had partially witnessed.
What is there in these jewels, Urraca? Is there
some spell of danger that made thee fear them? Why
didst thou refuse them?
There was a spell, there was a danger in them,
Edacer. Thou hast said it. But thou hast no fears
such as mine. The spell will not harm thee. Do thou
take them. Therethey lie beside thee!
What! wilt thou not wear them? he asked, in
no little astonishment.
Never! as I live. Take them,they are thine.
What is't with thee and Amri?
I'll tell thee some time hence; but answer me,
what is this business of thine upon which he goes? Is
it some coil of state, or some fool affray,or goes
he but to get moneys for thy pleasures? May I not
hear it?
I cannot tell thee yet,but thou wilt hear it if he
prospers in it. Let it suffice, then, that 'tis something
as thou sayest,thou almost hittest it.
How?what?speak on.
'Tis business of the state he goes upon.
Psha! thou dost mock,thou mockest either him
or me. He is a Hebrew! what has he to do with
the state, or the state with him, unless to rob him?
I mock thee not'tis strange, but true. On the
state's business goes he.
In what form?
He aims to trap a secret enemy, and leads two
followers
of mine for that object.
An enemyah!whowhat enemy?
A pagehe has a secret we would gaina
glorious
secret, Urraca, which promises us a goodly sum
of gold if we can win it. Let him but take the page,
and force him to disgorge, and we are made.
Well, it is strangea page!
Urraca seemed to muse, and a sudden change passed
visibly over her features as she uttered the exclamation.
They seemed full of strange conjecture and
intelligence
:
A page, didst thou say, Edacer?
R 2
The Goth answered her with some little surprise
Ay, to be sure,a pagea boya brata little,
long-legged, bashful thingan urchin, sixteen years or
sonot more.
Intrusted with a secret of the state! Why, this is
madness, if 't be true,rank folly!
Why?how, Urraca?
There's more in this, Edacer, than thou tellest me.
Noas I liveno moresave in the secret, which
now I cannot tell thee.
But this page,it cannot be a page that has this
secret.
He said a page,I know not.
And lacks he strength to take a page? Wherefore
thy followers?
The boy may struggle
I've been a page myself! she exclaimed,
interrupting
him suddenly, though still without seeming to
address him. I'll be once more. Hear me,
Edacer
.
She beckoned him with her finger.
It will nothing affect thy secret if I go and see this
page. I'll go as one of thy followers,wearing thy
badge
But
Nay,thou canst nothing plead in opposition.
Thou canst trust me not less than they. I'll go as one
of them.
But the disguise
Is readyall. I should not have my freedom, but
that I can wear all shapes that take my choice. I have
a garb will suit me.
And thou wilt
Follow in Amri's steps as one of thine. Hear me:
I do suspect him that he pursues another with the love
which he has promised me.
And what carest thou, Urraca, for his love? What
is his love to thee?
Nothingif love be only valued by the worth of
him who gives it. Every thingif she who claims it
is in want of itif she has none beside.
But this is not thy state, Urraca.
It is!it is! she exclaimed, mournfully, with a
degree of feeling, which, before this, her own sense had
never permitted her to expose to one so callous and
coarse as Edacer.
But, whether it is or not, she continued, is
nothing
now. Goteach thy followers to receive me as
one of them. Get me a spear. Be sudden, and say
nothing.
Edacer did as she required; and it was not long
before
Urraca, habited like a follower of the Gothic lord,
proceeded, with another, after the direction and the lead
of Amri, who was also disguised almost beyond
detection
.
XXIV.
At
the Tribune's Gate, according to appointment,
Pelayo, meanwhile, had met with many of the nobles
of his party,Goths and natives alike. The place
was a thoroughfare; but Pelayo had designated it for
the purposes of meeting, as he well knew that no
privacy
was so secret as that of the crowd, and no
assemblage
so little liable to suspicion. The plot was
ripening
fast. The money of the Hebrew had procured both
arms and men, and every circumstance persuaded
Pelayo
the more to a rapid concentration of all his plans
for the approaching moment of revolution. He knew
the danger of a secret intrusted to so many, when the
various parties were not kept frequently together. He
knew the necessity of excitementthe excitement of
continued strifeto keep the mixed multitude as one.
More than this, alarming intelligence had reached him
of the suspicions of Don Roderick, the usurper, with
regard to the conspiracy, and he had just received a
missive from the Archbishop Oppas, advising him that
he had been summoned by Roderick to attend a general
council of the nation at the royal city of Toledo.
Other accounts informed him that Count Julian had
been ordered suddenly to proceed to his command at
Ceuta, in order to oppose an unlooked-for irruption of
the Moors. This movement would necessarily employ
the army of Roderick in a remote quarter, leaving free
room and a fine opportunity for the success of a sudden
and strong blow, struck in the chief cities, by a
simultaneous
movement of the conspirators; who,
meanwhile
,
had been briskly engaged in bringing their
followers
together, and, by means of the gold which they had
freely distributed, had secured converts everywhere to
their cause. All the arguments spoke for the propriety
of an early effort, and the conspirators separated,
leaving
the Prince Pelayo, who remained in waiting for
another
agent of his cause. Nor did he wait long after
their departure. The page of Melchior, true, and
vigilant
as true, approached him as soon as they were out
of sight. Pelayo received his packet, and pressed the
boy's hand while he took it.
Thou art a noble servant to thy father, Lamech,
thou art a page among a thousand;would that thou
wert mine, Lamech. Wouldst thou be faithful to me,
as thou art to him?
Faithfulfaithful to thee, my lord? was the
stammering
response of the messenger.
Ay, faithful, Lamech. But I know thou wouldst.
Thou wouldst love me as truly as thou lovest thy father,
if thy lips would promise it.
Love thee, my lord
Ay, love me, Lamech. I love thee, boy, though
thou art not of my kin, and of another and a hated blood.
Thou hast grown upon my love from thy good service
and thy fidelity, and thy clear, true love for thy father.
The tears stole into the eyes of the page, but no word
was uttered. Pelayo spoke to him of other topics.
Tell thy father that thou hast seen me,that the
Lord Eudon has already brought his men together,that
the arms have been delivered to Aylor by the Hebrew
warrior Abimelech, who has mustered a goodly troop
along the Pass of Wallia. Say yet more, and forget not
this, Lamech, that we hold to our purpose of assemblage
at the Cave of Wamba. Melchior must be there, to
speak after his own fashion to the Jews who will gather
with us. His words are much to them. Hast thou
heard me, Lamech?
I have, my lord.
Thou wilt remember all that I have said to thee, so
that Melchior will hear it as from my own lips?
He shall hear all, my lord.
Then thou must go now, Lamech. The night
grows, and thou hast a long path before thee. But thou
fearest nothing, Lamech?
Nothing, my lord.
Would thou wert son of mine, Lamech, Jew though
thou art. Would thou wert son of mine. But go thy
ways,give me thy hand
The soft fingers trembled in the gentle grasp of the
warrior
Go thy ways, and hurry fast to thy dwelling. These
hands are not formed for strife, and would little avail thee
if lifted against an enemy. Good-night, boy.
She faltered forth a good-night in return, and her heart
died away in a sweet sadness within her rapidly-heaving
bosom, as she turned from him to pursue her homeward
progress.
XXV.
Stand
by, and when I speak were the words of
Amri to his followers.
Stayhe comes! Be ready with thy aid when I
shall call thee.
The three took shelter in the shadow of a jutting
wall, awaiting the approach of the page. Unconscious
of danger, and with thoughts rather too full of the image
of Pelayo to think of herself, Thyrza moved slowly along
beside the wall. On a sudden the arms of Amri were
thrown around her. She shrieked aloud in the
extremity
of her terror.
A woman's voiceI knew it, was the half-muttered
exclamation of Urraca, as she came forward with her
companion.
Give me thy cloak! was the hurried demand of
Amri; thy handkerchief,help me to bind his mouth.
The shrieks of the captive maiden in the meanwhile
rang through the otherwise silent streets. The tread of
a heavy and hurrying footstep was heard approaching
them.
Hasten! cried Amri,there!
The maiden struggled, and strove vainly to cry aloud.
Her mouth was now effectually bandaged. But she
struggled still; and Amri, hearing the approaching
footsteps
,
bade the followers of Edacer stand between them
while he bore off the captive. One of them did so, but
the new-comer thrust aside the presented spear, with
a single stroke from a heavy mace which he bore, with
the ease of a giant. Urraca had prudently darted aside
without offering opposition. Before the foiled
spearsman
could recover, Pelayofor it was hehad
approached
the seizer of the maiden, who continued to
struggle desperately in his grasp.
What ho! cried Amri; approach not, whoever
thou art,we serve the Lord Edacer. Behold his
badge.
Be paid for thy service, whomsoever thou callest
thy master, cried the impetuous prince, for he had
recognised
the voice of the page Lamech at the first alarm
thou hast claim for such pay: and, as he spoke, with
one blow of his heavy mace, he smote the treacherous
Hebrew to the earth. Thyrza fell with him, as he still
retained her in his grasp, but she was unhurt. The
baffled spearsman, having recovered from the
impetuosity
of the first attack, now rushed upon the prince; but
his thrust was unavailing, in opposition to one possessed
of the great skill and power of Pelayo. The spear of
the soldier was shivered in his hands by a single blow
of the mace, and he must in another instant have fared
like Amri, but that he prudently gave back, and left the
path of the victor unobstructed. Pelayo paused not an
instant to complete the rescue which he had so manfully
begun. He lifted the only half-animated form of
Thyrza
in his arms, tore the handkerchief away with which
Amri had bandaged her mouth, and with as much ease
as if she had been an infant, he hurried off from the
scene of the affray without any farther interruption from
the soldier. The heavy mace being still vigorously
brandished by its owner, with an ease and adroitness
which warned him of the utter hopelessness and
imprudence
of any second effort in a conflict with one so
superior
to himself both in skill and prowess, he wisely
refrained from offering any farther resistance to his
progress.
XXVI.
The
sturdy follower of Edacer, mortified at his
defeat
,
now turned upon the disguised Urraca, who, by
this time, was busy in examining the hurts of her Hebrew
lover.
Why didst thou not set upon him from behind when
thou sawest that I had crossed weapons with him in
front? Thou art
Urraca silenced his speech by addressing him in her
natural tone of voice.
Waste not the moments in idle words, but take
him up in thy armsgently and with caresee that
thou hurt him not, as thou valuest thy good. Bear him
along with me.
He did as she commanded, and, unconscious all the
while, for the blow of Pelayo had completely stunned
him, Amri was carried by the soldier to the dwelling of
Urraca.
Meanwhile, but little more conscious than the
wounded
Hebrew, Thyrza was borne by the vigorous Pelayo,
quickly, and in silence, through the now deserted streets.
Once or twice during their flight she made a feeble
effort to resume her feet, but he gently bade her desist;
and her head, half in stupor and half in consciousness,
sank at length upon his shoulders, while the tears of an
aroused apprehension and deeply-excited sensibilities
poured unrestrainedly forth from the clear fountains of
her lovely eyes.
XXVII.
In
the quiet chambers of the lowly dwelling in which
Pelayo found temporary security, he at length arrived
with his precious burden. He laid her down upon his
own humble couch, and watched her, as slowly she
recovered
her consciousness. She started up as she
beheld
the earnestness of his gazea deep blush
overspread
her cheek, and with averted eyes she rose from
the couch, and was about to move away from the
apartment
,
though evidently without any distinct purpose in
her mind, when Pelayo restrained her.
Where am I? she demanded. My fatherprince
I must go nowI must go to my father.
These were the hurried and brief words which fell
from her lips when she came to a full consciousness of
her situation. She looked round upon the bare walls
of the mean and cheerless apartment as she spoke, and
wondered where she found herself. Could so base a
dwelling be the place of safety and retreat of one so
noble
,
and so highly-born and nurtured, as Pelayo? The
dwelling of the persecuted Hebrew was superior. It was
usually proudly furnished, though the exterior was low
and uninviting. She was confused by her thoughts,
which yet dwelt earnestly on the objects around her.
Be no longer apprehensive, Lamech, said Pelayo,
soothingly, as he laid his hand upon the arm of the
maiden
,
and gently restrained her movement. Be no
longer apprehensive. There is now no danger. You
are here safe with me, and the villains who had seized
upon you have forborne to pursue us.
But the maiden trembled more than ever, even after
his assurances. The slight pressure of his hand upon
her arm had been electrical in its consequences. A
thrill of flame seemed to rush at that moment through
Vol. I.S
all her veins, and, as his dark and searching eye was
riveted upon her face, her cheek glowed with all the
intensity
of fire. Yet, as he still addressed her by the
name of Lamech, she was happy to believe that her
secret
the
secret of her sexwas yet safe hidden from
his knowledge. That belief restored her. She felt how
dreadful it would be if Pelayo should know the truth.
But, though something strengthened with this conviction,
she did not readily trust her lips to reply. She felt that
he must falter in her speech. Her heart was full, and
she trembled with the rush of its tumultuous and
conflicting
feelings. He beheld her emotion, and ascribed
it to any but the proper cause.
Fear nothing, Lamech. The danger is now over.
Thou art yet but a child. I warned thee that thou didst
too greatly overtask thy strength; and, though I would
not pain thee, boy, by such a thought, yet I very much
fear thou dost overrate thy courage. Thou wert not
made for strife,thy nation is enfeebled by its petty toils,
and hath been too long restrained from all free and
noble
exercises. They know not, and thou hast not often
shared in, warlike arts, though thou sayest that thou hast
dwelt in a land, and moved among the incidents of a
time of peril. Thou hast not the soul for strife; and, if
thy father will heed my counsel, he will keep thee in a
quiet spot, and afar from his own toils, which are full of
danger. After this night, Lamech, thou wilt seek me
out no more. I will not suffer thee to harm thyself by
exposure of thy youth to such rude assaults as that to
which thou hast been subjected, and to which neither thy
heart nor thy strength is equal. After this night thou
shalt forego these labours.
ButI must return now, Prince Pelayo, to my
father
.
Let me go, my prince, since there is no more
danger. Let me return, I pray thee.
There is no danger here, Lamechbut there is
danger in the paths of the city. There were cries of
alarm even as I fled with thee upon my shoulders, and
the soldiers of the governor parade all the public
passages
.
The answer of Pelayo seemed only to inspire her
with a new resolution and strength. She rose in spite
of his restraints, though he still stood in the way of her
progress.
I must go, my prince. There is no danger to me.
I can pass through the passages unseen.
This was thy thought, Lamech, when leaving me
at the Gate of the Tribune,and the thought is idle,
Lamech, and thou wert rash and wrong then to go, and
I were not less rash and wrong to suffer it. Thou shalt
not go
My fathermy fatherprince; I must fly to him.
He will sorrow after me as if I had come to some
dreadful evil.
And better that he should sorrow thus, without
reason
,
than that thou shouldst go forth to danger and give
him good occasion for such sorrows.
I must go, my prince, she said, doggedly; I dare
not remain longer.
Go to, boyam I a child, that thou shouldst lesson
me after this fashion? Thou shalt not go! I am
resolved
thou shalt not! I were no friend to thy father,
and still less a friend to thee, if I suffered thee to go
forth at this hour, when the slaves and soldiers of the
tyrant traverse all the paths of the city.
She wrung her hands, and sank upon her knee,
imploring
permission to depart. Pelayo frowned heavily
upon the seeming boy as he looked upon this weakness.
Go to, boy;though I had deemed thee to be
weak, I had not thought thee wilful. What dost thou
fear with me? What hast thou to fear? This
apprehension
shows basely in thee, even beyond the reproach
which speaks of the cowardice of thy people. I held
thee better taught. I looked upon thee as one possessed
of more courage and heart than thy present wilfulness
approves to be in thee.
How had he mistaken her! It was only because of
her possessing so much heart and courage that she
exhibited
so much seeming weakness. But of this Pelayo
dreamed not. He continued
Thou shalt not leave me till dawning, Lamech.
Thou art safe with me.
She almost shrieked aloud, as she cried out in her
terror
But I must, my lord, although I perish for it!
Alas! alas! my father,I must go to him at once, my
lord.
Why this is wilful madness, boy. What dost thou
mean?am I thine enemy?
Oh, nono! But I must go, my prince. Upon
my knees I pray thee, let me go! I will risk all the
dangerall, alland will not deem it such. Let me
but go. There is no danger
There is danger, Lamechgreat danger,and I
will not suffer thee to depart till early dawning. Then
thou mayst go to thy father, not before.
She buried her face in her hands while she entreated
him, but he remained inflexible; and, though evidently
chafed by what he deemed the perverse weakness of the
boy, he yet spoke him kindly while denying him his
prayer.
No, Lamechthou shalt stay with me this night,
thou shalt share with me my couch, and I will protect
thee from every harm until the morning, when thou shalt
go home to Melchior.
Kill me rather, my lord, she cried aloud, in
seeming
desperation. Kill me rather, or let me go this night
to my father.
Thou art but a foolish boy Lamech, and sinfully
wilful, when I but deemed thee childishly weak. I am
no boy like thee, and thou hast much mistaken me if
thou thinkest I will let thee go forth at this mad hour of
the night. I have said, and thou pleadest and prayest
vainly! I am resolute. Here shalt thou keep till
morning
here,
in this chamber. Thou dost not fear to
sleep with mewith thy prince, Lamech?
Her head was prone to the ground, and she replied
not. He stooped to lift her from his feet. His arm
encircled
her slender waistbut she clung to the ground
as if she sought for it to conceal and cover her.
What means this strange passion, Lamech? he
cried, as with a strong arm he lifted her to her feet. She
averted her head, and wept in a paroxysm of tears;
then desperately seeking release from his firm hold, she
cried
Thou art a Christian, my prince,it will shame
thee that one of my race should linger long in thy
dwelling.
I heed not of thy race, Lamech. Thou art a sweet
and a good youth; though this night thou hast erred
grievously in the weakness which thou hast shown to
me, and in the wilfulness to which thou still keepest most
strangely.
Pardon me, oh gracious princepardon me, I pray
thee, that I have so offended, but let me depart from thee
at once to my father. I will not again offend thee. I
will pray for thee to the God of Israel. I will
When thou knowest me better, Lamech, said
Pelayo
,
sternly, thou wilt know that I trifle not with my
resolves. I have declared that, as it would be danger,
and may be death, for thee to go forth this night, thou
shalt here remain and partake of my couch with me
My lord, I cannotI dare notI will not! I must
go, though I perish.
Thou shalt not, Lamech.
Hear me, my princeI am not the son of
Melchior
.
He released her from his grasp as she spoke these
S 2
words. Her eyes were uplifted for an instant; and, as
they encountered the intense gaze of his, she sank again
upon her knees before him.
Not the son of Melchior!who art thou? he
demanded
.
The child of Melchior. The child, but not the
son, was the desperate answer. Look!behold, my
prince.
And, as she spoke, undoing a nice piece of network
which was artfully wound in with, and secured her hair,
she let the thick, glossy, and beautiful volume fall down
upon her shoulders. In the next instant she herself fell
prostrate along the floor, and her long tresses swept the
dark pavement even to the feet of Pelayo.
XXVIII.
He
lifted her from the ground in spite of all her
resistance
,
though he lifted her with the utmost tenderness.
He bore her once more to the couch, and laid her
exhausted
form upon it.
Thou hast done rightly, maiden, he spoke, after a
brief interval given to astonishment, in which his eyes
perused her with a singular interestthou hast done
rightly, maiden, whosoever thou art, in speaking out the
truth. Be calm!be not doubtful nor afraid,thou art
as safe from harm in the chamber of Pelayo, as, in his
heart, he beholds thee without one ungenerous thought
one dishonourable feeling.
Oh, my lordI thank theeI thank thee! From
the bottom of my soul I thank thee! I knew that thou
wert nobleforgive me that I did not confide to thee at
the first.
Better as thou hast done, maiden. Thy secret was
no less thy father's than thine, and if he confided not to
Pelayo, it was not for thee to do so. But give me to
know thy name.
She faltered out the word in a trembling emotion that
was not without its pleasure. He spoke the name as if
musingly to himself.
Thyrza!and, thus speaking it, he paced to and
fro three several times across the chamber before he
again addressed her. When he did so, his thought was
one of manly and gentle, yet, with him, of natural
consideration
.
And for me, and in my cause, maiden, thou hast
adventured thy young and tender limbsthy life and thy
honour, at midnight and in strange places
I feared not, my prince,it was my father bade me,
and II knew that I was serving theeserving thee
and him.
Thou hast served nobly and well, maidenThyrza,
but thy father has exposed thee to toils beyond thy
strength, and such as are foreign to thy gentle sex
I have had neither pain nor fatigue in their
performance
,
she cried, interrupting him.
But a dreadful peril, Thyrza. Thinkest thou the
villain who assailed thee knew what thou wast?
Thinkest
thou he knew of thy sex?
I know not, was the trembling response, as the
recollection came over her of what she had suffered and
might have suffered, but for the timely assistance of
Pelayo.
May I now depart, my lord? was the timid
address
of the maiden, as she saw that he was engaged in
thought.
He did not seem to heed for a moment. More
earnestly
and anxiously she again addressed him
Have I my lord's permission to depart now?
He turned to her instantly, and took her hand within
his. She strove to withdraw it from his grasp, and, as
she strove, he released it, and then she feared that she
had offended him, and, unconsciously, the
lately-withdrawn
hand was extended towards him. He did not
seem to remark upon the act, though he resumed its
possession; and he spoke thus immediately after
Thou hast hitherto had no wrong, Thyrza, at the
hand of Pelayo. Believe me when I tell thee thou hast
none to fear. Confide in mein my strengthnot less
than in thine own. It is not less, believe me, than thine.
That strength is thy security. If it can protect thee, by
the strong arm, from the robber of the night, it can also,
of itself, forbear thy injury. I must be this night thy
keeper and guardian, and hold the place of thy father.
Thou canst not go hence now. It were madness,
and I could not go with thee unless into the very den
of danger. Here, thenin this chambershalt thou
sleep,nay, interrupt me not, and fear not,here shalt
thou sleep, and sleep securely, even from any danger of
my intrusion. I have another chamber in the court
without. Behold this bar,when I am gone, and thou
hast closed the door behind me, thrust it into these
cavities
which thou seest on either side of the wall, and thou
mayst sleep as securely as if thy own father watched
over thee, with a strength boundless as his love, and as
sleepless. Thou wilt be as safe from my approach,
Thyrza, as from the enemy from whose brutal outrage
I rescued thee. Sleep, maiden, without fear. I leave
thee, with God's blessing upon thy slumbers.
He waited not for any answer which she could make,
but at once hurried out of the apartment. Long did her
eyes strain after his departing form, and sweetly that
night did she think and dream of all the events of the
evening. Was it sinful that, in her sleep, her dreams
brought to her a renewal of his embrace, and that she
joyed to linger in the folding fondness of his manly
arms? Was it sinful that she sighed at morning when
she awakened, looking round upon the pillow, to feel
that she had but dreamed? Ah, if her thoughts and
dreams that night were sinful, what heart is innocent?
What maiden is without a blemish?
Wrapping his mantle around him, Pelayo threw
himself
down in the court before the door of the apartment
which he had given up to Thyrza, and many new
thoughts in his mind kept him wakeful; and, when he
slept, many strange, sweet fancies made him sad when
the night was so soon over, and when the bright glances
of the day aroused him.
XXIX.
It
was yet early morning when the agonized and
greatly apprehensive Melchior appeared before the
prince, in the court where the latter had been sleeping.
Lamechmy son? cried the venerable and anxious
parent.
Thy child sleeps yet, Melchior,she is in the
chamber! was the calm reply of Pelayo.
She!Ha!Speak to me, Prince Pelayomy
child,thou knowest her sexher secret. She is safe?
She has had no wrong?
She is as thou wouldst have her, Melchiora pure
and virtuous maiden. But go in to her, and she will tell
thee all. Let her hear thy voice at the entrance, that
she may unbar for thee the fastenings. I will,
meanwhile
,
look round upon the court, that we may not be
vexed with prying glances.
Thyrza! exclaimed the old man at the door, after
Pelayo had gone.
My father! was the sweet response from within.
The door opened in the next instant, and fond and holy
was the embrace taken between the doting father and
his dutiful and lovely child. She told him all her
adventures
of the nightof the wrong which she had partially
sustained, and from the dangers of which Pelayo had
rescued her, and of the forbearance and nobleness of
the prince in all which had taken place between them.
When Pelayo returned to the court, the gratitude of the
father and daughter was spoken in the warmest language
of acknowledgment and devotion, though it remained
unspoken in words.
END OF BOOK H. AND VOL. I.